AN ANCIENT History and exquisite Chronicle of the-Romanes wars, both
Civil and Foren.

Written in Greek by the noble Orator and Historiographer. Appian of
Alexandria, one of the learned Counsel to the most mighty Emperoures, Traiane
and Adriane.

In the which is declared:

Their greedy desire to conquer others. Their mortal malice to destroy
themselves. Their seeking of matters to make war abroad. Their picking of
quarrels to fall out at home. All the degrees of Sedition, and all the effects
of Ambition. A firm determination of Fate, through all the changes of Fortune.
And finally, an evident demonstration, That peoples rule must give place, and
Princes power prevail.
With a continuation, because that part of Appian is not extant, from the
death of Sextus Pompeius, second son to Pompey the Great, till the overthrow
of Antonie and Cleopatra, after the which time, Octauianus Caesar, had the
Lordship of all, alone.

(...)

JMPRINTED AT LONDON by Henry Bynniman.

Anno. 1578.

coat of arms or blazon

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, his singular good Master, Sir ^^ Christopher Hatton,
Knight, Captain of the Queens Majesty's Guard, Vicechamberlaine to her
Highness, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
WHAT care the almighty King of Heaven has, of the Princes and States of the
earth, though sacred Scripture did not teach us, Profane doctrine might
instruct us.

Homer shows, that God throvveth his shield in the war, to defend the
Prince from harm, and that he appoynteth to every governor, a peculiar God
for his protection.

How God plagueth them that conspire against their Prince, this History
declares at the full. For of all them, that coniured against Caius Caesar, not
one did escape violent death. The which this Author has a pleasure to
declare, because he would affray all men from disloyalty tovvard their
Sovereign.

The greatest service that men can do, is to save their Country from danger.
The Romans gave him a crown that saved one Citizen. Then how many crowns
deserves he, that helps to save a number?

They used to make a coin for his commendation, with this inscription: The
Senate and people of Rome for Citizens saved.

Cicero was called, Father of the Country, because he kept it from decay.
All they that in their consultations, do seek the like benefit to their
Country, do deserve the like revvard and praise, and in the testimony of
good men's hearts, they are sure to have it.

Then seeing this Authoures only purpose is, to extol the princely rule, and
to procure the safety of the people, I have presumed to make a present of him
to your Honor, that you being in case to do the like good, may receive the
same triumph of your desert.

How worthy the VVryter is to be read, I refer it to the witness of one
worthy The reverend father in God T. C. Bishop of Lincoln, in his book
entitled Thesaurus linguae Latinae and Britannicae.
Prelate of this land, who (as he said of Plato) shall suffice for a
multitude. Further, with the manner of the Authoures vvriting I do not mean
to trouble you, himself shall tell your Honor, that such as be in your case,
may bring to pass that he desires, to the glory of God, the honor of the
Prince, the benefit of the Country, and renoume of your self.

Your Honors servant most duetifully bounden: H. BINNIMAN.

The Preface of the Author.
THe Roman people and the Senate, did many Four causes ^^ of discord among
the Romans. Holy H^^ dedicate to ^upiter, three miles beyond Rome, over the
river Aniene, now Tiberone. Creation of the Tribune of the people. Volscians
people between Hosti^ and Circei^.
times contend, for making of Laws, releasing of debts, division of lands, or
election of officers, yet was there no tumult nor uproar, but only discord
and debates in ^iuill manner, and that was done with great reverence one to
another. The people, on a time having been at war, and falling into like
contention, did not abuse their armor presentlye, but stepped aside unto an hill,
which thereof was called Holy, where was no violence done, but a creation made
of an officer of themselves, whom they called Tribune of the people, to be a
restraint to the Consuls chosen by the Senate, that they should not have the
only rule* in the Common wealth. Of this great hatred and variance grew
between these officers: the Senate and the people being divided for them, and
styrred by ambition, sought the M. Coriolanus, the first that rose against his
country, his name was. C. Martius, because the City of Coriolie, belonging
to the Volscians, was vvonne chiefly by his mean, he bare the name of the
city The Romans had their proper names, as Caius, Quintus, or Marcus, the
name of their house, as Martius Valerius, Tullius, and of some fact or figure,
as Publicola, Coriolinus, Affricanus
one to overrule the other. Martius Coriolanus, in such a conte^tion being
unjustly banished, fled to the Volscians, and made war against his country.
This only feate of force, should a man find among the old strifes, which
nevertheless was the act of an outlawe. But in their common metings, was never
weapon drawn, nor ^iuill murder done, before Tiberius Gracchus Tribune of the
people and a deviser of the Laws, did first perish in sedition, and many more
with him taken in the Capitol an H^ where was the chief palace and temple,
so called of a man's head that was found It was begun of Tarquinius
Pr^scus, and finished by Tarquinius Superbus, but not dedicated. In the
foundation Tarquinius spente xl. M. l^. weight of silver. M Horatius the
second consul in Brutus place did dedicate it. It was burned in Sylla his
time, and bu^lded again, and dedicated by Ca^ullus, Sylla being dead. Then
was it burned in V^^ellius time and restored by V^spatian: and also after his
death it was burned again and his son Do^nician^ builded it, and dedicated
it, and made it so suniptuous in guilding and trimming of it, is he spente
above xij. M^talentes upon it, nor for no great holiness, but for his
pleasure, for his Galieries and his banqueting houses passed this.
Capitol, were slain about the Temple. Notwithstanding, discord ceased not by
this disgrace, every man being evidently bente against other, bringing many
times their weapons, and now one officer, and then an other (by this division)
was dispatched, in the temples, in assemblies and in Courts, the Tribunes,
Pretors, or Consuls, either provoking to it, or working this occasion of it.
Uncomely contumely of every trifle, and foul contempt of law and right, did
ever play a part. This evil growing great, manifest insurrections were made
against the state, mighty and fierce armies were raised against the country,
banished me^ striving for restitutio^, or magistrates contending among
themselves, for offices at home, or army abroad. Some there were, in power
like princes, and as Monarkes, made leaders of seditious armies: some would not
leave the army that was delivered them of the people: some without authority,
would levy strange soldiers against their enemies, striving whether of the^
should first get the City, in word against the contrary faction, but in deed
against ye country: for they invaded it, as an enemy. Cruel murders were used
in some, in others proscriptions to death, banishments, consiscations, and
torments intolerable, so as no kind of cruelty was left undone, till
Cornelius Sylla, one of the mighty Captains of rebellion, fifty years after
Gracchus healing evil with evil, made himself a Monarke for a time: the which
kind of officers, they called Dictators, used in most dangerous times, and
commonly given over after six months were ended. But Sylla, being in deed
Dictator by force, Dictator, was he that ruled alone, yet at the battle he
might not be on horseback.
perpetual, yet in speech pretending to be elected, when he had his fill of
that rule alone, was the first man, (as I think) that durst freely give over a
Tiranicall power, affirming he would answer for his doings, if any would
accuse him: and in the sight of all sorts, as a private man, many times he
went to the common place, and returned home again without hurt. Such a fear
was there yet of his authority, in them that beheld him, or an astonishmente,
of the resigning of it, or a reverence, that he offered to aunsweare for his
doyngs, or some other courtesy and consideration, acknowledging his Tyranny to
have been profitable to the country.

Thus a while sedition ceased with Sylla, and there was a remedy of the evils
that Sylla had done: but after him it began again, Caesar, conquered France,
passed the flood ^e^^, and sailed into England.
til Caius Caesar, by election sent to govern France, and after a long time
being commanded by the Senate to give over, he answered, that it was Pompey
his enemy, leading an army in Italy, and repining at his authority in
France, that sought to remove him, and not the Senate. Yet notwithstanding, he
propounded conditions.

That either both of them should reteyne their armies, to anoyde Caesar
offreth conditions.
suspicion of peril:

Or that Pompey also, should leave his power, and live a private life according
to the laws.

Obteyning neither of these, he marched out of France against Pompey and his
country, the which he inuated, and him, The place vv^ called ^harsalia, from
the which Pompey fled into Egypt, where he was killed of the young Kings
Counselors.
being fled, he pursued into Thessalie, and overcame him very victoriously
in a valiant battle, whom fleeing from thence, he followed into Egypt, where
he was slain of that country men. And when he had tarried and set a stay
among the princes of Egypt, and ouerthrown his greatest enemy, who for his
worthynesse in the wars, was surnamed Great, no man now being Pompey, for
his valiantness, had the name of Megnus, that is Great, given unto him.
bold to do anything against him, he returned to Rome, and was chosen the
second Dictator perpetual after Sylla. Then al sedition ceased out of hand,
till Brutus and Cassius, either for envy of his greatness, or for zeal of
their country, killed him in the Brutus, Cas^ius.
Senate house, being most accepted to the people, and most expert in
government. The people, of all other, most lamented him, and required his
strykers to be punished: they burned his body in the common place, where they
erected a temple, and sacrifised unto These attendures the Romans called
proscriptions, when a decree was written to co^denme a man without
aunsvvere, and ki^ him without law. ^epid^s. Antonius. Octau^tes.
him as to a God. Then discord reuued and increased so far, as slaughter,
bannishmente, attendures, both of Senate men and Gentlemen followed
confusedlye, the seditious of both sides seeking to sequester his enemy, he
cared not how, not sparing friends nor brethren. So much did deadly desire
of debate, ouerwhelme al natural friendship and alliance. Yea they went so
far, as three men, yt is to say, Lepidus, Antony, and he that first was
called Octauius, (who being of Caesar's blood, and his son by adoption, took of
him the name of Caesar) did divide the Roman Empire, as a private possession,
after the which division, falling soon out, as was none other like, Octauius,
Caesar exceeding them both in wisdom and experience, first berefte Lepidus
of Li^bia, which fell unto him by lotte, and then overthrew Antonie at Act^o a
place in ^pir^. The Gulf of Ionia is from Brun^usia to Mont Gargone, the rest
is called the Gulf of Venice.
Actio, and took from him al ye rule he had from syna to the Duke of Ioma^
after these most mighty acts, wherewith all men were amassed, with his navy he
wanne Egypt, the gretest kingdom and of longest continuance, after Alexanders
Egypt.
reign, and only left to make the Roman state as it is, by the which, being
yet alive, he was of the people of Rome Augustus is a name, by the which the
Romans did call their holy things 25. Augusta temple and Auguri^m, and
whatsoever Jupiter increases by his mighty power. The Senate did consult to
call him Ro^^dus, but this name seemed more holy and reverent, that vvhiles he
was alive, he might be conse^rated as a god.
called Augustus, and the first that so had that title. He showed himself to
be another Caesar, yea more mighty than Caesar was, as well touching the
subication of his own country, as of all other nations, not needing any
election, or form of creation, to be a pretense to his doings. In continuance
of time, being settled in his state, and in all things happy and beloved, he
left behind him a succession; and a lynage to reign likewise after him. Thus
the Commonwealth of the Romans, after diverse debates, came to unity, and
the rule of one. How these things were done, I have written, gathering the most
notable matter, that they that list, may see the insatiable ambition of men in
greedy desire of kingdom, joined with intolerable pains, and innumerable
kinds of calamities. The which I have the rather taken in hand, because
dealing with the History of Egypt, and al these things going before and ending
there, I was compelled to make rehearsal of the^. For by this occasion was
Egipte also conquered, when Cleopatra The order of the story, which is left
out in the Italian translation. When Caesar Octauian had overcome Antony and
Cleopatra, and made Egypt a province to the Empire of Rome, he made one
Cornelius Gallus lieftenant there, and in token of the Conquering of that
country first by him, he coined a money, in the which was the picture of
a Crocodile, which is there only to be seen in the flood Nilus, chayned to a
palm tree, and trees of Palms laid over him, with an inscription. Col. Nem.
that is, C^lligauit Nemo, signifiyng that he triumphed of Egypt, sprinkling it
with deavv instead of rain, of which there is none.
took part with Antony. Now because of the multitude of matters, I have
divided them thus. The first shall show the things done from Sempronius
Gracchus, to Cornelius Sylla. The second shall contain all the acts from that
time unto the death of Caesar. The rest shall declare all the dissension that
was between the three men, one against an other, and the Citizens of Rome and
them, until the last and greatest feate of Civil force, in the which
Augustus overcame Antonie and Cleopatra at Actio, from the which time the
Chronicle of Egypt shall take his beginning.

The History of Appianus Alexandrinus of the Civil dissentions of the Romans.
The first book.
WHen the Romans first conquered Italy, It was 500. years before the
Romans could conquer Italy. This manner of inhabitants they called Colonies,
which were taken by lot, as the Greek word expresses, which is (...).
which they did by little and little, they took part of the land, and builded
new Cities, or sent of their own people to inhabit the old, that by this
mean, they might be sure of the country. The ground that was tilled, either
they distributed, or sold it, or let it to ferme to the inhabitants. The wast,
which by reason of the war was very much, not having ever leisure to make
division of it, they proclaimed in this sort, to them that would manure it.

For the yearly increase of seed ground, they required the The Romans
order for inhabiting the ground
tenth part.

For the places planted with trees and wood, they would have a fifth part.

For Cattle either great or small, they appointed a tribute accordingly.

This they did, for the maintenance of the Italian nation, The Romans make
account of the Italian nation.
whom they accounted to be men of best service, that they might always, in the
wars, have the use of that were their own: but it came soon otherwise to
pass, for ye rich me^, having got ye greater part of the undivided land,
prosumed upon long prescription of time, that no man would molest them, and the
poor men's small portions, lying nygh them, either they boughte for a little by
persuasion, or they encroched to them by very violence, and oppression, so as
now, in stead of Manor places, they had as it were whole countries: and
because they would not have their husbandemen called any time away to the
wars, they bought their Hynes and Herdes, to labor the grounds, and would
not set their countrymen to any work at all: by reason whereof, their gain
was incredible, as well for the yearly profit of their possessions, as for the
multitude of increase of those slaves, which Increase of slaves. Decay of
Italians.
were never called to y^ war. Thus the great me^ grew exceeding rich, and
every place was full of ^crutle generation: but the Italians fell into decay and
want of men, and were also oppressed with poverty, by occasion of their
continual pressing to the war, and daily exactions put upon them. And if at
any time they were eased of these, they felt a further inco^uenie^ce, for where
they had no land of their own, the rich me^ being Lords of al, and they using
the labor of bondmen in stead of free men, the Italians were utterly
corrupted with rest and ydlenes. The people of Rome was much offended herewith,
because they could not have such service of the Italians, as they had before,
and whenever they made any expedition abroad, they were not without danger,
for the great multitude of bondemen at home: they could not tell how to remedy
this matter, for it was not easy, nor altogether equal, to thrust them out of
possession, that had had so long continuance in their lands and houses, which
they had so well planted and provided. At length with much ado, the Tribunes
took the matter This was called Lex Licini^.
in hand and ordained,

That no man should keep above five hundred Acres of land. An Acre was so
much ground as a pair of O^en could arie in a day, the measure whereof 240.
foot in length and a 120. in breadth. The measure of a foot was 4. hands,
and one hand was four fingers, and the measure of a singer, according to
Geometry, three barely corns. This is added (...) the Italian translation.


That no man should feed above one hundred great cattle.

That no man should feed above five hundred little cattle.

And for the better observation hereof, they appointed a number of freemen, to
mark what was done, and to make declaration of the same from time to time.

The law was allowed, the penalty assigned, and the commissioners were sworn,
supposing that by this mean, some land would be left, that for a small
price, might be awarded to the poor. But regard was there none, neither of
Law nor of the oath, and if some did seem for manners sake, to obey the law,
and make a counterfeyte division to them neighbors, the most part did
utterly contemn the law, till Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus a goodlye noble
man, honorable and eloquente, This Gracchus was sent Praetor to Numantia,
where the Co^sul Mancinus was overthrown, and seking for peace the
Numantines would grant none, except Gracchus were sent to the^, which
being done, a peace was made, the which the Senate did not approve, though
xx. M. Citizens were saved thereby, beside the slaves and rascals, in so much
as the consul was sent thither again naked and bound, but Gracchus, the
people praised that had saved so many Citizens upon which occasion he became
an enemy to the Senate, and a friend to the people.
whereby he was more notable than all the other Tribunes, made a solemn
oration, in the praise of the Italian people, lamentyng that so warlike a
nation, and of the Romans alliance, should shortly be dispeopled and
brought to penury without all hope of remedy. He inu^yed against the ra^e of
Slaves, as unfit for the war, and vntrustye to their Lords: he called to
remembrance, a fresh affliction in Cicelie, by slavish servants against
their masters, the which had their increase also, by being used in country
business, whom the Romans could not subdue, without long and sharp war,
full of variable and dangerous success: and having spoken to this effect,
he renewed the law.

That no man should have more than five hundred Acres.

That their children should have half so much: which he added to the old law.

That three men chosen and changeable every year, should make division to
the poor.

The rich men took this matter very grieuouslye. For now they could not
illude the Law, as they did before, because of them that were appointed for
the division, nor purchase their Lands, that had their parts assigned, for
Gracchus had provided for that, forbydding all manner of sale. They assembled
together in several companies, fyndyng fault with the Law. They were in a
marvelous disdain and grief, that the poor should possess their ancient
inheritance, their plantings and buildings, and that they should forgot the
purchase of the lands that they had paid for to some of their neighbors.
Others repyned at the loss of their forefathers A Syrian slave in Sicelie
after a mad sort raging with a desire to make rebellion, pretended a religion
of doing honor to the goddess of Syria, and called bondemen to liberty and
arms, and that he might seem to do that by the vvil of God, he held a nutte
in his mouth stuffed with Sulphur, and fire, the which when he spoke, did
cast forth flames.
The old Romans did bury in their possessions and it was long after Christ,
ere me^ were buried in sacred places.
Sepultures, contained within their grounds, and the p^rtitions of their
portions, left of their parents.

Some objected their wives marriage money, and consumed upon the same, or the
land of inheritance to their children: and some declared what debt they were
fallen into, by reason of interest, so as there was great disorder, quarelling,
and indignation among them.

The poor men on the contrary side, complain that they were The poor
offended.
brought from good wealth, to extreme want, and thereby to decay of
continuance, not being able to bring up their children. They showed how many
times they had bin a warfare to win this land, and might not bear to be
be^est their public portion. They rayled on the rich, that in the stead of
free men, Citizens, and soldiers, they had chosen bond servants, a
generation ever unfaithful and stubborn, therefore not fit for the war.
Thus the one reuiling and vpbrayding the other, the multitude, that either were
of the Roman foundation, or of their own government, and al other, that any
ways were partakers of the land, fearing the loss thereof, resorted together,
and were divided with the one or the other, and so being enbolded by number,
they waxed fierce, stirring rebellion, and abiding til the law should be
discussed: the one by no mean to suffer it to prevail: the other, that it
might take place to the uttermost. Both sides were ambitiouslye bent for the
sequel of it, and against the appointed day prepared The Latin translation of
P. Candidus and the Italian differs from the Greek.
themselves. Gracchus mind stood upon a resolution, not to further
abundance of riches, but the increase of men, in procuryng of the which
commodity, he much magnifyed himself, as in a travel that to Italy could
not be of more honor nor importance, the difficultye whereof he did not
conceive. When the day of making Laws was come, he made a long plausible
Preface, and asked of them, If it were right yt public things should be divided
in Gracchus talk.
common: and if a citizen were to be preferred before a servant: and if a
soldier were more profitable, than he that was unapt for the war, and a
partaker of public profit more well willing? Not tarying long in this
comparison, as needless, he straight turned his tale to utter the hopes and
fears of his country, that where they had by the war won so much land
of their enemies, and had good hope to get the rest of the earth, they would
now put aim hazard, whether to conquer all that remained, by increase of fytte
me^, or to lose this through want of their own, and envy of their enemies. He
set forth the glory and wealth of the one, and the danger and doubt of the
other. He exhorted the rich to regard, if it were not more for their profit to
gratify the people with land to bring up their children, in hope of the wealth
to come, than to strive for trifling matters, and to neglect the greater
things, they having sufficient recompense of their charges bestowed, by
possession of five hundred acres of choice, free and certain land, and to every
of their children (if they had any) half so much. After this sort Gracchus
speaking much, kindling the pore, and other to, that stood upon reason, rather
than desire of possession, he commanded the Clearke to pronounce the law. But
Marcus Octauius the other Tribune, whom the possessioners M. Octauius
re^isteth the law.
had made to resist, and with the Romans being ever more able to forbid,
commanded the Clearke to silence. Then Gracchus greatly blaming him, deferred
the Court till the next day, when, having prepared a sufficient force to
compel Octauius, commanded the Clearke with threats to propound the law to
the people: but Octauius forbadde him again, and put him to silence. Then the
Tribunes fell to chafing one with an other, so as the law could take no place
for the tumult, wherefore the great men required to commit their difference
to the Senate. Gracchus took Gracchus to the Senate.
hold of that offer, thinking every reasonable man to be wylling with the
law, and ran into y^ Senate house, where being reproved of the rich, as
among the few chief men in The word signifies the great men, or ^ straight.
a straight, he ran again into the common place, and said he would defer
the trial, till this next days assembly, both for the law, and for the
authority of Octauius, and whether by order, a Tribune resisting the law,
might reteyne his office: and so he did, at which time Octauius nothing
abashed, made resistance again. Wherefore Gracchus put the matter first to
the vayces, and when one company had given against Octauius, Gracchus turned to
him, and prayed him to leave his purpose, but he cared not for it, and so they
proceeded. There was five and thirty companies, whereof Five and thirty
companies ^^ Rome.
seauenteene had given against him with great fury, and where y^ eyghtenth
should have determined the matter, Gracchus again in the sight of the people,
lamentably desired him, that being in that danger, he would not hinder so
profitable and honorable an act to all Italy: nor to withstand so great
desire of the people Gracchus excuses himself of the deprivation of his
fellovv.
which he ought to further, being a Tribune: nor to suffer the disgrace of
losing his office. Thus he spoke, and called God to witness, that against
his will his fellow was deposed. But when no persuasion would serve, he made
the decree: Octauius being deprived, he secretly conveyed himself away,
Octauius depri^ed. Q. Mummius chosen. Law of lands. Officers for the law.
Appius Claudius*
Quintus Mummius was chosen Tribune in his place. The law of lands was
pronounced, and the first officers appointed to see it executed, was Gracchus
himself the lawmaker, and a brother of his name, and Appius Claudius his
father in law. So much did the people fear, that all the labor of the law
should be lost, unless Gracchus and all his family had the execution of
it. Gracchus was maruellously magnifyed for this law, and accompanied of the
people to his house as a preserver, not of one City or Country, but of all
the nations of Italy. This being done, they that had the day, returned to the
lands in the Country from whence they came for that purpose, but they that
lost the day, remained discontented, and talked that Gracchus should not
escape blame when he should be out of office, that durst violate a Magistrate
of so great authority, and give occasion of so manifest sedition in Italy.
Now was it Summer, and the time of choosing Tribunes at hand. It seemed that
the rich would so labor, as the office should be given to some of Gracchus
greatest enemies. The trial being at hand, and he afraid that he should
not be elected Tribune for the year to come, called people out of the
Country, to give voice in the election, but they being occupied in Summer
business, and the day drawyng nygh, he was Gracchus labors the people.
compelled to make the people of the City his refuge, and went about to
every one aparte, to desire them to make him Tribune again, being in danger
for their sakes. When the day was come, the two first companyes chose
Gracchus, but the rich men cried, that it was not lawful for one to be
Tribune twyce together. Rubrio a Tribune, to whose turn it came to be chief
of the election, doubted of the matter. Mummius Doubt in the^ election.
successor to Octauius, prayed his fellow to commit the order of the
election to him, which he did, but the other Tribunes affyrmed, that this
must be tried by lotte, for where Rubrio had his turn, the appoyntmente did
apperteyne to them all.

The contention being great, and Gracchus having the worse, he deferred the
discussing till the next day, and being utterly discouraged, although yet
in office, he remained the rest of the whole day in the common place,
beseechyng every man to be his help, as though he should streyghte have bin
destroyed of his enemies. The poor men were moved with compassion, and
considering that they were not used indifferently as Citizens, but rather as
slaves to the lust of the rich, and fearyng for Gracchus state, who suffered
for their sake with lamentation, they all brought him to his house at night,
and bade him be of good cheer against the next day. Gracchus being thus
encouraged, assembled his part in the night, and gave them a watchworde to
fight it out if need required. Then he went to the Temple of the Capitol,
where the election should be, and when the assembly was come together, and
he in the myddest of them, some of the Tribunes and the rich men would not
suffer the election to proceed for him: wherefore he gave his watch word,
they that were privy to it made a great shoute, and began the fray, some
stood about Gracchus Tumult b^ Gracchus.
to guarde his person, some tore the seats, some wrang the rods and maces
out of the Sergeantes hands, some rent asunder every thing, and bet the
rich men out of the place, with such a tumulte and terroure, as all the
Tribunes ran away, and the Priests shut the Temple doors. The flying and
running was confused, and the speech not well understood. Some thought that
Gracchus had deposed an other Tribune, for spying none of them there, it was
like to be so. Some thought he had made him self Tribune again without
any Election. In the mean time the Senate assembled in the Temple of Faith.
Surely I marvel, that where the office of one ruler had Temple of Faith.
many times before preserved the state in like troubles, that now they did not
choose a Dictator. In former times it was found Dictator.
most necessary, but now neither in memory, nor after cared for. When the
Senate, as well as they could had resolved what was to be done, they went up to
the Capitol, and Cornelius Scipio Nasica, by the name of chief Bishop led the
way, and spoke with Chief Bishop. P. Scipio Nafica.
a loud voice that they should follow him that would have their Country safe.
Then he pulled the skirte of his gown over his head, either to give a token by
his garment, that the more might follow hint, or for a sign to them that saw
it, that he would fight, or for that he would as it were hide from the Gods
what Superstition.
he meant to do. Being come to the Temple, and thrusting in among Gracchus
route, they gave place unto him, as to a most worthy man, whom they saw all
the Senate follow: then did his company wring the weapons out of the others
hands, and The fray.
gathered the pieces of the broken seats, with any other things that they
could get in the place, and bet Gracchus part so violently, as they drove them
to the brinke of the hill, in the which tumulte Gracchus was slain, and many
with him at the Temple Gracchus slain, who was a gentle courteous man, sober
and eloquent, with modesty.
doors, before the Images of the Kings. Thus Gracchus, being some of that
Gracchus that had bin twice Consul, whose mother was Cornelia daughter to
Scipio that conquered Africa, meaning well to his Country, but going about
it indiscreetly, was slain in the Capitol, being yet Tribune. First Sedition.
(...) was a base son to Lumenes, by a vvench of Ephesus, that was a
Minstre^s daughter, A^^^^^s son to Lu^enes, made his Testament after this
so^e, Populus Romanus honorum m^orum haeres esto. The Romans stayed the
province of Pergamo. Aristonicus as heir to his father invaded it, and killed
Licinius Gracchus that was sent against him. Then M. Perpenna ouerthrevv him
at Str^^onic^, and was killed in prison by the Senates commandment.


As this was the first mischief that was done in the place of election, so
did it not cease till many more were done from time to time. The City was
divided into woe and joy for Gracchus death; some lamented for themselves as
well as for him, that the present state was no more a common wealth, but rather
a Conquest and cruelty. Other rejoiced at that was done, whereby they had
obtained their purpose. This was done, when. Aristonicus contended with the
Romans for the Lordship of Asia. Gracchus being thus slain, and Appius
Claudius dead, straight way Fuluius Flaccus, Paperius Carbo, and Gracchus the
younger, took upon ^. Flaccus P. Carbo.
them the defense of the law, and where the possessioners denied their lands to
be surueyed, they made Proclamation, that the overseers Proclamation.
should acuse them, of the which grew a multitude of difficult matter, for
all the land adjoining together, whither it was sold or divided to their
companions in war, came to be examined how it was sold, and how it was
divided. Every man had not his conueyance, nor the portions appointed them, and
they that had, were found doubtful. And where land should be divided again
according to the order, some of the owners must be put from their grounds and
manors, to barren seed, and from fruitful and well planted places, to Fennes
and marrish grounds. And where at the beginning of the lands conquered, there
was no great certentie kept, and now that by decree all land diuisible must be
labored, many had entered upon their neighbors bounds, whereby the form of
the places were confounded, and time had so altered the rest, as it was hard
to find the wrong that the rich had done, although it were great: so was there
nothing but confusion, every one changing and chopping into others right. The
Italians were very much grieved at this sharp dealing The Italians sueth to
Scipio.
of the commissioners, and made suit to Cornelius Scipio that overcame
Carthage, to be their defense against those injuries, who for that he had had
there good service in the wars, was Scipio.
much grieved they should be misused, wherefore he came into the Senate house,
where he did not directlye speak against Gracchus law, but showed the
difficulty of the matter, and wished it should not be determined of them that
had the dealing of it, because of suspicion, but of some other that might be
thought indifferent, the which he quickly obtained as a thing reasonable.
Tuditanus the Consul was appointed to be the judge, but he entering Tuditanus.
into the cause, and finding it so intricate, took in hand a voyage against
the Illirians, seeking that occasion to be rid of The Illirians now
Sla^onian^*
this. They that were first appointed for the division, because no man required
justice of them, did nothing in the same. Here of an hatred and grudge of the
people did grow against Scipio, that he would have more care of the nations
of Italy, than of the people of Rome, which for his sake had diverse times
gotten the displeasure of the great men, and twice made him Consul The people
of Rome against Scipio.
before he might so be by the law. This being known, his enemies spoke
manifestly against him, affyrming that he went about utterly to break
Gracchus law by force and violence, which when the people heard, they were
afraid, till Scipio in an evening, taking a pair of Tables to note what he
would say the next day, was found dead without any wound, either by the
practice of Cornelia mother to Gracchus, that his law should not be fordone,
and by the help of Sempronia her Sempronia and Cornelia suspected of Scipios
death. This was Scipio Junior Africanus, nephew to Scipio Affricanus that
ouerthrevv Anniball. Servants confession.
daughter, who was married unto Scipio, whom she loved not, nor he her, for
that she was foul and barren, or rather (as some think) that he killed
himself, because he could not fulfill his promise. Some say, that his
servants being racked, confessed, that certain strange men unknown to
them, were let in at the back door, and that they did choke their master,
and because they saw the people angry with him, and to be glad of his death,
they durst not bewray it. Thus dyed Scipio, and was not thought worthy a
public funeral, although he had done so great service to his Country. So
much could present Ingratitude.
displeasure prevail over benefytes passed. This hap gave courage to
Gracchus faction, although the division of lands was diversely deferred by the
possessioners, whereof some thought good that all companions in war should be
called to the freedom of the City, to make the benefyte the more common, and
Freedom of the City.
so leave the contention for land. The Italians accepted this very gladly, and
preferred the freedom of the City, before the land in the Country. Fuluius
Flaccus being Consul, and a diuider of Fuluius Flaccus.
land, was a great doer in this matter, but the Senate did not allow, that
they that were their inferiors, should now become their fellows: so this
device took no place, and the people that was in hope of the division, was
utterly discouraged, till Caius Caius Gracchus the second Tribune.
Gracchus, brother to him that made the law of lands, was thought the most
meet man to be a Tribune, who since his brothers death had lived in rest: and
though many of the Senate enuyed him, yet he stood for the office, and
obtained it with great glory. He devised to deceive the Senate, by making
Distribution.
a law that the people should have a distribution of a months Corn of the
common store, which thing was never seen before, whereby straight he wanne
the peoples hearts, and Fuluius being his friend, he was declared Tribune for
the year to come: for now there was a law made, that if a Tribune had A
law for the Tribunes benefit.
need of furtherance to perform his promise, the people before all other
should make choice of him, and so Caius Gracchus was chosen Tribune the second
time. Having thus allured the people by his largess, he wanne also the
Gentlemen by an other device. They being in dignity next the Senators, in the
midst Gentlemen, Equites, The next degree to the Senators after the order of
the Ath^nians, when they were able to find an horse* Judgments of
corruption. Cornelius Cotta. Salinator made the toll of salt. Manius Acilius
overcame Antiochus. Corruption. Translation of Judgments.
between them and the people, he turned the judgments diffamed by corruption
from the Senatoures to the Gentlemen, obiecting against them things lately
committed, that Cornelius Cotta, Salinator, and Manius Acilius, who subdued
Asia, being openly condemned of bribery, were releassed by the Judges, when the
Ambassadors were present, going about, and crying out upon them with great
slander, whereof the Senate being ashamed, gave place to the law, the people
proclaimed it. Thus were these judgments translated from the Senatoures to the
Ge^tlemen. When this law was made, Gracchus (as they report) said, he would
dispatch the Senate quickly, which saying was found true by that followed
thereof, for where the Gentlemen had the judgments of corruption, banishment
and diffamation, which they used extremely over the Romans and the
Italians, yea the Senators themselves, all the Gentlemen were like Princes
extolled, and the Senatoures like slaves dejected, beside forth the Gentlemen
joining with the Tribunes in elections, to gratifye them again in every thing
they would. The Senators were Cruelty of the Gentlemen.
fallen into so great a fear, as though the state should streyghte have bin
changed, they only having the name, and the Gentlemen the authority, who in
process of time, did not only ouerrule the Senators, but did them open spite
against all law. They dealte with matters of corruption, and felt so of
continual gain, as they used their authority more rigorouslye and
moderately. They brought in privy accusours against the rich, and by their
faction and force overthrew the laws of corruption, so as the custom of
trial of judgments was utterly overthrown, and a new disturbance concerning
laws of Judges stirred up, as like so long to continne as the former. Now was
Graccus making of long high ways in Itah, seeking thereby Gracchus makes ^^vv
vvayes.
to help the multitudes of the laboring men, to have them ready in any
enterprise at his commandment. He also placed diverse new in habitances, and
furthermore stirred the Latin nation to require the freedom of the Romans,
as a thing to procure hate to the Senate, if they should deny it to that
nation that was so nigh allied unto them. He also gave authority to other
confederates of Rome, to give voices in elections, which might Gracchus gives
voice in elections.
not so do by ancient manner, that he might have the more help to procure
laws at his pleasure, for the which the Senate was much troubled, and
commanded the Consuls to make proclamation, that no man, unless he had a
right in elections, should resort into the City, or approach within five miles
of the same, during the time of assemble for the laws. They persuaded Liuius
Drusus the other Tribune, to resist Gracchus laws, not making Liuius Drusus.
the people acquainted with it, and it was granted, that who so The Senates
device to overthrow the laws.
would resist, should not need to show cause thereof. And to win the commons
hearts, they decreed twelve new inhabitancies to be made, wherewith the people
was so won, as they cared not for the laws. Gracchus being thus deceived of
the peoples favor, sailed into Afrike with Fuluius Flaccus, who was Tribune
Gracchus sayleth into Afrike.
with Gracchus after he had bin Consul, where an inhabitance was appointed,
because of the plenty of the soil, which Colonie.
was done of purpose, that by the absence of the people, the Senate might have
some rest from these sturres. This inhabitance was appointed where Carthage
was, little regarding that An inhabitance where Carthage was.
Scipio the winner of it, did vow it for ever to be a place of pastime. Six
thousand was assigned, which by law ought to have bin less, that they might
the rather please the people. They returned to Rome, and gathered the six
thousand out of al Italy, but when it was written out of Africa, that the
Wolves had destroyed the plat of the city, which Gracchus and Fuluius had
laid, the Southsayers affirmed, that the inhabitants should be unlucky,
wherefore the Senate called a counsel, that the law of Inhabitance revoked.
inhabitance might be revoked. Gracchus and Fuluius being deceived of this hope
also, like mad men, said the Senate did lie, touching the token of the Wolves.
The vuruly sort of the commons favoring them, came with their weapons to the
Capitol, where the assembly should be for this inhabitance. When the people
was assembled, and Fuluius began to speak, Gracchus came up to the Capitol,
guarded with them that were privy of his purpose, but being resisted of them
that understood he would make new business, he left the way to the
Capitell, and took a low Gallerie, there waiting to deceive his adversaries.
One Attilius, Attilius.
a man of the common sort, seeing him in these turmoyles, and making sacrifice
in that gallerie, came and took him by the hand, either to persuade him, or
suspecting him, or otherwise to talk with him, prayed him he would spare his
Country: he was y^ more troubled, as fearing to be apprehended, and looked
angerly upon him, whereat one of his people, without any commandment or token
given, but only by conjecture of Gracchus grimme look, thought it now to be
time to please his Captain, if he began the fray, drew his sword, and ran
Attilius through. A great Attilius killed.
shoute being made, and the head body seen among them, every man fled out of
the Temple with fear of like displeasure* Gracchus went to the common place,
minding to say somewhat to the people touching this fact, but no man would
harken to Gracchus act detested.
him, every man detesting it as a wicked fact. Gracchus and Flacchus were out
of hope having lost this occasion, which they thought to have prevented, and
ran home to their houses, accompanied with their companions. The rest of the
people, as in time of danger, about midnight took the common place, and by
break of day, Opimius the Consul had appointed men in armoure to L. Opimius.
keep the Capitol and called the Senate together by public officers,
himself in the mean time abiding in the Temple of Jupiters children, to
provide for the necessity. This being thus ordained, the Senate sent for
Gracchus and Fuluius to answer for themselves in the Counsel house, but they
in armoure went to the hill called Auentine, hoping by the strength of the
place to Auentine was one of the seven h^ls of Rome.
bring the Senate to some composition, and offered liberty to bondmen that
would repair unto them: but no man made any account of them, wherefore they
took the Temple of Diana, and fortifyed it. Then they sent Quintus, son to
Flaccus unto the Senate, Second sedition.
requesting a pause with a truce of concord. The Senate willed them to leave
their armoure, and come to say what they could for themselves, or else to send
no more: nevertheless he came again, and Opimius the Consul not taking him
for a messenger because of their disobedience, caused him to be deteyned, and
sent soldiers against Gracchus, and he sledde over the wooden bridge, unto
the other side of the floude into a grove, with The vvoodden bridge was at
that part of Tiber that goes to the hill Ianiculo.
one man, to whom when he saw he should be taken, he offered his throat to be
cut. Flaccus fled into a shop of one of his acquaintance. They that
followed him, threatened to burn the whole street, unless they delivered him.
His friend being ashamed to betray him in his calamity, bade an other do it,
and so was Flaccus taken and killed, and both their heads were brought Gracchus
and Fuluius slain. This Gracchus was very eloquent, but so vehement, as he
would move up and down, and cast his Govvne off his shoulders. Purgation of
the City. Temple of Concord. Law to sell land. Division by money. Sp.
Borius.
to the Consul Opimius, who gave the weight of gold for reward, and the people
spoiled their houses. The Consul took their companions, and committed them,
till they were executed. To Quintus he granted to choose what manner of death he
would: then he purged the City of bloodshed, and by the Senates sentence,
erected the Temple of concord in y^ common place. This was y^ end of Gracchus
y^ second his sedition. Not long after a law was made that any man might sell
the land yt was in controversy, the which the former Gracchus had forhidden,
whereby the rich men again did buy the poor men's parts, or thrust them out
by violence, til Spurius Borius the Tribune did devise a law, yt land should be
no more divided, but remain with the owners, and a tribute to be raised of it
for the people, the money whereof should be distributed, whereby the poor had
some relief, but to the increase of me^ it was no help at al. Thus was
Gracchus law abrogated by a slight, which might have bin very good and
profitable, if it had bin used accordingly. Not long after, by an other
Tribune, the distribution also was taken away, so as the people was utterly
destitute of al help, whereof followed want of Citizens and souldyers,
reuenewe of land, of stipende, and of laws, the space of fifteen years
after Gracchus law, with a more quietness. In this mean time A Theater was
a place of Plays to be seen of the people, and it was round saving in one
place. An Amp^^theatre was round every where. Sometime the Theaters served
for the people to learn Oratio^s. Q. Metellus Censor. This Nonius, of other is
called Memmius and Mumius. Nonius killed. In this matter this Author sees meth
to vary from other.
Scipio the Consul threw down a Theater that Lucius Cassius had begun and
almost ended, either as an occasion of new sedition, or for that he would not
have the Roman people acquainted with the Greeks pastimes. Q. Metellus a
master of manners, minded to have removed Glaucias that had bin Consul, and
Apuleius having bin Tribune, from their dignity, for their evil life, but he
could not do it, because his fellow was against it. A little while after to
be revenged of Metellus, Apuleius labored to be Tribune again, because
Glaucias was Praetor, and should be chief in the election: but Nonius a noble
man, using free speech against him, and reproving Glaucias, was chosen
Tribune. They fearyng that he being in authority, would punish them, sent a
band of busy fellows as he went from the election, and killed him, entering
into a shop to save himself. This murder being committed, they of Glaucias
faction, before the people could assemble again, those Apuleius Tribune early
in the morning, and by this mean was the death of Nonius not followed, men
being afraid of the Tribune. Metellus was banished by y^ help of C. Marius now
six Metellus. C. Marius was an enemy to the nobility, and a laborers son,
void of learning, and rude in manners, yet so good a Soldier, as when
Scipio under whom he served in Spain, was asked whom he thought meet to
be general after him, he clapped Marius on the shoulder and said,
peradventure this ^^^*
times Consul, who bearing secret hate against him, conspired with his
enemies. Apuleius did make a law to divide certain lands of the French,
won by the Cymbrianes, whom Marius had driven away, as now no longer of
the French, but belongyng to the Romans, and therefore might be divided. It
was promised that if the people would allow the law, the Senate should
confirm it the fifth day by an oath, and he that refused to swear to it,
should be removed from the Senate, and be condemned to the people in twenty
Talents. This was a device to be revenged of Metellus, who for his gravity
would not swear unto it. The law being in this forwardness. Apuleius
appointed yt day, and in the mean time sent into ye Country for such as had
served Marius in y^ wars, to have their help, but because y^ Italian's
should be more advanced by this law than the Romans, the people was not
content with it. So discord arose in the time of the meeting. Apuleius did put
back from the higher place all Objection against the law.
that were against the law. The people of the City cried that it th^ndered,
which when it happened, it was not lawful for the Romans Thunder stops any
proceeding in elections and assemblies. The Citizens against the Countrymen.
The law vvonne by force. Marius dissembleth.
to conclude any thing in their consultations. Nevertheless Apuleius band
used violence still, wherefore the Citizens girded their gowns, and took such
weapons of wood as they could get, and resisted the Countrymen. They again
being encouraged by Apuleius, stuck to it, and with their staves and battes
beat the Citizens so, as the law was won. Marius the Consul forthwith
propounded the oath, and because he knew Metellus a constant and sound man in
his purposes, he first showed his own opinion, affirming he would not swear,
and all to deceive Metellus who said the same, wherefore both of them being
commended of others, Marius brake up the house. The fifth day after, which was
the time appointed for the oath, the Consul assembled the Senate on a sudden
about ten of the clock, and said, he was afraid of the people that favored
the law so fervently, A device of Marius to illude the law. The words be*
(...) and (...) commentum and subtil^^^^.
yet he had devised a shift and a subtlety for it, and that was this, that a
man might swear to the words of the law so far forth as it was lawful,
and so for the time the Country people might be sent home, and after it
might be well proved that it was no law, which by violence and by the
thundering of Jupiter was made contrary to the order of the Country. When he
had said thus, every man was silent for fear of entrapping, and the
suddaynesse of the time: wherefore he arose and went to the Temple of Saturn,
where the common treasourers should swear. Himself swear first, and so did
his friends: other Senators did the like for fear. Only Metellus would not
swear, continuing Metellus refuses the oath.
in his former sentence without dread. Apuleius the next day sent a Sergeant
to pull him out of the Court, but the Tribunes defended him. Then Apuleius and
Claudius ran to the Country multitude, affirming that they neither could
have la^d, nor law take place, unless Metellus were banished: wherefore a
decree of his banishmente was made, and a Proclamation from the Consul, that
no man should succoure Metellus, neither with fire nor water: and one only day
was given him for deliberation of the matter. The people of the City were
offended, and The moderation of Metellus.
went about Metellus with their weapons: he thanked them for their good will,
but said, his Country should not be brought into trouble for him. So Apuleius
pronounced the decree of his exile, Metellus banished.
and Marius confirmed it. Thus was the most worthy man of the City banished,
after the which Apuleius was Tribune the third time, and for his fellow, one
Gracchus a runnagate was appointed, Gracchus the runnagate, who was advanced
by Marius.
reporting that he was son to old Gracchus, the people favoring him for the
names sake. The election of the Consuls being at hand, Marcus Antonius was
chosen for the one, without any sticking: for the other, Glaucias and Memmius
contended. Memmius was of more estimation in the City. Glaucias and Apuleius
feared themselves, and sent certain men with wasters into the assembly,
which laid upon Memmius, and killed Memmius killed.
him. Thus was the solemn assembly disturbed, no regard being had now of law
or justice, nor reverence of God or man. The people was grieved at it, and the
next day gathered together to dispatche Apuleius, but he got the company of
his new multitude of Countreyme^, with Glaucias and C. Sapheius a treasourer,
and took the Capitol. The Senate commanded they should be taken and
dispatched, but Marius unwilling to it, did for a show arm men very slowly.
Some there were that did cut away the water that went into the Temple,
wherefore Sapheius that could not abide the lack of water, persuaded the^ to
set the Temple a fire, but Glaucias and Apuleius yielded themselves first, and
after so did Sapheius. And where every man called upon their execution, Marius
shut them in the Senate house, as to deal with them more according to law.
But the people perceiving this to be a delay, pulled the staves of y^ roof of
the Temple, and never left throwing upon them, till they had killed all three,
Sapheius, Glauclas and Apuleius killed.
whereof one was a Questor, an other a Tribune, and the third a Praetor, and all
at that time clad with the robes of their office. With them also was slain a
great number of the people, entangled with their sedition, and in it the other
Tribune, that was thought to be son to Gracchus, the first day of the entering
into his Tribuneship, for now neither liberty nor dignity, neither law nor
office was able to reeeue any man, when as the Tribunes office, created for the
repressing of wrongs, and defense of the people, as a sanctuary and holy thing,
was waxen a worker of injuries, and had injury done against it self. After
Apuleius and the rest were killed, the Senate and the people decreede to call
home Metellus, but P. Furius Tribune, not borne of a free man Furius.
to his father, but made free of a bond man, boldly did resist them, and
rejected his son Metellus, beseeching him with tears upon his knees in the
sight of all the people, which young man for that pitiful act, was ever after
called Metellus the dutiful. Caius Canuleius Metellus the dutiful.
Tribune the next year, did accuse Furius and the people that would not tarry
to have him tried by judgment, did tear Furius torn in pieces.
him in pieces. Thus ever one mischief or other was committed in the common
place. Metellus was called home, and (as they say) a day did not suffice for
them that came to welcome him Metellus revoked.
home at the gates of the City. Thus the third sedition, after the two
former, made of the two Gracc^^, begun by Apulesus, The third sedition.
and working much trouble to the Romans, was ended. In the mean time
kyndled a stir called the fellows war, which as it was sudden, so it
shortly grew very great, and caused dissension to cease at home, for fear
of trouble abroad, and when it was ended, it raised new turmoyles and workers
of discord, not for making of Cities, or creating of officers among the
people, but with mighty armies seeking one another destruction, the which I
thought good to join with this History, because it proceeded of civil
dissension, and increased to a far greater tumulte, the beginning whereof was
this. Fuluiu^ Flaccus being Consul, was the first that openly encouraged
Fellows vva^, and the cause of it.
the Italians to ask the freedom of Rome, that of subjects they might be
coequall in authority. And because he was so earnest in the cause, the
Senatoures sent him to a forrayne war, where he labored to be Tribune.
When Flaccus se^^ into ^^beria.
his office should end, and brought to pass that he was chosen Tribune
with Gracchus the younger, both the which going about to make laws in the
favor of the Italians, were slain (as ye have heard,) whereby the Italians
were the more sharplyesette, taking it greeuouslye, that they were rather used
like vnderlyngs than fellows, and that Fuluius and Gracchus for their sakes
were so destroyed, after whom, Liuius Drusus a Liuius Drusus.
noble man and Tribune, had promised the Italians to make a law in their
favor, touching the freedom of the City, whereof they were very desirous,
as the only mean, of Servants to be made Superioures. To gratifye the
people of Rome, the Tribune led new inhabitances, as well into Italy as
Sicelie, determined before, but till that time deferred. He also took in
hand to make pacification between the Senatoures and the Gentlemen which
were fallen out for authority of judicial matters, and when he saw he
could not directlye restore the Senate to their former jurisdiction, he used a
policy with them both, for where the Senate by reason of sedition, were
scarcely the number of three hundred, he devised that so many more should be
chosen of the Gentlemen, and of them all, Judges to be chosen in time to
Increase of Senators.
come, to hear matters of corruption, which was now no more regarded, for
men were waxen so shameless, as it was thought no fault: but this policy
had contrary success, for the Senate was grieved that so many Gentlemen
should so suddaynely be made their fellows, being unlike that they in like
authority would agree with them. The Gentlemen were afraid that the whole
order of judgments should be in the Senate, the which thing, now having
tasted of great gain, with much authority they began, (not without cause) to
suspect: besideforth an emulation grew among themselves, which of the^ should
be thought worthier than other, to be chosen to the three C. and he that was,
was sure to be envied: but nothing did more trouble them, than that the trial
of corruption should be called again to the ordinary court, the which was now
out of use, and in this, the Senate and the Gentlemen, though they agreed not
Drusus said there was nothing now left to be divided, but earth or ayre^
among themselves, yet they both conspired against Drusus. The people was
pleased with their new habitations. But the Italians, for whose sakes the
Tribune had begun all these things, could not away with the placing of new
habitacions, It should seem by some that he would have revoked certain
inl^^b^tancies. Tus anes. Vmbrianes be now D^^ato d^ Spoleto.
for if the division of common land should cease, the rich men, some by force
and some by fraud would win it, and straight get it from them, and be evil
neighbors to them that would with-holde them. The Tuscanes and the Vmbrians
having the like affection, were brought of the Consul inpretence to dispatche
Drusus, but in very deed to resist the law, against the which they openly
cried and expected the day of determination. When the Tribune heard of this,
he came not abroad, but gave audience at home in a dark gallerie, and in an
evening dismissing the people, it happened so that he cried, I am hurt, and with
y^ word he fell down dead, and it was found yt he was stricke^ with a
Shomakers knife in y^ flank. Thus Drusus ye Tribune Drusus flayne.
was slain. The Gentlemen of this determination took occasion to pick
quarrels against their enemies, and induced Q. Valerius Q Valerius.
the Tribune to take upon him to accuse all them that either privily or
apertly had furthered the Italians in the public matters, hoping thereby the
great men should have bin brought into slanders and diffamation, and they be
their Judges, which being rid away, they should yet have greater power in
the common wealth. And whereas other Tribunes did refuse to propound the law,
the Gentlemen with swords in hand, did compass the place, and caused the law
to be made, which as soon as they had obtained, they brought in accusers
against the Senators, whereof one Bestius would not obey, but went into
voluntary ^. Bestius exiles himself. Cotta willingly exiled.
banishment, as he that would not give himself into the hands of his enemies.
Cotta appeared in judgment, and when he had very boldly declared his service
for the common wealth, and reprehended the Gentlemen, before he should be cast
out by decree, he went away willingly. Mummius that euercame Greece, being
promised of the Gentlemen to be released, was deceived, Mummius exiled who
ouers threvv Cornelius and thereof was called. Ac^^icus, because it stood in
Achaia.
and forced with shame to flee judgment, and to lead his life in the I Will of
Delos. The people began to be grieved at this disorder increasing daily against
the best men, lamenting that so many and so good Citizens should be so
suddenly taken from them. The Italians hearing of Drusus death, and the cause
of so many men's exile, thinking no longer to be suffered, that such a sort of
their chief patrones should be thus used, and not hoping any other way to
obtain the freedom of the City, determined to leave the Romans, and to
make war upon them. At the beginning of this confederacy, they secretly
gave hostages for assurance of their faith, which thing was long hid to the
Romans, because of their dissension and judicial causes, but when it was
perceived, they sent diverse abroad to understand the thing closely, one of
the which, marking that a young man of the City of Ascolo, This City is in
that part that is called. Abruzzo, near to the territory of (...),
apperteyning to the Pope. There is another of this name in Apulia, called
Ascolidi Sairiano for a difference. Presidents. Hadriane the Emperor.
Proconsulles. Seruilius killed at Asculi. ^onteius killed. Marsians in Campania
di Roma. Malinia^s in Campania felici. Vestinians in Abruzzo. Marusians A^
bruzzo. Picentines Campanites di Lauoro. Ferentines in Cati^. Hirsians Abruzzo.
Pompeyans in terrad: Lauoro. Venusians in Apulia. lapigianes otra^t^* Samnites
Abruzzo. All these nations be beyond Rome.
Asculi was delivered to an other city as pledge, he did utter it to Seruilius
the President of that province: for at that time, it should seem, that the
Romans had presidents in diverse parts of Italy, which manner Hadriane when
he was Emperor desired to renew, but it continued not long after his time.
Seruilius came in great anger to Asculi at a feast, and sharply rebuked them,
whereupon they killed him, because they were discovered by him. They killed
also Fonteius yt was his legate. They had ye name of Legates among the
Romans, that were sent in commission to the Presidents of the Country. After
these two were slain, there was as little courtesy showed to the rest of the
Romans, for they were al killed, and their goods set to spoil. The
conspiracy being now opened, all the neighbors about Asculi went to arms.
The Marsians, the Malinians, the Vestinians, the Marucians, and beside them the
Picentines, the Ferentines, the Husians, the Pompeyans, the Venusians, the
lapigianes, and the Samnites, which people before had ever bin enemies, and
hurtful to the Ramaines. All other nations from the flood The flood I^ri^
Lario, now Clariano in Campania.
Lario, which flows, as I take it at Linterno was a City in Campania,
where Scipio chose to end his life, after he had found the people of Rome
unthankful.
Linterno, to ye Gulf of Ionia, did send their Ambassadors to the Romans,
complaining, that where the Senate had used their service and travel, always
in getting their great Empire, they made no regard of it, nor for all their
pains thought them worthy to be partaker of their City. To whom the Senate
sharply answered, that if they repented their former doings, they should send
Ambassadors, if not they should send none. They as men desperate, prepared
for the war, and made a common army of all the Cities, one of footmen, and
an other of Horsemen, to the number of one hundred thousand. The Romans made
power as great against them, partly of their The army of the Italians.
own, and partlye of the Confederate Cities that yet remained in league.
Sextus Julius Caesar, and Publius Rutilius Sex. Julius Caesar. P. Rutilius
Consulles.
Lupus, then Consulles, were leaders both, as in a war at hand, and
dangerous. The rest remained at home to defend the gates and the walls, and
because men's minds were en^ang^ed this way and that way, by reason of the
new law, they appointed assistantes to the Consulles, Assistantes to the
Consulles.
whom they called Legates, men of the best ^orte. To Rutilius, was joined
Cneus Pompeyus, father to Pompey that was surnamed Greate^, Quintus Capi^,
Ca^^s Perpenna, and Valerius Messala. To Sextus Caesar P. Lentulus, brother of
the said Caesar, Titus Didius, Licinius Crassus, and Cornelius Sylla. And
beside these, Marcus Marcellus. These many appointed to the Consuls, served as
Lieutenantes in several places, and the Consuls went over all, to whom and
to the other the Romans sent ever new supplies, as in a trouble of great
danger.

The Italians had their Captains out of every City, beside the which, as
in a general cause, these were the Generalles, T. Afranius, C. Pon^ilius,
Marius Ignatius, Genera^es of the Italians.
Quintus Pompedius, C. Papius, M. Lampronius, C. Iudacilius, Hirius Asinius,
and Vetius Cato. These deuidyng their armies together, went against the
Romayne Captains many times with the advantage, and many times with the loss,
the chief of both the which briefly to declare, were these: Vetius Cato
put to flighte, Sextus Julius kylied two thousand of his men, and drove
him to As^rni^, a City Sextus Julius overthrown.
of the Romayne devotion, where standing to their defense, L. Scipio and L.
Acilius in slaves apparel fled away, and the enemies with time and hunger
consumed them. Marius Ignatius took Venafro by treason, and killed two
companies Venafro lost. It is near the (...) Vultu^^^. Perp^^^^ overthrown
and discharged.
of the Romans.

P. Presenteius did overthrow Perpenna a leader of ten thousand, killed
four thousand, and took the armoure from the most part of the rest.
Wherefore Ratilius the Consul discharged Perpenna of his leading, and
committed the remnaunte of the Army to C. Marius. M. Lamponius slew eyghte
hundred of them that were with Licinius Crassus, and chased the other Grument^.
Li. Crassus lost^ (...) vvo^^e, ^ City not ^ar^e from Naples.
to the City of Grument^. C. Papius g^t^ Nola by treachery, and made
Proclamation to two thousand Romans that were there, to come and serve,
which they did, and he accepted them: but the Captains that refused to obey
his Proclamation, he took, and famished them to death. He wa^^e also
Castabuli, Minturnio, and Salerno, that were habitations of Castabuli in
Campania, Mint^^^ in Campania, when Mari^^ hid himself. Salerno beyond
Naples. Nuceria bes^eged, thirty miles from Naples. Acerre a City in
Campania, which Anniball burned, the people being escaped. Oxintha son to
Iugurth. Venusio in Apulia. Numidians.
Rome, and caused all the prisoners and Captyues to serve in his Camp. He
burned all about the compass of Nuceria, which caused the next Cities to
yield for fear. He requyryng an army of them, they sent him ten
thousand men, and one thousand Horse, with the which he beseeged Acerre*
Sextus Caesar with ten thousand French footmen, and many Numidian
Horsemenne, approached to Acerre.

Papius brought out of Venusio, Oxintha, son to Iugurthe sometime King of
Numidia, where he was kept of the Romans, and claddyng him with Purple,
showed him many times to the Numidianes that were with Caesar, of the which
many fled thycke unto him as to their king. Wherefore Caesar sent away the
rest as suspected into their Country, after the which, Papius came upon him
with contempt, and bette down part of his trenche, He sent his Horsemenne
about, which killed six thousand of Papius Papius lose^^^
Souldyoures, which done, Caesar removed the Camp from Acerre.

To Iudacilius in Iapigia, the Canusians, Venusians, and many other Cities did
yield, some that would not he ouerc^me, and as many noble men of the
Romans as he found, he slew, the Commons and the slaves he used in his
(...).

Rutilius the Consul, and C. Marius made Brydges, not far asunder, to pass
over the River of Liris. Vetius Cato camped nigh the bridge of Marius and laid
an ambushe over against the Consuls bridge. In the morning he suffered him to
pass over, and set upon him with that sleyght, and many of his people he
killed on the land, many also he drowned in the flaud. The Consul in this
conflict was hurt in the head, and dyed shortly The Consul killed. Marius.
after. Marius being at the other bridge, and perceiving y^ chance by the
bodies that were brought by the stream, passed the flood with great speed,
and set upon Catos Camp, kept off a few, and made him lodge the night where
he had won the day, from whence for lack of victual he was compelled to
depart. Futilius corpse, and many other Gentlemen, being sent to Rome to be
burned, Heaviness at Rome for the death of the Consul.
it was an heavy sight to see the Consul and so many other destroyed, and
cause of many days mourning: wherefore the Senate decreede, that they that
dyed in the war should be buried there, least the other by the sight should
be made afraid to go to the field. No successor was made to Rutilius that
year, because Sextus Caesar had no leisure to go to the election, but his
host, the Senate appointed Caius Marius and Q. Caepio to rule. Q. Pompedius
lying against Caepio, fled as a ru^nagate, and brought Pompedius deceyueth
Caepio.
two slaves as pledges, cladde in purple as his sons: and to have the more
credit, he brought certain wedges of lead, laid over with silver and
gold. He exhorted him to set upon his men being without a Captain easy to be
overthrown. Caepio was so light of belief, as he went with him. When
Pompedius was nigh the place of embushment, he ran up to an hill as to ospie
the enemy, to whom when he had given his token, they appeared, and overthrew
Caepio, and many more with him. The Caepio flay^^.
Senate committed the rest of his army to Marius. Sextus Caesar Sextus Caesar
flees.
marching with thirty thousand footmen, and five thousand horses, among
hills and rocky streyghtes, Marius Ignatiue fell suddaynely upon him, and
compassed him in the same. He fled away in a litter (because he was sick) to
a river, where was but one bridge to pass, there he lost the greater part of
his army, the other threw away their armoure, with whom he hardly escaped to
Theano, them he armed again as well as he could, and Theano in the end of
Apulia.
with an other multitude that came unto him hand over head, he approached to
Acherre, which Papio had beseeged. Their Camps lay hard together, yet for
fear durst not provoke one the other. Cornelius Sylla, and C. Marius did
follow valiantly the Marsians that lay against them, unto the hedges of the
Uineyardes. The Marsians with much ado got through the hedges, in the which
Marius and Sylla thought not good to pursue them, but Sylla waiting with his
Camp on the other side of the Uineyards, encountered them as they would have
escaped out, and killed many of them, so as the slaughter of that day was
above six thousand, and the harness that the Romans took, was a great
deal more. By this chance the Marsians like mad men were the more fierce,
and armed themselves again, and went on to provoke the Marsi a valiant people
in Latio, now Campania.
Romans, who durst not come to hand with them, nor begin the fight, for they
be a nation most warlike, and through this chance this only triumph was made of
them, where before (as the saying is) neither was there triumph of them, nor
without them. Falerio in Camepania where the good wine is praised. Firmo a
town in the march of Ancona.
About the mount of Ealerno, Iudacilius, Titus Afranius, and P. Ve^tidius
together, did overthrow C. Pompeyus, and drove him to the City of Firmo. They
went their way, and left Afranius to beseege Pompey, who armed his men
speedely, but would not come to fight, yet by the coming of an other army,
he sent Sulpitius about to be on the back of Afranius, and he came forth on
the face. The fight being doubtful on both sides, Sulpitius set the enemies
Camp on fire, which when they saw, they fled to Ascoli without order or
obedience, where Afranius was killed continuing Afranius killed.
in the fight. Pompeyus proceeded to the winning of Ascoli. Indacilius was
borne at Ascoli, and fearing the loss thereof, he Iudacilius.
took eight compantes and went toward it, sending to the Asculians before,
that as soon as they saw him a far off, they should issue upon the enemies,
that they might be assailed on both sides: but they would none of it.
Notwithstanding Iudacilius entered through the Camp with as many as he could,
and reproved his Countrymen for unfaithfulness, and cowardlinesse, but
having Cruelty o^ Iudacilius.
no hope to save the City, first he killed all his ancient enemies, then
those that of late had caused the multitude to disobey him at this instant.
That done, he prepared a fire in the Temple, and set a bed upon it, then
he did banquet with his friends, and after he had made merry with them, he
drank off his poison, and laid him down on the straw, Iudacilius death.
and bade them set it on fire. Thus Iudacilius desirous to dye honorably
for his Country, made his end. Sextus Caesar, the time of his office being
expyred, was made Uiceconsull of the Senate. He set upon twenty thousand
as they removed their Camp, and killed eyghte thousand of S. Caesar dies.
them, and unarmed many more, lying long at the seege at Ascoli, he dyed of a
disease, and appointed C. Bebius to serve in his place. These were the things
done in Italy, about the Ionian sea.

The Hetrurians and Vmbrianes on the other side of Rome hearing of this, they
and other Countries their neighbors were disposed to rebel. The Senate
being afraid, least the enemy being round about them, they should be
undefended, sent garrisons of free mace men to all the coast between the
City and Cuma. This was the Cuma in Campania felici. Freemade men sent to
war.
first time that they were admytted to serve in War for want of free men.
Those Italians that remained in good faith, they made free of the City, of the
which all were desirous. This benefyte they sent also to the Hetrurianes, who
received that freedom very friendelye. The Hetrurians now Tuscanes.
Senate by this courtesy made their welwyllers the more wyllyng, put them
out of doubt that were in fear, and caused the enemy (for hope of the like)
to be the more remiss. The Romans did not receive these new Citizens into
the fuye and thirty companyes (for so many The Italians made Citizens of Rome.
they were) least that they being more than the old, should prevail in
elections, but brought them into new companyes, divided by tennes, whereby
they were last in the elections, and many times their voices were in vain,
because the old fuye and thirty were first called, and more than half.
Whether this was not known at the first, or that the Italians were content
with it, afterward^ it was cause of new contention. They about the Ienian
Sea, not hearing of the Hetrurianes repentance, sent fifteen thousand men
in aid to Hetruria, with long and laborious iourneys. C. Pompeius now
Consul, met with them, and killed five thousand of them, the rest returnyng
home by waylesse places, sharp season of Winter, and by eating of Acornes,
were the half destroyed.

That same Winter, Cato, Pompeius fellow, made war Cato slain.
upon the Marsianes, and was slain. Sylla lay in Camp at Mount Pompey. L.
Ignatius with great despyghte, encamped within half a mile of him. Sylla
could not abide this Sylla flees.
contumely, but set upon him, not tarrying for his forragiers, and was
driven to flee, but when his forragiers were come, he set upon him again
and put him to Sylla puts to flight.
flyghte. He then Camped farther off, having a supplye of Frenchmen. He again
placed his Camp near to Sylla. The armies being thus nygh together, a
Frenchman of mighty stature came forth alone, and challenged any of the
Romans A Combat. A Numidian.
to fight with him: a little Marusian answered him, and killed him, with the
which, the Frenehmenne were so discouraged, as they fled their way, whereby
the Camp being troubled, no company of Cluentuis would tarry, but with
consusion fled to Nola. Sylla pursued, and killed thirty thousand in the
chase. And whereas the Nolanes received them but at one gate, for fear the
enemy should also enter, he slew about the walls twentye thousand, among
whom Cluentius mansullye fyghting, was also Cluentius slain.
slain.

Sylla went against the Hirpinianes, and beseeged A Equilan^. Hirpini in the
^rutians. Iucanes be they that now be of Pasibcata.
They looking for the Lucanes aid that day, desired respite to consider: he
perceiving their craft, gave them one hour, and in the mean time set
Ladders to the walls, which were made of woodde, and at the Aquilano taken.
City in Brut^^.
end of the hour set them on fire. They being afraid yielded, yet he
spoiled it, because they yielded not of good will, but of necessity. Other
that yielded he received, till he had subdued all the Hirpian nation. Then he
went against the Samnites, not that way which Mut^lu^ their Captain kept,
but (...) overthrown.
an other unknown by a compass, and came upon them suddenly, and killed
many of them, and the other ran hither and thither, and Mutilus was hurt, and
with a few fled to Asernia. Asernia in (...).
Sylla went against the Brianes, where the common counsel of the factions were
kept. This City had three fortresses, and whiles Brianes now (...) in
Abruzzo.
the Brianes came wholly against Sylla, he sent about certain, whom he
willed to take any of the fortresses that they could, and to signifye it by a
smoke, which being done, he gave a hot assault on the front three hours
together, and got the Town. These things that Summer were happily done of
Sylla, and toward winter he went to Rome to stand for the Consulship. C.
Pompeius Salapia a City of Apulia, where (...) was caught in love. Canue
now Berletta. Canutui a city in Apulia, where is the best vvoll in Italy,
now Ca^ossa. The flood Anfido. Trebatius is discomfited by Cossonius.
subdued the Marsians, Marusians, and the Venusians. C. Cossonius a Lieutenant
did burn Salapia, and took Canue. By the coming of the Samnites, with whom
he fought valiantly, till many dyed on both sides. He was feign to leave the
seege of Canuti^, and go to Canue. Trebatius the Captain of the Samnites,
sent unto Cossonius, that either he should come over the river that divided
their armies, to fight, or go back, that he might come to him: he went back,
and when Trebatius was coming over, Cossonius set upon him, and had the
better in the fight, and as he would have fled over again, he killed
fifteen thousand of Trebatius men, who with them that were left, fled to
Canusio. Cossonius having spoiled Larinates etc. people of Apulia. Pediculi in
Calabria.
the lands of the Larineans, Venutians, and Asculans, invaded the Podiceans,
whom he wanne in two days. Cecilius Metellus became his successor to his
army, who went against the Iapigians, and overthrew them by battle, in the
which Pompedius one Po^pedius killed.
of the Generalles of the revolted people was killed, the rest fled by heaps
to Caecilius. This was the sharp contention in Italy, called the fellows
war, till all the same were received into the civility of Rome. Except the
Lucanes and Samnites, the which Italians received to the freedom of Rome.
(as it should seem) were after received also, and were appointed to their
several companies as the former, least being joined with the old, they
should, being more in number, have the upper hand in elections.

Now began the Usurers to contend one against an other Usury.
in the City, because some had bought debtes with the interest, being
forbidden to take usury upon vsuries by an old law, and a pain appointed to
him that so would use his vsuries. It should seem that the old Romans
detested usury as much as Romans, Grecians, and Persians, hate Usury.
the Greeks, as a matter intolerable to the poor, and cause of debate and
evil will. The Persians also by like reason did account it full of fraud and
leasing, but usury being confirmed by custom and time, they required it
accordingly. The other alleged cause of delay through war and sedition, and
some threatened the usurers with the statute. Asellio a Judge, to whom that
jurisdiction Asellio.
belonged, sought to agree them, but could not, wherefore he gave them leave
to try the controversy by law, putting the Judges in remembrance, as well of
the custom, as of the law, as a thing doubtful. When the Usurers heard
Asellius make mention of the old law, they were grieved, and killed him after
this manner: It was his turn to make oblation in the Sacrifice to Jupiters
children.
common place to Jupiters children, the multitude standing about the sacrifice,
one of the former threw a stone at him, and hit him, wherefore he flong down
the vessel of sacrifice, and ran toward Vesta the Goddess of Virginity.
the Temple of Vesta, where being prevented and excluded, be fled into a
shop, and there they slew him. Many that went after him thinking he had bin
fled among the Virgins, ran Disorder.
into places where it was not lawful for men to come. Thus Asellio a Judge,
sacrificing and cladde with an holy vesture of Aselius killed.
gold, as in such solemnities is wont, was killed the second hour among the
Temples in the miost of the common place. The Senate made Proclamation, that
who so ever would bewray the killer, if he were a freema^, he should have
silver: if he were bond, he should have freedom: if he were privy to it, he
should have pardon: but no man would do it, for the Usurers kept it secret.
These murders and civil dissentions happened yet now and then, but afterward
Captains of sedition with great armies contended together by law of war,
their Country standing as a pray to them that could catch it, the beginning
and proceeding whereof after the follows war was this.

When Mithridates King of Pontus, and other nations had invaded Bithinia,
Ph^^gia, and Asia, confining to the same Beginning of Civil vvarres.
(as I have showed in my Book of that matter,) it was by lotte assigned to
Sylla the Consul, being yet in Rome, to govern the army in Asia, in that
war of Mithridates. But Marius, who thought this war would be easy to
dispatch, Marius.
and very much worth, desirous also of the Generalles room, attempted P.
Sulpitius Tribune of the people, with many promises, to be his friend. And he
put the new Citizens of Italy in good hope, that were inferioure in
elections, to be distributed thorough all the Companies, not showing that he
went about any matter of his own, that he might use them as faithful
ministers in all assayes. Sulpitius straightway Sulpitius.
propounded a law for it, which if it had taken place, Marius and Sulpitius
should have had their wills in all, because the new Citizens did so far
exceed the old, which thing the auntients perceiving, did stoutely resist the
new, and both sides used stones and staves in their defense. This evil growing
still greater, and the Consuls fearing the passing of the law that was at hand,
did proclayme a vacation for many days, as in festival times Vacation*
was wont to be done, that some intermission might be had of this law and
inconvenience. Sulpitius could not abide this vacation, and therefore willed
his faction to come to the common place with weapons hid, and do as should
fall out, not sparing the very Consuls if need were. This done, he spoke
against the vacation, as a thing contrary to the law, and bad the Consulles,
Sulpitius against the vacation.
Sylla, and Q. Pompey forthwyth to revoke it, that he might proceed to the
approbation of the law. A tumulte began, and they being prepared, drew their
daggers, and threatened to kill the Consulles if they spoke against them:
wherefore Pompey secretly fled, and Sylla went aside, as to take advice: But
Pompeys son, being son in law to Sylla, was killed of Sulpitius faction,
because he spoke somewhat liberally against them. Then Sylla returned, and
revoked the vacation, and went Vacation revoked.
to Capua, to the army which was to pass into Asia, for the war of
Mithridates, not knowing any thing yet what was meante against him. The
vacation being dissolved, and Sylla gone Capua the chief City of Campania.
The war of Mithridates appointed to Marius. Sylla to his Souldyers.
out of the City, Sulpitius propounded the law, and to C. Marius for whom he
had done all this, he assigned the rule of the war against Mithridates in
Sylla his place. Sylla hearing of (...), and determining to try it by fight,
called his Souldyoures together, which were desirous to go this journey for
the gain thereof, and knew that Marius would use other Souldyoures in it,
and declared unto them what spyghte Sulpitius and Marius had done him, not
showing plainly his meaning, for he durst not yet make mention of any such
war, but only exhorted them to be ready, as occasion should require. They
understanding his intent, and afraid to be prevented of this warfare, opened
Syllas cogitation, and badde him boldly lead Sylla re^ur^^e^^^ to Rome in
Arms.
them to Rome. He being glad thereof, marched with six Legions. All the
officers of his Camp, but one Tresourer, posted to Rome, and could not abide
to go against their Officers of good conscience.
Country.

Embassadoures came to him by the way, and asked him why with arms he did
invade his Country: he answered, Aunsvvere of Sylla.
to deliver it from Tyrauntes. He made this answer twice or thrice to
several Ambassadors, and wythall required, that the Senate with Marius and
Sulpitius might meet him in the flelde of Mars, and there he would do, as
by counsel should seem good.

When he was come nygh, Pompeyus his fellow resorted to him, allowing and
praising his doyngs, and ioynyng with him in all things. Marius and Sulpitius
not prepared for so short a distaunce, sent other Embassadoures, as directed
from the Senate, wyllyng him not to come nygher than five miles to the City,
till they had consulted of the present state. Sylla and Pompey well
understanding their meaning, promised so to do, yet followed as soon as they
were gone. Then Sylla took the gate called Celimontana, and the wall next
it^, with one Legion, and Pompey Celimontana Gate. Collina Gate.
took Collina Gate with an other. The third he placed at the bridge of
wodde, the fourth he left as a ward under the walls, with the rest he entered
the City with enunies mind and deed: wherefore the dwellers about did stop
him, by castyng (...) enters the City with arms.
upon him from above. He threatened to burn their houses, and then they
ceased* Marius and Sulpitius came against him in the AFs^^^lie was the hill
in Rome, upon the which T^llus Host^^^us kept his Souldioures. First fight of
the arms in Rome. The boldness of Syl^^.
plain of Esquily, with as many, as of the suddayne they could bring armed.
This was the first fight that ever was in Rome of such enemies, not now for
any pretense of dissension, but by plain force, with Trumpet and ensigns, as
in law of war. To such inconveniences were they now come by nourishing or
dissentious. Sylla his souldyoures gave back, wherefore he took the standerd,
and stood to it with danger, so as the reuerenc^ of their General, and the
fear of dishonor that come to them that forsake their ensign, did stay them
straighte from fleeyng. Sylla called fresh Souldyers from the Camp without,
and sent others Saburra, in the old vvriting Succurra, a street in Rome,
where Souldyers were placed, to relieve them of Esquilia.
to the street called Saburra, to compass the enemies on the backehalfe.
Marius company made but faint resista^ce against these new men, and fearing to
be compassed on every side, called to the Citizens that fought yet in their
houses, and proclaimed liberty to servants if they would come to help: but
none coming forth, and they in utter despair, fled out of the City, and
so did every noble man that was of their faction* Sylla passed Marius flees.
to the way called Holy, and such as made any spoil, he punished Holy way in
Rome so named of the peace that Romulus made with (...).
in the sight of all men. He also set garrisons in the City, and both he and
Pompey watched, going about every where, that no hurt should be done, either
of them that had lost, or of them that had won. Day being come, they called
the people to a counsel, they lamented that the state was betrayed of certain
troublesome men, and that they were constreyned by necessity to do that they
had done. Further thoy affirmed, that nothing of importance should be
propounded to the people, but that were before debated of the Senate, renewing
an ancient law, now of Sylla renueth old laws. Comicia Ce^turiata where
the best men gave voices. King Tullus.
long time out of use, and that the elections should not be of the ordinary
companies of wards, but of the general assembly by the rate of substance,
according to the institution of King Tullus, supposing by these two things,
that if no law were propounded to the people before the Senate, and that
electio^s should not con^st in the poor and bold sort, in steed of the wise
and substantial men, there should not be such occasion of sedition. Many
other things they spoke of the Tribunes, in writing against that power as
Tyrannical, whereby the Senate was grown into contempt by so unfit men:
therefore they chose together* three hundred of the vest sort, and whatsoever
had bin done by Sulpitius after the vacation of the Consuls, they revoked it as
unlawful. Thus sedition from strife and contention, did grow to murder, and
from murders to very war, and this was the first army of Citizens that
invaded the Country as enemies. Yet sedition ceased not by this trial of
arms, for continual invasions were made against Rome, the walls were beaten
down, and all other extremities of war done, no reverence either of law,
common wealth, or Country, being able to refrain the violent minds. Then
was banished Sulpitius the Marius etc. proclaimed Traitors.
Tribune, and with him Marius, six times Consul, and his son P. Cethegus,
^umus Brutus, C. and Q* Granius, P. Albinouanus, M. Lectorius, and other, to
the number of twelve Senators, as stirrers of tumult, rebellious to the
Consuls, prouokers of slaves to revolt, by offering them liberty, for the
which they were proclaimed enemies to the Roman state, and that it should be
lawful to kill them without punishment, or bring th^^ to the Consuls. Their
goods were confiscate, and serchers ran about to catch the^, who found
Sulpitius, and slew him. Marius alone without Sulpitius slain.
servant or fellow fled to Minturna, the rulers of that City for fear of
the Proclamation, keeping him in a close house, that Mynturna in Campania
between Formiae and Sinness^. Marius flees to Minturna.
had bin six times Consul, and done so many notable feats, would not be
authors of his death, but sent a Frenchman that was there by chance, with a
sword to kill him. The Frenchman (as they say) went in to him lying on the
straw in the dark A Frenchman appointed to ^^^ Marius, can not do it.
house, and was afraid, for he thought that his eyes did cast forth beams
and flames of fire, and that he did rise from his couch, and cried with a loud
voice, dare thou kill C^^^s Marius. The Frenchman fled as fast as he could
out of the house like Marius escapes.
a mad man, crying, I can not kyl Marius, whereby the Rulers that doubtfully
had determined this, were stricken with a divine fear, and a fame spoken
from his childhoode, that the man should be seven times Consul, for they
say, when he was a child, seven young Eagles fell into his lap, which the
Southsayers Token of Marius honor.
did show, that he should seven times have the greatest honor. The
Magistrates of Minturna remembering this, and thinking the Frenchman was feared
by Gods operation, they conveyed Marius out of their City, to save himself as
well as he could. He knowing that he was sought for of Sylla, and followed of
the Horsemen, went toward the Sea by vnbeate^ ways, and chansing upon a
Cotage, stayed there, and covered his body with leaves, he heard a noise, and
lay still covered with his leaves, but hearing it more and more, he lept into
an old Fishermans bote, and took it away spite of his teeth: a tempest arose,
Hard hap of Marius in escaping.
and he cut the Cable, and hoysted the sail, and committed himself to
fortune, and so he came to an Island, where he found a Ship of his friends,
with whom he sailed into Lybia, but being rejected from thence by Sextus the
Presidente, as an enemy, he lived all that Winter in the Sea, under the
Mountains of Numidia. Being thus again a seaborde and known, of his friends,
there sailed to him C^^^egus, Granius, Alben^uanus, Lectorius, and others, and
his son, all the which being valiant men, fled from Rome* to a Numidian
Prince, and being afraid of Treason, departed from thence. These had good will
to set upon Sylla, whom they thought violently to use their Country, but
lacking army, they tarried till occasion might serve. Sylla being the first
that ever entered the City with arms, and able to have made himself in Rome
equal with a Monarch, after he was a^enged of his enemy, he did willingly
refrain from violence. He sent his army to Capua, and ruled again as a
Consul. The faction of the banished, chiefly the rich men and women that
were full of money, being delivered of fear of the army, were earnest for the
return of their men, and omitted neither care nor cost, laying wait for the
Consulles bodies, because if they were well, their matter were dashed. Now
when Sylla* should ^eaue his office, the army that was appointed him against
Mithridates should be his defense. Pompey the other Consul, the people pitying
his case, appointed him the gouernemente of Italy, with the army that was under
C. Pompeius* When Cneus heard of this, he took it evil, yet he received
Quintus into the Camp, Pompey the Consul killed.
who the next day doing his office, Cneus went aside as a private man, till a
number pretending to hear the Consul, enclosed him and killed him, other
fleeing away. Cneus returned as though he had bin marvelous angry that the
Consul should be so unlawfully slain, but angry as he was, he straight took
the rule upon him again. When the news of the Consuls death was brought to
the City, Sylla was afraid of himself, and straight carried his friends with
him wheresoever he went, and in the night had them about him also, and so not
tarrying long, he went to Capua to his army, and from thence sailed into Asia.
The friends of the fled men had great confidence in Cinna that was Consul
C^^^^*
after Sylla, and stirred the new Citizens to the devises of Marius, and
thought it meet that they should be mixed with the old companies, least being
last of all, their rooms should be lost. This was the plat, for Marius and
his friends return. The old Citizens stood stiffely against it. Cinna stood
with the new Citizens, corrupted (as it is thought) with three hundred
Talentes. Octauius the other Consul defended the old. Cinna his company,
Octauius.
closely armed, took the common place, and cried to be mixed with y^
companies. The other inultitude better minded, resorted to Octauius with their
weapons also, to whom tarrying at home to take aduisement, w^^^e was brought,
y^ the most part of y^ Tribunes did resist these doings, and that there was a
tumult of the new Citizens, with weapons drawn in the way against the
Tribunes of y^ contrary side, rushing into the common place. When Octanius
heard of this, he went the way called Holy, with a great company, and Way Holy.
thro^ging through y^ midst of y^ contrary side, got y^ co^monplace and
stayed the^. When he had thus afraid the^, he went into y^ Temple of Jupiters
children to avoid Cinna, but they that were with him, Tu^^^^ in the which the
nev^ Citizens are killed.
without any commandment, ran upon the new Citizens, and killed many of
them, and chaced the other fleeyng to the Gates. Cinna having his trust in the
new Citizens, and thinking to have done all by force, and now contrary to his
opinion, seeing the boldness of a few to have overcome, he went about the
City, and called slaves to liberty, but when none came, he ran to the next
Cities, which not long before were made free of Rome, that is, ^ibur,
Preneste, and other as far as ^^^ur now T^^^^^ sixteen miles from Rome.
Preneste now P^lastr^^^ in Champa^ne of Rome. Nola nine miles from Naples.
Cinna deposed.
Nola, and stirred them to sedition, and gathered money for the war. Cinna
being thus occupied and devising, some Senators of his mind fled unto him,
as C. Melonius, Quintus Sertorius, and the other C. Marius. The Senate did
decree, that Cinna should no more be taken as Consul nor Citizen, because
being Consul, he left the City in tumulte, and called bondmen to liberty,
and in his place they appointed Lucius Merula, Jupiters Priest. They say that
this holy Priest only might ever wear the The thing was called. Apex,
which was a wand vvound about with wool in the height of his hatte.
Jupiters Priest. C^^^^ to the Soldiers.
wand of his hatte always, where as other might not do it, but in sacrifices
only. Cinna went to Capua, where was an other army of the Romans. He did
make suit to the Rulers of it, and to as many Senators as were there. He went
in the midst as Consul. He threw away his maces, and like a private man
wept and said. Of you (O Citizens) received I this dignity, the people gave
it me, and the Senate have taken it from me without you, and as I suffer in
mine own cause, so am I grieved for your sakes: why should we now desire
favor at the companies in our elections? What need have we of you? how shall
you be any longer Lords of elections, of assemblies, or of chief officers, if
you can not mainteyne that you have given, and take away when you see cause?
When he had spoken thus to stir them, and lamenting much his own cause, he
rent his garment, and ran from the Chair, and fell flat among the^, and
still lay down, till they for pities sake took him up, and set him again in
his Chair, and took him the bundelles of authority, Cinna restored to his
dignity*
and bade him hope well, as became a Consul, and to use them as occasion
should require. The officers of the Camp by this mean did relent, and swear
to Cinna the oath of a Soldier, and so did all the rest. This done, he went
boldly to the confederate* Cities, and stirred them, as for whose sakes he
suffered this calamity. They relieved him with money, and many of the other
great men of the City came unto him, which did not like the quiet state of
the common wealth. Thus Cinna did. Octauius and Merula the Consuls, fortifyed
the City with rampires, and preparation The Con^^^^ prepare for defense.
of engines of war. They sent for Souldyers to the Cities that remained
obediente, and into France their next neighbor. They also called home Cneus
Pompeius the Proconsull, leading an army at the coast of the Ionian Sea, to
come with all speed to serve his Country. He so did, and planted Collina a
gate in Rome, now Salaria.
his host at the Gate called Collina. Cinna came also, and encamped by him.

Caius Marius hearing of this, passed the Sea to Hetruria with Marius returns.
his fellows banished, and Servants, and there came to him about five
hundred of his friends of Rome: he with vile apparel and long hear to move
pity went to the Cities, showing his victories and honors against the
Germans, and The Germans were cal'ed Cimbrianes, now thought to be D^^es.
his six times Consulshippe, and (that which pleased them best) promised to
do for them in the law of elections: and so he gathered six thousand
Toscanes, and came with them to Cinna, who gladly received him into the
society of his doyngs. Ostia spoiled, being at the mouth of Tiber, about
twelve miles from Rome. Arimino is in that part that now is called Romania,
next ^^ ^omberdie, and was ^^^ division of o^de Italy at the flood Rubicon.
Cee^lius Metellus is too precise, and gives occasion of advantage to his
enemy. Marius enters Rome. Appius Claudius ^eceyueth Marius into the City.


Being met together, they ordered their army at the floude Tiber, and divided
it into three parts, Cinna and Carbo over against the City, Sertorius above
it, and Marius toward the Sea.

They made Bridges over the River, that they might keep victuals from the
City. Marius took Ostia and spoiled it. Cinna sent to take Arimeno, that no
army should come out of nyghe France. The Consuls were afraid, having need
of an other army, and because they could not call home Sylla being entered
into Asia, they commanded Cecilius Metellus that was about the remnaunt of
the fellows war against the Samnites, that he should dispatche it as
honestly as he could, and come to help his Country that was invaded. He
stood too much upon terms with the Samnites, which when Marius heard, he
granted them all their demaundes, and so the Samnites joined with Marius.
Appius Claudius a Captain, and keeper of the hill Ianiculo, and the walls
there, having received a good turn, and myndfull of the benefyte, opened the
gate by break of day, and so Marius entered, and Cinna followed, but they were
soon repulsed by Octauius and Pompey, that came against Marius repulsed.
them.

It chanced so, that there was great lyghtnings that Pompey destroyed by
lightning.
fell upon Pompeys army, whereby he and many noble men were destroyed.
Marius kept all victuals from the City that came from the Sea, or above from
the fresh water, and he rode to the nigh Cities, where any Corn was laid
for the Antium, now (...). Aritia tenn^ mile from Rome. Lanuuis^m now
Indouina. Marius keeps victuals from Rome. The way called Appia went from
Porta Capena to Br^^^dase, paued with fouresquare stone. Mount Albano nigh
Rome, with a lake, of the which a propliecie went of the ^^m^unes victory.
Romayne store, and by suddayne coming to Antio, Aritia, and Lanuuio, he
took them all, and some other Cities by Treason. And thus keeping away
victuals by land also, he approached toward Rome boldly, by the way called
Appia, before any victualles could be brought from any other place, and
with Cinna, Carbo, and Sertorius, Camped twelve miles from Rome, Octauius,
Crassus, and Metellus did lie against them at Mount Albano, and considering
for the time to come, although they were superioure in strength and number, yet
had they a compassion to put their Country in hazard by one battle.

Cinna sent Trumpettes about the City, proclayming liberty to Servants,
whereby a multitude of fugitives came unto him. The Senate was afraid thereby,
and doubtyng of the people, because of the want of things in the City,
changed their mind, and sent Embassadoures to Cinna for reconciliation. He
asked them first, whether they came to him as a Consul, or as a private
person. They doubted what to answer, and returned to Rome.

Now many of the freemen came unto him, some for faction, and some for fear
of famine, and to see the sequeale of it: and Resort^ to (...).
now proudely he approached the walls, and Camped within an arrowe shot.
They that were with Octauius were in fear and doubt, and slow to fight,
because of the runnawayes, and often sendyng between, the Senate was greatly
amazed.

They thought it unjust to depose Lucius Merula, Jupiters Priest, that was
chosen in Cinnas place, and had not offended, but being oppressed with the
great myseries, they sent to Cinna as Consul, and as they looked for no
great The Senate sends to Cinna as Consul. Doubriull aunsvvere.
good thereby, so they required Cinna to swear, that he would commytte no
murder. He resused to swear, but promised that willinglye he would be no
cause of manslaughter. He wylled also, that Octauius that came in at the other
gates, should get him away, least some displeasure might be done him
against his will. This he answered from an high Throne as Consul, to the
Embassadoures of the City. Marius Marius.
standing next the Senate, was silente, but by his cruel countenance, it was
perceived that he was bente to murder.

The Senate accepted this, and willed Cinna and Marius to enter, well knowing
that Marius did all, and Cinna assented to it. Marius spoke in iestyng wise,
that it was not Marius scorne^^
lawful for a banished manne to enter, wherefore the Tribunes did revoke the
banishmente, and dissolve the decree The banishment of Marius revoked. Marius
and Cinna give their oath for Octauius. He is counseled to flee.
made against him by Sylla. Then they entered the City with the fear of all
that received them. They made spoil of the contrary part, without stop.
Cinna and Marius sent their oaths to Octauius, but the Southsayers and
Diuiners badde him not trust them, and his friends counseled him to flee, but
he protesting never to leave the City, whiles he The constancy of Octauius.
was Consul, went among them to Ianiculo, with the noble men, and part of
the army, where he remained, and sat down in the seat, cladde with his
robe of rule, being waited upon with the rods and axes, as Consulles were
wont. Censorinus Censorinus commet^ to kill Octauius contrary to the oath.
came against him with certain Horsemenne, his friends perswadyng him to
flee with his army, and bringing him an Horse, he would not allow of it, nor
once rise, but abode the death. Censorinus cut off his head, and Octauius
Consul headed.
brought it to Cinna, and was the first Consulles head that was set up in
the common place: but after him, the heads of the other that were slain were
set up also, and this mischief beginning with Octauius, continued still in
such murders of them that were counted enemies. Searchers ran straighte
about for to find their foes, and there was no regard of Senator or
Gentleman, nor no difference made. All the heads of the Senators were put up in
the common place. There was neither reverence of the Gods, nor respect of men,
or any matter made of (...).
murder, but all bent to cruel acts, and from acts to horible fightes,
killing, cruelty, and cuttyng off the heads of them that were killed, to the
fear and astonishme^t of the beholders, making thereof most miserable show.
C. and Lucius, Julius, Breethren, Atilius, Eranius, P. Lentulus, G. Numitorius,
and M. Bebius were Noble men killed. Crassus killed.
slain, being met in the way. Crassus fled with his son, and prevented
them in killing him, then himself was killed of the pursuers. Marcus Antonius
an orator fled into a Form M. Antonius Orator, bevvrayd by a Vintner.
house, the keeper whereof received him gentlye, and hid him, and sendyng a
Servant for Wine to a Tavern oftener than he was wont, the Tauerner asked
him why he boughte Wine so often, he told him secretly in his ear, then the
Vintner sent one straighte to Marius, and opened the matter, whereof he was
so glad, as he minded to have gone and Marius glad to have Antonius killed.
killed him himself, but being stayed of his friends, a Captain of a band
was appointed to it, who sent his Souldyoures into the house, whom Antonius,
being so singular an Orator, did deteyne with sweet speeches, diverse ways
mouyng Eloquence.
them to pity. The Captain maruellyng at the matter, went into the house,
and found them attentively hearkenyng to his tale, wherefore himself killed
him, as he was yet eloquente in speaking, and sent his head to Marius.
Cornutus lying hid in a Cotage, his men carefullye kept Cornutus saved by
his Servants.
him. They found a dead body, which they threw into a fire that they had
made, and when the searchers came, they said it was their masters body,
whom they had first strangled. Thus was he saved by his Servants.

Q. Ancharius waited when Marius should make Sacrifice in the Capitol,
trustyng in the time of Sacrifice to find him the more merciful. When he
had begun the Sacrifice, and saw Ancharius coming unto him, he commanded
him to be killed there, so his head, Antonius, and other Ancharius killed in
the Temple.
Consulles and Senators were set up in the common place. None of their
bodies thus slain, were thought worthy to be buried, but the carcasses of
so many noble men, were thrown down to be devoured of Dogs and Foul. Many
other horrible acts were done upon them, expulsion from their possessions,
publication of their goods, depriuatio^ of their dignities, and reuocation of
all things that Sylla had done, whose friends and kinsfolk were killed, his
house pulled down, his goods conflscate, and he proclaimed enemy to his
country, his wife and Sylla proclaimed rebel.
his daughter with great danger escayed: finally, there was all sorts of
mi^eries and mischief that could be invented, and for a show of law and
authority, after so many murders without law, accusings were brought in
against Merula Jupiters priest, Accusers. Merula.
for anger of his office, which he took without any displeasure to Cinna, and
against Catulus Luctatius who was fellow with Marius, Catulus Luctatius*
in the war against the Gimbrians, and once saved by Marius, but now thought
unthankful, for that he was sore against him after he was banished. They were
kept in close prison till the court day, and then called to judgment, and
where they must be four times cited by certain distaunce of hours, Merula in
the mean time cut his veins, and by a writing made by him, did testify, that
he had laid of his priestly attire when he cut his Merula dies.
veins, for it was not lawful for a Priest to die with that upon him. Catulus
choked himself in a chamber new made and moysty Catulus dies.
with a smoke, and thus they two died. The bondmen that came to Cinna by
proclamation were al made free, and seruyng him as Soldiers they did not only
run about and spoil every house, but also slew whom soever they met, not
sparyng their old masters. Cinna many times did monishe the^, but they were
Cinna kills the free made.
never the better, wherefore in the night when they were at rest, he sent ye
French bands, and killed them every one. Thus these flaues received worthy
punishment, for their unfaithfulness against their masters. The year
following. Cinna, the second time, and Marius the vij. time were chosen
Consuls, to whom after his banishment, and proclamation that any man might kill
him, the token of seven Egles appeared again unto him. He being bent to all
extremity against Sylla, died the first ikoneth Marius dies.
of his seventh Co^sulship. Cinna took Valerius Flaccus in his place, and
sent him into Asia, who being dead also, he chose Carbo to (...) in Marius
place, dies in Asia.
be his fellow in office.

Sylla thynkyng long to return against his enemies, made short end with
Mithridates, and, as we have said before, in Acts of Sylla in Asia.
three years, and them not complete, he destroyed one hundred and threescore
thousand men. He restored to the Roman Empire, Graecia, Macedonia, Asia
and Ionia, with other nations that Mithridates had oppressed. He took from
him his navy, and shut him within the compass of his Fathers kingdom: he
returned with an arinie mighty, obedient, expert, and coragi^us in their
doyngs paste, he brought also a multitude of ships, money and furniture of
all things fit, whereby he was feared of his enemies. Cinna and Carbo being
perplexed, sent diverse over all Ital^^ to provide money, men and victual,
the rich menus with their substance they made sure, the Cities they styrred,
especially the new made Citizens, as for whose sake they were now in danger.
They prepared a navy with great speed, they called home the ships of
Cicelie, they kept the coaste sure, and omitted nothing that might be done,
with speedy care and diligence. Sylla with haughty heart wrote to the Senate of
himself, showing what he had done in Lybia, when he was Treasourer, against
Iugurth king of Numidia, what against the Cimbrians, what in Cicelie, when he
was Admiral, and what in the fellows war, when he was Consul: but the late
affairs done against Mithridates, he chiefly extolled, rehearsing at large the
infinite sort of nations that he had taken from him and made subject to the
Romans, notwithstanding Sylla vvrighteth to the Senate.
all the which, because he had received certain afficted Gentlemen of Rome
banished by Cinna, and comforted them in calamity, he was of his enemies
proclaimed rebel to his country, his house was pulled down, his friends
were slain, his wife and children could scarcely save themselves and flee
unto him. But now he would come and be au^nged of them and the whole City
for their doyngs, as for the other Citizens, and them that were new made he
would not blame any of them. These letters being read, every man was afraid,
they sent Ambassadors, to treat of attenement with his adversaries, and if he
required any assurance, that the Senate would fulfill it, and commanded
Cinnas his officers to leave gathering of me^, till Syllas answer were heard.
They promised so to do, but when the Ambassadors were gone, they made
themselves Consuls for the next year, because they would not return of the
suddayne, for the elections, and went about Italy, gathering men, which they
sent into Lyburnia, as they were ready, there intending to set upon Sylla.
The first that went Dalmatis is now part of Slauonia.
had prosperous journey, the next were beaten with tempest, so as when they
came to land, they returned every man to their Country, as though they would
not willingly serve against The Souldyers refused to go against their
Countrymen.
the Citizens. The other hearing of this, refused to sail into Lyburnia. Cinna
was displeased, and warned them to assemble, mynding to compel them: they with
anger went, thynking to be revenged. One of the Sergeantes making way for
Cinna, and hitting one of the Souldyers over the legs, an other of the army
stroke the Sergeant again. Cinna commanding him to be taken, they all made a
great shoute, and fell to throwing of stones. They that were next him drew
their swords, and killed him. Thus Cinna being Consul, was murdered. Carbo
called from Cinna killed. Carbo afraid to go to Rome.
Lyburnia them yt sailed thither, and being afraid of these doings, would not
return to Rome, albeit y^ Tribunes did earnestly require him to come to y^
election of a new fellow in office, at length threatening him y^ they would make
him private, he came and propounded ye election of a new Consul. The day being
unlucky, he appointed an other. That day also lightnings falling upon the
Temple of the Moon, and Goddess of Corn, y^ masters of Ceremonies Lightnings
upon the Temple of the Moon and Ceres.
did differ y^ election, till after y^ standing high of ye Summer Sun, and
so Carbo was Co^sul alone. In the mean tune Sylla made this answer to the^
that came to him from the Senate, that The aunsvvere of Sylla.
he could not be friend to them, that had dealte so outragiously by him, but
with the City, that desired his preservation, he had no quarrel: yet he said
they should be most sure, that would trust to him, whom to defend, he had a
welwilling army. By this wo^de it was chiefly understood, that he would not
dissolve his army, but intended to play the Tyrante. He required his dignity,
his substance, his Priesthode, and any other office he had, to be restored
unto him without exception, and with the Embassadoures he sent certain of
his, to require the same, ^he which hearing that Cinna was slain, and the
City troubled, returned from Brunduse to Sylla, doing nothing: then Sylla with
five Legiones of Italyans, six thousand Horse, and certain other of
Pelop^neso and Macedonia, marched, having in the whole Pelop^neso now M^^^^.
Pireo was the port of Athens now Porto ^^ne. Para in Achaia. Sylla gives
privileges to Brunduse.
forty thousand, from Pireo to Patra, and from Patra to Brunduse, with xvj.
hundredth Ships. The Brundusianes received him willingly, wherefore he gave
them privileges which they yet hold. From thence he removed his army and went
forward. Mesellus surnamed the duetifull, that was left to finishe the
fellows war, and for Cinna and Marius came not into the city, but remained
in Liguria to see what would hap, came unto him ^ncalled, as fellow in the
war, and he accepted his society as yet Metellus the duetifull c^^uneth to
Sylla.
Procon^ull, for they that be once chosen, do continue till they return to
Rome. After Metellus, C^. Pompeius, that not long after Pompeius com^ieth.
was called great, son to him that was killed with the lightnyng, as we
said before, came unto him with a legion of the Picenes, who for the glory of
his father, might do much with that people, and to avoid suspicion* not
thought to be Syllas friend, and shortly after brought two legions more, and
was the most forward man in the a^auncement of Sylla, wherefore Pompey honored
of Sylla.
Sylla had him in great honor, and as they say, would only rise to him when
he came, though he was but very young: and this war ceasing, he sent him into
Lybia to break Carbos friends there, and to restore Hiempsall, whom the
Numidians had expulsed, Hiempsall restored by Pompey.
for the which Sylla granted him to triumph of the Numidians being yet young,
and but a gentleman. By this mean, Pompey growyng great, he was sent into
Spain against Sertorius, and after into P^ntus against Methridates. Cethegus
also came to Sylla, that was his most earnest enemy, with Cinna and Marius,
and with them put out of the City. He humbled himself unto him, and promised
to do what service he would have him. Thus having a very great army, and many
noble friends, he used them as Lieutenants, but he and Metellus were yet
Proconsuls, and had the highest place: for it was thought that Sylla being
Proconsul in the war against Mithridates, was not yet discharged of it,
though he were judged a Rebel of Marius. The have he bare to his enemies, was
grievous and close, who being in the City, and well coniecturing of his nature
by his last invasion thereof, having the taking of the same yet in their eyes,
and their decrees made against him still in memory, his house overthrown in
their sight, his goods con^^^cated, his friends killed, and his family The
preparation of Syllas enemies.
hardly escaped, were in marvelous fear, and thinking no mean to be between
victory and utter destruction, did with fear conspire with the Consuls
against him. They sent about Italy, they gathered men and money, leaving off
nothing in this extremity, either of fore^ight or diligence. Caius Norbanus,
Lucius C. Norbanus. L. Scipio. Carbo.
Scipio, both Consuls, and with them Carbo, who the year before was in
authority, having all like hate against Sylla with fear and conscience of yt
they had done, against him more than other, gathered in the City as great an
army as they could, and an other out of Italy, and went severally against
Sylla with two hundred The Consuss against Sylla. Twenty thousand men.
bands of fifty men at the first, but after with more than these, for the
favor of most men enclyned toward the Consuls: for the doings of Sylla coming
against his country, had the show of an enemy, but that the Consuls and
their friends did, had a pretense Sylla seems as an enemy to his Country.
Consuls carry authority.
of the state. The common sort knowing their former offenses, joined with
them, as partakers of their dread, for they perceived certainly that Sylla did
not mind the correction, afraying, or punishment of a few, but the
destruction, slaughter, and utter undoing generally of all, which opinion was
not vain, for this war consumed all in the which, ten thousand, and
twenty thousand did many times fall in one fight, and about the City fifty
thousand of both sides was slain, and to the rest Sylla left no kind of
cruelty undone, neither to private men, nor to whole Cities, till he had made
himself a Monarke of the Roman Empire, and brought all to his will and
pleasure. All this was (as it were) by inspiration showed before unto them, for
fearful things against reason did vex all men privately and publicly over
all Italy, and the old prophestes most fearful Prophecies.
were called to memory, and menye Monsters were daily seen. A M^le did bring
forth. A Woman delivered a Uiper for a Monstrons tokens.
child. God with earthquakes shaked the City, and ouerthrewe many Temples: and
that that most grieved ye Romans, the Capitol Capitol turned.
that before from the Kings had continued four hundred years, was set a
fire, and no man could tell the cause, all the which did foreshew the
multitude of men to be killed, the overthrow of Italy, the Captivity of Rome
and her Citizens, and the change of the common wealth. This war began when
Sylla arrived at Brunduse the CLXXIIII. Olympiad. The length of it The
sharpness of this war.
is not so great, as the sharpness of the extremities, every man his private
means was followed, because the vehemency of their affections caused in short
time the more and sharper effects to follow. Three years it continued in
Italy, till Sylla got the Three years lasted this war.
principality. In Spain it continued longer, but the battayles, the
skirmishes, the expugation of fortes, the seeges, and all the forms of wars
in Italy, both of the whole armies, and of part of them, by their several
Captains were many, and al notable. The greatest and most worthy of the which
to speak briefly were these. The first was at Canutium by the Proconsuls
against The battle at Ca^^sio. This is the place called C^^^^, where A(...)l
gave the Romans their great overthrow. Another of that name Ca^^ssa. Th^^^^
in Ap^^^^.
Norbanum, where Norbanus lost vj. M. men, and Sylla lxx. but many more were
wounded. Norbanus fled to Capua. Sylla and Metellus being at Theano, Lucius
Scipio came with an other army very faintly, and desired peace might be made.
They that were with Sylla sent to Scipio to agree upon articles, not so much
hoping so to do any good, as because they thought his army would rather
revolt, by reason of their discourageme^t: yet they met, and Scipio took
hostages for the agreeme^ts, and went, and came into the field. Three of either
side did confer, so as it was not known what they did. Scipio thought good
to send Sertorius to Norbanus his fellow, to signify what was spoken of, both
armies remaining in quiet loking for answer. Sertorius in his journey took
Swessa, that was a town S^^^ssa taken in the time of treaty by Sertorius, a
City in Campania nigh Mon^ Massico.
of Syllas. Sylla sent a messenger to complain with Scipio. He either privy
to the fact, or doubting of the answer, as a thing not fit for Sertorius,
sent the hostages again to Sylla. His army being offended at this deed of
Sertorius in a time of treaty, and at the sending again of ye hostages, not
being required, laid all the blame Scipio the Con^ull betrayed of his army.
upon the Consuls, and privily co^pacted to revolt to Sylla if he would draw
near, which he doing, they al went unto him, leaving Scipio the Consul, and
Lucius his son in the tente, and were taken of Sylla. Me think it is a
strange thing, far unfit for a Captain, to be ignorant of such a practice
of his whole army. When Sylla could not persuade Scipio, he did let him and his
son go without hurt, and sent other me^ to Norbanus to treat of
conditions, either because he was afraid of ye force of Italy y^ conspired with
the Consuls, or y^ he went about to deceive him as he had done Scipio, but no
man coming with answer (because it seems Norbanus feared the like blame of
his army) Sylla marched toward him, wasting al things as an enemy. Norbanus
did the like, but took other ways. Carbo made have to the City, and
proclaimed Metellus, and other that were gone to Sylla, Rebels. At this time ye
Capitol was on fire, and some Jupiters Temple in the Capitol on fire.
say it was Carboes work or the Consuls, some say Sylla sent to do it, but
the certe^tie is unknown, and I could never learn which way it came.
Sertorius being before chose^ Praetor of Iberia, after he Sertorius flees into
Spayno.
had detained Swess^, he fled into his province, and the former Prefors not
receiving him, it caused the Romans to have much to do. The army of y^
Consuls increased every day from the more part of Italy, and from the hither
side of France, about Eridanus the River. River of Po^.
Sylla was not idle, but sent some of his into every place of Italy. He got
many for love, some for fear, some for money, and some for hope, and thus was
the rest of that Summer consumed. The year following, Paptrius, Carbo again,
and Marius, nephew to the AEsis now Fiemesino betvveene Spoleto and Ancons.
The fight between Metellus and Carinna.
mighty Marius, being xxvij. years old, were chosen Consuls, the Winter and
the cold continuing long, did divide the^ asunder. At the beginning of the
Spring, about the flood Aesis, from morning till midday, was a great battle
fought, betwixt Metellus and Carinna, one of Carbos Pretors, at the which
Carinna losing many, fled away, all ye Country yielded to Metellus, and
forse^ke the Consuls. Carbo came upon Metellus and beseged him, til he heard y^
Marius the other Consul had a great overthrow at Preneste. Then he removed his
Ca^p toward Arimino, y^ rereward whereof was set on ^^^neste not far from
Rome. (...) now in Roman ^. Se^^ not far from (...). The battle betvveene
Sylla and young Marius.
of Pompeius, and greatly distressed. Sylla took Sett^, and Marius who was
lodged nigh him, withdrew by little and little, til he was come to the place
called Holy Port, there he set his me^ in order, and gave Sylla a battle, in y^
which he fought very fearcely, til his left wing began to give back, of the
which five ba^ds of footmen, and two of Horsemen, not loking for any other
turn, threw down their ensigns, and fled to Sylla, and this was the cause of
Marius ruin, for after many were slain, y^ rest fled to Preneste, whom Sylla
followed in chase. The Prenestines did receive them yt came first, but when
Part of young Marius Soldiers revolt to Sylla. Sa^^^ites killed.
they saw Sylla at hand, they shut the gates, and took in Marius with ropes.
The other about ye walls were al slain and taken, whereof many being Samnites,
Sylla commanded to be killed, as ancient enemies to the Romans. At this time
also, the residue of Carbes army was overcome of Metellus five bands, whiles
they fought, reuolting unto him. Pompeius ouerthrewe Marcius at Sena, and
sacked the Sena a City in Tuscane, an hundredth miles on this side Rome.
City. Sylla having Marius shut in Preneste, made a tre^ch about the City,
and a great wall a good way off, appointing Lucretius Offella to y^ charge, not
otherwise meaning to deal with Marius, but with famine. Marius not loking for
any help, would needs kill his private enemies, and sent to Brutus, the Praetor
of y^ City to assemble the^ for another purpose, and to kill Pub. Ant stius,
and the other Papirius Cruelty of young Marius agai^^^ some Citizens. P.
Anti^^^^^, Pap. Carbo, I. Domitius, and I. Sccuol^ slain.
Carbo, Lucius Domitius, and Lucius Sceuola, the great Bishop of the Romans.
These two were slain in counsel, as Marius commanded, Domitius fleeing, was
stricke^ at his going out, and Sceuola was slain a little before ye Senate
house. Their bodies were cast into ye River, for now it was out of use to bury
the^ that were killed. Sylla sent his army severally by diverse ways to Rome,
and willed the^ to take the gates of the City, and if they were repulsed, to
retire to Ostia. The Cities received the^ as they came, with great fear, and
opened their Gates when they would come in, and when they came to the City it
self, they opened the Gates, for being pined with hunger, and oppressed with
desperation of present evils, they were in ure to suffer the mightier power,
which Sylla when he knew, came forward with his Camp, and planted it in the
field Sylla enters Rome.
of Mars before the gates, and entered. All the contrary faction fleeing out of
the City, their goods he made common, or caused them to be sold by Trumpet.
He called the people to a Counsel, and lamenting the present time, badde them
be of a good cheer, Sylla to the people.
for he would set all in quiet, and bring the common wealth to better estate,
and whatsoever he should ordeyne, all should be for Clusio is under the
dominion of Sena, where Porsena the king of Tuscane held his Court. Spanish
Horsemen. Clani^, Clanius not far from Naples, at the City of Acerra.
the best. Having thus disposed his matters, leaving certain of his friends to
guard the City, he went to Clusio, where the remnant of the war was. In the
mean time, certain Spanishe Horsemen sent from the Captains of Iberia, came
to the Consuls, with whom Sylla making a fight on Horseback, he killed fifty
of them at the flood Clan^^, and two hundred and 70. fled unto him, the
residue Carbo destroyed, either hating the sudden reuolting of that nation,
or fearing the like loss by them. At that time with the other part of his
armies, Sylla overcame his enemies Saturnia in Campania. Vritanes not far
from Otranto, but far from Rauenna. Naples. The battle betvveene Carbo and
Sylla. Fight at Clusio. Fight at Spoleto an ancient City, the which
valiantly drove away Anniball after his victory at the lake of Perugia, and
stuck continually to the Ro^maines. Carinna flees. Martius goes to rel^^u^
Marius.
about Saturnia, and Metellus coming to Rauenna by ship, did win the
region of the Vritanes, abundante with grass and Corn. Certain other of
Syllas people entering Naples by treason in the night, slew all that were
there, saving a few that fled, and took away the Galleys of the City.
Between Carbo and Sylla was a sore fight at Clusium, till the Sun went
down, and when they had fought with like courage on both sides, night did
end the fight. In the field of Spoleto, Pompeius and Crassas, both Lieutenants
to Sylla, did kill three thousand of Carbos Soldiers, and beseeged Carinna that
was Camped over against them. Carbo minded to relieve Carinna with his other
host, which Sylla understanding, placed an embushment, and as they were
passing, destroyed two thousand of them. Carinna in the dark night, full of
rain and showers, although his enemies perceived, but cared not for it, for
the foul tempest he fiedde away. Carbo understanding that Marius his fellow
was distressed with hunger at Preneste, commanded Martius to go thither with
eight Legions, against whom Pompeius lying in awayte in a straighte, put them
from their journey, and having killed many, held the other as beseeged upon an
hill, where upon Martius without any companion, the fires being still kept,
fled away. The army laying the blame of the deceyte upon him, fell to
division, and one whole legion under The ^my re^olte li from Martius.
their ensigns without any commandment, marched to Ariminum, the other
went every man to his Country, so as there remained but seven bands with
the Capsayne. Martius with this infelicitie came to Carbo, Marcus Lamponius
from Lucania, M. Lamponius, Pom. Telisius, Gutta Capu mus come to relceue
Marius.
Pontius Tilisius from the Samnites, and Capuanus Gutta leading seauenty
thousand men, came to deliver Marius from the seege. Sylla understanding of
it, kept them back at a straight where they must needs pass. Marius being
utterly void of all help without, made a forte in the plain that was large
between Marius issues upon Lucretius.
both hosts, into the which he brought his army and ensigns to force
Lucretius, with the which attempting many wars in vain, he retired again
into Preneste. At this time, Carbo and Norbanus in Placentia came on the
suddayne in the evening to the Placentia is in Lombardy, vvher Auniball
ouerthrevv the Romans. A fight of Carbo and Norbanus against Metellus.
place where Metellus lay, and being within one hour of ye night among the
Uineyards, fondly and suriously set upon him, thinking by their sudden
assault to overthrow Metellus, but being overcome by the iniquity of the time
and place, entangled among the vines, ten thousand were slain, vj. thousand
yielded to the enim^e, the rest ran away, and but one thousand departed in
order to Arretio. Another Legion of Lucanes, led by Albinouanus, Airetio one of
the twelve Cities of Tuseme, about thirty miles from Florence. Albinouanus.
hearing of this loss, fled to Metellus for aughte he could do.
Albinouanus in great rage came to Norbanus, but shortly after making a secret
compact with Sylla to be assured as he should do a notable service, he invited
Norbanus and his chief Captains to a ba^quet, as Gaius Antipestris, Flauius
Fimbria his brother y^ in Fimbria killed himself in Asia, not to be taken of
Sylla. Albinouanus kills his friends, and flees to Sylla.
Asia had killed himself, and al other his officers present of y^ Camp. All the
which being come (except Norbanus) who only was absent, he slew them in his
tent, and fled to Sylla. Norbanus hearing of the loss at Arimi^^, and that
diverse of their armies were fled to Sylla, supposing now no more trust to be
in friendship (as in adversity it happens) took a private little boat, and
sailed The end of Norbinus at Ebodes.
to y^ Rhodes, in the which place, being required after of Sylla, and y^
Rhodianes doubting what to do, he killed himself in the midst of their
common place. Carbo commauuded Damasippo at Preneste to take two Legions, and
to deliver Marius from the seege, but the could not do it, because the
streyghtes were kept of Sylla. France on this side the Alps. Iucullus.
Placentia now Pazenca in Lombardy.
All the Frenchmen that from Rauenna ^welte to the Alps, did reuolte to
Metellus. Lucullus did overcome another part of Carbo his host at Placentia,
which when Carbo heard, having yet thirty thousand Souldyers at Clusie, two
Legions of Damasippus, and many other with Carinna, and Martio, and a great
number of Samnites, who refused no pain in passing the streightes, being
Carbo quayleth.
out of al hope, cowardly sailed into Lybia with his friends, being yet in
opinion to turn Lybia against Italy. They that remained at Clusie, came to a
fight with Pompey before that City, and lost The battle at Clusio.
about twenty thousand of their men, which loss had, the rest returned to
their own Countries.

Carinna, Martius, and Damasippus, with the Samnites, met at the streightes, to
pass by very force, which when they could not do, they marched toward Rome,
thinking (as void of men and strength, and for lack of victual) to take it.
They encamped at Albano, ten m^les off. Sylla, fearing that their coming
might molest the City, sent his Horsemenne with all diligence to encounter
them by the way, and himself with his mighty army came at midday, and lay at
Port Collina, a little from Venus Temple.

The enemies encamping also at the Gates of the City, a great fight began a
little before the Sun set. In the right wing Sylla had the better, the left
wing having the worse, fled A fight before Nome. Part of Syllas army flees.
The Portculice let down, cause of slaughter.
to the Gates. The old men that were there, seeing the enemy also coming
among the other, let down the Portculice, and killed many, whereof some were
Senatoures, and some Gentlemen. The other of force and necessity turned to
their enimyes, and fought all night with a great slaughter.

In this battle was slain Telesinus and Albinus, both Pretors, and their
Camps taken, Lamponius, Lucanus, Martius, Carinna, and other Captains of
Carbos faction fled. Great Fifty thousand slain before the gates of Rome.
was the slaughter at this fight, for it is said, there was slain about
fifty thousand, and above eight thousand, taken prisoners, and because the
greater part of them were Samnites, Sylla caused them all to be shot to
death. The next day Martius and Carinna were brought captive unto him, whom he
did not pardon after (...) cr^eitie against the ^^^^ites. Martius and Ca^^^n:
put to death.
the Roman manner, but put them to death, and sent their heads to Lucretio,
to nail them on the wall at Preneste, which when the Prenestines saw, and
hearing that al Carbos armies were destroyed, and Norbanus fled out of Italy,
and that the rest of Italy with the City of Rome, were for Sylla, they did
yield the City to Lucreti^. Marius hid himself in a Cave, and shortly
after killed himself. Marius kills himself.
Lucretius cut off his head, and sent it to Sylla, who hanged it up in the
common place, giving him this taunt for his young years to be a Consul, A man
must first be a Mariner before he Sylla taunteth.
can be a Master. When Lucretius had received Preneste, he killed part of the
Senatoures that were for Marius, and part he put in prison, all the which,
Sylla at his coming put to death, and The taking of Preneste, and cruel
handling of it.
commanding all the Prenestines to come without armor into his Camp, he
chose of them such as he thought had done him service, which were but few.
The other he divided into three parts, Romans, Samnites, and Prenestines. He
pardoned the Remains, Prenestines plaged.
although as he told them, they had deserved death. Both the other he
commanded to be done to death with darts. The women and the children he
suffered to go away free. The City he sacked, which was very rich, and thus
was Preneste taken. Norba an other City did still stoutely resist him, till A
Emilius Norba.
Lepidus got into the City by policy in the night, which thing the Citizens
perceiving, and being in desperation, part killed one an other, part killed
themselves, part hung themselves, part The miserable end of the Citizens of
Norba. There is another Citi^ of this name in Spain called Norba Augusta, now
Alcan ara.
shut their doors, and part set their houses a fire, which by the wind grew
so great, as the City was burned, and no man had the spoil. Thus they
manfully died.

Italy being thus afflicted with fire, famine, and slaughter, the Captains of
Sylla went to every place, setting garrisons where suspect was, and Pompeius
went into Lybia and Sicilia against Norbanus and his partakers. Sylla called
the Romans to a Counsel, speaking very magnifically of himself, and very
horribly for Sylla to the (...).
them, making this conclusion, that he would reduce the Roman people to
better state if they obeyed him, but he purposed not to Sylla to the (...).
spare one of his enemies, but extremely to punish them, were they Pretors,
Questors, Tribunes, or any other that had conspired with his foes, since the
day that Scipio brake promise with him: which being said, he proscribed to
death forty Senatoures, Proscoption is condemnation of death without
Judgment.
and a thousand six hundred Gentlemen of the Romans: he is the first that we
find, did proscribe men to dye. He appointed rewards for the killers, and the
bewrayers of the offendoures, and Horrible cruelty of Sylla.
penalties for them that did hide any of them. Shortly after he added more
Senators to the first, which suddaynely were killed where they were found:
some in the streets: some in their houses, and some in the Temples: some were
brought unto him on high, and thrown before his feet: some were dragged, and
some were beaten, no man daring speak one word at the pitiful sight hereof,
for fear of the smart: some were banished, and their goods given to other:
some were sought for that were fled, who being scourged every where, were
miserably done to death. Against the Itlians also were many murders, many
banishme^ts, and many publicaties of their goods, that had any way obeyed
Carbo, Norbanus, or Marius, or any of their officers, for the which, sharp
judgment was given over all Italy. Many and diverse accusations also were made
upon Captains and armies, and them that lent any money, or showed other
service or counsel against Sylla. Hospitality also and courtesy done by the
way in iourneys, or any other like friendship, as lending or borrowing of
money, or keeping company, Extremiti^.
was punished. The rich men were most sharply handled in all these things, and
when accusatio^s failed in particular men, Sylla turned to whole Cities, some
he punished by pulling down their forts, some their walls he made equal with
the ground, to some, he put a public pain, or else a yearly tax, some he
gave in habitation to them that had served him, among whom also he de^ided the
houses and lands of the Citizens, which thing made them sure to him all his
life, and as men that were certain of nothing but by his weal and safety, they
mainteyned his quarrel after he was dead. This was now the state of Italy.
Pompey had intercepted Carbo, and such noble men as were with him, flying from
Lybia to Sicilia, and from Sicilia to Cosyra, commanding all Cosyra an Hand in
the coast of (...). Car^^ put to death.
to be killed, before they come in his sight, except Carbo, who was brought
bound unto him, and laid before his feet, having bin thesce Consul. After a
long rebuke, he condemned him to death, and sent his head to Sylla, who having
all things as he would against his enemies, saving Sertorius, who was far
off, and the only enemy remaining. He sent Metellus to overthrow him in
Iberia. All civil matters he used as he listed, laws, creations by voices,
elections by lottes, was no more spoken of, every man fearing, either hiding
themselves, or holding their peace, or confirming by decree, as sure and
irreuocable, whatsoever he had done, either as Consul, or Proconsull. They set
up his Image of gold on Horseback, in the common Palace with this Title,

Cornelius Sylla the happy Captain.

For so did Flatterers use to call him in his fortunate fightes against his
foes, which name beginning of flattery, remained firm and stable. I have
seen in some writings, that he was called by decree Sylla the gracious, which
thing is not incredible t^ (...). Faustus.
me, because he was after named the Fortunate, which be names very nigh to
lucky and gracious. There is also an Oracle of Oracle.
continuance when he searched for things to come:

Credit me (O Roman) Venus has given great power, When he vvrote to the
Grecianes he named himself Epaphroditus, that is, acceptable to Venus.

Unto Aeneas lasting line But thou, honor
Each of the Gods yearly, and do them not forget.
Thy gifts to Delphos send, and one, the Mount so great,
Of cloudy Taure, shall climb, where Venus ancient race
At Cares City dwell, and does surname the place,
And offering there thine axe, shall take the royal mace.
The Romans wrote the same upon his image, which as I think, they did to
taunt him, or to mollify him: he sent a crown of gold, and an are with this
inscription.

To thee (Venus): these gifts the Monarch Sylla sends,
According to his dream that all to battle tends,
To Mar, and martial se^tes, his whole intent he bends.
Being now a King or Tirante, not chosen but by force and violence, wanting an
appearance to seem to be chosen, he invented this craft. In old time, kings for
their virtue did rule Rome, and A (...) Dictator.
when any of the^ did die, one Senator after an other did rule five days, til
the people had chosen an other to be king, and him y^ ruled those five days,
they called a king between, for in that mean time, he was a king. The
electio^s of ye Co^suls was ever done by Interr^g^^^.
them yt ended their office, but if by chase there was no Co^sul present, the^
was there also a king between made, til ye Co^suls were A King for the mean
time.
elected. Sylla following this custom, no man being Consul after ye death of
Carbo in Sicilia, and Marius in Preneste, he went out of ye City, Interea.
and commanded the Senate ye a King between should be chosen, and so by the^
Valerius Flaccus was chosen, thinking he would have Valerius Flaccus
proceeded to ye Consuls election: but Sylla severally by his letters, willed
Flaccus yt he should propou^d to ye people, that Sylla thought it expedient yt
one should be created the ruler in she City, yt was named Dictator, now not
used four C. years since, and whomesoeuer Dictator.
they chose, they should persuade him not to give it over at a time, but to
continue it, til he had appesed Rome, Italy, and other kingdoms, now afflicted
with sedition. Every man in his mind thought this was meant of Sylla, and he
did not much disse^ble it, for in ye end of his letters, he signified yt he it
was, if it should so seem to the^, yt should be so profitable to the commonwealth. Thus he wrote. The Rumaines yt now could do nothing in lawful
electio^s, nor had now any authority, embracing a show of election, as an
Image and pretense of a liberty, in want of al things did create Sylla a
Tyra^t to rule as he would. The office of Dictator having some similitude of a
Tira^t, in old time, was sone ended, but now yt first time, The office of a
Dictator did end in two months. Kings. Cons^ls. Kings. Olimpias a kind of
shows used in Greece every five yea^^^ according to the which they made
the^r accomptes of yeare^.
without any limitatio^, it was made very tyranny in deed. Only for the names
sake of election, they chose him Dictator to make laws, and use the common
wealth as he thought good. Thus the Remains having kings first, in the hundred
Olimpias, and after being a populare state, with yearly Co^suls, another
hundred Greek Olimps being passed, they had kings again, after the Clxx.
Olimp^. In Greece, there was now no more actiuitie used in the Olimps, but
renning of the race, for ye Champions and other sightes, Sylla had removed to
Rome, as some recreatio^ to the people after the war with Mithridates, and
the troubles of Italy, for he pretended that he would refresh and comfort y^
people after their long labors, and to show a figure of a common wealth, he
willed the^ to choose Co^suls, so first were chosen Marcus Silius, and
Oratilius Dolabella, and he like Some (...)
a King ouerlooked them. Being Dictator, four and twents ares were borne
before him, as was wont before she old kings. He had also a great guard about
his body. Some laws he made, and some he revoked. He would have none to be
Praetor before he were Questor, nor none Consul, before he were Praetor, and
forbadde any man to have that office twice, before ten years ^^^^^tion of
(...).
distance. The Tribune ship of the people he so defaced and deminished, that no
man cared greatly for it, for he ordained that he (...).
that was once Tribune, should have none other authority: wherefore all they
that were renoumed or noble, utterly refused that office, and I can not affirm
whether Sylla did translate it to the Senate, as it now is, or no: and because
the Senate was consumed by war and civil discord, he chose three hundred of
the order of Gentlemen to be Senatoures, and have voice by companies ^^cre^^e
of Senatoures.
in elections. The Servants of them that were slain, being young and lusty, he
made free, to the number of ten thousand, and declared them Citizens of
Rome, and named them of himself, Cornelians: and by this mean he had of the
commons ten thousand Servants made free, and named Cornelians.
to do his commandment. He provided the same throughout Italy, and to the
xxiii. Legions that served under him, he gave much lands in diverse Cities (as I
have said) whereof part was Lands given.
never divided, and part was forfeyte by penalty. He was to be feared in all
things, and so ready to anger, as he slew in the midst of the Palace,
Lucretius Offell^, by whom he beseeged Marius in Lucretius killed.
Preneste, and won that City, and obtained his great victory, because he
desired to be Consul before he had bin Questor or Praetor, being of the
Gentlemen's order. And after he had denied him, he not leaving his suit, because
he trusted in the great service he had done, but made request to the Citizens,
he called the people to a Counsel, and thus said. Friends, know you, and give
care to me, I have killed Lucretius, because he was disobediente unto me, so
the^ he showed a reason, A certain Ploughma^ was (...) to the (...).
bitten with Lyce, and stayed his Plough twice to pick them out of his cote,
but when they bit him the third time, he threw his cote in the fire. So doc I
advise all, as subdued, that they do not prove the fire at the third time.
Thus he astonished all men, using his authority at his pleasure, and triumphed
of the war against Mithridates. Some in a test, called his rule, a negative
Denied Kingdom.
kingdom, because only the name of a King was denied: out other, turning it to
the contrary in deeds, named it a plain Tyranny. To so great inconvenience
had this war brought both the Romans, Italians, and all other nations,
partly with Pirates, partly with Mithridates, and partly Sylla his invasions,
partly with consuming their treasure in sedition, and oppression of extreme
exactions: all the nations and Kingdoms, all confederates and Cities, as well
tributaries as other, that by league and All nations plaged by Sylla.
oath had joined themselves to the Roman Empire, and for their society in
war, and other service, lived with their own laws and were free: he caused
all to pay and to obey him, and from some, ports and provinces granted by
league, were taken away. Sylla received to his protection Alexander son of
Alexander King of King of Egypt. Thus Alexander vv^s left in Coo of his
Grandmother Cl^o^atra with great riches.
Aegipt, brought up in the I Will of Coo, and of the^ delivered to Mithridates,
and from him sledde to Sylla, and by decree made him king of Alexandria, being
now destitute of a man King, because the women that were of the royal blood,
wanted a man of their kin, thinking to get great gain of this rich Country,
but the Alexandrines when he had reigned nineteen days, sharply bearing
himself of Silla, brought him from the Court into the common Alexandrianes
kill their king.
schole, and there killed him. So they for the greatness of their proper
kingdom, and not feeling the smart that other had done, cared not for others
power. The year following, Silla using still Sylla being Dictator, is chosen
Consul. Metellus Piu^. The Emperoures were Consuls. Sylla refuses the
Consulship* Scruilius called Isauricus, for Isauria a country in little Asia.
the authority of Dictator, yet to show it a form of populare state, was
chosen Consul, and with him Metellus, surnamed dutiful, and by this example
peradventure, they that be now kings of Rome, do admit Consuls, and they them
selves be Consuls sometime also, thinking it no dishonor to have that office
with a greter authority. The year following, the people desired Silla to be
Consul again, but he refused it, and appointed Seruilius Isauricus, and
Claudius Pulcher to that office, and he without any compulsion, gave over the
office of Dictatorship freely, being the highest dignity (...)eth (...)e.
of all other, and surely I marvel, that he, who was now chief of all other,
and alone in authority, would give over so noble a dignity, not to his
children, as Ptolomeus in Aegipt, Ariob^rzanes (...)us, (...)s, (...)-(...)s
in Cappadocia, and Seleucus in Syria, but to them that had suffered by his
tirannic. It seems beyond reason, that he, who by violence, passing so many
perils, had made himself a Prince, The rare (...) of Sillas (...).
should so freely leave it, and beyond al men's opinions, have no fear of the
alteration. After he had killed more than a hundred M. me^ in war, slain so
many civil enemies, above nine C. Senators, xv. Consuls, and 2600. Gentlemen,
and banished a great number more, some of the which he spoiled of their
goods, some their lives, not suffering them to be buried, that he was neither
afraid of them at home nor abroad, nor of the Cities, of some of the which, he
had bet down their forts and walls, from some, taken away their goods and
lands, and put tributes upon them, but would needs become a private man. So
great a confidence and Confidence of Sylla.
fortune had this man, that in the midst of the common place he burst say, yt
therefore he gave over his authority, that he might render an account of it
if he were required. The rods and the axes he laid away. The guard of his
person he removed, and went alone with his friends in the midst of the
people, the multitude beholding and amazed at the thing. Only once as he went
home, Sylla suffers a young man to (...) him.
a young man reviled him, and because no man did forbid him, he took courage
to give him evil language, til he came to his house, so as he that before was
so furious against the greatest men and Cities, could now patiently suffer this
young man: only thus he said, entering his house, either by natural reason, or
by a diuinatio^ of things to come: This young man will be the let that an other
The aunsvvere of Sylla.
man having such authority, will not so give it over, which thing shortly after
happened to yt Romans, for Caius Caesar would not so leave his power. Surely
Sylla appears to be in all things vehement, C^sar follovveth not the example
of Sylla. Cuma is a pleasant place, not far from (...).
from a private man to make himself a Tyrant, and from that to be a private
man again. This done, he gave himself to quietness of y^ Country, and went
to Cuma, a City of Italy, to his own lands, leading a quiet life at the sea
side, and sometime hu^ting in the field, not for any misliking of the private
life in the city, nor for want of power to enterprise any thing that he would,
for, for his age, he was in good strength, and of body very ^ound. About Italy
he had an hundred and twenty thousand men, that lately warred under him, which
had received great gifts, and much The power of Sylla.
land of him, and in the city there were ten thousand of Cornelians, and
other multitudes of his factio^s, al friends faithful to him, and fearful to
other, all the which had their whole trust in him, of that they had done, and
in him reposed the surety of all they had. Notwithstanding all this (as I
think) he was weery of war, weery of dominion, and weery of the City, and
therefore sought a vacation as it were, and quietness in the Country. After
this, the Romans being delivered of tirannie, fell again to sedition: for when
they had created Caius Catulus one of Syllas faction, and Lepidus Emilius, of
the contrary, Consuls, enemies one to another, and ready New occasion of
sedition by the Consuls, C* Catulus, and Lapid. (...). Vision of Sylla.
to contend by and by, it was certain that a new inconvenience would take
beginning of these* They say, that whiles Sylla lay in the Country, he had a
vision that a God called him, the which in the morning he told to his friends,
and with great speed made his testament, which being signed that day, in the
evening a fit took him, and in the night he dyed, of the age of lx. years,
Death of Sylla. Age of Sylla. Happy.
a man, in all things most happy to his end, and as he was surnamed, so was he
fortunate in deed, if he be happy that can do what he li^t. And there was a
contention in Rome about him, some would Contention for the burial of Sylla.
have his body brought with great pomp through Italy to Rome, and there in the
common place to be honored with public funeral. Lepidus and his friends were
against it, but Catulus and other of Syllas side prevailed. So his body was
brought through Italy in a litter of gold in royal manner, numbers of musicians,
horsemen, and Syllas corpse in a ^^tter of gold.
other armed multitude followed. Al his Captains and Lieutena^ts that had
served under him, came to this po^p, from every place in armor, and as they
came, so were they set in order. Other multitudes also repaired, as never had
bin seen at any business. The Funeral of Sylla.
ensigns and axes that he used in his dignity, were borne before, and when he
was brought into the City, great honor, and exceeding show did increase.
Two thousand Crowns of Gold and more, were of purpose made, and presented.
The gifts of Cities, of Legions that had served him, and of every private
friend, were delivered, other ornaments were added to his funeral, the
sumptuousness whereof, no man can express. His body being brought in with the
army, the religious people, The receiving of his body.
both holy men, and sacred Virgins, did receive and bear by course: the
Senate and Magistrates, with all their tokens of office, did the like: the
troops of Horsemen, the bands of footmen, divided in order, did attend:
several benevolence was showed, bringing banners of gold, wearing harness of
silver, which yet be used in triumphs. There was a great number of Trumpets,
Praises of Sylla.
which in order did sound an heavy noise. The Senate praised him first, then
the Gentlemen, after the army, and all the people, whereof some desired his
life, some that feared him and his army, did now no less marvel about his
dead body: for remembering Affections of men.
in their minds the noble ^^ates he had done, and the manner of his death, they
could not but be astonished, confessing him to be of al other, though their
enemy, the most happy man, so as being dead, he was dreadful unto them.
Being brought into the common place before the Tribunal, where Orations were
wont to be made, the most eloquente man that then was alive, made the funeral
Oration, because Faustus his son was yet under Funeral Oration. Faustus his
son under age. In the field of Mars* none buried but kings.
age. The noblest of the Senate did take the litter, and bear it into the
field of Mars, where none was wont to be buried but Kings. The Horsemen and
the army marched about the fire whiles his body was consumed. This was the end
of Silla.

The Consuls going from the funeral, did contend with words and spiteful
speech, intending between them to make division of the rule that belonged to
the City.

Lepidus to flatter the Italians, required they might be restored Contention.
to the lands that Silla had taken from them. The Senate fearing The Consuls
bound by oath.
this falling out, did bind them both by oath, that they should not contend by
arms. Lepidus being appointed by lotte to the province of France beyond the
Alps, did not return to the election, Lepidus refuses to return to the
election.
because he intended the next year to make war upon Sillas faction, without
respect of his oath, for it seemed he had fulfilled his promise, in keeping of
it during his office.

This his purpose not being secreate, the Senate sent for him: Lepidus makes
war.
He, not ignorant why he was called, came with all his army as though he would
have entered Rome therewith, but being forbidden, he proclaimed war by a
Trumpet.

Catulus of the other side did the like: Not long after making a A Battle
between the Consuls. Lepidus overcome and dies in Sardinia in the sea of
Libya, called Sanda liotis, because it is like the ^ole of a foot. Sertorius.
battle in the field of Mars, Lepidus was overcome, and without any great chase
he fled into Sardinia, where being vexed with a consuming disease, he dyed.
His army disturbed in sundry parts, was dissolved the greatest part of it,
Perpenna led into Spain to Sertorius.

The last work left to Sylla was this war of Sertorius, continuyng eight
years with difficulty, not as Romans against Spaniardes, but as one with
another against Sertorius, who ruled Sertorius occasion of new war.
in Iberia. He, when Carbo and Sylla were at war, took the City of Suessa
by composition, as we have said, and fled from thence to his office, leading
with him an army of Italians, and gathered more of the Celtiberians, with
whom he expulsed the officers that were there for Sylla, who would not admit
him, and fought very valiantly with Metellus, that was sent against him of
Sylla, and being courageous to any feate, elected a Senate of three hundred of
his present friends, which he called the Roman Sertorius makes a Senate in
Spain.
Senate, in dispight whereof he named it, the Choice Counsel. Sylla being
dead, and after him Lepidus. Sertorius having another army of Italians, which
Perpenna brought unto him as a Praetor of Perpenna.
Lepidus, he had an opinion to be able to make war upon Italy: which the
Senate fearing, sent another army and another Praetor, which was Pompey, to
the army that was before in Iberia, Pompey into Spain.
who being but a young Gentleman, was renowned for the service he had done under
Sylla in Libya and in Italy. He passed the Alps very boldly, not that way that
Anniball did so notablye, Rodanus Rosne in France. Eridanus Poo in Italy.
but brake another way by the fountains of Rodanus and Eridanus, both the
which floudes, have their springs not far asunder from the high Alps. Rodanus
runs by the Frenchemen that he beyond the Alps, into the Tirr^ne sea: the
other within the Alps flowing to Ionia and in steed of Eridanus is called
Padus. Being come into Iberia, Sertorius straight did overthrow one legion
going a foraging with their baggage and slaves. The City Justice. A vv^^^^
^t(...).
of Lau^one in Pompeius sight he spoiled and overthrew.

At this siege a woman being missused of a souldior, with courage beyond
nature of her kind, pulled out his eyes. Sertorius A whole band put to
death.
having understanding of the chance, put to death the whole ba^d, being
counted corrupted in like things, though it were al of the Romans: then
winter coming on, they rested. The Spring Pirenei mountains divide Spain
from Ira^ce* Lusitania, Portugal. Battle at Sura now Sucrone.
approaching, they came forth, Metellus and Pompey from the mount Pirinei, and
Sertorius with Perpenna from Lusitania. They met at a City called Sura, where
giving battle, though an horrible thunder, in y^ clear air, which is
marvelous, and lightnings out of reason did flash upon the^, yet they as
expert soldiers without fear^ kept y^ fight, and made great murder one of
another, til Metellus had Metellus overthrows Perpenna. Sertorius
overcomes Pompey.
ouerthrown Perpenna, and scattered his men, and Sertorius overcome Pompey, who
was hurt in y^ thigh with a darte, and escaped with much danger This was the
end of the first battle. Sertorius had a white Heart tame, and to him very
loving, the which being lost, A white Heart. Some think this battle was
fought at Segobrida a town in that part of Spain also. Segunti^ now called
Muruidero
he took it for an evil token, and would not come forth for grief, thinking
his Heart had bin taken of his enemies, who scorned him for it: but when y^ Heart
was seen again, and came running to him, by and by, as by y^ provoked, he set
upon his enemies, and made diverse light fightes. Shortly after they fought a
great battle about Sagu^tia, from noone till night, in y^ which he overcame
Pompey in the battle of horsemen, and flew.vj. M. of his enemies, and lost half
so many of his own. Metellus of yt other side, killed.v. M. of Perpe^nas camp.

The next day Sertorius with an huge number of Barbarians, a little Pompey
loses, Metellus gayneth.
before night set upon Metellus, and had broken his camp, if Pompey had not
approached, and made him leave his bold enterprise. These things being done in
so^mer, they retired to their winter harborow. The year following, being y^.
Clxvj. Olimp. 2. of y^ co^federed ^^thy^ia is the ^^^te Region ^o Troy, over*
against Thracia. Two regions fell to the Romans by Testament.
nations did fall to the Romans. Bythinia given by Nicomedes, and Cyrene by
Tolomeus Lagus, called Appion, leaving it to the^ by Testament. On the other
side, great enemies discovered against them, Sertorius in Spain, Mithridates in
y^ East, rouers over al yt sea, a stir in Creta, and a tumult of the
Fe^ce-players of Italy, very sudden and sharp. The Romans dividing their power
for this purpose, set.ij. Trouble.
legions into Iberia, which being come, Metellus and Pompey removed from their
wintrings at y^ mount Pirenei into Iberia. Sertorius and Perpenna came from
Lu^itania, at the which time, many fled from Sertorius to Metellus, with the
which Sertorius being grieved, he handled many Sertorius remoueth the Romans
from the guard of his person. Sertorius cruel.
cruelly and barbarously, whereby he grew into hate of the army and the rather
for yt he removed the Romans from the custody of his body, and put the
Celtiberians in their place. They could not abide to be reproved of
unfaithfulness, though they served an ennimy to Rome, but this thing chiefly
grieved the^, that they were counted Grief of the Romans.
rebels to their country, for his sake, and yet suspected of him, and that with
him there was no difference between a fugitive and a faithful. The Celtiberians
also used the^ dispitefully, and taunted them as unfaithful: notwithstanding
the Romans did not utterly forsake him, Aragon.
because of their commodities: for there was not a more valiant nor fortunate
captain than he, in somuche as the Celtiberians would call him Anniball for
his promptness, who was the most politic and forward Captain that they
could rehearse. Sertorius compared to Anniball.
After this sort stood the army with Sertorius. Metellus people did daily
molest the Cities, and compel many to yield unto the^.

Pompeius besieged Palantia, and with timber had made way to scale the wall.
Sertorius came to the relief, and removed the siege* Pompey burned his timber
work, destroyed the walls, and retired to Metellus. Sertorius repaired the
City, and speedilye went toward Calagyrus, where, encou^tring with the^ yt lay
there, he killed. 3000. of them. And these were ye doings in Iberia this year.

The year following, the Roman capitaines with greater courage set upon the
Cities yt held with Sertorius, and took some of the^, and other they sought to
get by policy, as they did, not using their whole force at every attempt. But
ye year following came stronger to the field, and did their things with more
confidence. Now Sertorius Sertorius decays.
began to decay, God being against him, and he omitting the laws and travails
of a captain, gave himself to delicateness, and women, feasting and drinking:
for these causes he was many times overcome, falling into furies and rages for
every trifle, and suspected every man. Wherefore Perpe^na, y^ from the faction
of Aemilius, Perpe^^a, Conspiracy.
came unto him with a great army, began to doubt of him, and conspired against him
with ten other, the which being discovered, some were hanged, and some
escaped, but Perpenna not being named, as was his marvelous good hap,
perseuered the rather in his Death of Sertorius.
purpose, he desired Sertorius to a banquet, and although he never went
without his Guarde, yet at the seaste, little respect being had, and he and
all they ouerladen with Wine, Perpenna cut off his head in the place where he
feasted. The army with great ire and tumulte rose against Perpenna, changing
their hate into love of the Captain, for though before they had us great
lykyng of him, now that he was dead, remembrance of his virtue turned their
minds to pity. And in this present Misery causes pity.
case, they contemned Perpenna as a private man: and thinking their only weal
did consist in Sertorius, they could not abide Portugales.
Perpenna, and not only they, but the Lusitanes and other Barbarians thought as
much, whom Sertorius chiefly used in the war, and when the tables of his
Testament were unsealed, and Perpenna found to be his heir, every man hated
him the more, because he was not only a Traitor to his Captain, but to his
friend and benefactour, and then had they not held their hands, but that
Perpenna hid himself, and pleased some with Perpenna found to be heir to
Sertorius.
gifts, and some with promise, some he made afraid with fear, and some he
sharply used with the terror of other. To the common sort he humbled
himself, and such as were in prison by Sertorius he delivered, and to the
Lusitanes restored their pledges, Perpenna cruel.
wherefore they were content to take him as their Captain. This honor had he
after Sertorius, yet not without great difficulty, for being cruel, he soon
fell to sharp punishing, and of the Romans that came with him, he killed
three of the noblest sort, and his own Nephew. Now was Metellus gone to the
other side of Iberia, thinkyng Pompey to be sufficient to overthrow Perpenna,
who a while spent the time in making skirmishes, not bringing for the Fight
between Pompey and Perpenna.
their whole power. The tenth day, with all their battles they came into y^
field, thinking with that one work, to make an end, Pompey passed little of
Perpennas experience. Perpenna distrustful of his armies continuance in
obedience, was y^ rather willing to try all at once. Pompey giving the onset
the more ^^ercely, and Perpenna Overthrow of Perpenna.
not abiding as a Captain, and the army void of goodwil, was soon overcome,
and every man flying, Perpenna hid him under a tuffte of bushes, fearing more
his own, than his enemies, and being taken of certain horsemen, they dragged
him to Pompey, and of his own people he was evil spoken of, for his offense
against Sertorius: he made great ado to be brought alive to Pompey, to reveal
unto him great matter of y^ Roman faction, either to tell the Death of Perpenna.
truth or to save himself, but Pompey sent to have him killed before he came
in his sight, fearing least he might have uttered some strange matter, y^
might have bin y^ beginning of a new stir Wisdom of Pompey.
in Rome, wherein Pompey seemed to do very well and wisely, and wan a great
opinion thereby. This was the end of the war in Iberia, and of Sertorius life,
which if he had not bin dead, would not have bin finished, neither so soon,
nor so easyly.

The war of Spartaco.

In this time in Italy, a Sword-player that kept in Capua for Spartacus.
shows, called Spartacus a Thracian borne, had served in war with the Romans,
and now was as a slave in custody for to show his cunning in plays: he
persuaded.lxx. more of his fellows, to adventure for their liberty rather tha^
to be slaves for shows, and with the^ forcing y^ keepers, he ran away, and
arming such as hemet with staves Mount de Soma.
and swords he fled to the Mount Vesuuius, whither many slaves, and some
freemen, flying to him from the Countries, he received the^, Aenomaus, Crissus,
o^
and robbed the plains adjoining, he appointed two officers, Aenomaus and
Crissus other two Sword-players, and making equal division Varinius Glaber* P.
Valerius were overcome of Spartacus.
of his pray among them, in short time great multitudes came unto him. Whom to
overcome Varinius Glabrius was first sent, and after him Publius Valerius, not
with an army of any regard, but such as for have they could gather by y^ way. For
y^ Romans did not think it should need any other, nor looked for such effect
at a First the battle between Spartacus and the Romans.
Sword-players hand. But when it came to the battle, the Romans were
overcome: Spartacus killed Varinius horse, and it lacked but little, that y^
Roman Captain was not taken of a vile Sword player, after this fight, more
and more resorted to Spartacus, and he had now an army of.lxx. M. for whom, he
made armor and al other provision. The Romans sent the Consuls with two
legions, against Mount Gargano in Appulia now called Mount S. Angelo.
whom Crissus came with.xxx. M. and was overcome at Mount Garinus, loosing two
parts of his army and his life also.

Spartacus passed over mount Apennine to go into France beyond the Alps: but
one of the Consuls lay in the way and Spartacus ouercometh the Consuls.
stopped his passage, and the other followed him: he fought with them both and
overcame them in several fightes: so as the Co^suls retired with tumuit.
Spartacus did sacrifice three hundred Romans to his fellow Cressus, and with
twenty thousand Remain Sacrifice of me^
footmen, he went to Rome, burning all unprofitable birds, and killed all
Captives and the beasts of carriage, to march the faster. Many fugitives
coming unto him, he would admit none.

The Consuls encou^tred him at Picene, where was a notable fight, and many of
the Romans slain, and lost the day. Yet durst he not go directly to Rome,
because he did not think himself equai with the Citizens in feats of war,
nor had an army thoroughly instructed, for never a City took his part, but only
slaves and fugitives, and a confused multitude following him: Th^r^s in Apulia
which the Romans made a colonie and called it Copia.
he turned to the mountains at Thurus, and besieged the town: he forhad any
mercha^t to bring gold or silver into his camp, or to be used: but brass and
iron he admitted, paying well for it, and did not hurt the^ that brought it.
Whereby having matter abeu^dant, he made very fair armor, and used to seek
pray in the country, and fought with the Romans again, and had the victory
and went away with a great spoil. Now were three years past, Three years
war.
and this war remained horrible to the Romans, which at the first they
contemned, as a play of Fence. The election of y^ new Consuls being come, such
a terror was of him, as no man desired the office* till Licinius Crassus,
notable in Rome for his house and Zicin us Crassus.
riches, took it upon him, and with six other legions went against Spartacus:
and being come nigh, he received the armies of Crassus does execution.
the two Co^suls, of the which he put to death every tenth man, as bapt by lot,
because they had bin so often overcome. Some think Crassus ouercom^c^^
otherwise, that they al fought and were overcome, and the^ he so punished them
by the tenth, and killed four thousand, having no doubt of the multitude. But
whither so ever he did, it auayled much to the overthrow of his enemies, for by
and by he set upon them ten thousand of Spartacus men that camped by the^,
whereof he killed two parts, and then with like courage so fiercely encou^tryng
with Spartacus, he overcame him with a notable fight, The thu^ ^^ttel.
Spartacus ^ yet^ tovvard (...).
and chased him to the sea, where he thought to escape by ship into Sicilie, but
he ouertoke him, and enclosed him in a trench, and when he had forced him to
^lee to the Samnites, Crasses killed six thousand of them at the sun rise,
and as many at the sun The fourth battle. Samnites, now Abr^^zo.
set, three only of the Romans being killed, and seven hurt, so great an
alteration was there of victory, after the execution of that punishmente.
Spartacus loking for horsemen to come unto him, did not now come forth with
all his men, but by times Spartacus holden in.
did much annoy the besiegers, sodaynely issuing upon them and throwing
firebrandes into their camp, burned their wall, and put them to much
difficulties and trouble. A Roman Captive he hung up in the midst of his
camp, showing to his soldiers what they should suffer if they did not
overcome. The Romans in the City seeing of this siege, and thinking it a
dishonor to be so long holden with a sword-player, appointed Pompey, who was
returned from Iberia with his army, (waying the difficulty of the thing) to
take the charge thereof. Crassus seeing the glory of Pompey appointed to this
vva^.
this war should be taken from him by Pompey, made have to try it with
Spartacus, and Spartacus thinking to prevent Pompey, would have made agreement
with Crassus, but being rejected he thought to prove the uttermost, and with
his horsemen that were come, he issued out of the camp, with all his bands, and
fled as fast as he could to Brunduse, Crassus following him: but when he heard
that Lucullus was come to Brunduse with his army from the war of Mithridates,
then in desperation of all things he encou^tred with Crassus. The fight being
long and difficulte, as among so many soldiers driven by desperation,
Spartacus was hurt The last battle vvherin Spartacus was ^^aint.
in y^ thygh with a dart, by y^ which wound falling on his knee, he defended
himself with his shield, and fought with the^ that came upon him, many of the
which he overthrew, till he and the companies about him were discomfited, the
other multitude without order fled, and were killed without number: of the
Romans a thousand were slain.

Spartacus being dead was never found, a great multitude from the battle
went to the Mountains, against whom Crassus followed. They dividing
themselves into fortye parts, fought it out, till they were all slain, save
six thousand, which being taken, were hanged in the way between Rome and
Capua. (...) the ch^e^^ City of C^ip^^^^. Contention between Crassus and
Pompey. Crassus seeks to be Consul* after Syllas appointment. Pompey, after
the ancient manner. Both chosen Consels.


This did Crassus in six months, contending with Pompey for glory, and would
not leave his army, because Pompey would not leave his, and both of them
sought to be Consul.

Crassus having been Praetor according to Syllas law, Pompey neither having bin
Questor nor Praetor, being yet xxxiij. years of age, promised the Tribunes to
reduce their office to y^ antie^t authority: and being both chosen Consuls,
neither of them would leave their army. Pompey said he would stay for Metellus
to make his triumph of Iberia.

Crassus affirmed that Pompey ought first to give over.

The people peceyuing that discord was ready to rise, and The people require
reconciliation.
two armies at hand, requested y^ Consuls sitting in their places to come to
reco^cilation, which at the first they both denied: but the southsayers
declaring great and grievous calamites to follow, unless they were agreede,
the people again with lamentation did desire them, recording the miserable
time of Sylla and Crassus relenteth first.
Marius: with the which things, Crassus being moved, rose first from his
seat, and came to take Pompey by the hand and to be reconciled. Pompey rose
also in have and came fast to him, and one embraced another, great thanks with
showtes, was given unto them, and the people would not let them depart, til
they had determined the dissolution of their armies.

This contention, that by all men's opinions seemed, would have grown very
great, was happily ended: the lx. year of the Civil war from the death of
Tiberius Gracchus.

The end of the first book of Civil dissentions.
The second Book of Appian of Alexandria touching the civil discord of the
Romans.
AFter the Monarchy of Sylla, and all that Sertorius and Perpenna did in
Spain, other like Civil business ^^l among he Romans, til Caius Caesar and
Po^pe^ he great, warred one upon another. Casar slew Pompey, and certain in
the ^enate killed Caesar* How this was ^one, and how both Pompey and Casar were
destroyed, this second Book of Civil cau^^s shall declare.

Pompey had lately scoured the seas of Rouers which robbed Pompey.
in every place beyond all reason: and after them subdued Methridates king of
Pontus: and set order in his kingdom, and al y^ nations as far as the East.
Caesar was yet a young man, forward in word and deed, bold to any thing, and
hoping of every Praetor had the chai^^ of the law. A^dd^s of houses and
pro^^^ion.
thing, inclined to ambition sobeyond al measure, as being Praetor and Fdilis,
he grew in great debt, to get the good will of the people, which is ever
wont to embrace them that be beu^tiful.

Caius Catilina was also notable, for his great fame and noble Cat^ime. Cat^ime
^^ileth his soune.
blood, a very rash man. thinking it once good to kill his own son for the
love of Aurelia Orestilla, because she would not grant to marry with him,
having a child alive. He was friend to Sylla, of his faction, and a very great
follower of him: through his ambition he was in much want, and by the enticing
of some great men and women, labored to be C^nsull, that by that mean, he
might make his way to Tyranny, and being in good hope to have the election,
he was repulsed, and Cicero chosen, a man most eloquent and sweet in speech.
Cateline, did Cateline repulsed and Cr^er^ chosen confull.
skorne him, and in despite of them that had chosen him, for the baseness of
his kin, called him a New man, (for so do they term them, that grow noble
of themselves, and not of their New man.
ancestors) and for that he was a stranger in the City, he named him a
Fermer, by the which word they call them that dwell in other men's houses. And
for this, he refused to deal in public matter, wherein was plenty of strife
and contention, VViues weary of their husbands.
and no great nor present further aunce to a Monarchy. Yet he gathered much
money of many wives which hoped to be rid of their husbands by this hu^ley
burley. He co^fecred with some of Senators Gentlemen.
the Senators and them that be called Gentlemen, and some of the Commons,
strangers and servant he also allured. But his chief Counselors were,
Cornelius, Lentulus, and Cethegus, which were then officers in the city. He
sent about Italy to the that had spent their gains got by the violence of
Sylla, and were desirous of the like enterprises again. To Fesule in Tuscane,
he sent Caius Manlius, and other into Ancona and Appulia, the which presently
did gather men for him. All these practices did Fuluia, a (...) utters the
consp^ac^e. Q Carius.
noble woman, bewray unto Cicero, whose lover Q. Spurius, a man for his lewd
life removed from the Senate, and admitted to Catelines conuentions, ambitious
and very light did boast with his woman, that shortly he should be made a
great man. Rumors were now raised of their doings in Italy, and Cicero set
gardes indiuers places of the city, and sent some noble men (...) chief
minister or Cate^^^^.
to have an eye to the suspected places. Cateline, although no man durst lay
hands on him, yet, because the truth was not tried out, perceiving the time to
be suspicious, and putting al his hope in spreding, sent his money before to
Fesule: and giving order with his confederates to kill Cicero* and in one night
to set the city a (...)
six in sundry places, he posted to C. Manlius, to make an other army of the
sudden, to invade the city after the burning. He caused the axes and rods,
to be borne before him like a Proconsull very fondly, and went to Manlius,
taking up soldiers by the way. Now was it thought good to Lentulus and his
companions, as The manner of the practice.
soon as they heard Cateline to be at Fesule, that Lentulus himself and
Cethegus should beset Ciceros house early in the morning with weapons hid, and
that they being let in, because of their dignities, should speak with him, and
by talk draw him a good way off, and when they had him from other company, to
kill him. Then should Lucius Sextius a Tribune, by and by call an assembly by
the ordinary officers, Cicero to be listed, the c^^t^ to be burned.
and accuse Cicero as a man fearful, troublesome, and a disturber of the
city, when there was no such cause: and the night after this Oration of
Sextius, to set ye city a fire in other.xij. places, to spoil it, and kill the
best me. This was y^ opinion of Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, and Sextius,
chief of y^ co^spiracie, and waited for ye time.

There were ambassadors of Sau^^* to co^plain of their governors, which by
Lentulus were admitted to ^ conspiracy, y^ they should stir their country
against the Romans. L^^u^us sent Vuiturtius of Cro^one with the^ to Cateline,
carrying letters without any name. The Ambassadors being afraid, did
communicate with Fabrus Sanga, who was their patron, as every other city had in
Cities had pa^^ones in Rome (...).
Rome. Cicero understanding this by Sanga, appreheded both them and Vulturtius
as they were going away a brought them to the Senate, to whom they confessed al
they had learned of Lentulus, and with much ^^o bewrayed, that Cornelius
Lentulus had often said, y^ by dest^^te. ^^. Cornelius should be Monarchs of
Rome, whereof Cornelius* a great surname in Rome.
^. were past, Cinn. and Sylla. When these things were declared, the Senate put
Lentulus out of his office. Cicero committed every of the to the houses of the
pretors, and straight returned and called ter sentece. There was much ado about
ye counsel house, for y^ truth was not yet known* and the conspiratours were
afraid of themselves. The servant, and freemade me^ of Lentulus and
C^t^^gus, got many artificers with the^, and went to the back sides of the
Pretors houses to have taken away their masters, which, when Cicero heard, he
ran out of the counsel house, and having set guard Privilege of Co^sul elect.
Syllanus.
in every place, came again, and hastened the judgment. Syllanus spoke first
as he that was elected to be Consul next: for it was the Romans manner to
have him speak first, that should follow in ye Consuls office, because (as I
think he should com^nly crecute the decrees, and thereby, consider the more
ripely and morely of every of Disagrement, (...) the co^spiracie.
them. Syllmus was of opinion y^ these men should have extreme punishment: and
many other consented to his judgment, till Nero must say his mind, who
thought it good to keep them in prison til Cateline were overthrown, and the
thing thoroughly (...) with whom Cicero du^^ste not contend.
known. C. Caeser, who was not without suspicion to be privy to this
co^spiracie, with whom Cicero durst not contend, because he was so accepted to
the people, added more, that Cicero should place them in such Cities of Italy
as he thought good, til Cateline were dispatched, and then to be brought to
judgment, that no e^tremitye should be used against so noble men, that
might (...).
seem void of cight or reason. This sentence seming indistere^t, man^ allowed
of it, and rashly consented to it, til Cato plainly had discovered the
suspision against Caesar: and Cicero fearing that this night some trouble would
follow, and that the multitude that were acquainted with the matter, and then
remained doubtful in the common place, would do mischief: and for some
inconvenience, as well of the one as of the other, determined to execute the
without judgment, as apparent offenders: Cicero brought every one of them,
(the Senate yet sitting) to the common prison, (...).
and without knowledge of the people, put them to death. Then he went to the^
that were in the common place, and told the^, they have lived: whereat they
dispersed with fear, were glad to hide (...).
themselves as well as they could: and so the city, that at that present was in
great fear* received a little comfort. Cateline had now gathered xx. M. and
armed the fourth part of them, and was going into (...) for more preparation:
but Antonie the other Consul, encountered him in the Alps, and without great
ado, overthrew him, as one that suriously had taken so horrible a thing in
hand, which when it came to the trial, without order, erecuted the
^^Spane^^yne.
s^^ne, although neither he nor none other of the nobles yt were of that
conspiracy, would agree to flee: but running among the enemies, were sl^in in
the midst of them. Thus the rebellion of (...)ey.
Cateline, which had almost brought the City to utter destruction, was
dissolved: and Cicero y^ before was only notable for his eloquence, now also
both for word and deed was extolled and plainly appeared the preserver of his
perishing country: wherefore thanks were given him in the whole assembly, and
diverse sholutes of praise made unto him: and whereas Cato thought him worthy
the name of father of the country, the people confirmed it with a cry. This
honorable name being given first to Cicero, is now attributed also to such
Emperors as be worthy: For this title is not given to every king with the rest
of his other style, but in time with great ado is decreede unto him, as a
perfect (...) money of his excellent virtue.

Caesar was chosen Liuetenant for Spain, and of his cred(...) (...).
was staide in Rome: for so much did he owe more than h^ (...) worth (as they
report) he said he had need of two (...) and five hundred millions, to have
nothing: yet agreeing (...) (...).
his creditours as well as he could, he went into Sp^^^e, where he did not
deal with City matters, or by sessions take order for their causes, thinking
that nothing served his purpose, b^^ thered men, and in time subdued all the
rest of Spa^^^, til he had brought it subject and tributarie to the Romans.
He sent much money to the common treasure of Rome, wheresore the Senate (...).
granted him a triumph: he made preparation of a great show in the suburbs of
Rome. The time of election of new Consulls (...).
was come, and he that stood for the office must be present, and if he were
once entered, he could not return again to make triumphs. He being very
desirous of the Consulship, and not yet ready for the triumph, sent to the
Senate and desired he might ask the office by his friends in his absence,
although it were against the Law: But Cato spoke against it, so as the las^e
day of the election was spent in reasoning. Wherefore Caesar set aside (...).
the triu^ph and came running to the election and desired the office.

At this time Pompey was in great power and glory for his victory Pompey.
against Methridates: he required that many things which be had granted to
Kings, Princes and other estates, might he confirmed by act of Parliament.
The which request many ^nuied, specially Lucullus, who made war against
Methridates before, Lucuilus against Pompey.
and brought him so weak, that it was an easy matter to overcome him, so as
indede the seat against Methridates was Crassus with Lucullus.
properly his, and Crassus took part with Lucullus. Whereat Pompey being
grieved, he joined with Caesar and promised by oath Pompey with Caesar.
to make him Consul, and Caesar reconciled Crassus to Pompey.

And these three having greatest power of al, did serve one another turn,
insomuche as one Va^ro a writer, in one of his books, did call this agreement,
a triple salling headlong.

The Senate having them in suspicion, did choose Lucius Bibu^ ^^^^ the other
Consul, to withstand Caesar, and they straighte fell to conte^^^^^, and made
private preparation of armor one against another.

Caesar was a deep dissembler, and in the Senate house used speeches
(...)yueth (...).
of reconcil^ation with (...), that by their dissension, the co^ non ^^ a^th
^ught take no ^^athe. He giving creotie to this pretense being vn^^^^sed and
unprepared, and ignorant of Cae^^^^ meaning, son that he had made great
promsion in s^cr^^te, and de^^i^d laws for the poor against the Senate,
d^^^d^^ng lands unto them: the best that was about (...), he appointed as of
the common treasure, to be bestowed upon them that had bin fathers of three
children, and by this mean he ^^^ the hearts of the multitude. For twenty
thousand were a compted only to take the benefit of three children.

Many of the Senate were against this purpose. Wherefore (...) with a famed
anger that they would not admit so ^^ste a thing, ^^n ou^e, and would not
call the Senate tog^^her all the year after. But in the common place he would
speak to the people, ^^^ enquired of P^mp^y and Cras^^^, how they liked of the
la^^^^, (...) their c^^seate, he willed the people to come to the ^^^^obation
of them, with their weapons hid.

The Senate (because it was not lawful to assemble, unless The (...).
truth Consuls were present) went to (...) house because they had not foresome
to make resista^ce to C^s^^, and exhorted (...) to ^^^hst ^^de the laws, that
it might not some he was ouer^ru^^^ by negligence, but of necessity. (...)
was persuaded, and (...) the Common place, w^iles C^s^r was yet speaking (...)
by (...).
to the people. Then was there much s^^ise and disorder, and some hurt, for
they with h^^^ weapons, brake the rods and ^^^^es of (...), and wounded the
Tribunes that were about h^^m.

(...) not abashed, offered his throat, and with a loud voice, called Caes^rs
row^e to y^ deed, saying: If I cannot per^uade Caesar to Justice by my death,
I throw upon him all this blame and mischief. Notwythstandyng, his friends,
though against his will, conveyed him into the next Temple of Iu^^^er
possessour.

Cato was sent for, and like a young man, thruste in among them, and began
to speak: but being ouerpreste with (...)s men, he was put out again: yet
pri^^ly coming in another way, he ran up to the place of speech, and
determining to speak nothing else, he sharply cried out against C^sar, (...)
was pulled down.

Then Caesar pronounced the laws, and caused the people so sweat unto them,
as ever to continue in effect* He co^^^^nded the Senate to swear also. Whereof
^^nye, and Ca^^ not agreeing, Caesar threatened death unless they swear, and
the people confirmed it, so that for fear they swear, and so did the Tribunes
The (...) co^^^^^ed by ^n ^^he.
also, because it auatled no more to resist, the law being pron^^ced by other.

Vetius, a man of the common sort, came running among them with a naked
sword, saying he was sent of Bib^lus, ^^^^o and Cato, to kill Caesar and
Pompey, and that the sword was delivered him of (...) one of Bib^lus
Sargeants. And although every man suspected this devise, yet Caesar stirred
the people, and appointed the next day to examine Vetiu^. He was co^^^^ted to
prison, and was dead that night.

This chance also being diversely construed, Caesar did not omit to work
it for his purpose, affirm^ng, that they that were afraid, had done it. Where
upon, the people did grant Vetiu^ dead.
revenge to be had of his en^mies.

Then Bib^lus lettyng all go out of his hands, as a private manne, came not
our of his house all the rest of Bib^lus gives over.
the year of his office. Now Caesar made no more inquisition of Vetius, but
having all the power of the common wealth alone, made more laws to allure the
people, and to confyrme all that Pompey had done, according to his promise.

There were that had the name of Gentlemen in the city, and were in the midde
place between the Senate and the people, These men might do much both for
their own substance, and for y^ gathering of tributes and tol^cs, which the
people did pay, whereof a number attended upon them most assu^edly. They made
suit ^^ the Senate to be discharged of part of the rent. The Senate made some
sticking at it, but Caesar not regarding that, only using the people did
re^^tte the third part of the rent unto them.

They having beyond their expectation obtained such bene^^^^ by his goodness
did extol him like a God, and so Caesar by (...)e, had another company
stronger unto him than the people was. Then Caesar made shows and huntings
unto them, (...)*
s^^ding upon ^u^r^ thing more than he was able, exceeding all y^ had bin
before time in s^^ptuous preparation, and bountiful rewards. (...)*
Wherefore they made him ruler of France, both on this ^^^^ and beyond the
Alps for five years, and for his office he had some legions appointed.

He considering that his absence should be long, and that envy would be greater
than the greatest favor, be^lowed his daughter (...) to (...).
in marriage upon Pompey, although Scipio were yet alive, fearing that Popey
(though he were his friend) might ^^^^ the greatness of his felici^^e: he made
the most seditious men officers for (...)*
the next year, and Aulus Gabi^^^ he declared Consul, who was his chief
s^^end, and married Calphu^^^^ daughter to L^^^us Piss, that should be Consul
with him.

^^^^ ^^^ing out, that rule was rated by making of wanton marriages: Tribunes
he appointed Va^^^tu^ and Cl^^^^^ called the (...).
Fair, who was s^^^l^ diss^med for a suspicion with Iul^a, Ca^^^ wise, in the
sacrifice that belonged ^nelye to women.

For the which, although C^^^r did put away his wise, yet he made
nothing ad^e with him, because he was accepted to the people: yet other did
accuse him for disparaging the holy (...) ^^^^^.
sacrifice, and ^^c^r^ did speak against him. Caesar was called to give
witness, but he said nothing, and rather made him Tribune of the people to
^ntrap C^^^er^, who spoke against the alliance of the three men, as a thing
tending to tyranny.

Thus did grief give place to gain, and one (...) benefited, that another
might be hindered: and it should seem that Clodius had gratifyed Caesar
before in the getting of his office in France. These things did Caesar,
being Consul, and when he had given over one office, he strayghte coueted
another.

Clodius accused Cicero, that he had contrary to law put (...) by (...)*
to death Lentulus and Cethegus before the Senate had given sentence: Cicero
that in that matter had used most noble courage, now being called to answer,
was very fainte hearted. He put on a mourning vesture, and full of weeping and
sorrow, he humbled himself to all that he met in the streates, not being
ashamed to trouble them, whom he never knew, so that his behauior was so
unseemly, yt they which should have pitied him, laughed him to scorn: to so
great fearfulness for one cause of his own was he fallen, yt all his life had
done most gloriously for others, even (as they say) Demosthenes of Athes, was
not able to answer Demosthenes.
in his own cause, but before he was condemned, fled away. Clodius, with spite
did mock his lowliness to me^ abroad, whereby being brought to desperatio^, he
also took a volu^tary banishment, many of his friends going forth with him,
and the Senate recommending him to Cities, Kings, and Princes. Clodius pulled
down his Clodius pulls dovvn^ (...)
houses both in the City and Country, and pleased himself so well with this
act, as he would needs compare with Pompey, who had then the greatest
authority in the City. Wherefore he called Milo that was fellow to Clodie, and
a bolder man than he, putting him in hope of the Consulship, to be against
his fellow, and to make a decree for Ciceros return, supposing that Cicero
would now deal with matters and actions against Clodie, and no more busy
himself in speaking against the present authority.

Thus Cicero that by Pompey was cast out, by the same was called home the
sixteenth month after his banishment, and his house and fermes were builded of
the common cost. He was received (...)
with great glory, every man waiting for him at the gate, spending one whole
day in embracements and welcom^, even as happened to Demosthenes at his return
from ^r^^^.

In this mean time, Caesar had done great feats among the Frenchmen and
Britains, as I have showed in my book of the French matters, and being full
of riches, he came to that part (...)h (...).
of France that consineth with Italy at so sloude Eridanus, to recreate his
army a while after their continual warfare. From whence, he sent to diverse
men, great sums of money. The yearly officers by turn came to visit him,
and so did the Presidents of Provinces, the Generals of armies, and other noble
men, so as sometime there were a hundred and twenty Mace^ (...) Cae^^r.
about him, and more than two hundred Senators, some, to thank him for their
offices, some, to seek money, and some for one thing, and some for another.
For now he took upon him all things by the greatness of his army, the
abundaunce of riches, and by friendeship, that he had won of al sorts.

Both Pompey and Crassus, sellowes of his power, came to him. They agreede that
Pompey and Crassus should be Consulls again, and that Crassus should have the
rule of the nations he had, for other sieve years, and so they departed.

Donutius A^^ barbus stood against Pompey for the Consulship, (...).
and when the day was come, both came in he night into the field to the
election. And such was the strife, as it came to st^^^es, till one with a
sword stroke him that bare Aenobarb^^ t^r^h, and then every man fled from him.
He had much ado to A (...) the (...)
be conveyed home in sasety: Pompeys gown was found bloody and borne home: So
nigh peril were both parts. Thus Pompeyus and Crassus being chosen Consulles,
they decreede to Caesar, other five years, as they had determined, the
Provinces and armies they di^ided between them. Pompey took Spain and
Barbary, to the Di^^sion of Provinces
which he sent his friends, and he remained in Rome. Crassus chose Syria, and
the nations next unto it, for desire he had to make war upon the Parth^^ns,
which he thought would be both easy and profitable, and to his renown. But
as before he went out of the city, al tokens seemed unlucky, so the Tribunes
did forbid him to molest the Parthians, that had made no fault. And because he
would not regard, they made public execration upon him, which he
contemning, was in the same war, with his son of that name destroyed, and
scarcely.x. M of an. C. M. did escape The calamity of Crassus.
by flight into Syria. But this calamity of Crassus is declared in the book
of the Parthian wars. The Romans being molesied with dearth, made Pompey
General Prouider of vi^^^als and as they were wont in Pirates war, joined.xx.
Senators with him as assistants unto him. He sent them to every country, and
made such speed, as Rome was by and by fulfilled with plentye of v^^^^all,
whereby he grew into greater glory and authority, than he The death of Caesar's
daughter.
was before. At this time Caesar's daughter that was married to Pompey, dyed,
wherefore every man was afraid that this affinity being broken, they two would
contend with great force. The state of the city was in trouble and disorder,
for the rulers did Rome disordered.
al for gain and ambition, and with force and weapons moved sedition. They
were not ashamed of briberie nor corruption so they might be made rich. The
people would not give their voices, unless they were hired. There was
seen.viij. C. tallents put in pawn for the nomination to an office. The
yearly Consuls were reject from armies and provinces, being taken away by y^
power of these three men. They that were of worst behavior, First three men*
sought their gain by armies and public matters of the City, and by the
electio^s of their private successors, by reason whereof the honest sort did
utterly leave to rule, insomuche as in this disorder, Rome eig^te Months vv^^^
out a Magistrate. Dictator.
the City was.viij. months without a Magistrate. Pompey of purpose did wink
at all this gear, that the necessity of time might make him a ruler alone:
and now it was spoken in every place, that the only remedy to these mischiefs,
was the auctority of one, whom it behooved to choose, being mighty of power, and
gentle of nature, signifying that Pompey had a sufficient army, and counted a
lover of the people, and for his honor, did lead y^ Senate, in life sober and
sincere, and in conversation. affable, either in deed, or apparaunce. He in
word seemed to be angrye at this expectation, but in effect he wrought it
secreatelye all that ever he could, and willingly looked awry at the disorder
of the common wealth, and the lack of officers in the same confusion. And
whereas ^ Milo did serve his turn against Clodie, and was well beloved of the
people, for the return of Cicero, looked for the Consulship, at due time
required for that office, he did keep him M^^^ ^^^^yned by Pompey.
back, by delaying the election. Wherefore Milo taking it unkindly, that he
should find Pompey unfaithful, went into the Country to Lau^^to, which
City they say Aencas coming from ^^oy, did first build in Italy, being from
Rome about eighteen The Author (...)*
miles. Clodie came ryding from his house, and met him at (...), and passed the
one by the other, only in countenance showing their e^^^^tie. A servant of
Milos ran to Clodie, (whither being commanded, or to dispatch his masters
enimye,) and stroke him with his sword on the hinder part of the head. Clodie
being wounded and full of blood, his horse-keeper (...)
carried him to the next Inn. Milo stayed with his servants, and coming unto
him between breathing and dying, dispatched (...) of (...) the (...) of Clodie.
him, pretending that neither he desired, nor devised this murder, but being
sure he should always be in danger, he purposed not to leave the thing
imperfect.

This chance being told at Rome, the people were displeased, (...) body ^^
brought to (...).
and watched all night in the common place. Some brought Clodies body the
next day and laid it in the Palaice: the which certain Tribunes, friends to
Clodie, accompanied with the multitude, took away, and bare it to the Senate,
either for honor, because he was of that order, or for reproach to them for
suffering such unlawful factes.

The rather sort of this route brake down y^ seats and chaires (...) for the
Senate house on fire.
of the Senate house, and made a fire, with the which the Senate house and
many other nighe, did burn at Clodies funeral. Milo was so lusty, that he
was not so much afraid for the feate done, as he was angry that such honor
of burial should be showed to Clody. He gathered a number of servants and
cuntrymen, he sent money to the people, and corrupted Marcus Cecilius, one M.
Cecilius.
of the Tribunes, and with a bold courage came to Rome. Cecilius straight
received him at his coming, and brought him to the common place among the^
that had taken money, as to an assembly. He pretended to be sorry, that any delay
should be had in judgment, trusting that if he might by these that were
present, be acquitte, he (...)geth (...)*
should avoid the sharper sentence. He showed he did not mind the matter, (for
he would not have brought his wife and famylie to such a feate) he spent the
rest of the r^^e against Clodie, as an impudent man, whose friends as impudent
as he, had burnt the Senate house for his sake. Whiles he was thus talking, y^
other Tribunes and the multitude slenderly armed, rushed into the common place.
Cecilius and Milo, in servants clothing fled Mylo (...)
away: much murder was committed upon the other, not asking who were Milos
friends, but without respect killed both Citizen His friends killed. Great
hurt done in Rome.
and stranger, and chiefly them that differed from the rest, either in gay
garments, or gold Kings: for in such a disordered state, tumulte growing by
rage of this pretense, the most part being servants and armed, against the
other not armed, they fell to spoil, they left nothing undone, they entered
houses, they ran about to see in deed what they might easily catch, and in
word to seek out Milos friends: and Milo was their pretense The name of Milo,
pretense of mischief.
many days, to do all mischief with fire and force.

The Senate for fear assembled, and were bent upon Pompei, whom some would
have had Dictator by and by, because the present time apeared to have need of
that remedy: but by Catos By Catos persuasion, Pompey Co^sull alone.
persuasion, they chose him Consul without a fellow, that he should have the
authority of Dictator by ruling alone, and yet be answerable because he was
but Consul. He was y^ first Consul that had two great provinces with army and
money, and the Monarchy of the City, being Consul alone. Cato was appointed
by decree to go into Ciprus, that he should not trouble Pompey at home, and to
put Pto^^lomie out of his kingdom, by a former law made by Clodie: who being
once taken with Pirates, Pto^^lomie for nigardise, sent him two talents for his
ransom. Pto^^lomie when he heard of this decree, threw his money into the sea,
and killed himself. Cato set the Country in order.

Pompey did give punishments for many offenses, and specially Pompeys laws
against briberie.
for bribery and corruption: for he thought y^ all common infection of the
City rose of this, and therefore had need of present medicine. He also
decreed, that any man that would, might call men to account from his first
Consulship to this time, and that was about twenty years, in the which Caesar
was Consul. Caesar's friends suspecting this to be done in despite or
calui^^tion of him that so long a time was comprehended, exhorte^ him to deal
with present matters, rather than to look backward, and trouble men that were
honorable. And among other naming Casar, he was offended, as one void of all
susp^tion, (...)con^t
and so appointed the time from his second Consulship: he said it was very
necessary so to begin, to make a perfect redress of the common, almost wasted
with evil men: which when he had said, he pronounced the law, whereof
followed by and by a number of sundry actions: and that the judges should not
be afraid, he with an army ouersawe their doyngs. First, being absente, Milo
was condemned for Clodi^^ (...)tion of Milo, etc. (...), Memmius, Hipseus,
(...)* cond^^^ed.
death, and Gabinius, of disobedience and mischief, for going into Egypt with
an army without decree, the books of Sybill forbiddyng it. Memmius, Hipseus,
Sextuis, and many other were condemned, either of bribery or corrupting the
people. Scaurus was called by Pompey to make answer, notwithstanding y^ the
people did entreat for him. And when the second time the people Scaurus
banished.
did resist his accusers, a violence was made by Pompeis soldiers, whereby the
people ceased, and Scaurus was also banished, and al their eriles recorded,
and Gabinius was confiscate after his banishment. The Senate giving open praise
to Pompey appointed two legions more unto him, and continuance in his provinces
Pompey^ father in law accused.
Memmius being condemned of briberie, and Pompeius law giving release to them
that accused an other, he called L. Scipio father Pompey puts on mo^^ning
vv^^d^.
in law to Pompey, into the like judgment of corruption. Wherefore Pompey,
putting on the garment of the condemned sort, many of the judges did the like:
but Memmius in contempt Pompey takes a selovve.
of the state, gave over y^ accusation. Then Pompey, having as it were, made
that direction that belonged to his Monarchi^, took Scipio for his selowe the
rest of the year: and after him, though others were received into office,
nevertheless he ouerloked and ruled all, and then was all in all in Rome. For
the good Senate estemeth Pompey.
will of the Senate was much inclined to him in despite of Caesar, who in his
Consulship seeking his private pleasure, seemed to make none account of the^:
and for that Pompey had quickly recovered the sick common wealth, without
molesting or h^^dring any man, further than his office. But the banished men
Ban^^^^^ (...) fly to Caesar.
fled still to Caesar, and bad him beware of Pompey, and that his law of
corruption, was most made against him Caesar did comfort them, and yet said
well of Pompey. He only labored ^^o Tribunes to make a law, that it might be
lawful for Caesar to ask the second Consulship in his absence: the which,
Pompey being yet in office and not resistyng, was granted, yet understanding
that the Senate did work against him, and fearyng that his enemies would make
him a pryuate man, he devised to keep his strength still, till he should be
declared Consul, and requested of the Senate a little longer time for his
office in France, or at the least for part of it. But Marcellus Marcellus.
that was Consul after Pompey, was against it, the which when it was told
Caesar, be laid his hand upon the hilte of his sword (as they say) and
answered, Then thus shall give it Answer of Caesar.
me. Hes builded new Como night unto the Alps, with the privileges of
Italy, which is, that so many as be officers a year, shall be Citizens of
Rome, which was a great prerogative to Italy.

One of new Como, that had thus borne office, and thereby thought to be free
at Rome, Marcellus in despite of Caesar did Dispight of Marcellus.
beat with rods, which the Romans do not suffer formo cause: and in rage
he bewraying his heart, bad him take this token of hospitality and go show
it to Caesar. This spite used Marcellus, and persuaded to send successors to
his provinces Marcellus.
before the time expyred. But Pompey was against that, under a show of
conueniencie and benevolence: that it Pompey pretends regard to Caesar.
was not meet that so noble a man, so many ways profitable to his Country,
should be thus maligned for so short a time, and decreed, that with time,
Caesar should give over his rule: After this, Caesar's chief enemies were
chosen Consuls Aemilius Paulus and Calidius Marcellus cousin Paulus and C^no
vvon by money
to the former Marcellus. Curio an other great enemy of Caesar was elected
Tribune, well beloved of the people and a great speaker.

Caesar could not win Claudius for no money, but Paulus he made his friend
with an hundred and fiftye talentes, that he should neither do with him nor
against him: it cost him more to win Curio because he was so much in debt.
With this money, Paulus builded a public place, called Paulus Palaice, one of
the fair works of Rome. Curio, that he should not be (...)
discovered by change of the sudden, required the office of making and pauing
of many and long high ways, and to be ouerseer of the same five years
together, knowing he should obtain none of these, and trusting that Pompeys
friends would speak against him, and so have some pretense against Po^pey,
which things coming to pass indeed as he thought, he had an occasion of
offense, Claudius propounded to send successors to Caesar's provinces, for the
time was now at hand. Paulus said nothing. Curio seeming to Calidius (...)
Question for Caesar propounded
disse^t from both, praised Claudius opinion, and as agreeing to it, said it
was meet that Pompey should give over both province and army as well as
Caesar, for so should the state of the City be clear and out of fear on
both sides. Many being against this, as not right, because Pompeys time was
not yet expired, Curio the^ showed himself plainly and sharply, that it was
not reason to send successors to Caesar, unless Pompey did give over: for
being suspicious the one of the other, the City should never have sure peace
unless all men were private. Thus he spoke; because he knew that Pompey would
not leave his power, and because he saw them offended with him for his
judgments of corruption.

This opinion being honest, the people praised Curio, as the The people
prayseth Curio.
only man that for the common weal, cared for neither of their displeasure:
and they brought him home, casting flowers, as upon a champion of a great and
difficult cause. For at that time nothing seemed more dangerous, than to
dissent from Pompey, (...) to the Senate.
who passing about Italy somewhat sickely, subtitlye sent unto the Senate,
praising Caesar's acts, and rehearsing his own from the beginning: and that
the third Consulshippe being given him, and provinces with an army
accordingly, he did not seek it, but was called to it, being thought meet for
the redress of the common wealth, and that I (quoth he) received unwillingly,
I do willingly give over to them that will have it, before my time prefixed.
The manner of this writing wrought a good lyking to Pompey, and a misliking to
Caesar, that would not give over when his time was ended. When Pompey was come
to the City, he spoke as much in effect, and then promised to give it over,
and as a friend and welwiller to Caesar, took in hand that he also would leave
with glad mind. For now being in years, and having taken great pains in the
armies against most fierce nations, and won great honor to his Country, he
would seek rest, with the offices and sacrifices of the City. Thus he spoke,
that successors might be straight sent to Caesar, and he standing upon his
promise only. But Curio correcting his sutteltie, said, it Curio against
Pompey.
was not enough to promise, but to give over in deed, nor that Caesar should
be put from his army, before he were in private state, neither should it be
commodious for him to mainteyne private e^mitie, neither for the Romans, that
such a power should be with one, rather than with the other, that if either
of them would hurt the City, the other should have to resist: and now
holding in no longer, he openly reproved Pompey, as a seeker of tyranny, and
if it were not now, that he gave over his army for fear of Caesar, he would
not give it over at all, therefore he thought good, that if they disobeyed, they
should both be declared enemies, and an army gathered against them: and by this
talk be covered, that he was corrupted by Caesar. Pompey being grieved, Pompey
departs angry.
and threatening, went angerly away into the suburbs. The Senate now had them
both suspected, but thought Pompey the more tractable. Caesar they misliked,
because of their suspicion in his Senate better likes of Pompey.
Consulship, and therefore did not think it safe to dissolve Pompeys power,
unless Caesar did resign, being abroad, and of a more aspiring mind: but
Curio was against it, and that it was expedient, that after Pompey, Caesar also
should give over all, which, when he could not obtain, he brake up the
counsel, leauyng all The authority of a Tribune.
imperfect, for so might a Tribune do. Wherefore Pompey repented him that he had
restored the Tribuneship to the ancient power, which Sylla had made very
sle^der. Only this was decreed at their departure, that Caesar and Pompey
should be sent into Siria to ^^^^e the Country, because of Cross^^
misfortune. And Pompey v^^^^ policy, required his legion again, that he had
lent Caesar, (...).
^^^^r the lo^se of (...) and C^tta his Captains.

(...) gave every man two hundred Drammes, and sent them to (...) and with them
sent another of his own, but being understood y^ there was no danger in
Syria, they went to winter at Capua. They that were sent of Pompey for them to
Caesar, told many hard tales against Caesar, and made Pompey believe, that
Caesar's army being wasted with weer^nesse, and long pain, was desirous to come
home, and when they were come on this side the Alps, they would reuolte to
Pompey. Thus they talked either of ignorance, or being corrupted, but every man
was sure The Souldyers of Casar (...)o him.
to Caesar in promptness and painfulness, both for the continuance of
service for the gaynes that grew by victories in the war, and for the great
liberality of Caesar himself, for he gave them freely to serve as he would
have them, which they all knowing, did likewise abide it.

Pompey giving credit to these tales, neither gathered army, nor provided for
so great a business. The Senate did require every man's opinion. Claudius
crastely propounded, and did ask disioyntly, whether they would send
successors to Caesar, and whether they would Pompeys power should be taken
from him. (...)tation to Caesar and Pompey.
To this many made denial, but to Caesar they decreed successors. Curio asking
again if they would have both leave their powers, x^i^. denied it, but CCClxx.
leauyng contention for commodity, inclined to Curios sentence: then did
Claudius dismiss the counsel, crying, Win you, that will have Caesar your
Lord.

A rumor being raised, that Caesar suddaynely was past the Al^^^, and coming
to the City, there was great sear and t^m^^te of all sides. Claudius
commanded the army at Copu^ (...)
to he se^te against Caesar, as an enemy, and when as Curio reproved it as a
lie, Claudius said, If I may not follow that is s^^ce by common decree of my
self as Consul, I will do it. And when he had said thus, he ran out of
the Senate house (...)
^^to the suburbs with his fellow, and offered a Sword to Pompey Even I
(quoth he) and this man, commanded thee to go against Caesar for thy
Country, and we give thee, either the army that is now at Capua, or any other
that is in Italy, and that thou may gather together what thou wil^^. He
obeyed, as commanded of the Consuls, only adding, unless somewhat m^^e be
better, dissembling, or even then pretending a show of ho^^nie. (...).
Curio now had no more authority over the City, for it was not lawful for
the Tribunes to go out of the walls, yet he complained to the people of
these doings, and required the Consuls to proclayme, that no man should obey
Pompey in gathering of men: but not preuayling, and the time of his Tribune
ship drawing to an end, being afraid of himself, and doubting to be no
more able to help Caesar, with diligence went unto him, who had now sailed the
Oceane Sea from Britiayne, and passed Caesar out of (...) divided France and
Germany. The old diu^sion of Italy was ^^ (...), and the (...) R^b^con, and
thereaboute.
from the French, that be near the flood Rhene, to the Mountains of the
Alps, with five thousand footmen, and three hundred Horsemen. He came down
to Rauenna, which was co^fine to Italy, and the end of his province, receiving
Curio with great courtesy, and thanking him for his trauayles, he consulted
with him of the present state. Curio thought good to send for all his army,
and to march to Rome. Caesar thought it better yet to treat of reconciliation,
and willed his friends to compound for him, that giving over Request of Caesar.
all other provinces and armies, he might only reteyne two legions, and
Ill^ria with France within the Alps, till he were declared Consul. Pompey
thought it sufficient, but because the Co^suls did resist it, he wrote to the
Senate, and Curio running in three days three thousand and three hundred
furlongs, he gave After this account, it should be three hundred miles. Caesar's
letters to the Senate.
the letter to the new Consuls, entryng the Senate house the first day of
the new year. It did conteyne a solemn rehearsal of all Caesar's doyngs from
the beginning, and a protestation to leave his army, if Pompey did the like,
and being yet in authority, if Pompey would not give up, no more would
he, but forthwith come to revenge his Country, and with speed to seek for
himself, at the which, euer^e man cried out, and that Lucius Domitius should
be his successor, L. Domitius.
as in a war proclaimed. Domitius went on with four M. lately gathered.
Antonius and Cassius being Tribunes after Curio, Determination against Caesar.
Antonitus, Cas^^s, Tribunes.
and liking well of his determination, the Senate the more earnestly did
affirm the army of Pompey to be their safety, and Caesar's, their destruction.
And Marcellus and Lentulus the Consuls, commanded Antony and Cassius, to go
from the assembly, least by using the office of Tribunes, they might happily
have some displeasure. Then Antonie cried aloude, and ran from his seat in a
rage, and lamented yt they should deface the office sacred, and Antenie
lamenteth.
a Sanctuary, and reject them with a despighte, that had given their counsel
for the common weal, not having committed any offense or crime against any
man. This being said, he lept out as a man by inspiration, forespeaking
wars, murders, attendures, Antonie prophecieth.
banishments, spoils, and all other mischief to come upon them, protesting
great execrations to them that were the cause of it. Curio and Cassius went
out with him, for now part of Pompeys army was seen to come, and besette the
Senate house. They by and by, secretly in y^ night, putting on servants
apparel, went to Caesar in an hired wagon. Caesar showed them as soon Caesar
shows the Tribun^s to his army.
as they were come unto the army, in that apparel, and to stir them the
more, said these men for doing well, are made enemies, and being persons of
such degree, speaking somewhat for them, were thus villanously banished. Now
was the war open on both sides, and proclaimed evidently. The Senate thinking
that Caesar would not suddenly come with his army from the Fre^^h, and that
he would not enterprise so great a feate with so few, appointed to Pompey to
gather a great number of Thessalians, old Preparation for Pompey against
Caesar. Thessalia was a Country of Gre^^^.
practiced Soldiers in the war, and to take up new, of the nigh nations that
were fit to serve. All the common treasure they decreed to him for this
war, offering also their private substance if need were, to be ready for
this service: and they sent to the Cities for more, with great have and
vehemency, leaving nothing undone, that might be with speedy consideration.
Caesar sending Speedlinesse of Caesar.
for his own army, putting more confidence in amazing his enemies with
sudden approach and terror of boldness, than in mighty preparation. With
five thousand began he this great Caesar manner (...) ^.
war, which he sent to take the commodious places of Italy. And certain of
his Captains, accompanied with the boldest sort, in peaceable manner, he
willed to go to Arimeno, and of the sudden, to surprise the City, which is
the first of Italy out of France. He in the evening, as though he had not bin
well, went Then France extended to ^^^mino, which i^ now in that part of
Italy that is called Rom^g^a, one of the 18. Colonies, that aided the Romans
against Annihall. Rubicon deuideth Italy, over the which he that passed in
arms, was a Rebel. Caesar stayed at the River of Rubicon. The saying of
Caesar. Caesar enters Italy. Caesar takes Arimeno. Fear of Caesar.
from the Table, leaving his friends sitting still, and taking a Coach, he
ran to Arimeno, his Horsemen following a certain distance off. And posting
thus as far as the flood Rubicon, which deuideth Italy, he stayed his
course, and beheld the River. He deeply waying in his mind all the mischief
that might follow, if he passed the water in arms, turned to his friends, and
said, The refrayning from this passage, shall be the beginning of troubles to
my self, but the going on with it, shall vex all the world. When he had thus
said, as a man rapte with a fury, he flong over, speaking the common word,
The Die is cast. Then he hasted to Arimeno, and took it early in the morning,
and so went forward, leaving garrison in convenient places, and the other by
the way he wanne, either by violence, or by gentleness. There was ^^eeing and
renning away from every place with much fear, and removing without reason,
and lamente, not yet knowing what the truth was, supposing that Caesar was come
to invade with all his might and power. Which when the Consuls The Consuls
suffer not Pompey to take the right course of war.
heard, not suffering Pompey to take the stayed way of war according to his
skilfulnesse in the same, forced him to go^ about Italy, and make men, as the
City should by and by have bin taken. The other Senatoures hearing of Caesar's
sudden approach beyond all opinion, were afraid, because they were not yet
prepared, and with grief repented they had not accepted Caesar's offers, which
then they thought reasonable. Many Monsters, and tokens from heaven did afray
them. God sent down Tokens.
rain of blood, Images did sweat, lightnings fell upon many Temples, a Bule
brought forth, many other fearful tokens did foreshew the overthrow and
mutation of the common state. Supplications were commanded, as in common
calamities. The people remembering the times of Si^la and Marius, cr^ed cut,
that Caesar and Pompey should give over their powers, as the only way to cease
war. Cice^^ sent to Caesar for reconciliation, but the Consuls were against
every thing, and Fauonius iested at (...)
Pompey for a word he once spoke, that at his call he would strike the earth
with his foot, and fetch forth an army. You shall have it (quoth he) if you
will follow ^^^, and think it no grief to leave Rome, and after Rome, Italy
to, if need be: for places and (...) to the (...).
houses be not strength and liberty, but men (wheresoever they be) bear these
with them, and when you have revenged your selves, you shall have houses
enough. This spoke Pompey, as it were threatening them that would tarry and
stick to leave their (...) forsakes (...).
lands for the leave of their Country. And straight he went out of the Senate
house and City too, and took his journey to Capua to the army there, and the
Consuls followed him. Other tarried with great doubt, and kept that night
together in the Senate house, but when day was come, the most part went out,
and followed Pompey. ^^r^^^io is now (...).


Caesar followed Domitius at Corfinio, who was sent to be his su^^essoure,
having not above four thousand, and beseeged him. And they of the City,
perceiving that Domitius would flee away, kept the gates, and took him, and
brought him to Caesas. He courteously received the army, yeeldyng unto him,
that other might be encouraged to the same, and suffered Domitius untouched,
Caesar takes (...), and ^^^eth him ^^^ie to go where he ^^^t.
with all his money and substance, to go where he would, thynkyng for that
gentleness he would have tarryed with him, and was not against him to go to
Pompey.

These things being thus done of the suddayne, Pompey went from Capua to
Brunduse, to pass the Ionian Seas to Epirus, Now Al^^^ia.
to make his provision for war there: he wrote to all nations, Lieutenants,
Princes, Kings, and Cities, every one with all the speed they could, to
contribute to this war. These were dispatched with speed.

Pompeys own army was in Spain, being ready for the march when occasion
should call them.

Of the Legions that Pompey had himself, he delivered to the Consuls, to lead
from Brunduse to Epirus, and they straight sailed (...) not in ^he Ita^^^^.
safe to Dirrachium, which Town some men, of this ignorance, thinks to be
Epid^^nus. A Barbarian King called Epidamnus builded a City at this Sea, and
of himself called it Epidamnus: his nephewe by his daughter, supposed to be
Nept^^es son, builded a port to that City, and called ^^. Dirr^^ chium. The
breethren of Dirrach^s made war upon him, and (...) ^o^^ (...)
Hercules coming from the I Will Erithea, joined with him for part of the land,
whereupon the Durachians, as coper^^one^ of their Country, account him the
founder of it, not denying Dirrachos, but more desirous of Hercules, because he
was a God.

They say further, that in this fight, Ionius, son to Dirrachos, was slain
of Hercules by chance, and that Hercules buried his body, and threw it into
the Sea, that it might bear the Ioni^^ S^a. Phrg^^ o^ Asia the ^^^^e.
name of him. In process of time, certain Phrigians got the City and
Country, and after them, a people of Illiria, called Ta^lantines, after whom,
another people of Illiria, called Liburnians, T^^lantines. (...) Na^^^.
with their swift Ships, did spoil their nearest neighbors, and of this it
is thought the Romans did call their swift Ships Liburnius, wherewyth they
give their first onset in fight by Sea.

They that were driven from Dirrachio by the Liburnians, Cor^yri^^^ be of the
^^e Co^^^^.
got help of the Co^cireanes, valiante men by sea, and expulsed the
Liburnians, and so the Corcirianes making a mixed inhabitance, it is taken to be
a Greek port, and they changyng the name as unlucky, called it Epid^mus, by
the name of the old City. Thucidides does name it so, yet this name has
prevailed, and it T^^^^dides.
is called Dirrachium. The Consuls and their company came to this City. Pompey
abode at Brunduse, and gathered together the Consuls ^^i^ed at D^rizzo.
rest of the army. He tarried for the Ships that carried the Consuls. He made
the Town strong, to keep Caesar from the walls, and in the evening tide,
sailed with his company, leauyng the bo^^est Souldyers to defend the Town,
the which (...).
also in the night sailed over with g^^^ wind. Thus Pompey with all his army
left Italy, and sailed into ^piro. Casar stood in doubt which way to turn
him, and where to begin the war, seeing well that all the force on every side
flowed to Pompey. He feared the army that Pompey had in Spain very great and
expert, least whiles he followed his fleeing enemy, they should beset him on
the backehalfe, therefore he thought it best to try the field first with
these in Iberia. He divided his power in five parts, some he left at
Brunduse, some at Hidrunto, and some at Tarento, ^run luse. Hydrunto now
O^^r^^to. Tarentum. Sardinia. ^^^in ^^ Pollio. Cato guieth place to Asinius
Pollio.
as garrisons for Italy. Other he sent with Quintus Valerius to get Sardinia,
an I Will plentiful of Corn, and he got it. Asinius Pollio he sent into
Cicelie, where Cato was Lieutenant, who asked him whether he had authority
from the Senate, or the people, to enter violently into another man's province:
he answered, that he that was Lord of Italy had sent him. Cato answered
again, that because he would spare the inhabitance, he would defer the
revenge till another time, and so sailed into Corcyra to Pompey.

Caesar came to Rome, and comforted the people with hope and Caesar to Rome.
promises, being stricken with the fear and memory of Sylla and Marius evil
times. He said further, that he would use courtesy to his enemies. As when he
had taken Lucius Domitius, he let him go with all his money unhurt. He brake
the locks of the common treasure, and threatened death to Metellus the Tribune
that would Caesar takes the treasure.
have resisted him, and took away the money that no man dur^^ touch, being
laid up there, against the invasions of France, with public execratio^ to them
that did stir or remove it, unless for the war of Celtica: Caesar said, I
have overcome those French Cel^es, and have delivered the City of that
execration. He made Emilius Lepidus Gouernoure of the City, and Marcus
Antonius, ^^. Antonius.
the Tribune of Italy, and the confederate army in it. Abroad he sent into
Sicilie, Curio to succeed Cato, Quintus to Sardinia, and Cneus Antonius to
Illiria, and to France within the Alps, he appointed Licinius Crassus. He
commanded two legions of young souldyers to be ready with speed, and to lie at
the coasts, both of the Tuscane, and Venetian seas, to whom, for Captains by
the sea, he sent Hortensius, and Dolabella. Hortensius. Dolabella. Caesar into
Spain, Afranius, and Petreius. Herda a City in Aragon, at the flood ^ycor^.


Caesar having thus made Italy too strong for Pompey to enter, he went into
Spain, and at his first encountering with Afranius and Petreius, Lieutenantes
to Pompey, he seemed too weak. Then they joined together more at hand about
the City ^^erda. Caesar lay in barraine rockey places, and was feign to fetch
his Caesar in distress.
victuals by the passage of the river Sypris: a sudden flood came and bare
away the bridge, whereby a great number lest in the straytes, were slain of
Petreyus, and Caesar himself with his other army, was much molested, with the
hard place, with hunger, sharp season, and with his enemies, so as he was
little better than besieged there til the summer came. Afranius and Petreyus
went into the further part of Spain to gather another army. Caesar prevented
them, stopping their passage, and compelled the^ to retire from whence they
came. In doing of this, he compassed a part of their army that came to take up
ground for their A token of yelding.
camp. They held their shieldes to their heads, which is a token of yelding.
Caesar neither took them, nor hurt them, but suffered Caesar's gentleness
them untouched to go to Afranius, and by such mean, he wanne his enimyes
hearts in all places.

Hereof was many conuenticles among the soldiers, and talk of reconciliation
by the whole multitude. Whereupon it seemed good to Afranius and some other,
to leave Spain to Caesar, and to depart safe to Pompey: but Petreius was
against it, and ran among the soldiers, and killed them that made those
Petreius furious.
metings for Caesar, and were come from him, and killed one of his own
Captains also that would have stayed his furye. Wherefore they were the more in
their minds inclined to Caesar so gentle, and offended with Petreius that was
so passionate. After that Caesar kept water from them: and Petreius being in
necessity, came with Afranius to a parlee with Caesar, both armies beholding
them. They agreede to leave Spain to Caesar, and that he should convey them
safe to the flood Varus, and from thence to suffer them to go to Pompey. When
Caesar was come to that floude, he called all the Roman and Italian
soldiers, and thus spoke unto them.

Enemies (for using that name to you, I shall the better declare my mind)
neither did I dyspatche you, when you were sent to get ground for your
Camp, and yielded your selves to me, neither did I hurt an other part of your
army, who^ I held from water, although Petreius did distray mine, whom he took
at the flood Sic^rie: If I have any thanks of you for the same, show it then
to al them, that serve in Pompeys camp. When he had thus said, he sent them
freely away, and appointed Caesar has Spain.
Quintus Cassius to the government of Iberia. Thus Caesar began.

In Lybia Actius Varus was Lieuetenant for Pompey, and Iuba Actius Varus. Iuba
takes Pompeys part.
king of Mauritania did assist him. Curio sailed against them out of Sicelie
with two whole Legions, twelve Galleyes, and many ships of burden, landing at
Vtica. He skyrmished with certain Numidian horsemen, and put them to flight.
He would needs be called general Captain, his army being yet but Imperator
was the term in Latin for such a general.
entering into arms. This honor is given to Captains, and the name comes
from the Soldiers, as witnesies to them to be worthy to be such generals: and
this honor, the Captains in old time obtained after all and many great
aftayres. Now as I hear, the limitation to this title, is to overthrow ten
thousand men. Whiles Curio was coming by ship from Sicelie, they that were
in Lybia, thinking that he, for the glory of the name, would encampe at a
place called Scipios tents, as Scipios tent^es. Water poisoned.
one that had emulatio^ of his renoune, they poisoned the water, and were not
deceived of their hope, for Curio lodged there, and by and by the army was
sick. They that drunk, had their fight daseled as in a cloud, and heaviness
of sleep in the head, many Curios army infected.
vomites of their meat, and a shrincking over all their body. Wherefore Curio
removed to Vtica it self, leading his army feeble for sickness by a great
and strong marish ground: but when they heard of Caesar's victory in Spain,
they took courage again, and placed themselves nigh the sea in a steyght way,
they fought fiercely there. Curio loosing but one man, and Var^ six hundred.
and many more wounded. King Iuba coming forth, (...).
a false rumor was raised, that at the floude Bagrada not far off, he
returned back because his Kingdom was invaded of his neighbors, leaving his
Licuetenaunt Saburra with a few at the floude. Curio gyuing credit to this
tal^ in the seruente heat, at the third hour of the day, led the vest part
of his army against Saburras, through sandy and deserte dry places. For if
there were any winter brook, it was dried The distress of Curio.
up by the heat of the sun, and the flood was kept of Saburra, and the king
himself yet still present there. Curio ran up to the hill tops, choked
with thirst, and heat. When the enemies saw him so evil bestadde, they
passed the river boldly with a readiness to fight. Curio, very unwisely and
unskillfully with his weak army being compassed with the Numidian horsemen,
came down, and for a time gyuing place, brought his men within a little
compass: but being ouercharged, he fled again to the hill tops. Asinius
Pollio at the beginning of this business, with a few, fled to the camp at
Vtica, least Varrus should attempt any thing by the noise of this evil
fortune. Curio made a desperate fight, and was killed Curio killed
with all that were with him, so as there was not one left to go to Pollio to
Vtica. This was the end of the fight at the floudde Bagrada. Curios head was
cut off, and brought to Iuba. When this mischaunce was known to the army at
Vtica, Flamma the Admiral fled, with his navy, before he received Flamma
^lieth.
any man from the land. Asinius took a boat and went to the Merchauntes
that were at the port, and prayed them to receive his army, and convey them
away. Some of them in the night came for ward for this purpose, and the
Soldiers went on with such number, as some botes were drowned, and they
that were upon the Sea and had money, the Merchauntes threw them into the
same for covetousness Couetise of Merchants.
thereof. This was their hap upon the Sea, which was littell better by
land to them that were left all that night, who in the morning yielded to
Var^. But Iuba came and set them all at the wall, and shot them to death,
as the remnaunt Roman Soldiers shot to death.
of his victory, nothing regarding though Varo prayde him to the contrary.
Thus the Romans lost two legions, that sailed with Curio into Libia, and
all the horse, ministers, and venturers of the Camp. Iuba returned home,
making boaste he had done so great a feate for his friend Pompey.

At this time Antonius in Illyria was overcome of Octauius Dalabella Pompeyus
Lieuetenant: and another army of Caesar's at Placentia, did reuolte against
their Captains, crying that they were holden in long war, and not paid the
five pounds which Caesar promised them at Brunduse. Caesar hearing of it, came
post from Massilia, and thus spoke to the soldiers that yet were in a
mutenie: What speed I use in every thing, you can witness with me: this war
is holden long, not by us, but by our enymies that flies us: you that in
France, by mine autoritye have gained well, and have bound your selves to me,
for all this (...) to the seditious Soldiers.
war, not for a part, now in the myddest of the matter, you forsake me, you
do do disobey your Captains, and go about to command them, of whom you
ought to receive commandment: wherefore being a sufficient witness to my
self of my former affection unto you, I will now use Petreius Law, and of the
nineth Legion, from whence tumulte chieflye arose, I will put to death the tenth
man.

Great lamentation was made throughout the whole Legion: wherefore these
Captains on their knees prayed him of pardon. He hardly and at length
granted, and came to this only, that any 120. that were most busy, should
be taken by lotte, and twelve of their Captains of bands, be put to death:
for one of the twelve, which was not present, nor a medler in this Mutenye,
he caused his accuser to suffer for him.

After this sort was the sedition at Placentia appeased. Caesar went to Rome,
and the people for fear chose him Dictator, neither the Senate allowing it,
nor none officer pronou^cing it: but he, refusing that dignitye, either as
odious, or superfluous, ruling only eleven days (as some say) appointed
Consuls for the rest of the time, himself, and Seruilius Isauricus.

The presidents of provinces either he appointed or altered at his pleasure.
Marcus Lepidus into Spain, Aulus Albinus into Sicelie, into Sardania Sextus
Peduceus, into new France Decimus Brutus, to the people oppressed with famine,
he gave victuals, and at their request, pardoned al fugitives, except Milo.
The people desiring also a cutting off of debte, because things bare no price,
by reason of the wars and seditions, he denied it them, but he appointed
Purueyors of victuals, which in steed of the debte, should take order
between the creditours and ye debtore. When he had done this, he sent all his
army to Brunduse in the Caesar makes vvinter war.
dead of the winter, and himself went forth in December, not tarying for the
election of new officers, till the new year that was at hand. The people
followed him, and prayed him to be at one with Pompey, for now it was very
evident, that he that overcame would be a ruler alone, but he went on, and
left nothing that was to be done with power and speed.

Pompey all this time made Ships, and still gathered greater armies, and more
money. He took forty of Caesar's ships, in the Ionian sea, and waited for
his coming. He exercised his people, ryding and running among them, and doing
every labor beyond his old years, whereby he got much love, and every man
came to see Pompeys exercises, as to a spectacle.

Caesar had ten legions of footmen, and ten thousand French Caesar's army.
horsemen. Pompey had five legions, with which he ^alled out Pompeys army.
of Italy, and as many horsemen, as with them were appointed: two out of
Parthia, the remnant of them that served with Crassus, and another part that
with Gabinius invaded Egypt. So had he of Italians in all eleven legions and
seven thousand horsemen. His confederates were of Ionia, of Macedonia, of
Poloponeso, and Boeotia, with archers of Creta, slingers of Thracia, and all
other that use artillery about Pontus. Some horsemen of the weaste French,
some of the east, of the Sirians sent by Antiochus, Cilicians and Capadocians,
and some of Armenia the less, Pamphilia and Pisida, not al for the sight, but
for garrisons, munitions, and other services of ye Italian army. Thus he
thought good to use the^ that none of the Italians should be drawn from the
day of battle. This was his army by land.

By Sea he had six hundred Galleys surnished at the full, whereof one
hundred were of Romans conduct, which he appointed to lead the other, and
many hulkes and other ships of burden, with diverse Admiralls, whereof Marcus
Bibulus was chief.

When al these things were prepared, he assembled as many Senators and Roman
Gentlemen, as were present, and all Pompey^ Ora^i^.
the army, into a place where he might be hard, and thus said unto them. The
Athenienses also (O friends) did leave their City The Atheniens. s ^^^^e
their City ^y the pe^^^^sio^ of (...).
to fight for their liberty, against them that spoiled it, they thinkyng,
not houses, but men to be their City. In doing of the which, they recovered
it again, and shortly made it more glorious. Our progenitors likewise, when
the French Cel^^^ invaded, forsook the City, which Cami^^us coming from
Ardea Ardea i^ (...).
did restore again. All wise men think their Country to be, where their
liberty is: which we considering, have sailed hither, not leauyng our
Country, but preparyng for it, and mn^lye to defend it, against him that
does violently^ invade it, and by corruption, and takes Italy desolated, whom
you have declared an enemy, he now sends presidents into your Provinces,
appoynteth some Governors in the City, and some in the Country. By this
insolency he has taken from the people their authority, and if he does
this, being yet in contrition, and with fear, and as one, that with Gods
help, shall be punished for it, what cruelty and violence think ye, will he
leave undone that thus uses his country, if he get the victory* Some there be
that take his part for money, which he gathered in France that belongs to
you, who chose rather to be slaue^ to him, than to live free with us. I do not
refuse the fight with you and for you, but do offer my self a souldior or a
Captain, as you will use me, and if I have any experience in the war, or any
felicity unspotted hitherto, I pray the Gods to grant me al at this
present, and to be such a defender unto my country in danger, as I have bin in
advancing the same. We ought to put our trust in God, and in our cause,
which has an honest and just desire of war for the common wealth of our
Country, and in the abundance of our provision, both by sea and land, which
we already have, and more, in that we shall have when we take the thing in hand:
For all the nations (as a man may say, from y^ East to y^ Ruxine sea) al y^
Grecia^s and Barbarians be with us, al kings y^ be friends to ^ Romans and to
me, have sent armies, weapons, vittails, and al other necessaries. Therefore go
to it cheerfully, as to a thing worthy your country, your selves, and me, and
being mind^ul of G^sar: dispitefulnesse, with speed fulfill that shall be
appointed you. This he said. All the army, and as many Senators and Gentlemen as
were there, which was a great and a goodly c^^an^, with one voice did praise
him, and prayed him to lead them as he thought good. Then he set some ships to
keep the sea, and sent his army to winter at Macedonia, thinking Caesar
would deser ^^^ p^^ is dece^^^d in C^^^^^ (...).
sailing over till after winter, the time being hard, and the seas rough, and
have remained at Rome, because he was Consul, and settle his rule there: so
far amiss did he conjecture of that that was to come. For Caesar, as I said
before, in the midst of winter did go to Brunduse, supposing he should most
amaze his enemies, by coming on the sodayn. Therefore neither having victual,
nor provision, nor all his army there, he called the^ that were present to an
assembly, and thus said unto them: (...) to his sould^ours.


Neither the hardenesse of the time, (O friends) that join with me in this
most noble enterprise, neither the delay of others, nor the want of convenient
preparation, do wythdraw Expedition.
me from my purpose: for surely I think that expedition is the best way for
me, and we that be first here, to go first on with the matter. As for
servants, carriage and baggage, I think it best to leave behind us, that the
ships that be now here, may receive us only as passengers, and we deceive
our ennimies, and set good fortune against evil time, bold courage,
against our small number, and our ennimies plenty, against our penury, all the
which shall be in our power, if we think nothing to be our own, but that we
shall win by force. Let us go therefore against their slaves, their provision
and victualles, whiles they be in houses for fear of winter weather. Let us
go whiles Pompey trusts that I spend the winter in shows and sacrifices of a
Consul. You know that I take the chiefeste Attempts ^^^ day^^.
point in w^rres, to be attempts of the sudden. It is honorable to prevent
the first opinion ^f things to come, and to foresee ^^re receyt there, for the^
y^ follow us next. I have thought this time meeter to have, than to stay: that
Pompey, who thinks I am yet at Rome, about my Consulship, may see me at his
cam^^ and though that I am well assured of your good wills, yet es tarry for
your answer.

All the army cried with great vehemency, that he should* lead them forth.
Then he came from his seat, and had them to the sea, being five legions of
footmen, and six hundred horse men chosen, lying at anchor, because of the
roughe seas.

The winter Sun was at the lowest* and the wind kept (...) ^^ s^^ved by
vveather.
him back against his will and evil content, who tarryed ^^ Brunduse till
the first day of the new year. Then came there ^^ him two legions more, whom
he conveyed over that winter ^^ hulkes, for he had but few Galleys, and they
were left for the custody of Sicelie and Sardinia. He was by tempest driven to
y^ mount Cer^uno, from whence he sent his navy back to fe^^^ the rest of his
army. He in the night went to the City of Ori^^ Ori^^.
and for the hard, straighte, and rocky way, was compelled to divide his army
into many parts, as the sharpness of the country might serve, so as if his
coming had been known, he might easily have bin kept back. About the
break of the day* with much ad^, he gathered his army together.

The people of the City said unto the Governor, that it was ^^s^^ has (...)*
a City of (...) in the ma^ches of (...).
not lawful to keep out the Roman Consul when he came, therefore the
Governor delivered the keys to Caesar, and continued with him in place of
honor.

Lucretius and Minu^ius on the other side of Orico, with eighteen Gal^^is to
guarde the victual that came by ship to Pompey, drowned their ships, that
Caesar should not take them, and fled (...) it is (...) ^s in the Greeke^
to Durazzo. From Orier Caesar went to Appolonia, where he was received of the
Citizens, and Stamerius the Governor left the City.

There Caesar calling his soldiers together, put them in ^^ membraunce, what
they had done by good fortune in the hard Durazzo has ^^^ long in the Turks
^^ (...), but lately ^t was gotten by the (...).
winter: they were Lords of the sea without ships, they had won Orico and
Valona, without fight: they had gotten their enemies things, Pompey being yet
ignorant. Now (says he) if we can catch Durazzo, which is the Baron of
Pompeys provision, al^ is in our hands, that they have bin laboring for an
whole Summer. When he had said thus, he led them with speed to Durazzo a
long way, resting neither day ne^ nyg^te* Pompey hearing this, came with great
have from Macedonia, cutting (...) h^th (...).
down the trees as he went, to stop the way to Caesar He pulled down
bridges, and burnt all provision by the way, thynking it (as it was in deed)
to be a good device, for to have only that preparation that might serve
himself. If any dust, fire, or smoke were seen to either of them a far off,
thinking it had bin of the contrary part, they strove who should run
fastest, sparing no time, neither from meat nor sleep. Have there was (...)*
and speed, with crying out upon them that led the^ with torchelightes,
whereof grew disorder and fear, as the en^mies had b^n at their heels: some
for weariness threw down their burdens, or withdrew themselves aside into
some corners, thinking it better to be left behind with present rest, than to
go on to it, without fear of the enemy. Both sides taking these pains,
Pompey came first to Durazzo, and encamped at the walls. By Pompey (...) ^^
to Durazzo before Caesar* and gets again Ori^o. Alore floude.
his Navy he got Orico again and gave, better guard for the Sea. Caesar lay
over against Pompey, the flood Alore slowing between them. There were diverse
skirmishes by them that passed the flood* but they never brought forth their
whole power, for Pompey did train his young Souldyers, and Caesar looked for
the rest from Brunduse. He thought, that if they came forth in the Spring in
great Ships, they could not escape the Galleys of Pompey, that scowred the
Seas, and waited for them: but if they did come forth in Winter, when the
enemy must many times take the Islands for their harborough, they might escape
them, or by the wind or their waighte, might pass through them, where upon
he sent for them with great have, and because they came not when he looked, he
purposed himself to go to them, for that they would not so soon come with
an other, and kept his determination secret. He sent three of his servants
to the flood* twelve furlongs off, to hire a swifte vessel of good proof, as
for one that should be dispatched from Caesar. He rose from the table as not
well at c^st, and ^ad his friends sit still. He put on a ^^tuate gar^el, and
in a Co^ch came to the Ship, as he that was f^^^ of Ca^^ in the rest he ^^eth
his servants to call on, he being Caes(...) to(...)
wrapped, and for the night altogether unknown. The wind was very rough, and the
servant exhorted the master to make have, y^ they might escape their enemies
which were at hand. The master passed the ^^u^ very speedily, with the
strength of oars, but when he came to the mouth of y^ flood, the waves of ye
sea beating against it with boisterous billows, and he, as though the enim^
had followed, laboring to ye utter most, and nothing prevailed, gave, it quite
over. The^ Caesar b^wraid himself, and said alowd, Be bold,, (...) himself.
stand against the storm, thou caryest Caesar, and Caesar, fortune. The
Mariners amazed at ye voice, received courage again, and by very force got
the Ship out of the floudes mouth, but by the rage of ye sea, and y^ billows
y^ were big, the Ship was driven to ye shore. Day drawing near, the
mariners were afraid to be spyed of the enemies, but Caesar cursed his envious
fortune, and bade the shipmaister turn home again, which was quickly done,
the wind serving through the flood. Some blamed Caesar for his bolddesse, some
accused him, as taking a thing in hand scarcely fit for ^asor is blamed.
Caesar sends for his men.
a soldier, much less for a general. Now he perceiving he could be no more
unknown, sent Posthumus to sail in his place, and bid Gabinius bring the army
by Sea, and if they refused him, to come with Antonio, or with Caleno, and if
all these failed, he Antonio.
had letters to the rest, that they should follow Posthumus, and take land where
they could g^t it, and not care for the ships, for he had need of men, and not
of ships. Thus did Caesar trust in fortune, contrary to reason. Pompey
inte^ding to take ye advantage, brought One of Caesar's, kills two of Pompeys.
forth his people to fight, and two of his soldiers passing ye flood where it
was lowest, one of Caesar's came against them, and killed the^ both, wherefore
Pompey retired, not liking that luck, feyning Pompey retireth.
to al other to lose a very good opportunity. Posthumus sailed safe to
Brunduse, but Gabinius, not obeying ye commandment, would needs Gabinius
loses men in Slauonia.
lead as many as followed him through Slauonia, without any rest, all the
which were almost slain by the ^^rians, which Caesar suffered, for the
necessity of time. Antonius by ship brought the other toward Valona, with
good and full wind, but about midday Caesar^ ships (...). N(...) nesse.
the wind waxing c^^^^, twenty of Pompeys Ships that scoured the seas es^yed
him, and came upon them, who in that calm were in great fear, least the
ste^^nes of the Gadyes should bore the or drown them, and using the best way,
made ready their darts and sings to keep the off, when suddenly, a greater
wind than the first arose, which they took, and with their mame sail passed
through beyond their hope. The other being tossed with ye storm and the w^^d,
(...)g raging seas, were scattered and driven to the rocky (...), (...) o^
Caesar's were taken falling upon ye flats. (...) b^ought y^ rest to a place
called Nymphey. Now had Caesar al his (...), (...) Pompey. They encamped the
one against the other upon (...)ppes, m^i^ing fort^ and mountes, about the
which there was ^^^y assaults and skirmishes, the one seking to (...) the
other, and at one of these skirmishes, where Caesar's (...) y^ worse (...) a ^
h^s Soldier as Caesar vv^^^nteth of him, received 1 2 ^. (...) on ^hys S^^^^d,
and 2, ^. pricks, and 7. vvounds on n^^ body at this time, and o^ another ^^
^^^ce, when his headpeece was broken, and ^e h^rt in the rac^, and in the
thigh, his shield st^icken down, his svvord broken, he lept into the Sea,
armed as he was, and ca^e safe to Caesar, crying parce Imperator, because it
was a fault to be unarmed. Plutarch tells of such another, when Caesar
was in England, and he names one ^cil^us, but nothing is said of M^nuti^^.
The ^^alian tr^^ (...) adds o^e, (...) Te(...) should (...) of (...) Caesar
(...) The (...) ca(...).
Captain, very notable for his valianttie^se, was stru^^n in the eye with a
dar^, which done, he lept before the rank^, making toke^ of (...), as though he
would have said somewhat. Then he called to a Captain of Pompeys, who was
esteemed noble, and said unto him, (...) one like thee, save thy friend, send
some that may lead me away by hand, because I am hurt, two men came running to
him as a fugitive, of whom the one he killed right out, the other he cut off
his shoulder. This he did, being in doubt both of himself, and of the fort.
The other being ashamed of their fault, came again lustely, and recovered
their fort. The great valiantness also of M^nuti^^ a trench keeper did help
much, for in his Target they say was found Cxx. darts, and he wounded in vj
places beside the loss of one eye also, ^^th the which, Caesar did honor with
great gif^s, appert^ining ^n soldiers. He thought to have had (...) by
treason, and (...) in the night to the gates with a few at the Temple of
Diana. This Winter, Pompeys father in law did bring another army from Syria
with whom Caius Cal^itius did encounter, and was (...) me, losing a legion of
eight hundred. Now Caesar had nothing by sea, all being kept by Pompeys Naues,
wherefore h^s army was in great want, and eat bread made of grass and weeds
which certain fugitives showed to Pompey as a good token, but he (...)
vv(...) of (...).
ioyed nothing at it, but said, with what beasts do ^^e sigh^^? Caesar being
driven by necessity, brought forth all his ar^^^, to force Pompey to fight,
but he, though many of his (...) Ca(...), (...) refuses ^^^ ^ight.
were thereby abandoned, yet would not stir, when(...) being maruellously
grieved, took in hand an enterprise, both difficult and strange, and that was,
to enuiron Pompeys Ca^^^ from Sea to Sea, which as it was a great thing to do,
so if it ^^^ke not The enterprise of Caesar.
place, yet should it carry a fame of glory for the noble enterprise, for it
was a thousand and two hundred furlongs, and yet he ^ight furlongs waketh a
mile.
took it in hand. Pompey made Contreworkes and walls. And thus both busied
themselves to defeat the other, and at the last there was a great fight
between them, in the which Pompey his A fight.
very valiantly euerthrow Caesar's Souldioures, and followed the^ fleeyng to
their Camp. He took many of their ensigns, and the Eagle, which is the
chief Standerd to the Romans with much ado was saved by the bearers regard,
and thrown into them Caesar repulsed.
Trench. This fleeyng being so notorious, Caesar came on with another company,
which was no less afraid, for though Pompey were a good way off, yet could
they not abide his sight, nor stay, Fear of Caesar's m^n.
though they were hard at their Camp, neither go in order, nor obey Caesar's
commandments, but every one fled whether he could, never looking back,
without shame, without commandment, or reason. Caesar ran about, and with
rebuke did show them, that Pompey was far off, and beheld them how they
threw down their ensigns, and fled. Some with much ado stood still as
men amazed, looking on the ground for shame, such a confusion fall upon them.
There was one that turned his ensign, and thrust the point against the
General, who was killed of Caesar's guard. They yt went into the Camp, did not
return to their places, but left all forsaken, and the Trenche vnkepte. It was
then thought, if Pompey had come forth with his power, he had made an end of
all the war, with ye one feate: but Lauinius (God so working it) persuaded
him rather to pursue them that fled, Pompeys victory ^^^ follovved.
and he somewhat slow of himself, or peradventure distrustyng that some
traynes had bin laid in the Camp for him, or because he condemned to do it,
as though the war were now ended. He set upon them that were yet abroad,
whereof he killed many, and that day in two sightes he took eight and twenty
Banners, leaning the other occasion, that might have made an end of a^^,
which Caesar could not deny, but that that day had ended the war, ^^ his
enemies could have used the victory.

Pompey (...) of this victory, sent letters of it to Kings and Cities,
(...)ughte that Caesar's Souldioures would have revolted unto ^^^, ^^^^essed
with famine, and overthrow in fight, and (...) Captains for fear of their
offense, but they (God (...)entan^e in them) lamented their fault, and
wh(...)d them gently, and gave them pardon, they were (...) with themselves,
and with a mutation beyond(...), after their Country manner, to take
Repentance of Caesar's Souldyers.
(...) and to kill every tenth man. But when Caesar w(...)hat, they were the
more grieved, and con(...) insured by them, and cried, that the (...) be
punished, as though they should not have (...), if the it ^^ders had not
turned. Caesar would not grant to this (...), but punished a few for a
fashion, whereby so Caesar's mildness in punishmente.
great a(...)ge through this moderation entered into them, as they de^^red him
he would forthwith set upon his enemies, and very earnestly they exhorted and
encouraged him to it, promising to amend their fault with a notable victory,
and they resorted together in heaps, and swear in Caesar's syghte never to
return from the field, unless they get the fight. His friends wyshed him
to use this repentance and promptness of the army, but he said unto the
multitude, that he would at a better opportunity lead them against their
enemies, and badde them then remember this forwardness. But to his friends he
said, that before he did that, he must take out of their hearts the fear
that was in them for the late loss, and to tarry, till the fierceness of the
enemy were abated: then did he confess, that he had erred, in placing his
Camp at Dirrachio, where all Pompeys preparation was, and that it behooved him
to seek other Caesar remoueth.
places, and draw Pompey where he might have the like want, which when he had
said, he went straighte to Ve^ona, and from thence to Th^ss^^y secretly by
night. G^m^^^^e a little ^^^e that G^^phie given in spoil, the first City ^^
Th^ssily, going from ^piro.
would not receive him, he took in his rage, and g^ue it to his souldyers to
spoil. The Souldyers that had bin long ^^^^, filled themselves of all things
excessiuely, and were ^r^^^^e ^^^ of Germans in Caesar's time, a drunke^ people.
measure, especiallyth. Germans were ^^^ted atfor their dr^^^^^nesse. And now
again it was thought, that Pompey ^^g^^e have come on, and done some notable
fea^e, but he by negligence, ^iterly om^^te^ to stir, till Caesar had marched
seaue ^^ay^s, ^^d camped at Pharsalia. In Gomphie they say was seen a notable
Caesar enca^peth at Pharsalia, before Pompey arriueth from D^razzo. The
vvilling death o^ diverse at Gomphie.
chance, dead bodies of noble old men, did ^e openly in a ^hrs^t^ans shop,
with cups in their hands, without wound^^* ^^* he number of twenty, as though
they had bin mu^^ed to ^ ^^^^ king, lying all upon the ground and one ^^^^g
in a chair as a Physician, that gave them the po^^on of execration.

Pompey made a counsel concerning Caesar* ^^^^^ing. A^^^nius A^^^nius.
was in opinion, that the Na^y which was great, should be sent against Caesar,
they being Lords of the Sea, he ^^^ghte ^^ off things from him, being in want,
and in a wandering journey, and that Pompey himself should lead the army ^^
the land ^^to Italy, which was yet enclyned unto him, and voy^e of enimyes,
and so being Lord of it, France and Spain, he might deal with Caesar at
home from the principal part. But he neglecting ^^^s Diversity of ^^^^ion.
that had bin best to have bin done, followed them that said, that Caesar's army
by and by would forsake him for famine, or not long like to hold out, for the
victory won at ^urazzo, whereas ^^^trarywise, it should be a great shame to
leave Caesar fleeyng, and that he that had overcome, should seem to flee, as
hough he were overcome. He giving place to these reasons, and for the regard
that he had of the nations of the East, that depended upon him, and fearing
least Luci^^ Scipio should receive any harm in M^cedoni^, and before all,
having a mind to use his army, that was so courageous to fight, he removed, and
set his Camp against Caesar Both Caesar and Pompey encamp at Pharsalo.
at Pharsalo, about four miles asunder.

To Pompey victual was brought from every place, for the wars, the ports, and
storehouses, were so open unto him, that by land he lacked nothing, and by sea,
whatsoever wind blewe, it served Abundance with Pompey.
his turn.

Caesar ^adde only such food as he ^^ulde get by daily force, Want with
Caesar. Courage of Caesar's So^ldiours.
and yet n(...) di^ forsake him, but by a divine instinct, required they ^^g^te
give ^a^tell thinking themselves to be far better than the ^th^^ yo^g
Souldyoures, because they had serue^ in the w^^^es t^u^e years together. But
now to spend the time in making of mountes and treaches, and carriage of
victual, The request of Caesar's Souldioures.
they were the weaker, because of their age, therefore it was better to try
all at once with la^oure, then by idleness to punish with famine. When Pompey
understood this, he thought it dangerous to deal^ with such experse men,
that cared not for themselves, and to adventure all at one work against
Caesar's ^ob^e fortune. He thought ii sur^r, and less dangerous, to consume
them wtth want, having no power to be relieved by land, nor no use of the Sea,
nor not a Ship to convey themselves Pompeys confideration good, but not
follovved.
away at a need. Thus he determined by very good reason to delay the war,
and to draw them from famine to famine: but the greater number of Senatoures,
and of them calle^ Gentlemen that were most honored, the Kings and Princes that
were with him* some for lack of experience, some for foolish hardynesse for
their victory at Durazzo, some, because they were greater in number, and some,
because they would r^ther have a short conclusion, than an honorable end, and
some, because they were weery of the war, all exhorted him to the fight,
showing that Caesar did always provoke him, and inuit him to it: but he did
use that reason against themselves, for to Caesar it was necessary so to do,
but to them, delay, til occasion, was much better, for need drove Caesar to
do as he did. But being still incensed by all the army, that was waxed
proud for the victory at Durazzo, and by the best sort that objected
ambition unto him, and therefore of purpose was so slow, that he might bear
rule over so many as good as Pompey called Agamemnon*
himself, and therevppon called him King, and Agamemnon* because he
commanded Kings in the war: he left his own consideration, and gave place
to theires, (God striking him now) and all the rest of that war. He grew
Pompeys alteration.
sickly and slow, contrary to his nature in all things, unwillingly he
prepared for the fight, to his own destruction, and them that gave him
counsel. Caesar that night, had sent three legions to get victuals,
thanking Pompey for his delay, and thynking he would not have changed his
mind. He had also sent about for more food, but when he heard that Pompey
prepared for the battle, he knew he did it of necessity, and that he was
driven to it by force of his army, he called his army forth with, and did
prepare likewise. He at midnight made Sacrifice to Mars and to Venus his
auncessors, for from Julius, A^^^as Petigree of Caesar from Venus.
son, it should seem by the name, that the house of Iuli^^ came. He vowed
to dedicate a Temple unto her in Rome, if she favored him, and brought him
victory.

A lightning came from Heaven, and went from Caesar's Cam^ A lightning.
to Pompeys, and there was extinct. Pompeys side thought some notable thing
should come from their enemies to them, but Caesar did expound it, that he
should quench Pompeys glory. That same night when Pompey did Sacrifice, the
host fled away, and could no more be found. And a swarm of Bees lighted
Tokens.
upon the Altar, which is a little and a stinging fly. An^ before day,
there came a strange fear in the Camp, the which Pompey came to search,
and after fell into a deep sleept, and being awaked of his friends, he
told them he dream^ he had dedicate a Temple at Rome to Venus the Victorice,
no^ Pompeys dream
knowing that Caesar had vowed the same.

His friends and all the host put trust in these things, and were glad of
them, and as they used all things with too much contempt and fierceness, so
went they to this battle, as though all had bin their own. Many did deck
their Tents with Bays, as token of victory, and their servants prepared
good cheer for them, and some did contend for Caesar's office The security of
Pompeys army.
of high Priest, all the which, Pompey, as a man expert in war, did mislike,
and though he were troubled, yet did he dissemble it, and held his peace with
doubt and fear, as he that now did no more rule, but was commanded of other,
because of force, and against his will, he did al things. So great a
discouragement to so noble a man, that til that day, had always had prosperous
hap, seemed on the sudden to fall upon him, either for that he was not
followed when he gave good counsel, but was Pompeys ^l^^^^tion.
driven to put the lives of so many in hazard, and his own glory, which he
had kept till that day unspotted, or for that he had some divination of the
evil, with fear that was at hand, that that day he should fall from so great
a Lordship, only to his friends thus he said: That whosoever had the
victory that day, should be cause of great calamity to y^ Romans for ever.
He set order for the battle, and by his words that he spoke in that fear,
many did gather that if he had won that day, he would not have given over the
rule.

Of the number that they had, whereof many speak uncertainly, Caesar's number.
I will follow the Roman Authors that write most Pompeys number.
reasonably of the Italians, in whom was the chief trust, not regardyng or
speaking much of the confederates, in whom they had little affiaunce.

Caesar had two and twentye thousand, and in them about a thousand horse.
Pompey had double as many, and seven thousand horse: so they that speak
likely, say there was at this battle.lxx. M. Italians: they that write less,
threescore thousand: they that make most, four hundred thousand, whereof
some say, that Pompey had three parts, and some, that of three parts he had
two.

Thus doubtfully have they left the matter: but how many soever they had, their
chief trust was in the Italians.

Of Strangers Caesar had French horsemen and also French men beyond the Alps,
of Grecians, Dolopians, Acarnians, and Aetolians. These helps had Caesar.

Pompey had all the nations of the East, in heaps both of horse Confederates of
Pompey.
and footmen, of Grecians, he had the Lacedomonians distributed under their
own Kings, the rest were Peloponesians, and with them the Boetians. The
Athenienses also came to ^an^a^^^* ^^^^^*
this war, although both sides proclaimed they should no^ be hurt, as the
sacred men of the law makers, drawn thither by the glory of this battle,
wherein they should fight for the Empire of the Romans.

After the Greeks, there were but few of all the sea toward the East, but the
inhabitours came to Pompey, Thracians, Hellespontians, Bithinians, Phrygians,
Jonians, Lydians, Pamphilians, Pysidianes, Paphlagonians, Cilicians, Syrians,
Pheniteans, and a nation of Hebrews, Arabians also mgh unto these, Cyprians,
Rhodians, stingers of Creta and other Ilanders. Kings and Princes also came to
aid him. De^ota^us the Tetrarche (...). Ariarathes. (...).
of the East Galatians, Ariarathes King of Capadocia, the Armenians within
Euphrates. Taxiles did lead the Armenians beyond Euphrates, Magabates
lieutenaunte to Artapa the (...).
King. Other inferior Lords resorted to this travail, beside threescore
ships of Egypt, sent of the Princes of the same, Cleopatra and her brother,
being yet a child. But these were not Cleopatra.
used in the wars, nor any of the other ships, but all lay ydely at
Corcyra, wherein it seems that Pompey did evil, to neglect (...).
so great a navy, wherewyth he might have ^^feated his enemies of al things:
but he trusted upon his army by land, and would try it with them that for
their continuance with long experience were full of courage, and as savage
people greedy of the fight. But to beware of them, the mishap, by Gods workyng,
at Durazzo seems to be the impediment, which to Caesar was the fitteste
opportunity of all other. For by that Pompeys army waxed insolent, and made
little account of their Captain, and took in hand this matter very
unskillfully. But God had so appointed it, that it should come to such a
state, as it is now over all. Then either of them assemblyng their armies,
exhorted them, and first Pompey said thus:

You (my fellow Souldioures) do now command as Captains, (...) (...).
and not obey as Soldiers: For whereas I would have consumed Caesar, you will
needs call upon the fight: therefore as appoynters of the battle, use it, as
the more, may do the less, and as vanquishers contemn them that be
vanquished, and as the young despise the old, and as the lusty may the feeble.
You have of your side power, preparation, and conscience of the cause, for you
travail for liberty and your country, with law and good opinion, with such
men as be Senators and Gentlemen, against one man that would usurp a
government. Go to therefore as becomes, with good hope, and have in your sight
the fleeing away they made at Durazzo, and how many of their ensigns we took
that day. This said Pompey, but Caesar to his men spoke thus.

The hardest (my friends) we have overcome, for in stead of Caesar's Oratic^.
hunger and want, we fight with men. This day determines all, remember your
promise at Durazzo, and what you swear one to another in my presence, that you
would not return, but victors. These be they (my Souldioures) whom we have
followed from the pillars of Hercules. These be they that fled from us
Italy. These be they that after our ten years service, after so many
enemies and victories as hard to be told won of us, after Spain, France,
and Britain, brought by us to our Country, and well nighe fourtye Realms,
does oppress us without reward, triumph, or recempence. These be they whom
I could not persuade, desiring but right, to be well thought of for my well
doing. You know whom I delivered unhurt, hoping that we might have had some
justice at their hands. Of all these, be all you together with me reuengers
this day, even as you know my carfulness, my faithfulness, and my free
liberality, it is no hard matter for young soldiers vnexperte to be overcome
of them that pains have past, and well bin tried by proof. Se the youthful
contempt and dys^ayne of the army against the Captain, so the distruste of
himself, whom I certainlye know to go to this feate with unwilling mind,
and full of fear, falling from his conditions, is given to case and
slothfulness, and now not a ruler, but ouer-ruled of other. And thus much
think, that I have spoken unto you of his Italians, for as for his
co^feder^ts, care not for them, nor make any accempte of them, nor offer any
earneste fight to them. that be slaves of Syria, Phrygia, and Lydia, are ever
ready to run away, and be kept under, whom I certayn^ye know, and you shall
evidently see, that Pompey will not use in ordered place osbatta^le. O^^ye have
^i^ of the Italians, and if the confederates ru^^e upon you like r^d^d^ggs:
down with them, and spare the other as your ^^^^men, and use your
confederats, for to afray them. But before al things, remember I may* see you
persourme that you have promised* and that you may choose either victory or
^eathe, pull down your Camp, and all the trenches, that we may have
nothing, unless we win it, let our enemies see that we be without Camp,
and that of necessity, we must encampe in theyrs.

When he had thus said, he sent out two thousand very old Soldiers,
that had the charge of the Camp, who wit forth and dug down the trenche
with a deep silence, and filled the ditches.

When Pompey saw that, and some thought they made way to flee, he perceived
the bold determination, and with a syghe Pompey sigheth.
said unto himself, that this fight should be with wild beasts oppressed with
famine, a fit medicine for the^. But now there was no more dallying, the thing
being come to the swords point, therefore he set about four thousand to
keep the camp, and pla^ed the rest between the town of Pharsalo and the
floude Pharsalo the town where the battle ^^^^* (...) of Thesisaiy and ^^
(...). Italians the ^h^c^c strength of both sides.
Enipeo. Caesar also arayd himself over against him, either of them placed
the Italians divided into three parts, distaunt a little a sunder, they set
the horsemen on the sides of them by portio^s, Archers and Slingers were
intermedled with them all.

Thus were the Italians ordered, in whom each of them had their chief
confidence, as for their confederats, they vs^^ them rather for a show.

Pompey had a great number of diverse language: of them he placed the
Macedonians, the Peloponesians, the Boetians, and the Athenienses, next the
Italians battle, because of their good order and silence.

The other, even as Caesar coniectured, he commanded every ^rder of (...)
(...) (...).
nation by it self, as warders out of the ray of battle, to compass the
enemy when the fight began, and to pursue them with as much hurt as they
could, and to put Caesar's camp to spoil which was void of defense. Scip^o
Pompe^s father in law, Scipi^. (...)* Aphranius* Pompey.
did lead the maine battle in the midst, Dom^^^^ the left wing, and
Lentulus the right, Aphranius and Pompey kept the ca^pe.

The leaders of Caesar's h^ste, were Sylla, Antonius, and Decimus. Caesar, as he
was wont, led the tenth legion, which the Caesar's order* Sylla. Antonius.
Decimu^* Caesar.
enemies seeing, brought against them the best horsemen, that being more in
number, they should, if they might, encompasse them. When Caesar perceived
that, he laid three thousand of the boldest footmen in abushment, whom he
willed, that when they saw the enemy going about to enclose, they should
leap forth, and with their pikes drive as hard as they could, at the faces of
them, for he knew that they being young and inexpert, would not abide the peril
of the face. Thus did they denise on both sides, and went about in every
place, and when they had given the order, and exhorted them to good heart, then
gave their words of knowledge.

Caesar. Venus the Conqueresse.
Pompey. Hercules unconquered.
When all was ready, they stood a good while in a great silence, stirred not,
but looked one upon an other, as amazed men which should begin the fight.
The multitude that hitherto had no compassion at all, now pitied that so great
an army of Italians should at once be hazarded, and that their virtue should
be tried only upon themselves, and the chief hurt be of Italians The
astonishment of both armies.
against Italians, and now at the very pynche of the mischief at hand, the
desire of glory that had in^^sed and blinded them, was quenched, and converted
into fear: for when reason did thoroughly way the affection of fame, and
measured also the danger present, they saw the cause consisted in the
contention of two men, for whose superiority all their lives was ventured, so
as whither were euercome, could not be safe in the furdest place, nor a great
multitude of noble men for their sakes: they remembered their ancient
friendship and affinity, how many things they had done to their own honor
and advancement, which now did wear their weapons against themselves, and
brought all that did serve them, to the like mischief, being of one nation,
Citizens, kin^cmen and allies, yea and some brethren. For so it happened in this
war, as among so many thousands as were together of one nation, diverse and
strange effects The strange abashment of both sides.
must hap, which, either of them now considering, were stricken presently
with a great repentance, as though in that day, they should be either first or
last upon the earth, and were loath to begin so doubtful a deed, and fell a
weeping on both sides. Standing thus and beholding one another, the day
passed: the Italians standing in due order with silence continued: but Pompey
perceiving his strangers to be troubled with this stay, and doubting least
confusion might follow thereof, at the beginning, first gave the token of
battle, and Caesar did the like. Then the trumpets stroke the sound of
battle as was required in such a number: beside, in sundry parts, the Heralds
and the Captains, were at hand to give encouragement: they marched stately
with astonishment and silence, as men that had been in many like pastimes: Being
at hand, the first charge was The ^nset given.
given with Archers, and Artillery, and soden onsets of horsemen to enclose the
footmen. There was too and fro, til Pompeys horsemen having the better, did
enuiron the tenth legion. Then Caesar, giving his token to them that lay in a
wait, they stepped forth against the horsemen, and with their pykes put up,
did lay them on the faces: they could not abide that boldness, nor the blows
made at their mouths and eyes, but confusedly fled away, and then did Caesar's
horsemen enclose the other footmen, being naked, which feared to have been
enclosed themselves. When Pompey percepued this, he commanded the footmen not
to move or stir from the battle, nor to throw light weapons, but to stand
distante in the forefront, and with their pykes at han^e to resist the enemy
coming on them. Some (...) of (...) (...) not (...)*
praise this policy, as the best, against compassing: but Caesar in his
Epistles does disprayse it, because the strokes that are given with a moving
vehemence, are mightier, and men by forcing foreward, be the bolder, and they
ye remain still, ware fearful, and easy to be bitte, as standing marks that
are shot at, as then it proved in deed. The tenth legion with him, fiercely
following, did beat the bodies of Pompeis leaft battle, void of horsemen, and
standing still till they put them out of order* and by very force made them to
turn, which was the beginning of ye victory in the other multitude. Although
there was diverse and sundry ways of slaughter and hurting, yet was there not
a voice heard in such a maine battle, but sighs only and groans of them
that fell valiauntlye in their places appointed. The confederates, as though
they had come to see them fight a pryse, did marvel at their goedly order, but
had no heart (for wondering at them) neither to enter Caesar's camp which was
kept of a few, and they very old men, nor to do any other thing, but stand
and gaze. But when the left wing of Pompeis host did retire by little and
little, yet fighting still, Pompeys consederates flec*
the confederates foully fled away, and cried, we be overcome. They ran upon
their own tents and camps, as though they had been the others, which when
they had spoiled, they went their ways as fast as they could. The other Italian
army perceiving they had the worse, gave back first in order, defending
themselves as they might, but the enemy still coming upon them, as now having
the victory, they also turned and fle^. Caesar then used great policy, y^
they should not gather together Caesar's poli^^e.
again, that this labor might not only make an end of one fight, but of all the
war. He sent tru^pets about y^ battles, commanding the^ to refrayn from
killing of their countrymen, and continue only against the strangers, and that
they should go among the^ y^ A vvord^ to stay. Stay without fear.
were overcome, and bid the^ stay without fear. This declaration of y^ crier was
learned from one man to another, and was ^ warning word for Po^peis host to stay
without fear: so passing by y^ other ^s Italia^s of one language and order, they
beat down the strangers not able to resist, and there was great slaughter made.
After Po^pey saw this Pompey ama^ed and speachlesse. A^ax Telamonius fell into
astonishment for the judgment given against (...).
alteration, he was astonyed and went softly into his ca^pe, and being come to
his tent, he sat down speechless, as they say Ajax Telamonius did for y^ grief
he suffered in y^ loss among his enemies at y^ battle of Troy: of the other,
very few came into y^ ca^pe, for Caesar's Heralds had made the^ stay without
fear, and being ouerpassed of their enemies, they might disperse the^ selves
here and there. The day was almost at an end, and Caesar road about with
marvelous pain, praying them that they would take yet a (...) exhorting (...)
make ^^ and.
little more labor, til they had gotten Pompeis camp, showing them that if
the emmies returned, they should be winners but o^ one day, but if they got his
camp too, the war should be ended for cuer. He held up his hands to them,
and was the first that ran toward it. This did stir the minds of them
that had weary bodies to see their general go before them: the victory of
things past; and the hope to get the camp, with all that was in it, did stic,
to that again, and when men be in hope and felicity, they feel the less of
labor and extremity. They went on with great courage, and beat away the
warders of the same, which when Pompey saw, he only brake into this Pompey
flees.
speech after his long silence, What, ours tents too, when he had thus
spoken, he changed his garment, and leapt on horse with feure friends, and
never left runnyng till by break of day he came to Larissa* Caesar (as he
threatened) at the giving of ^ar^ss^ in (...), and in other places.
the onset, did lodge in Pompeis pauilion, and supped with his provision, and
the rest of his army did the like.

There were slain in this battle of both parts of Italians (for the
strangers because of their multitude and contempt be not numbered) of Caesar's
arraye thirty captains of bands, The loss of (...).
and CC. soldiers, or as some say, two thousand and ij. hundred. Of Pompeys
ten Senators, of the which was Lucius Domitius Pompeys lo^^e. ^* (...)
(...) P^m^ (...) ^x^. M. ^y death, and xxv. M. by taking, ^^e r^ite (...).
(...).
once appointed Caesar's successor in France, and of them that be called
Gentlemen* about forty of the best: of the rest of the army, they that make
most, say.xxv. M. But Asinius Pol^^o that was at that fight with Caesar,
writes that only fire thousand of Pompeys was slain at that battle. This
was the end of that great fight at ^ha^sa^^o.

Every man ^cusessed that Caesar had deserved the first and second honors,
and with him the ^enth Legion. Crastinius a (...) of (...).
leader of a band, was thought worthy the thi^de, who going to y^ fight, being
asked of Caesar what he thought, an^vered couragiou^^^, (...) of (...)*
we shall win D Caesar, and then shalt find me here ^yther alive ^r ^ea^.
The a^^y did (...), that he going from band to band like a man in a fury, did
as much as a man might do. When he was sought for, and found among the dead,
Pompey takes the ^ea. Mi^ilena, in ^esb^ now Metelin.
Caesar did bury him with the ornaments due unto him, and erected him a Tumbe
nygh y^ common Sepulcher. Po^pey from Larissa with like speed went to the sea
side, where he took a little boat, and by chance met a ship a floate, and
sailed to Mitilena, where he received his wife Cornelia, and passed with four
Gallyes, Pompey^ determination of recovery.
which the Rodians and Tirians had brought to him. He refused to sail to
Corcyra and Libya, where he had an other great army, and a mighty navy by sea.
He made his course to Parthia, thinking to recover al again, keeping his
purpose close from his friends, till he came with much ado to Ciluia. There
they prayed him Cornelia Pompeis wife Crassus daughter
to beware of the Parthians, which had lately overcome Crassus, whereby they
were the more insolent, and that it was not fit to bring Cornelia, so fair a
woman, among so intemperate people, especially being Crassus daughter. The^ he
devised whither he should go, into Egypt, or to Iuba king of Barbary. They
thought no good to be had with Iuba, therefore they counseled him to go to
Egypt, a nation nygh, of great dominion, fertyl and abundant of grain, money,
and nauye, whose kings though they were children, yet friends to him for his
fathers sake: and so for this cause he sailed into Egypt.

At this time Cleopatra being eiected out of the kingdom by her brother, with
whom she should jointly have reigned, prepared an army in Syria against him.
Ptolomeus Cleopatras brother Crassus an hill ^^ the end of Nilus. Ptolomeus
against Cleopatra.
was at a place in Egypt called Cassium, and did lie in camp to resist his
sisters forces, and as fortune would, Pompey was driven thither. When he
perceived an army aland, he stayed his ship, and thought, (as it was in deed)
that the king was there: he sent unto him, to show of the amity between his
father and him. The king was thirteen year old: one Achillas did govern his
army, and Photinus and Cnuch was his Treasurer. They began to consulte what
was best to be done with Achille^ Photinus* Theodo^us*
Pompey: There was^also Theodotus of Samos, an Drator and Scholema^ster to the
king, who did persuade the wicked act to deceive and ky^ Pompey, to gratifye
Caesar. This counsel prevailed, they sent a simple boat as though the
roughness of y^ Sea would not suffer a greater. Some of the kings servants
went into the beat, and with them Semprouius a Romayne, (...).
who had served under Pompey, and was now with the king. He offered his hand
in the kings name to Pompey, and wylled him to come as to his son and friend.
As this was done, the army was set in order, and drew near the sea as to
honor Pompey, and the king was set in the midst in a purple vesture to be
seen of all

Pompey suspected all, both the ordering of the army, and the means of the
vessel: chiefly because the king came not toward him, nor sent any of his noble
men, he spoke a verse of Soph^cles:

Who to a Tiranne goes, A verse of ^ophocles*

His slave he is, though free he rose.
And then he entered yt boat. Every man being silent in y^ passage, he rather
suspected, and chiefly Sempronius, either because he knew him to be a Roman,
and having served under him, or because he did conjecture it, seeing him only
standing, according to soldiers discipline, who do not set, when the chief
is by. Then he turned to him and said, surely I should know thee, O Soldier.
He nodded at him again, and as he turned, was the first that stroke him, then
the other. His wife and friends seeing this a far off, cried, and held up
their hands to the gods Sempronius ^ Roman first stryketh Pompey
reuengers of friendship broken, and sailed away straight as from enemies
land. They that were about Photino cut of Pompeis head, and kept it for
Caesar as a great gratification: but he Pompey cruelly^ killed.
worthily revenged this wicked deed upon them. The rest of his body was buried
at the sea bancke, and a silly Sepulcher was made, to the which one wrote this
Epitaph:

Lo here he lies in simple grave. Epitaph of Po^pey

A Temple that deservde to have.
In process of time the grave was covered with sand: and certain Images of
Brass which the inhabitants did afterward set up to Pompey under the Hill
Cassius, were taken away and laid up in a secret place of a Temple. In my
time Adrianus the Roman Emperor in his journey that way, Adrianus the
Emperor rest^ reth the grave of Pompey.
did cause it to be sought and found out, and made the grave to be amended, so
as every man might see it, and erected the Images that were dedicated to Pompey.

This was the end of Pompey, by whom so many great battayles had been fought,
and the Roman Empire so increased, Pompey the great.
as he had the surname of Great, never being overcome before, but from his
youth still invincible and happy: and from three and twenty to eight and fifty
years, he ruled like a king, but in opinion supposed to govern like a
populare man, for the emulation of Caesar.

Lucius Scipio, Pompeis father in Law, and all the other noble men that did
escape the battle, fled to Cato to Corcyra, who Corcyra an Island in the
Io^^ian sea. The care of Pompeys friends.
was general of another army, and three hundred Galleys, being left there as a
prudent Counselor. The noblest of Pompeis friends divided the Nauye. Cassius
sailed to Pontus to Pharnaces, to stir him against Caesar. Scipio and Cato
went into Libya trusting upon Varus and his army, and Iuba king of Numidia
his confederate. Pompey, Pompeis eldest son, and Labienus Pompeys son
Labienus Scapula.
with him and Scapula, having a part, went into Spain to make it against
Caesar, and they got him another army of Iberians and Celtiberians and slaves
to have the preparation greater: so mighty a power of Pompeis army was yet
left, which he, by his infelicitie did abandon when he fled away* They that
were Cato chosen general in Lybia, refuses.
in Lybia did chose Cato for the general Captain, who for y^ presence of such
men as had been Consuls, and others that had been Lieuetenaunts, and he only a
Praetor in Rome, refused the same. So L. Scipio was made general and a great
army was gathered and trained, and these were the chiefest preparations in
Libya and Iberia gathered against Caesar.

After the victory, Caesar aboade two days in Pharsalo, sacrificing
Thessalians made free of Caesar who had served him.
and recreatyng his wearye army, and there made the Thessalians free that had
served him, and pardoned the Athenians at their suit, using these words: How
often has the glory of your ancestors saved you, when you have deserved
destruction?

The third day he removed toward the East, following the fame of Pompeis
flighte, and for want of Galleys sailed over Hellespont in little boats.
(...) now (...) of (...). These (...) Europe and (...) a covvarde.


Cassius with his number of Galleys met him as he was going to Pharnaces, and
although he might with his Galleys have had the advantage of those little
boats, yet for fear of Caesar's felicity and valiantness, he was amazed, and
suspecting that Caesar had come of purpose to find him, he held up his hands
and came from his Galleys into the boats to ask him pardon, and deliver him
all his Galleys. So much force had the glory of Caesar's felicity, for I see
none other reason, nor can judge any other mean in so great difficulty of
time, to have such fortune that he should so afray Cassius a valiant man,
coming upon him with scauent^e Galleys utterly unprovided, that he durst not
meddle with him. For as cowardly as he did now yield unto him upon the Sea, so
after did he as cruelly kyl him when he was (...).
Lord of all at Rome. Wherefore it is evident that he was then ouerborne with
the fear of his felicity. Caesar thus being saved against all hope, and past
Hellespont, he pardoned the Ionians, ^ores.
Aetolians, and other nations that inhabit great Cherroneso, which by one
name is called Asia y^ lower. He forgave them Caesar say^e^h into Egypt.
that sent ambassadors to crave it. Understanding that Pompey was gone to
Egypt he went to the Rhodes, where he would not tarry for the rest of his
army that was coming to him by parts, but with the Galleys of Cassius and the
Rhodes, and such men as he presently had, he took ship at night, and sailed
forth, not showing whether, only commanding the captains in the night to
follow the light of his ship, and in the day, the flag of the same: to the
master whereof he commanded, after he had sailed a good way, to set his
course toward Alexandria: and so being three days upon the sea, he came
thither. In this place he was well received of the kings officers, the king
being yet at mount Gassius.

Caesar at his coming pretended to have nothing ado, because of his few men,
but went about the City, to behold the beauty thereof, and stood and heard the
Philosophers disputations, whereby (...).
he wanne much love and good favor of the Alexand^^^^s being among them as
one having nothing to do. But when his army was come, he laid hands upon
Photinus and (...), and put them to death, for the wickedness done to Pompey,
Therdotus (...)
fled into Asia, whom Cassius found there, and caused to be hanged.

The Alexandrians were offended herewith, and set upon him with the kings
army that was there, and made many fights with him about the kings Palaice, and
at the sea bank, where (...) (...) by (...).
Caesar was driven to take the sea, and to swim a good way.

The Alexandrians took his cloak and bare it up as a token of victory. His
last battle was with the King himself at the floude Nilus, where he overcame
him, and restored the kingdom Caesar overcomes the King of Aegipt. (...)
(...). This book is not extant. Caesar we ^^ when he did see Pompeys head.
to Cleopatra, after he had bin nine months there. Then he sailed upon Nilus
with four hundred ships, in company of Cleopatra, for whose pleasure he did
many things, all the which be particularly told in my book of Egiptian
matters.

He could not abide to behold Pompeys head that was brought unto him, but
commanded it to be buried: he also builded a little Temple before the City,
which was called the Temple of Reuengement, Temple of Reuengement* Traiane.
the which in my time when Traiane the Emperor did make war against the
Jews, was pulled down of them, to serve some turn in the war.

When Caesar had done these things in Alexandria, he went with his army
thoroughe Syrta against Pharnace, who had bin Caesar against Pharnace.
Domitius over* thrown in ^yr^a. Amysso a City in the confines of Paphlagoma
and Capadocia.
very busy and taken diverse of the Roman Provinces, and gotten one victory
of Domitius lieutenante to Caesar, by the which growing stout he took Amyso a
City of Pontus allied to the Romans, all the people whereof he sold as
slaves and made their children Enuchs, but when Caesar came, he fled as far
as he could, and sent to Caesar for peace by his Ambassadors, who brought him
a crown of gold, and offered foolishlye the Kings daughter in marryage to him.

He perceiving their presents and messages, went on with his army,
entertayning the Kings Ambassadors with ordinary talk, till they came nighe
where he was encamped, and then he said: shall not this murderer of his father
be yet killed? and then he leaped on horse. And at the first charge Pharnace
fled away, and Caesar ouerthrewe the most part, with a thousand horsemen,
that with the first, did keep in chase with him. At this Caesar said with a
loud voice. O happy Pompey, that had to do with such me^ of war as
Mithridates, and this man's father was, thereby both to be thought and called
Great. Of this fight he ^^^i, vid^, vici. ^^sp^or^s part of the kingdom of
P^^t^s.
sent thus to Rome, I came, I saw, I conquered. Pharnace was content to go to
the kingdom of Bosphorus, which Caesar appointed him.

Caesar spent no time in trifles, so many battles yet remaining behind, he
went into Asia, and by the way gathered money of the Cities that were troubled
with them that took paymentes of the Tributes, as we have showed in our book
of Asia. Now word was brought him that there was sedition raised in Rome,
^editio^ in Rome.
and that Antony his lieutena^t did keep the common place with an army.
Therefore setting all things aside, he made haste to Rome. Whither, when he
was come, all civil discord ceased, Sedition in Caesar's army.
but another began among his soldiers, because they had not yet, neither
received the promise made for their service at Pharsalo, nor that it was reason
that they should be still kept in war, and therefore they cried every man to go
home. He had promised the^ rewards at Pharsalo, and other rewards when the war
of Libya Drac^ma is a p^^^e of coin, vvaying as much as a sterl^ng groat,
after eight groates to an ovvnce. Salustius in danger.
should be ended. Therefore he sent them a thousand drammes apeece, with a
promise of more. They bad him promise no more, but pay al out of hand. And it
lacked but little that they had not killed Crispus Salustius, had he not
shifted away.

When Caesar heard this, he commanded the legion that Antony had for the
guarde of the City, to keep about his house, and the entry of the City,
fearing spoil, and he, very boldly (all men fearing and diswading him from
the rage of the soldiers) went among them as they were in mutiny in the field
of Mars, Caesar among his seditious souldioures.
and not being perceived, was set in the high seat. They confusedly, and with
tumulte came running unarmed, and as the manner is to salute the General when
he comes first among them, he commanded the^, that if they had any thing to
say there, touching the gifts, they should speak it before his face, whiles
he was present: they durst not speak a word for fear, but taking Caesar
vvs^do^ a^^n^ his ^^^ o^ ting Sould^o^s.
a mean way, cried to be released of the war, hoping because ^e had need of
men to finish the rest of his wars, he would have said somewhat of the gifts.
But he contrary to all opinion, without any stay answered: I discharge you.
They being ast^med hereat, and standing in a great silence, he said again:
And I will give you all that I have promised you, when I shall triumph ^^ the
rest. This word unlooked for, and appearing so courteous, did strike in them
such a consideration with an emulation, that they thought it a shame to
forsake their Captain in the mids of his enemies, and that others should
triumph in their places. They Souldioures repent them.
remembered what loss they should have by leaving the war in Libya, and be
thought enemies as well to Caesar as to his adversaries: for this doubt they
remained silent in fear, hoping yet that Caesar would have given them
reward, and forgyuen them the fault for his present need, but he sat as
silent as they. Therefore his friends wished him to say somewhat unto them, and
not to leave them, that so often had served him, with so short and severe a
speech. He began to speak and call the^ Citizens in stead of soldiers, which
was a token they were discharged of y^ war, and become in their former private
case. This they could not suffer, but cried that they did repent, and prayed
they might be taken to the war, Caesar refused it, and came from the seat.
Then they made greater instaunce, beseeching him that if they had done amiss
to punish them: he stayed a while, neither going forward nor backewarde,
seeming to doubt what to do, yet he returned and said he would punish none
of them, but that it grieved him that the tenth legion, which he had always
loved and honored, should give cause of such tumulte, and only this said.

I do release them of their service, and yet will give them all I have promised
them, when I come from Libya, and I will give land to all, when the wars
shall be ended, not as Sylla did, spoiling it from other that had it, and
causing both the taker and the loser, to live together, to maintain perpetual
enmitye, but I will divide both the common and mine own, and the lack I will
buy with my money.

Showte and rejoice was made of all, saving of the tenthe legion, against the
which Caesar seemed to be inexorable. Therefore The tenth legio^ desires to
be punished.
they desired him they might be punished by death, as the lotte should fall
out. But he having no need of further furye of them, and perceiving they were
throughlye penitent, forgave Reggio, is the f^rthe^ town in Italy toward
(...) fore^ande of (...). Caesar sayleth into (...). (...) Cittye in (...),
(...) my^es from Carthage. A Senate in Lybia of three ^a^dred Romans.
Adrumeto a City in Africa, farie from Carthage. Labienus. Petreius puts
Caesar back. Petreius follows not the vnstorye.
them all, and straight went to the war in Barbary, passing from the narrow
Sea at Reggio, he went to Messina and to L^lybee, where he understood that
Cato kept part of the army both by sea and land at V^^ca, with three hundred
which like chief counselors were greatest doers of the war, and called the
Senate, and that the General Lucius Scipio, and the best lay in Adrumeto,
therefore he sailed against Scipio who was gone to ^uba, and gave order for the
fight with his camp, taking the opportunity against his enimyes that were
without the General. Labienus and Petreius chief under Scipio, did not refuse
the fight, and had far the better of Caesar, putting him to flight, and
fiercely with contempt followyng him, til Labienus horse was thrus^e through
the belly and killed, and he saved by the guarde of his person. Petreius, as he
that had taken sufficient trial of his army, and might win when he would,
left the thing unfinished, saying to them that were by him: Leaft we should
take the victory from Scipio our General. Caesar's fortune.
This was also another token of Caesar's fortune, that his enemies in apparaunce
having the victory, would so suddenly break the fight, when they had the day.
They say that Caesar at this fight, was fa^ne to stand against his men, and
to take the Egle from him that bare it, being the chief standerd, and to go
to the foremost The d^^^ger of Caesar.
to stay the^ from flying, till Petreius retired, and Caesar had time to depart
with leisure. This end had the first fight y^ he made in (...) (...).
Barbary. Not long after, Scipio came forth with.8. legions, xx. M. h^^sme^
whereof the most part were Affricanes, many target me^, ^ rrr Elephants, which
^uba the King, who had other footmen, about. rrr. M. and Numidia^ horsemen
almost.xx. M. many darters, and threescore other Elephants.

Caesar's army was dismayed, and troubled among themselves as well for their
former loss, as for the fame of their adversaries, both in number and virtue,
specially the Numidian Horsemen, beside the terror that they had to make a
strange fight ^occhus King of the Moors, that delivered ^ugurtha to Sylla.
Ci^tha a City of Numidia, now Constana, where Iugurth killed Adher^all. The
fifth Legion gives the Elephant in a^ en^^gne. Caesar's Victory.
with the Elephantes. But Bocchus, another king of the Moors, having taken
Cirta, the chief City of Iuba, he upon the news of his own loss, returned
home with his army, leaving only thirty Elephants with Scipio. Caesar's army
by this, took such courage, as the fifth Legion desired the fight against the
Elepha^ts, of whom, having a noble victory, they give an Elephante in their
ensign at this day. The battle being long and difficulte on every side, and
full of uncertainty, about the evening Caesar hardly got the victory, and
overthrew Scipios Camp, not leaving the victory in the night, till all was
brought to pass, the enemies by sinal parts as they could, fled: and Scipio
with Afranio, leaving all, fled to the Sea with twelve Ships unarmed. Thus an
army of fourscore thousante Souldyers, well trained in the war, and
encamped by the former victory, was in this second fight utterly vanquished.
Caesar's glory, through his felicity, was comp^ed of all me^ unconquerable, and
they that were overcome, would attribute nothing to his manhood, but excuse
all their Caesar's felicity.
faults by his felicity. It seems that this war had this unfortunate end,
by the unskillfulness of the Captains, that they did not endure, till Caesar
might have bin put to his shifts, nor Unskillfulness.
bring the first victory to perfection, but would needs leave it, when they
were in the midst of it. This being told at V^ica the The noblemen of Rome
flee.
third day, and Caesar coming forward, every man began to flee, of whom
Cat^ stayed none, but gave Ships to the noble men that desired them, yet
himself tarryed like a constant man, and where they of V^ica promised, that
they would make intercession to Caesar for him, before themselves, Cato smiled
and answered, Cato to the V^icenses.
there needed no reconciliation between Caesar and him, and that Caesar knew
well enough. Then he sealed up all the treasure, and the assurances and writings
of every man, and delivered them to the Magistrates of V^ica, and in the
evening using his bath and his supper, sitting at his meat as he was wont to
do, since the death of Pompey, nothing changing from his wonted in inner,
neither ^ahing more nor less. He talked familiarly with them that were
present, of them that were sailed, and if the wind were good for them, and how
far they might pass before the morning that Caesar came. And when he went
to bed, he change^ nothing of his usage, but only embraced his son more
straightly than he was wont: but because he found not his sword in the place at
his bed where it was wont to stand, he cried, he was betrayed to his enemies
of his own folk. What should I (...)
use (quoth he) if they set upon me in the night? They desired him he would be
content, and to work nothing against himself, but to rest without his sword.
Might I not (quoth he) if I would, cheke my self with my cloak, or crush my
head against the wall, or fall and break my neck, or stop my breath and kill
my self? When they heard him speak after this sort, they brought him his
sword. Then he called for Plat^s book of the Immortality of (...) of the
Soul. Cato strike ^^ (...).
the Soul, which when he had read, and thinking them that kept the doors to
be at rest, he stroke himself with the sword under the breast, where at his
bowels fell out, at the which noise, they without came in and the Physicians
put in his bowels again unperished. When he came again to himself, he was
sorry he had given no deeper wound, tha^king them that they had saved his life,
and made the^ believe he would rest: then they took away y^ sword, and shut
y^ door, that he might sleep: he seeming to be asleep, tare asunder with his
hands (like a wild beast) the sowing up of his The death of Cato.
wound, rent his belly asunder, and flong the entrayles into the store, and so
dyed at fifty years of his age. By doing this, he confirmed the opinion that
he held of all men, most singular by nature, judging virtue, honesty, and
goodness, not by men's manners, The singularity of Cato.
but by high cogitations of the mind: Martia, Philips daughter he married a
maid, and loved her full dearly, and after he had children by her, he gave
her to his friend Hortensio, that was desirous (...).
of children, and could not get a fruitful wife, and when she was with child
by him, he received her home again, as with interest. This was Catos behavior.
The Vticenses buried him very honorably. Caesar fayde, that Cato enuyed his
glorious proceedings: Cicero made a book in the praise of him, and called it
Cato. Caesar made another in the disprayse of him, and called it Anticato, Iuba
Anticato.
and Petreius hearing what was done, and thinking no saferie nor escape to be
left for them, with their swords killed one another Iuba and Petreius killed
themselves one another. Crispus Salustius. Lieutenant. Young Pompey. Caesar
puts to death. Scipio drowned
in their house. Caesar made Iubas Kingdom tributarie to Rome, and appointed
Crispus Salustius to be Lieutenant of it. He pardoned the Vticenses: and Catos
son, and a daughter of Pompey, with two little children whom he took at
Vtica, he sent safe to Pompey. Of the three hundred, as many as he found he put
to death. Lucius Scipio the General, keeping the seas all Winter, till he fell
among the enemies, behaved himself very valiantly, till he was overcome, and
then stroke himself, and lept into the Sea. This was the end of Caesar's war
in Libya. Then he went to Rome, and made Triumph of Caesar
four triumphs of the French, of the which he had overthrown many and great
nations, and the other reuolting, he brought to order, of Pharnace at Pontus,
of Libya, and the confederates of Scipio, Iuba.
where Iuba, the son of Iuba, the wrighter of Histories, being yet an
infant, was brought. He showed also a certain triumph of Aegipt, with a fight
by water at Nilus, which was done between the French, and the Pharnatian
triumph: but he refrayned Lamentable shows. Affections of the people. A
talent of the least varne, was one hundred pounds, which is colled the less
tale^t of (...). The greater talent o^ (...), was about 23^. pound. There
were other talentes, whereof soul were 400. pound. A (...)me of (...)
contained six (...), vv(...) was much ^^ke our halfe^eny, and one hundred
drammes made an (...) pound.
from triumphing of the Romans, as civil matter not fit for him, and loathsome
and unlucky to y^ Romans, to be showed in triumph: yet all the chances, and
y^ men in pictures, and diverse images, ( Pompey except) he brought in: him only
he forbad to be showed, because he was so well beloved of all sorts. The people
(though they were afraid) sighed at this sight, especially when they saw
Lucius Scipis the general strike himself to the heart, and fall into the Sea,
and Petreius in his tent so to kill himself, and Cato tearing his bowels like
a brute beast, but at the death of Achillas and Photinus, they rejoiced, and at
the flight of Pharnaces they laughed. The money that was brought in the
triumphs, is said to be 70. Talents and an half, and two thousand eight
hundred two and twenty Crowns of gold, the weight whereof did exceed twenty
thousand four hundred fourteen pound weight, by the which after y^ triumphs
were ended, he performed all that he had promised to his army, and more to. To
every soldier he gave five M. drammes of Athens, to a leader of a band twice
so much, to a Captain of a thousand, and a Lieutenante of Horsemen twice so
much more, and to every one of the people, one pound of Athens. He exhibited
many shows of horse and music, and fighting on foot, one thousand against
an other, and of horsemen two thousand against so many, and other of footmen
and Horsemen mingled Shows by Caesar.
together, and of Elephantes, twentye against twentye, and a fight by Sea of
four hundred Galleys, and a thousand of either side. He erected a Temple to
Venus his auncester, as he Venus Temple:
vowed at Pharsalo, and about the temple a goodly court, which he would should
be called the Romans court, not for bying and selling, The Romans Court
like to our Exchange. Place of conference. Image of Cleopatra.
but for conference, as among the Persians, there is for them that will have
any doubt discussed touching justice. The Image of Cleopatra was set up by the
Goddess very fair, which is yet seen there. A view of the people was made,
and they found scarcely half so many men alive, as were before the beginning
of the Decay of people.
war, so much had contention wasted the City.

Now was he made Consul the fourth time, and went into Iberia Caesar made
Consul.
against young Pompey, as to the leauings of the civil war, not to be
neglected, for all the best men that fled out of Libya resorted to him, and
all the remnant of the armies at Pharsalo, and other places, repaired thither.
Of y^ Iberianes and Celtiberianes, very Power in Spain.
valiant nations, used to the wars, and of slaves a multitude, did serve
Pompey, and having bin exercised four years, were ready to fight with
desperate mind. Pompey putting great trust in this, refused not to fight, but
would needs try it out with Young Pompey refuses ancient counsel.
Caesar as soon as he came. But the ancient and wise me^ in experience that
were come from Pharsalo and Lybia, did rather advise him to consume Caesar in
time, and to distress him with want, as in those strange places he might.
Caesar came from Rome in seaue^ Caesar into Spayn. Fear of his Souldyoures.
Rashness of young Pompey. Corduba, a City in Spain, the country of both
Seneca and In^ane the Poet, now Cord^^^.
and twenty days, passing a long way with a great army, and such a fear
fell among them that he brought, as never did before, because of the
multitude, experience, and desperation of the enemies: wherefore Caesar came
the flowlyer forth, and because he used some foresight, Pompey came lustily
upon him, and vpbrayded him of fearefulnes, which rebuke Caesar could not
suffer, but made order for the battle at Corduba: his word was, Venus and
Pompeys Piety. When they should go to it, a fear Fear in Caesar's army.
Some vvrighte, that this fight was given at Monda, which is now Mundesara:
the places not being far asunder, some name the one, and some the other.
and dreadful slothfulness took Caesar's army, wherefore he besought all the
Gods, and held up his hands to Heaven, that he might not lose all his noble
acts by this one Battle, and therefore went about the army, and exhorted them
to be bold. He pulled his headpeece from his head, that they might see his
face, and so receive good heart: but they for all that could not put away
their fear, till Caesar took a Target from one of them, and to the Captains
about him thus said: Shall this be the end to me of life, and to you of
service? and ran from the army so far, as Danger of Caesar.
he was but ten foot from his enemies, who threw two hundred darts at him,
of the which he shunned part, and part he received on the Target. Then his
Captains ran about him, every man, and the whole army set forward with
great violence, and fought all day, sometime with advantage, and sometime
with disadvantage, sometime winning, and sometime losing, till at night he got
the victory with much ado, so as he said, at other times, he had fought for
victory, but now, he fought for life. There was great slaughter of Pompeys
part, which fled to Corduba. Caesar's saying of this fight.
And Caesar, that they should not gather again to a news fight, commanded
his army to compass the City. They being weery of the former pain, took the
bodies, and the armure of A trench made of dead bodies.
them that were slain, and bare them between them, and making them fast to
the earth with their spears, used them for a Corduba taken.
Trench. The next morning the City was taken of Pompeys captains. Scapula
made a fire, and threw himself into the flame. Scapula, Varus, and Labienus,
kille^. Pompey flees. Carteia is a City in Granado, now Tarifa.
The heads of Varus, Labienus, and other noble men, were brought to Caesar.
Pompey at the beginning of the loss, fled with a hundred and fifty horse
into the Carteia, where he had a Navy of Ships, he came secretly to the
Ships carried in a litter, and when he perceived them there to be in fear of
themselves, he was in dread to be betrayed, and therefore took a boat again,
and by the way, his foot hong in one of the ropes, which one minding to cut,
missed the rope, and hurt him in the foot, but he Pompey hu^^.
went on to the next village, and was cured, where being sought for, he fled
among the bushes and desert paths, in the which the (...) d^^ pr^^ke his
wound so, as for very weariness he s^^^ him down under a tree, whether the
searchers pursued him, and he valiantly defending himself was slain, his head
being Pompey the elder ^onne, slain.
carried to Casar, and by his commandment buried: so this war at one
brunte, contrary to all opinion, was ended. A younger brother of this Pompey,
called Sextus, did gather the remnant Pompey the younger brother.
of the leauings of this war, and in close manner, conveyed himself hither
and thither, robbing for their living. Now Caesar having finished all civil
dissension, went to Rome, with such fear and opinion, as never man before.
All honors that above man's Caesar honored (...).
reach could be devised, were done unto him: Sacrifices, Plays, and gifts, as
well in Temples and public places by the companies of the City, as by all
nations and Kings confederate to the people of Rome. Many diverse forms were
set upon his images, The great (...) of the ^ (...) ^ut (...) g^^e Crowns or
garlandes to them that had ^on^ worthy (...). ^^^her of the ^^^^trey. ^^tator
per^^^^^. Honors given ^^ Casar. Holy days.
of the which some had crowns of oak, as to the savior of the country, with
the which in old time they were honored that saved their Country. He was
named father of the Country, and chosen Dictator perpetual, and Consul for
term years, and touching his body, accounted sacred and inviolable, to give
audience in a chair of gol^e and yuorie, and continuallye make Sacrifices,
elad with triumphant garments. They ordained the City to be holy those days
that he wan any victories. They appointed Sacrifices and Priests for five
years, and public vows for his preservation, and orders were made, by the
which all his acts were confirmed by oath. And in the honor of his house, the
Month Quintilis, was called Julius. Many Quintilis, Julius. Temples ^ed^ca^ed
to Caesar.
Temples were dedicated to him alone, as to a God, and one jointly to him and
Clementie holding hand in hand. Thus did they fear him as a Lord, and honor
him as a merciful Minister. There were that labored to have called him King,
till he heard of it, and forbad it with threats, that no man should once
Caesar refuset^ the name of ^yng.
name it, as detestable, and unlawful from his auncesters. He discharged the
bands of his guard, by whom he had bin defended from his enemies, and went
abroad with the officers of the City only. He being in the common place,
and giving audience, the Senate with the Consule going before in goodly order,
brought him a decree of all* these honors, which ^e received Caesar's
statelines.
gently, not rising to them, neither coming nor going* which gave occasion of
matter to them that meant to accuse him of aspiring Occasion of hate.
to a Kingdom. He accepted all the dignities, saving the Consulship for ten
years, therefore willed himself to be declared Consul, and Antonius with
him, that was Captain of (...) Caesar and Antonius C^nsul^.
his Horsemen, which office he appointed to Lepidus, to exercise the rule of
Horsemen* by deputies, because he was Gouernoure in Iberia. He revoked all
banishments, except such as were fled for wicked offenses. He pardoned his
enemies, and to such as had fought against him, he gave yearly offices, and
sent them The clemen^^^ of Caesar.
to charges of provinces and armies, which ma^^ the people to think, that he
would have left them in a common wealth, as Sy^la did when he had the like
authority: but they were deceived. Caes^r deceyueth the peoples opinion.
One of them that would have had the name of a King set forward, did put
upon his image a Crown of Laurel, with a A Crown upon Cas^s Image, by one
that was apprehended of the Tribunes Marullus, and Siti^s.
wreath of a white riband. Marullus and Sesetius being Tribunes, apprehended
him, and threw him in p^^son, thinking so to have pleased Caesar, a^one that
abhorred the name of King. This he suffered patiently, and where others called
him King as he went out at the gates, and the people sighed at it, he answered
covertly* I am not King, but Caesar, as though they had bin deceived Caesar
accepts not the name of a King.
in the name. Marullus caused him to be apprehended, that first of them
began this matter, and w^lled him to be brought to answer in his Court.
Then Caesar could no longer suffer, but accused Marullus and his fellows
before the Senate, as one that craftily wroughte against him Caesar angrye
with the Tribunes, causes ^^sp^^^on of Kingdom.
by a calumniation of Tyranny, and whereas they deserved ^eathe, yet he
thought it sufficient for them to lose their office, and be put out of the
Senate. This did most of all confirm, that he coueted this little, and that he
bente all his pra^ise to that end, and was utterly become a Tyrante, for as
there was good authority to punish them that named any man king, so was the
Tribunes office holy, inuiolate by law, and ancient oath, and it made the
anger the sha^per, that he would not tarry the time of the office which when
he understood, he did re^ent him, and first perceived, that it was an hard
thing to deal rigorously* in peace, without authority of war. His friends
gave him counsel to beware, and that he had given great Caesar vvarred.
occasion to his adversaries to get matter against him: therefore when they
moved him y^ he would be content to have a guard of Spanish bande^* he said,
there was nothing more unhappy, tha^ Answer of Caesar touching a guard of his
person. (...) were shows of naked Priests in the honor of ^a^^^. Antony
sets a Crown on (...) head.
a continual guard, for it is of one that is ever afraid. Yet the practices to
be a King, ceased not, for sitting one day in the common place in a chayr^ of
gold to see the plays of Pan, Antony his fellow in office, naked and
anointed, as the manner was for the Ministers of that solemnity, ran vpto
Caesar's seat, and set a crown on his head, at the which sight few reioicing,
and more lamenting, Caesar threw it off. Antony set it on again, but Caesar
rejected it. The people stood silent, looking what end this would have, and
when they saw Caesar utterly refuse it, they rejoiced, and highly commended him
therefore. Now either because he despayred, or in vain attempted, or would
avoid the practice of so od^ous a thing, or for that he would leave the City
because of some enemies, or that he had regard to his health, being troubled
with a falling sickness, which in rest many times came vp^on Caesar has the
falling sickness.
him, he determined a great voyage against the Getes and Parthianes* against
the Getes, because they were insolente people, and quarrelling, ^uer troubling
the Roman state. Against the ^ete, S^ithi^^s in Europa. ^ Voyag^ into
Parthie.
Parthianes, because he would re^^nge Crassus death whom they had slain,
contrary to oath and promise, and so having an army of sixteen Legions, and
ten thousand Horse, he sent them before to pass the Ionian Sea. There was out
of Sybils books an old saying, that the Parthians should not be overcome,
till a King Prophecy.
went against them: wherefore some there were so bold to say, that as it was
expedient for the Romans to call him Dictator, or Imperator, or any other
name in stead of a King; so that all nations subject to the Roman Empire,
should call him King. He refused this also, and made have to his journey,
because he saw he was enuyed in the City: but whereas be tarried till the
appointed time, his enemies killed him four days before in ^^^ Senate house,
either for envy, which commonly accompanyeth Envy.
such felicity and authority, or as they said, for the love of their
countries liberty. For now they knew well that though he did not overcome
those nations, without doubt he would be a King. And for this cause (I
think) they took the enterprise against him, under the pretense of that
name: for though he was but Dictator in degree, it was as much as a King in
deed. There Conspiratours M. ^rutus. Ca. Cassius. D. Brutus.
were two chief in that conspiracy, Marcus Brutus Cepio, son to Brutus that
was killed of Sylla, which fled to Caesar after the calamity of Pharsalo
field, and Caius Cassius that delivered his galleis into Caesar's hand at
Hellespont. These two were before of Pompeys part, and now much honored of
Caesar. Decimus, Brutus, Albinus, always thought worthy of Caesar to be used
in honor and credit, and had great affairs committed to them, and in the wars
in Lybia, trusted them with armies, and made them Governors of Provinces.
Decimus of France beyond the Alps, and Brutus of the same, on this side the
Alps.

Brutus and Cassius being Pretors, contended for the superiority Cloaked
contention.
of the place, either indeed who should be higher, or else for a pretense,
that they should seem to be no friends. Caesar setting order betwixt them,
said to his friends: Cassius desires right, but Brutus must be pleased, With
so great love and honor did Caesar use him, that of some he was compted his
son, because he loved very well Seruilia, Catos sister, and Brutus mother.

Therefore when he got the victory at Pharsalo, he gave great Caesar's care of
Brutus.
charge to his Captayns, that in any wise they should save Brutus. But Brutus
either as an ingrate man, or ignorant of his mothers fault, or distrustful,
or ashamed, or very desirous of his cou^trys liberty, preferring it before all
other things, or that he was descended of the ancient Brutus, that drove out
the Kings: or that he was incensed and rebuked of the people, for many things
were written upon the Images of old Brutus, and in Brutus.
the Court hall of this Brutus secretly set up: Brutus thou take rewards,
Brutus thou art dead, O Brutus I would thou were alive now, Brutus, what
unworthy posterity have thou? Brutus thou art not come of him.

These and many other like, did inflame the young man's mind to take the work in
hand as from his progenitor: The same of making him King did still increase,
and that there would be a Counsel for it, a little before the which, Cassius
took Brutus by the hand and said:

Brutus what shall we do in that counsel? shall we, as Casars (...).
slatterers agree to make him King? Brutus answered, I would not be at that
Counsel Cassius being cheared with those words, (...).
said: what if they call us as Officers, what shall we do (good Brutus?) I will
(quoth he) defend my Country even to the death. Then Cassius embraced him,
saying: Whom wil^e thou take of the best being of this opinion? do thou
think that artificers and light people do set those writings upon thy
Judgeme^t place, rather tha^ the best Citizens of Rome, which of other Pretors
do look for shows, and pastunes of horse and wild beasts, but of thee they
require liberty, as a work worthy thine ancestors.

After they had thus first opened what they had long kept in their minds
before, they then dealte plamely, and each of them More Co^spira^o^^es.
proved his own friends, and some of Caesar's, whom they knew to be meet for
a bold enterprise, and they got of their friends two brethren, Cecilius and
Buc^l^^^us, the^ R^brius Riga, Q. L^ga^iw, Marcus Spurius, Seruilius Galba,
Sextius Naso, and ^o^^^us Aquila, all these of their trusty friends, and of
Caesar's familiars. Decimus, of whom we spoke, Caius Casca, Trebonius Tu^^us
Cymbrus, Minutius, and Basillus. These being thought sufficient, and not
judging it fit to have any more, they agreed together without oath or
sacrifice, and yet was there not one that changed or disclosed, but only sought
time and place.

The time was short, because Caesar must go away the fourth day to his
armies, and then should straighte have a guarde of Souldioures about him: The
place, they appointed the Senate house: thinking though the Senatoures were not
privy, yet when they saw the ^eede, they would help to it, as they say
happened to Romulus, who of a King became a Tyranne. Romulus was thought to
be corn a pieces of the Se^^te.


And that this act even as that, being done in the place of Counsel, should
not be thought a treason, but a deed of the City, void of dread of Caesar's
army, because it was a common consent, and that honor should remain to them
also, as not ignorant of the whole intent. Concluding upon this, they thought
the Senate house the fittest place. Of the manner, they differed: some thought
good to kill Antonie also, being Consul with Caesar, and his greatest friend*
and most accepted to the army. Consultation of Caesar's death.
But Brutus ^^yde* if we dispatche Caesar alone, we shall be named killers of
a Tyranne, because we deliver us of a king, and thereof must have our praise:
but if we kill any of his friends, we shall be though^^ (...) against Pompeys
enemies. Being all persuaded by this* they looked for the next meeting of the
Senate.

The day before that Caesar should go to the Senate, he had Caesar at a
banquct.
bin at a banquet with Lepidus Captain of the horsemen, whither he carried
Decimus Brutus Albinus, and talkyng merilye what death was best for a man,
some saying one, and some another, he of all, praised the sudden death.
Sudden death best.


Thus he prophesied of himself, and spoke in self of that which should come
to pass in earnest the next day. After the Caesar's wife a fearful dream.
banquet, in the night, his body was sickely, and his wife Calphurnia dreamed
she saw him all to be goared with blood, and therefore stopped his going
forth. In making sacrifices, many Sacrifices unprosperous.
fearful tokens appeared, wherefore he determined to have sent Antony, to
dissolve the Senate.

Decimus being present, persuaded him not to take that calumniation of the
suspicion, but himself to go and dissolve it, Impediments to the conspiracy.
and so he was carried thither in a Litter.

That day certain plays were exhibited in Pompeys Theater, Theater of Pompey.
therefore the Senate should be kept in the place next to it: using also to
see the fights.

Brutus and Cassius early in the morning, did sit as Pretors, giving audience
to suitors very quietly in a court nighe the theater of Pompey, and hearing of
Caesar's sacrifices, and the differing of the Senate, were in great doubt: and
one that was there, took Casca by the hand, and said unto him: would you
keep it from me that am your friend? Brutus told me Casca Disclosing.
was in a sudden passion, that he knew it: then he saite more (...) ^^d the
^uer ^^^ht of ho^se^ ^^^ple^, a^^ (...) Prayer.
to him simlyng, where will you have money for your office of Edilis? and Casca
told him. Brutus and Cassius being together, and in talk, one of the Senators
Publius Laenas, said, he wished well to that they had in their minds, and
exhorted them to dispatch it. They being much amazed, held their peace for
anguishe.

As Caesar came forth, one of his familiars understanding of ^^^^ition of
dis^^^ing.
the conspiracy, and using to tell what he heart, went to Calphurnia, and
said only this, because the matter touched Caesar much, he would tarry til
he came from the Senate, for he knew not all that was wrought against him.

And one Artemidorus that was his host in Guido, ran unto the Counsel house
and found him new slain. Of another A book of the Conspiracy.
a book of the Conspiracy was delivered, as he made haste into the Senate,
which was found again in his hand when he was dead. And came out of his
Litter Laen^, that had wished well before to Cassius, came unto him, and talked
very earnestlye with him, the sight whereof did trouble the^, and the length of
the Fear to the co^spiratoures.
talk made them wink one at another, to dispatche themselves, before they
should be taken.

But perceiving by the manner, that Laena was liker to speak for himself and
make supplication, than to bewray them, they stayed, and in the end, when they
saw him give humble thanks, they were encouraged again.

It was the custom that Rulers of the City should sacrifice, Sacrifices.
when they went to the Senate: And again in Caesar's first sacrifice, there
was no heart, or as some say, no head of the entrails, and when the Diuinor
said it was a sign of death, Caesar contem* neth the sacrifi^es of ^^il luck.
he smiled and said, so it was in Spain, when I ouerthrewe Pompey: and the
Diuinor aunswering that then he was in peril indeed, and now the token was
more manifest: Caesar bad him sacrifice again, and nothing appearing better
than it was, and being ashamed y^ he made y^ Senate tarry for him and being
hastened of his enmies, as though they had bin fri^ds, in dispight of his
enemies, he went in, For it must needs come that was determined.

They left Trebonius to entertain Antony without the doors, and when Caesar
was s^^^ his seat, they stood about him as his friends, with weapons hid,
and first Attilius Cymber stood T^^^^us.
before him, and made suit for his brothers return that was banished: Caesar
being against it, and utterly denying it, he took him by the purple robe, as
he would have made more suit, he rufded The (...)
the garment, and pulled it over his neck, crying: Why stay you (O friends?)
Casca came over his head, and first thrust his dagger at his throat, which
missing, hit him on y^ breast. Caesar twitching his gown from Cimbro, and
catching Casca by y^ hand, flung from his seat, and with great violence laid
hold upon Casca. Whiles he was doing this, wrestling with him, another stroke
him on Caesar giue^^ over when Brutus had ^^^ken ^^m, and some write that he
said, what thou a^^^ son.
the side that lay open, and Cassius hurt him in the face, and Brutus on the
thyghe, and Bucolinus between the shoulders: yet Caesar with rage and rear
like a wild beast, stepped to every of the^: but after Brutus had hurt him,
as though then he had dispaired, he wrapte himself in his gown, and fell
comely before the picture of Pompey: and they, (when he was down) used such
despite, as they gave him three and twenty wounds, and many were so hasty,
that they hurt one another.

When this act was done by these murderers in a sacred place, upon a sacred and
inuiolate man, by and by there was fleeing from the Senate house, and about all
the City: and in Confusion.
the tumulte, some Senators were hurt, and other men were killed: and there
was much slaughter done both of Citizens and straugers, not of purpose, but as
happens in such a Civil stir, when one comes upon another ignorauntly. The
sword players that had been in armor from the morning, for the show of
certain plays, ran from the game place, to the bars of the Senate house:
the people that came to the plays driven into a fear, fled away: shoppes
were spoiled: al doors were shut, and preparation made for defense from the
house Antony.
tops. Antony went to his own house, entending to take advice for this case
of Caesar's.

Lepidus the Captain of horsemen, being in the common place Lepidu^.
and hearing what was done, ran to the I Will within the City, where he had a
legion, and brought them abroad to be ready at Antonies commandment. For he
did cleave to Antony (...)
as Caesar's friend, and chiefly as Consul. Being met together, they had
great desire to revenge Caesar's death that thus was handled. They feared the
Senate would take the killers part, therefore they would stay to consider of
it. There were no soldiers about Caesar, for he delighted not in a guard, but
only (...) in the (...).
used the Sergeants of his aucthoritye, and when he went from his house to the
Senate, he was waited on with many of the magistrates, and great number of
people, as well Citizens as strangers, and of servants and free men in great
multitude: all the which fleeing away by heaps, only three servants tarried,
which laid his body in the litter. Thus three men not suitable, did carry him
home, that a little before was Lord of sea and land. The murderers would
have said Three men only ca^e with Caesar.
somewhat in ye Senate house, but no man would tarry to hear. They wrapped their
gowns about their left arms as Targets, and having their daggers bloody, cried
they had killed a king and a Tyranne, and one bare an hatte upon a spear, in
token of Liberty. Then they exhorted them to the common Liberty.
wealth of their country: and remembered, old Brutus and the oath made against
the old Kings. Some went among them, showing their daggers, who though they
were not at the fact, yet would they have part of the praise, as Lentulus,
Spintor, Fauorinus, Aquinus, Dolobella, Murcus, and Peticus, who were not They
that sought praise found pain.
then partakers of the glory, but afterward tasted of the punishment with the
offenders.

The common people came not to them, which made them the more doubtful and in
fear. As for the Senate, although for ignorance and tumult, they were fled,
yet they had good trust in the^, as in their kinsefolkes and friends, and such
as could as evil bear Tirannie as they: but the people they suspected, and The
^^^^e of (...)
as many as had served Caesar in war, whereof there were not a few then
present in the City, some discharged of the warfare were appointed to
habitations, and some that had bin at their dwelling places, were now come
again to go the journey with Caesar. They were afraid also of Lepidus and his
army in the City, and of Antony the Consul, least he would use the people
only, leaving the Senate, and work them some displeasure, being thus bestad,
they went to the Capitol with the swordeplayers, where consulting what was
best to be done, it seemed good to give a largess to the people, hoping that
if some began to praise their act, the other would follow, for love of liberty,
and the desire of common wealth: for they thought y^ people of Rome to be as
sincere now, as they had heard it was when old Brutus expelled the Kings, not
understanding that (...)
they looked for two things contrary in themselves, that they that love
liberty and would be corrupted, should be profitable to them at this present,
whereof ye one was more easy to be had, as in a state for ye most part
corrupted: for now the people was Causes of corruption as Rome.
mirt with strangers, and a libertyne was equal with a Citizen, and the fashion
of a servant, like to the masters: for y^ Senate ercept, the rest was
indifferent to the servants. Further, y^ distribution of corn, which was used
only in Rome to be given to y^ Distribution of Corn.
poor, had brought yt idle and needy vacabonds of Italy to Rome. Again, a
number of old worn soldiers out of wages, were not divided into their
countries as they were wont severally, because some had served in unjust wars,
but would go into common habitations, Maisterle ^^men.
and take other men's land and houses, remaining together in temples and common
places, under one ba^ner, and one chief, yt might apoint the^ a province, and
selling away their own, to be the more ready to go, they were sone bought for
reward. Therefore it was not hard for Cassius to gather a number of such men,
and bring them into ye common place: and albeit they were hired, yet durst they
not praise yt was done, for fear of Caesar's glory and others devotion, but for
ye common wealth sake, they cried for peace, and earnestly exhorted the rulers
unto it, for this was the devise of the kyllers, to work their own safetye.
And there could be no peace unless there were a forgetting, standing in
these terms.

Cynna a Praetor and a kinsemanne by marriage to Caesar, Cynna accuses Caesar^
beyond all opinion, came among them, having on his vesture of office, which
he threw of, as given him of a Tiran, and called Caesar the Tiranne, and them
that killed him, killers of a Tiranne, and praised the fact, as most like to
their progenitors, and that those men were to be called from the Capitol, and
to be honored with dew rewards. This Cinna said: but they, seeing the
uncorrupted people was not myxte with them, did not call them from the Capitol,
nor did any thing else, but only exhorted to peace. Then Dolabella a young
Dolabella
man and a noble, appointed to be Consul, after Caesar had been gone, for the
rest of the year, having on the garment of a Consul, and the Maces of his
office, was the second that spoke evil, and pretended he was privy to the
devise, and only sort that his hand was not at the doing of it: and as some
say, he decreed that that day should be honored as the birth day of the
City. Then the hired men took heart, when they saw both a Praetor and a Consul
to forgive them, and they called Cassius and the rest out of the Temple, who
were glad of Dolabella a young noble man and a Consul being most meet to match
^^^^^^ and Cassius to the people.
with Antony: only there came down Cassius and Marcus Brutus with his bloody
hand, for they had striue^ who should give Caes^r most wounds, and when they
were amiddest the people, they spoke nothing humbly, but as in noble and
evident things one praised another, calling the City now blessed, attributing
much to Decimus, that in so fit a time bad served them with swordplayers.
Then they stirred the people, that they would do things worthy their
ancestors, which had expelled kings, not reigning by violence as Caesar did,
but being chosen lawfully: they also propounded that Sextus Pompey, son to
Pompey the great, that had made war against Caesar for the common wealth,
might be called home, being yet in arms in Spain against Caesar's Captains,
and likewise C^setius and Marul^^s that were deprived and banished by Caesar,
being Tribunes of the people. When they had thus said, they went up
again to the Capitol, for they did not trust very much in that multitude.
Then their friends and kinsfolk might repair unto them into the Temple, of
whom, they chose the most ancient to send to Lepidus and Antony for
reconciliation, (...).
and regard of liberty, and to save the Country from the evils that might
grow, unless they be foreseen. This much did the messengers require, not
praising ye thing that was done, (for they durst not to Caesar's friends) but
desired to have it borne with, for the worthynesse of the doers, not for hate
to him, but for the love of their country, and pity of the City, now
consumed with continual sedition, of which one more would utterly destroy all
good men of the same, and that it was not right that for any hate amongst a
few, they should work the public destruction, but rather that for public
commodities, private enmities might be wiped away. Antonius and Lepidus (as I
said) minded to revenge Caesar's death, either for friendships sake, or The
device of Antony and Lepidus.
for a practice between them, or for desire of rule, and thynkyng all things
would be the easier to them, if such notable men might be rid out of the way,
yet they feared their friends and their kinsfolks, and the Senate that
inclined to them, and most of all Decimus, whom Caesar had appointed to
govern France their neighbor, whereby he had a mighty army. Therefore they
thought it best to tarry for a better occasion, and devise to get Decimus
army that was so valiant and expert, with labors never left. Having this
fetch, Antony thus answered the messengers. For private displeasure we will
work nothing, but for Antonyes aunsvvere.
offense and matter, wherein we are all sworn to Caesar to be keepers of his
body, and defend it against violence, it is requisite by our oath to follow the
fact that is done, and the rather to live with a few pure, than all to be in
danger of those execrations, yet for their honor that be of that opinion, we
will debate with you in the Senate house, and take the way for the City, that
by common consent shall seem good. Thus Antony answered, safelye. They gave
thanks and departed with sure hope that al should have gone well, and that the
Senate would have favored their cause thoroughly* Antony in the mean time
caused the officers to make watch for the City all night, and by turn to
keep their seats as was want in the day, and to have fires over all the
City, by mean whereof, the friends of ye offendoures went to every Senatoures
house, and requested them for themselves, and for the Countries common wealth.
There ran abroad also the Captains of such as should have habitations,
threatening mischief, unless some did perform the lands and places that was
given and promised. The sincere sort of the City took good heart, perceiving
the small number of these doers. They enclyned to the memory of Caesar, and
were of diverse opinions. Caesar's money, and the books of his doings, were
carried to Antonie, Casars money and vv^itings sent to Antony.
either because Calphurnie for the danger of her house did send them to Antony,
as more surer, or that Antony did so command it. This done, a decree was made
by Antony that night, to call the Senate before day at the Temple of the
Goddess of the earth, not far from his own house, for neither durst he go
to The Senate in the Temple of the Gods of the earth.
the Senate house in the Capitol, because of the sword players gathered
there, nor bring the army into the Town for troubling of it: notwithstanding
Lepidus brought them in. Day drawing nigh, other Senatoures came to y^ Temple
of y^ Goddess of the earth, and Cinna the Praetor having on again his garment,
which the day before he had thrown off, as given him of a Tyrant, made have
thither, whom, when part of the uncorrupted people, and part of Caesar's
Souldioures saw, being in a rage, because the day before, he was the first
that openly spoke evil of Caesar, being his kinsman, they threw stones at
him, and A Tault against (...).
drove him into an house, and got woodde to have burned it, had not Lepidus
come with the army and forbidden them. This was the first token whereby
Caesar's friends had confidence, that the conspiratoures and the hired
fellows were afraid.

In the Senate house there were few that were pure from violence and
contention. The most part with diverse device favored the manquellers, and
thought them most worthy of trust to be there for common consultation, and of
offenders to make them Judges, the which Antony did not let, because he
knew they would not come, as they did not indeed. Then (...) of (...)ing the
(...).
in trial of the Senate, some very earnestly and plainly praised the fact,
namyng them Tyrant-kyllers, and wylled they should be rewarded. Other denied
the reward, themselves not desiring it, nor having done it for that intent,
but thought it just they should only be commended as welldoers. Some would not
allow that commendation, but only thought it enough if they were forgyuen.
Thus did they devise and forecast at the first, to what the Senate would
incline, that after by little and little, they might the easier obtain the
rest. The uncorrupted company did abhor the act as wicked, yet for the
reverence of their great houses, were not against, but that they should be
saved: yet that they should be honored as well doers, they could not abide.
Other spoke against this, that it was not convenient so to have them, as the
rest, that belo^ged to their safety, should be enuyed. And when one said, that
their honor should be Caesar's dishonor, they answered, that it was not
fytte a dead man should be preferred to the quick. Another vehemently
saying, that of two things one must be chosen, either to declar^ Caesar a
Tyrante, or to forgive these by mercy, they took hold of this only, and
required that voices might be tried of Caesar by oath, and that the decrees
made of necessity, should not prejudice them, for whiles he ruled, they did
nothing freely, but all for fear of themselves Pompey being slain, and with
him many a thousand more. Antony markyng all things deceytefully, perceiving
that ample and euidente matter of speeches was offered, determined to turn
their cogitation with Antony* ^^tte^^^^.
a private care and fear of themselves, and understanding that a great part
of these Senatoures, were appointed to offices and Priestehoodes in the City,
and to gouernements of armies and provinces by Caesar, for the time to come,
(for he should be long forth with his army, the space of five years)
commaundyng silence as Consul, thus said.

They that would have boyces tried upon Caesar, must know Antony^s ^^^t^on.
before, that if he ruled as an officer lawfully chosen, then all his acts and
decrees must stand in force, but if by violence we think he played the
Tyrant, then must his body be cast out of y^ City unburied, and all his acts
be revoked: wherefore (as I see) we must meddle with all y^ world both by sea and
land, and many be such, as though we would, will not obey us, as I shall
declare hereafter. Now what apperteyneth to us alone (for this matter,
touches only us) I will put all things before you, that as in an eas^e platte
you may see a show of harder things. All we in manner have borne office under
Caesar, and yet do bear, chosen, and made by him, and some are, to have
offices in time to come, as the lotte falls out, for you know he appointed for
five years the yearly offices of the City to you, and the regimentes of
Countries and armies. If you will willingly forgo them (for that is in your
power to do) this would I have you first determine, and then proceed to other.
Thus Antony did kindle a fire, not for Caesar, but for themselves, and held
his peace. Then they by and by in throngs with shoutes, starte up, and denied
that any other trial should be made by the voices of the people, but that the
things appointed, should be assuredly holden. There were some under age, and
other that might find resistance in election, whom he chiefly stirred, of
whom Dolabella the Consul was one, to whom it was not lawful to be consul by
election, because he was not five and twenty years of age, wherefore he showed
a suddayne mutation of that he pretended the day before, rebuking Dolabella
changed.
as many of them, as thought the conspiratours worthy of honor, that they that
were in office, should be dishonored, by making their security to have the
better show. Other put Dolabella and the ^est in hope, that they should
rece^ue thanks of the people, and straight resume their dignities, without any
alteration of the officers, but to show a lawfuller way by common election,
and that it should be an ornament to them to be advanced, as well by the
authority of the people, as by the appoyntmente of one ruler: and this was no
sooner spoken, but some of the officers, to deceive the other, put off their
robes, as to rece^^e the same again more lawfully. Some perceived the craft,
and did not think to get by election, that they already had. The matter
standing thus, Antony and Lepidus went out of the Senate house, for certain
that came running from the multitude did call them, and as they were seen from
above, and silence hardly put to them that made much noise, one cried unto
them, whether of his own mind, or that he was suborned, and bade them take
heed, least they suffered the like. Then Antony losing A new st^rr^ by Antony.
his gown, showed his curet, incensing the lookers on, as though now no man
could be safe, unless he ware armoure, no not the Consul. There was some
cried that the fact might be punished, and more made request for peace, to whom
he thus said: Of that we will consider, as shall be fit to be, and what it
is, that it may avail, but the surety of it is hard to be found, since
neither oath nor execration could profit Caesar, and to them that called for
revenge, he turned and commended them, as more careful of their oaths and
honesty. I would be (quoth he) your Captain, and cry as you do, but that I
am a Consul, to whom belongs rather to speak for profit, than for justice,
for so do they within persuade us, and so Caesar himself, for the profit of
the City, sparing them that he had taken in war, was of the same
destroyed. Thus wrought Antony artificially, and they that thought the fact to
be punished, required Lepidus that he would punish it. Lepidus intending to
speak, they that stood far off, prayed him to go into the common place,
that all might hear him indifferently. He went straight forth, with opinion
that the peoples minds were new turned, and when he was come to the place of
speech, he lamented weeping, and thus said. Here I was yesterday Lepidus to
the people.
with Caesar, and now am I here to enquire of Caesar's death, what will you
have done many cried that they should revenge Caesar. The hired men cried for
peace in the City, to whom he said, we will so, but what peace speak you
of? with what oaths can it be sure? for all our Country oaths we have sworn
to Caesar, and we that are compted the least of them that did swear, have
trodden all under the foot. Then he turned to them that cried for revenge*
Caesar said he, is gone from us, an holy and honored man in deed, and we be
afraid to hurt the City, and them that be left. This do the Senate treat of,
and many thinks it good: then they cried, that he alone should take it in
hand, I will (said he) for it is a just oath to me alone, but it is not enough
that I and you alone do will it, or that we alone can fulfill it. ^andling the
matter thus craft^ly, the hired men, knowing that he was ambitioue, praised
him, and exhorted him to take the office of Caesar's Priesthode, of the which he
being very glad, said: You shall remember me of this hereafter, if I shall be
worthy of it, Caesar's Priestoode offered to Lepidue.
They that were hired, were the more instant for peace, because of the liberal
speech of the Priesthood. Then said he, although it be unjust and wicked, yet
will I do it, because you will me. This said, he returned into the Senate
house, where Dolabella all that time had bin importune for the continuance of
his office. Antony gathering the peoples humor, looked over him with a smiling
countenance, and finding them to dissent among themselves, and the people to
do nothing earnestly, having beholden all sufficiently, he determined to save
the me^, hiding one necessity with another, that both they should be saved by
especial grace, and that Caesar's acts should be confirmed by decree, and the
Senates orders take effect: therefore silence being commanded, he said thus.

Of the Citizens offendoures (you men of equal honor) in this your
consultation, I have said nothing, but to them that contrariwise A^t^ny to the
Senate.
desired a trial of Caesar, I put forth only one of his decrees, which has
not without cause kept you in contention till this time: for if we do refuse
those offices, we shall confess so many worthy men, unworthily to have
received them. Then consider that is not easy to be hard, and number in your
minds the Cities, the nations, the kingdoms, the regions, and (as I may say)
all things from the East to the Weast, y^ Caesar had by his virtue vanquished
for us, and all that by his power subdued, the same by law, clemency, and
courtesy he made assured unto him. Which of these do you think will bear to be
deprived y^ things they have enjoyed, unless you will fill all with wars,
that are desirous to heal your country that is now most feeble with
disease. Those that be far off, and kept down with fear and fight, I will
omit to touch: but those that be not at hand only, and as I may say, even at
home through out all Italy, some have received rewards of victory, and by
multitudes, with the armies, wherewith they served, be of Caesar appointed
habitations by the same institution, whereof many a thousand be within this
city: what do you think they will do, if you take from them that they had, or
that they looked to have of Cities and Countries? This last night did show us
an Image of this matter, for when you did entreat for the offendoures, they on
the contrary ran about with threatenings. Do you think they can abide to see
Caesar's body violated, torn and unburied (for these things by law are went to
be done against Tyrants) which have served in the wars with him, and to
have the gain gotten by the victories of France and England confirmed unto
them, when he that was the gyuer of them, is so despightfully handled? what
think you the people of Rome will do? what think you the Italians? what hate
shall you have both of God and man, if you do so defile your empire, enlarged
from the Oceane sea, to the people unknown: for you shall not lack reproufe
and blame for this your inconstancy, more than they that think you worthy
honor, that killed a Consul in the Counsel house, an holy man in an holy
place, Senatoures being the doers in the sight of the Gods, and dishonor him,
that of his enemies is most honored: from these things as unlawful and not in
your power, I do warn you to refrain. Then this sentence I give, that Caesar's
acts and decrees do remain firm and stable, that the offenders be praised
in no wise, for it is not godly, just, not consonant, Caesar's acts being
ratified, that of mercy only you will pardon them for their friends and
kinsfolks sake, so as they do so accept it, and will of the^ confess it in
tha^keful part. When Antony had said this, with great contention and vehemence
the decree was made, all other being silent and content: That there should be
no action for Caesar's death: That all his acts and decrees should be
confirmed, so as they were commodious for the city. And this, with much ado,
did the friends of the Decrees.
offendoures cause to be added for their safety, that they were not more kept
for justice sake, than for profit. Antony gave place unto it. These being
decrees, they that were heads of men to be set in habitations, desired a
private decree by common authority, that their places of inhabitance might
be made sure unto A decree for habitations.
them, and Antony was not against it, showing some fear with the Senate. This
decree was made, and another like for them that went to their inhabitations.

The Counsel being thus broken up, there were some that pers^oded Lucius Piso,
to whom Caesar had lest his Testamente, (...)
that it should neither be brought forth, nor his body buried openly, (...)
T^^^^ment.
least it might breed some new tumult in the City. He being otherwise
minded, was threatened to be called to answer, for that he defrauded the people
of such substance due to the common treasure, once again making signification
of Tyranny. Then Piso cried as loud as he could, praying the Consuls that
were yet present, to go to counsel again, and said. They that have affirmed
that one Tyrant is taken away, they in steed of ^^^ to the people.
that one, be all Tyrants unto us, forbidding me to bury an holy Priest, and
threaten me, if I bring forth his last will. They make confiscation of his
goods, as of a Tirant. His acts that makes for them they ratify, but those
that he has left for himself they revoke, not Brutus and Cassius, but they
that did incense them to this mischief. Of his Sepulture be you Lords, of his
Testament, I will be, and shall not suffer him to be dectyued in my trust of
faith, before some man takes away my breath.

Much stir and business did rise of this among them all, and specially by
them that supposed to get somewhat by his Testament: therefore it was thought
convenient that his Testament should be brought abroad, and that his body
should be buried Caesar's Testament.
openly, and so the Counsel rose. Brutus and Cassius understanding of this,
did send to the multitude to call them to the Capitol, and when many came
running thither with great have, Brutus said thus. Now O Citizens, we be
here with you, that yesterday were in the common court, not as m^ fleeyng to
the Temple (...) to the people.
that have done amiss, nor as to a fort, having committed all we have to you,
but the sharp and strange mishap of Cinna, have compelled us thus to do. We
have herd what has bin objected against us of our enemies, touching the oath,
and touching cause of doubt, y^ in peace can be no surety. What we have to say
herein with you O Citizens, we will confer, with whom we have to do
concerning other common matters. When Caius Caesar from France invaded his
Country with enemies arms, and Pompey, a singular favorer of the people,
had suffered, as every man knows: after him a number of good Citizens went
into Iberia and Libya, and were destroyed. We at his desire gave him security,
and as it should seem, afraid of himself, seking to make his Tyranny sure,
we swear unto it. If he had required us to swear not only to confirm the
things past, but also to have been his slaves in time to come, what would they
then have done that now lie in wait for our lives? I suppose very Romans
indeed, will rather choose certain death, as they have often done, than by an
oath to abide willing servitude. If Caesar hitherto have gone about nothing to
make us servile, we confess we have broken our oath: but if neither offices in
the City, nor provinces in y^ country, nor armies, nor dignities of the
church, nor assigning of inhabitance, nor other honors be left to us, or had
the consent of the Senate, or the allowance of the people, but did all by his
own commandment: if his ambition was never satiate, as Syllas was, who, when
he had ouerthrown his enemies, restored to us the common wealth: if he making
another army for a long time, took away our election for five years, what
liberty was this, when no hope could appear? what should we say of the
peoples chief officers, Sesetius and Marullus, were they not with contumely
thrust from the sacred and inuiolate offices? and where the law and oath of
our ancestors do not suffer any actio^ to be made against y^ Tribunes, yet
Caesar banished them and showed no cause: whither the^ have offended against
the holy Tribunes, we, or Caesar? being a sacred and inniolate man, to whom,
not willingly, but of necessity, we granted these things, nor before he came
against his country in armor, and had killed so many noble Citizens. The
office of the Tribunes can not be holy nor inniolated, to the which our
fathers in time of commonwealth did swear without co^pulsion, with intent to
have it everlasting. The reuenewe and account of the Empire, where became it?
who brake open the Treasure house against our wills? who caught the money
untouched and vnremouable? who thretned death to the Tribune that resisted him?
but what oath (say they) shall be sufficient to preserne peace? if there be no
Tyranne, there needs no oath: our forefathers never had need of any. But if
any other will aspire to tyranny, there is no faith, no not with an oath,
between the Romames and a Tiranne. Thus we speak now in peril, and will ever
speak it for our country. For being in honor and safety with Caesar, we
preferred the honor of our country before our own: well they use calumniation
against us and stir you for the habitations. If here be any present, either
y^ has, or shall be appointed to those inhabitance, I pray you do so much at my
request as give a token of your selves. Many did so: then said he: Oh well
done (good men) that you be come to do as other do, and it is convenient that
you which indifferentlye do travail and labor for your country, should
receive equal reward of the same. The people of Rome did appoint you to Caesar
against the English and French men: it is therefore reason, that having done
good service, you receive as good rewards. But he bound you with oths and
unwillingly led you against the City: he led you likewise against the best
Citizens in Libya: likewise against your wills. If your travail had been only in
this, paraduenture you would have bin ashamed to ash recompense: but the
service that you did in France and England, no envy, no time, no oblivion of
man, can put out of memory: and for these, the best recompense which the
people was wont to give to the old soldiers, not taking away men's lands or
houses that had not offended, nor giving to one that was an others, nor
thinking they ought to recompense with injustice, nor when they had conquered
their enemies, to take away all their land, but made a particion, and appointed
some of their soldiers to dwell there, as a garrison for the conquered places,
and many times when the Land that was won would not suffice, they either divided
of the common, or bought more of new: So did the people place you, without any
others displeasure. But Sylla and Caesar who invaded their country as enimyes,
having need of guard and garrison upon their country, did neither send you to
live in any of your own countries, nor bought any land for you, nor bestowed
that upon you that they had got from other, nor upon composition restored the
honors on them, from whom they were taken, although they had the treasure
and conquered land, but took from Italy that had not offended, nor done any
thing amiss, by law of war. or rather of robbery, lands, houses, Sepulchers
and Temples, which we would not take from our greatest strange enimyes, only
setting a ta^e of the tenth part upon them: but they have made diuition to you
of that which was your own countreymens, and them that sent you to serve
Caesar in the French wars, and made many vows for your victories, and
appointed you by companies to convenient dwelling places, with ensigns and
discipline of Soldiers: So as you can neither enjoy peace, nor be sure of
them that be thrust out, for who so ever is put out and spoiled of his own, he
will remain to spy a tune for to be even with you. This was the cause why the
Tirannes would not let you have any land, which might have been given you by
other means, that having ever enemies that lay in wait, you should be sure
kepers of their power, which by injustice did contine we yours. For, the good
will that Tirans have of their guard, is that they he as far in doing wrong,
and fear, as themselves. And this they (O* God) d^ call a cohabitation, whereby
lament of countrymen might be made, and insurrection, of them that have done
no wrong, and then for this purpose have made us enemies to our own
countrey^olk^, for the(...) singular profit^ and we, who^ now y^ chief
officers of y^ country, do say they save us for mercies sake, do confirm
pres^tly, and herafter will confirm, y^ same to be bond to you for ever, of the
which we take god to witness, that ye have and shall have al you have had, and
that none shall take it from you: not Brutus, not Cassius, not they y^ for your
liberties have put al their selves in peril, and we y^ ^e only accused in this
matter, will save our selves, and be to you and to your allied friends, a
special comfort, and y^ that is most pleasant to you to hear. At the first
occasion that shall be offered, we will give you the price for the land y^ is
taken from other, of the common reuenew, that you shall not only have your
setting settled, but also void of al e^combraunce.

Whi^es Brutus thus spoke, all the hearers considering with the^ selves that he
spoke nothing but right, did like them well, and as men of courage and lovers of
the people, had them in great admiration, and were turned into their favor,
and determined to do them good the next day* which being come, the Consuls
called the people to an assembly, and repeated the opinions.

Then Cicero did speak very much in the praise of forgetting Cicero. This
forgetfulness was called Amn^ftis after the manner of the Gr^^ ans. Prutus and
Cassius reconsiled with the Consulles.
of injuries, of the which they reioiced, and called Brutus and Cassius from
the Temple. They desired pledges, to whom Lepidus and Antonies sons were
sent. When Brutus and Cassius were seen, there was such a noise, as the
Consuls that would have said somewhat, could not be suffered, but were first
required to shake hands and be at one, which they did. And the Consuls minds
were troubled with fear or envy, that these men and their friends should
prevail in that common cause. Then was Casars testament with the writings for
the disposition of his goods, Casars testament.
brought forth, which the people commanded to be red. There Octauius.
was Octauius his nephew by his sisters daughter, found to be his son by
adoption: His gardings were given the people for solace, and to every Citizen
of Rome that was present, seauentie five dra^mes of Athens. Now was the people
straight turned This dram was the value of a grote.
to anger, being abused by the name of a Tyranne, that in his testament had
showed most love to his country. And one thing seemed most to be pitied, that
Decimus Brutus, one of the killers Decimus Brutus heir to Caesar in remaynder.
was made his son among his second heirs: for the R^maines manner was, to
their first heirs to add the second, y^ if the first The people turned.
take not, the fe^o^d may. With this they were much troubled, thinking it a
wicked and abominable an, that Decimus should conspire against Caesar, whom
he had made one of his children.

Piso brought forth Caesar's body, to the which, infinite numbers in arms ran,
to keep it, and with much noise and po^pe, brought it to the place of speech.
There was much lame^tation and weeping, there was rushing of harness together,
with repentance of the forgetting of reue^geance. Antony marking how they were
affected, did not let it slip, but took upon him to make Caesar's ^nneral
sermon, as Consul, of a Consul, friend, of a friend, and knifman, of a kinsman
(for Antony was partly his kinsman) and to use craft again. And thus he said:

I do not think it meet (O Citizens) that the burial praise Antony of Caesa^
of such a man, should rather be done by me, than by the whole country. For
what you have altogether for the love of his virtue given him by decree, as well
the Senate as the people, I think your voice, and not Antonies, ought to
express it.

This he uttered with sad and heavy cheer, and with a framed voice, declared
euerything, chiefly upon the decree, whereby he was made a God, holy and
inuiolate, father of the country, benefactor and governor, and such a one, as
never in all things they entitled other man to y^ like. At every of these words
Antonie directed his countenance and hands to Caesar's body, and with vehemency
of words opened the fact. At every title he gave an addition, with brief
speech, mixte with pity and indignation. And when the decree named him father
of the Country, then he said: This is the testimony of our duty.

And at these words, holy, inuiolate and untouched, and the refuge of all
other, he said: None other made refuge of him. But, he, this holy and
untouched, is killed, not taking honor by violences which he never desired,
and then be we very thrall that bestow them on the unworthy, never suing for
them. But you do purge your selves (O Citizens) of this unkindness, in y^ you
now do use such honor toward him being dead.

Then rehearsing the oath, that all should keep Caesar and Caesar's body, and
if any one went about to betraye him, that they were accursed that would not
defend him: at this he extolled his voice, and held up his hands to the
Capitol, saying:

O Jupiter Countries defendour, and you other Gods, I am ready to revenge, as I
swear and made execration, and when it seems good to my companions to allow
the decrees, I desire them to aid me. At these plain speeches spoken against
the Senate, an vpr^are being made, Antony waxed cold, and recanted his words.
It seems (O Citizens) (said he) that the things done have not bin the work
of men* but of Gods, and that we ought to have more consideration of the
present, than of the past, because the things to come* may bring us to greater
danger, than these we have, if we shall return to our old, and waste the
rest of the noble men that be in the City. Therefore let us send this holy
one to the number of the blessed, and sing to him his due hymn and mourning
verse.

When he had said thus, he pulled up his gown like a man Antoni^^ gesture in
the time of the tunerall of Caesar.
beside himself, and gyrded it, that he might the better stir his hands: he
stood over the Litter, as from a Tabernacle, looking into it, and epening it,
and first sang his Himne, as to a God in heaven. And to confirm he was a God,
he held up his hands, and with a swift voice, he rehearsed the wars, the
fights, the victories, the nations that he had subdued to his Country, and the
great ^ooties that he had sent, making every one to be a marvel Then with a
continual cry,

This is the only unconquered of all that ever came to han^s with him. Thou
(quoth he) alone did revenge thy country being injured. 300. years, and
those fierce nations that only invaded Rome, and only burned it, thou
broughtest them on their knees.

And when he had made these and many other inuocations, he turned his voice
from triumph to mourning matter, and began to lament and moan him as a friend
that had bin unjustly used, and did desire that be might give his soul for
Caesar's. Then falling into most vehement affections, uncovered Caesar's body,
holding up his vesture with a spear, cut with the wounds, and red with the
blood of the chief Ruler, by the which the people like a Quire, did sing
lame^tation unto him, and by this passion were again repleate with ire. And
after these speeches, other lamentations with voice after the Country custom,
were sung of the Quires, and they rehearsed again his acts and his hap.

Then made he Caesar himself to speak as it were in a lamentable sort, to
how many of his enemies he had done good by name, and of the killers
themselves to say as in an admiration. Did I save them that have killed me?
This the people could not abide, calling to remembrance, that all the kyllers
(only Decimus except) were of Pompeys faction, and subdued by him, to whom, in
stead of punishment, he had given promotion of offices, governments of
provinces and armies, and thought Decimus worthy to be made his heir and son
by adoption, and yet co^spired his death. While the matter was thus handled,
and like to have come to a fray, one Caesar's shape shevved in wax.
showed out of the Litter the Image of Caesar, made of ware, for his vody it
self lying flat in the Litter, could not be seen His picture was by a devise
turned about, and.xxiij. wounds were showed over al his body, and his face
horrible to behold. The people seeing this pitiful picture, could bear the
dolor no longer, but Change of peoples ^^^des. The Senate house set a fire
wherein Caesar, was killed. One Cynna k^led an other.
thronged together, and beset the Senate house, wherein Caesar was killed, and
set it a fire, and the kyllers that fled for their lives, they ran and
sought in every place, and that so outragiouslye both in anger and dolor, as
they killed Cynna the Tribune being in name like to Cynna the Praetor that spoke
evil of Caesar, and would not tarry to hear the declaration of his name, but
cruelly tore him a pieces, and left not one part to be put in grave. They
carried fire against other men's houses, who manlye T^^^uite and rage of people*
defending themselves,, and the neighbors entreating them, they refrayned from
fire, but threatened to be in arms the next day. Wherefore the strikers hid
themselves, and fled out of the City. The people returned to the Litter, and
carried it as an holy thing, to be buried in an holy place among the Gods, but
because the Priests did deny it, they brought him again into the common place,
where the Pallaice of the old Kings were, and there, with all the bourds and
timber, which they could find in the place, which was much, beside that every
man brought of himself, with garlandes and other gifts of private persons,
making a solemn Caesar's f^uera^^^
show, they buried the body, and abode al night about the fire. In the which
place, at the first was made an Altar, but now there is a temple of Caesar,
where he is thought worthy divine A Temple to Caesar.
honors. For his son by election, Octauius, taking the name of Caesar, and
disposing the state after his example, which then taking the beginning, and he
exceedingly advancing to the degree it is now did think his father to deserve
honors equal with the Gods, The Romans used to give divine honors ^^ their
princes.
the which at this time having their original, y^ Romans now use to give the
same to him that rules the estate, unless he be a Tyranne, or diffamed at his
death, that in old time could not suffer the name of a King alive.

Thus Caesar was killed, on the day which they call the Ides of March, which
day of the Month, the Soothsayer sarde he (...) in March she. 9. days
follovving the first 7. days.
should not pass, at the which, he, in the morning mocked him, saying, the
Ides be come: to whom he answered boldlye again, but they be not yet gone.
Caesar scorneth the Soothsaiers.


Thus he despising as well the foresayings of this constant Soothsayer, as all
other tokens spoken of before, went abroad, and was killed y^, lvj. year of his
age. A man most happy and fortunate in all his noble actions, and most like unto
Alexander the great, A comparison between Alexander and Caesar.
for they both were very ambitions, and valiant and swifte to execute their
enterpryses, in perils most bold, of their bodies most careless, and did not
more trust in Soldiers service, than in courage and fortune, of the which the
one, in the heat of summer through places void of water, went to Ammon, and
ran Ammon in the dserts o^ ^^^^t, where ^^p^ter gave o^a^les. In India at
the pl^^e called (...). Pamphilia in Asia the less.
over the gulf of Pamphilia, of the cross surgyng Sea, fortune staying the
ragyng waves whiles he passed, and sendyyg him rain when he went by land, he
assayde the Indian Sea that was not Nauigable. He was the first that scaled a
town, and alone mounted the enemies wall, and alone received.xiij. wou^des on
his body, ever invincible, and always getting victory at the first or the
second Battle. He subdued many barbarous nations Alexanders a^^^.
in Europe, and overcame the Grecians, a valiant people, and loving liberty,
and before him, obeying none, but Philip, and that a little while, for an honor
to appear in his feats of war. Asia, (as a man may say) he ranged all over,
and briefly for to tell his fortune and Empire, as much land as he saw, he
got. And conceyuing and determining a Conquest of the rest in his mind, he
was destroyed.

To Caesar the Ionian sea gane place in the midst of winter, and showed it
self cauline to his navigations. He also sailed the Bryttaine Ocean, not
attempted before, and falling upon the C^s^^s a^^^^.
rocks of England, he had the shipmayster run a shore and ^itte their
ships. In an other sea, striving with the stream alone in the night in a
little boat, he badde the Master let the sails go to the wind, and trust
more in Caesar's fortune, than in the Sea. Against his enimses alone he has
lepte many times. and all the rest have bin afraid. He alone did fight with
the French thirty times, til he had subdued forty nations of the^, which
were so terrible to the Romans, as old and holy men, Al ages and degrees
must strive against the french.
by law were privileged from war, except when the French enemy came, for
then both horse and old men must go forth. At Alexandria, being left alone
to fight on the bridge, and beset on every side, he threw off his purple, and
leapte into the sea, and being sought of his enmmies, he diued in the bottom a
great while, and only sometime rose to take breath, til a friendly ship came
nighe him, to whom he held up his hands, showed himself, and was saved.

Falling into the civil wars, either for fear, (as he did say) or for desire
of rule, he did match with the valiauntest Captains in his time, in many
and great battles, not Barbarians only, but also Romans, which in
manhood and fortune did excel, and overcame them all, either at the first
or at the second battatle. His army not being invincible, as Alexanders,
Caesar had los^e sometimes.
for in France, C^tta and Titurus his lieutenants were evidently overcome with
a great loss, and in Spain, Petreius and Aff^anius held him besieged. In
Dyrrachio and Libya, they fled fowly away, and in Spain they were afraid of
young Pompey. But Caesar himselse was ever void of fear, and in the end of
every war, had the victory.

The Roman Empire from the weaste to the floude Euphrates, Euphrates (...)
flood of Macedonia, running into the red Sea by Babylon.
by force, or by fair means he obtained, much surer and stronger than Sylla.

He showed himself to be a King in spite of them al though he would not
receive the name. And he also having made determination of other war, was
taken away. Beside forth, their armies were alike: prompte to them both with a
beneuolente mind: and in sight, of like fierceness: disobedient many times
to them both, and full of sedition for their long labors. Nevertheless, when
they were dead, both after one sort did lament and moan, and thought them
worthy divine honors. They were both in body of good complexion and fair:
both of them had their petigree from Jupiter, Alexander from Aeacide and
Hercules, Caesar and Alexander like.
and Caesar from Anchises and Venus. As both were desirous to conquer with
whom they contended, so easy to be entreated and to forgive them whom they had
subdued, and beside forgiveness, would do them good also, seeking nothing
else but victory.

Thus far they were alyke, but in rising to their rule, they were not of like
power: for the one rose from a Kingdom increased Alexander and Caesar unlike.
by his father Phillip, the other from a private estate, yet noble and
renoumed, and very needy of money. Of tokens, which to them both were great,
they were alyke contemners, yet neither of them angrye with the Diuiners, that
did foreshewe their death. The tokens were like many times to them both, and
to like effect. Twice to them both were unlucky signs, in the which the
first showed to them both doubtful danger. Alexander These people be of India
and called Malli of Plu^a^^th.
among the Oxidi^nes, scaling the wall before the Macedonians, being utterly
destitute by breaking of the ladders, leapte boldly among his enemies within,
where he was sore hurt in ye breast, and in the neck, and beaten down with a
mighty mace, so as he was Peril of Alexander.
hardely saved by the Macedonians, that for very shame burste open the gates.
Caesar in Spain, when his army was very fearful Peril of Caesar.
of Pompey the young, and refused to go to the fight, can between them both,
and received.ij. C. darts upon his Target, his army ran in for fear and
shame, and saved him. So the first unlucky sacrifices did signify peril of
death to them both, and the second, death it self indeed.

Pythagoras a Soothsayer, told Apollodorus that was afraid of Alexander and
Ephestion, that he should not need to fear, for by the sacrifice, he found
that both of them should shortly be dead. And coming to pass, that
Ephestion died by and by after, Apollodorus was afraid that some treason had
bin wroughte against the King, and told him what the Soothsaier had said: ^e
smiled, and asked of Pythagoras what the token did pretend, he answered the
last day, whereat he smyled again, and thanked Apollodorus of his
faithfulness, and the Soothsayer of his confidence. To Caesar (as we have
said) the last time that he went into the Senate, the same tokens happened.
Whereat he laughed, and said: The like was seen in Spain, and when the
Diuinour answered, that then he was in danger, but now the token signifies
more certain death, then r^lenting somewhat to this free speech, he
sacrificed again, till he tarryed so long about the sacrifices, that he was
angry, and went in and was killed.

The like happened to Alexander when he came from India to Babylon with his
army, where being nigh, the Chaldeans exhorted him to refrain at this
present, to whom he rehearsed a verse.

The best Prophet is he, that coniectu^eth honestly.

Then the Chaldeans warned him the second time, not to go with his army on y^
weast side, but to compass and take the City Alexander contemns tokens.
on the East, and stay there: with that (they say) he was content, and began
to go about, but being angry at the moory and fenny way, he contemned the
second warning, and went in at the Euphrates* and Pallacotta, floudes.
Weaste. Then he sailed upon Euphrates to the flood Pallacotta, that receives
Euphrates, and runs into the Fennes, whereby Assyria is kept from
ouer-flowing. He minded to have defended this flood with a wall, and whiles he
was sailing upon it, they say he scorned the Chaldeans, because he safely had
entered Babylon, and was come forth again to sail, but it was but deferred
till he came again, for then he dyed out of hand.

The like contempt Caesar seemed to use, for the Soothsayers Caesar contem*neth
tokens.
had appointed the day of his death* and said he should not pass the
Ides of March: and when that day was come, he laughed at him, and said, the
Ides were come, but that very day he was killed. Both they despised y^
Prophe^^es alyke, but were not angry with the Prophets, yet they both dyed as
they were told. They were both studious of learning and virtue, as well of their
own country, as of Greek and other strangers. Alexander delighted in the
Brachmanes, which among the Indians be reputed most learned Prachm^es were
the wise Philosopers of India, chosen to it by consent.
and wise men, as the Magies among the Persians. Caesar dealte with the
Aegiptians, when he put Cleopatra in his kingdom, whereby he directed many
civil things in Rome: and among other, he turned the order of the year, being
without certainty, because of the odd months (for they measured it by the
Moon) to the course of the Sun, as the Aegiptians do. It was his hap that
none did escape that sought his death* but by his heir received worthy
punishemente, as Alexander did them, that killed Phillippe his father. How
that was done the books in order shall declare. ()

The end of the second book of Civil dissentions.
The third Book of Civil Dissension.
THus C. Caesar, yt was most worthy of rule among ye Romans, was slain of his
enemies, and buried of the people Of al his killers punishment, and how the
best of them soonest received it, this Book and the next shall declare, and
likewise comprehend all the other Civil strifes, that the Romans had among
themselves.

The Senate blamed Antony for the funeral of Caesar, by (...)* (...) the
^^^^te^feyte (...).
the which the people was so stirred, as they did forthwith despise the law of
Oblivion, and ran with fire to the houses of the strykers. This unkindness,
with one invention, he turned into benevolence. Amatius, a cou^terfaite
Mariane, pretending to be Marius son, was for that name accepted of the
people, and by this counterfaiting, being taken as a kinsman to Caesar, he made
most moan for his death, and set up an Altar where he was buried. He had a
rowte of R^^^ians about him, and was ever terrible to the killers, of the
which some were fled out of the city, and so many as had by Caesar, the
government of provinces, were gone to their charges. Decimus Brutus was gone
Lombardy. Asia the ^esse.
to France next Italy: Trebonius into Asia about Ionia: Tullius Cimber into
Bythinia. But Cassius and Marcus Brutus with whom the Senate bare most, and
were likewise chosen of Caesar to be Presidents for the year to come* as
Cassius in Syria, and Brutus in Macedonia, being yet officers in Rome, of
necessity and law, (as Pretors) must attend upon the dispatch of the^ that
should have places appointed to live in, and gave audience to any other that
made su^e to sell the parts of their places, which by law was forbidden to be
done within.xx. years. With these Amatius did conspire, and only e^^pected
occasion. At the talk of this co^spiracy. Antony, as Consul, came upon them,
and apprehended Am^^io, and A(...)o put to death by Antony.
without judgment, put him to death very stoutly. The Senate marueled at this
matter, as great and beside law, yet the commodity of it, they embraced very
joyfully: for without such stoutnesse, they thought Brutus and Cassius could
not be in safety. The companions of Amatius and other people with them, for
the love of him, were much grieved at this fact, chiefly that Antony should so
dispatche one that was honored of the people. They could not abide so to be
despised, wherefore, with shoutes they went crying out of Antony, and
commanded the Magistrate to erect an altar to Amatio, and there to make the
first sacrifice to Caesar. They were driven out of the common place by the
soldiers The ^o^^^ice^ of Ama^^^ punished.
that were sent of Antony, wherewith they were more grieved and made greater
noise: some of them brought forth the settles of Caesar's pictures pulled down,
and whereas one said he could bring them to a shop where his images were
defaced, they straight way followed him, and when they saw it, they set al a
fire, till other were sent of Antony which killed part of the^ that stood to
their defense, and part they took, and as many as were bond they hanged, and
the free men, they threw down headlong: and thus, this tumult ceased. But
extreme hate of exceeding love, was now wrought in the people, against Antony.
The Senate was glad, as though there was none other fear to be had touching
Brutus and Cassius.

And further, where Antony purposed to call home Sextus Antony pretends to
call home young Pompey.
Pompey, son to Pompey the great, who yet was loved of al me^, out of Spain,
where still he made war with Caesar's Capitaynes, and for his fathers goods
confiscate, to give him of the common, five thousand millions of Drammes of
Athens, and Millions be here ten thousand.
to make him admiral of the sea as his father was, and to use the Roman
nauies, where so ever they were, to al occasions: The Senate not a little
marueled* and accepted his offer, spending an whole day in the praise of
Antony, for they knew no man more accepted, nor better beloved of the people
than Pompey.

Brutus and Cassius the most honorable of all other, and of Pompeis faction,
thought to hold their safety with sure hand, and that the course that they
had taken should prevail, and the peoples authority be surely confirmed, and
that their estate should Cicero prayseth Antony. The Senate gives a guard to
Antony.
stand. Cicero for this, made continual praise of Antony, and the Senate
considering that the people evidently did mean evil to him, gave him leave to
chose him a guard for his person of the old Soldiers that resorted to him:
he, either because he had done all to this end, or for that he would embrace
this occasion so favorable, picked out at length a guard of.vj. M. Antony
choseth a legion for his guard.
not of the common Citizens, whom he knew he might have at his pleasure at any
other time, but of all the leaders and Captains of experience and estimation
in Caesar's army. Of these, he chose chief officers in comely order, whom he
used honorably, and made them partakers of ordinary Counsels. The The Senate in
a jealousy of Antony.
Senate driven into a jealousy for this number and choice, counsayled him to
reduce this guard as envious, to a conueuient number: he promised so to do,
when he had quieted the tumultes of the people.

Now where by decree he had stablished all that Caesar had done and would do,
and had the wrytings of memorial in his Phaberius* in the Greek. Taberius in
the Latten.
custody, and ^^^aberius Caesar's Secretary at his commandment, for Caesar
going away, left all his determinations with Antony, he added many things to
the behoof of many men: he gave graunts to Cities, Princes, and to his own
guard. And he made known to all them, that could claim any thing by Caesar's
assignation, that they taking the benefit, might yield Antony abuset it
Caesar's testament.
him the thanks, and by this mean he brought many into the Senate and degree
to himself, and the other, he wan with fair promise, that they did no more
malign against his guard.

Brutus and Cassius perceiving nothing, neither of the people, nor of the
soldiers to appear peaceable for the^, neither unlikely but y^ co^spiracie of
Amatio might be done against the^ by some other, neither well abiding variable
Antony, that bare himself so boldly of his army, nor seeing that the peoples
rule could be confirmed by these doings, but suspecting that Antony wrought
against it, they put their chief trust in Decimo, who had three Legions, lying
in the sides of Italy. They wrote secretly to Trebonius in Asia, and to
Tullius in ^ythinia, to gather money closely, and look about for an army.
They were desirous to take the provinces that Caesar had appointed the^, but y^
time did not yet suffer them. They thought it not convenient to leave their
office in the City, before the end of the same, and to run into suspicion of
desire of rule of nations. They chose rather for their necessity, to spend
the mean time, as private men, than to be officers in the City, where they
could neither be sure of themselves, nor do any thing to their honor, in the
service of their country. Being in this case, and the Senate perceiving their
mind, they thought good to make the^ purueyers of grain (...) and Cassius made
purueyers.
for the City, from every country, til the time might serve the^ to take the
charge of their provinces: and thus they did, that Brutus and Cassius should
not seem to flee. So great a care and reverence was there of them, that for
them chiefly they mayntained the other killers. When Brutus and Cassius were
gone out of the City, and Antony now alone ruled all, he coueted the
presidentship of some province, and the army thereof: he was chiefly desirous
of Syria, but knowing he was already suspected, he thought he should be more, if
he required any, for the Senate had secretly wrought Dolobella to be against
him, who was the other Consul, and always at strife with Antony. Antony seeing
that Dolobella was a young man and ambitious, persuaded him to ask Syria, in
Cassius place, and their army that was made against the Parthians, but not to
ask it of the Senate, (for that was not expedient) but of y^ people, by a law.
He was persuaded by and by, and propounded the law. The Senate aleaged that he
brake Caesar's acts: he answered, that the war of Parthi^, was appointed to no
man by Caesar, and that Cassius, who was sent to Syria, was the first that had
altered Caesar's decrees, in giving leave to them that were assigned dwellings in
the country, to sell their portions before twenty years determined by law: A
de^ice to ^e(...).
and that he could not take it well, being Dolobella, not to be thought worthy
of Syria, before Cassius. The Senate persuaded Asprin^ one of the Tribunes, to
find a fault in the assebly by some toke^, hoping that Antony would have
allowed it, being Consul, and officer of the tokens, and still (as they thought)
at variance with Dolobella.

The election now being come, and Asprina affirming the toke^ to be unlucky,
and then the manner was to send other into it, Antony was angry at the subtilty,
and commanded the companies to make choice for Dolobella. And so was Dolabella
made president of Dolabella president of Syria.
Syria, and general of the army against the Parthians, and of the legions that
Caesar had gathered for this purpose, and left in Macedonia. This was the first
time that Antony seemed to favor Dolabella. This being done of the people,
Antony required Macedonia Macedonia (...) to Antony.
of the Senate, thinking they would be ashamed to deny it him, seeing
Dolabella had Syria, and now void of an office. The Senate gave it him
unwillingly, and marvelled that he would deliver the army that was there to
Dolabella, whom yet they Cyrene a City and a province in Africa, now
Corciria. Creta, an Island in the midst of the Sea, now Candia. Syrene and
Creta to Brutus and Cassius. Octauius Caesar's nephew, at Valona, which is on
the other side of the gulf of Venice.
were glad should have it before Antony. Now Brutus friends thought good to
ask Antony other provinces for Brutus and Cassius, so Cyrene and Creta was
given them, or as some say, both Creta and Syrene to Cassius, and Bythinia to
Brutus. And these were the doings at Rome.

Octauius, Caesar's sisters nephew, was made of Caesar general of the horsemen
for one year, and this honor Caesar used to give to his friends from year to
year. He being yet young, was sent of Caesar to Velona to apply his book, and
to be trained in feats of war, there to remain whilst he went against
his enemies, and to exercise himself with the bands of Horsemen that came from
Macedonia, with other great Captains of the army that resorted thither to
visit him, as Caesar's kinsman, whereby he was known to many, and wanne the
love of the army, for he received them that came to him with great courtesy.
Having bin now six months in Velona, about the evening, it was told that
Caesar was slain in the Senate house, of them that he loved best, and might
do most with him. Of further matter nothing being yet told, he stood in
fear and doubt, whether it were the whole public work of the Senate, or some
private practice, or whether the doers were punished of the more part, or
whose act it was, or whether the multitude did join with them. After this,
his friends sent to him from Rome, wishing him to go to the host of
Macedonia for his surety, in the which place, after it should be known, that
it was no common fact, he might be a terror to his enemies, in revenging of
Caesar, and diverse of the Captains promised him, that if he would come to
them, they would see him safe. His Mother, and Philip his Father in law wrote
unto him, to take nothing upon him, nor to be encouraged, remembering that after
Caesar had overcome his enemies, he was thus used of his dearest friends.
The private life at this prosent Octauius sayleth into Italy.
was further off from peril, and now rather to be chosen, and if he were with
them at Rome, he should be well kept. Octauius by these persuaded, without
further knowledge, what was done after Caesar's death, embracing the Captains,
sailed over the Ionian Sea, not taking land at Brunduse, because he did not
trust the army that was there, and therefore was well ware: but at another
City not far off, called Lupio, where he stayed, and received Lupio Iezze, a
port Town.
aduertisementes from his friends, of Caesar's death, of the peoples tumult, of
the publication of his testamente, and of the orders taken, and was advised to
beware of Caesar's enemies, because he was named his son and heir, and
counseled him not to take the inheritance upon him. But he thinking it a
dishonor, as well of this, as not to revenge Caesar's death, went to Brunduse,
se^dyng before to search, that there should be none of the strikers in any
awaite. The army of that place did meet him, and received him as Caesar's
son, where with good courage he made sacrifice, and The army at Brunduse
receives Octauius. Adoption.
straightway accepted the name of Caesar, for the Romans used to give their
name to them whom they made their children by adoption, which he did not only
admit, but changed his name from Octauius, Octauius son, to Caesar, Caesar's
son, which continued till his end. By and by was there great repair of me^
to him, some as Caesar's friends, some as his servants, and freemade men, and
Octauius received the name of Caesar.
some souldioures with them, some bringing preparation and money toward
Macedonia, and some other revenues of other provinces to Brunduse. He then
trusting upon the multitude that came unto him, and in Caesar's glory, and in
the benevolence of all me^ to him, took his journey toward Rome, accompanied
with a convenient number, which daily like a stream did increase, being safe
from open force, by the multitude of people, not without suspision of deceypt,
because all that came with him almost were of new acquaintance, and every
city did not favor him. But Caesar's souldioures, and such as were by his
appoyntme^t placed, came from Resort to young Caesar.
the habitations to the favor of this young man. They lamented for Caesar, and
complained of Antony that would not revenge so great a mischief, affirming
that they, if any man would be their guide, would revenge his death. Octauius
Caesar gave them great praise, and willed the^ to be quiet for the time, and
came to Terracina, about fifty miles from Rome, where it was told him, that
(...).
Syria and Macedonia was taken from Brutus and Cassius by the Consuls, and that
to comfort them, Creta and Syrene were granted them, and that certain
banished men were revoked, and that Pompey was restored, and that many were
made Senatoures by Caesar's determination, and diverse other things. Being come
to Rome, his mother, and Philip, and their friends came unto him, and again
prayed him, not to dissente from the Senate, because it was decreed, that there
should be no question of Caesar's death. Further, they feared Antony and his
power, who neither came himself to meet Caesar's son, nor sent any man to
receive him, all the which Octauius took very temperately, and said, it was
In desire of Octauius.
meet that he should go first to Antony as a young man to an elder, and a
private man to a Consul, and that he would observe y^ Senate as should be
convenient. And though (quoth he) there be a decree, that no man should
persecute the killers, and yet if any man durst take it in hand, bath the
people and the Senate by law, and the goods by justice, yea and peradventure
Antony also will be helps to it, and if he did refuse the inheritance and
adoption, he should offend against Caesar, and defraude the people of their
distribution. In the end he knit up his speech, that it was not only honest
for him, to put himself in danger for this matter, but also if need be, to
lose his life, otherwise he should seem unworthy the choice y^ Caesar had made
of him in so great matters, seeing he himself was wont to contemn all manner of
peril. Then turning to his mother, Octauius words to his mother.
he rehearsed those words that Achilles spoke to Thetis.

I do rather wish of my life an end,
Than I should omit reuengement of my friend.
This word (quoth he) did win Achilles immortal fame, but much more the
deed, and that he ought to revenge Caesar, not as a friend, but as a father:
not as a fellow Soldier, but as a General: not dying by law of war, but
murdered wickedly in the Senate house. For this speech, his mother, from
fear, turned to you, embraced him, affirming he only was worthy for Caesar.
This talk being ended, she prayed that all might have lucky and prosperous
success with speed, yet she persuaded him at the first, rather to use
policy and sufferance, than playnenesse and boldness, when he commending her,
answered he would so do. In the night, he sent to his friends, and prayed
them the next morning to be with him in the common place with the other
multitude. In that place meeting with Caius Antonius, brother to Marcus
Antonius, a Praetor of the City, he said unto him, that he did accept the
adoption of Caesar, for it was the manner Adoption.
of Rome, that the adopted children should exhibit testimony to the Pretors,
which being registered, he straighte went out of the common place to Antony the
other Con^ull, who was then in Pompeys gardings, which Caesar had given him:
and when he had tarryed at the gate a long while, he entered into a suspicion
The meeting o^ Octauius and Antony.
of Antonies alteration. Being at length let in, due salutations and
intretaynme^ts were between them, and because they must talk of things that
were expedient, Octauius Caesar said thus.

I (Father Antony) for the benefits that Caesar showed to thee, Octauius
Oration to Antony.
and the thanks thou gave to him, requiring thee to be a father to r^e, do
praise thee for the things thou have done for him, and I will be thy debtor of
thanks for them, but wherein I may blame thee, I will speak it frankely, for
dolor does thereto drive me. When he was slain, thou wast not present, the
quellers holding thee without the doors, for either should thou have saved
him, or have bin in the like danger thy self: of the which if the latter must
have happened. It is well now that thou wast absente. When some decreed them to
be honored as against a Tyrant* thou denyedst it effectually, for the which I
know thou (...) as a successor of his (...) is they (...).
deseruest clear thanks: but if thou know that those men did conspire thy
death, not as one that would revenge Caesar (as we think) then were they not
Tyrantkillers, and for that they fled to the Capitol, as to a Sanctuary like
offenders craving merc^e, or into a sort, as enemies for their strength,
wherefore oblivion and acquitall of the murder, was required for the^, though
some of the Senate or the people were corrupted of them, and if thou had bin
otherwise minded, thy office did require thee to punish so great a fault, and
to correct them that did err, yet did thou send pledges of thine own into
the Capitol, for the assurance of the manquellers. Well, grant the corrupted
sort did force thee to it, but when Caesar's Testament was read, and thou
made his funeral Oration as right was, and the people for the fresh memory
of Caesar, carried a fire against them, and for their neighbors sake, spared
them: and again, they were in arms twice the next day, why did not thou
help the people as their leader, with fire or armoure, to punish the
murderers? if any punishment ought to be of them that are evident offenders,
by thee, a friend to Caesar, a Consul, and Antony. Marius Amatius, by
commandment of thy great power, was put to death, but the quellers thou
susferedst to slay, and to run to certain provinces, which wrongfully they
hold, having killed him that gave them. Syria and Macedonia, thou and
Dolabella, doing well, when things were settled, took from them, for the
which I would thank thee, if thou had not straight appointed them to Creta
and Cyrene, and thought fugitives worthy provinces, ever to be as garrisons
against me. Decimus having France our neybour, you have suffered, he also being
made ruler of that, and other by my father, but some will say, the Senate did
determine it, yea and thou did confirm it, and satest as chief in that
Senate, the which thou chiefly of all others for thy self, ought to have
resisted. To give them oblivion of their faul^o, was as a granting only of
their lives, but to assign provinces and honor, was a contumely of Caesar,
and an overthrow of the judgment. Therefore as passion does carry me
peradventure beyond the due respect of my years and reverence to thee, I will
speak it, both as to a sure friend of Caesar, and of him, though worthy much
honor and power, and also, as to one, that might have bin his heir, if he had
known that thou had come of Aeneas, rather than Hercules, for that did he
much consider, when he took order for his succession. But for the time to
come, O Antony, for the Gods of friendship, and for the duty to Caesar, if
thou will change any of the things done, as thou must if thou will, if not, at
the least help to further me, that mind to be revenged of ye quellers, with
the people, and such of my fathers friends as I have: and if any respect of
men, or of the Senate does move thee, be not angry with me. Thou know what a
charge I and my house have about these matters, for the performing of the
distribution that my father gave to the people, and for the care thereof, that
by delaying of them, I might not seem unthankful, nor they yt should receive
habitations in the country, should be consumed by me, tarrying in the City.
Of all that was to thee brought immediately after ye death of Caesar, to be in
safety for danger of his house, the jewels and apparel, I think good thou
shall have, and al other things which thou will, but for the distributio^, give
me the coined gold which he had gathered for his determinate wars, which
shall suffice me to divide among three hundred thousand me^. The residue of the
charges, if I may be so bold, I will either of thee, or by thy help, borowe it
of public money, and forthwith make sale of my private substance. Whilst
Caesar spoke thus, Antony was astonished at his courage and boldness, far
beyond the opinion of his years, and being grieved with his speech made
without reverence of him, and specially for that he required the money, he
answered him sharply after this manner.

If Caesar, together with his inheritance and name (O son) had Antonyes
aunsvvere to (...).
left thee also the state, thou might well have required an account of
common things, and I must have answered: but if the Romans have by oath
decreed, that no man shall receive rule by inheritance, nor no man be a
successor to Kings, whom they did expel, which was chiefly objected
against the father of the quellers, affirming they killed him as a King, and
not as a Captain, I ought not to answer thee touching any of these public
causes, and by the same reason, I do deliver thee of the gyuing of thanks,
which thou owe to me therefore, for it was done not for thy sake, but for
the peoples, yet one of the greatest acts that ever was done for Caesar, and
for thee: for if I of mine own boldness and hate to them, had ouerpast the
honors for the strikers as killers of a Tyrante, Caesar had bin judged a
Tyrant, to whom, neither glory, nor honor, nor establishment of his acts had
bin made, neither Testament, son, or substance had bin stayed, nor his body
bin thought worthy burial, no not as a private man, for the law does command
the bodies of Tyrants to be cast unburied, their memory to be raced, and their
goods to be made common, all the which I fearing, did contend for Caesar's
immortal glory, and for his public burial, neither without peril nor envy
of mine own person, of men fierce and full of bloodshed, and as thou may
know, conspiring against me, and of the Senate that could evil bear thy
fathers government: but I thought rather to offer my self to peril and
trouble, than to suffer Caesar to be dishonored and unburied, the best of all
other men, most fortunate in his affairs, and of all other using me most
honorably. By these mine only perils, thou have presently these singular
benefits of Caesar, his blood* his name, his dignity, and his substance, for
all the which, thou ought rather to give me thanks, than to reprehende me
for any thing done for the appeasing of the Senate, for the recompense of such
as had deserved, or for other commodities and considerations, seeing thou art
young in respect to me: therefore this shall be sufficient, for that thou
spakest herein. Thou do glance at me, as though I were desirous of rule
only, which I never coueted, and yet have bin thought not altogether unworthy
of it. Thou say I am sorry, for that I was not made heir by his testament,
yet by thine own confession, I am content with the petigree of Hercules. For
thy necessity, that thou would borrow of the common treasure, I think thou
did but dissemble, because thou can not be ignorant, that all is consumed,
and that thy father had ye receypt of all the revenue, since he came to his
authority, being brought to him in stead of ye treasure house, and to be
found in his substance, when we had determined to search for the^. This ca^ be
no wrong to Caesar being dead, nor be called unjust, though he were alive, yt
being required, would yield thee acco^pts: and when thou shall find ye many
private men will contend with thee for his goods, thou shall well perceive thou
c^st not obtain the^ without great controversy. As for the money which thou
say was left with me, neither was the sum so great, nor now they be in
my hands, for all were distributed to officers and magistrates, as Tyrants
goods, Dolabella and my breethren only excepted, and by me bestowed upon such
purposes, as Caesar had appointed: and when thou shall have the rest, thou
shall bestow it rather upon the^ that may hinder thee, tha^ on the people, if
thou be wise, whom they will send away (if they be wise) to their
habitations. For the people as thou oughtst to know (being lately trained in
Greek letters) is unstable, and ever moving as waves in the Sea, now People
unstable.
coming, now going. After the which sort, the people have set alo^te our
ambitious men, and brought them down as low again.

Octauius being grieved with many of these things that tended to contumely,
went his way, often calling upon his fathers name. He put to sale his whole
substance by and by that came Octauius sells ^^^ substance.
unto him by inheritance, coveting to win the people by this liberality,
because Antony appeared a manifest enemy unto him. The Senate intending to
make inquiry by decree for the public treasure, many of them were afraid of
young Caesar, for the benevolence of his father had with the Souldyers and the
people, and for the present large^^e in alluring of them, by consuming of his
substance which was very great, many thinkyng that he would not live in the
rate of a private man, and chiefly for that Antony would agree with him,
because he was young, famous, and rich, and would still vsurp Caesar's former
dominion. Some were joyful of these things, that these men should be at
variance, and by the inquisition of the moneys, Caesar's riches should wast, and
they have abundance of the common treasure, because much of the public store
would be found among Caesar's goods. Many of them called Caesar into the law
for their lands, every one clayming his own, and for that much was common, by
reason of condemned, banished, and attaynted men. These controversies they
brought before Antony, or before Dolabella, the other Consul. If any matter
were heard before other Judges* Caesar had ever the worst, because of Antonyes
friendship, albeit he showed by record what his father had purchased, and that
al his acts were ratifyed by the last decree of the Senate. Many other actions
of injury were put up against him extraordinarily, and they grew infinite, in
so much as Pedius and Pinarius, to whom Caesar had given a portion of land,
complained of Antony for themselves and for Caesar, as they that suffered wrong
by the Senates decree, affirming he ought to reject only matters of despite,
and al other of Caesar's doings he should confirm. He answered, that things done
peradventure, had some contrariety with the Senates decree, and (quoth he) the
decree may be written contrary to the meaning. For where only oblivion of
injuries was granted, there was no alteratio^s of the former proceedings,
neither for his sake, nor to be plain, for any of their sakes, rather than a
device to apea^e and stay the people which was in tumulte, and that it were
more just to use the meaning of the decree, rather than the words: neither
was it meet to resist so many men, that by sedition were fallen from their
own, or their ancestors possessions, for one young man that beyond all hope
had gotten so much of other men's substance, and none of his own, using
fortune not for honor, but for insolency. Yet he said he would favor them,
when they had divided with Caesar. Thus did Antony answer Pinarius, who
straight made division, least their parts should be consumed in suits, not
for themselves but for Caesar, whom not long after they must gratify in all.

The time of plays drew nygh, which Caius Antonius, brother to Antony, should
exhibit for Brutus as Praetor, being absent, Plays for Brutus.
in as good sortas might be, because Brutus had made great preparation for the
same, thinking by this liberality and pastime, the people would be won to call
him and Cassius home again. But now Caesar working ye multitude to the
contrary, did give among the ambitious sort (as every man first came) all the
money that he had got by his sale, to prevent the others whole purpose. He went
into every common market, commanding to be proclaimed, yt they should sell al
his goods, though that he had were never so good cheap, because of the
doubtful and suspicious controversy of the law and of his heart. Whereby he
turned all the people to benevolence and pity, as unworthy to suffer so
much. For whereas beside his own heritage he had sold his private substance
that ca^e to him by his father Octauius, or by any other way, and all that his
mother and her husband Philip had, and clayming a portion of more goods of
Pedius and Pinarius, he determined to sell all, as though Caesar's substance
would not suffice, only because of his v^ratio^s. The people thinking no
longer y^ to be Caesar's gift, but Octauius liberality, they had inward
compassion of him, wondering at his great attemptes, and well perceiving that he
would not long pass for Antonies displeasure.

Now were the plays of Brutus showed in most ample manner. The plays
disturbed.
When certain hired men, did cry that Brutus and Cassius might be called home,
and the rest of the Theater did agree unto them for their pardon, the other
rushed in by heaps, and marred all the play, and quenched their instant
request. Brutus and Cassius understanding that Caesar had dashed their hope in
the show, they determined to go to Syria and Macedonia by force, as provinces
appointed to them before Antony and Dolobella.

This being evident, Dolobella also went into Syria, and made have by the way,
to make money in Asia. Antony desired much to have the army of Macedonia, as
very fit for the maintenance of his power, being in virtue best, and in power
most, (for they were sire legions) beside other number of Archers, Darters, and
light armed, with many horsemen and other great furniture for the war, all the which he feared should follow Dolobella into Syria, going against the
Parthians, whether Caesar had appointed them. He minded to have them himself,
because they were nyghe to the sea of Ionia, from whence he might soon bring
The G^^tas, ^e a people of Sythia in Europe. The name now ^^ turned into the
Thracians.
them into Italy In the mean time a sudden rumor came, that Geetes, knowing
of Caesar's death, did invade Macedonia. Wherefore Antony required his army of
the Senate, that he might punish the Geetes, because they were first appointed
against the^ of Caesar, and so that all was now quiet with the Parthians. The
Senate suspected this rumor, and sent to understand the certainty of it.

Antony, to deliver them of fear and suspicion hereof, decreed Antony deuiseth
to stop the creation of a Dictator.
that for no cause it should be lawful to create a Dictator, nor that any man
should take it, though it were given him: and if any man did perceive any to
contemn this order, it should be lawful to kill him wheresoever he were
met. By this means he did temper the hearers, and practicing with Dolobellas
friend to give him one legion, he was chosen captain of the army, and
Lieuetenant of Macedonia. Having now what he would, he sent his brother Caius
in all have to carry the decree to y^ army.

They that went to understand of the Geetes being returned, affirmed that
they saw no Geetes in Macedonia, but they added (either saying true, or being
taught of Antony what they should say:) It was to be feared, if the army were
taken away, the Geetes would ouerrunne Macedonia.

Whiles this was doing in Rome, Cassius and Brutus did gather money and men,
and Trebonius that was governor in Asia did Dolobella kept out. Ephesus, now
^ogli^ i^ Ion^^. Dolobella takes S^yr^s.
make Cities strong for them, and would not admit Dolobella neither at Pergamo
nor at Smirna, onlyhe appointed him a market place out of y^ walls as to a
Consul. He therefore went about with anger to win the walls: Trebonius not
obtaining, promised he should be received at Ephesus: he going thither,
Trebonius sent certain aloof to see his doings: who, when night was come,
seeing him going on, not suspecting any thing else, left a few to follow
him, and returned to Smirna. Dolobella having laid wait for this matter,
turned upon these few, and slew them, and straight in that night came to
Smirna, which findyng without watch, he took with a scale. Trebonius was
found in bed, and desired he might be brought to Dolobella, and that he
would wyllinglye follow them. One of the Captains looked on him, and said:
Come on, give us thy head, for thy head, not thee, are we commanded to
bring: and when he had thus said, he stroke off his head streighte. When day
was come, Dolobella caused Trebonius head to be set up over the judgment
place where he was wo^tto give audience. The army (in fury) y^ followed (...)
killed and ^p^ghtfully used.
y^ ca^pe, and the people (because Trebonius was privy to Caes^^s death, and
held Antony with a tale without, when the^ killed Caesar in the Senate house)
did use his body very spightfully, and threw his head upon a paueme^t of stone,
like a balfro^ one to another, Trebonius one of the cons^ita^ors vv^^ the first
that vva^ killed.
which when they had scornefully used, they crushed and brake it a pieces. And
this was the first of Caesar's strikers that received this punishment.

Antony intended to bring the army from Macedonia into Italy, and wanting
other pretense thereunto, desired the Senate, that in stead of Macedonia he
might have France within the Alps, of the which De^^^^us Brutus Albinus was
ruler remembering that Caesar brought his army from thence, when he overcame
(...) now (...).
Pompey: but when it was perceived, that he minded to bring that army not into
Italy but into France, and the Senate considering that part of France to be as
a strong sort for the^, was grieved, and now understood the deceytes of
Antony, repenting Senate works ^e^^etly against Antony.
they had given Macedonia unto him. Therefore they sent pri^^e messengers to
Decimus, to keep his province strongly, and to gather other army and money,
that he might resist Antony. So much were they troubled and in anger against
Antony. And he, contrary to the Senats mind, entending to ask it of the
people by law, as Caesar once obtained it before, and as Dolabella had Syria,
now of late. And to afra^ y^ Senate, he commanded his brother Caius to
transport the army of (...) shevv^
Macedonia by the Ionian Sea to Brunduse, and there to do what Antony should
require.

Now was there plays to be ^hewed by ^^itonius the (...), and of hou^es as
well pro^^n^ a^ holy.
ouers^^r of victuals. At the which Caesar had prepared a crown and a
chair of gold for his father, as in all shows they had ordained, so to honor
him.

C^i^^^^s said he would not admit Caesar to be honored in the charges y^ be
should make. Wherefore Octa^^i^n brought him before Antony the Consul: Antony
said he would put it to the Senate. Whereat Octauian being offended, Do so
(quoth he) and I will set the Chair till thou ha^^e made the decree.

Antony was angry and forbad him. He forbadde it also in other (...).
plays after to be made, and that was somewhat unreasonable, for Octauius
himself did exhibit it, being instituted of his father, to Venus his parent,
to whom in the common place, he builded a Temple with a Count.

Of this did manifest hate grew against Antony of all men, as thought he did
not rather ^^^^ Octauius Caesar now, th^n (...)
contemn the former unthankfully. Young Caesar with a mu^^^tude as a guarde
went among the people, and such as had bin benefited by his father, or served
him in the wars ^^u^ouslye, he besoughte them, that they would not suffer him
thus, to (...)
be so many ways despised, but both revenge Caesar their chiefetayne and
benefactour so dishonored of Antony, and desen^e themselves, who should have
none assurance, unless the things that he had decreed were established. He
went up to every high place of the City and cried upon Antony:

Be not angry with Caesar for me, nor dishonor him that has (...) Antony.
most honored thee O Antony, and was most affectionated to thee, do me what
^n^ury thou will, but save his substance from spoil, till the Citizens have
their part, all the rest take unto thee. It shall be sufficient for me, though
I be poor, to be successor to his glory, so thou will suffer the people ^o
have their portion.

After these words, there was evident and continual exclamation against
Antony, and although he sharpelye threatened Octauius, and that his threats were
openly known, yet did they the more s^irre at it. Wherefore the chief of the
Capitains that served in Antonies guard, in great estunation with him, and The
(...) of* Antony in ^^uour of Octauinus.
had bin before with Caesar, desired him he would leave his dispight, as well
for their cause, as for his own, having served under Caesar, and received so
many good turns of him.

Which things Antony considering, and confessing them to be true, and half
ashamed they should be laid upon him, and now should have need of
Octauians help, for the province of France, he began at length to be
quiet, and to show, that Antony re^^^eth
some things were done against his will,

But because the young manne was so hawtie at those years, he did revoke
certain things, for that he had no regard nor reverence to the Capitaines
and old officers: yet for their sakes he would reframe his anger, and return
to his old conditions, if he also would leave his insolent behavior.

The Captains being glad of this, brought them together, and when they had
declared their griefs they set them at one. Now Reconciliation of Antony and
Octaui^^.
was the law called upon for France, the Senate being against it, and
entending to prohibit it, if Antony would propounde it to them, and if he
did not, but require it of the people, they would set the Tribunes to be
againsteit, and some there were, that would have it free from al Lieutenants
over that nation, so much afraid were they of it.

Antony did object unto them, that they would trust Decimus with it, that was
one of Caesar's killers, and distruste him that did not kill him that wanne that
province, and made it fall to his knees, casting forth openly against them al,
as though they had bin desirous of that was done to Caesar.

The court day being come, the Senate willed the assembly The Senate takes a
^^ard^*
of the companyes to be gathered, and in the night, they set up Tents in
the common place, and called a band of Souldioures to desende them from all
happes.

The people being offended, labored for Antony by the help of Octaui^, that
sat among the Tents, who entreated (...) now ^^^^^eth for Antony.
for him: for he was very much afraid, least Decimus should be Gouernoure of
a Province of such importance, and an army so great, being one that had
killed his father: and for this cause he began to favor Antonie, with
whom he was reconciled, trusting to get some good at his hand.

The Tribunes being corrupted of Antony, and keeping silence, Tribunes corrupted.
the law took place, and the army being now at the sea, was for reasonable
consideration assigned to Antonie.

One of the Tribunes being dead, Octauius much favored Flaminius against the
next election, and because the people thought (...)* The people minds to make
Octauius (...).
himself would have the office, but refused to ask it, because of his young
years, they determined nevertheless at the election, to make him Tribune. The
Senate had envy at his increase, and were afraid, if he were Tribune, he would
accuse his fathers killers to the people. And Antonie not regarding to break
friendship with Octauius, whither it were to please the Senate, and to quiet
their minds, for the late law made for his Province, Antony against Octauius,
aga^^.
or for their sakes that should go to inhabit as Consul, he decreed that
Caesar should deal with no man but lawfullye, otherwise he would further by all means his authority against him.

This declaration being unpleasant to Caesar, and contumelious both to him
and the people, they were angrye, and intended to make stir at the election,
and to affraye Antonie, Sedition procured.
and by the help of the other Tribunes, to revoke the decree.

Octauius Casar, as one evidently deceived, sent many to the Cities that his
father made for to inhabit, to show them how he was used, and to know their
minds therein.

He sent some also as cariers of victual into Antonies camp, to mingle among
them, chiefelye to deal with the boldest of them, and among the rest to
scatter libells: and thus he did.

The Capitaines and chief men with Antony, finding time convenient, said thus
unto him:

We (O Antonie) that with thee have served Caesar, The oration of the
Capitaynes to Antony.
and gave to him chief authority, and till this day have remained as
assured servants of it, have known that his killers and the Senate favoring
them, did as much hate and seek to dispatch us. But when the people did
disturb them, we were encouraged again, because we saw that Caesar was not
forgotten lacked no friends, nor destitute of favor: yet did we put all our
trust in thee, as in Caesar's friend, and next him, most acquainted in the
service of war, and now our General and for all respects most sit for it.
When our enemies did rise, and boldly force Syria and Macedonia, and prepared
money and men against us, and the Senate maintainyng Decimus, and thou consuming
the time in contention with Caesar Octauius, not without cause, we were
afraid, that in time to come, this dissension ^etweene you, would raise a
greater war than has been, and give occasion to our ennimies to do what
they would against us: all the which, seeing thy self do understand, we
beseech thee, that for Casars sake, and for our love, which has done
nothing to offend thee, and for the commodities that may rise both to thee and
us, that whilst thou may, thou would agree with Octauius, which only
is sufficient, entending to be revenged of the strykers. The which thing,
clear of all care, shall stay thee in authority, and place us in security,
that now are in doubt both for thee, and for our selves.

The chiefetaynes having said thus much, Antony thus answered:

What benevolence and love I have ever borne to Caesar, Antonius (...) to the
Captains.
in all his causes, offering my self to most perils of all other, you that
have been in Soldier fare with me, and present to every thing that has bin
done, can well testify. How much love and good will he showed to me, even
till his last day, I shall not need to repeat. For his quellers, waying both
th^se, me^ut^ to have killed me with him: as though I being a ^^^, they could
not think their intentes to* consiste in safetye. And if any manne did
affraye them from that mind, it was not done for desire and care of my life,
but for a respect only that they would not seem to persecute their
ennimies, but to dispatche a Tyran. Who then can think that I do forgette
Caesar my benefactour, or have more esteemed his enemies than him, or would
willingly forgive them his death, that have sought mine, as this new Caesar
thinks? How then comes the oblivion of his death, and their aduanceme^t to
provinces: for this he obiecteth against me, and not the Senate? Hear you then
how it has come to pass. Caesar being slain in the Senate house, every man
was afraid, and I most of all for Caesar's friendship, and ignorance of the
fact, for I neither heard of the comuration, nor understood how many were
of the conspirancie. The people was in tumulte, and the strikers with the
swordplayers took the Capitol, and made themselves fast, and the Senate was
of their side, which is now more evident, because they decreed honors to
them, as to the killers of a Tyrant, and if Caesar were a Tyrant, then must we
have bin destroyed straight, as friends to a Tyrante. So I being troubled with
tumult, with fear and sorrow, could not use reason, nor be without
perplexity, as you may perceive, if you will consider, for on the one side,
was need of boldness vehemente, and on the other dissimulation extreme.
First this was to be done (the residue easlie followyng) to take away the
honor to be given to the strikers, against the which I only standing,
resisted both the Senate, and them, and brought to pass with great pain,
using eindente courage, only offering my self to that peril, supposing that
we, Caesar's friends, should be in surety, if he^ were not condemned as a
Tyrant. The like fear troubled our enemies and the Senate, that if he were not
judged a Tyrant, they should be accounted manquellers. And for this
contention, I thought it best to give place, and to allow oblivion of his
death, in stead of honor to be given to them, that I might win of them, as
much as by necessity I could. And this was the manner of my doings, that
neither I did suffer Caesar's name to be abolished, nor his substance to be
confiscate, nor his adoption (in the which this man now most gloryeth) to be
dissolved, nor his testament to be frustrated. His body I caused to be buried
princely, and honors due unto him before, to be consecrated as immortal, and
all his acts and decrees to be kept firm and sure, and his son and our
friends the Captains and the Souldioures, to be in good safety, and to live
in honor in stead of rebuke. Think you the obteyning of these things of the
Senate for Oblivion, were but small and trifles? or do you think without
Ob^uion the Senate would have granted them? which for these causes (I think)
is plainly to be performed, for a true dealyng with the strikers, and for
animmortall glory of Caesar, and all our weal and surety. The which I have
not done of that purpose, but to turn the course to the contrary. For when I
had brought the Senate to that that was profitable to us, and allowed the
killers to remain in quiet, I did overthrow the Oblivion, not by decree nor
statute (for that I could not) but by an earnest jealousy of the people,
bringing Caesar's body to be buried in the common place, and causing his
wounds to be seen of the multitude, showing his vesture bloody and mangled,
and declaring his virtue and benevolence to the people, weeping when I made the
mourning Oration. I called him by the name of a killed God. These were my
words and works, whereby the people was so provoked, as in stead of Oblivion,
they took fire, and went to the quellers houses, and in the end drone them
out of the City. How this was contrary to the Senate, they being grieved
with it, it was evidently seen. For they accused me first of ambition, and
appointed provinces to Brutus and Cassius, Syria, and Macedonia, which were
full of great armies. And least they should seem to make have before their
time, they gave them pretense to provide grain for the City. Wherefore a
greater fear did yet trouble me, for lack of an appointed army, as men
naked to syghte with so many well armed, my fellow being a man suspected,
and disagreeyng from me, and one of the conspirators against Caesar, and
appointed to be here at the day of his death. For these things being in
great trouble, and seeking with speed to disarme our enemies, and to arm
our selves, I killed Amatius. I thought good to call home Pompey, that by
this mean I might join the Senate again. Yet not much trustyng them, I
persuaded Dolobelia to ask Syria, not of the Senate, but of the people, by a
law to be made: and in his suit I furthered him, of a friend to make him an
enemy to the strikers: and that it should seem very vnfytte for the Senate
to deny me Macedonia, seeing they had granted Syria to Dolobella, for
otherwise would they not have granted me that province, nor delivered me
that army, except they had first granted to Dolabella the same, to go
against the Parthians: nor they would not have taken from Brutus and Cassius,
Syria and Macedonia, unless they had appointed some other provinces to them
for their surety. Needs must they appoynte one for another, but what manner
ones, Cyrene and Creta, void of armies, which they our enemies, in
contempt, have left as unprofitable, and by violence, have entered the other,
which we took from them. Thus was our army put from our enemies to
Dolabella, by device and sleighte, and exchange of other provinces: for where
war was not, there must things be done by law. This being thus brought
to pass, and our enemies gathering another army, I had need of the same
my self, that was in Macedonia, yet wanted occasion to require it. When the
fame came that the Getes would invade Macedonia, which not being believed,
espies were sent to understand the truth, I decreed, that no man ought to
ask the Dictatorshippe, nor to take it though it were given him. By the which
thing they being chiefly allured, appointed me the army, and then did I
think my self equal with mine enemies, not these that be euidente, as
Octauius thinks, but other more in number, greater in power, and not yet
appearing. When I had done this, one of the strikers remained still hard at our
sides, Decimus Brutus. He being a gouernoure of a great country, and a
mighty army very bold, I devised to take his province from him, yet with a
regard of the Senate, promising to deliver Macedonia void of army. The
Senate taking the thing evil, and perceiving some device to be had, what
and how great matter was written to Decimus, you know, and to stir the
Consulles against me, wherefore with the more boldness did I practice to win that province, not by the Senate, but by the people and law, and to have
the army of Macedonia come to Brund^s^, to use at all oportunities* and with
the Gods help, we will use them as necessity shall compel us. Thus from much
fear, wherein we were at the first, we be turned into safety of them that
have to do with us, and into boldness against our foes, whose courage
begins to shrink, and ours to increase. You see what repentance they make of
their decrees, and what pain it was to me to take France, given to another
man. You know what they wrote to Decimus, and what they persuaded the Consuls
against me for that matter, but with the Gods of our Country, with dutiful
mind, and with our valiante acts, by the which Caesar was a conqueroure,
we will revenge him, laboring with our bodies, and counselling with our
mynds. These things (O Souldioure fellows) I would have secret, although
how I have done them, I have told you, with whom I will participate all
things both in word and deed, the which you may show to any other that do
not know it, only Octauius except, who is most unthankful to us.

When Antony had thus said, it seemed to the Captains that he had done all
things with great art and policy, to deceive the quellers whom he hated, and
therefore they were desirous to reconcile them with Caesar once again, and
persuaded them to meet in the Capitol.

Not long after, Antony did cause some of his guard to be apprehended by his
friends, as entised by Octauius to destroy him, New despight^ of Antony
against Caesar.
either to discredit Octauius, or for that he thought it true, learning it of
such as were sent to his Camp. He declared this to be done by all conjecture,
to dispatche his person, which matter being quietly heard, caused much ado
and indignation among the people. A few that were grounded upon reason, were
glad that Antony might do Caesar good, and also hurt at his pleasure,
because he was terrible to the strikers, and if he were once dispatched, they
might with the more security, do their feats, because the Senate chiefly
favored them. Thus the wyser sort did think: but the multitude seeing that
despite and hynderance was daily offered to Octauius, they thought it not
unlike to be a calumniation, and yet supposed it not good nor honest, that
Antony being Consul, should be in danger of his person. Octauius Caesar
with great anger and fury went among them that were of this opinion, and
cried, that he was circumuented of Antony, for the frendshyppe that he only
had with the people, and ran to Antonyes house, and there he exclaymed Caesar
exclaymeth against Antony.
and called the Gods to witness, with all execrations and oaths, provoking him
to come to trial: and because no body came to him, he said to his friends,
I am content to be judged by his own people. And with that, he brake in at
the doors, but being kept back, he swear, and rebuked them that kept the
gates, because they stopped him from making further trial with Antony. He
went his way, and protested to the people, that if any hurt came unto him, it
should come by Antonyes means.

Having spoken this with great vehemency, it grieved the people, and some of
them repented of their former opinion. Some stood in doubt, and ^usted
neither of them. Some thought it a dissimulation between them, the better to
bring to pass, that they had agreed upon in the Temple against their enemies:
and some thought Antonie devised it, to have a greater garrison about him, and
to turn men's good will from Octauius.

Now was there secret intelligence given to him, that the Antonyes army at
Brunduse discontented.
army at Brunduse, and the ordinary Souldioures, were angrye with Antonie,
because he neglected Caesar's death, and that they would revenge it to their
power, and that Antonie was gone in have to Brunduse for this cause: Octauius
was afraid, least he returning Antonyes going to Brunduse, suspected to Caesar.
with his army, should find him unprovided. He took money, and went to
Campania, to win the Cities that were inhabited by such* as had served his
father, and first he persuaded Celatia and Silio, two Towns about Capua. He
gave every Octauius goes to make men. Celatia in Latio. Silio, Cas^ilinum in
Campania, not far from Capua. Fear in the City.
man five hundred drammes, and had ten thousand men, neither armed, nor
distributed into due bands and order, but only as a guard of his person under
one ensign. They in the City were afraid of Antonies coming with his army,
and when they heard that Octauius was coming with another, they were in a
double fear, and some took it well, that they might use Octauius against
Antony. Some that saw their reconciliation in the Capitol, thought it but a
dissimulation, and a recompense of the one to be in authority, and the other
to persecute the quellers.

In this disquietnesse, Carnutiw. the Tribune, enemy to Antony, and friend to
Octauius, went to know the truth, which (...).
being done, he declared to the people that there was plain variance
between Antony and Octauius, and that it stood them in hand to make Octauius
their friend, seeing they had none other army to resist Antonyes Tyranny.
When he had said (...) ^ Tribune* (...) yo^^ Casar against Antony.
thus, he willed Octauius to enter, who lay a little without the City at the
Temple of Mars. He did so, and came to the Temple of Jupiters children, about
the which the Souloioures stood with their weapons openly. Carnutius spoke
first against Antony. Then Octauius himself revived the memory of his
father, and showed what injury Antony had done him, Octauius to the people.
whereby he was forced to get an army for his surety, with the which he
would obey, and serve his Country in all things, now ready against
Antonie. When he had thus said, the Counsel was broken up.

The army that thought otherwise, because of their reconciliation, and that
they were only brought to preserve Octauius person against his quellers,
seemed to be grieved, that such words should be spoken against Antonie,
then being a General of an army, and Consul of the City: and some desired
to go home, as to arm themselves, for they could abide none other, but their
own armies: and some told the very truth. Octauius army goes from him.


Octauius began to doubt again, seeing it came otherwise to pass than he
thought, and therefore gave place to the occasion, trustyng to win them
rather by gentleness than by (...) gives (...) to the souldyoures.
force, wherefore some he sent to be armed, and some to their home again,
promising them all for their labors, and hydyng his grief, he gave them new
gifts, and promised them more liberally to requite them, and that he would
use them in all his enterprises, rather as his fathers friends, than as his
Souldioures. When he had so said, one thousand, or three at the most (for
in this the Writers vary) he wanne to tarry, the rest went away. They
remembryng the toil of tyllage, and the gain of warfare, and the words of
Caesar, that easily did draw them, and the gifts they had received, with
the hope of that they should receive, as the variable nature of people is,
began to repent, and turning occasion to duty, they armed themselves, and
returned to him, and he went to Rauenna Octauius army returns to him. Ar^uum
a City in Tuscane, thirty miles from Florence.
for more revenue, and when he had gone over the Country, and gotten more
men one after another, he sent them to Arezz^.

In this mean time of the five Legions of Macedonie, four were come to
Antonie to Brunduse, accusing him, as one that neglected Caesar's death: and
because they gave no greetyng to him when they brought him to his seat, as to
hear somewhat first said of themselves, he was offended with their silence,
Antony offended with the Souldioures.
and could not refrain, but rebuked them of unthankfulness, that where by
him they were called from the journey into Parthia, to remain in Italy, they
did not acknowledge any thank A mutiny in Antonyes Camp.
for it. Then he blamed them for bearing with the rash young man, (for so he
called Caesar) that they would not discover to him such persons, as he had
sent to make difference between them: but he would find them out himself,
intendyng to lead them to the wealthy province of Celtica, and to give every
one that would abide with him, one hundred drammes. The Souldyoures laughed at
his miserable offer, and the more The Souldyoures laughed at the misery of
Antony.
he was angry, the more were they in disorder and tumulte, wherefore he rose
and said, You shall learn to be ruled.

Then he enquired of the Chiefetaynes, who were the seditious? (for among the
Romans they used to note every manne by writing) and by law of war he
chose them out, but he did not kill every tenth manne, but part of them,
thinking by a few, to affray the rest. They, not to fear, but rather to anger
and hate, turned his doings, which thing when they perceived, that were sent
thither by Octauius, they threw bills about the Camp, containing the
niggardnesse and cruelty of Antonie, with an unthankfulness T(...) (...)a*
(...)y in (...)ng.
to Caesar that dead was, and the liberality and gentleness of him that now
they might help. Antonie with great diligence sought out the authors, with
threatening of great pain to them that did not disclose them, but when he
could not find any out, he was much offended, that the whole army should
favor them: and when he heard of the extraordinary bands that were gone to
Caesar Octauius, and what was done for him at Rome, he was troubled, and came
again to the army and said. It did grieve him to do that he had done for the
necessity of Souldious discipline, taking but a few, in stead of many,
according to the law, Antony to his Souldyoures.
and that they did well know, that Antonie was neither cruel, nor sparing,
but (quoth he) let anger go, let this be enough, both of punishment, and of
offense, and as for the hundred drammes, he meante it not as a gift, (for
Antonies fortune required otherwise) but as a welcome of first acquayntance
between them, rather than a gift, he wylled them to have it, and that by the
law of their Country and Souldyoures order, they ought to be obediente to
him in this, and in all other things.

Thus he said: yet did he not add any more to the sum, least the Captain
should seem to give place to the Souldioure, and they either for repentance
or for fear, accepted it, and he changed the officers of his Camp, either
for the displeasure of this sedition, or for some other suspicion. The rest,
with such furniture as he had, dividing his host, he sent by sea to Arimeno.

He taking one band of the most likely men, both in body and obedience, went
toward Rome, from thence to go also Arimeno in (...)*
to Arimeno. He proudely entered the City, leauyng one band without the
City in Camp, and with them that were about him armed, he caused his house
to be guarded in the night for his safety, to whom he gave watchwordes, in
diverse parts, as a garrison in the City. He assembled the Senate, intending to
have accused Octauius for his doings, but at his entry, it was told him that
the martial legion by the way was gone to Octauius. And as he stood in doubt
and fear what Two legion* reuolte to Octauius from Antony.
to do, it was also showed him, that the fourth legion following the Martials
example, was likewise revolted to Octauius. Being much troubled, he entered, and
made a show as he had called the Senate for an other purpose, and tarried not
long there, but went to the gates, and from thence to the City of Alba, to
stay the reuolters. But being put from the walls, he returned, and to the
other legions he sent five hundred drams Tibur^, now T^uol^.
a man, and with them that he had, he went to Tiburo, having such
provision as they be wont that go against their enemies.

Now was it evident that war would follow, for Decimus meante not to leave
his Province.

Antony being in this place, almost all the Senate, and many of the
Gentlemen came to do him honor, and so did a great part of the people, synding
him gyuyng oath to his soldiers that were present, and of other that had
served him before, which resorted to him in great number. And they freely
swear to Antony, that they would not break The Senatoures and Citizens
sworn to Antony.
faith and benevolence with him. So as now a man might doubt, who they were,
that a little before had spoken against Antony for Octauius Caesar's sake.

Antony thus with great pomp, approached Arimeno, where was the beginning of
France Cel^^ca his army. Beside these new Souldioures, was three legions
from Macedonia, for now all were come unto him, and the old Souldioures that
then served, were counted twice so good as the young.

So had Antony an army of four legions of expert Antonies army*
Souldioures, beside such as be wont to follow as venturers, and the old
guarde of his person, with other n^we chosen.

Lepidus in Iberia, had three legions, Asinius Pollio, two, Lepidus* Asinius
Pollio, Plancus.
and Plancus in further France, three, all the which seemed to take Antonies
part.

Octauius Octauius Caesar had two choice legions that went from Antony* one
of yo^g soldiers, and two of them that served him first, neither full in
number, nor furnished in armoure, yet supplied of the new comers. He gathered
these together at Alba, and sent them to the Senate.

They did so much rejoice in Octauius, as a man might doubt that any
did before honor Antony: yet were they The Senate mistaked o^ Octauius us
and Antony both.
not content that the legions that went from him, should go to Octauius, and
not to them Nevertheless, they praised them and Caesar, promising shortly
after to determine by decree what was to be doonc, when the new Magistrates
had their offices.

It was evident in the end, that they would bend against Antony, and because
they had no army, and could gather none without the Consuls authority, they
deferred all till the new election.

Caesar's army offered him Maces and Sergeants prepared, and prayed him to take
upon him the Lieutenantship and leading of their war, they being ever used to
such authority.

He thanked them for the honor, but referred the matter to the Senate, and
them that would have gone by heaps for this purpose, he forbad, and stayed them
that would have sent Ambassadors, that the Senate (quoth he) may take order
for it of themselves, understanding of your offer, and my refusal. They hardly
being contented this way, and the Capitaines construing it as men had in some
suspicion, he declared unto them, that the Senate did not rather incline to him
for good will, than for fear of Antony, and want of army, til we (quoth he)
have dispatched Antony.

The murderers being friends and kinsemen to the Senate, will gather power for
the^, which I perceiving, will pretend to obey them. And this is not to be
disclosed, for if we take power upon us, they will call it violence and
contumelic: but if we make danger of it, they will peradventure give it us,
fearing otherwise we shall have it by you.

When he had thus said, he saw the two legious that came to him from
Antony, showing the shape of battle, A ^he^re of fight by two legions.
contending together in as vehement wise, as though they had been fighting
indeed (kylling only excepted) and he being delighted with this feate, and
glad to take the occasion, did give to every man other five hundred drammes,
and if any necessitye by the war should follow, he promised to them,
having the better hand, five thousand drammes a man.

Thus did Caesar with liberality of reward, win them that were his hired
men, and these were the dooyngs in Italy.

In France, Antony commanded Decimus to go into Macedonia, Antony vvarneth
Decimus out of his Province.
to obey the people, and save himself.

Decimus sent him the letters of the Senate very well written, signifying,
that as well ought he to obey the Senate, as he the people. Antony appointed
him a day when he would use him as an enemy. Decimus required him to
appoint a longer day to himself, that he should not too soon be made an
enimye to the Senate. Antony, that was too good for him in the field, yet
thought it better to go unto the Cities, and they received him.

Decimus being afraid that he should not when he would, enter any of
them, feigned he had received letters from the Senate, to return to Rome with
his army, and so as one going home into Italy, he was received in every place.

But when he came to Mutina, a plentiful City, he shut Mutina a City in
Lumbar^y, row Modena. Decimus takes Modena for his defense.
the gates, and commanded the Citizens to bring all things forth, that was
necessary for food, and caused al their beasts to be killed and poudred, for
fear the siege would last long, and so he tarryed for Antonies coming.

His army was a number of Sworde-players, and three legions armed, whereof one
was of new Soldiers without experience, the other two of former service, and
very faithful to him.

Antony with anger came against Decimus, and cast a trenche about the
City, and so was Decimus besieged. In Rome, the Consuls according to the
year, being chosen, did straighte assemble the Senate with sacrifices in the
Temple against Antony.

Cicero and his friends, did require he might be judged an enemy, Cicero
against Antony.
because, he by force of arms, did take the Province of France, contrary to
the Senats pleasure, to trouble his country, and because he had brought that
army into Italy, that was appointed him against the Thracians.

They alleged also against him, that after Caesar he sought to rule, being
armed in the City with so many band-leaders, and using his house as a forte
full of Soldiers and Ensigns, and in all his dooyngs more insolent, than
became a yearly officer.

Lucius Piso, one that favored Antonies faction (and a man Lucius Piso
against Cicero.
very notable among the Romans) and other that favored Piso for Antonies
cause, required he might be called into judgment, because it was not the
manner of their country to condemn any manne before he were heard, nor
convenient, that he that was yesterdaye a Consul, should this day be an
enemy, especially having been so often praised both of Cicero and of other.

The Senate stood doubtful in the cause all the night. Senate against Antony.


The next day in the morning, being again assembled, the Ciceronians with
great instaunce, had decreede Antony an ennimye, had not Saluius the
Tribune dissolved the counsel till the next day. In these offices he has
most power that may prohibit.

The Ciceronians did spitefully labor against him, and Ad^ra against
Antony.
ran among the people, to stir them upon him, and cited Saluius to
answer. He without fear came forth, till the Saluius.
Senate stayed him, fearing least he should incense the people to draw them
to the memory of Antonie, they were not ignoraunte, that they condemned a
noble manne without judgment, nor that the people had given him France: but
for fear of the strykers, they were angry with him, because he first brake the
law of Oblivion, and therefore they chose Octauius, against him before, who
not being ignorant thereof, was desirous to dispatch Antony.

The Senate being thus affected, the voices notwithstanding were deferred to
the Tribunes. Yet it was determined, that Decimus should be praised for that
he had not given, place to Antonie in Celtica: And that Caesar with the Consuls
Hircius and Pansa, should join with such armies as he now had, and that an
Image of gold should be made to honor him, and that he might give voice among
the Senators, and be allowed to be Consul Honors given to Octanius.
ten years before the law: and that the legions that went from Antony to him,
should have as much given them of the Treasure, as Caesar had appointed to
them after the victory: all the which being decreed, they brake up, even as
already Antony had, being an enemy in deed, no Tribune daring speak for him
the next day.

Wherefore his wife, and his mother, with his son being yet young, and his
other friends and familiars, all the night went to the great men's houses, to
beseech them, and the next day came to the Senate house, suing to every man,
falling to their feet, with weeping and wayling in black habit, they cried
out at the counsel door: and some, for the lamentable voices and behavior, and
for the sodennesse of the matter, were moved with compassion: wherefore Cicero
being afraid, he spoke thus unto the Senate.

What we ought to decree of Antony, yesterday we did determine, Cicero against
Antony.
for when we gave honor to his adversaries, we condemned him as an enemy.
Saluius, was only an impediment against us, either for that he thinks
himself more wise than we, or for the friendship he bears to Antony, or for
ignorance of the matter. Every one of these, is to our great shame, that al we
should have less wit than one: and also to Saluius, if he do prefer his
friendship before the common wealth. But, when he has not well understand this
present case, he should have given credit to the Consul, the Pretors, and to
the Tribunes his fellows, and to the other Senatoures in number and
worthiness so many, who for our age and experience, ought to know Antonie*
better than Salu^o. In public causes and judgments the more part ever has
the right, but if causes must vee known, and now learned again, I will
repeat them briefelye, and touch the most principal matter.

When Caesar was dead, Antony took away our common money, the rule of
Macedonia he had by us, but into France he entered violently without us. The
army that was delivered him against the Thracians, he brought into Italy
against us, requiring these deceitfully of us, and not obtaining, he did them
of himself. At Brunduse he^ ordained a princelye band to be about him, and
openly in Rome, men in armor did guarde and watch him under ensigns. He
brought from Brunduse an other army to the City ready to all attemptes,
aspiring to the things that Caesar (whom he lamented) coueted: and when young
Caesar prepared against him another army, he was afraid and went into
France, as a place fittest to use force against us, because Caesar from that
place did invade us, and got the rule over us, and giving terror to his army,
that they might stick to him in all his unlawful dooyngs, by lotte, he
caused them to dye, neither making any mutiny, nor forsaking their charge and
order in battle, for the which only the law of arms, (I think,) has
appointed that punishemente, which, few Capitaynes scarcelye in great
perils would use for necessity: But he at a word and a ieste gives death
to Citizens, and death not of them that deserve, but of such as he would
choose: wherefore they that could, have forsaken him, and you yesterdaye did
determine to reward them, as those that had done well. They that could not
escape away, for fear do dwell with him, and as enemies invade your land,
and besiege your army: and your general, and whom you appointed to remain
in France, Antony commands him to depart.

Whether then have we judged Antony an ennimye, or does he use us as enimyes?
Our Tribune will not know this, till Decimus be dead, and till that province
so great and so nygh unto us, and after the province, the army also of
Decimus may be in Antonies power, to work his hope against us. For by like
the Tribunes will not ^o soon decree him to be an ennimye, till he be Lord
over us.

While Cicero was thus saying, his friends made a great noise continuallye:,
and would not suffer any manne to speak again, till Piso rose up, when as
the Senate for the reverence of him commanded silence, and then the
Ciceronians stayde, and Piso thus began to speak:

The law, (O Senators) does allow the accused to Piso against (...)
have his cause heard, and when he has answered for himself, to be judged
accordynglye: Cicero the most vehement Oratoure, I do challenge, who durst
not accuse Antony when he was present, and in his absence has laid great
matter to his charge, the greatest and doubtfullest whereof I will note, and
with short answer show them to be false.

He says, that Antony after Caesar* death, did take the public money as
his own, the law calls such one ^. Thief, and not an enimye, appointyng
the pain. Therefore when Brutus had slain Caesar, and accused him to the
people, for spoiling the common money, and leaving the ^te^^^ nothing, Antony
by and by did decree, that the matter (...) ^t searched (...) approved his
sentence by public (...), appointyng a reward of the tenthe (...), to them
that would declare it, which we will double if any man can accuse Antony of
that. And thus much concerning the money.

The province of France we did not appoint to Antony: the people did by law,
Cicero being present, in such sort as many other be given, and heretofore gave
the same to Caesar in like manner. Part of the decree is, that Antony should
make war upon Decimus if he would not give place unto him, and that the army
prepared against the Thracians, (who stirs not) should be led against him,
if he resisted. Cicero does not judge Decimus an enemy that makes war
against the law, but Antony, that obeys the law. If he condemns him, he
condemns them that made the law, whom he ought by persuasion to pacific,
and not to provoke by contumely. Neither ought he to credit that place to
Decimus, who^ the people have bannished for murder, and discredit Antony, to
whom the people have given it by law. It is no good counsel to make division
with the people, especially in dangerous times, nor to forget, that this
belongs chiefly to the people, to judge of friends and foes: for by the
ancient laws, the people only is Lord of war and peace, in the which at this
time notwithstanding they have not appointed, nor commanded, nor used their
privilege over us. But (he says) Antony killed certain Soldiers, being
general and appointed thereunto by you. Never was there Captain general, that
was charged with that offi^ce. For the laws have not thought it meet, that
the Captain should be subject to the Soldiers: and there is nothing worse in
a camp, than disobedience, by the which some conquerours have been
overthrown. None of them that were punished, have complained, nor none of
their friends or kinsfolk. But Cicero has accused, and finding fault at
their death, instead of such honor as has been wont to be given to such
executers, he will have Antony exclaymed an enemy. How Antonies army was
disordered, and how they dis^ayned him, it is en^de^t, by the two legions y^
are fled from him, who^ you commanded to serve under him ^ they, contrary to y^
law of soldiers, have not fled from him to you, but to Octa. Caesar, which
Cicero, prayseth also, and yesterday would have the^ rewarded of y^ common
Treasure, which example I pray God you do not one day repent, to such
inconvenience has enmity carried Cicero. He accuses Antonies Tyranny also, and
murder of soldiers, whereas they that seek mischief to their countries, ever
do please their armies, and not so punish the^. And because he can accuse
Antony of none other matter of Tyranny after Caesar's rule, go to, I will ask
him questions of every thing. Whom has Antony killed vnharde, as a Tyrant, who
now him self unhard is in danger to be condemned? whom has he vanished?
whom has he cast out? has he bin so to every particular man? has he laid
traynes for us all at once when (O Cicero) he decreed forgetfulness of all
things done? or that no man should prosecute the murder? or that a search
should be made of common Treasure? or when he called home Pompey, your Pompeis
son? or when he wished he might be recompensed of the common, for his fathers
substance? or when he dispatched the counterfayte Marius? whom then you al
praised and now only, in that Cicero will not, you disprayse? or when he
determined that no Dictator should be created or spoken of: or when he ordained
that he that would, should dye for it. These were the things that Antony did
to us in two months, when he alone remained in the City after Caesar: when
by and by the people pursewed the stickers, when by and by we were afraid of
things to come. When, if he would have taken his occasion and have been vmust,
he could not have had a better, yet he did not use his power to the contrary.
What did not he alone rule, when Dolobella was gone into Syria? What did not he
use his army priest, to al purposes in the City, which you appointed to him?
did he not watch the City? was not he himself guarded by night for fear of his
enemies? had he not occasion by Caesar's death, his friend, and benefactour, and
most dear to the people? Had he not another, more nere when his body was laid
for of me^, of whom he neither banished, nor put to death any but rather
favored them as much as by reason and honesty he could, not envying them?
These you see. O Romans, be the greatest, and most doubtful matters that
Cicero hathg athered against him, and to his accusations he joins deuination:
as though Antony would have brought so great an army, against the City,
but that he was afraid of Octauius Caesar, that prevented him with an other
army. If to entende only so, be the part of a man that is an ennimye, why
does he not count him one that came and encamped in the Cittye, and gave you
no warnyng of it? If Antony would come, how hapte it he came not? was he
afraid of Caesar's three thousand unarmed, he having thirtye thousand well
armed? They came only to Caesar for to help to a pacifycation between them,
but when they saw that war would follow, they forsook him. If he were
afraid when he had thyrtie thousand? how came he hither with one thousand?
with the which going to Tibure, how many did we send unto him? how many
of us went to be sworn of him, that were not sworn before? what praises did
Cicero make of his good gouernemente and virtue? how would Antony, if he
had known this, have left with us the pledges that now be without the
Senate house, his mother, his wife and his young son, which lamente and
fear now, not of Antonies doyngs in the common wealth, but for his ennimyes
power.

This I have rehearsed unto you, as an example of Antonies innocencye, and
Ciceros mutabilitye. And to them that well will consider, I will give this
exhortation: neither to charge the people nor Antony, neither to bring in
general enimetie and danger, the common wealth, being sickely, and wantyng
them that speed^^^c might relieve it: but to make the Cyttie strong before they
abroad do stir any tumulte, whereby we may resist any that will rise
against us, and ^^^ge of them as we shall think good, and perform what we
have judged. But how can this be done? If we can suffer Antony for the love
or favor of the people, to have France, if we call home Decimus with his
three legions, and when he is come, sen^e him into Macedonia, retayning his
legions, and calling for the two legions that went from Antony, we do
require them (as Cicero says of Caesar) to be in the City, so as having
five legions, we may confyrme what we will by decree, and not be driven to
hang of any man's hope.

This have I spoken to the hearers, without envy or emulation. But for them
that inconsiderately and unadvisedly seek to trouble* you for private grudge
or displeasure, I shall beseech the Judges not to be to quick nor swifte
against so great men, and leaders of so mighty armies, that they do not
force them to make war against their wyli, remembryng Marcus Coriolanus, and
the late Caesar, whom, bringing an army likewise, and offering very good
conditions of concord, we rashelye condemned as enimye, and of necessity
made him to be so indeed. Let us bear with the people, that while erst did
stir against the strykers of Caesar, that we seem not, to his reproach, to
give them provinces of nations, nor praise Decimus, because he despises the
peoples law, and condemn Antony, because he receives France by the peoples
order. And it behooves them that be of good judgment, to redress them that
go astraye, and the Consuls and Tribunes to provide for the dangers of the
present state.

Thus did Piso speak in defense, with cries and sharp words, and was the
only cause why Antony was not judged a rebel. Yet could he not obtain that
he should have the province of French Celtica. For the friends and
kinsefolke of the killers for fear did let it, least the war should
cease, and he be at one with Octauius, and they both revenge Caesar's death.
Wherefore their practice and devise was to keep Antony and Octauius still at
debate.

It was decreed that Antony should receive Macedonie, in stead of Lombardie. Al
other orders, either of ignorance or of purpose, they committed to Cicero to
appoint, and to give answer to Ambassadors. He having this sentence, did thus
determyne.

That Antony should straight depart from Modena, and The decrees of Cuer^
against Amony.
leave Celtica to Decimo: and to be within the compass of the flood Rubicone
(which divides Italy from Lombardie) by a day prefixed, and commit all his
matters to the Senate.

Thus Cicero ambitiously and unjustly did appointe his determinations, not for
any so great private enmity, but as it should seem, by destinye that was
determined to trouble the state with mutation, and bring himself to some evil
hap in the end.

At this instante they were come that brought the ashes of Trebonius, and the
despite used to him, which being thoroughly known, the Senate did easilye
decree Dolabella to be a rebel. Dolabella declared a rebel.


When the messengers were come to Antony, they were ashamed of their strange
commission, and said nothing, but delivered the decree unto him* He with great
anger did ^^ueigh against the Senate and Cicero, maruelling that they would
think The answer of Antony to the decree.
Caesar a Tyranne or a king: that had so much augmented the state of Rome, and
not account Cicero so, whom Caesar took in war, and yet did not kill,
whereas Cicero does prefer his killers, before his friends, and hated
Decimus, when he was trusty to Caesar, and loved him ever since he was a killer
of him, and would aid him that only by Caesar kept Celtica, and judge him a
rebel that had it by the people. To the legions that were assigned by decree,
and revolted, the Senate gives reward, but none to them that remain in their
duty: and so corrupt (quoth he) the discipline of war, not belonging to me,
but to the City. To the quellers, he could grant oblivion of the fact, to
which I consent for two noble men's sake: but Antonye and Dolobella he
judges enimyes, because we keep that was given us, for that is the very
cause. Antony to the Senate.
But if I leave Celtica, I am neither enemy nor tyranne. I protest I will
dissolve that forgetfulness, that shall not be very acceptable to him.

Many things after this sort spoke Antony, and wrote this Antony to Cicero
answer to the decree, that to the Senate he would obey as to his Country,
but to Cicero, that wrote the commandment, thus he spoke:

The people have given me Celtica by law: Decimus, that will not obey, I will
remove, and revenge the matter of murder in him for all, that the Senate may
be purged of the ^aulte they Antony condemned.
be in, whereof they be full for Ciceroes sake, to help Decimus. When Antony
had thus said, he wrote it by and by. Wherefore the Senate judged him an
enemy, and the army with him, unless they went from him.

Macedonia and Illiria with the armies of both, they appointed The power of
Marcus Brutus in Asia, Macedonia and Slauonia.
to Marcus Brutus, till the common wealth were brought to better state. He had
an army of his own, and had received one of Appuleius. He had ships both
galleys and hulkes, and sixteen thousand talents of money, and great plenty of
armor, which he found in the City of Demeatride, laid up there by Caesar,
all Demeatride, a town in These salie, that was called Pagasa, now
Demeatrida. Syria appointed o Cassius.
the which the Senate confirmed by the decree, that he might use to the
benefit of his country.

Syria was by the Senate appointed to Cassius, and commanded to make war
upon Dolobella, and all that had provinces or armies of the Romans from the
Ionian Sea to the East, were charged to obey Brutus and Cassius. Wherefore
Cassius and Brutus estate was suddenly in great fame.

When Octauius Caesar understood these things, he was in doubt, for where he
thought the law of Oblivion to proceed of a conuenie^cie of humanity, and a
respect of pity of their kinsfolk that were men in like authority, and
therefore had appointed them to provinces for a short time for their security,
as Celtica to Decimus, to note Antony of Tyranny, and by that device to induce
him against Antony.

Now that Dolobella was condemned as a rebel, for killing one of the
quellers, and that mighty nations were given in province to Erutus and
Cassius, and many armies with great speedin^^ie appointed to them, with
abundaunce of money: and that they were made Generalles of all the people from
Ionia to India. He perce^ued that all this tended to the advancement of
Pompeys part, and to the utter destruction of Caesar's: And that the Senate
went about to deceive him as a youngman: (the plotte whereof he conceived in
his mind,) and that when he was When hey (...).
made a Captain against Antony, it was meant to take his army from him, and
that the Consulls being in the field, there was no need of any other
Captain, and that only honors were given to the Soldiers that revolted
from Antony, and his vnhonoured: and that this war would work his infamy,
being used to none other intent of the Senate, but to the destruction of
Antony. He kept the considerations secret to himself, and mak^ng sacrifice
for the charge given him, he thus said to his army.

This honor, (O fellow Soldiers) I may thank you (...) to the soldiers.
for, not only now, but from the time you gave me power. For your sakes the
Senate have given i^ me, and therefore, for this also you know I am your debtor
of thanks, which, if the Gods shall give us god luck, I will requite
abundantly. Thus did he speak to win^e his army and marched forth.

Pansa, one of the Consuls, lead his army, over Italy, Hirtius, (...).
the other Consul, divided with Caesar: and as he was secretly instructed of
the Senate, he required in the di^ision, the two legions that went from Antony,
because they were counted the best Soldiers. Caesar did grant every thing, and
when they had divided, they encamped together that winter.

At the end of winter, Decimus began to lack victual, wherefore Hirtius and
Caesar went to Mutina, that Antony (...) of (...), one of (...) o^ Italy, and
(...) and (...).
should not get from them Decimus army oppressed with famine.

Antony holding Mutina straighte, they with all their forces would not fight
with him, but tarried for Pansa. Diverse skirmishes were made, in the which,
though Antony had the greater number of horse, yet the narrowness of the
field, and the ditches about the rivers, did keep back the multitude of
horsemen. And thus went the matter at Mutina.

In Rome in the absence of the Consuls, Cicero did al, as the Cicero rule^h
all at Rome.
peoples ruler. He assembled the Senate every day: he made provision of
armor, compelling workmen without payment: He gathered money, and put great
impositions upon Antonies friends. They suffered it patiently to avoid
displeasure, til Publius Ventidius that had served under Caesar, and was
friend Ventidius makes Rome afraid and Cicero to flee.
to Antony, could not abide the sharpness of Cicero, but went to Caesar's
habitations, where he was well known, and got two legions, which he led
to Antonie, by Rome, to take Cicero. Great trouble grew of this, insomuche as
many went away with their wives and children for fear, and Cicero Cicero
flees.
fled out of the City, which when Ventidius knew, he turned straighte
to Antony, and being stepte by Caesar and Hirtius, La M^^ ca de* Ancona the
country of Ancona.
he went to Picene, where he gathered another legion, and stayed to see what
would come.

The Consul and Caesar, seeing that Pansa drew nighe with his host, sent
Cars^leius the leader of Caesar's chief band, and Carsuleius.
the Martial legion to help him to pass the straights.

Antonie did not much care for the passage, so he might The stratage^^^ of
Antony.
otherwise hinder them, and being desirous of the ^ight, could not use his
horsemen in the plain, because of the Fenny place full of ditches. He hid
two of his best legions in the Fenne, the way being made by hand, and
straighte, and on both sides covered with reeds.

Carsuleius all the night passing ^hys place, by the break of day, was come
to the way made with hand. With the Martialls Souldioures and five other
bands, they went upon the made way, being clear of ennimyes, and behold
the Fenne on every side, and when they saw the stirring of the reeds, and
some glittering of terg^ts and headpeeces, they began to suspect, when as the
chief band of Antony sodainelye appeared before them.

The Martial legion being on both sides beset, and having no roomth to shifte
abroad, forbad the new soldiers to take any pains with them, least for
lack of experience they should trouble them, they placed Caesar's thief band
against Antonies, and they dividing themselves to two, encountered with both
legions. Pansa was Captain of the one part, and The notable fight of the
Martial legion against two of Antonies, and the two chief hands of Antony
and Octauius. This battle is declared in the tenth book of (...) his EP^stles.
Cars^leius of the other. And because there was two Fens, there was two fights:
and because of the straight place, the one could not see the other: and upon
the very way, the two chief bands began another fight between
themselves. Antonies men intended to be revenged of the Martialls, because they
were fugitives, and to use them as traytoures. The Martialls would be
revenged of them, as suspected of their fellows deaths at ^^unduse. Being
thus privy one to another doings, and that they were the strength of either
army, they hoped by this only feate, that the war would be determined. The
one was ashamed that two legions should be overcome of one, the other sought
glory, that one legion should defeat two: and so they joined battle for
anger and emulation* rather of themselves, than of their Capitaynes, trying now
their own matter. And for their experience, they neither made cry, as though
they had not stricken one another, nor in the fight any of them uttered any
voice, neither when he had the better, nor when he had the worse. They fetched
no compass nor course, but stood firm, as in Fennes and ditches, where they
could not one put another back, but with their short swords, they clasped
together, as in a wrestling place. No blow was given in vain* but either
wounds or slaughter followed, and only sighs in steed of voice. He that fell
had straight another put in his place. There was no need of exhortation or
calling on, every man by his own experience was a Captain to himself. And
when they had ouerlaboured, they would stay to take breath, as men do in
places of exercise, and straighte close again.

The young soldiers stood in a maze to see this feate done with so good
order and silence: all these continuing beyond man's nature, the chief band of
Caesar was all slain. The Martialls under Carsuleius had rather the upper
hand of their enemies, who not disorderedly but in ray, withdrew the^ selves.
They under Pansa did abide it out, and equally stood to it on both sides,
till Pansa was wounded with a darte in the belly, and was carried Pansa the
(...).
to bononia. Then they, at the first retired in order, but after they turned
more swiftely as flying, which when the young Soldiers saw, they fled with
confusion and cry to the camp: which Torquatus the Praetor had provided whiles
they were fightyng, foreseeing the need of it, to the which the new
Soldiers ran with great violence, being Italians as well as the Martials, but
exercise makes them of one nation so much to differ in virtue. Exercise
The Martials did not enter the trench for dishonor, but stood before it, and
weary though they were, remained ready to resist any assault, and to abide the
end of the matter. Antony did not touch the Martialles, because he knew them
valiant, but the young Soldiers he chased, and made great slaughter among
them.

Hirtius, at Mutina, hearing of the fight, being about eight Hirtius.
miles distant, came in baste with the other legion that was fled from Antony.
The sun was now going down, and Antonies Soldiers having the victory, went
singing to their camp. Hirtius appeared to them, he being in good order with
one legion The fight with Hirtius (...) men.
sound and valiante, and they out of order. Wherefore of necessity, they
placed themselves in due sort, and showed many valiant and noble feats: but
although they were coragious, yet being weary, they were overcome of the other
that were fresh, and the most part slain of Hirtius in this feate: albeit he
did not follow them, for fear of the Fennes, and the night coming on, (...),
u^rth^ own.
did sever them. The Fenne in most places was filled with harness and dead
men, and with half dead and wounded. They that were safe, dispaired of
themselves for weariness. But the horsemen The horse men of Antony.
of Antony rode about al night, and gathered them together: some they carried
themselves: some they brought home on horseback: some they badde take hold by
the horse tail, to go the faster, and seek to save themselves. Thus Antony
having fought very nobly, lost his force by the coming of Hirtius: wherefore
he abode in a village in the field without a camp. The Village is called
French Market. The half of either side (...)ts.
was slain, and C^s^rs band of his person utterly destroyed. Of Hirti^s
Souldioures few were left, all the which the next morning removed their Camps
to Mutina.

After this loss, Antony determined no more to give battle to his enemies,
nor to admit any attempt to the same, but with his Horsemen only to molest
them day by day, till he had gotten Decimus to yield, being driven by hunger.
For this cause Hirtius and Caesar the rather provoked him to fight: and whereas
they did perceive, that Antony would not come forth, kee^pyng his men in
order, they went to the other side of the City, which, (because it was the
harder to approach, was the less kept) y^ with their whole army they might
enter by force. Antony made resistance only with his horsemen, but they being
put back by other horse, and the army passing as it would, Antony was afraid*
of the City, and brought forth two legious. They glad of this, retired, and
fought with them, and whilst Antony from other ^he (...)*
camps sent for m^^ legions, as in a troubled time of so great and suddayne
attempt, the which being long a coming, Caesar's men overthrew Antonies in the
fight, and Hirtius drove Antony to his Camp, where fighting manfully before
Antonies Tente, he was slain, whose body Caesar loving* in great speed
recovered, (...). ^^ay^^.
and got the Camp, till shortly he was repulsed by Antony. Both of them
watched all night in armoure. Antony being fallen with this second loss,
streighte after the battle called his friends to counsel. They thought,
according to his former meaning, to keep still the s^^ge at M^dena, and not to
come to any fight, for both the losses were like, Hirtius slain, and Pansa
hurt. In Horsemen, he the better, and Mutina brought to extreme want, must
needs shortly give over. Thus his friends thought good, and it was best
indede, but Antoni^ (God now striking him) was afraid least Caesar should
proceed to the obteyning of the City, as he did the day before, or by making
walls entrenche him, having many pioners for the purpose, and then his Horse
should do him no good: he said, Lepidus and Plancus will despite me, as one
overcome, but if we go from Modena, Ve^tidius will straight come to us with
three legions, from the marches of An^on^^, and, then being so strong, Lepidus
and Pl^ncus will take my part. Thus he said, and as a man not afraid in
perils, he leuyed his seege, and went straight toward the Alps. When Decimus
was delivered of the seege, he began to fear Caesar as an enemy, because both
Consuls were now gone, wherefore he make the bridges of the river before day,
and sent to him, both acknowledging him De^m^^^ (...) to O(...).
the author of his safety, and prayed him, that having the floude betwixt
them, he would come to a talk, with witness of Citizens, where he would let
him understand, that very wicked Fortune forced him to conspire against Caesar,
being thereto driven of other. Octauius angerly answered the messengers,
refusing the thanks that Decimus gave him for I (quoth he) came not to save
Octauius aunsvvere to ^^cimus.
Decimus, but to overthrow Antonie, with whom to be reconcyled, there is no
reason, but to come to speech or fight of Decimus, his nature abhorred it: let
him therefore keep himself, so long as it shall so seem to them of the
City. When Decimus heard this, not being far from the flood, he called to
Caesar by name, and with a loud voice, read unto him the Senates letters, by
the which they had given him the province of Celtica^. And he forbad also
Caesar, that without the Consuls, he should not pass the bridge into any
others province, nor follow Antonie, for he was able enough to do it. Octauius
seeing him in such boldness by the Senate, when he might by his commission
have taken him, he spared him, and went to Bononia to Pansa, from whence he
wrote to the Senate of all things, and so did Pa^s^, whose letters Cicero
Th(...) (...)e o^^^ly. (...) to the S(...)n^y. S(...) o^ (...) ^^y^s.
did read to the people of Rome, as from the Consul, but Caesar's, were read
to the Senate only. There was decreed general Processions of fifty days
against Antonie, the like whereof was not done of the Romans, neither for
the war of France, nor none other battle.

The Consulles armies were appointed to Decimus, Pansa being yet alive, but
not like to escape, and Decimus made general Decimus made general.
alone against Antonie, and public Prayers were made, that Decimus might
overcome Antonie: so great an hate and displeasure was grown against
Antonie. ^o the two legions that fled from Antony, was confirmed to every
Soldier according to the former promise, five thousand D^ammes of the common
treasure, as to Soldiers of conquest: and it was granted them in solemn
feasts to wear a crown of D^^ue leaves. Of Octauius nothing was mentioned,
not (...)
so much as his name, so soon did they contemn him, as though Antony had been
utterly destroyed. They wrote also to Lept^^^, ^^^^cus, and Asinius, to fight
with Antony, when they should ^^^^gh him. These were done in Rome. Pansa being
at point of death by reason of his wound said thus to Caesar sittyng by him:
(...) is a friend to thy father as to my self, whom I could (...)
not ^^^eage being slain, not able to resist so many, whom, thou also haste
done wisely to obey, although thou had an army. They at the first fearyng
thee and Antony, a man most ambitious, and enclinyng toward Caesar's
sentence, have been content to suffer you to be at variance, and consume your
selves, and when they saw that thou wast Lord of an army, as iyong man, they
set thee forth with some countenance and slender honors. After thou wast
stronger and of more estimation, and that thou would not recerue the
authority under the army that they gave thee, they were troubled, and they
appointed thee to join with us, that we might take from thee the two
legions, which were most practiced, hopyng that if any of you were overcome,
the other alone should be the more weaker, and after him destroy al Caesar's
friends and set up Pompeys. This was the sum of the determination. I and
Hirtius have done our commission, to repress Antony that grew into suspicion.
Now that he is overcome, wae thought it best for thee to be at one with him,
doing thee this benefit* in remembrance of Caesar's amity, only that which
we supposed will further thy felicity in time to come. Before this time to have
given thee this Consell had not benefitte, but now that Antony is broken,
Hirtius dead, and I not like to live, opportunity serves to speak, not that
thou should thank me when I am dead, but that thou being borne to great
felicity (as thy deeds do show) might know what is best for thee, and
the chayse and destiny of Hirtius and me. The army that thou gave us, we
think it most fit to give thee again, and so we do. The young Souldyoures if
thou could keep, I would also give thee, but it would much offend the
Senate, because the officers of them, were sent as keepers to us, and it would
work th^^ enu^e, and put thee to more trouble than needs, therefore Torquatus
the Praetor shall have them. When he had thus said, and delivered them to
Torquatus, he dyed: and they Pansa the Consul dies.
as the Senate commanded, were sent to Decimus. Caesar delivered Hirtius and
Pansa to their funeral with great honor, and The Consuls buried honorably.
sent them to Rome with great show. In Syria and Macedonia at this time diverse
things happened.

Julius Caesar when he passed by Syria, left a Legion there, mynding Cecilius
Bassus.
then to go against the Parthians, Cecilius Bassus had the charge thereof, but
Julius Sextus, a young man, and allied to Caesar, had the Julius Sextus.
dignity, who led the legion without order, to delitious and licentious
life, the which when Bassus reproved, he used him with despightefulnesse, and
Bassus again calling him, and he grudging The mutiny of the army in Syria.
at it, he commanded he should by force be brought before him. At the which
when tumult and fray was made, the army not bearing Inlius killed.
this despighte, killed Julius, whereof they streighte repented the^, for fear
of Caesar. Then making oath one to another, that unless forgiveness and faith
were given them, they would fight to death, and compelling Bassus to that
oath, they gathered another legion, and trained them to their exercise. Thus
some do write of Bassus. But Libo writes, that Bassus was of Pompeys part,
and after the battle, lived privately in Tyro, where he did corrupt some of
the Legion, who killed Sextus, and after obeyed Bassus. But howsoever the
matter went* they valiantly resisted Sextius Murcus, that was sent of Caesar
with three Legions, till Murcus Sextius Murcus. Minutius Crispus. Bythinia in
Asia the less, next Troy. Cas^ius obtained the Legions.
did call to Minutius Crassus, that was ruler of Bythinia, who came into his
aid with three other Legions, and when Bassus was beseeged of these, Cassius
came in great have, and received by and by the two legions of Bassus, and also
wanne the fire legions that beseeged him, by friendship, who obeyed him as
vnder-Consul. For (as I said before) it was decreed, that all should obey
Cassius and Brutus.

Albienus at that time, being sent of D^lobella into Aegipt, Albienus
brought from thence four legions, which being scattered after the overthrow
of Crassus and Pompey, or else left of Caesar with Cleopatra, Cassius coming
suddaynely upon him, compelled him to deliver his Legions in Palestina, being
afraid with four Legions Palestina next India and Arabia.
to fight with eyghte. So Cassius beyond expectation, was Lord of twelve full
Legions, and Dolobella going out of Asia into Cassius, Lord of twelve Legions.
^a^dicea, a noble City in Asia, ^igh the ^^ond ^y^us.
Liodicea, where for friendship he was received, he followed and beseeged,
which thing when the Senate heard, they were glad.

In Macedonia, Caius Antonius, brother to Antonius Marcus, did make war with
Brutus, having one Legion of armed Citizens, and being inferioure to Brutus, he
laid traynes for him, which Brutus escaping, did catch him with the like
traynes, and doing nothing to him nor them that he had taken, he badde his own
Souldioures to be familiar with their enemies, but they refusing that
familiarity, and not admitting their conu^rsation, he suffered them freely to
depart, when he had them at advantage. They going another way, he appeared
suddaynely unto them in another straight, where he did not touch them, P^^^us
gets legions in Macedonia.
but gently received them. They remembering that he was ever thought to be the
most courteous Citizen, and worthy the opinion that he had of wisdom and
mildness, they accepted his courtesy, and gave themselves unto him. Caius
also yielded to him, and was in honor with Brutus, till he was found many
Brutus the ge^^le.
times corruptyng the army, and so put away.

Thus Brutus to his former army, had six Legions, and praising the
Macedonians, he gathered of them two legions more, whom he exercised after the
Italian manner.

These things were done in Siria and Macedonia.

In Itali^, Caesar took it evil, that Decimus was made General against
Antonie before him* He hid his anger, Octa^^us desires Triumph* The Senate
denies Triumph (...).
and desired that he might make a Triumph for the feats he had done, and
being rejected of the Senate, for requiring greater things than belonged to
his age, he was afraid, least if Antonie were overthrown, they would more
despise him, and therefore desired to have conference with him, as Pansa
counseled him when he dyed.

All the Souldioures and Captains of Antonies that he had taken, he used
courteously, and took them as his own, and Caesar uses Antonyes Souldioures
well.
them that would, he sent to Antonie, as a signification, that he was no
enemy to him.

To Ventidius that was friend to Antonie, and had brought three legions, he
drew nygh with his army, and when he had Octa^ius Caesar practi^eth with
Ventidius, Antonyes friend.
made him afraid, he did nothing to him, but granted him either to join with
him, or to go to Antonie freely with his army, and to protest, that for lack
of knowledge, he had ^mitted the common profit. When Ventidius heard this, he
went to Antonie.

In the mean time, Octauius Caesar honored Decius, one of Antonies Captains
whom he had taken at Mutina. He gave him leave to go^ to Antonie if he
would, and he Octauius saying to Decius, a Captain of Antonyes.
demanding of his mind toward Antonie, he said, he had showed sufficient
and many tokens to them that could perc^yue, and to them that would be
ignorante, more would not suffice.

Thus did Caesar signifye to Antonie.

To Le^idus and Asinius he more plainly signified of the despite against him,
and of the myghtie preparation of the kyllers, Octauius deals with Iepidus
and Asinius.
making them afraid, that to increase Pompeis faction, all Caesar's friends
one after another, should be served as Antonie was, which he, through
ignorance and suspicion of a fear, did longer suffer. He allowed well they
should obey the Senate Octauius pra^^^^e with Antonyes friends.
for a fashion, but for their own surety they should agree together whylest
they might, and that they should herein reprove Antony, and to use the
manner of the legionaries, not to depart from them when the service was done,
nor to leave the trade of war and disseuer, (least thereby the Enemy might
take some advantage,) but rather together inhabit others places, thereto
desirous for their power, than severally every man in his country consume his
own. This did Caesar send to Lepidus and Asinius. Deci^us army old and
famished, was full of sickness, and looseness of body, Decimus army after
^^^ger, (...) for plenty. Plancus ^oyneth with Decimus.
and the new Souldioures were yet unexercised* but Plancus with his ordinary
army drew nigh unto him, and Decimus wrote to the Senate, that Antonie should
be caught in his snares, being tired with things past.

P^mpeys friends hearing of this, did maruellously rejoice, crying now to be
time, to restore their Countries liberty. Every man made sacrifices, and
elected ten men to punish Antonies A creation of ten men in Rome.
power. And this was a form to abolish Caesar's decrees, which Antonie put in
ure by his remembrances, doing little or nothing of himself: which thing the
Senate well perceiving, did by occasion disanull some, and so they hoped to
dissolve all: and the ten men did command, that whosoever had received
any ^^di^t of ten men.
thing by Antonies authority, contrary to the Senate, they should restore it,
and declare it, and to them that disobeyed, a punishment was threatened. Pompeys
sect required the rule of Consuls, in stead of Hirtius and Pansa, for the rest
of the year. Caesar did the like, not of the Senate, but of Cicero, privately
sendyng to Octa^ius requires to be Consul with Cicero.
him, and exhorting him to be in office with him, because he was more sage,
more expert, and better acquainted with the office than he, and that he only
would think it a benefyte to bear the name, that he might have an honest
pretense to leave his army, for the which cause he had required a triumph.

Cicero hereby being blown up with ambition, said, he perceived The ambition
of Cicero.
a conspiracy to be wrought by the Captains abroad, and therefore he thought
good to pleasure this young man, being not well entreated, and Lord of a
great army, and rather to grant him an office in the City before his time,
than to force him to be in arms, least he might do something that should not
content the Senate, and wished some of the wise ancients might be appointed, as
a master of his young years. But the Senate laughed at Ciceros ambition, and
the kinsmen of the killers were Cicero is laughed ^^.
against it, ^earing that Caesar would accuse them when he should be Consul,
and for diverse lawful causes made delay in the election.

Antonie in this time passed the mountains. Having persuaded Culeo suffers
Antony to pass the mountains.
Culeo a Captain of Lepidus, and keeper of the passage, to credit him, he
drew nighe the ^ioude where Lepidus was, and lay without trenche or ditche,
because he would show he was friend to him. Diverse messages were sent between
them. Antony recording diverse friendshippes and pleasures, affirmed, that if he
Pract^se between Antony and Lepidus.
would not agree, all they of Caesar's (...), should be brought to the like
calamity.

Lepidus being afraid of the Senate, that had commanded him to make war
upon Anto^^, affyrmed yet that he (...) it against his will. Now Lepidus his
army reuer^^cing the dignity of Antonie, and perceiving the messengers
between them, and delighting in the quietness of his soldiers, secretly
first mingled among the^, and after openly, as with their fellow citizens and
soldiers: and when they were forbidden by the Captains, they making no
account of their commandment, made a bridge of boats over the river, that
they might the better come The tenth legio^ began to reuo^te from Lepidus*
Laterensis.
together: and the legion called the tenth, sometime wont to be led of
Antonie, prepared for him in their ten^s.

Laterensis, one of the noble Senatoures perceiving this, opened the matter to
Lepidus, who giving no credit to him, willed the army to be divided into
diverse parts, as to be sent to diverse uses to try their treason or faith.
Lepidus divided them into three, and commanded them in the night^ that they
should conduct a Treasourer of the army that was coming Lepidus souldioures
lets in Antony.
at hand. They passing the last watch, and arming themselves as to a journey,
went to the strongest part of the camp, and opened the gates to Antony, who
ran into Lepidus Tents, all the army bringing him and praying Lepidus of
mercy and peace for the afflicted Citizens, Lepidus leapte out of his Antony
and Lepidus ag^ee.
bed without his clothes, and promised so to do^, and embracing Antony, excused
the necessity. Some say he did kneel to Antonie, as one that was a cowarde
and of small experience, the which all writers do^ not allow, nor I think it
to be probable, for he had done no part of an (...) ^athe great power
again.
ennimye against Antony, whereby he should be asrayde of him.

Thus Antony was risen again to great power, and beecame most fearful unto
his ennimyes, for he had the Army that he led from Modena: he had
received three legions by the way, of Ventidius, and new had the
fellowshippe of Lepidus, with seven legions, armed with all kind of
furniture, and preparation requisite.

Lepidus bare the name among them, but Antonie had the direction of all.

When this was showed at Rome, a marvelous and suddayne mutation of minds
followed: some, from great boldness fell to fear: some from great fear
were lifted up to courage.

The decrees of the ten men were broken with spighte, Alteration in Rome.
and the creation of Consulles was instantelye called for.

The Senate stood in doubt what to do, and feared that Caesar and Antonie
would agree.

They sent secreatelye Lucius and Pansa, to Brutus and The Senate se^deth
Lucius and Pansa to Brutus and Cassius.
Cassius, as to view public plays, that they set forth in Grecia, and
secreatlye required them, that as soon as might be, they would come to help
them.

From Libya they called two of the three legions under S^xtius, and the
third, they commanded to be given to Cornificiu^, that was ruler of the other
Libya that obeyed the Senate.

They were afraid of these, when they remembered they The fear of the Senate.
had served under Julius Caesar, and were inclined to his doings.

This doubtefulnesse drove them to this point, that because they feared new
Caesar would consent with Antonie, Nevve Caesar chosen lie^tena^t to Decimus.
they chose him again very vnfitlye lieutenaunte under Detimus, but Caesar
for anger, as continuallye used with dispight, stirred his army, that they
should be sent to a needye journey before they were paid the five thousand
drammes, promised Caesar stirs his souldioures against the Senate.
them for the first, and counseled them to send to the Senate for it, and
they sent the Captains of the bands.

The Senate knowing wherefore they were taught to come, answered they would
send their Ambassadoures unto them, whom they thus instructed.

That they should priuatelye speak to the two legions that went from
Antonie, and teach them not to put Senate sends to the souldi^^^.
their trust in one, but in the Senate only, whose power was eternal, and
that they should go to Decimus, whither they would send them their money,
and pretended they had ready to give them the one half, and that ten men
should be appointed for the payment, not namyng Caesar for the eleventh.

The Messengers, because the legions would not be spoken to, without Caesar
returned in vain.

Caesar would no more have other to speak to the Souldioures, nor tarrye any
longer, but himself went to the army being assembled, and showed what
despite the Senate had done him, and that they meant to destroy every one of
Caius Caesar's friends.

He badde them beware of them, that would have them (...), his souldioures
against the Senate.
turn to a Captain, by sentence of gods judged an ennimy, and so from one
ennimye to another, either to be utterly destroyed, or to be at debate among
themselves, for the feate at Mutina being common, reward is only appointed
to two legions, to work strife and discord among them.

You know (quoth he) why Antonie is persecuted, and what the Pompeyans have
propounded in Rome against them that have received gifts by Caesar's
appointement. What trust can you have, either of the land, or the money that
he gave you, or of my safetye, so long as the kyllers kinsemen do bear rule
in the Senate? As for my self, I am ready to take such end as shall happen
unto me, and it shall be mine honor to suffer for my fathers defense: but for
you, so many, and so worthy men, my whole care is, being in peril for my
fathers sake and mine. You know that I am clear from al ambition, since I
refused the authority that you would have given me, with the ceremonies of a
Magistrate. Now I see that bo^^e our safeties does (...) desires to be
declared (...) by the souldioures.
consist, if I be of you declared Consul, for so shall the things be made sure
unto you, that my father has given you: the lands and habitations that be
due unto you, you shall obtain, and all your gifts to the vttermoste: and I
seeking the punishment of the strihers, will, with you, dispatche our other
enemies,

When he had thus said, the army chearefully made a noise, and sent the
Capitaines again to Rome to require the Consulshippe for Caesar. When the
Senate objected against his age, the Captains, as they were instructed, said
that in old time Coruinus was Consul before his time, and after him Consulls
under age. Coruinus. Scipio.
Scipio, bath the first and the second, and by their youth, the Country was
advanced. Coming to later time, they brought forth Pompey and Dolobella, and
Caesar himself, to whom it was granted to be Consul ten years before his
time.

The Capitaines speaking thus with much boldness, some of the Senatoures
could not abide, that they being but bandleaders, should use such free
speech before the Senate, and rebuked The Senate rebukes the souldioures.
them, as men more insolent than became Souldioures duty.

When the whole army heard this, they were more angry, and desired they might
straighte be led to the City, that they might make Caesar's son a Consul by
a famous election, whose father they extolled with immortal praise.

When Octauius saw this vehemency, by and by from that Octauius ^o^th against
the (...).
assemblye, he marched forward with eight legions of footeme^, and a sufficient
number of horsemen, and all provision accordingly, and when he was paste the
floude Rubicone, from Celtica into Italy, as his father did before, when he
moved civil war, he divided his army into. ij, parts, y^ one he commanded to
follow at leisure, the other and ye better, he took with him, and made much
speed, minding to take them unprovided He met with part of the money that the
Senate had sent the soldiers for a reward, and being afraid of the bringers
of this gift, he sent^ secretiye some before to afraye them, whereby they with
their The fear at Rome.
money fled away. When the report of his coming was at Rome, great was the
trouble and tumulte, running hither and thither to send their wives and
children, and to carye their chief substance, either into the country or so
the strongest parts of the City. For it was not thoroughly known, whyther he
came only to ask the Consulshippe. But when they heard that he came as an
ennimy with an angry army, they were afraid of al hands.

The Senate was greatly stricken that they had no power Alteration in Rome.
sufficient, and as in such fear happens, one of them accesed an other:
some, because they took away the army from Antony with such dispight: some,
because they had suspicion of the Triumph, which was but right: some for
hatred and division of the money: some, because he was not appointed the
eleventh manne in the distribution: some, because the rewards were not given,
neither soon enough, nor full enough, said the army was become their enemy* and
blamed this contention so much out of season, Brutus and Cassius being so far
off, and Antonius and Lepidus their ennimies so nygh, whom perceiving to be
ready to agree with Caesar, made the fear to grow the greater.

Cicero, that before was the great styrrer, did now no where Cicero not see^^.
appear. In every manne was marvelous mutation in every matter: and for the
two thousand and five hundred drams that should be given to two legions, to
give five thousand drammes to eight legions, and in steed of ten men, to
make Caesar the distributour alone, and to grant him to ask the Consulshippe
in his absence. Ambassadors went in haste t^ Inconstancy (...) the Senate.
make this message with diligence, who were not out of the town before the
Senate repented them, as they that oug^^^ not so cowardly to be troubled, nor
to receive another ^^ran without bloodshed, and that it was not the use to ask
the Consulship by force, nor that Captains should rule the Country at their
pleasure, and that they in the City should arm themselves, and allege the
laws against them that came to invade the Country: and if they would needs
proceed, rather to suffer the seege till Decimus and Plancus might come: and
better to defend themselves to death, than willingly to receive servitude
without redress.

They recyted the old examples of the Romans in sufferance and Counsel for
their liberty, which they would in no wise give over. And when the two
legions called from Libya, did that day arrive at the port, they thought that
the Gods did exhort them to mainteyne their liberty: and repenting now
themselves, they would revoke all that they had done, ( Cicero Cicero seen
again.
now appearing among them.) Therefore all men that were of age, were appointed
to serve.

The two Legions that came from Libya, and with them a Two Legions ^^^iue
again.
thousand Horse, and one Legion that Pansa left them, were put together,
all the which was divided. One part kept the hill Ianiculo, where all their
money lay. Another kept the passage of the flood, by the officers of the City
dividing themselves: and some had brought their moneys to the port in
Ships and boats, that if they were overcome, they might escape by Sea.

Thus they did with great boldness and speed, trustyng thereby to affray
Caesar, or to move him without his army to ask the Consulshippe of them, or
manfully to defend themselves, and that the state might change to contrary
fortune, whiles they did fight for their liberty.

Caesar's mother and his sister they could not find, neither Caesar's mother
and sister sought for.
by privy nor open search, wherefore they made a great stir, being spoiled
of so great pledges, and thought that the Caesarians did not incline to them,
because they had so surely hid them from them.

Some of the messengers remaining yet with Caesar, the contrary determination
was told him: wherefore they departed from him with shame: he with the army
being the rather styrred, came forward with great have, fearing the women
might take hurt. And to the people that was in tumulte, he sent his Horsemen
before, willing them no more to be afraid: whereat every man rejoicing, he
took the places above Mount Quirinale, no man daryng to encounter or resist
Mount Quirinale, one of the seven hills of Rome. Mutation in Rome.
him.

Wherefore an other marvelous mutation was seen of the sudden. So many noble
men that went unto him and received him, the common people following and
using Honor given to Octauian.
the Soldiers in battle raye, as men quiet in peace, he leauyng his army
in that place, the next day came into the City with a sufficient Guard
about him: they of the City met with him all the way on every side, and
saluted him, omittyng no part of humanity nor humble service. His Mother and
his Sister from the Temple of Vestae with Legions of the Senate go to Caesar
Octauius.
the holy Nuns, ran out to embrace him. The three legions dispising their
Capitaynes, sent Ambassadors unto him to yield themself. Cornutus one of
their chief Capitaynes, Cornutus himself.
killed himself, the other trusted to his promise and faith.

Cicero hearing of these promyses, practysed to come before him by his
friends, which being done, he excused himself, and extolled the persuasion
that he had used to the Senate Cicero (...).
for his Consulshippe: he answered only with a taunt, that he was the last
of his friends that came unto him.

In the night a sudden rumor was raised, that two legions of Caesar's, the
Martial and the fourth, were revolted to the City, as grieved they should be
brought to betraye their Light credit to a vain rumor.
country. The officers and the Senate gave faith unto the rumor very lightly,
and though the other army was at hand, they thought with these men so
valiant, they might resist the rest of Caesar's host, till more power might
come to them from other place. And in the night, to be sure, they sent Ancona.
Acilius Crassus into Picena to gather an army, and they commanded one
Apuleius a Tribune to run to the people with this joyful tidings: and the
Senate that night, came to the Counsel* Cicero standing at the door and
receiving them with great joy and gladness: and when it was known it was
but a false rumor, he fled his way in a wagon.

Caesar laughing at them, brought his army nygher the City, to the place
called the field of Mars. He hurt none of the officers, not so much as
Crassus, yt was posting into Picene, although Acilius Crassus.
he was brought unto him in a servile habit, but spared all, to the opinion
of his humanity, albeit, not long after, he put them to death.

The common treasure found in Ianiculo or in any other Octauius dealing in the
Cities.
place, be commanded to be brought together: and all that was before appointed
by Cicero, he distributed to his army, two thousand and five hundred drammes
to every man, the residue he promised to give them. When he had done this, he
retired from the City, till the election of the Consuls, when, he was chosen,
and with him, Q. Pedius, as he desired, who had left a portion Octauius and Q.
Pedius Consuls.
of Caesar's inheritance unto him.

Then he came into the City as Consul, and sacrifised. And there appeared to
him twelve Gripes, as did to Romulus A token of xii. Vultures.
when he builded the City. The sacrifices being ended, he gave himself in
adoption, to his father, according to the law Curiate, that is* to be
confirmed in adoption by the people.

For the Romans call Curias, companies or wards of the people Cur^^.
Phratri^.
divided, as the Grecians, do call Phratriae, fellowshippes and Frater^i^ies.
This use among the Romans, was most effectual in the law for them that be
without fathers: and they may as well as Legitimate children command the
kinsefolke and free made men of them that do adopte them. And it was one of
Caius Caesar's glories, that he had many rich free made men: and chiefly for
this cause peradventure, this Caesar, in his first adoption by testament, had
need of this also.

He dissolved by a new law that Dolobella should not be judged a rebel, and
that the law might proceed for Caesar's killing.

wherefore accusations were written against them by Caesar's (...) against the
(...) Caesar*
friends, to them as strikers, to the other, as privy only: for this was
objected against some of them, and to some, because they would not be seen
when Caesar was killed. And to all these, a day certain was assigned by
Proclamation, when they should appear to make their annswere, all the which
failing at the day, Caesar himself markyng the judgments, none was par^^^ed
of the fault, but one noble man, who then had no hurt, but Many condemned for
Caesar's death.
shortly after was condemned to death with the other. And at this time Q.
Gallius, brother to Marius Gallius, Antonyes friend, Q* Gallius condemned.
being a Praetor in the City, did desire of Caesar the Lieutenantshippe of
Libya, which when he had obtained, he wroughte wyles against Caesar. The
other Pretors deprived him of his office, and the people and the Senate
condemned him to death. Caesar commanded him to go to his brother that was
with Antony, and when he had taken Ship to go, he was never seen after.

When Caesar had done these great things, he inclined to pacification with
Antony. When he had heard that Brutus* had twenty Legio^s, against yt which
he would have Antonyes help, he went out of the City toward the Ionian Sea,
and making small iourneys, be tarried to see what the Senate would do. Pedius
when Caesar was gone, persuaded, that before grudge should (...) council*
grow to extremity, they would agree Antony and Lepidus. And although they
perceived that this agreement was not for their sake, nor for their Country,
but only to help Caesar against Brutus and Cassius, yet did they by
necessity determine it, and revoked the sharp decrees made against Antonie and
Lepidus, and all the Souldioures under them, and to send them other more
favorable, for the which Caesar wrote his letters of congratulation unto
them, and promised to help Antonie against Decimus, if need were. The Senate
used like friendly manner reward P(...) Cae(...)
him, and gave him their hearty thanks, and Antonie wrote that he would plague
Decimus for Caesar, and Pl^n^^^, for himself, and join with Caesar. Thus they
wrote one to another.

Whilst Antonie pursued Decimus, Asinius Pollio came unto him with two
Legions, and practiced to have him pacifyed Plancus reconcyled with Antony.
with Plancus, and Plancus with three Legions agreed with Antony, in so much
as now Antony had a most myghtie power.

Decimus had ten Legions, whereof four most warlike being feebled with
hunger, were yet vexed with sickness.

Of new taken, there was six Legions, but vnexperte and fearful. Wherefore
Decimus doubting to fight, determined Decimus is driven to flee, and his army
forsakes him. Rauenna. Aquileia.
to flee to Brutus into Macedonia, and not to pass by the Mountains, but by
Rauenna and Aquileia. And because Caesar was coming that way, he took a
longer and an harder R^n^ is a flood in Italy, that runs not far from
(...).
journey to pass by Rene, and go to the wild places of barbarous people,
where the new Souldioures, oppressed with want and heat, forsook him, and
went to Caesar, and after them the four Legions of older Souldioures went to
Antony. Then to the other multitude (the French Horsemen men, being the guard
of his person only except) he gave leave (if they would) to go every man to
his own, and gave them such gold as he had, so as when he came to the Rene,
he had but Decimus forsaken.
three hundred, where, because the passage was hard, they all forsook him save
a few, which few also shortly did leave him, and with ten only, changing
his garmente like a French man, whose language he could speak, he went
forth as one of that nation, not with ha^ty iourneys, but easlie to Aquileia,
thynking with so few he might well escape: but being taken of Thieves and
bound, he asked what Prince was (...) is taken with the eues.
Lord of that part, they said Camillus. He much esteemyng the name of
Camillus, desired he might be brought to him, who Camillus.
when he saw him in appearance, spoke fair to him, and rebuked the takers,
that without regard, had so evil entreated so noble a man, but privily he
sent unto Antony, and Antony moved Barbarous (...). (...) is killed of one
Camillus, by the commandment of (...).
with the mutation, could not abide to see him, but willed Camillus to kill
him, and send him his head, which when he saw, he commanded it to be buried.

This end had Decimus, a Captain of Caesar's Horsemen, ^na by him made Ruler
of old France, and for the year to come elected Consul, and Gouernoure of
the other France, and was the second of the kyllers that next Trebonius was
punished, a year and a half after Caesar's death. And this very time
Minutius Basill^s one of Caesar's quellers also was killed Minuti^^ Basil^^
killed of his own men.
of his own servants, because he had made some of them Eunuchs for
punishmente.

()

The end of the third Book of Civil dissentions.
The fourth Book of Appiane of Alexandria, of the Civil dissentions of Rome.
THus two of Caesar's killers, being overthrown in their provinces, had their
punishment, Trebonius in Asia, and Decimus in Celtica. Now, how Cassius and
Brutus, chief of the conspiracy against Caesar were plagued, being Lords of
all the land between Syria, and Macedonia, having mighty power both by Sea
and land, with twenty armed legtons, beside Horsemen and Ships, and money at
will, this fourth Book of Civil discord shall declare. And with the same, the
inquisitions, and the searchers of them that were appointed to dye by
proscription, and the lamentable afflictions on every (...), is ^ condemnation
(...) law, to kill men wheresoever they be found.
side, such as neither among the Greek seditions or tumultes, nor among the
Romans themselves had bin done by any remembrance, saving only of Sylla,
who was the first that by Proclamation condemned his foes to dye: for Marius
did only seek to punish them whom he found: but Sylla with great rewards
and like punishments of them that did conceal, proscribed men to be (...),
as they were caughte. What Marius and Sylla did, it is showed before in that
matter, now the rest shall follow in order.

Caes^r and Antonie, of enemies, were made friends, about (...)t o(...)e.
A(...)es (...) (...)o
the City of Modene, in a little plain Island of the floude Lab^^^^, each of
them having five armed Legions, which being placed one oueragaynste another,
either of them with three hundred, came to the bridges of the River. Lepidus
being come before to search the I Will, made a token with his cloak to them both
to come. They left their companyes with their friends at the Bridges, and
came into the myddest, to a place that might be seen, and sat all three
down, Caesar in the myddest, because of his office. Two days from morning
till night they conferred, and made this determination.

^ That Caesar should gyus over his Consulshippe, and Ventidius receive it for
the rest of the year.

That a new office should be instituted by law, for redress of civil
troubles: and that Lepidus, Antonius, and Caesar, should have that authority
for five years, with the same power that Consulles have: so it was thought
best to name it, peradventure because of Antonyes decree, forbiddyng any man
to be Dictator.

That they should by and by appoynte the offices of the City from year to
year, during the five years, and divide the Provinces.

That Antony should have all France on this side the Now Narbona.
Pirenei Mountains, except that which they call old Celtica.

That Lepidus should rule that and Spain.

That Caesar should govern Lybia, Sardinia, and Sicelie, and any other Island
there.

Thus did these three divide the Roman Empire, leaving the provinces beyond
the Sea, because of Brutus and Cassius that were Gouernoures there.

That Antony and Caesar should make war upon Brutus and Cassius.

That Lepidus should he Consul for the time to come, and remain in the City
for all occasions, and govern Spain by Deputies.

That Lepidus should reteyne three Legions of his own army for the defense of
Rome.

That the other seven should be divided between Caesar and Antony, that
Caesar should have three, and Antony four, that either of them might lead
twentye Legions to the war.

That they should encourage their armies as well with rewards of victory, as
other gifts, as by the promise of eyghteene Cities of Italy, excelling in
substance, s^yle, and fair buyldings, and that both lands and houses of the
same should be divided unto them, as though they had bin taken by war.
Amongst the rest these were the chief, Cap^^, Reggi^, Ven^sia, Beneuent^,
Nuceria, Arimeno, and Vibona* Cities of Italy divided to spoil.
Thus were the fairest parts of Italy assigned to the Souldioures.

It was also agreed, that every of them should dispatche his private enemies,
that no trouble might come by them, after that they, upon these
determinations, should be gene far off, to make a long war out of their
Country. All these things were signed with their hands. Casar, as Consul did
declare them to the army* saving only their names that were appointed to dye.
When the Souldioures heard it, they were glad, and embraced together for joy.

These being done, many Monsters and terrible tokens Tokens in Rome.
were seen in Rome. Dogs yeelled like Wolves, a fearful warning. Wolves
ran about the common place, a beast, not wont to be seen at Rome. An Ox
sounded a man's voice: and a child spoke as soon as it was borne. Some of the
Images sweat. Some did sweat blood. Great voices of men, noise of harness,
and running of Horses, were heard, and nothing seen.

About the Sun, there were many vnpleasante sightes. Storms also of
stones. Continual lightnings fell upon the Temples and the pictures.

For this cause, the Senate sent for Southsayers and Prophets out of To^^an^,
the most auntiente, of the which, affirmyng that the old Kings should
return, and every man be in A rare example of a Southsayer.
bondage but himself alone, he shut his mouth, and stopped his breath till
he dyed.

These three men being thus alone by themselves, did appoynte them that should
dye. They suspected some for their power. Some they registered as their private
enemies, and some their own familiars and friends they gave to dye, to serve
each others turn, both then, and afterward. And so were men condemned one
after another, some for enemitie: some only for a little offense, as for
loving his enemies, or hatyng his friends, or for being too rich, because
they wanted much money to maynteyne the war. Brutus and Cassius receiving the
rentes and Tributes of Asia, and being also helped by the Kings and Princes
there, and for as much as they were in want, because Europe, and chiefly
Italy was wasted with wars and paymentes, they did put a grievous imposition
upon the common sort of men and women, and made the artificers and workmen
to pay them tribute, and some was proscribed for the goodness of his lands and
houses. And thus all these were condemned to dye, and to be confiscate,
whereof there Equites.
were three hundred Senators, and two thousand of them that be called
Gentlemen, among the which were the breethren and uncles of these that had
condemned them, and some that ruled armies under them, and as many as had
displeased them or other that were leaders under them. And intendyng to
condemn the multitude after this conference, at their being in Rome, they
appointed twelve of the suddayne (or as some say) seauenteene of the chiefest
to be killed, whereof Cicero was one. And by and by they sent about it, and
four were straight killed at their tables, or where they were met, the other
were sought in houses and Temples, so as there was a sudden trouble all that
night among them, with cries, running, and Misery of Rome
yelling, as in a City taken. For when it was known that men should be
apprehended, and no certenty upon whom the proscription would fall, every
man thought himself to be sought of them that made inquiry. Wherefore in
this confusion some had determined to burn their own things, and some to
set public places all on fire, intending by good reason to do some notable
feate, before they would suffer. And they had done it out of hand, had
not Pedius the Consul gone about with Proclamation, and comforted them to
tarry, till the truth were thoroughly known. When morning was come, Pedius
according to the sentence of the three men, did condemn seauenteene, as only
supposed chief authors of civil evils, and only condemned: whereof he gave
his faith publicly to the rest, not knowing what was done, and he for (...)
Consul dye^^.
the labor he took in the night, dyed. The three men, Lepidus, Antonius, and
Caesar, entered Rome, each one by himself in three several days, with the
gardes of their persons, and one Legion a piece* in order of battle.

When they were come, the City was full of Souldioures, and ensigns placed,
where was fytte, and by and by there was an assembly, in the which, Publius
T^tius Tribune of the people, Publius T^tius propounds the new rule of the
three men.
did by law confyrme the new rule, by the appoyntemente of them present, for
five years of three men, Lepidus, Antonius, and Caesar, with equal power as
Consuls (which a man might call reformers, after the Greek manner, and that
(...) was the name among the Lacedaemonians* which were rulers of Cities and
Castles. Increase of condemned me^.
name the Lacedaemonians gave to them that directed their sta^e, neither any
respite being given for the approbation, nor a special day appointed for
voices to be used. Out of hand the law took place, and that night
condemnations of thirtis, beside the seauenteene, and of one hundred more, were
set up in many places of the City, and shortly after, another hundred and
fifty, and ever some were added more in the book, to them that were first
condemned, or killed, as by ignorance, that it might be thought they were
worthy to dye. It was ordered, that all their heads should be brought to the
three men, and a reward appointed. A free man's reward was silver, a
Servants, liberty and silver, and who received a condemned Rewards.
man, or concealed, or hindered the search, should be punished with like pain,
and every man might declare against whom he would for the same reward.
The Proclamation was after this sort.

And that all men should suffer their private places to be searched. Marcus
Lepidus, Marcus Antonius, and Octauius Caesar, chosen The Proclamation of the
three men.
reformers and directoures of the Common wealth, say thus: If the
unfaithful, evil disposed men, had not been pitied when they needed, and
being so, had not become enemies of their benefactours, and after co^spired
against them, they had not slain Caesar, whom he took by war, and saved by
mercy: accounted them friends, and plentifully advanced them, with offices,
honors and gifts: nor we should have been compelled thus violently to use
them, that have with such despite, made proclamations of treason against us:
but now by their evil meanings toward us, and their worse working toward
Caesar, perceiving that by humanity, their malice is made obstinate, we have
chosen rather to prevent them than to be taken tardy of them. Let no man think
our act unjust, cruel or to sore, considering what Caesar, what we have
suffered at their hands. Caesar being chief ruler, and prince of holy things,
Conqueror and ouerthrower of nations, most terrible to the Romans, and the
first man that beyond Hercules pillars did prove the sea not sailed before, and
found land unknown to the Romans, in the midst of the sacred place,
called the Senate house, in the sight of the goods, they have en^io^sly killed
with. xxi^^. wounds, whom he took prisoners in war, and not only saved
their lives, but made some of them heirs of his living. The rest of them
through the same wicked purpose have sent these detestable offenders, in
steed of punishment, to the rule of Provinces and armies, which they abuse in
spoiling of common treasure, in gatheryng one army against us of them, and
requiring an other of the Barbarians always enemies to this state. Certain
Cities belongyng to the Romans, refusing to obey them* they have burned,
spoiled or rased: others oppressed with their terrible threatenings, they force
against their country and us. We have already punished some of them, and by
the help of God, ye shall soon see the rest have their i^ste deserte. The
greatest matters touching Spain, France, and here at home, we have at our
commandment well dispatched. Nevertheless we have an hard and sharp work
in hand, to make war against the murderers of Caesar that ^e beyond the
seas: and because we shall make this war abroad, we do not think it sure,
neither for us nor for you, to leave enemies at home, that might disturb us
in our absence, and wayfe their times as the war should have success,
neither to make any delay in this hasty expedition, but rather to rid them at
ones, they having begone the war against us, and judged us and our armies,
traitors to our Country, not regardyng neither the envy of man, nor the
reuengment of God, in destroying so many millions of their Citizens.

We are not offended against the multitude nor will take them all as enemies,
that have been so to us, nor altogether weigh riches, substance or dignities,
nor kill so many as an other chief ruler have done before us, who redressed
the City (...)
in like Civil dissentions, whom, for his lucky doings you did call Happy,
(although there must needs be more enemies to three than one) but only the
worste and most wicked sort, as well for you as for our selfs, we entende
to correct otherwise by our contentions, you all, between us, must needs be
utterly destroyed, and of necessity, our army that has been so iniuried and
despighted, as they have been proclaimed public enemies, must needs some way
be comforted at our hand.

And where as we might lay hands upon the condemned, where we would, yet
we thought it better to pronounce them, than at all adventures to oppress
them, and that for your sake, least the rage of the Soldiers might exceed
upon them that are not touched, and that their names being comprehended in a
certain number, they might leave the rest by the decree.

Then that good Fortune may come by them that be contained in this writing:
Let no man receive any manne, nor hyde, nor send away, nor be won for
money. For if any (...).
do save, help, or be found pryuye: him, will we, without all excuse and
par^^^ie, put among the condemned sort.

Of them that shall dryng the heads of such as they shall kill, before us, a
free manne shall have xxv. thousand drammes of Athens for every head, a
servant shall have, Rewards.
his liberty and ten thousand, and his Masters place in the City, and
the same shall they have that shall inform, and none of their names that
receive these rewards, shall be noted in our books, that they may not be
known.

This was the proclamation of the three men, as I could translate it out of
Latin into Greek.

Lepidus was the first that did condemn, and the first of Lepidus co^de^neth
his brother
the condemned was Paulus his brother.

The second that did condemn, was Antony: and the second Antony condemns his
^^^l^
that was condemned, was his uncle Lucius, for they first condemned these as
enemies.

The third and the fourth was of them, which in an other book, were
appointed to be Consuls in time to come. Plotius, brother to Plancus, and
Quintus, Father in law to Asinius: and these were not the rather put before
other because of their dignity only, but as much for terror and
desperation, that none should hope to be saved.

Thoranius was among the condemned men, who, as some say, Thoranius tutor to
Caesar condemned.
was Tutor to Caesar.

By and by after these co^demnations, the gates were kept, and all other
passages and ports of the City, Fennes also and Moors, and any other place
suspected to be fit to flee unto, or for them that fled, to be hydden in.

The Capitaynes of the bands were commanded to raunge the fields abroad,
and to search diligently, and all this was done at once.

Forthwith, both in the country and the City, as menn^ were taken, there
was great suddayne slaughter, and diverse kinds of murders, and cuttings off
of heads to be showed for rewards sake.

Then was there hasty fleyng, and unseemly sight of them, that before were
goodly to be seen: some leapte into puddles, some into ditches and sinckes
most unclean: some got up to the smoky rouffes and chunmes, or sat close
with deep silence under heaps of tyles: some were as much afraid of their
wives or children that bare them no good will, as they were of the killers:
some of their free made me: some, of their bondme^: some creditours, of their
debtours: some of their neighbors, coveting their grounds: what souer had bin
kept in before, the^ it burst forth: a cruel and confused mutation of
Senators, of Consuls, of Pretours, of Tribunes, of new elect to those ostices,
or of them that had borne office. It was to see them fall at a slaves feet with
tears, namyng him savior and good master: and more pitiful it was, that
when they had done all this, they could get no grace, there was all shapes of
misery: not as in sedition or sacking of a City, where men might fear
their foes and enemies, and trust their families, but here they were more
afraid of them, than of the killers: The which being void of fear,
otherwise than in tumulte and war, they sodainelye of friends were made
enemies, either for hydden hate, or for the proclaimed rewards, or for the gold
and silver in their houses: for by this occasion, every man waxed extremely
unfaithful to his master, and their reward did ouerwhelme natural dewty
toward the same, and he that was faithful and well willing, was afraid to
help, to hyde, or conceal, for the cruelty of the punishment.

The former fear of the seventeen men did amaze them again, for then non
being named, but many suddenly taken, all were afraid of the like, and
therefore sought together for defense. For upon these proscriptions, some were
by and by given in pray to every man, and some being sure of themselves and
desirous of the gain, hunted out the other, to have reward of the killers. The
rest of the common sort, some spoiled the houses of them that were killed,
which profit drew their minds from common feeling of present mischief: some
more temperate and mylde, were astonished and amazed. It seemed wonderful to
them to consider, that other ^^tt^es being ^^done by s^d^^i^^, Cont(...) to
(...)mitie.
have bin preserved again by agreement. Thi^ C^^tie^^, the^^uision of the
rulers had consumed, and their agreement brought it to desolation: some dyed
resisting the killers, some without revenge, as not knowing by whom they were
maimed. There were some that killed themselves with voluntary hunger, some
used halters, some drowned their bodies, some threw themselves down from the
house to^^^, some leapt into the fire, some offered themselves to the strykers,
some tarryed when they were called, some hid and disgrated themselves
unseemly, some resisted the evil, and thought to have boughte it out: some
beside the sentence of the three men, of ignorance or deceit, were dispatched
(as it did appear) by one that was slain and not condemned, when the head was
shown.

The condemned persons heads were brought before the seats in the common place,
that they that had brought them, might receive their goods.

On the other side, there was as much care and virtue, both, of women,
children, brethren and servants, saving and shifting for many, and dying with
them, if they could not bring to pass what they meant, and some killed that
came to kill them.

Oh them that fled, some were drowned in the Sea, Fortime being in all
against them: some beyond all hope, returned to offices in the City, to be
Capitaines in war and triumphs* Such demonstration made that season of
things to be wondered at. And these were done, not in a private City, nor in a
weak and little kingdom, but in the most mighty, and the Lady of so many
nations, both by land and sea. God God vvoulde have it so.
himself did stir it, to bring it to that good order, that now it is in.

There were such things done of Sylla, and before him, of Sylla* Marius.
Marius, the chief of the which, I have showed in their lives, and then men
lay unburied. But these doings for the worthynesse of these three men,
especially for the virtue and fortune of one of them which brought the Empire
to a sure scate, and left, a stock^ and name to them that now remain after
him, a man may worthily think to be far of more importance, which, as they were
more or less notable, and be more fresh in memory, and lately done, I will
declare, yet not al (for they be not worthy the telling* that touch the simple
death and fleeing, of them that were pardoned of the three men, which after
they returned, lived a life unknown) but the most marvelous, that may make
a man^frayd, and cause credit to that is spoken before. They be many, and
many of the Romans have in many books, written these of themselves, of the
which I will show briefly a few of the greateste in every sort, for the
relief of the same, and for the happiness of the time that now is.

The evil began at the first brunte* of them that were yet in office. And
(...) the Tribune was the first that was killed, (...). Authority of Tribunes.
whose power was sacred and sure by law, exceeding the rest, so as the
Tribunes have committed some Consuls to prison.

This was the Tribune that first forbadde that Antony should be declared an
ennimye, after the which time he stuck altogether to Cicero.

Understanding the intelligence of the three men, and their (...) the T^^b^^^
killed.
approach to the City, he made a feast to his friends, as one that should
not often so do again. The Souldioures running into the house, they arose with
fear and trouble. The Captain of the band commanded them to be quiet and
still, but Saluius, as he sat, he took by the hear, till he might dispatch
him, and upon the table cut off his head, and commanded them within to
make no business, least if any trouble were raised, they should suffer the
like, and they being astonished, remained after the Captain was gone, til
midnight, with the Tribunes Coryse.

The second that was killed, was Minutius a Praetor, setting in judgment in
the common place. (...) killed, that was a Pre^^^.


Understandyng that the Souldioures were coming, he leapte down, and
thinking where be might hide himself, he changed his garment, and ran
into a shop, sending away his servants and his shows of office.

They for reverence and pity, tarying still, against their will, made the
killers the ^^^^er to find their master* Reverence out^ of time. Annalis
killed.


Annalis an other Praetor (going about with his Son that labored to be a
treasurer, to few to them that gave voices) his friends that were with him,
and they that bare the maces of his office, understanding he was condemned,
forsook him* He fled unto a tenant of his, which had a straight and a
homely house in the Suburbs, for all purposes very fifte, and was hid safe,
till his Son, that thought he was fled thither, brought the strykers to the
house, and was rewarded of the three men with his Fathers goods, and chosen a
Chamberlayne of the City, A wicked so^ killed.
who, being after very drunk, and troubling the Soldiers, the same killed
him, that dispatched his Father.

Choranius not now a Praetor, but one that had been, and father Choranius killed
by the sure of his son.
of a young man that was (...), and might do much with Antonie, praye^ the
strykers to spare his kyllyng a while till he might ^ende his son to speak
to Antony, they laughed and said, his son had spoken, but it was to the
contrary. When the old man heard that, he desired them tp (...) til he had
seeue his daughter, whom when he ^^we, he commanded to abstain from his
goods, least her brother should^ few for her death also to Antony. But he,
having consumed all his substance in evil life, was attached of (...), (...)
himself by fleyng away.

Cicero who after Calus C^sar, did direct all like a ruler alone in Cicero
killed. Cicero cannot abide the sea sickness and retourneth. The Author goes
to see Cicero his house in the country.
a popular state, was proscribed, with his son, his brother, his (...), his
friends, familiars and ^^herents. Fleeyng by bote, ^e could not abide y^
sickness of the sea, but returned to a place of his own: which I for the
remembrance of his misfortune, did see about Capu^ a City of Italy. When
they that came to seek him were at hand (for, of all other, Antonie was most
desirous to have him* and all about Antonie, were ready to get him) the
Crows came unto his house, and made such a Cicero warned by Crovves.
noise, as they waked him out of his sleep, and drew out his garment from his
body, that lay upon him* til his servants perceiving the thing, and taking it
to be a token from God, put Cicero in a litter, and led him toward the Sea,
through a thick wood, and rode secreatly, and where as many did run on every
side, asking if they saw Cicero, some for good will and pity said, he was
gone and sailed over sea, but a shomaker tenant to Clodie, the A Shomaker ^e
vvrayeth Cicero
sharpest enemy of Cicero, told Laena the Captayn where he went with a few.
He ran, and seeing his servants to be many more than he had brought with him,
and ready to defend him, he cried very loud for a policy, make haste you
bandeleaders that be behind. Then Ciceroes servant thinking they should have
bin ouerlaide, forsook their master.

Laena, which by Ciceroes help had bin before saved, pulled his (...), o^e
saved by Cicero, kylle^^ him.
head out of the Litter, and cut it off, having three strokes, and making
three wounds for lack of cunning. He cut off also his hand, with the which
he wrote the orations against Antonie as a Tyranne, in the which, he followed
Demos^^e^es, that did The orations of Cicero called Philippica. Po^^ (...) made
to carrye. Antony the nevvs of (...) death. (...) done to (...) kyllyng of
Cicero. After that Augustus had the rule of all, and ^ounde one of his
Nephevves, with a book in his hand which was of Ciceroes making the child
was afraid to shevve it, but he vvoulde needs see it and read it, and said:
Child, this m^nne was learned, and a lo^er of his country. And not long after
he took Cicero his son to ^e his fellow in the Consulshippe, in whose
time Antonies Images were thrown down and ^ decr^^ made that never any of
his house should be called (...) So in the end, the reuengemen^ of Antonies
(...) was appointed by God, to the house of Cicero.
the like against Philippe. Some rode, some sailed to carry* Antony the news,
and Laena* as he sa^e in the common place, took the head and the hand, and
showed it a far off He was marvelous joyful, and crowned the Captain, and
gave him honor with great gifts, that is to say, two hundred and fifty
thousand (...) of Athens, because he had dispatched his greatest and busiest
enemy.

Cicero his head and his hand was set up for a time in the common place
before the Tribunal, where he was wont to make orations, and more came to see
it, than before to hear him.

They say that Antony did set Ciceroes head upon his table at his meal,
till he had his fill of the sight of that evil. Thus Cicero a man most
eloquent to this day, having borne the office of a Consul, in greatest causes
most profitable to his country, was thus destroyed, and after his death*
despighted* Cicero h^s son is sent to (...).
His son was sent into Grecia to Brutus.

Qu^^tus Cicero and his son killed*
Quintus, Ciceroes brother, and his son being taken, prayed the strikers, to
kill him before his son: but his son desired the contrary. Wherefore, the
souldioures promised both their requests, and taking them asunder, by a token
killed them both Ignatius father and the son.
at one instante. Ignatius the father and the son, fightyng together, dyed of
one wound, and when their heads were stricken off, their bodies did yet
embrace.

Balbus sent his son to the sea, that they should not be espied Balbus and
his son.
going together, and shortly after he followed aloof, and when one told him,
either of malice, or of ignorance, that his son was taken, he went back and
sent for his killers, and it chanced that his son was drowned in the Sea. Such
like calamity can fortune give.

Aruntius could hardelye persuade his son that would not Aruntius and his
son.
flee without him, to save himself, because he was but young. His mother sent
him before to the gates, and then returned to burye her husband being killed,
and when she heard shortly after, His wife.
that her son was dead on the sea, with hunger she killed hirselfe.

These be examples of good and evil children.

There were.ij. brethren condemned, called Ligari^, which being Ligari^ two
brethren.
hid, fell asleep, til one of them being found of his servants, was killed,
and the other making escape, and hearing of his brothers death, threw himself
from the bridge into the river, whom, when fyshermen had saved, as one that
fell by chance and not of purpose, he strove a great while with them, that they
should not save him, and threw himself under the water: but they being
stronger than he, bringing him up safe, he said, you have not saved me, but
put your selves in danger of death with me, that am a condemned man: yet they
having pity of him, saved him, til the soldiers that kept the bridge saw
it, and ran down to cut off his head.

Of two other brethren, one threw himself into the river, his Two brethren*
servant seeking his body five days after, which when he had found, and
knew it was he, he cut off his head for the reward: The other brother being
hid in a sakes, an other servant did bewraye him.

The Souldioures refused to go in, but with their weapons and Spears, pulled
up his body, and cut off hie head in such case as it was.

Another understanding that his brother was proscribed, and Two brethren.
not knowing that himself was so to, ran and cried, kill me before him. The
Captain knowing the truth of the condemnation, thou make a reasonable request
(quoth he) for thou wast condenmed before him, and so in order killed them both.

And these be examples of broethren.

Ligarius being hid of his wife, made one only maid A good wife has
evil luck.
privy to it, and being betrayed of her, she followed him that bare away her
husbands head, crying, I must have the like punishmente, because I have hid
him: and when none of the Souldyoures would kill her, nor accuse her, the
went to bewray her self to the princes, and because they did not regard her
for pity, she destroyed her self with hunger. And her have I thought good to
note in this place, because being willing to save her husband and could not,
she killed her self with hunger: but they that had good luck for their good
love to their husbands, I will wrighte among them that saved their* Husbands.

Other there were that wickedly did betray their husbands, and of them
one*that was married to Septimius, which was corrupted in love of a friend of
Antonyes, who being desirous, An evil wife.
of his harlot, to be made his wife, caused him to speak to Antony to have
her, and forthwith was Septimius condemned, which thing he learning of his
wife, and ignorant of his evil at home, fled to her, and she soeming to be
careful to keep him, shut the doors, and hid him till the strikers came,
and in one day he was killed, and she married.

Salassus fled, and being without hope, in the night refurned Salassus.
to the City, to abydetyll the sharpness of the time might cease. He came
to his house that was sold, and enely his housekeeper, (who was sold with the
house) knew him, who brought him to his lodge, and promised to keep him, and
hid him to his power. He had him call his wife from the other part of the
house, she aunswering, she durst not come, fearing her maid might suspect
some what by night, said, she would be with him in the morning. When day was
come, she called y^ strikers. The Porter ran to the house to call his
mistress, because he thought she tarried too long.

Salassus being afraid of his Porters long absence, was in Ruill wife.
doubt of deceyte, and went up to the top of the house, from the which,
when he saw, not his Porter, but his wife hrynging the strikers, he cast
himself to the ground.

Fuluius fled to a woman servant, whom first he kept, Fuluius betrayed.
after made her free, and gave a dowry to marr^^ her: she having (...) these
benefytes, for iclousic of another woman whom he had married, betrayed him.

These examples may be for evil wives.

Statius the Samnite, that in the fellows war had done many Statius.
things for the Samnite, and for the excellency of his feats, blood, Part of
the Kingdom of Naples called Abruzzo.
and riches, being chosen into the Roman Senafe, and now four score years
of age, was condemned for his riches: he opened his house to the people, and
suffered his servants to take what they would, and something he threw out,
till it was void, then he set it on fire, and shut it, and burned in it, and
the fire did consume many other places, of the City.

^ (...) for the most part keeping his doors open, killed al them Capits.
that forced to come in, one after another, at length oppressed with the
multitude, he alone, having killed many, dyed.

Vitulinus gathered a great number of men about Reggio, of Pitulinus: Reggio
in the end of Italy, next Sicelie.
such as were condemned, and other fled with them, and from the eyghteene
Cities that were give in pray to the Souldioures, which were grievously
offended. Vitulinus having these killed y^ ordinary bands that were sent to
seek them, till a greater army was sent, and then he gave not over, but went
into Sicelie to Pompey, who held that Island, and received such as fled unto
him, where he did serve very valiantly, til after many fightes he was (...):
yet having sent his son, and all the condemned men Messina, the chief port
Town of Sicelie, next Italy.
with him to* Messina: when he saw the ships to be arrived, he fell on his
enemies, and was cut in pieces.

Naso, being betrayed of a servant, whom he loved and had Niso.
made free; took a swarde from one of the souldioures, and only killing the
traitor, offered himself to the strikers. A seruante that loved his Master,
kept him safe in an hill, and went to the sea, to hyre him a boat. After his
return, perceiving his Master, to be killed, he cried albude unto him,
having yet a little life, stay a white, O Master (quoth he) and sodamlye
stroke the Captain and killed him: then coming again to his Master, killed
himself, saying: O Master thou haste received comfort*

Lucius gave his gold to two of his most faithful servants Lucius.
whom he had made free, and went to the se^, where they ^^^ting from him, he
returned, and not caring for his lyse, offered himself to the quellers.

Labtenu; who in Syllas time had taken and killed many that Labienus.
were then proscribed, might well be repro^ed, if he had not suffered the like
valiantly He went out of his house, ^^t^^ and in his thaire, and tarrsed for
the killers.

Castius in the Country was hid of his good se^ (...), Castius.
the Soldiers ever running about in (...) (...)* menne^ heads: he could not
abide the conti(...) of the fears, but badde his servants make a fire* and if
any ma^^e did ask* them, say Cestius was killed and there buried. When they
had made the fire reapye, he leapte into (...)

Apponius hiding hymseisr surely, could abide the evil Aponius.
diet, but offered himself to the sword.

Another willinglye offered himself openly, and because the strikers tarryed,
he shoaked himself in the midst of them.

Lucius father in law to As^^^^^, then Consul, fled unto Lucius.
the Sea, the tediousness whereof not able to abide, he leapts into the water.

Sisinius fleeing away, and crying that he was not condemned, Sisinius.
but followed of them, to be betrayed for his money, they brought him to the
book, and badde him read hye own name, which when they had done, they
dispatched him.

Aemilius not knowing he was condemned, seeing the^ follow one Aemilius.
another, asked y^ Captain who was condemned: the Captain lookyng him in the
face, said, Thou and he, and so killed them both.

Cilo and Decius coming out of the Senate house, and knowing Cillo and Decius.
they were condemned, and their names in the book, no man following them, they
fled unseemly to the gates, and their runnyng, be wrayed themselves to the
Captains. Icelus that Icelius.
favored Brutus and Cassius, and Octauius Caesar, being present with his army
at the assembly, and other giuyng voice secretly to their condemnation, only
he openly gave to the absolution, and hid himself with great mind and trust
of liberty, and when he saw a dead body carried forth, he went among them
that bare the bear. The warders at the gate perceiving there were more men than
were wont to bear a corpse, having no regard of the bearers, searched the
bear, thinking there had been no dead man in it: wherefore the bearers being
angry with ^cilius; because he was none of their company, the strikers knew him
and killed him.

Varus being betrayde of his free made man, fled, and went Varus.
from hill to hill till he came to the senne of Minturno, in the Minturno
where Marius was hid.
which he took his rest. The Minturnians searching y^ fenne for a these, the
tops of the reeds wavering bewrayed Varus, who being taken, he confessed he
was a felon, upon the which he was condemned and led away, and when he
should have been racked with the other offenders, abborring that vile manner, he
said:

You of Minturno, I warn you, neither to rack me nor kill me, having been a
Consul of Rome, and condemned now of the Prmces, which is more to my honor:
for if I can not slay, it shall be better for me to suffer with mine equals.
They not believing him, and distrustyng his tale, the Captain came, and cut of
his head, leaving his body with them.

Certain that took Largus in the country, not seeking him Largus.
but an other, having pity to kill him whom they fought not, gave him leave to
flee into the woodde, and he being followed of other, ran back again to the
first, to whom he said: kill you me, who may have the reward, deseruyng it
for having pity of me. So dying, he requited them with like humanity.

R^sus having a very fair house nighe to Fuluia Antonies R^sus. An house.
wife, which she would once have bought* and he then denied her, now offryng
it in gift, was yet condemned, whose head when it was brought to Antonie, he
said it appertayn^d not to him, but sent it to his wife: she commanded it to
be hanged up at the house, in steed of the common place.

An other had a fair shadowed Vineyarde, and a goodly A Vineyarde.
cave in it, deep and large, for the which peradventure he was condemned. It
was his chance to refreshe himself in the Cave. When the quellers came yet a
far of, his servant put him in the secret place of the den, and put on his
masters garment, fayning to be he, and in fear, and had like enough to have
been killed, if one of his fellows had not bewrayed his craft. The Master
being killed, the people took it grievously A good servant revvarded, and in
evil punished.
before the Princes, and ceased not till the bewrayer was hanged, and he that
would have saved his Master, made free.

Arterius being hid, his servant betrayed, and being made Arterius.
free, had all the substance from his masters children, and used them with
despite. They with silence followed him in every place weeying. The people
detestyng this injury, caused An evil servant well served.
that the three men made him that was now so rich, to be bond again to the
children of the condemned father.

And thus much touching men.

The poor Orphans also had diverse fortune at this time: Orphans.
of the which, one going to his schoolmaster, was killed, with his leader
that embraced the child and would not let him go.

Atilius, having on now his robe of perfect years, wents Atilius.
(as the manner was) with a company of his friends to the temples to sacrifice:
Suddenly, being known to be condemned, his friends and his servants forsook
him. He being alone, and left, of all the company, went to his mother, who
durst not receive him for fear: and he not entending to prove any other after
his mother, fled into an hill, where being driven with hunger to go into the
plain, met with a thief, that used to rob in the ways, and of him by
force was made to follow that work: The A clu^de bevvrayeth himself.
child brought up in dayntinosse, and not able to abide that pain, ran into
the high way in his purple robe to the Soldiers, to bewray himself, of whom
he was killed.

After these were done, Lepidus triumphed of Iberia, and propounded The triumph
of Iepidus. Iberia, Spain. Decree of Lepidus at his triumph.
a decree after this manner:

For good fortune be it imputed to all men and women, that this present day do
make holy and feastfull: He that shall not seem so to do, be he among the
condemned men.

He made his triumph to the Temples, all sorts following him with pleasant
show and grieved mind.

The goods of the attaynted men were set to sale to their Goods set to sale.
neighbors, but there were few that would buy any of them. Some were ashamed
to increase their evil fortune, and thought it would not always so continue,
nor sure for them to let their gold and silver be seen, nor their
possessions, now without danger, by having more to put all in peril. Only
some of a boldness came forth, and because they only bought, they had it for
little: but where the three men hoped this would have suffised, and had yet
need of much more, they declared it openly, Women of Rome condemned.
and condemned a thousand.iiij. C. women, which were thought most rich, and
these must needs be punished to bear the charge of their war, every one as
much as should please the three men. A pain was appointed to them that hid
any thing, or did under value themselves: and to the declarers of the same, a
reward propounded, both for free and bond. The women sought to sue to the
Princes by such women as were in most estimation with them. Of Caesar's sister,
nor of Antonies mother, they were not reject. But Fuluia, Antonies wife, shut
her doors upon Fuluia rejects the vvome^ that sued to her. She was Antonies
wise and cause of much seryse, and with so^ovv ended her life. Oration of
Hortensia.
them, which despite taking grievously, they came into the common place, and
aproching to the seat of the Princes, the people and the Soldiers standing
about them, Hortensia being appointed, spoke thus: As it was seemly for us
silly women, we have sued to your wives, and having suffered of Fuluia, that
was unseemly, we be come from hi^ into the common place. You have taken from us
our Fathers, our Husbands, our Brethren and children, pretending that they
have done you injury, and after you have spoiled them of all together, you do
oppress us, to the rebuke and disgrace of the kind and condition of women's
nature. If we have done you miurie, as you say our husbands have done, then
proscribe us as you did the^. But if we women, have made none of you enemy,
nor taken none of your houses, nor corrupted none of your armies, nor led
against you any other, nor let you to take what office and honor you would,
why be we partakers of the punishment, that were no workers of the injury? why
are we enforced, that have not dealt at all, neither with office, honor,
army, nor common wealth, which by you, is now brought to such calamity? If
you say, because of the war: when had we no war? or when did women cause
the war, whom, nature among al men has released from the same? Our Mothers
once The Matrone^ of Rome did give their levvels to help the City.
beyond their nature, did further it, when the City and the whole state was
in extreme danger by the violence of them of Ca^^^age. And then willingly
they did contribute, not of their land, their houses, their dowries or
possessions, without the which the free can not live, but only of their Jewels
and Ornaments, not for any punishment, neither by information nor accusation,
nor of force nor violence, but what they themselves would. What fear have any
of you now, either of your rule, of your country. If the war of the French,
or of the Parthians, be at hand, you shall find us no worse, than our
Mothers, for ^^ the safety of our country. As for Civil war, neither have we
moved, neither have conferred with you, one against an other. We have not
dealt, neither with Caesar nor Pompey: Marius nor Cinna did never compel us,
no not Sylla that was a tyranne to his country. You say you will reform the
common wealth.

When Hortensia had said thus much, the three men were grieved, that women
(men being silent) should be so bold to make open Orations, and examine the
doings of Princes, and that they should not give their money, because men went
to war. Wherefore they commanded the Sergeantes to put (...) pri^^ silence.
them from the bar, till a great noise being made without of the people, the
Sergeants ceased: and the Princes said, they would defer the matter till
the morning.

The next day they condemned four hundred women, in stead of a thousand four
hundred, in the valuation of their goods. A Mi^^o^is here tenn^ thousand. The
Ita^^^ and P. Can^^^^ text, ^^ not true keep. A decree ^onching men.
Then it was decreed, that every man that had more than ten Milions, as well
Citizen, stranger, freemade man, religious, as all sorts, sparing none, and
that with the like fear of punishment, and the like penalties, they should
give the fiftith part of their goods, as an interest to them, and pay a
yearly tribute for the war. And as these by commandment were put upon the
Romans, so the army with contempt did worse: for where the Princes in these
doings had their only trust in them, they craved of them house, land,
possession, and whole substance of the confiscated persons. Some required to be
adopted children to those Rage of Souldioures.
men. Some devised other shifts: for they killed them that were not condemned,
and challenged their houses that were not accused: in so much, as the Princes
commanded one of the Co^suls to make correction of things done, otherwise than
was commanded. But he being afraid to touch the Souldioures, least he should
provoke them against him, put to death a few Servants, that went abroad in
Souldioures manner. And these were the chief (to the end) of the calamities
of the condemned men. Now, what (contrary to all hope,) happened to some, to
their safety of the suddayne, and to honor at length, it shall delighte Hope
not to be given over.
me to wright, and be a pleasure for other to hear, that for no adversity
they should give over hope.

They that could escape, fled to Brutus and Cassius, and to Cornisicius
Brutus. Cassius. Cornisicius.
in Libya, who took the peoples part.

Many went into Sicelie, an I Will nigh Italy, where Pompey received Pompey.
Nobleness o^ young Pompey.
them very gladly, for he showed most notable care for the afflicted sort,
sending cryers abroad to call all sorts to him, and to them that could save
any, whyther they were free or bond, he propounded rewards double, so much as
the killers had. Boats and Ships of burden did meet them that sailed, and
Galleys being full at every shore, showed tokens to them that went amiss, and
saved all that they met. He receiving them that came, gave them raymente and
living forthwyth. The worthy sort he used in his army or his navy: and when
the three men and he should make a truce, he would never grant to it, till
they that were come to him, should be comprised in it. So was he most
profitable to his afflicted Country, and wanne great glory to himself, not
inferioure to that he had of his father. Others, being otherwise ^^edde or
hydden till the truce, some in fields, some in graves, and some in the City,
lived with sharp pains. There were loves incredible showed of Women to their
Husbands due, and of children toward their fathers, and of Servants,
against nature, to their masters: the which as they be most notable, I will
declare.

Paulus, brother to Lepidus, (the Captains having reverence (...).
unto him, as a brother of a Prince) with their leave sailed to (...) a city
in (...) of (...) and (...).
Brutus, and after to Mi^eto, at the which place, peace not yet being made,
he obtained return, and was called home, but would not.

Lucius, Uncle t^ Antonie, Antonyes mother kept him not ^^Lucius^^.
hid, being her brother, the Captains for the most part honoring her as
the mother of a chief ruler, but after, they using violence, she came forth
into the common place, and A good sister.
to Antony that sa^e with the other Princes, she said:

I confess (O Prince) that I have received Lucius, that I have him yet, and
will keep him, till thou kill us both together, for the like pain is
appointed to the receyuers.

He reproved her, as a good sister, but as an unkind mother, Antonies words
to his mother.
for that she ought not to save Lucius, but should have stopped him, when he
judged her Son an enemy, nevertheless, he caused Plancus the Consul, to
decree his reuocation.

Messal^ a noble young man, fled to Brutus. The three men fearing Mess^la.
his wisdom, wrote thus*

Since the friends of Messala does affirm unto us, that he A letter of the
three men.
was not a medler when Caius Caesar was killed, we put him out of the
proscribed number. But he did not accept the pardon, but when Brutus and
Cassius were killed about Thrace, the army which remained great, having
Ships, money, and good hope, would have had Massala to be their Captain,
Massala.
who refused it, and persuaded them to give place to adverse fortune, and to
join with Antony. Wherefore he was in great credit with Antonie, and agreed
with him, till he reproved him for his wanton dealing with Cleopa^ra, and then
he went to Caesar, who made him Consul in Antonyes place, when he was again
declared an enemy, after he did fight against Antonie in the battle by
Sea at Acti^, a for^^ad of Ep^ru^.
Acti^.

Caesar sent him against the French that revolted, and Caesar sent.
granted him to triumph for the victory.

Bibulus also was accepted to Antony, with Messalae, and was Bibul^^.
an Admiral for Antony, and went against Caesar when they warred together,
and being Presidente of Syria under Antony, there he dyed.

Acilius fled from the City secretly, and being betrayed Acilius and his
good wife.
of his Servant to the Souldyoures, he persuaded them in hope of much
money, to send some of them to his wife, with a token which he took them.
She brought unto them all her store, saying, she did deliver all unto them, as
though they would perform their promise: but yet she knew not whether they
would or no, but she was not deceived of this good liking, for they hired a
ship for Acilius, and sent him into Siceli^.

Lentulus, being desired of his wife to flee with him, and Lentulus and his
good wife.
diligently attendyng on him, he, for that he would not put her to the
danger, fled secretly into Sicelie, where ^eeyng made a Lieutenaunte of
Pompey, he sent her word how he was ^scaped, and in office She hearing
where her Husband was, secretly left her mother, who had good eye upon her,
and with two Servants with great pain and want, she as a slave went, till
she came to Messina from Reggi^ about night, and easily learning where the
Lieutenantes Tente was, she found Lentulus, not as a Lieutenant, but with a
poor b^dde laid upon the ground, and simple diet, for desire of her.

Apuleius wife threatened she would bewray him, if he fled (...) his good
vvi^e.
alone, wherefore against his will he took her with him, and it was his hap
in that fleeing, not to be suspect, going openly with his wife, his men, and
his maids.

Antius his wife, wrapped her husband in a covering, and by (...) and his good
wife.
that mean sent him with the Carriers to the Sea, from whence he fled into
Sicelie.

Reginus wife, put her husband in the night into a filthy sincke, Reginus and
his good wife.
into the which the Souldioures would not go in the day, for the sauoure.

The next night she cladde him like a Colyer, and gave him an Ass to carry his
coals, and she followed a little after in a litter: which when the warders saw,
suspecting some man to be in the litter, searched it: whereof Reginus being
afraid, ^anne back, and as a stranger, prayed a souldioure to be good to the
women. He angerly answering him as a Colier, knew him notwithstanding, (for he
had served under him once in Syria,) and said, go boldly (O Captain) for
so it becomes me yet to call thee.

Scoponius wife obtained him of Antony, and being till that (...).
time of good fame, did now heal one evil fortune with another.

Geta his son made a fire in the open part of his house, to Geta a good
son.
bury his father that seemed to be dead, whom he had hid in a house in the
Country new made, where the old man disguising himself, laid a parchment
before his eyes, and after the agreement was made, he took away the parchment,
but found Eye lost for lack of use.
his eye out for lack of use:

Oppius son, minding to tarry with his old feeble father, bare Oppius a
good son.
him on his back, till he was past the gates, and the rest of the way, partly
leading him, and partly bearing him, he brought him safe to Cicelie, no man
suspecting, or troubling the manner of it: As they wright that Aeneas was
reverenced of his enemies, Aeneas. Anchises.
when he bare his Father Anchises. The people of Rome commendyng the young
manne, caused that afterward he was made Chamberlayne of the City. And
because he could not bear the charges of his office, for that his goods
were confiscate, the artificers freely gave him to supply the Kindness of
Commons.
same. And the people that beheld his shows, did every man cast so much
money into the game place, as they made him rich.

Arianus caused to be graven on his Sepulcher by his Testament Arianus his good
Son. An Epitaph.
thus: Him, that lies here, his son (that was not proscribed) did hide,
being condemned, and ^^eyng with him, saved his life.

Metellus the Father and the Son, the Father was a Captain Metellus father
and son.
under Antonie at Actio* where he was taken prisoner, and unknown: his Son
served Caesar, and was a Captain at the same field. When Caesar did give
sentence upon the captives at Samo, the young man was present: The old manne
Samo an I^e over against A^ho. A good Son.
being brought forth all forlorn with long hear, misery and want, and all
transformed by the same, when in order of the captives, he was called of the
crier, his Son lepte from his seat, and embraced his Father, (whom he
scarsly knew) with tears, and when he had ceased from sorrow, he said to
Caesar: This has been thine enemy O Caesar, and I thy friend, him thou must
punish, and me reward: I desire thee to save my Father for me, or let me
die for him. Every man taking pity, Caesar commanded Metellus to be saved,
though he were his very enemy, and before despysing many gifts, to be drawn
from Antonie.

The servants of Marcius with good love and Fortune, Marcius and his good
servant.
all the time of the proscription, did keep him within his house, till fear
set aside, Marcius came out of his house, as from banishment.

Hirtius with his men fleeyng the City, went about Hirtius
Italy, delivered prisoners, and gathered them together that fled, and took
towns, a few at the first, after more in number, till he had a sufficient
army, and overcame a part of the Brut^^ns, from whence sendyng his army, he
sailed with them al (...).
to Pompey.

Restio, that thought he fled alone, a Servant followed Restio and a good
servant.
him secretelye, being brought up of him, and aforetyme well used, but
after, for evil conditions, branded.

When Restio rested in a Fenne, and did see this Servant so nighe him, he was
afraid: to whom the Servant said, that he did not so much remember his
present brandes, as he did his former benefits: and so caused him so repose
in a cave, and provided meat for him, as well as he coulde^ and after that
the Cane was suspected, and Souldyours drew nighe to Restio where he was, the
Servant perceyuyng the matter, followed and killed an old man that passed
by, and cut off his head: the Soldiers being angrye, and coming about to
take the killer, he said, I have killed my Master Restio, that gave me
these brandes. They took the head, to have the reward, and carried it in
vain into the City. The Servant comforted bye Master and sailed with him
into Sicelie.

Appion restyng in a stable, the Soldiers sought him: his Appion and a good
servant.
servant put on his garment, and lay upon his bed and willingly received
death for his Master, he sittyng by him in the form of a servant.

Memmius house was sought of the Soldiers, one of whose Servants went
into a litter, his fellows bearyng (...) and a good servant.
him as he had been their Master, and being taken, he was content to die
for his Master, who fled into Sicelie.

Iunius had a free made manne, Philemon, who had a (...) and a good
servant.
fair house, where he kept his Master in a vaughte, in which they are
woonte to lay Harness, Money, or Wrytinges, and fed him in the night, till
the Peace was made.

An other free made man, keepyng the Sepulcher of his Master, did also preserve
his Masters Son in the same grave, together with his Father.

Lucretius wanderyng with two faithful servants, for Lucretius.
lack of meat, returned to his wife, being borne in a litter of his
servants, into the City, as a sick man: when it happened that one of the
servant had broken his leg, he went on with the other, till he came to
the gates, where his Father before being proscrybed of Sylla, was taken. The
Soldiers coming about him, he was much afraid for the luck of the
place, wherefore he fled with a servant, and was hid of him in a grave,
and chaunsing that robbers of Sepulchers did search graves, the servant
offered himself to be spoiled of the robbers, whiles the master fled to
the gates, and tarried till his servant came to him, whose garments he put
on, and went to his wife, under whose care being kept, he was hid between
two beams, till he was pardoned, by means made for him of some, to the
three men. And after peace was made, he had the office of a Consul.

Sergius was hid of Antonie himself, till he had Sergius.
persuaded Plancus the Consul to proclayme his reuocation again. In the
dissension of Caesar and Antonie, when Antonie was declared enimye of the
Senate, he only openly gave voice for his acquitall.

And thus these were saved.

Pomponius decked himself like a Praetor, and his servants, Pomponius.
like the Sergeaunts, and so went thorough the Cities with his maces and
Officers round about him, that he should not be known: and at the gates
he took publyque coaches, and went thorough Italy, every manne receyuyng
him, and sendyng to him as a Praetor appointed of the three men, to make truce
with Pompey, to whom also he came in a public Galley.

Apuleius and Aruntius counterfaiting themselves to be Capitaynes, Apuleius.
Aruntius.
and their servants Soldiers, ran to the gates as Capitaynes, and pursued
others, and by the way, they delivered prisoners, and received such as came to
them: so as either of them had a sufficient band, with Ensigns and armor,
and she^^e of an army. And chancing that by diverse ways they went toward the
Sea, they both camped in one hill, with great fear lookyng one to another.

In the morning, not having clear sight, and thinkyng that either of them had
been sent to destroy the other, they fought it out very fiercely, till they
knew the truth. Then repenting that deed, they threw away their weapons, and
wayled that fortune should be so contrary to them, and took ship, the one
saylyng to Brutus, the other to Pompey. And he went on with Pompey: and the
other, under Brutus was president of Bythinia, and when Brutus was dead,
delivered it to Antonie, and was saved.

A servant of Ventidius, when he was first condemned, put Ventidius good
servants.
him in fetters, as though he would have delivered him to the killers: in the
night he persuaded his fellows, and cladde them like Soldiers, and his
master like a Captain, and went out like a band appointed, and brought his
master out of the City, passing through Italy into Sicelie, many times
meeting other Capitaynes that sought Ventidius.

Another hid his master in a Sepulcher, and when he could not abide the
fearfulness of fancy in the Sepulcher, he hid him in an homely house,
nyghe the which a Soldier dwelling, he could not abide that fear neither:
Wherefore turnyng from fear to extreme boldness, he shaued his head, and
played the schoolemayster in Rome till the truce.

Volutius being Aedile, was condemned. He having friendship Volutius. The
priests of Isis were clad with a garment that had a dogs head. Caleni. in
Campania. Sittius.
with a Priest of Isis, borrowed a stole and a vesture down to the foot, and
put on a dogs head, and in that manner of furious service, passed safe to
Pompey.

The Calenians did keep Sittius the Citizen, that had liberally spent of his
substance upon them, and with weapons warded him, rebuking his servants, and
keeping the soldiers from the walls, till the furye being paste, they sent
to the three men for him, and obtained that Sittius excluded from the rest of
Italy, should remain A banished man in his country.
in his country. So Sittius is the first and only man, that as a stranger,
was an outlawe in his own country.

Varr^ a Philosopher, and a writer of Histories, having done Varr^.
good service in the wars, and in place of a Lieutenaunt, and therefore
peradventure as an ennimie to the Monarchy, was condemned. His friends being
desirous to receive him, and It is said, that Antony pardoned Varro with
these words, Viuat Varro vndoctissimus.
contending for him, Calenus obtay ned him, and kept him at his Vineyarde,
whither Antony came sometime to walk, and yet never a one within, did bewraye
Varro, neither of his own servant, or of Calenus.

Virginius an eloquentman, taught his servants, that if Virginius.
they killed him for a little money, and that with danger, they should get
hate, and at length be in great fear: but if they saved him, they should win
sure glory, good hope, and hereafter money much more abundant and certain.
Wherefore they fled with him, as with their fellow servant, and in the way
being known, they fought with the soldiers: and he being taken of them,
told them also, that they would not kill him for any malice, but for only
hope of money, which they should have more iustlye and plentifullye, if they
would go with him to the sea, where (quoth he) my wife has a ship with
money. They being persuaded, brought him to the sea: his wife, as she was
appointed, came to the sea, and because her husband tarryed, thinking he had
bin gone to Pompey, she went her way, leaving a servant on shore to she whim
so. When Virginius was come, the servant ran unto him, and showed him where
his ship sailed, what his Maistresse said of the money, and that he was left
behind to tell him. The soldiers perceiving al to be true, Virginius desired
them to stay, til he might call his wife back, or go with him to her for
their money. They took a boat, and with great labor rowed him into Sicelie,
where receiving their promise, they would not go from him, but tarryed with
him till the end.

A certain Marrinet received Rebulus into a ship, to go Rebulus.
into Sicelie, and required his money, which if he had not, he would accuse him,
that he did, as Themistocles did, when he fled, that Themistocles.
is, threatened he would accuse him, for receiving him for money: wherefore, the
Mariner was afraid, and brought him unto Pompey.

Murcus being a Lieutenante under Brutus, was condemned, Marcus.
and when Brutus was overcome, he was taken, and made himself as a servant,
whom Barbula bought, and perceiving him Barbuli^.
to be apt, made him chief of his fellows, and gave him money to bestow:
and when he saw him still more wise and diligent than the common nature of
servants, he put him in hope, that if he were one of the proscribed men, he
would save him, if he would confess it. He denying it earnestly, and
declaring his stock, his name, and former masters, he carried him to Rome,
thinking, if he had been a condemned man, he would have refused to go. But he
followed cheerfully, and being at the gates of the Consuls house, a friend of
Barbulas that saw Murcus in ^eruile manner waiting upon him, did secretly tell
him in his ear. He (by Agrippa) obtained of Caesar, that Murcus was pardoned,
and remained friend to Caesar. Not long after, it happened that he was a
Captain in the war against Antonie, at Actio, and Barbula was a Captain
of Antonies, where fortune came Barbula.
about to both alike. For, when Antonie was overthrown, he was taken, and
counterfeyted to be a servant, whom Murcus bought as ignorant. But showing all
to Caesar, he obtained his Equal fortune.
pardon, and so requited his former benefit. To these fortune was like on both
sides, and so continued: for they were officers together in one dignity at
Rome.

Balbinus fleeing, and retourning with Pompey, and being made Balbinus. Lepidus
deposed. (...).
Consul, it happened that Lepidus of so great a Prince being made a private man
by Caesar, came to this necessity, y^ when Maecenas did accuse Lepidus his
son of conspiracy against Caesar, and also accused the mother, as consenting
to her son, and Lepidus himself, as a weak man, he despised: the son he
sent to Caesar, to Actio: for the mother, because she was a woman, and not to
be ^aryed, he required surety to be put before the Consul. But when no man
would be her surety, Lepidus waited many times at Balbinus doors, and coming
where he sat in Judgment, and being often repulsed of the officers, at length
(with much ado) he spoke thus:

The accusers do confess mine innocence, affirming, that Lepidus suit for his
wife.
I am neither consenting to my wife nor my son. I did not proscribe thee,
when I was one of the Proscribers. Have respect unto the chances of the
world: and to me, that attend upon thee, give this grace, that either my wife
may go to Caesar upon my surety, or I be bound to go with her.

Whiles Lepidus spoke this, Balbinus considering the mutation, Cicero the son.
delivered the wife of her bond.

Young Cicero was sent of his father into Grecia, foreseing what would come.
From Greece he went to Brutus, and after Brutus death, to Pompey, and with both
was honored with the place of a Lieutenaunt. And after them, Caesar, to clear
himself of Ciceros injury, The Bishops of old Rome were Magistrates and
Judges of religion.
made him straight the Bishop, and not long after, Consul, and President of
Syria. And when Caesar overcame Antony at Actio, he was yet Consul, and Caesar
wrote to him of it, which Letters he readde to the people of Rome, and sat in
that seat of Justice, where his fathers head was put.

Appius divided his substance among his servants, and sailed Appius.
with them into Sicelie. They watching for his money, a storm rising, put him
into a boat, that they might sail with the more safety: but it chanced,
that he in the boat was saved beyond all hope, and they drowned with their
ship.

Publius, a treasurer of Brutus, and of the family of Anteny, Publius.
was requested to forsake Brutus, which because he would not do, he was
proscribed: yet he returned, and was a friend to Caesar, and when Caesar came
to him, he would show him Brutus picture, for the which he was praised of
Caesar.

These things, beyond hope, happening to the proscribed men, both in danger
and safety, many more being omitted, I thought chief to be declared.

When matters had thus passed in Rome, all the places about, for these
troubles, were full of enemies, and great wars fell out: In Libya of
Cornificius against Sextius: in Syria of Cassius against Dolobella: in Sicilia
of Pompey, where great affliction was among the Cities for this captivity. I
will ouerpasse the less: the greatest, that appeared more worthy than the
rest, in Loadicea, Tharsus, Rhodes, Patareans, and Xantheans, and every of
them, which from the beginning in order I have gathered to write, were these.
The Romans call that part yet old Libya, which they wanne of the
Carthaginenses: that, which King Iuba held, and Old Libya.
was after gotten by Caesar, they call New Libya, and may be of Numidia.

Sextius being president of New Libya under Caesar, commanded Nevve Libya.
Sextius. Cornificius.
Cornificius to give place in the old, as though all Libya was Caesar's by lot.

When the three men made their division, he said, he knew no such division
made of the three men among themselves, nor would deliver the Province, which
he had received of the Senate, but only to them again. And for this cause
they made war one against another.

Cornificius had an army well appointed and great in number: Sextius had
light harnessed, and fewer, by the which coming abroad, he caused men to
reuolte from Cornificius, and gave repulse to Ventidius, a Captain of
Cornificius, coming upon him lustily, and besieged him.

Laelius an other Captain of Cornificius, went abroad, and wan Cirta and other
places from Sextius, and they al sent to Arabion Cirta a City of Numidia,
where ^ugurth killed Adherbal. Arabion. Sittius.
the king, and to them that were called Sittians, to take part with them in the
war, which were so called for this cause. Sittius in Rome, not abiding
sentence in his own quarrel, fled, and gathering an army, came from Italy and
Spain, into Libya, and took a part among the Libyan Kings that warred
together, and with whom he joined and got the victory, he was called a
Sittian, because his army did very valiantly. Sittians.


When Caius Caesar did persecute Pompeys friends, he did fight for him in
Libya, and ouerthrewe Sabura, Iubas Lieutenant, a famous man: For which cause
Sittius was rewarded of Caesar, Manassa. Manasses.
with king Manasses land, not al, but the best part of it. Manasses was this
Arabions father, and confederate with Iuba. His land Caesar gave to Sittius
and to Bocchus king of the Marusians, one part whereof Sittius divided for the
people under him.

Arabion fled into Iberia to Pompeis children, and when Caius Caesar was
killed, he returned again to Libya, and ever sending some of his Libyans to
the younger Pompey into Iberia, and receiving expert soldiers from thence, he
took his land from Bocchus, and dispatched Sittius by craft: and being still
friend to the Pompeyans, and perceiving their fortune to be full of infelicitie
without hope, he agreede with Sittius, and soon by him was reconciled to
Caesar. The Sittians also for his fathers benevolence with Caesar, joined with
him.

Sestius being now emboldned, came from the siege to the fight, where
Ventidius was slain, and the army fled without a guide, whom he chased and
killed, and took many of them.

Laelius hearing of this, levied the siege at Cirta, and went to Cornificius.

Sestius being hauty with this feat, went to Cornificius at Vtica, and encamped
against him, having much people. And Cornificius sending Laelius with horsemen
to take a view, Sestius sent Arabion with his horse against Laelius, at the
face: and he with horse better appointed, came upon him on the side, and
disordred him, so that Laelius, though not inferior, yet fearing his retire
should have been shut, took an hill that was between both, where Arabion,
as he was directed, killed many, and compassed the rest.

Cornificius seeing this, came forth with his whole power, to help Laelius.
Sestius set upon him on the back, with sudden charge, whom Cornificius
endeavored to repel with great travail. Arabion in the mean time creeping
with his me^ through the stony places, came secretly over mountains upon
Cornificius camp.

Roscius, that was keeper of the camp, being distressed, offered Roscius
killed.
his throat to be cut of a Page.

Cornificius weary of the fight, went to Laelius to the mountain, Cornificius
killed
not knowing what was done at his Camp, when Arabion* horsemen came upon him,
and killed him. Laelius seeing al Ielius kylleth kyniselfe.
this upon the hill, killed himself. When the Captains were dead, the armies
fled severally, and such of the proscribed men as were with Cornificius, some
fled into Sicelie, and some whither they could. Sestius rewarded Arabion and
the Sit^ians with goodly gifts, and the Cities he pardoned, to obey Caesar.

This was the end of the war in Libya, betwixt Cornificius and Laelius,
very short, if a man consider the feats done with so great speed.

With Brutus and Cassius, in comparison to these, little was Brutus and Cassius.
done, and that was this: when Caius Caesar was killed, the murderers took the
Capitol, and when obi^uion of al things was decreed, they came down.

The people at the funeral of Caesar, being moved with pity, ran about to
seek the quellers, and they driving them back from the tops of the houses,
went to the provinces that Caesar had appointed. Cassius and Brutus being yet
Pretors in the City, were assigned also of Caesar to provinces, Cassius to
Siria, and Brutus to Macedonia. And because they could not go to their
provinces before their time, nor abide the hate of the City, Brutus and
Cassius.
they went away, being yet in office: and the Senate, in consideration of
them, appointed them Purueioures for provision, that in that mean time, they
should not be thought to flee away.

They being gone, Syria and Macedonia were appointed by decree to Antony and
Dolobella, being then Consuls. The Senate, being very much grieved, gave them
in stead thereof Creta and Cirene, which they not regarding, in short time
gathered much money and men, and entered Syria and Macedonia. And thus they
wroughte.

When Dolobella had killed Trebonius in Asia, and Antonie had overcome
Decimus in Celtica, the Senate being offended, did decree Antonie and Dolobella
to be enemies, and restored Brutus and Cassius to their former provinces, and
added to Brutus Illyria, commanding al other that were rulers of the Roman
Illyria added to Brutus.
dominion, as well of provinces as armies, to obey Brutus and Cassius. After
this, Cassius prevented Dolobella entering into Syria, and used the tokens of
that office, and gathered twelve legions, that for the most part, had
served, and bin trained under Casus Caesar, one of the which, Caesar had
left in Syria, to go to the Passus. Sextus Julius*
war against the Parthians. The charge of this, had Secilius Bassus, but the
dignity, Sextus Julius had, a young man and Caesar's kinsman, who being
lascivious, and suffering the legion to fall to riot, Bassus reproved him:
wherefore he fell out with Bassus, and called him rascal, and after waxing
more disobedient, Bassus commanded him to be brought of the Sergeants,
whereof a tumulte growing, and Bassus being in danger to be killed: the army,
not abiding that disorder, killed Julius: of the which repenting them by and
by, and fearing Caesar's displeasure, they agreed together, that unless they
had forgiveness, they would fight til death, and to this they compelled
Bassus: and getting an other legion, they trained them, with the which they
valia^tly overcame Sextius Murcus, sent against them with three legions from
Caesar. To Murcus, came in aid Minutius Crispus from Bythinia, Murcus.
with three other legions, and besieged Bassus with six legions. Cassius
coming in relief of Bassus, received his army freely by and by, and after,
Minutius and Murcus, delivering to Minutius.
him their legions for goodwill, they obeyed him in all things as y^ Senate
commanded. Albinus being sent of Dolobella, brought out of Aegipt four
legions of the remnaunt of Pompeius and Crassus discomfiture, which of Caesar
were left with Cleopatra. Cassius set upon him in Palestina (knowing nothing of
these chances) so suddenly, that he compelled him to deliver his army, being
afraid with four legions to fight against eight. Thus Cassius (beyond al
expectation) was Lord of twelve legions, and many of the Parthian archers on
horseback came to serve Cassius, he being known among them, when he was an
officer in Crassus camp. Dolobella remained about Ionia, dispatching
Trebonius, Trebonius*
and putting tributes upon the Cities, and by Lucius Figulus ^. Figulus.
hyring nauies of the Rhodes, the Lycians, Pamphagonians, and Celicians, which,
when they were ready, he determined to go into Syria himself by land with two
legions, and Figulus by sea. And hearing of Cassius army, he turned his journey
to Laodicea, a City friendly to him, joining to Cherronesus, and fit for all
surniture, (...), ^ore^.
as well for passage by Sea, as defense by land. In the which place, he might
provide all things plentifullye ^^o^ the Se^, and when he would, without fear
sail from the land.

Which Cassius seeing, and fearing that Dolobella should escape him, having
gotten a place called Isthmus, almost an Island, not (...) a na^rovve land
betvveene two seas.
two furlongs over, he took all the stones and timber of the cotages, boroughs
and sepulchers, to make a peer for ships. He sent to Phoenitia, Lycia and the
Rhodes, and being rejected of all, but the S^donians, yet he went against
Dolobella, and both of them haning lost numbers of shyps, Dolobella took
five, with all the men. Cassius sent again to them that had despised him, and
to Cleopatra Queen of Aegipt, and to Serapion General in Cypres for her. The
Tyrians, the Aradians, and Serapion, without any in Arad^^i be of the I Will of
Aradus, and it is one o^ the Cities of Ph^nitia that makes ^^polis, Tyrus and
Sido^ be the other. Excuses of Cleopatra.
telligence from Cleopatra, sent him as many ships as they had. The Queen
made excuse to Cassius, by hunger and pestilence, wherewith Aegipt was
oppressed: and for the familiarity with the former Caesar, she favored
Dolobella, and with this determination, she sent him four legions by Albinus,
and an other sufficient company, by sea (because of the wind) stayed.

The Rhodians and the Lycians said, they would help neither Brutus nor
Cassius in civil wars, and that they had given ships of passage to
Dolobella, but not entered with him into any society of war. Cassius being
prepared again, with such as he had presently, encountered with Dolobella
twice, and at the first, they fought it out with like force: but after
Dolobella was too weak by Sea. Then Cassius, with a rampire, so beat the
walls of the City, that they were like to fade, and when he could not
corrupt Marsus, that was chief of the watch by night, he wanne Marsus.
Loadicea vvon. Dolobella killed.
the Captains of the bands, that warded by the day. And Marsus resting by
day, the gates were opened, and he entered in diverse parts with his army.

The City being taken, Dolobella bad one of his Guard cut off his head and
carry it to Cassius, to save his own, which he did, and after killed
himself. Marsus also did rid his own life.

Cassius having gotten the City, swear the army of Dolobella to himself. All
the Laodiceans sacred and publyke things he spoiled, Laodicea spo^^^^
the chief of the City he punished, the other he oppressed with grievous
payments, and brought the City to extreme misery. From Laodicea he went
toward Egypt, understanding that Cleopatra did sail with a great navy to
Caesar and Antonie, thynkyng he might stop her voyage, and be revenged of
her, understanding that Aegipt was in great distress for famine, having no
great army of strangers, the Soldiers being gone with Albinius. Being in
this hope and determination, Brutus in haste advertised him, that Caesar and
Antonie did pass the Ionian Sea. Cassius unwillingly, left the enterprise of
Aegipt, and sent away the Parthian Archers on horseback, with their rewards,
and messengers to their King for further aid: which coming when all was
done, ranged Syria, and all the nighe nations to Ionia, and departed. Cassius
left his Nephewe in Syria with one legion: the horsemenne he sent before to
Cappadocia. They suddenly set upon Ariobarzanes distressed.
Ariobarzanes the king, as one that before meante to deceive Cassius, and
brought all his money and riches to Cassius. The Tharsia^s being at debate, the
one part honored, Cassius coming Tharsue at diuisi^ A city in Cilicia at the
floudde Cydno.
first, the other Dolobella after him: and both of them did it, by the show of
the Cities authority: and embracing both, as the turn served, either side (in
such a cha^geable city) used oth^^ extreemely. When Cassius had overcome
Dolobella, he commanded them to pay a thousand and five hundred Talentes:
they not knowing The calamity of Tharsus.
what to do, and being with despite required of the Soldiers thereunto,
were compelled to sell all their pryuate Jewels, and holy things in common, and
other which they had for their triumphs and sacrifices, which not suffising,
the Magistrates sold their free people. The first was the Virgins and their
men children, after their women and old men pityfully, and then their
youngmen, whereof many killed themselves. Being in this case, Cassius came from
Syria, and stayed it for pitties Cassius shows souie pity.
sake, and released them of the rest of the Tribute. Thus Tharsus and Laodicea
were punished. Cassius and Brutus consultyng together, it seemed best to Brutus
to remove the army from thence Counsel be ^^^ene Brutus and Cassius.
into Macedonia for greater consideration. Because it was said, their enemies
had forty legions, and that eight of them were past the Ionian sea. Cassius
thought the multitude of the enemy not to be passed of, because in time their
number should be their destruction for want: and therefore that they should
set upon the Rodians and Licians, friends to their enemies, and having nauies
least they should come upon their backs, when they had agreed, they divided
their armies. Brutus went against the Licians, and Cassius against the Rodians,
for he was brought up there, and learned the Greek tongue. And because they
were very ^^^do, now Capo Crio.
strong upon the Sea, he prepared and exercised his own ships at Guido. The
wise men of the Rodes were afraid to come to fight with the Romans, but the
people was lusty recounting their former The Rhodes. an Island in the sea that
is called Carpathio, the* which in greatness, is next Iesa ^us and Cyprus.
feats against other manner of men than these. Their ships also they gathered
of the best, of the which were.xxxiij. when they had done so, they sent some
to Mindo to Cassius, requesting him he would not reject the Rhodes, a City
that ever did revenge such as contemned them, nor the co^uentions between the
Rhodians and the Romans, that one should not bear arms against the other:
and if he did allege any thing for society of war, that they would
understand of the Senate of Rome, and they commanding it, they said they
would do it. Thus much they said. He answered, that for the rest, war must
judge in steed of words and where the league commanded they should not
leauie arms one against another, the Rhodians did conspire with Dolobella, and
aided him against Cassius. But where it commands that one should help
another, and now that Cassius requires it, they use a shifte by the Roman
Senate, which is scatered, and at this present destroyed by the Tyrannes that
be in the City, which should be punished, and so should the Rhodians, taking
their parts, unless they did as he commanded them. Thus said Cassius. When
this was known at Rhodes, the ancient men were the more afraid. The people
were persuaded by one Alexander and Manasses, remembering unto them that
Mithridates came against the^ with many more ships, and before him Demetrius.
Therefore they made Alexander their chief officer called Prytan^o, and Manasses
their Admiral. Pryta^eus was in Athens the chief City of Autonie.
Nevertheless, they sent Archelaus ambassador to Cassius, who was his
schoolmaster in the Greek, to entreat him familiarly: and when he had taken
him by the hand, he spoke to him as to his acquayntance:

Thou that art a lover of the Greek language, do not disturb Archeleus
scholenaster ^^ Cassius.
a Greek city, nor the Rhodes (being a lover of liberty) nor deface the
Dorian dignity, never yet blemished since it first began: nor forget y^
goodly history, which thou did learn at Rhodes and Rome. At Rhodes, how
much the Citizens of the same have ever stood to their defense, against
nations and kings, and such as were thought invincible, as Demetrius and
Mithridates, for their liberty, for y^ which thou say thou trauaylest. In
Rome what we have done for you, as well against other as Antiochus the great:
there be pillars set up of you as momuments of us. And thus much may he said to
you, O Romans, of our nation, of our worthiness, of our state, never yet in
servitude, of our society and choice of you. But in thee now ( Cassius) a
certain great reverence, I say, remains toward this city, thy nurse, thy
scole, thy Physician and house, where thou did dwell, and to my scole, and my
self, and to other things wherein I took pains. Now you well requite all this
upon my country, y^ it be not forced to make war with thee that was
nourished and brought up in it, nor put us to y^ necessity of one of two
things, either that y^ Rhodians shall all be destroyed, or Cassius overcome. I
advise thee further, beside y^ I have prayed thee, that have tak^ in hand this
feate, for ye common wealth of Rome, y^ thou always make the Gods the guydes in
so great a cause. You Romans did call the Gods to witness, when by Caius
Caesar, ye made solemn league with us, and by oath confirmed the same and gave
us your right hands, which enemies perform, and shall not friends and fellows
d^ it? Refrain now for Gods cause, and for the glory among men, seeing nothing
is more barbarous than breach of league, which make the offenders to seem
unfaithful both to friend and foe. When the old man had thus said, he did not
let Cassius hand go, but he wept and wiped his eyes with it, that with that
manner he might move Cassius, who for reverence was abashed, and with some
passion said thus:

If thou did not persuade the Rodians to do me any injury, then thy self
have done it: but if thou did exhort and advise Cas^^es to A^helous.
them, and could not persuade them, then I do revenge thee. I have been
injured evidently: first, because I asking help of them, that nourished and
taught me, am contemned and despised: then, because they preferred Dolobella,
(whom they neither taught nor brought up) before me: and that that is the more
heinous, not only before me, but Brutus and other noble men, whom you know
well to be fled from Tirannie, and to be ready to fight for liberty of our
country. You the Rodianes lovers of liberty, preferred Dolobella before us,
he seeking to take the same from other: and us (whom now you ought to favor,)
you pretend, you will not deal with civil war. It were civil, if we did
covet unlawful power: but now open war is made of peoples rule, against
Tirannes state: and you that have popular government, do forsake the same: and
of them that do labor for their laws, and bear good will to the Romans, and
be condemned to death without judgment, that be prescribed and confiscate, you
have no pity at all. But you answer, you will understand the Senates mind,
which is now destroyed and can not help it self. For ye knew the Senate had
decreed to Brutus and me, that all the inhabitants between Ionia and the East,
should obey our commandments Thou make a rehearsal what you have done for
us at our wa^ts, for with good will you have received reward again. But you
forget, that you deny help to us, that suffer injury, for the saving of our
liberty, whom you ought, if there had been no friendship betwirt us, but would
now have begone it, to have aided the common cause of Rome, few being of the
Dorean liberty. You bring forth also leagues (lacking other matter) that
Caius Casar the first author of Tirannie did make with you, and say, that the
Romans and Rodians should help one an other in their necessities. Help you
then now the Romans that in greatest cause be in most peril. Cassius a
Roman borne, and a president of the Romans, does challenge that league,
according to the decree of the Senate, in the which it did command, that all
the dwellers beyond Ionia, should obey us. Brutus does require the same, and
Pompey, keepyng the Sea for the Senates safety. To decrees, we join prayers,
for all them that be fled from the Senate to me, to Brutus and to Pompey. It
is the peoples public decree, that the Rhodianes should help the Romans,
every one as they have need. If we be neither officers nor Romans, but you
take us to be fugitives, strangers, and condemned (as they name us that have
proscribed us) and that you have nothing to do with us, but with Romans (O
Rhodianes) and their leagues, then may we make war with you as strangers, and
free from confederacy, except you obey us in all that we require. Thus
Cassius, as it were dallying with Archelaus, sent him away. Alexander and
Manasses, Captains of the Rhodianes, with their three and thirty Ships,
sailed against Cassius to Myndo, to prevent him in the sea, having hope,
lightly to overcome him, because they made that voyage into Guido against
Mithridates, when they had happy end of the war: and using rowing for a
show, they sailed the first day to Guido, and the next, Guido a City like an
Island in Caria.
set upon the Cassianes, whereat they maruelling, did encounter with them,
showing noble strength on both sides. The Rhodian ships were light, and gave
a suddayne onset on their enemies, Battle by Sea betvveene the Romans and
the Rhodianes.
and retired again, and fetched what course they would. The Romans were
heavy, and abode by it, and when they joined with them, ouerlayde them like a
fight on foot. Cassius with the multitude of his ships did so beset the
enemy, that they could not compass, nor retire at their pleasure, but only
aforehande give a charge, and retire again: and that commodity was taken away
by the straightness of the place. For their coming upon the Romans great
ships with their sharp stemmes, did no good, because the Romans stood
immovable against their light vessels. In the end, three of the Rhodianes,
with all the men in them, were taken, two were broken and sonke, the rest sore
beaten, fled to the Rhodes.

The Romans resorted to Myndo, and repaired their vessels Myndus, a sea*
coast town of Caria.
that were bruised.

This was the end of the fight by Sea, between the Romans and the Rhodianes,
which Cassius beheld from a Mountain.

When he had repaired his Nauye, he sailed to Lorenn^, a Castle (...) is in
^ame.
of the Rhodians, and his footmen he committed to Phanius and Lentulus, to be
transported in great Ships. He sailed with fourscore vessels, which was a
terrible sight to the Rhodians. Being arrived at Rhodes, he stirred not,
neither with his Nauye nor his fotemen, thinking they would have yielded: but
they came fiercely forth to the fight, and having lost two Ships, they
shut themselves within the Port of the City, and took armoure, and resisted
the fotemen that Phanius had set a shore, and also Cassius that approached
the walls next the Sea, not unfit for that fight: which he foreseeyng, had
brought Turrets with him, which he set up, and assailed the City both by sea
and land, which being unprovided for so suddayne a matter, must needs either
by force or famine be overthrown. The wise men of the City, to avoid that
danger, had some talk with Phanius and Lentulus. In the mean time, Cassius
was got Rhodes taken.
into the City with the choice of his army, using no force at his entry,
which some thought to be by them that pityed the famishing of their City.

Cassius, having the City in captivity, sat down in y^ Judgment seat,
and pitched his spear in it, in token it was thrall, and badde them not to
fear. He commanded his army upon pain of death, not to make any spoil. He
called. 50. Rhodians by The hard dealing of Cassius with the Rhodians.
name, whom he punished with death. Five and twenty y^ would not appear, he
banished. He took all the money that was gold or silver, holy or public, and
appointed a day to every man to bring in his private substance. He proclaimed
death to them that hid any thing. To the accuser he proclaimed a third part,
and to the bond, liberty. Many at the beginning hid their things, hoping
the spoil would have no such end: but when they saw men were bewrayed,
they brought forth all for fear. Some was hidden in the ground, some in filthy
pittes, and some in graves, out of the which more was brought, than at the
first.

This was y^ captivity of the Rhodes, to the rule of the which, Spoil of the
Rhodes.
Lucius Varus was left.

Cassius being encouraged with the speedy taking of this City, and abundance
of money, commanded the other nations of Asia to pay the ten years tribute,
which they did accordingly.

It was then reported, that Cleopatra, with great preparation of Cleopatra.
army and Nauye, would sail to Octauian and Antony, both for the friendship of
the former Caesar, and for fear of Cassius, who sent Murcus with his best
Legionarie men and archers, with Morta. Tanarum, a promontorie of Iaconica,
where Hercules took his way to Hell. Brutus. Iycia a Country of little
Asia, betvveene Pamphilia and Carta. Loca a region in the end of Greece.
Illyria is a great Region of Europe, now called ^lanonia.
fourscore armed Ships, to Pelloponesus, and staying at Tenaro, meant by
prevention, to get the spoil of all Pell pon^so.

The things that Brutus did in Licia, were not great: but thus they began.

When he had the army of Apuleius, and gathered of the tributes of Asia
sixeteene thousand talentes, he sailed into B^ecia, where he did receive a
decree from the Senate, that he should use the same, and govern Macedonia:
which being known he took to him threes Legions from Illyria, the which
Vatinius, then Lieutenante of Illyria, delivered unto him. Another Legion he
had of Antonyes brother in Macedonia, to the which, joining four more, he was
Lord of eyghte Legions, the greater part of the which, had served under
Caius Caesar. He had also great numbers of Horsemen, and archers, and other
shot. The Macedonians he armed after the Italian manner. In gatheryng thus
his army and treasure, he had this good luck from Thracia.

Polemocratia, a Princes wife, and slain of his foes, came to Treasure, and a
Princes child delivered to Brutus.
Brutus for the care of her son, and committed him to Brutus hands whth her
Husbands treasure. He delivered the child to be trained of the Citizenians,
till he should be set in his fathers Ciricus, an I Will in Propon^is, with a
City of that name.
Kingdom. He found in the Treasure great massies of gold and silver, which
he caused to be coined, to make money.

When Cassius was come unto Brutus, they consulted upon The seege of Zanthus a
Citle in Iycia, which shevved great manliness before against H^rpagus
Lieutenant to Cyrus.
their business, and determined to begin the war upon the Licians and
Xanthians.

And to begin with the Zanthians, they of the City cut off their sub^^bes,
that Brutus should not use the^, nor have commodity of any thing there, they
compassed their City with a ditche, and upon it made their defense. The ditche
was fifty foot deep, and the breadth proportionate accordingly. Upon it they
stood, and threw their darts and arrows upon the Romans, divided as with a
flood impassable. Brutus got many Pioners, and covered the^ with leather, to
overthrow the ditche. He parted the army for y^ night and the days labor,
never ceassing, but as in a matter of great speed, used the souldioures, to
contend who should do fastest. And though at the beginning it seemed he went
about a tedious and frutelesse work, yet in the end, he brought it to pass
very quickly, contrary to the Zanthians opinion, which thought it would have
bin many months in doing, or not done at all. But now they are shut up,
and driven within their gates, with a great change. He gave daily assaults at
the gates, ever changing his Brutus beats down the Trench.
men. They resisted, and put fresh and sound men in the place of the weery
and wounded, so long as their fortes held: but when they were beaten down,
and all broken, Brutus thinking what would follow, commanded his souldioures
to retire from the gates.

The Zanthians thinking that to be done by negligence, issued out in the
night with lights to burn the Romans engines, who being encountered of the
Romans that lay for them, The Zanthianes killed at their gates.
retired to the gates, the keepers whereof, fearing the enemy should enter
also, shut them out, whereof did follow a great slaughter before the gates.
Not long after, the Romans going back again, the Citizens came out, and
fired the engines: and because of the former loss, the gates were opened to
them, at whose going in, two thousand Romans thrust in with them, and more
followed: at the which entry, the gates fell down, either suddaynely, or of
purpose, the matter failing that held them The Romans in danger.
up. The Romans were either killed, or shut in. The gates could not be opened,
nor without some engine be removed. The Zanthians threw upon them in the
streets from above. They having neither bow nor arrows, got into a straight
place, called Sarpedono, that they should not utterly be besette about. The
Romans that were without, were careful for them within, and Brutus ran
among them, to see that all help might be assayed. At the gates barred with
iron, they could not get in, their scales and Towers being burned. Wherefore
some made scalyng ladders presently, and went up upon timber, as upon
ladders: some tied forkes to ropes, and threw them to fasten on the wall, and
climbed up by coardes. The O^nandians their Oenandia ^s a City of ^al^ra, a
little region of ^^Spand^^.
neighbors, and enemies, and confederate with Brutus, gate up over the rocky
places, which when the Romans saw, they followed with great labor, whereby
many fell, and some that got over, went to open the gates, and laid timber so
thick, that they might come over: which they did. And being now many, they
brake the gate, not being very strong, both they within and without helping to
it: and the Souldioures entered in very boldly, both at the broken gate, and
over the wall, upon the way made with timber, so as there was thrusting in on
every side. The Zanthians with great shoutes set upon the Romans that were
The Romans saved in Serpedono a holy place closed in the City.
in Sarpedono. The Romans at the gates, careful for them both within and
without, used all violence to make way, and as carried with a fury, they bare
all down before them, making such bast and noise, as they might know within
it, God working a change for them. And this was at the setting of the Sun.

The City being thus taken, the Zanthians went into their houses, and burned
their most precious things, and wilfully offered their throtes to be cut. The
lamentation was so great, that Brutus fearing the spoil, called his
Soldiers back by a The taking of Zanth^s.
Trumpet: and when he knew what was done, he pitied the state of them for
their liberties sake, and sent a truce unto them. They repelling them that
brought it, and bringing all they had, to stackes that they had made in their
houses, set the same on fire, and burned themselves therewith.

Brutus saved all the sacred things, and only took the Servants of the
Xanthians, and an hundred and fifty women free and without husband. Thus three
times the Zanthians perished for their The often sacking of Zanthus.
liberty, being beseeged of Arpalus, Lieutenant of Cyrus the great. They
killed themselves rather tha^ they would be slaves, and the City was by him
left to be their grave. And they say, they suffered the like of Alexander,
Philips son, and could not abide to obey Alexander, though he were a Lord of
so many lands.

Brutus went from Xantho to Patarea, a City (for affairs (...) City in
(...) where (...) gave answer (...) the sixth Months of VVinter.
of the Sea) like unto it: and bringing his army about the city, he commanded
them to be obediente, unless they would suffer as the Xanthians had done.
Some of the Xanthians were come unto them, bewayling their misfortune, and
counselling them to see better to themselves. The Patareanes aunswering nothing
to the Xanthians, spent the rest of the day in consultation. Day being come,
and Brutus approchyng, they cried from the walls, that they would obey him in
any thing he would, and opened Patarea yielded.
their gates. He entered, neither killing nor spoiling any man: only their gold
and silver that was the Cities, he gathered together, commaundyng every man to
bring in his private goods, upon those pains that Cassius had set upon the
Rhodians. And they did so.

A Servant did accuse his master for hydyng of money, and showed a Captain
that was sent, where the gold was. All being carried away, the master held
his peace, but his mother (wylling to save her son) cried, that she had
hid the money. The Servant (not required to speak,) affirmed she said not
true, and that he had hid it: whereat Brutus pitying the young man in
silence, and the mother in passion, Justice of (...).
sent them away unhurt, with the money they brought, and hanged the Seruante,
that would have betrayed his master.

Lentulus at this time being sent to Andriaca, a notable port Andriaca the
name of a Town in diverse regions he^re of ^^cia. My^^, a City of Lycia.
for the Nauies of the Myreans, brake the cheyne of the Port, and went into the
City. They obeyed his commandments, and delivered him their money, which he
carried to Brutus. The Lycians sent to Brutus, that they would obey him, and
aid him to their power. He put a tribute upon them, and gave the A^ylas is
in Asia.
free men of the Xanthians to that City. He commanded the Navy of Lycia, to
sail with the rest to Ab^^o, from whence he led his footmen, and abo^e
Cassius coming from Ionia, to go together to Seftus. Sestus in ^^^^pa,
divided by the narrovv S^^ called Hellesp^t.


Murcus saylyng about Peloponeso, understood that Cleopatra had a wrack by
tempest about Libya, and that her scattered Nauye was blown to Laconica, and
that she was so sick, as Laconia, a region of Peloponesus, sometime called
(...) (...) the ^. cities* (...) were contained ^^^.
uneath she could get home again. And that he should not seem to bring
out so great a company in vain, he sailed toward Brunduse, and took the
I Will next the Port, and kept the rest of the enemies army, and their victuals,
from Macedonia.

Antonie came against him with those few long Ships that he had, and at
the nygh places annoyed him with the Antony against Murcus.
Towers he had made. He sent his army by parts in great Ships,
obseruyng the wind from the land, that they should not be intercepte of
Murcus: and being in some doubt, he called for Caesar, that was in the coast
of Sicelie, to match with Sextus Pompey. Which matters went after this sort:

Pompey was the younger son of Pompey the great, being Pompey the younger.
not accounted of Caesar for his youth like to archieue any matter, and
remained in Spain. He, in company with a few thieves, roued on the Sea, and
was not known to be Pompeys son.

The number of the Roners increasing, and having a good band, he confessed he
was Pompeys child. Wherefore all the remnant of his fathers and brothers army
resorted to him, as to a familiar Captain.

Arabion being dispeopled in Libya, came unto him (as we Arabion joins
with Pompey
have said) and he having this multitude, his acts were esteemed greater
than as of a Pyrate, and Pompeys name sounded over all Spain; full of people,
so as the officers of Caesar durst not meddle with him: which when Caesar
heard, he sent Carina with a greater army to overthrow Pompey. But he
being armed for the light attemptes, suddaynely set upon him, and troubled
him, and took Cities both small and great, for the which cause Caesar sent
Abnius Pollio to succeed Carina, and to war with Pompey, which at the time
that Caesar was killed, did try their power: after the which Pompey was
revoked of the Senate, and then he went to Massilia, to hear what was done,
who being chosen Admiral as his father, he gathered all the Ships he could
get together, and kept the Seas, but would not come to Rome. And when the three
men's power began, he sailed into Sicelie, and beseeged the Captain Bythinicus,
that would not receive him, till Hirtius and Fannius (condemned by
proscription, and fled from Rome,) caused that place to be given to Pompey.
Thus Pompey was Lord of Sicelie, having a Navy and Island nigh to Italy, and a
great army, both of them he had before, and also of them that fled from Rome,
both bond and free, and such as the Cities of Italy sent him, that were given
in pray to the Souldioures: for these did detest in their hearts, the conquest
of the three men, and as much as they could, secretly wrote against them. And
as many as might get out of the Country, being now no more of their Country,
fled to Pompey, being at hand, and most accepted to the Romans of that
time. There came also to him Seamen from Libya and Iberia, skylfull in the
water: in so much, as Pompey was full of Captains, Ships, Souldioures and
money. Of the which when Caesar understood, he sent Saluidienus with a Navy,
thinking it Saluidienus.
to be an easy matter to put Pompey from the Sea: and he passed through Italy
to help Saluidienus from Reggio. O(...) pasteth to help Saluidienus. S(...) a
Town in the end of Calabra. Scylla and (...).


Pompey came against Saluidienus with a great navy, and making the fight
hard at the shallowes of the I Will about Scyleion, Pompeys Ships were lighter,
and exceeded in the promptness and experience of the skillful Seamen. The
Romans were heauyer and greater, and the more unfit, as the manner of the
shallow Sea is to whirle about, that The fight by Sea, betvveene Saluidienus
and Pompey.
the billows break on either side the water. Pompeys were the less troubled,
for custom to the surgies, but Saluidienus Ships could neither stand firm
for lack of that experience, nor able to use their ^ares, nor having fit
sternes for to turn at will, were sore troubled. Wherefore toward the Sun
set, Saluidienus first withdrew, and Pompey also did the like. The loss of
ships was equal. The other that were bruised and broken, Saluidienus
repaired, lying at the port of that narow sea Balaron. Balaron.
Caesar came and gave great faith to the Reggians and Ipponeans, Reggio is the
surdest City in Italy next Sicelie. Ippona was a city sometime called
Vibona, and Vi^on Falentia, now there is but a little town called ^^bona.
that they should be exempt from them that were given in victory, for he
feared them most, because they were so nigh that narow cut. But when Antony
sent for him in haste, he sailed to him to Brunduse, having on his left hand
Sicelie, entendyng then not to match with Pompey. Murcus (when Caesar came,)
that he should not be enclosed of Antony and him, went a little from
Brunduse, waytyng by the way the great ships that carried the army to
Macedonia, which were waited of the Galleys, the wind being great, even as
they could wish. They sailed away cheerfully without any need of any
Galleys, whereat Murcus was grieved, and waited for their return empty. But
they (both then and after) carried over the army with full sail, till The army
passes.
all the army with Caesar and Antony were passed. Murcus being thus hindered by
fortune (as he thought,) tarried for other passages, and preparations of new
Soldiers from Italy, to hinder (as much as he could) the provisions and the
army left: and to him Domitius Oenobarbus, one of Cassius Capitaynes, came, as
to a service of great moment, with fifty ships, one other legion, and
Archers, that Caesar's army, not hable to be victualed otherwise sufficiently,
but from Italy, it might as (he thought) be stopped from thence. Thus they
with one hundredth and twenty galleys, and more ships of burden, with a great
army did scour those seas.

Ceditius and Norbanus, whom Caesar and Antony sent with Antony and Caesar.
viij. legions into Macedonia, and from thence to Thracia, went above the
hills a hundred and.xl. miles, till they came beyond Philip, and took the
streyghts of Torpido and Salapian, the beginning Philippi first called Dathes.
Torpido and Salapia, straights in Thracia.
of Rascopolinus land, and the only known way between Europe and Asia, and
that was a let to Cassius army going from Castius to Abydus.

Rascopolis and Rascus were brethren, of the blood of the Thracian Rascopolis
and Rascus brethren divided.
kings, and being Princes of one region, they differed in opinion, Raseos
favoring Antony, and Rascopolis Cassius, either of them having three thousand
horse. Cassius Capitaynes, askyng of the way ^^s^^pol^^ said, The short and
plain way goes from hence to Maronaea, and leads to the streights of
Salamina, being M(...), city of (...). Salamina, over against (...).
possessed by ye enemy, and is not to be passed. There is another way thrice
so much about, and hard to pass, where the enemy can not go for lack of
victual, from whence they might go to Thracia and Macedonia. When they heard
this, they went by Aeno and Maronaea to Lysimachia and Cardia, that receive
the Aeno, where (...) was buried. (...) of Ci^^^^a (...), City. M(...), the
cost.
straight of Cherronesus as two gates: and the next day, they came to the
gulf of Mellana, where they mustered their men. They had ninetene legions of
armed me^. Brutus ten, and Cassius nine, none full, but with two thousand
at the most to be filled: so as they had about fourscore thousand. The
horsemen of Brutus were four thousand Celtians and Lucitanians, two thousand
Lucitamins.
Parthenians, Thessalians, Thracians and I^irians: Cassius, of Iberians and
Celtians, had two thousand, of Arabians, Medians and Parthians, Archers on
horseback, four thousand. The Kings and Princes of the Galatians in Asia
were their confederates, The muster of (...) and Cassius army.
and followed them with a great host of footmen, and horsemen above five
thousand. This great army of Brutus and Cassius, was set in order at the
gulf of Melane, with the which they proceeded to the war, appoyntyng other
men for other necessities. They purged the army by Sacrifice according to the
manner, and fulfilled promises made for money, giuyng libecally Liberality of
(...) and Cas^^^^.
to win men's hearts, as they might well, having such plenty of richesse,
because there were many that had served under Caius Casar. And that none
should make any stir at the sight or name of new Caesar. it was thought
meet to speak to the army. There was a great seat, in the which sat none
but Senators and Pretors. The rest, as well Romans as strangers, ^^oode about
below: glad they were to see one another, as they that were stronger than they
supposed. Boldness and great hope grew at the sight of the army, which thing
increases the good will of Soldiers to their Captain, and hope that is
common, gets benevolence. The noise that hereof was made, did cease by the
trumpets and criers: and Cassius, because he was elder tha^ Brutus, came a
little forth, and thus said to the army:

This contention, O Soldier fellows, as it is rommon to (...)ation of Cas^^^^.
us all, and therefore causes us to trust one an other: so is it convenient,
that we do perform to you, all that we have promised, the which is the
greatest trust, that we will fulfill whatsoever we promise you hereafter. The
hope consists in the virtue of you that be Soldiers, and in us whom you see
about this seat, so many, and so great men of the Senate: and also, in the
plentyfull furniture of all things which you see, of victual, of armure, of
money, and of Ships, of confederates of Nations and Kings, that of
necessity, they by reason must be ready to be willing and agree, whom the
provision and common cause has joined together. Whereof the two men our
enemies do calumniate us, you know thoroughly, and for that do you serve with us
willyngly. Therefore now it is fit to declare the cause, which shall
chiefly show, that we have the best, and most just pretense of this war.
We, that have made Caesar great, by following him and leading you in the wars,
did continue his friends to the end, so as it shall not appear, that he was
entrapte of us for any enimity. In matters of peace, he is to be blamed, not of
us his friends, in the which we have been honored, but by laws, and order of
the common wealth, whereof now no law, no rule of the best, nor peoples power
remains: all the which our fathers framed, when they expelled the kings, and
by oath confirmed, never after to receive other: to the which oath, their
posterity, of the same mind, consenting, and puttyng from them the
execrations thereof, they could not longer endure to see one man, though he
were a friend and beneficial, that did convert to himselse the public
treasure, the armies, the elections of officers from the people, the
governments of nations from the Senate. Yet he was a law in steed of laws,
and a Lord in steed of the people, and a Prince in all respects in stead of
the Senate. The which peradventure you do not perfitely know, but only
consider his valiantness in the war. But now you may easily learn it, by ye
things only that touched your selves. You the people, in the war, do obey
your Generalles as your Lords. The same condition you receive of us again in
peace, the Senate prouidyng, that you be not deceived, your selves being Judges
and lawmakers, according to your companies and societies, creatyng Consulles,
Tribunes and Pretors, and by your voices judging ye greatest things, punishing
or preferring them, as they thought you worthy punishment or preferment. This
retribution (O Citizens,) has brought your authority to The authority of the
people.
high felicity: for you have preferred the worthy, and they being preferred,
have rendered like thank to you. For this worthiness you made Scipio Consul,
when you testified for him in the Scipio made Consul before his time.
matters of Libya, and made, whom you would, Tribunes of every age, of your
selves, as was fit for your causes. What need I to rehearse many things that
you already know, but that, fince Caesar bare rule, you could create, neither
Consul, Praetor, Tribune or Officer, nor could testify for any man's virtue,
nor receive mutual testification for your selves. And to speak of the chief,
no man gave you thanks for any office, for authority, for justice or
correction. And that that was most to be lamented of all other, you could not
help your Tribunes, when villainy was done them, that you should not retain
your power continual, and make it sure and inviolable: but your self see them,
that ought to have been untouched, and their authority inuiolate, and their
ornaments sacred, to be condemned without any judgment, by the commandment
of one only, because they seemed to be grieved with them that would have
declared him a king, the which the Senate took most grievously for your
sake. For, the Tribuneship is yours, not the Senates. Yet ye could not plainly
accuse that man, or bring him to judgment, because of his mighty armies,
which belonging to the public state, he challenged for his private pleasure:
the which entendyng to be revenged of the rest of his Tyranny, coniured
against his body. The sentence did necessarily proceed from the best, the
seat was done of a few. So soon as it was done, the Senate decreed it a
common agreement, and that openly, that the rewards for killyng Tirannes might
be put in ure. Antony staying that, under a pretense of tumulte, and we not
thinkyng our selves worthy reward to the City, rather than by it, to help
our country, this was stayed, because they would not any contumely should be
showed to Caesar, but only a releasement of his Tyranny, every man decreeyng a
for getfulnesse, as a thing of most surety, that no matter should be made
of the murder. Antony by little and little withdrawing the people from us, the
Senate gave us great offices of provinces and armies, commanding all the land
between Ionia and Syria to obey us: whether punishing as offenders, or
honoring ve, with solemn purple, with mases and Sergeants? by the which
reason, they called Pompey from banishment, being a young man, and not
acquaynted with the thing, but only because he was Son to Pompey the great,
who trauayled for the peoples rule: and because he was secretly in Spain to
avoid tyranny, they restored him to the value of his fathers goods, by the
common treasure, and made him ruler of the sea, that he might have some
authority, being of the peoples faction. What other act or token of the
Senate do ye require, than that all this was done by their sentence? unless
it be not enough to confess it by word, but to do it and say it, and together
with their sayings to reward you with great gifts, because when they say it,
they can perform it. Now you know how men be handled: they be proscribed
without judgment, and their goods be publicate, they be killed without
sentence in their houses, in their porches, in the Temples: of Soldiers, of
servants, of their enemies: drawn from their privy houses, and pursued in
every place. Where ye law permits a man that will, to flee into the common
place, where never no enemies head was brought, but only armor and ship
stems, now the heds of Consuls, of Pretors, of Tribunes, of Questors and of
Gentlemen be brought, and a reward appointed for the evil. This is an
insurrection most cruel that ever was against all sorts, a sudden slaughter
of men, and a strange hate of women, children, freemade men* and servant: so
far and to such a change is our city turned. The authors of all this
mischief, be the three men, which before other have proscribed their brethren,
their uncles, answearyng one an other, our City (men say) was taken of the
wild and barbarous. Yet the Celtes cut off no heads, nor used villainy with the^
they took, nor prohibited any man to hyde himself, or flee yt war: neither
did we ever use any city so, which we have taken by force, neither have we
persuaded other to do, yt now, not a private city, but the chief of al, does
suffer, of them that affirm they do reform and direct the common wealth. What
like thing did Tarquinius, whom, for ye injury done to one woman, and that
proceeding of love, and being a king they banished, and for this only act,
could never abide a kingdom. And whiles these three (O citizens) do thus, they
term us seditious, and say they will revenge Caesar. They do proscribe the^ yt
were not present when he was killed, of y^ which, here be many who^ you see,
being condemned for their riches or houses, or for favoring ye peoples
government. By ye which reason, Po^pey also was proscribed with us, being far of,
in Iberia, when we did ye deed, because he is descended of a father yt loved
the peoples state, and for yt he was called home of ye Senate, and made
admiral of ye sea, he is of these three men condemned to death. Did women
conspire against Caesar, whom they have condemned in a payment? What did an
100000. of the people, who^ they have condemned to pay, upon pain, and
accusations, and proscribed the^ unless they do it, whereof they ought to be
free? And they yt with all they have done, cannot yet perform their promise to
their Soldiers, we that have done no wrong have performed our promise to you,
and reserve to do more, when time should serve. Thus God has showed his help
to us doing justly, and with God, you have now to consider men, who^ you see
here your Citizens, who^ you have seen your Pretors, your Co^suls many times
with praise, now you see the^ fleyng to you, as to well doers, and lovers of
the people, taking our part, and wishing well to the rest yt we shall take in
hand. More just rewards be propounded of us to ye preseruers of the^, than
theirs yt would destroy the^. They care not for us that killed C. Caesar, yt
would have ruled alone, and others, that were with us, which remain in despite
of his tira^nie, and take not the rule to themselves, but leave it to ye people
according to the country laws. This war is not taken of like cause. They make
it for power and tirannie, which they have showed in their proclamation: we
make it for no such matter, but only yt our country being set free: we may
live privately under y^ laws in order, al good men, and the Gods chiefly do
judge our cause. The best hope to him y^ makes war, is his just cause. Let
it not trouble us, though we have served under Caesar, for we served not under
him, but under our country. The gifts that were given, were not Caesar's, but
y^ countries and public, neither is this y^ army of B^^tus or Cassiw, but y^
Romans, we being your fellow soldiers and Roman captains. Which if they yt
make war against us would understand, every man might safely lay down his
armure, and render all the armies to y^ city, and make choice of such as might
be profitable to it, which we only desire. But seeing they will not chose this,
for y^ wicked tyra^nie they have showed, let us, (O war felows) go to it with
sure hope, to serve, as free, the Roman Senate and people for their liberty.
Then every man cried, let us go, let us go, and we desire to march out of
hand. Cassius being glad of this forwardness, caused silence to be made
again, and thus said: All the Gods y^ be Lords of war, requite (O war
felows) your faith and pro^ptnesse. Now then understand what prouisto^ we that
be your Captains have made, as men y^ be favored of the Gods, and how far
we exceed our enemies in number and goodness. We have armed legions equal
with them: we have fortified our places with good guard, as well as they: in
horsemen and nauies, we do pass them: in aliance of kings and princes, and
nations from Asia, we surmount the^. They come upon us only on y^ face, we go
upon them on the back also. For we have Pompey in Sicelie, and Murcus in
Ionia. Norbanus also lies with a great navy and two legions, to stop their
passage by sea: all places behind us be void of enemies both by Money the
strength of war.
land and sea. As for money, which some call y^ strength of war, they want,
neither can perform their promise to their old soldiers, nor exact so much of
y^ condemned men as they supposed, because none of their friends is willing to
buy y^ places, which they have put to sale: otherwise they can get nothing: for
Italy is wasted with sedition, tributes and conde^nations. We with great care
have got present plenty, wherewith we may gratify you again, and much more
collected of the nations behind us, to be brought unto us. And victual, the
greatest want to mighty armies, they have none, but only from Macedonia a
mountain country, and Thessalia a straight region, which with great toil,
they must convey by land. For if any thing be brought (...) part of A^^^^^o.
Iapigia* Ap^^^a.
them from Africa, Lucania, or Iapigia, Pompeius, Murcus and Domitius shall
shut them up. We both have and shall have from the Sea, the Islands and all
places of the continent, every day without any difficulty, between Thracia
and the floudde Euphrates, and that without danger, no enemy being at our
backe^ wherefore, it is in our power to do our feate with speed, or to do at
leisure, to consume our enemies with hunger. This have you, (O fellow
Soldiers) by man's provision, the rest shall answer in order, thorough you
and the Gods. We have given you for former matter, all that we promised you,
requityng your faith with multitude of gyfts, the greater labor we will
worthily recompense according to the determination of the Gods. And now, to
them that shall cheerfully go to this feate, for this assembly and
exhortatio^s sake, we will give now even from this seat, to a Soldier a
thousand five hundredth Drammes of Italy, to a Captain of a band five times
so much, and to a Tribune, according to the proportion. When he had said
thus, and encamped his army, with work, word, and gifts, he dismissed the
multitude. They remained praising Br^tus and him very much, and promised to
do for them all that should be convenient. They gave then the gifts out of
hand, and other beside these, to the best sort, for many (...) ployne in
Thracia by the which (...) did number his great army. A toke^ of two Egles.
considerations. And as they received, they sent them forth in bands, to
Dorisco, and they followed, not long after. At this time two Eagles sat upon
the two silver Egles in the standerde, beatyng at them, or as some say,
coueryng them, and tarried still, and were fed with public provision
appointed from the Generalles, and the night before the day of the battle,
they flewe away.

In two days coming to the gulf of Melana, they went to Oeno, and from Oeno
to Dorisco, and other places, to the mount Serrio hill at the ^o^^^ta^d^.
Serrio, which stretchyng to the sea, they kept still by land. They commanded
Tullius Cymbrus with a navy and one legion, and Tullius Cymbros.
certain Archers, to go by that chaste, which before had bin deserte, although
the land was good, the Thracians neither using the Sea, nor for fear receiving
them that came from the contrary coast. The Grecians and the Calcidonians
keeping that sho^e, and using the Sea, flourished in Merchaundise and tyllage,
the Thracians agreeyng with them for the receypt of their Mountains, till
Philip, Amyntas son, did overcome the Chaldeans and others. so as nothing is
to be seen of the passengers, but only a little Chapel.

This desert place Tullius quickly passed over, so as for Brutus company, he
espied a fit place, and measured it for the Camp, keeping that same course
with his Ships, in so much as Norbanus left the straight of the Saporians,
as unprofitable to be Saporia, a ^^tle at the flood Nestus.
kept, which things happened as they desired: for at the sight of these
Ships, Norbanus was troubled of Saporia, and called Ceditius from Turpilio to
come to him in have, and he did so. The Turpilio.
streightes of Turpilio being left, Brutus men went on: the deceyte appearing,
Norbanus and Ceditius took Sapeio manfully, so as Brutus people could not
pass* wherefore they were afraid, least they Sapeio.
must now go about, as they should have done at the beginning, and to pass
every place besette, not having time convenient for it, because of the
Mountains, and the season of the year.

Standing in this stay, Rascopolis said unto them, there was a Roscopolis.
Sapei, people at the floude Nestu^.
way by a compass to the Mountain of the Sapeorans of three days journey,
never gone of men before, for the sharp Rocks, want of water, and thickness
of wodde: therefore if they would go it, they must carry water, and pass a
straight way, yet passable: and this journey for the solitariness, the very
birds could Solitary way.
not discover. The fourth day they should have the flood Arpesso, Arpe^^o,
H^bru^, floods in Thracia
running into the flood Ermo^, from whence in one day going to Philip, they
might set on their enemies of the suddayne, whom they might so overcome,
byca^se they had none other shift. The Souldioures being taught this way for
lack of other, and in hope to take their enemies at the advantage, a part was
sent with Lucius Bibulus, appoynting Rascopolis to guide the way. With great
pain and labor they went on, and made it yet with courage and good heart
the rather, because same that were sent before, returned, and said, they saw a
floude a far off.

The fourth day, being tired with the sharpness of the journey, and troubled
with thyrst, their water being spente, which they braughte for three ^ayes,
because it was said there The h^rd passage of the Ro^^^s.
was no water, they began to fear, least they were deceived, not that they
did not believe them that said they saw the floude, but because they thought
they were led a wrong way, and therefore began to exclayme and cry: and
when Rascopol^ came to them to encourage them, they reviled him, and threw The
dacourage of the (...). The ^age of (...).
stones at him. Bibulus humbly besought them, that they would patiently abide
the rest of the journey.

A little before night, the floude was seen of the foremost, and straight an
eskrie was made as reason was, with great gladness, which being received of
them that followed, if came to the hyndermost.

Brutus and Cassius understanding this, led the rest of they^ army this
hard way, but the cry was so great, as it was heard of the enemies, whereby
they could not preuente them, for Rascus, brother to Rascopolu, hearing the
cry, suspected it was A ^oyfull cry di^couereth the enemy.
the enemy, and marvelled so great an army could pass so hard a journey,
void of water, which scarcely was passable to the wild beasts, for the
highness of the woods: and he Amphipoli^ a C^tie, that is h^^vvcen^ (...)
and (...).
streyghte told N^^ banus of it, who fled from the streyghtes to Amphipoli.

Thus both these Thracian breethren help their armies, the one in leadyng an
unknown way, the other in descrying what was done. So B^utus Souldyours with
marvelous boldness, came to Philippi, whyther also arrived Tullius, so as all
the army (...). Philippi. Da^e. Crenida. (...). ^ing Philip builded, and named
this (...)
met.

This City Philippi was called before Date, and first Crenida, because many
fountaynes which in Greek be called Crene, do flow from the Mountains.

This place very fytte for the Thracians, Philip walled about, and called it
of his name Philippi.

This City is builded upon an high hill, the greatness whereof comprised the
breadth of the same.

On the North side it has wooddes and hills, by the which Rascopolu brought
Brutus and Cassius army.

On the South side is a Fenne, and beyond that, a Sea, where from the East,
the streyghtes of Sapeon and Torpilos be Sapera, ^^^ (...), stre^^^tes Murcino
and Drabisco. Strameo^^^ a flood dividing Ma^^^ d^^ia from Th^^^^^. Pr^s^rpo^a
was the ^ayde. Zyg (...). The God was Plate.
seen, from the Weast a large field, as far as Murcinae and Drabisco, and
the flood Strameno, three hundred and fifty furlongs about, very plentiful and
fair (where they say) it chanced a maid was ravished as she gathered
flowers. There is the flood Zygastes, in the which (as they report) a God brake
his Chariot as he passed over, whereof the flood had the name. The plain
bends downward, so as it is a receypte to them that march from above from
Philippi, against them that set from Amphipolu.

There is another hill at Philippi, not great, whom they call Dionisio, in
the which be mines of gold, called vntouchable. And Dionisio. (...), places
holy and inu^olable. The place or their Camps. Epidamnum, Du^^zzo. Casar sick.
going from Philippi a mile and more, there be two other hills, standing two
mile from Philippi, and more asunder. In these did they encampe, Cassius
toward the South, and Brutus toward the North, not myndyng to follow
Norbanus, because they heard that Antony was at hand, Caesar remaining at
Epidamnum for sickness.

The field was known to be fair for a battle, and the hills for a Camp,
and about it on the one side Fennes and waters to Strymo, and on the other
side, streightes, deserts, and vnpassed paths. In the midst of the hills a
mile over, was the way between Asia and Europe, as a gate. This place they
fortifyed with trenche to trench, leaving a gate in the midst, that it seemed
but one ^^^pe. There was a floude nygh, which some call Ganga, and some
Gangites. And behind that, Gangites. Thasus, an I Will nigh Thracia. Nea, an
Island and a City, where they say Philoctetus was bitten of a Serpent, and
dyed.
the Sea, by the which they had their prouiston, with passage and entry.

They had made Thasus the ^^orehouse of their proui^ion, being ^ij. ^^^^ off
and with their Gallyes, had passage to Nea, a City ^^xe mile from them, and
they joining in this place, tray^^^ their Army. Antony.


Antony came on with great have, insending to get Amphibol^^ for the stay of
the war, which finding possessed of N^r^anus, he was glad, and there he left
the furniture for the war, with one Legion, which P^^arius led. He went on
boldly, and Camped in the field, but a mile from his enemies, and streighte
was seen the want and abundance of both armies. The one was above in fruitful
ground, the other beneath in a bottom. They Anto^^e^ Camp.
had wodde from the Mountains, these, from the Fenne. They had their water
from the River, these from the pooles and pittes which they dug for the
time. They had their victuals from Thaso, a few furlongs from them, these
from Amphipole, above Thaso, an I Will and a City, oueragainst the flood N^ssus.
Antonies Camp.
fifty miles off. It seemed that Antony was driven thus to do, because there
was no more good ground, and the plain being hollow, in the which, by
reason of the ouerflowyng of the flood sometime, he found the water both sweet
and sufficient, by making wells and pittes.

This boldness, although it proceeded of necessity, yet it astonished his
enemies, that so nygh and so soon he was encamped with such a contempt:
wherefore they made many Trenches, and fortifyed every place with walls and
rampyers.

Cassius seeing Antonyes fury so great, entrenched that was left to the
Fenne, being omitted for the streightenesse, so that no part was vndefenced,
but a side of Brutus, which was hyllie.

Cassius had the Fenne and the Sea, all the rest being taken in with
Trenches, ditches, and gates. Thus they both were placed. Only with their
Horsemen sometime they skirmished.

When all things were provided and Caesar some yet not able to fight, for he
came in a litter to his army, his Captains set themselves in order to
fight, and Brutus did the like from the higher place easy to be seen, and
yet intended not to come down, but to waste their Enemy with want, either of
them had nineteen legions of armed footmen. But The number of b^^^ a^uies.
they that were with Brutus, were the selver in number, and they that were with
Caesar were the more. Of Thracia horse me^, there were with Caesar and Ant^nie
above thirtene thousand: with Brutus and Cassius twenty thousand: so as for
multitude of men, for boldness and virtue of Captains, for armoure and
furniture of Souldioures, there was most goodly show on both sides. Yet they
did nothing many days, because Biutus would not strike the battle, but
consume them with stopping of victual from their enemies. They had al Asia
to serve them, and the nighe places to bring them all thing by the sea: but the
enemy had little, neither susficient nor certain. For from Aegipt they could
VV(...) to(...) and (...) camp.
receive nothing, because of the dearth that had wasted the country: nor from
Spain nor Africa, because of Pompey: nor from Italy, because of Murcus and
Domitius: and Macedonia and Thessalia, could not by a great deal, supply
their want, which places, they only had for their succor. And that was the
cause why Brutus refused battle. Antonie fearing this, determined in any wise
to give the battle, and if it were possible, to make the Fen passable, that he
might come upon the back of the enemy, and take their victual that came from
Thase.

Therefore on a time, bringing his men forth in order of battle, Antonies
polliey and pa^nefulnesse.
with banner displayde, he appointed a part of his army both by night and
day, to make a straighte pathe in the same, cutting down the reeds, and
laying timber and stones of either side, so as they should not shrink. The
foundation whereof he pyled and made strong with marvelous silence. The
thicknssee of the reeds took away the sight of the work. And when Antony
makes a way in the Fenne.
the^ had wrought ten days, he sent certain bands the direct way, and the
space left between, he took and made many Towers. Cassius maruelling at the
devise and policy, and intending to defeat the Castells made of Antony,
entrenched all the residue of the Fenne, beginning from the camp to the sea,
pauing and making bridges and ditches upon the sure ground, taking in also the
way that Antony had made, that neither they that were there could go abroad,
nor he help them though he would. Antony perceiving this about midde day, in
a rage and fury, brought his whole army, being otherwise appointed, B^ what
occa^^on the patte^^ beg^nne.
and turned the^ upon the for^ification of Cassius, between the Camp and the
Fenne, bringing engines and scales, as though he would charge upon his Camp.
In doing this between both armies with great boldness, Brutus Souldioures
were grieved, thinking it a shame for them to let them so escape, and without
comm ^^^ement, saving of one Captain, they set upon their fla^ke. Brutus
men having thus begone the matter, gave a charge upon Caesar's army, that
was in a readiness, and put them from their place, and took their Camp,
which was common to Caesar and Antony. Caesar himself was absent, shifting
off that day, for a dream he had, as he writes in his book of
Remembraunces. Antony seeing the fight to be begun, was glad he had brought
the enemy to C^sar absent for a dream.
it, yet he thought not good to turn into the plain, least he should
disturb his battle. Therefore to do the rest with that fier^enesse he
began, in running manner he marched and mounted up, for all the resistaun^e
that was made, and by very The ^^rie of Antony.
vehement force, beat back the battle of Cassius, keepyng the order that was
appointed them, they being astonished at this feate done beyond all reason.
When Antony had thus broken them, he brake down the overthwart trench with
vtolence, filling the ditche, and stinging down the rampires, and all the rest
to the gate, where he di^^ressed the warders, and entered for all the weapons
that were thrown upon him. Some passed over the broken walls, some over the
dead bodies, and al was ^he fight at (...).
done so ftercelye and so sodainelye, as they that came out of the Fenne to
help them, were driven back again, of them that had got the wall, with the
like vehemency: and they only that were with Antony, entered into Cassius
Camp, the other still fighting without. The camp was thought to be strong,
therefore few kept it, which was the cause why it was the more easily taken.
The soldtors of Cassius being thus put to the (...) takes the Camp of (...).
worse, and knowing that their camp was taken, fled very co^fusedly: the
matter was equal on both sids: for Erutus overcame Caesar's battle, and lodged
in his camp. Antony overthrew Cassius, (...) take(...).
with a marvelous bol^enesse and spoiled his camp. The slaughter was
confused, for by the greatness of y^ plain, and raising of the duste, one
knew not another, till sometimes they asked, and then called them to their due
places. Some returned laden with gere, like Cariers rather than soldiors,
which some threw away and took from them. There was no rejoicing one with
another, because it was not well known what was do^^: so there was much
confusion. On Cassius side, numbering siaues and The (...).
al sorts, was slain* viij. M. of Caesar's, twice so many When Cassius was put
from his camp, and could no more get to it, he went to the hill of Phillippi,
and beheld what was done. But he neither could well see nor hear, for the
duste and noise: only he saw his own Camp spoiled. Wherefore he
commanded Cas^i^^ co^^a^ded Pindarus to kill him.
Pindarus his page, to kyl him with his own sword. Pindarus stayde at the
matter, and in the mean time a messenger came and told, that Brutus had
overcome Caesar, and possessed his Camp. To the which Cassius said, tell him
we are overthrown, and all the victory is his. Then he turned to Pindare, and
said: why doste not thou rid me of this dishonor? and so offering his
throat, Pindarus cut it.

Thus they say Cassius died. Some tell after this sort, that a Some think
C^s^i^^ killed himself vvyr^ the dagger th(...) ^* he killed Caesar.
band of Brutus horsemen, came to bring him the good news. He thought they
had been his enemies, and sent Titinius to know the truth. The horsemen
receiving him with great joy as a srend made a loud noise. Cassius fearing he
had fallen in his enemies hands, said thus: we have suffered to see our friend
taken of our enemies, and went in with Pindarus, and that he was never seen
after, so as some think that Pindarus did it not. This was the end Cassius i^
killed on his birth day.
of Cassius life, it chaunfing so, that the day of this foughten battle was the
day of his birth. Titinius killed him self for his long tariance.

Brutus bewayling the death of Cassius, as a rare Roman, and such Brutus ^an
^teth the death o^ Cas^^^^.
a one as the like was not to be found for virtue and valiantness, called him
happy, that he was rid of cares and troubles, the which would bring him to
the like end. He committed his body secretly to be buried, that the army
should not be discouraged at the sight of it, and without meat or sleep,
remained all that night in setting Cassius men in frame. Day being come, the
ennimies were in order again to fight, that they should not seem to have the
worsse. Brutus perceived their intent, and said: Let us arm also and make
a show likewise, that we are not inferior. Which when he had done, the
enemy retired. Then he said pleasantly to his friends: They seemed to
provoke us, as the weaker, but they will not put the matter to trial.

The same day that the field was fought at Philippi, an other (...) a (...),
the same d^ye that the (...) was at (...). A light on the (...).
very great seat was done in ^onio. Domitius Caluinus did lcade in great
ships,* i^. legio^s to Caesar, that had y^ name of Martial, being so called for
the honor of their valiantness. He led also a ba^d for his guarde, of two
thousand men, and four troops of horse, and other numbers gathered together,
with a few Galicyes.

Murcus and Otnobarbus met them, with one hundred and thirty long Ships. A
few of the former Hulkes fled by good sailing. The other, by the sudden
ceassing of the wind, in a sea calm and still, were caught, being by very
fortune given to the enemies, who without fear, bo^ged and brake them, not
having any help of their few Galleyes, being compassed of so many.

Great and diverse was the travail of them that were in peril, linking
themselves together with their Cables, and with weapons and courage putting
themselves in order, y^ the enemy should not use them, though they overcame
them. Murcus threw darts ofn^re, which did quickly burn the byndings, and the
ships se uered asunder, to avoid the fire. The galleys were ready to hinder
them every way, wherewith the soldiers being grieved, and especially the
Martialls, that being better in valiantness, (...) by ^ea to (...) and C^s^^.
should p^r^the for lack of fyghting, some killed themselves with the fire,
some leapte into the enemies galleys, and killed some, and were killed
themselves: the ships half burned, went their way, carrying men, some
consumed with fire, some with want and thirst Some with y^ Cables or plancks
were carried to y^ rocks, or desert shoars: and some were saved, beyond al
reason: some continuing flue days, by eating pitche osf the cables and sails,
held out, till they were briuen to land by the byllows. Thece were many that
gave themselves to their enemies being overcome with calamity. ^vij. of their
Galleyes yielded, whose soldiers Murcus took to him. Caluinus the General
came five days after to Biund^se, with one ship, being thought to Caluinus.
have been lost.

This hap was in ^onio, the same day that the field was at Philippi, whether
you will call it a shipwreck, or a shipfight. The which evils co^curring
together, being after known, caused the greater fear. Brutus called his army
together, and said thus: There is nothing (O fellow soldiers) in yesterdayes
fight, but Oration of ^^^tus.
that makes you superior to your enemies. You gave the charge cheerfully,
when no warning was given you: the fourth legion, so renoumed to them, in whom
their battle had their confidence, you overthrew utterly: their army you
drove to their camp: their camp you first took, and after spoiled, in so much
as you have far overcome the loss you had in the last batail. And where you
might have made an end of all your travail, you chose rather to fall to
spoil, than to follow your enemies that were overcome: for many of you
running before them, set upon their spoil. And in this one, they have but the
of our camps, but we have all that they had, so as the recompenceof the loss
is double. And having this advantage in the fight, how much other wise we do
exceed, you may learn of the captives: for their want of victual: for the
striving for it: for the difficult bringing o^ it: and for the evident getting
of so little. For from Sicelie, Sardinia, Libya, and Iberia, they can have none
for Pompeius, Murcus, and Oenobarbus, they keeping those Seas with two hundredth
and three score ships. Macedonia they have consumed: now only they have from
Thessalia, which how long can it serve them? Therefore when you see them offer
to fight, then think they chiefly be forced by hunger, and doc choose death
rather by their hands. Let us contrariwise foresee, that hunger may fight for
us, that we may take them the feebler and more consumed, when it shall be fit.
Let not us be carried with affection before due time: nor think flownesse, or
quickness to be experience: nor have our eye upon the sea backewarde, which
ministers to us such food and service, when we see that victory is ours
without danger, if you will abide, and not distruste: that though they come
forth and provoke us, not stronger than we, as the work yesterday showed, but
for avoiding further fear, that all the courage, which I desire you to keep,
you may show forth, when I shall require you at once, and the perfect rewards of
victory, when the gods shall have given their sentence of us, by our perfect
deeds, I will give unto you. And now for yesterdayes virtue, I give to every
soldier, a thousand drammes, and to your Capitaines, as the proportion
requires.

Thus he said, and straight divided the gift to every legion, and same say, he
promised to give the^ Macedonia and Thessalia in spoil.

Caesar and Antony seeing that Brutus would unwillingly come to the fight,
called their people, and Antony said thus: Yesterdaies work, (O Men) I
perceive our enemies in words do divide, Antones Oration.
as they that chased some of us, and spoiled a camp, where indeed they
confess al was yours: for I affirm unto you, that neither y^ next day, nor
yet, willingly will they come to y^ fight, which is a most certain surety of
yesterdaies fear and loss, as in y^ manner of contentions, of force, they that
are the weaker, go out of the place. They did not gather so great an army
that they might inhabit the Deserte of Thracia, by making of their walls,
but they made all that defense, for fearo of your coming upon them: and now
minding to keep in, for yesterdaies overthrow, when the elder, and the more
expert of the Captains for very desperation, killed himself, which is the
greatest declaration of their misery. Therefore when you shall provoke them,
and they not answer, nor come from their hills, but trust in their holds,
in steed of their hands, then you (O Roman men) enforce them again, as ye
forced them yesterday, thinking it shame to give place as fearful, and
provoked to refrain, and to be holden the worse men for their keeping in. For
we come not hither to live in the plain, nor if we tarryed, it would suffice
us, but the speedy attemptes are to be given in war of the wise, that we may
the longer continue in peace. The times and the travail we must foresee, of
whom, you cannot complain, for yesterdayes assault and attempt. When you are
required, then show your virtue to your capitaines, be not grieved with
yesterdayes spoil, for riches is not in that we have, but in that we got by
conquest, for that we lost yesterday. For it remains safe with our enemy,
the which and their own, they must yield us, when we overcome them: and if we
will go forth to get that, then must we set forth to the sight. Yesterday we
took again of theirs sufficiently, and happily more susficient of our own,
for they have brought together all that they have by violence spoiled out of
Asia, and you coming as from your Country, have left at home the most
precious things, and only brought necessaries. And if you had any thing
of estimation, you compted it your Generals, all the which, we be ready to
give you, for this victory, and for the recompense of this loss. For your
sake we will give rewards of victory, to every Souldioure five thousand
drams, to a Captain of a band five times so much, and to a Tribune double
so much as a Captain.

When Antony had thus said, he set them in order to fight, but the ennimie
would not come forward. Antony being grieved, still set them in battle ray.

Brutus had his army in good order, and needed not come to the fight, for he
had taken all the ways for provision of things needful.

There was an hill very nighe to Cassius Camp, hard for the enemy to take,
because the nighnesse made it in danger of the archers. Cassius had entrenched
it, that no man should from that place give any bold attempt unlooked for:
which being abandoned Casars men take an hill.
of Brutus, Caesar's soldiors in the night with.iiii. legions took it, carrying
with them many hurdles and hides to resist ye shot. When they had the hill, they
led other.x. legions half a mile and more toward the sea, and to the first
four, they added two legions more, to take by that devise all things even to
the sea: and if there were any way beside the seas, as by the Fennes, or other
mean, they might distress it, and take the victual from their enemy. Brutus
made devises against them, setting up other forts against their Camps. Casars
soldiers also set up a new work. Now was yt famme evident, and increased
every day in greatness and fear, (...) in the camp of Casar and (...).
for they could no longer have sufficient brought the^ sto^ Thessali^, and from
yt sea there was no hope, ye enemies being lords of yt ships: and the late
loss in Ionto being told to them both, they were the more afraid, the
winter being at hand, and they lying in a Fenny plain. Deliberation had for
these things, they sent a legion armed into Achia, to provide them necessary
victuals, (...) the north (...) of P^lopo^^^^.
and to send it them with all speed: but not able to avoid the present
peril, nor make any other device, nor in the rest of the camp, to do any
more to offend the enemy, they came forth with showts, and called Brutus to
the fight, scoffing and railing Antonie provoke (...) to fight.
at him, and doubting whither this refraining from fight, were like a man
besieged, rather than a man beraught his wit. This was known to him from the
beginning, and he believed it the rather, because of their want, and their
loss in Ionto, perceiving his enemies had one mischief of another. And he
determined, as a man besieged, or any other way to avoid the battle, rather
than to come to hands with men driven by hunger and desperation of all things,
having their only hope in their hands. But his army, for lack of
consideration, did not think so, but were grieved, that as women within, they
were shut up with idleness and fear. Their captains also were not content,
and blamed Brutus opinion, thinking with that courage of the soldiers, the
sooner to overthrow their ennimie. The cause hereof proceeded, that Brutus was
so courteous and mild to al me^, and ^^^^esie in a (...) is hin^^^^^^.
unlike to Cassius, that was severe and imperious in all thrnges, so as his
commandments were kept without any resistance of the soldiers, not asking
questions, nor reasoning what he would have done: but Brutus would do
nothing without the opinion of the Captains, through his gentle nature. At
length his army by companies and rowtes began openly to ask.

What means our General^? wherein have we offended of late when we did
overcome, when we did tha^^, when we distressed our enemies, or when we took
their Camp.

Brutus suffered this of purpose, and did not call them so a^ye assembly,
least he should be forced unseemly of the rude multitude, (...) bears of
purpose.
chiefly of the hired sort, whose manner ever is like unto unstable
servants, to hope in the change of masters, and to set their safety in the
contrary faction. The Captains also being angry, and wishing him now not to
doubt, the army being in this forwardness, would do some notable feate, and
if any thing hapt amiss in the fight, they might return to their Camp, and
defend themselves with their wall.

Brutus was much grieved with the Captains, and fearyng they would put him
to the danger, by light dealyng with the army, whereas he without doubt or
sharp fortune, was sure of victory not dangerous, he consented to his and al
their destruction, thus reproouing them:

Like Pompey the great be we forced to fight, not commanding ^^ut^s one
r^^led like Pompey
as a Captain, but rather obeying as a Souldyoure.

And I think he spoke no more, to hyde that he most feared, least the army
that sometime served Caesar, would take occasion to reuolte, which at the
beginning, both Cassius and he feared, so as they gave none occasion to them of
any offense.

This Brutus was brought unwillingly to set his men in order before the
Trenche, wylling them not to march far from the byll, that they might have
their retire (if need were) nigh, and be the surer, and the more easy to
march against their enemies again.

Of both sides there was great preparation of all things, and a great desire
of the feate, with a boldness of necessity, the one for fear of hunger, the
other of just reverence, compellyng the Captain to come forth, that they
should not be worse than their promise, nor weaker than their words, and be
thought rather gilty of pain for their rashness, than worthy of praise for
their good counsel. Brutus going among them, on Horseback, showed a severe
countenance, and exhorted them in few words as the time would serve.

You would needs fight you would needs force me, otherwise The (...)
having the victory, do not deceive, neither me, nor your selves of this hope.
You have an hill to fight with you, and at your back all is youres. Your
enemies be in doubtfuli case, being between you and famine.

Having said thus, he rode about, and encouraged all the bands, and with
cry they receiving him, to his great praise.

Caesar and Antony going about their, offered their right hands to them
that were next, and severally exhorted them, and did not hyde their hunger,
that they might stir them to the more present boldness.

We have found (O men) our enemies. We have them as Caesar and Antony to their
(...).
we desired out of their Trenche. Let none of you be afraid to give the
charge, nor give place when you be set upon, nor let him rather chose,
famine and dolorous destruction, that can not be avoided, than our ennimies
death and bodies, which to your boldness, weapons, and travail, they will
easily give. The present case requires speediness. You may defer nothing
till to morrow, but this day must determine all things, either with per^^te
victory, or valiant death. If you have victory, you shall win in one day
victual and money, Ships, and Camps, and rewards of victory of us. This
we must remember, that when we give the charge upon them, we do first
purpose in the myddest of their force and forwardness, to shut them from
their Camp, and to drive them to the plain from the hills, that the war be
not to be begun again, nor that our enemies drive us not to idleness
again, which for their faynienesse have no hope in fight, but put all their
trust in retrayning from battle.

Caesar and Antonius after this sort exhorted their Souldyoures, and every man
had a respect to appear worthy Souldyoures for such Captains: and they
were the more styrred to avoid the want, for the suddayne loss in the Ionian
Sea, and those rather with pain and hope (if need were) to abide the
uttermost, than to be consumed with an evil, that cannot be avoided.

The matter standing thus, and every one moved against him that was next, the
anger of both sides increased very much, and they were filled with boldness
incessable. And now they did not remember that they were Citizens together,
but as enemies by nature and blood, they threatened one another: so Nature and
Country forgotten.
suddaynely had rage and fury in them quenched nature and reason. They
prophesied alyhe of both sides, that that day in that feate, should judge all
the Roman causes. And the judgment was given in deed. The day being
spente in preparation Two Eagles. A token before the fight.
till the ninth hour, two Eagles falling between both Camps, sought
together, at the which was great silence: that Eagle flying that was toward
Brutus, whereat a shrill cry was made of the enemies. Both brought forth
their standards. The march was fierce and vehement. They little needed
arrows, stones, or darts, after the manner of war, for they used none other
coming on, than the order of battle, wherein they were brought up: and they
buckled with naked swords, The veheme^^i^ of Souldioures.
and laid on of either side, to put one another from their ray, the one for
their safety, rather than for victory, the other, for victory and comfort of
their Captain, whom they had provoked to fight.

The slaughter and the fightes were great.

The bodies were been away, and other were put in their places to serve the
former ranks.

The Captains riding about, and beholding every where, encouraged them to be
valiante. They comforted them that ^^^ke pains, to continue still their
labor Those that shrunk they changed, that their boldness that were in the
front, might be continued. At length the Souldyoures of Caesar, either for
fear of famine, or for Caesar's fe^^citie (for Brutus men were not to be
blamed) overcame the battle of their enemies, and put them back, as an
heap of an heavy mass, yet they turned again into their place slowly and
with order: but when their ray was broken, they went away faster, and the
second and third band turned with them, and disorderedly thrusting (...)
one upon another, were broken of themselves, and of their enemies, that
without stay pursued them, till they ^ledde evidently. And Caesar's ^ould
youres then remembryng their promise chiefly, fiercely followyng them, gave an
assault upon their Camp very daungerously, and on every ^^de so set upon
them, that they compelled them to slay, whereof some went toward the Sea, and
the hills by the floude Zygat^.

This alteration being made, the G^nerall^s divided the rest of the (...).
Caesar, to keep them that fled from their Camp, and to hold the Camp
himself: Antony, to follow the fleers, and to overthrow the remainers, to
assault their other Camps, and with ^^dent violence, to put all to ruin.
And fearing that the Captains might escape him, and gather another army, he
sent his Horsemen to the ways and issues of the filde, to stop them that
^^ed^e. Some went from hill to hill ( Rascus the Captain being their g^yde,
because of his experience in the way) and passed by the trenches and rocky
places, chacing them that fled, and keeping other from fleeyng. Some followed
Brutus himself. When Lucinus saw them so fast running after him, he stayde,
and as though he had bin Brutus, prayed them he might be led to Antonie,
Lucinus act for to save Brutus.
and not to Caesar, by the which he was the rather thought to be Brutus, in
auoydyng his unplacable enemy.

Antony understanding he was brought to him, went toward him in good order,
considering the fortune, the woorthynesse and virtue of the man, and how he
might use him. Being at hand, L^cinus meetyng with him very boldly, said:
Brutus is not taken, neither shall virtue ever be taken Boldness of (...).
of vi^e. I deceyuing these men, thus am before thee.

At the which word the Horsemen being ashamed, Antony to comfort them said*

You have hunted none (...) game, but better than you think, so much is a
Friend better than an Enemy, and committed Lucinus to wait upon one of his
friends, and after used him as his assured. Brutus fled to the mountains
with a convenient multitude, that in the night he might return to his camp or
take his way by the sea. But when he heard all passages were kept, he
continued with all his people in arms. And they say he looked up to the
Stars, saying: O Jupiter thou know who is the cause of these evils,
meaning, Brutus words, meaning by Antonie, whom he said should once be
punished for it. Antonies repentance. A trenche of dead bodies.
Antonie, which (they say) Antonie after in his private perils did confess,
saying: That where he might have ruled with Brutus and, Cassius, he was now a
slave to Octauio. That night Antonie continued in arms, that he might have
Brutus, making a trench of dead bodies and of the baggage brought together,
Caesar laboring till midnight* withdrew himself for sickness, committyng the
charge of the army to Norbanus.

Brutus perceiving what wait his enemies made for him, and having no more but
four legious, where with he was well warded, desired the chief of his host,
which now were ashamed and repented of their act, to send to see, how they
might make way to pass the traynes, and to recover their own that was kept in
the aba^doned tents. They being unwilling, and now considering Brutus men
gives over.
more than they did, and that God was against them, told their General they
had given him evil counsel, and they having tried fortune so often, would not
now put any more hope in their matter. Then Brutus said to his friends: I am
no longer profitable to my Country. He called one of his most, ^^rat^.
Brutus ^eyng persuaded to flee, said: yea, but with hands not with s^^t^.
The death of Brutus, vvherin it vv^s le^n^ that virtue was overcome of
Fortune. ^^ saying* Overtue unhappy* ^^ words only, vvi^e, etc. One only
fault of Brutus and Cas^^^.
trusty friends, named S^rato of Epir^, and wylled him to kill him ou^ of
hand, who entreatyng him to take better advice, called* one of his servants,
and said: O Brutus, in thy last, commandment thou shalt not want, neither
thy friend, nor thy servant. And having thus said, he thruste his ^^orde
into Brutus side, neither r^sistyng nor helpyng.

Thus Cassius and Brutus died, most nobl^ and worthy Romans, and but ^or one
fa^te, ^uer followed virtue. Whom Ca^^^^ Caesar of enemies taking Pompeyus
part, had made* ^reendes, and of friends, used them as his children: and the
Senate had them ever in great regard, and pitted their chance, and for their
two sakes, decr^^^ an act of oblivion of all things: and (...) vvorth^* u^^l^
of (...) and Cas^^^.
when they ^l^^de, sent them to provinces, that they should not seem to
flee* Not omittyng yet the honor of Caesar, nor forgettyng his feats, of
whose virtue and fortune they marvelled, being alive, and when he was dead,
buried him with public expense, and proclaimed his works to be immortal* ^
appointed offices and provinces for y^ most part by his assignement* not findyng
any thing better than Caesar had determined. But the care and regard for these
men, brought them into a suspicion The estimation of ^^ut^^ and Cas^^^ brought
calum(...).
of false accusation: they were so honored of al men. And of the best of the
banyshed men they were thought most honorable, though Pompey were at hand,
whose cause was not unpardonable, and they far off, and void of
reconciliation, needyng many things, scarsly having two legions. They gathered
after twenty legions, and as many thousand horsemen, and about* two hundred
long ships, with other sufficient furniture, and money most plentiful, of
the willing and unwilling nations and Cities that they overcame, and their
enemies The power of ^^^tu^ and Cas^^^.
of the contrary faction. They had the rule of all the Realms from Macedonia
to Euphrates, and whom soever they overcame, they brought them to their
society* and had them most trusty: they used Kings and Princes, and the
Parthians, The ^^^on^ in the ^^^ o(...)(...).
although their enemies, in matters of small account: but when they came to
great things, they could not abide them, because they would not accustom a
barbarous and hostile nation among the Romans. And most marvel of all it is,
that The Soldiers (...)ed under Caesar, were ^^sty ^o (...)us.
their army being the most part of Caius Caesar's, and desirous of his
felicity, for good will and affection, they could turn to the contrary part
to him, being killers of him, and went with them against Caesar's Son, and
more faithful to them than to Antony, fellow in rule and enterprise with
^cta^ian. For The Soldiers more (...)y to ^^^tu^ and Cas^^^ than to Antony.
none of them left Brutus or Cassius when they were overcome. But Antonie, at
Brunduse they forsook before the trial. The pretense of pains both under
Pompey and now, was not for themselves, but for the name of the peoples
government, over glorious, but not commodious. For both of them when they saw
they could be no longer profitable to their country, dispatched themselves
alike* In their several considerations Manners of Cass^us.
Cassius was i^^utable, as they that in the combattes will never g^ue over,
only having regard to the danger. Manners of Brutus.
But Brutus in every place was full of affability and gentleness, and not
ignorant of Philosophy. Yet by these men, the act against Caesar was done,
contrary in all thing, being no simple work, nor in no small matter, for it
was against their freende, contrary to reason, and against their well doer,
unthankfully, Their fault against Caesar.
whom h^e had saved in the war, and against the chief ruler, iniustly in
the Senate house, and against an holy man, having on an holy vesture: and such
an officer, as never The vvorthynesse of C^s^^ God punished the death of Caesar
^^ Brutus and Cas^us. Toke^^ to Cassius.
was the like, so profitable to all men and to his country and Empire. The
which God did punish in them, and many times gave tokens of it. For when
Cassius was purging his host, the Sergeant put on the crow^e the wrong way,
and his golden consecrate vesture of victory fell to the ground, many great
birds sitting upon the camp, made no noise, and swarms, of Bees were
continually about him.

Brutus (they say) celebratyng his birthe day in ^amo upon the Tokens to Brutus.
sea, being nothing merry about it, without occasion did cast forth this verse.

But me cruel destenie, and L^tones son does destroy. The words of
Patroclus used by Brutus.
Going with his army between Asia and Europa, and watchyng in the night when
light failed, a fearful shape appeared The bad Angel of Brutus. ^
to him. Whom he boldly askyng what man or God he was, the vision answered:
I am Brutus, thine evil luck, and at Philippi I will appear again unto
thee. And they say he saw him there before the last fight, and when the army
went out of the camp, an Ethiopian met them, whom as an evil token, they
killed.

In these things also was a divine work. That Cassius in Work of god, Cas^ius
despayreth to ^one.
victory yet indifferent, gave over all hope without any cause: and Brutus,
driven from his good determination of refrayning fight, falling into the
hands of them that were forced by famine, Brutus is ouerruled.
himself having plentyfull food, and ships at commandment, and was rather
overcome of his ^am^^iers, than of his enemies: and where they had fought many
fields, they never had no hurt. Both of them were killers of themselves, as
they were of Caesar.

Thus Cassius and Brutus were punished. Brutus body being found, Antonie
cladde it with a purple pall, and when he had The body of Brutus* (...) mother
o^ (...).
used it with fire, he sent the relikes to his mother Seruilia, Brutus army
when they heard he was dead, sent messengers to Caesar and Antony, who were
pardoned, and divided into their armies, being about.xiiij. M. They yielded
also that kept the (...)^ and (...) given to ^poyl^.
^ortes and Tents, all the which were given to Caesar's and Antonies
Soldiers to be spoiled.

Of the Noble men that were with Brutus, some were slain in the battle, some
offered themselves freely to the Generals; some of purpose continued the fight
to be killed: as Lucius ^ Cas^^us* C^^^ his son.
Cassius a brothers Son of Cassius, and Cato his Son, who falling many
times among their enemies, and being forsaken, took of his headpeece, that he
might be known, or notably killed, or both.

Labeo known for his wisdom, father of that Labeo that now Labeo.
is renou^^ed for his knowledge in the laws, made a grave in his tente, big
enough for his body, and taking order for all things with his servant, he
signified to his wife and children what he would have done, and took the
letters to his servant to carry, and taking him by the right hand whom he
loved best, and turnyng him as the Roman manner was, made him free, and being
turned he took him his sword and offered his throat, and so to him, his A
tente for a grave.
Tent was his grave. Ras^us the Thracian that brought many through the
mountains, desired a reward, and had it, to save his Policy of brethren.
brother Ras^^polis: whereby it may be perceived, that at the beginning these
Thracians were not at variance. But because two great armies at debate should
pass their countries, they divided the cert^^i^^ of fortune, that he that
wanne, might save him Po^^^^ Brutus vvi^^.
that lo^t. Portia, (...) his wife, and sister to Ca^^ the younger, when she
heard that they ^^th were read, being diligently kept of his servants, took
the fire from the har^^, and swalowed the coals. The other noble men fled to
Thaso: some sailed away, some gave themselves with the rest of the army* to
M^ss^^^, Cor(...), M^ss^^^, Cor^^^^^o and (...) re^^ant of thy^ army.
and Lucro ^ibulo, men of like authority, that they might take counsel for
themselves to do for all the rest. Many gave themselves to Antony as he sailed
toward ^hase, and all the money, armoure and plenty of victual, and any other
preparation which was great.

Thus Caesar and Antony, by singular boldness, got such a journey at two
fight ^a foot, as none had done before them for The mightiness of the armies.
no such, nor so great an army of Romans, ever came to hands before: not
gathered of common Citizens, but of the best Gentlemen: not ignorant of
fighting, but long practiced of th^selues, not of strange or barbarous nation,
but of all one language, and one art of war, of one strength and exercise,
hard to be matched therefore among themselves: none ever used more boldness
or fierceness in fight, a token of that, the number of dead men, being equal
in both fights, and no fewer of theirs that did overcome. Caesar's and Antonies
soldiers did fulfill their Captains will, in one day and one work,
changing extreme danger of famine, and fear of death, into victual
abundant, into safety stable, and into victory notable. It followed of The
fight ^hevved what would become of Rome.
that fight, that the wise Romans did prophecy. For the common wealth was
chiefly judged by that feate, and was like to have come to the populare state
again. And there was no act of any such troubles among themselves, but in
the variaunce between Caesar and Antony, which was the last among the
Romans. The things that in the mean time were done under Pompey, after
Brutus, by them that of Cassius and Brutus friends fled hither and thither,
retaining the renmaunt of so great preparation, neither were they done with
such boldness, nor with such forces of men, of Cities, or of Captains in
their provinces, for they had no nobility, no Senate, nor no glory, as Brutus
and Cassius had.

The end of the fourth book of Civil Dissentions.
The fifth Book of Appian of Alexandria, of the Civil Dissentions of the
Romans.
AFter the death of Brutus and Cassius, Octauian went into Italy, and Antonie
into Aegipt, where Cleopatra meetyng (...) in love ^^^th (...).
with him, overcame him at the first sight. The which love, brought them to
destruction, and Aegipt to utter ruin. Whereof Egypt also shall be a part of
this volume, but not so great, as it can give it ye title, because many of the
civil battles are intermedled with it. For after Cassius and Brutus, there
were like Civil Dissentions, but without a General, that commanded all as
they did, but some leading armies here, and some there, till Sextus Pompey, the
second son (...) Pompey.
of Pompey the Great, being left of that faction, was set up (...) deprived
of Brutus friends. Lepidus being now put from his dignity, all the
authority rested in Antony and Octauian, the which things fell out after this
sort.

Cassius surnamed of Parma, when Brutus and Cassius went to (...) of Parma.
battle, was left of them in Asia, with an army and a navy, to gather money.
When Cassius was dead, he having no such hope in Brutus took thirty of the
Rhodian ships, which he thought to be sufficient, and burned the rest (the holy
ones only excepted) that they should not rebel: and with these and his own
ships he departed.

Clodius being sent thither of Brutus with thirtene ships, and (...)
fynding the Rhodians revolted (for now Brutus was also dead) took away the
garrison of three thousand soldiers, and sailed to this Cassius. ^orulus did
join with them, having many other Io^^l^^.
ships and money, which he had gathered at Rhodes before they revolted. To
this navy, as to a thing of power, resorted, all they that had offices in Asia,
and made legions and soldiers for the sea, as well as they could of servants
and people, of the countries and Islands. There came to them Cicero, that was
son to Tullius (...) the y o^^^^. Th^ss^^ an Island in the (...) s^a. M(...)
Aenobarbus.
Cicero, and diverse noble Citizens, that were sled from Thaso, and by and by
there was a great army, with a sufficient navy of good Captains, taking with
them Lepidus also, with an other band, which he kept for Brutus at Creta. And
with these forces they sailed to Murcus and Oenobarbus into the gulf of Ionia,
where dividing themselves, part went into Sicelie to Sextus Pompey, and part
remained with Oenobarbus, for private faction: and thus of the remnants of
Brutus and Cassius, a new army was made.

Octauian and Antonie sacrificed for the victory at Philippi, and gave thanks
to their soldiers. And to perform their promise, Octauian went into Italy, to
distribute land to the soldiers, which he did choose for his health. And
Antony went among Octauian goes into Italy. Antony goes beyond the sea.
the nations beyond the seas, and gathered money for hie soldiers, and divided
between them, the lands y^ Lepidus had. France beyond the Alps, Octauian
would have free, according to the determination of the decree of his uncle
Caesar.

Lepidus was accused to favor Pompeys part, which if it were Lepidus accused.
found false, Octauian, determined to give him other Provinces. They licenced
the old soldiers except eight thousand, which desiring to serve still, they
divided between the^, and of them appointed bands for their bodies. To these
there were added eleven legions that went from Brutus, and.xiiij. thousand
horse, of Fphesus, now F^lg^so, a cittye of Ionia, where was the goodly
Temple builded of Amazo^s. Antony pardons. Pergama a city in Asia, not far
from the floude Ca^^^. Troy was called by this name. Laodicea, a city in
Asia, whose citizen ^eno, An to^^^ and Augustus made a king.
the which Antony took for his journey six legions and ten thousand horse.
Octauian had four thousand horse, and five legions, and for those that Antony
had, he should receive of Antonies out of Calenus, which he left in Italy,
and so sailed to the Ionian sea. When Antony was come to Ephesus, he made
solemn sacrifices to the Gods, and forgave the soldiers of Cassius, that were
in Sanctuary, and asked pardon, Petronius being except, and as many as had
conspired Caesar's death, and Quintus that betrayed Dolobella to Cassius at
Laodicea: and to the Grecians and other nations that inhabit about Pergamo in
Asia, in a great assembly of Ambassadors that came for peace, he spoke in this
wise:

You men of Grecia your King Attalus, by testament bequeathed (...) to the
(...).
you unto us, whom you found more beneficial unto you, than Attalus was, for
we forgave you the Tributes that you paid to Attalus, till we had need of
Tributes, because of them that troubled our peace. Then we set Tributes upon
you, not according to every man's value, that we might exact it without peril,
but required you to pay a portion yearly, that we might be partakers of
your yearly fruits, and feel your loss in hard tunes. And when the
Bayliffes (requiring more than they ought) did you injury, C. Caesar forgave
you the third (...) to the (...)
part of your Tributes, and forbadde that injury to be done to you
hereafter, for he committed to you the gathering of the Tributes of your
Country people. And our good Citizens call such a man as he was, a Tyrant: and
you have given them much money that were kyllers of the man, that most deserved
of you, and that against us* that revenged his quarrel But forasmuch as
Fortune, favoring the just cause, has decreed, not as you would, but as
right was, if you had continued in arms as their fellows, you had bin
punishable, but because we do easily believe, that you did it by compulsion,
we forgive you the greater punishment: only we have need of your money, your
land, and Cities, to pay our armies, which be eyghte and twenty Legions, which
with their appertena^ces makes 170. thousand, beside Horsemen, and other remnant
of the common sort. Of this multitude you may well conjecture, what charge we be
at. Octauian is gone into Italy, to divide lands and Cities unto them, and as I
might say, to bid Italy be packing. But y^ you should not leave your Cities and
Country houses, your temples and religions, and your auncesters monuments, we
only require your money, and not all, for y^ you could not bear, but a mean
part, which when you hear, I think you will go contented away. As much as you
gave our enemies in two years (which was ten years tribute) so much will we
require, saving y^ it must be paid in one year, because nenessitie so
exacteth. You may acknowledge thanks, and confess that you are not punished
as you have deserved. Thus he spoke to please ye soldiers, to whom they
promised rewards at their meeting at Modena, and then they were xl. legions, so
many of the^ were consumed. He had not fully ended his tale, when ye Grecians,
sat upon Tributes put up on the Grecians by. ^^^ony.
ye ground, with many demonstratio^s accusing ye cruelty of Brutus and Cassius,
showing they were rather worthy pardon tha^ punishment.

They would gladlye give to their friends, but they were bereft all of their
enemies, to whom they had given not only their moneys, but when that failed,
their jewels and ornaments, which they coined of themselves. At length, with
much ado, they obtained to pay nine years Tribute in two years.

As he went about the provinces, Lucius brother to Cassius, and (...) Cassi^^
^^ p^^doned of Antony.
other fearing themselves, when they had hard of his mercy showed at
Ephesus, they came and submitted themselves to him, and he pardoned them,
except such as were privy to the conspiracy, for to them he was inexorable.
He did comfort the cities yt Privileges given to the Iy^i^^^, and Xamb^an^
exhorted to restore ^^^ ^^ city* Islands given to the Rhodian^ called Clade^
nigh to (...) Iland^ (...) to the (...) A^g(...), (...) A^non^ where children
well brought up proved evil. (...) is in Asia the l^^^^ the people ^e called
Call^^ (...), ^^ ^^ part of Syria that is next Arabia. ^ (...), is ^^^^ plain
of the country. Antony partial. (...) (...) of (...) Cl^op^^^ (...) (...)
excuses ^^^ ^^li^*
were grieuouslye oppressed, and gave priuilegies to the Lycians, and exhorted
the Xanthians ^et^store their City. He gave to the Rodians, Andrus, Tenus,
Naxus and Mindus, which shortly after he took from them, because of their
sharp government.

He granted the Tarsentans and Laodicians liberty, and made free all the
Citizens of Tarsus, that had bin taken with privilege: he received the
Athenienses very gently, and gave the^ Tenus, Aegi^^, Icon, C^am, Sciathus and
Peparetis. Then going through Phrygia, Mysia, Gallogrecia, Cappadocia, Cilicia,
Cael^s^^ia, Pales^^a, Ituraea, and other provinces of Syria, he put great
Tributs upon the^. He took up matters of controversy of princes and Cittes,
even as he would himself. And where the controversy for Cappadocia, was
between Sifinn^ and Ariarathes, he preserred S^si^na for Gl^phy^^a his fair
mothers sake. In Syria he delivered the towns of Tirannes. In Cilicia he
accused Cleopatra, because she did not help Caesar in his wars She did not so
much excuse her self, as boaste that she had sent ^oure legions to Dolobella,
at the beginning of y^ war* and having prepared a Navy, was let by
tempests, and by the chance of Dolobella that was s^^ner overcome than the
looked for: and that notwithstanding, Cassius twice threatening her, she
contemned him, and Murcus also, and with a rich Navy, sailed into the Ionian
sea, and there beside other losses, fell sick. Wherefore she returned no more to
the sea, after the victory was (...)on. Then Antonie being caughte in mind
with the sight of her, he began to love her, like a young man, though he were
forty years ^^t^^y in ^oue.
of age, his nature (as it seems) ever being pliant to that thing: and
before, he had a mind to her, when he was a Captain of horsemen at
Alexandria, under Gabinius.

Now leaving his woonted diligence, he did all things as Cleopatra would have
him, without respect of God or man's law. In so much, as he sent Soldiers
to kill Arsino^ her sister, that was fled into the Temple of Diana, crying
for mercy: and commanded the Tyrians to deliver Serapion, Captain of ^^t^^y
^^^e (...) by Cleopatra. Tyrus, sometime^ an ^^ande after ^oyued to the land by
Alexander. The king of Egypt dead and never found.
Cypres, to Cleopatra, being fled for safety to Tyrus. Likewise he
commanded the Arcadians to do with an other fugitive, because he took upon
him the person of Ptolomeus, Cleopatras brother, being overcome in Nilus of
Caesar, and never seen after. He also commanded Megabysus a Pr^s^e of Diana
of Ephesus, to be delivered, because he received Arsinoe as a Queen: but when
the Ephesians made suit to Cleopatra for him, he let him go: so soon was he
changed. This affection was the beginning of his The lightness of Antony.
troubles, and end of his life. When Cleopatra was gone home, he sent his
horsemen to spoil the Palmirians, a City not far from Euphrates, a light
offense being objected to them, for a fashion, because dwelling in the
confines of the Romans, and the Parthians, they seemed to be of doubtful
faith, for they were merchants, and brought and fetched the wares of India and
Perside, to the Romans: but in very deed it was to enrich his horsemen. And
when the Palmirians had understanding of it, they conveyed away their goods,
and guarded them with Archers, wherein they excelled. The horsemen finding the
City void, went away empty and unhurtful. Of this occasion the wars of
Parthia seemed to rise, many of the tyrannes of the countreye of Syria
resorting to them. For this country (till Antiochus the The state of Syria.
good, and his son) was under Kings, successoures of Seleucus: but being
brought into the form of a province, they had Scaurus Scaurus. (...)ius*
Crassus.
their President* to whom the Senate sent other successors, and among them,
Gabi^^^s, which made war upon the Alexandrians. Crassus succeeded Gabinius,
which was after slain of the Parthians. But after the death of Caesar, and
sedition rising, every City was holden by an usurper, the Partheans helping
them. And now had they entered Syria, ( Crassus being dead) one alluring
another: from whence Antonie drove them away, and made them flee to the
Parthians. Which being done, he put tributes upon the people, and did not
pacify the province after the commotion of the Palmirians, but divided his
army into wintering places. He went to Cleopatra into Egypt, of whom being
princely received, he tarried the Winter with her, like a private man in an
Antony pr^^^re.
other man's kingdom, either to show, that the rule perteyned not to him: or
to be the more fit to frequent the feastful days of the Winter. And leaving
all cares of a Captain, he put on a Greeks robe, and such a garment, as the
Athente^ses and Egiptians Priests do use. And he resorted only to temples,
scoo^es, and assemblies of Philosophers, keeping company with the Grecians that
obeyed Cleopatra, for whose cause he had (as he said) made that voyage.

Caesar Octauian in the mean time fell sick in his journey to Octa^io^ sick.
Rome, and very dangerously at Brundusi^, where it was said, he was dead.
Being recovered, he entered the City, and delivered Antonies letters to his
Captains, who straight commanded Calenus to deliver two legions to Octauian,
and wrote into Africa to Sextius, to deliver that province: both the which were
done. Then dyscharging Lepidus of his suspicion, he committed Africa Division
of Italy to the soldiers.
to his government, and sold such goods of the condemned men, as were not yet
bought. Going about to place his Soldiers in their dwellings, and to divide
their lands, he found great troubles: For, the Soldiors required every best
City in Italy, as they were chosen before the war. Contrary, those Cities
required, that all Italy might be contributarie to this division, or the places
of dwelling might be appointed by lot. The soldiors also required the valewe of
the lands, because there was no common pay. Both old and young women, and
children, assembled together in the Temples, and public places, lamenting and
complaining, that they being native of Italy, should be put from their houses
and lands, as prisoners in the war. The people wept for these miseries, and
most of all, when they remembered that it was not done for the common wealth,
but for the private lust of a few, the which had overthrown the common
weal, and now gave their Soldiers rewards, that they, by that gift, should
be ready to serve their turns, and still k^epe (...) of Italy.
down the common state. Caesar appeased the Cities, and showed the cause of
necessity, and that all was not sufficient. And he says truth, for the
neighbors were oppressed of the soldiers, I^s^tiablenesse of Soldiers
going beyond their bounds, and catching more than was given them, and taking
ever the best. Neither were they frayed by Caesar's rebukes, nor contented with
new gifts, for they did now little force of the princes, who had need of their
help, to hold up their ambition. For now the end of the five years
approached, and every one had need of several help to maintain his Lordship.
The Soldiers had need of them, to keep still that which was given them: they
had need of the Soldiers favor, to confirm their rule. Caesar also
comforted the needy Soldiers with other gifts, borowyng money of Temples,
whereby he won their hearts, O(...) excl^i(...) ^po^.
they being thankful to him, as of whom they had received their lands and
goods, and they that were spoiled, crying out upon him, which he suffered for
the Soldiers sakes.

Lucius brother to Antonie being Consul, and his wife Fuluia, and Manius that
had the oversight of his things in his absence, that this benefit might not
seen to be only of Octauian, nor he have only the thank, and the other
general be defrauded of the favor of the Soldiers, used subtle means, that
the placyng of the inhabitauntes might be deferred till Antonies coming.
Which when it seemed impossible, for the haste of the Soldiers, they desired
of Octauian, that they might place Antonies Soldiers, although by agreement
it was granted to Caesar Antonies Soldiers placed by his friends.
Octauian by Antonie* which they denied to be true. Therefore bryngyng F^^luia
with Antonies little children to the camp, they besought them instantly, not to
suffer Antonie to be defrauded Antonie renounced.
of his thanks, and renown that he had gotten. Antonies name was then very
glorious among the Soldiers and others, for the victory at Philippi was
attributed to Antonie only, because of Caesar's sickness. Though Octauian saw
that covenant was broken, yette for Antonies sake, he was content to give
place. So Antonies legions were placed with very much license, that they
should not seem to be inferior to the benefit of Caesar. There were other
Cities near to these, whose lands were divided to the Soldiers, which
suffered many injuries of the Oppression of Cities.
Soldiers, the Citizens crying to Octauian, that division of lands was now
more cruel, than proscriptions of life. For then enemies were punished, now
innocents are plagued. Caesar did well perceive the injury, but could not
remedy it. For neither had he money wherewith to pay the possessours of the
land, neither could the rewards of victory be deferred, for the wars that
might ensue, Pompey being Lord of the Sea, who Pompeys Aenobarbus and Mur*cus
Lords of the sea.
caused famine in the City, all victual being kept away: Aenobarbus and
Murcus, having an other army, and gatheryng an other navy: and the Soldiers
the more unwilling, except they have promise kept: and the space of five
years was almost come, so as they must have need of Soldiers, Insolency
of Soldiers.
and therefore bare with their insolency: In so much, as in the Theater, a
common Soldier wantyng a proper seat, Theater the place where they behold
pastyme.
went and satte in the place of a Gentleman. The people noted it, and Caesar
raised him. The Soldiers were angry at it, and when Caesar came from the
pass time, they compassed him, and required their fellow Soldier, whom they
thought to be destroyed. But when he came, they said he came out of prison,
Insolency of Soldiers.
which because he denied, they said he was hired so to say, and was a
Traitor to his company. This rudeness was used in the Theater.

Being called to the division into the camp of Mars, and coming to it by
night, they were angry that Caesar tarried so long. Nonius a Captain rebuked
them, and told them their duty, and put the cause upon Caesar's sickness.
They called him Nonius killed of the Soldiers.
flatterer, and threw stones upon him, and drove him to take a water, out of
the which they took him up dead, and laid him in the way* where Caesar
should pass, who was monished by his friends, not to trust their rage: but
he to a^oyde further inconvenience by his absence, went on, and when he
Uproar of Soldiers.
saw the dead body of Nonius, he went aside. And when the fault was laid upon
a few, he willed them hereafter one to spare another, and so gave them gifts
and distribution of lands, and Sufferance and liberality of (...).
rewarded some beyond their own expectation. Which constancy of him they so
lyked, as they required that the kyllers of Nonius might be punyshed. He
said, he knew them well enough, and was satisfied with their confession and
conscience: and the rest he forgave. By the which mercy and liberality,
being provoked, they made great shoutes of his felicity. These two contempts
of the Soldiers among many other, may suffice to be showed.

The cause of this, were they, that without lawful authority, Cause of
disorder among the Soldiers.
(as happeth in civil wars) taking upon them to be Capitaynes, led these
Soldiers, not to serve their country, but themselves: not against enemies,
but against Citizens. This destroyed the discipline of the Romans war. The
Soldier, rather desirous to serve for pryuate affection, and the Capytaynes
to abuse them for private commodity. Not only a Soldier, but whole armies
were to be bought for money. And it was offense to favor the good, and praise
to advance the evil. So as for light causes, whole armies would go from a
good and lawful leader, to a lewd and vsurpyng Captain: (like agreeyng with
like) the Soldiers took them for enemies, were they never so honest, that
their Capitaynes hated. And the Capitaynes to have Soldiers at hand, suffered
them to commit things abominable, without al reverence of law and justice.
So now all discipline being corrupted, they were Discipline corrupted.
compted best, that could raise most sedition.

The City in the mean time, was in great penury, their provision of corn
being stopped by Pompey. In Italy, tillage being Pe^^^ie and troubles in Rome.
almost le^te for the continuance of war, and that that there was, being
consumed of the Soldiers: and in the City, thieves and murderers by night,
were unpunished, for what soever was done, was imputed to the Soldier. The
commons shut up their shoppes, and were without officers, which would not
serve where theft was suffered.

But Lucius, being well affected to the common wealth, and Lucius takes part
with the old husbandemen.
grieved with the power of the three Princes, continuyng longer than the time
appointed, contended with Caesar* for he only promised help to the old
possessioners, making supplication to all the officers, and they promised their
service to him. Whereby, both Antonies Soldiers, and Caesar himself, accused
him as an enemy to him, and Fuluia also, as stirrers of war out of time. But
a Manius counsel.
devise of Manius prevailed, which persuaded Fuluia, that if Italy were in
quiet, Antony would remain with Cleopatra in Aegipt, but if wars were
styrred, he would come quickly. Fuluia Antonies wise stirs war.
Then Fuluia of a womannishe passion, incensed Lucius, and when Caesar went to
place the new inhabitancies, Antonies children and Lucius went with them,
that Caesar should not have the whole thanks, by going alone. Caesar's
horsemenne scoured the coaste toward Sicelie, that Pompey should not spoil
it. Lucius Beginning o^ suspicion.
either afraid in deed, or fayning to be afraid, that these horsemen were
sent against him and Antonies children, went in haste to the inhabitauncies
of Antonie, to get a guard about him, accusing Caesar, as unfaithful to
Antony. But he answered, that he kept faith and friendship with Antonie, and
that Lucius sought to move war, for y^ he was offended with the rule of the^
three, by the which the new inhabitants might take full possession, and that
the horsemen were yet in the coast, and did their duties. When Teano, a city ^
Fia Appia. An other in Apulia. Conditions between Caesar and Antonies
soldiers.
Antonies Soldiers understood this, they made a meeting with him at Theano,
and were reconciled to him with these conditions.

That he should divide no lands but to such as served at Philippi.

That the money of the condemned men, and their lands, should be equally
divided among Antonies Soldiers.

That hereafter one alone should not leuy men.

That two legio^s of Antonies should serve Caesar against Po^pey.

That the Alps toward Spain should be open to them that Caesar sent, and
not be shut by Asinius.

That Lucius should put away his guard, and exercise his office with
quietness.

These were the covenants, whereof only the two last were kept. And
Saluidienus passed the Alps spyte of them that kept Preneste now Pilestrena
a City in Latio.
them, the rest were defeated. Wherefore Lucius went to Preneste, affirmyng he
was afraid of Caesar having a guard about him, and he none. Fuluia also went
to Lepidus, saying, she was afraid Fuluia flees to Lepidus.
of her children, for she trusted him better than Caesar. And they both wrote
to Antonie, certain friends carrying their letters, that might certify him of
all things, the copies whereof I have long sought, and can not find. Then the
chief of the armies, agreed to take up this matter, and affirmed they would
compel him that were unwilling. They sent for Lucius friends to come to
them, which they denying to do, Caesar accused them, as well to the chief of
the armies, as to the officers of the Cities.

Then great resort was made to Lucius out of the City, Great resort to
Lucius.
beseechyng him to have compassion of afflicted Italy, and take some man, that
either with him, or with the Capitaynes might make an end of the matter. And
where as Lucius had regard both of them that spoke, and also of the things
spoken, Manius Manius answer sharp.
answered sharply. That Antonie only gathered money of strange nations, but
Caesar did get men's love by prevention of the armies and fit places of
Italy. For by fraud he had gotten France, which was Antonies province, and
for xviij. cities, that should be given to the Soldiers, he ransacked almost
all Italy. And also gave money to four and thirty legions, not only to eight
and twenty that fought in his quarrel: and that he had spoiled Temples in
pretense of war against Pompey, which was not yet begone, for all the great
dearth in the City, but in deed to win the favor of the Soldiers against
Antonie, in so much as the goods of the attaynted, are not sold before they
be given to the^: but if he seeks peace, in good faith, he must make
accomptof things he has done, and hereafter do nothing but by consent of
both. This was the bold answer of Manius, that neither Caesar should do
any thing alone, nor the couenaunts between him and Antonie remain firm,
that is, that either of them should have full authority in their provinces,
and each confirm others acts.

Caesar seeing that they sought war, prepared himself for it, but the two
legio^s that were placed about of Ancona, and first Souldioures of Ancona labor
for peace.
served his father, and after Antony, for the love they bare to them both,
sent Ambassadors to Rome, to pray them to have respect to peace. And when
Caesar answered that he swerued not with Antony, but Lucius with him, the
Ambassadors conferring with the officers of Antonyes Souldyoures, sent a
common Embassage to Lucius, requiring him to be content to commit his
difference with Caesar, to arbitrament, affirmyng they would take upon them,
except he would condiscende. Having obtained their request, Gabij was
appointed the place Gabij a people, destroyed by Tarquinius Superbus. Meeting
at Gabij. A fight by chance.
of meeting, in the midde way between Rome and Preneste. There was prepared a
seat for the Judges, and two chayres to show the cause. Caesar came first,
and sent Horsemen that way that Lucius should come, either to see what Lucius
did, or whether there were any traynes laid. They lyghted upon Antonyes
Horsemen, which came as forerunners of Lucius, or to see if all were clear:
they fell to fight, and some were killed. Wherefore Lucius went back for
fear of treason (as he said) and being The day frustrate.
called of the chief of the army, promising him to conducte him safe, he
refused. Thus the pacifyers being deceived, war was threatened with bitter
words between them. Lucius had The war breaks. Lucius power.
six legions, of the levy which he took when he was created Consul, beside
eleven of Antonyes, under Captain Caleno, and all those in Italy.

Caesar had four Legions at Capua, and certain bands for Caesar's power.
Antium was a City in Latio, very good upon the Sea. Lannuuium, now Indo^i^^.
Treasure houses of holy money. Tibure now Tiuoli. Nemore, not ^arre from
Aritia. Pompey increases.
his person.

Saluidienus brought other six Legions out of Spain.

Lucius had money of the provinces that Antony had pacyfyed.

Caesar had of all them that came unto him by lotte, except Sardinia, which
was then in war.

He got much of Temples, promising to render it with interest, that is, of
Capitoli^, Antio, Lanuuio, Nemore, Tibure, in the which Cities be treasures at
this day of holy money.

Out of Italy all things were not quiet, for Pompey, by resort of condemned
Citizens, and ancient possessioners, was greatly increased, both in might,
and estimation: for they that feared their life, or were spoiled of their
goods, or lyked not the present state, fled all to him. And this
disagreemente of Lucius, augmented his credit: beside a repair of young men,
desirous of gain and service, not caring under whom they went, because they
were all Romans, sought unto him. And among other, his (...) to (...).
cause seemed most just. He was waxed rich by booties of the Sea, and he had
good store of Ships, with their furniture. Murcus also brought him two
legions, and five hundred archers, much money, and fourscore Ships: and he
had another army from Cephalenia. Wherefore me^ think, that if he had then
invaded (...) Sea. Pompey loses (...). Honor of Pompey. Sextius.
Italy, he might easily have got it, which being afflicted with famine and
discord, looked for him. But Pompey of ignorance had rather desend his own,
than invade others, till so he was overcome also. In Africa Sextius the
Lieutenant to Antony, being lately commanded to deliver his charge to Fagion
Caesar's Lieutenant, and sent again to take it from Fagio, who would not
deliver Fagio.
it, but made war, having a band of discharged Souldyoures, and a number of
Africanes, and the help of the Princes there. And when Fagio was overcome in
both wings of his battle, and also lost his Camp, thinking it had come by
treason; Fagio kills himself. (...). ^. Carinas.
killed himself, and so Sextius onto again was Lord of both provinces of
Africa. Bocchus King of the Mauritians, at the persuasion of Lucius, made
war upon Carinas, Governor of Spain for Caesar. And Aenobarbus with lxx.
Ships, and two legions, and a band of archers and venturers, scouring the sea
of Ionia, destroyed the regions that accepted the rule of the three men. And
being come to Brunduse, ^e partly took the Gallyes of Caesar, and partly
burned them, and driving the Brundusians within their wall, spoiled the lands.
Caesar sent a legion thither, and willed Saluidienus to come out of Spain. And
throughout Italy men were mustered in have, as well of Caesa a Captains, as of
Antonyes, for Lucius. Diverse (...) troubled all over.
fightes there was between them both, in just battle, and in ambushmentes:
The favor of Italy was more inclined to Lucius, because he fought for them
against the new inhabitants. Not only the Cities that were given in pray, but
also all Italy was stirred, fearing the like calamity, and rejecting Caesar's
souldioures that borrowed holy money, and partly kylling them, they gave aid to
Lucius, keeping their Cities for him. Contrariwise the new inhabitants stuck
to Caesar, as though either labored for their own. In this state, Caesar
called the Senatoures and Oct^i^^: to the Senate.
the Gentlemen, and thus spoke unto them: I know I am contemned of Lucius
faction as a coward, and afraid of mine own weakness: and that contempt is
increased by your assembly. I have a valiant army, both that which he iniureth
by hyndering their possession, and also that which aforetime have served under
my banner, the rest be as sure, except one meaning. I delighte not in civil
wars that be not necessary, nor do think to abuse the Citizens that be left,
to destroy one another, chiefly in this civil motion, the misery whereof
shall not be told from Macedonia or Thracia, but shall be seen in Italy. The
which if it be the field of this war, what incommodities shall it suffer.
This is the cause why it yrketh me to begin first. And now I protest, that I
neither quarrel with Antony, nor do any thing why he should quarrel with me.
It is your part, that for your selves you do reprove Lucius, with his
abettors, whom I pray you to reconcile unto me: but if they continue in their
obstinacy, I shall make it known, that I am not slow for fear, but for
consideration. You shall be witnesses not only to me, but also to Antony, that
I am driven to this necessity, by the insolency of Lucius, When Caesar had
thus said, they returned in have to Preneste. Lucius answered only this, that
the matter would come to trial on both sides shortly, and that Caesar
dissembled, who had sent a legion to Brunduse, to stop Antonyes passage from
Italy. Manius also showed Antonyes Epistle, false or true I can not tell, which
A letter of (...) shevved.
willed his estimation to be mainteyned, though it were by war. And when the
Ambassadors of the Senate did demand, if any man did blemish his estimation,
and if they did, they should complain to y^ Judges. Manius used many
threatenings again, till they went No conclusion of peace.
away without conclusion. Yet y^ Ambassadors did not show y^ answer to Caesar,
either because he knew it particularly, or because they were abashed, or for
some other cause. Then present war appeared. Lepidus Gouernoure of the City.
Caesar made provision, and left Lepidus Governor of yt city with a garrison of
two legions. Many of the noble men of Rome resorted to Lucius, declaryng that
the authority of three men did displease (...) to Lucius (...). (...) of two
legions.
them. And thus this war followed after this sort. Two legions of Lucius at
Alba made a tumulte, and drove away their Captains, and were ready to
reuolte. Caesar and Lucius both made have to them. Lucius came first, and with
many fair words and promises stayde them. Furnius brought him another army,
and Caesar cut off the tail of it, and drove Furnius to an hill. He that
night following went to Sentia, a City of his Furnius besege^ at Sentia,
betvveene Campania and (...). Lucius enters the City.
faction, whom Caesar would not follow for fear of traynes, but the next day
beseeged the City. Lucius went to Rome with al have, and sent in three bands
by night, he followyng with his army, where he was received of Nonius that had
the guard of the gate, and took his Souldyoures to serve. Lepidus escaped, and
went Lepidus flees. Lucius to the people of Rome.
to Caesar. Lucius assembled the people, and put them in good hope, that Caesar
and Lepidus should be punished for their misgouernement, and that his brother
would willingly give over his unlawful authority, and take the Consulship
for it, which was an office instituted by their ancient fathers. When he had
said thus much, the people being glad, and thinking that the three men's
authority should soon cease, saluted him General, which done, he went
against Caesar, gathering by the way another host of the places of Antonyes
inhabitance, and settled them, being well affected to Antony: but Barbatius,
who had bin his treasourer Berbatius.
in war, and was sent from him in displeasure, told the people that Antony
was angry with them that styrred against Caesar, and the common authority. The
people being thus abused, forsook Lucius, and went to Caesar. Lucius now
marched against People forsakes Lucius.
Saluidienus, that brought great power out of France to Caesar, and
Saluidienus. Asinius. (...). Agrippa.
Asinius, and Ventidius, Antonyes Captains, followed at y^ tail, so as he
could not go forward. Agrippa a man most trusty to Caesar, fearing least
Saluidienus should be compassed, took Lombardy, y^ which place he thought
Lucius could not spare and that he would leave Saluidienus, and come against
him, and so might Saluidienus follow at y^ tail. And Agrippa was not
deceived, for when Lucius saw he was deceived of his purpose, he repaired to
Asinius, ^ Ve^tidius, whereby Saluidienus and Agrippa, were free to take what
advantage they could: which, when Lucius perceived, and durst not fight with
them both, he went to Perugia, a City well defensed, (...)oeth to Perugia.
and there encamped, loking for Ventidius: but by and by Caesar, Agrippa and
Saluidienus coming upon him, he was be^i^ged with three armies at Perugia: and
least Lucius might escape their hands, they sent to Caesar's other forces, to
deteine Asinius and Ventidius, although they made no great have, nor approved
that war, nor Occasion of the hinderaunce of Lucius.
were sure of Antonies mind. Beside, there was emulation between them, either
of them seeking to be leader of all.

Lucius being thus besieged, neither durst give battle, being Lucius in
distress.
inferior not only in number, but also in goodness of Soldiors, nor depart
from thence, so many being ready to molest him: therefore he sent to Ventidius
and Asinius, by Manius, to persuade the^ to come to help him and the^ that
were besieged. He sent also Titinius, with four thousand horse, to spoil
Caesar's lands, that thereby he might call him from the siege, and so have
Perugia, Siege of Perugia.
free to winter in, if need were, til Ventidius and his company might come.
But Caesar having al his power together, compassed Caesar encloteth Lucius.
the place, eight miles about, because of the hills that be there, and made a
long trenche to Tiber, that nothing should be Tiberis springs about.
Are^^o, and goes thorough Turs^an to Rome now Tenure. Plancus.
brought from thence to Perugia, Luc^^n after like sort trenched the roots of
the hills. Fuluia, commanded Ventidius Asinius, Ateius and Calenus to make
haste to help them that were besieged, and gathered a new host, and sent it
by Plancus to Lucius. This Plancus by the way cut off a legion of Caesar's.
And Plancus.
whereas Asinius and Ventidius went very slowly, as uncertain of Antonies will,
yet, for Fuluia and Manius sake, they came forward. Caesar with Agrippa went
to meet them, leaving sufficient forces at Perugia. But they disseuered
themselves: the one Lucius power dieuerereth them selves. Pa^enna fi^deth at
the gulf of ^^n^ce Arimeno on the (...) the (...) the (...) Se (...)
to Rauenna, the other to Arimeno, and Plancus to Spoleto. Caesar leaving
against each of them power to keep them from joining again together,
returned to Perugia, and added rampires to the ditches, making the ditches
more large, by thirty foot, both in breadth and deepnesse. He made also the
trenches stronger, and joined to them. 1500, towers of woodde.lx. foot
asunder, so as they served for both turns, as well to resist them that came
to the City, as to keep them in, that would come out of it. In the which
times there were many sallies made (...) of the (...).
out of the city, Caesar's men being the better a far off with shot, and Lucius
more bold at hand stroks. But when the work was finyshed, famine took the
city, and encresed daily. For neither y^ cicize^s nor Lucius, had made any
provision of victuals. Which, when Caesar (...)e in Perus ^^^. ^^len ^es be the
^rie day of the a^^neth. (...) the first month of the yetre. I(...) a
sayleth the camp.
understood, he kept the^ the straighter. The night before the Calends of
January, Lucius thinking y^ feastful time would have wrought negligence among
the enemies, he gave an assault to y^ camp, thinking he might have put in some
companions, which he had many in diverse places: but one legion being quickly
called of the watch, and Caesar coming with his bands, after a sharp fight,
Lucius was repulsed. At this time in Rome, corn being kept Tumulte in Rome for
corn. V^nt^^ us.
for the use of the soldiors, the people with tumult and contention, ran into
private houses, and took what corn they could. Now Ve^tidius soldiors
thinking it a shame, not to help Lucius, marched forth, and overthrew Caesar's
garrisons in every pla^ce. But when Agrippa and Saluidienus were come with more
me^, they turned to Fulginio, a castle not far off from Perugia, where being
besieged Fulginie.
of Agrippa, they signified by night to Lucio, with many fires, where they were.
Then it was thought best to try it out by fight. But Plancus thought it best to
stay, and not to hazard thi^selues between (...) connsel.
Caesar and Agrippa, which sentence prevailed. They that were besieged at
Perugia, when they saw the fires, they were glad, and thought there was some
impediment y^ they came not forward: and when the fire ceased, they thought
they had bin destroyed. Then Lucius oppressed with famine, made issues out of
the city, from the first watch until break of day, on every side: but being
repulsed in every place, he retired, and perusing the victuals, commanded, that
the bondmen should have none, and yet to be kept, that Extremity of s^^uine.
they should not get out to show the need to y^ enemy. They ran about in
Orchards and gardens, and eat grass and leaves where they Misery of sla^^es
could find any: and when they were pined, Lucius put the^ into diches, that
the enemy should not perteiue any burials, nor the City be infected with the
favors. But no end being of hunger nor death, the soldiors being weary, desired
Lucius to sally out again, and they would break the conteary trench. Whole
feruentnesse when Luqueius saw, he said: Of late we did not fight so
valiauntly as we (...) f^ll (...).
might have done, now therefore yield, or sight to death. Every man consented.
Therefore that the night should give none occasion to cowardnesse, they desired
they might go to it in the day: and so Lucius led them forth, at break of
day, with many scales and engines of iron and other, to fill the ditches and
climb the Assault of the Trenche.
trenches, and with all kind of weapons to throw. Thus they issued with great
violence, and filled the ditches without stop, and casting their engines to
the wall, some did beat down the trenche: some set up their scales, and some
assaulted the toures, and without all respect of death fought it out,
notwithstanding the great resistaunce that was made with the shot on the
contrary part. This fight was in diverse places, so as the defeuce The
^er^enelle of the fight.
was the weaker. The fight was fierce upon the bridge which they passed, and
also scaled the rampire, and were like to have done some desperate feate,
except the most valiant of Caesar's host, had with like courage come to the
resista^ce, ever being relieved with fresh men: and the other at length being
tired, were thrown from the trench, and their engines broke, and yet they stuck
to it without shrinking though strength and voice failed them. Yet not being
able to resist, and ashamed to give place, they abode Lucius repulsed.
it, til Lucius did blow the retreat, at the which, when Caesar's soldiers did
make great token of gladness, Lucius men stricken with shame, took their
scales again, and approached the wall: but not able to do any good, Lucius again
did call them back, y^ they should not cast away their lives in vain. Then
with heavy hearts and against their wills they retired.

This was the end of this sharp assault. Caesar then appointed souldioures to
ward at the french, and at a token, to leap up to the wall, which they
dydde^, though they had none d^casion, exercising themselves, and
discouraging their foes. Lucius Souldioures remained sad, and the wards were
negligentlye kept, so as diverse fled into the Camp not only of the common
sort, but also some Capitaynes. Lucius was inclined to peace, pitying the
multitude that perished, one thing hindered it, that Caesar's en^^ies were afraid
of themselves, (...) en^loned to (...).
but when it was heard that he used the fugitives ge^tly, and that he was
desirous of no man's death, the^ Luius thought it expedient, without any
further respect, to seek peace. And least the people would deliver him for
all, he thought he would prove Lucius to the be ^ieged.
their minds, and thus said:

My desire and intent was (O soldier fellows) to have reduced the common
wealth, to that state y^ our ancestors left it, because I saw the office of
the thres men turned into Tirannye, and not amended after the death of Brutus
and Cassius, by whom they made their pretense of war. For Lepidus being
removed from their Collegeship, and Antony occupied in far parts, this man
alone does here what he lists: the laws be only pretenses, and shades. I
seeking remedy for these incommodities and minding to have restored the common
wealth, I required that the soldiers, having their due rewards, the power of
one might have bin abolished, which because I could not do, I went about to
do it by force and power. Then this man accused me to the army, as one that
pitied the antie^t inhabitance: of the which accusation being ignorant, and not
believing it when I heard of it, because I was sure you received lands by my
division: yet many believed that false accusation, and joined with him to make
war against us, which one day they shall find to be done against themselves.
For I am witness, that you following the better part, have labored for the^,
above your strength. Yet we be overcome, not of the eunimye, but of hunger, and
as it were forsaken of our Captains. It should have become me to have abiden
the uttermost for my country: and thereby in the end have had the praise of my
good will: but I can not for you, whose safety I prefer before my glory.
Therefore I will send Ambassadors to the victour, and I will require him to
punish me only, and let you go, and that he would give you y^ forgiveness,
which I do not ask for my self. You being Citizens as he is, and sometime his
soldiers, not now offending, but having a just cause of war, be overcome,
not with fight, but with famine. When be had thus said, he sent by and by three
of the offiters that were chief. The rest of the multitude lamented, either
their own case, or the Generals, which meant well as they did, and seemed to be
a friend of the common wealth, and feign Ambassadors to Caesar.
to give place to extreme necessitye. The Ambassadoures that were sent to
Caesar, remembered to him their common country, their common souldiourfare
passed, the friendships of the noble men of both sids, the custom of their
ancestors abhorring from Caesar's answer
such deadly Oissentions, and other things to this purpose. Caesar, knowing
that his enemies host consisted in old and young soldiers, used art, and
said, he pardoned all Antonies soldiers, the other he required to submit to
his discretion. Thus he Private talk.
spoke openly, but secretly to Furnio, he signified he would pardon al, except
his private enemies: which private talk with Furni^s, they had in suspicion,
and said, that war was not made for displeasure, but for common cause, and
required Lucius either to have general peace, or martial war. Lucius having
pity of those noble men that were equal in dignity with the other, praised
them, and said he would send other Ambassadors to him: and Lucius goes to
Caesar.
because he thought none so fit as himself, he would go alone without an
Heraulte. When it was told Caesar that Lucius was coming to him, he went
straight to meet him, and they both came in sight, accompanied with their
friends, in the habit of a General. Then Lucius sending aside all his friends,
went on with two Sergeants, signifying what he meant: and Caesar following
Caesar meets with Lucius.
that benevolence, showed the like token of modesty. And when he saw Lucius
come within his trenche, that so he might show himself to be in his power, he
first went out of the Trenche, that Lucius might be free to save himself.
This Lucius to Caesar.
they did outwardly by tokens of courtesy, and when they were come to the
ditche, and had saluted each other, Lucius thus began.

If I had made this war with strangers, I would have bin ashamed (O Caesar)
to have bin overcome, and more ashamed to yield myself: from the which
ignominy, I would easilye have delivered my life: But because I have dealt
with a Citizen of like authority, and that for my country, I think it no
shame for such a cause to be overcome of such a man, which I speak, not that
I refuse to suffer any thing that thou writ put upon me, being come to this
camp, without an Herald, but to ask pardon for other, just and commedious
for thine estate. Which, that thou may understand the more plainly, I will
separate their cause from mine, that after thou shall understand that I am the
only cause, thou may exercise thine anger upon me. Think not that I will
inuey against thee licentiously, which now were out of time, but will only
tell the truth, which I cannot dissemble.

I took this war against thee, not that I would be a Prince, if I had
dispatched thee: but that I might have brought the Common wealth to the rule
of the Senate, which is now taken away by the power of three, as thou thy
self canste not deny.

For when you begun it, confessyng it unlawful, you said it was necessary
for a time, Cassius and Brutus being alive, who could not be reconciled unto
you. They being taken away, the rest, (if any rest there be) being afraid of
you, and taking arms, not against the Common wealth, and your time being
ended, I required that the oppressed Senate might be restored, not regardyng
my brother before my Country. For I hoped to have persuaded him at his
return, and I made haste to do it in the time of mine office. If thou
would have done so, thou should have had the glory alone, but because
I could not persuade thee, I went to the Cittye, and thought to get it by
strength and force, being a Senatoure, and a Consul.

These were the only causes of this war, not my brother, not Manius, not
Fuluia, nor the lands divided to the Souldyoures, that wanne the field at
Philippi: not the pity of the old possessioners cast out of the lands: for
by mine authority, some were appointed to lands for my brothers Legions, the
old owners spoiled. But this calumniation thou dyddest devise, that thou
myghtest put the fault of the war from thy self, to me, and the new
inhabiters. And by this art, wynnyng the hearts of the old Souldyoures, thou
have wanne also the victory: for it was persuaded them, that I would put
them out by violence. These devices were to be used, when thou made war
against me. Now being Conqueroure, if thou be an ennimie of thy Country,
make me an enemy also, that could not remedy it, being let by famyne.
And this I speak freely, gyuing my self (as I said) into thy hands,
showing what I thought of thee before, and now also, being with thee alone.
Thus much of my self.

Now, as concerning my friends, and the whole army: if thou will believe me,
I will give thee most profitable council. Do not use them hardly for my
cause, and matter: and seeing thou art a man, and subject to unstable fortune,
make not thy friends the flower to venture, for thee, if they shall see
examples given of thee, nothing to be hoped, but to the Conqueroures. And if
thou reject all my council, as of thine enemy, I may not be ashamed to
crave pardon of thee, that thou would not exact punishmente of my friends
for my fault or missefortune, but rather turn all upon me, which am the
cause of all these troubles: for I have left them behind me of purpose, least
if I should speak these things in their hearing, I should seem to seek
mine own cause. To this Caesar answered.

When I saw thee come to me without an Heraulde, I came apace out of my
camp, that thou myghtest freely do that might be for thy good. And seeing
thee acknowledgyng thy fault, thou commyttest thy self to my power, I need
not confute the things which thou have objected against me firmly, but
falsely, hurting me now as thou (...) before. For if thou had come to make
confederation, thou should have come to an angrye Conqueroure not without a
cause. But now, seeing without any condition thou give thy self, thy friends
and army to us: al anger is taken away, al necessity of truce is cut off.
For now I must consider, not so much what you have deserved, as what is
seemly for me to do, which I had rather do, either for Gods cause, for my
cause, or for thy sake (O Lucie): neither will I deceive Caesar pardons
the expectation that thou haste brought with thee.

Thus much do I find in the daily notes of the Chronicles of that time, in this
matter. and Caesar marvelled at the noble and stout The marvel of both
Generalis.
courage of Lucius, joined with prudence: and Lucius marvelled at the clemency
and quick briefness of Caesar: the other gathered comecture of their talk,
by the countenance of them both. Then Lucius sent to the chief Captains,
that they should receive Lucius rendereth
the watch word of Caesar. They brought a book of the number for so was the
manner, as it is now, that when the captain A book of the number of
soldioures. Lucius soldiers receive watch word of Caesar.
asks the watch word, he offers to the Prince a book of his number every
day. Receiving the watch word, they did not leave the wented watches, for so
Caesar commanded that they should keep watch severally. The next day Caesar
sacrificed, and Lucius sent the host to Caesar, carrying their harness, but
going in their common apparel, and a far off they saluted Caesar, as
General, and stayde legion by legion, as Caesar had appointed: for he
divided the old legions from the young. When he had sacrificed, he sat in
the Generals seat, and commanded every one to lay down their armor, which
being done, he commanded the old soldiers to draw nighe, that he might
reprove their unkindness, and make them afraid, yet his meaning was known
well enough. Then whither it was of purpose, or of affection, Caesar's
souldioures came ^ute of their places, Soldiers embracing.
and embraced Lucius soldiers, and wept, and sued to Caesar for them, and they
would not leave, but still cried upon Caesar, so as there was much mourning.
But Caesar changing his mind, and appeasing the multitude, said thus:

You my (fellow Souldyers) have always so well served Caesar pardons the
young Souldyoures.
me, as I can not deny you anything. The young Souldyers, which I think have
served justly under Lucius standerd I remitte: but those that have heretofore
bin joined with you in war, and now be saved by your mean, I would ask,
what miurie I have done them, or what grace denied them, that they should
serve another, and bear armoure against me and you, and themselves? for I
suffered all the pains for division of the lands, of Souldyers ^^i^t cry for
pardon.
the which these were partakers, whose l^udenesse now, if you will sufferme, I
will punish. But they denying that, and continually calling for pardon, I
grant (quoth he) that you demand, Pardon.
let them go free, so as hereafter they agree with you: which being promised
on both parts, thanks were cried to Caesar, who was content that some should
be lodged in houses. The common sort he wylled to lie in their Camp, where
they first were placed, till he sent them to wintering. Then sitting in the
high seat, he called Lucius, and the chief out of Perugia, among whom, were
many Senatoures and Gentlemen, all in hea^ie Remanes appeared, and were well
used for a time.
shape, who being out of the Town, a garrison entered. When they were come,
Caesar took Lucius to him, the other were committed to his friends and
officers, being warned to keep them in honest and secret custody. The
Perugians crying for pardon over the wall, he commanded to come without the
Senate Perugians pardoned.
only, which being done, he pardoned them.

The Senatoures were put in prison, and after killed, except Lucius
Aaemilius, who being in Rome, when y^ killers of Caesar were cried, he thought
good they should be punished, and the Captains of Perugia killed.
City purged. He minded to have given the City in spoil to the Souldyoures,
but one Sextius, a mad fellow, surnamed Macedonian, because he had served
in Macedonia, set his Sextius sets the City on fire. Perugia set on fire.
own house on fire, and threw himself into it, and the wind being great,
blew the fire over all the City; and burned it, the temple of Vulcene only
excepted. This was the end of Perugia, an ancient and goodly City, for (they
say) it was one of the Antiquitle of Perugia. It was first called Vi^ia
Coloni^, of Vibius a Captain of the Acheanes that first came thither: but the
Criaginens of Armenia did build it, and of a Griffou which they bare in their
standerd, called in their language Perugio, they called the City Perugia.
Caesar repaired the City, and it was called Perugia, Augusto. with this in
scription, Augusto Sacro Perugia restitut^.
twelve Cities, which the Hetrurians builded after their first coming into
Italy. Wherefore, after the Tuscane fashion, they honor Juno. And after that,
they that followed, chose Vulcane in stead of Juno for their patron.

The next day, Caesar made truce with all the armies, yet some tumultes
continued between them, til, Canutius, and Flauius, Clodius, Bithinicus, and
diverse other were slain, who were deadly enemies of Caesar.

This end had the seege of Perugia, and the war that Lucius made, which
certaynely was very dangerous, and like to have continued long. For Asinius,
Plancus, Ventidius, Crassus, Attieus, and others of this faction, had an army
divided into thirteen parts, with six thousand Horsemen, and above. All the
which, scattered, some to Brundusio, some to Rauenna, and some to Tarento.
^^^cius ar^y scattered.
Some went to Murco, some to Aenobarbo, and some to Antony himself. Caesar's
bands chaced them by land, and Agrippa got two legions from Plancus, which
were left at Camerina. Fuluia Cameria in Lati^. Fuluia ^eeth. Putzol^ in
Campania.
with her children fled to Putzolo, and from thence to Brundusio, with three
thousand horse, which the Captains appointed for her conduit. At Brunduse she
took Ship with five Gallyes that were sent from Macedonia, and Plancus went
with her, who for cowardice, had forsaken the rest of his army which served
Plancus the covvard.
Ventidius. Asinius entised Aenobarbus to Antonyes side, whereof they both
wrote letters unto him, and prepared for him against his coming into Italy.
There were other bands of Antonyes under the Alps, whereof Calenus was
Captain. Caesar intended to win them to him, because he had Antony now in
suspicion, that if he were his friend, he would keep them for him, if he
proved his enemy, he would serve himself: and whylest he sought a good
occasion, Calenus dyed. Caesar took the advantage, and had the army, for
Fusius, Calenus son, delivered all for fear. Thus Caesar takes Antonyes
bands in Lomberdy.
Caesar without any business, got eleven legions, and most ample provinces,
from the which he removed the old officers, and placed his own, and went to
Rome. Antony kept the messengers that were sent from the inhabitancies, either
because of y^ winter, Antony deteyneth the messengers.
or because he would not have them report his doings.

At the beginning of the Spring, he went from Alexandria, came to Tirus, and
from thence by Cipres and Rhodes into Asia, where he heard of the seege of
Perugia, for the which he blamed Antony finds his wife.
his brother and his wife, and most of all Manius. He found his wife at
Athens, that was fled from Brunduse. His mother Iulia, Pompey sends Iulia,
Antonyes mother to him honorably.
Pompey had sent out of Sicelie, whither she fled in company of Libone, his
father in law, Saturninus, and others of the best sort that he had, the which
assayed to allure Antony to Pompeys part Pompeys friends assayed Antony.
Antonyes aunsvvere.
against Caesar. Antony thanked Pompey for sending him his mother, the which he
would requite in time conueniente, and if he did make war against Caesar,
he would use his society, but if Caesar and he continued in agreement, he
would reconcile him to C^sar, And this was Antonyes answer. Caesar being
come to Rome, understood that some were gone to Athens, but what answer they
had of Antony, he could not tell. Then he sought to Caesar discrediteth Antony
at Rome.
discredit Antony, with the souldyoures, as he that would join with Pompey,
to put them from their possessions, and that many were fled to Pompey, but
for all that, he could not win the Souldyoures from Antony, so great was
the glory that he had Glory of Antony great.
got at Philippi. Caesar thought himself good enough for Antony and Pompey by
la^o, for he had above 40. legions, but he had no ships, and they had more than
500. with the which, if they would beset the coast of Italy, they might soon
oppress it with famine. Therefore of many maidens y^ were offered him in
marriage, he thought to make his best match, and he wrote to Maecenas, that he
should contract him to Scribonia, sister to Libo, father in law to Pompey, y^ he
might Marriage for Caesar to serve his turn.
have a pretense to agree with Pompey if need were. This done, he removed
diverse of Antenyes friends from their authority, and sent Lepidus into Africa
with six legions of Antonyes. Then he called to him Lucius, and praised him
as kind to his brother, that Caesar to Luciu^.
he would take his fault upon himself: but he could not but think
unkindness in him, that after so great benefit showed to him, he would not
plainly tell his brothers conspiracy.

To this Lucius answered, I knew my sister in laws ambitious Lucius to
Caesar.
desire to rule, but I took the commodity of my brothers army, to take the
rule from you all, and if my brother would come now to abolishe your
Monarchy, I would take his part always against thee for my Countries sake,
although privately I am most beholden unto thee. But if he will seek
companions of his tyranny, I will take thy part against him, so thou will
destroy the Monarchy: for the affection to my Country shall always prevail
more with me, than favor Constancy of Lucius.
or kindred.

Caesar maruelling at the constancy of Lucius, said, he would Caesar to
^ucius.
not use him against his brother, though he would follow him: yet he would
commit to him the province of Spain, and appoint Lucius is honored of Caesar
with regard.
Peduceus and Luceius his Lieutenantes.

Thus in show of honor he sent away Lucius, yet secretly commanded he
should be privily watched.

Antony leaving his wife sick at Scicyone, took the Sea with Sicyone not
far from Corinth.
no great army, with a Navy of two hundred Ships, which he had made in Asia.

When he understood that Aenobarbus came to meet him with AEnobarbus goes to
Antony.
a great army, who was suspected not to be trusted of his word, (for he was
one of the condemned men of conspiracy against Caesar, and in battle at
Philippi, fought against Caesar and Antony,) yet he went toward him with five
good Ships, that he might seem to trust him, willing the rest to follow
after. Aenobarbus when he had sight of him, came forward with all his Navy.
Then was Plancus afraid, and wished him to stay, and first to try Plancus
afraid.
what he meante, because he was to be doubted. Antony answered, he had rather
dye, being deceived by trust, than be thought Antony to Plancus.
to flee for fear. Being come near, both the Admirals were known by their
flagges, and sailed one to the other. The Herald of Antony standing in the
forepart, either ignorante that he was not a sure friend, or of a boldness of
mind, that the inferioure should stoop to the superioure, commanded the
other to strike sail, which they did, and drew to the side of Antonyes
Ship, where they saluted and embraced one another: and the army of
Aenobarbus received Antony for their General: yet was Plancus scarsly assured.
And Antonie took Aenobarbus into his own ship, and sailed to Poloenta, where
Aenobarbus had Poloenta.
his footmen. And there Aenobarbus gave place to Antonie in the Generals tent.

From thence they sailed to Brunduse, where was five bands of Casars in
garrison. The Brundusians shut the gates to Aenobarbus Antony and Aenobarbus to
bruduse. Antony is kept out of Brunduse.
as an ancient enemy, and to Antonie, as one that brought an en^nie. Antonie
took this pretense to be done by Caesar's commandment, and therefore,
fortified the narrow part of earth Antony besieged ^runduse. brunduse was
builded of the A^to^^ms, and after inhabited of Cr^tenses, and at last made an
inhabitaunce of Rome: ^t has the name of the form of an Hearts head with the
horres which the M^sapians call Brudusium, for that shape has the port,
which is one of the best of the world. Antony uses ^on^p^^s help. Pompey
sends a navy with Menodorus, and besieges Cossensa and Thuris. The space
from Tiber to Beneuento, was called An^onia, by the which name also, Italy
was called. Caesar troubled. Consentia, is yet a City, builded upon seven
hills, and thereof gives seven hills for their arms. Soldiers practice
peace. Can^sio now Canossa, in Ap^tlia. Antonies policy. Agrippa recouereth
the besieged places.
that joined to the City, with ditche and trenche. For this city is almost
an Island in a port like a crescent, which by land, could not be come unto,
when this cliffe was cut from it, and the place fortified. Antonie also did
beset the haven, which is very great, and all the Islands in it, with many
Castles that he made. He sent also into sundry coasts of Italy, to take the
fit places, and exhorted Pompey, also that he should invade Italy, as much
as he could. He gladly sent Menodorus with a great army and.iiij. legions, to
get Corsica, which was Caesar's, where he took two legions, being amassed at
this atonement with Antonie. Antonies Captains took Sigunto a city in
Ausonia. Pompey befleged Thurij and Cossentia, and placed his horsemen in their
fields. Caesar, troubled in so many places at once, sent Agrippa to releue
Ausoniae. He commanded the Soldiers that were placed, to serve: but they,
understanding that it was done by Antonies consent, denied, which troubled
Caesar most of all. Yet he went to Brunduse with an other army, and by fair
words made the soldiers to go with him, the which practiced by secret
means to reconcile Caesar and Antonie. And if Antonie would not, they would
stick to Caesar, who was now sick at Canusio, and had a greater army than
Antonie: When he was come to Brunduse, and saw how Antonie had cut off the
land from the Town, he lay and waited his adversaries dayngs. Antonie was
stronger in munitions, by the mean whereof he sent for his army out of
Macedonie, and used this policy, to put country men by night into his
ships, both Galleys and other, and to make a show of a great army, to come
from Macedonia, and so began to beat Brunduse, whereof Caesar was sorry, for he
could not help it. At that evening it was told, that Agrippa had recovered
Siguntum, and that Pompey was repulsed from Thurio, and that Cossence was still
beseeged: whereat Antony was sorry. And hearing that Seruilius was coming to
Caesar with one thousand and two hundredth Th^rio was a city builded by
Niei^^, coming from Athens not far from the which Mama is gathered.
Antonies vali* antnesse. (...), in Ca(...).
horse: he could not stay, but straight from supper with great rage, took his
friends and.iiij. C. horse, and valiantly gave the onset upon a M. and v. C.
and took them sleepyng at Vria, and brought to Brunduse. So great a fame was
still of him, for the victory he got at Philippi. The guard of his person,
would come to Caesar's camp, and vpbrayde them, their unkindness to him that
saved them at Philippi. Who answered, that they did but defend themselves.
Then they objected one against an other. Objections ^ Soldiers on both parts.
The one, that they were excluded from Brundusio, and that the army of Calenus
was taken from them. The other, that Brunduse was besieged, and that the coast
was invaded, and aliance made with Aenobarbus, a killer of Caesar, and with
Pompey, a chief enemy. At length Caesar's men opened their mind to Antonies,
that they felowed Caesar, not forgettyng Antonie, being desirous that they
might be reconciled. But it Antonie would not relent, they would do their
uttermost. And this talk had they in Antonies camp. Whiles this was a doing,
news came that Antonies Antonies wife dead.
wife was dead, who could not bear his unkindness, leauyng her sick and not
bidding her farewell. Her death was thought very commodious for them both. For
Fuluis was an unquiet woman, and for jealousy of Cleopatra, raised such a
mortal war. Yet the matter vexed Antony, because he was ^u^pted the occasion
of her death. L. Cocceius was friend to the^ both. He the Summer before
Cocceius talk (...) Antonie:
was sent of Caesar with Cecinna to Antonie into Asia, and Antonie sent
Cecinna home and kept Cocceius still. He seeking occasion to try Antonie, told
him, Caesar had sent for him, and desired he might depart, and asked whether
he would write to Caesar or no, Antonie was content he should depart. But
as for writing (said he) what should we write but tauntes one to an other,
seeing we are now enemies. And I wrote to him by Cecinna, the copy whereof
you shall have if you will. I brought you letters from him, (said Cocceius)
and enemy you can not take him, that used your brother Lucius and your other
friends so well. Why (quoth Antonie) he shuts me out of Brunduse, and has
taken mine army and province that Calenus kept. And where he is good to my
friends, he has made them by his benefits mine enemies. Then Cocceius not
mindyng further to stir so angry a man, departed. And when Caesar saw him,
marueling he Caesar to Cocceius.
had tarried so long, said* I have not saved your brother that you should
become mine enemy? how call you (said he) your friends enemies, and take from
them their armies and provinces? whereto Caesar said. After the death of
Calenus, so great a charge ought not to be given to so young a man, as Calenus
son, Antonie being absent, and Lucius, Asinius, and Aenobarbus in arms
against me. As for Pla^cus legions, I intercepted, that they should not go to
Pompey, as the horsemen did. These things were told otherwise to Antonie,
(said he) yet he believed nothing till he was shut from Brunduse. I knew
not of it, said Caesar, neither did I command it: the Brundusians, and the
garrison that I left, could not abide him, when he brought with him
Aenobarbus, a killed of Caesar and a proscribed man, who after the field at
Philippi, besee^ged Brunduse, and yet troubles the coast of Italy, burned my
ships, and spoiled the country. You have (said he) consented one to the
other, to make alliance with whom ye will. Neither have Antonie joined with any
manqueller more than you have for regard of your father. Aenobarbus is no man
killer, neither any decree of anger made against him, neither was he privy to
that purpose. And if he be thought unworthy pardon because he was friend to
Brutus, then must we see whether al other be not in his case. Co^federacie is
made with Pompey, not to hurt you, but if you make war upon Antonie, to have
his society, if not, to reconcile him to you, who is boyde of fault: but you
are in the fault. For if war had not been made in Italy, they durst never
have sent Embassages, to Antonie. Caesar replied, and said, that Fuluia,
Lucius and Manius began the war in Italy. And Pompey durst never before
invade the coast of Italy, but upon the trust of Antonie. Not only trusting
upon Antonie, but sent of him; said Cocceius, for I will not dissemble, and
he shall (...) the rest of Italy being void of Navy, if you make not peace.
Caesar not Caesar's words of Pompey.
unwilling to hear this divise, stayde a while: Pompey shall be punished,
whelynow (quoth he) being already repulsed from Thuriji Than Cocceius
perceiving all the controversy, told him that Fului* was dead, for
unkindnesse of Antonie, and now that she is gone, there is no way but to
utter one an others grief without Caesar is (...) by the talk of Cocce^^^.
dissimulation. Caesar being appeased by this talk, received Cocceius, who
requested him to write, somewhat to Antonie, as the younger to the elder. He
denied to write any thing to his enemy, that would write nothing to him. He
also thought unkindness in Antonies mother, that being of his he use, fled
out of Italy, and would not seek to him, of whom she might have obtained any
thing, as of her Son: and to her ^ee was content to write. When Cocceius came
forth, many of the Capitaynes declared the minds of the Soldiers, that
except they would be reconciled, war should be made. Which he told
Antonie, and wished him to cou^termaund Pompey from further invasion of Italy,
and to send Aenobarbus away, till they were agreed. Iulia his mother joined
with Cocceius, and prayed her son so to do. Antonie stood in doubt, for if
the peace did not take, he must Antony in doubt what to do.
desire Pompeis help again, the which would be a shame for him: but his
mother putting him in comfort, and (...) seeming to know more, Antony gave
place, and required Pompey to return Antony consents to peace.
into Sicelie, and he would keep promise with him, and sent Aenobarbus, with
authority into Bythinia. When y^ army heard this, then chose messengers that
might go to either general, and cutting off(...) rehearsal of unkindness
paste, to require the^ Me^engers of (...)on.
to link in (...). For this purpose, of Caesar's part, there was chosen*
(...): and for Antonie, Pollio: and Cocceius was joined A marriage pra(...) for.
^^(...).
to them a^ a free^^e to both: And* because. Marcellus was dead, that was
husband to (...) Caesar's sister, they required that she might be made sure* to
Antony, which being done, all the army, cried, Happy ^a^ it: (...) continuing
their rejoice one whole day and a night. Then Caesar and Antonie, once again
divided (...).
the whole (...) Empire, and made C^dropoli. a City of Slauonia the (...) of
both their parts, because it stood in the end of the Adria^icall sea.

That Caesar should have al (...) and Islands westward even to the main Sea.

That Antonie should have the like Eastwarde, even to the flood Euphrates.

That Lepidus should have Africa still, as Caesar had appointed.

That Caesar should make war upon Pompey, unless other order were taken.

That Antonie should make war upon the Parthians, to revenge the injury
done to Crassus.

That Aenobarbus should be received into society, with those conditions that
he had of Antonie.

That it should be lawful for both, to levy men in Italy, with like numbers
of legions. This peace was solemnly ratified.

Whereupon they sent away their friends about their affairs. Antonie sent
Ventidius into Asia, to repress the Parthians, and young Labienus, who by the
help of the Parthians, made new commotio^s in Syria, as far as Ionia, all the
which be showed in the Parthians Menedorus dryueth Helenus out of Sardinia.
war. Pompey, by his Captain Menodorus, repulsed Helenus Casars Lieftenant
out of Sardinia. Wherefore Caesar would not be reconciled with him. They went to
Rome together, and celebrated the marriage. Where Antonie put Manius to death,
because he Manius is put to death by Antony, and Saluidienus accused.
stirred Fuluia to make war. He accused Saluidienus governor for Caesar, of
the army at Rh^danus, that he would forsake his master and cleave to him:
whereof he wrote letters to him to Brunduse. This was not lyked of all men,
declaryng unconstant dealing in too much seeking of amity. Caesar called
Saluidienus unto Saluidienus killed of Caesar.
him, as about a matter of charges, and to send him again to the army, whom
when he came, he slew him with reproach, and delivered his army to Antonie, as
suspected.

In the mean time the city was oppressed with famine* for neither durst the
Merchauntes bring any corn from the East Famine in Rome.
because of Pompeis being in Sicelie, nor from the Weast of C^^sica and
Sardinia, where Pompeis ships also lay: nor from Africa, where the nauies of
the other conspiratours kept their stations. Being in this distress, they
alleged, that the discord of the rulers was the cause, and therefore required
that peace might be made Caesar will not agree to peace with Pompey.
with Pompey, unto the which when Caesar would not agree, Antonie thought
war was needful for necessity, and because money wa^ted, a decree was made
by Antonies advise, that every master A payment put v^ on the people.
should pay the half of.xxv. drammes, for every slave that he had, which was
determined to been done in the war of Cassius, and that somewhat also should
be paid of every man's heritage. The people tore the decree with great fury,
and objected the consuming The people resist^^^ decree of Caesar and Antony.
of treasure public, the spoylyng of provinces, the sacking of Italy, and all
for private displeasure, and yet all would not serve, but must now put new
impositions upon them that have nothing left. They assembled and murmured, and
compelled the^ that would not, and with threatenings to spoil and burn their
The people resist Caesar.
houses, gathered all the people. Then Caesar with a few of his friends and
guard, came to them to excuse themselves, but they threw stones and drove him
away, which when Antonie heard, Who buyeth firendship to decre shall smart as
A^^^^^ did.
he came to help him. To him coming the holy way the people did nothing,
because he was willing to agree with Pompey, but prayde him to depart, which
when he would not do, they threw stones at him. Then he brought in his
soldiers that were with out the walls, and not about him, into the city,
being divided into market places and streates, wounded and set upon the
multitude and killed the^ in the streates as they came. And they could not
easily flee for ye multitude, nor break through by runnyng, so that many were
hurt and killed, crying and yellyng from their houses.

So Antonie had much ado to escape and Caesar by him was, Caesar e^^^^eth ^y
Antonies means. Dead bodies cast into the river, and after ^poy^ed.
evidently preserved and got away. Thus did Antonie deliver Caesar from present
peril. The bodies of the commons that were killed, were cast into the river
to avoid the grief of the sight, which came not so to pass, for the
Soldiers, fished for them as the stream carried them, and took from them
their apparel, Antonies counsel. The a^iance of the marriage betvveene Caesar
and ^^^ siser (...)sa, was named Aenaria of A^^e^s, and now Isch^^ of
strength, it was the inhabitance of the marquess of ^^^^^a.
which grieved the beholders. Thus this evil ended with envy of the Princes,
and yet no remedy for the lack of things, whereat the people grutched and
suffered. Antonie wished Libo his friends, to call him out of Sicelie, to
congratulate for the alliance made, and he would procure greater matter, and
save him harmless. They wrote letters to Libo, and Pompey was content he
should go. And when he was come to the I Will called Pithecusa, and now Aenaria,
the people assembled again and prayed Caesar, to send him letters of
safeco^du^t to come to treat of peace, which he did, although against his will.
The people also compelled Mutia, mother to Pompey, to go unto him, threatening
else to burn her, and help to make peace. When Libo perceived how the enemies
were inclined, he desired to speak with the Captains, that they Baia was a
City not far ^^ Naples, where the old Romans had great delight. Menodorus
counsel.
might together agree in the covenants, the which the people compelled the^
with much a do, and so Antonie and Caesar went to Baia. All other persuaded
Pompey earnestly to peace, only Menodorus wrote from Sardinia that he should
make open war, or drive off, whiles the dearth continued, that he might make
peace with the better conditions, and had him take heed of Murcus, who was a
mouer for peace, as one that sought to be in his authority. Wherefore Murcus
^s put from Pompey.
Pompey put away Murcus, and used his counsel no more, whom before he
honored for his worthiness and wisdom: whereat Murcus took displeasure and
went to Siracuse, and to such as Siracuse, now Sarag^sa, a goodly city of
Sicelie.
were sent after him to keep him, spoke openly against Pompey, wherewith he
being angry killed diverse of the best about Murcus, and sent to kill him,
and to say that his slaves had done Murcus and Bythinius killed o^ Pompey.
it, which being done, he hanged certain of Murcus slaves as though they had
done it. The which craft was not hid, nor the wickedness that he did against
Bythinius, a noble man and a valiant warrior, and constant to him from the
beginning, and his friend in Spain, from whence he came willingly to serve
him in Sicelie. When he was dead, other men took in hand to persuade him to
peace, and accused Menodorus as desicous of his office by sea, not so much
caring for his master, as for his own power. Po^pey following their counsel,
sailed to Aenaria, with many chosen ships, Now Ischiae.
himself being in a gorgious galley with six ores on a sea^e, and so did pass
Dicearchia proudly, toward the evening, the enemies Dicearchia, now Puzzole,
Puteoli, an old ruined city, nearer Naples than Baia, being three miles
asunder by land, to the vvh^ch Calig^^a made a bridge by the sea, meeting of
Caesar, Antony and Pompey.
loking upon him. The next morning stakes were set in the sea, and bridges
made, into one of y^ which joining to the la^d, Caesar came with Antonie*
Pompey and Libo entered the other bridge, in such distance, y^ one could not
hear an other, unless they spoke alowd. Pompey required society of rule, in
place of Lepidus. They only granted his return to his country, then al was
dashed. Till often messages were sent between, offering diverse co^ditio^s on
both sides. Pompey required that such condemned men as were with him for
Caesar's death, might be safe in exile, and that the other men of honor and
proscribed, might be restored to their country and goods. The dearth
continuing, and the people vrgyng peace, it was granted that they should
recover the fourth part of their goods, as redeeming it of the new
possessioners, and wrote of it to the condemned men, thinkyng they would accept
it, which took the offer, being now afraid of Pompey, for his wickedness
committed against Murcus, to whom they went and moved him to agree. He tore his
Pompey in a ^age
cloak, as betrayed of them, whom he had defended, and often called for
Menodorus, as one expert in matters of slate, and only constant in faith. At
length, by the exhortation of Murcia his mother, and Iulia his wife, they three
met again, upon an old peer of the sea, being well guarded, where they
concluded with these conditions.

That peace should be, both by sea and land, and the Merchantes The
conditions of peace, betvveene Antony, Caesar and Pompey.
have free course.

That Pompey should take his garrisons out of Italy, and receive no more
fugitives, nor keep no nauies in Italy.

That he should rule in Cicelie, Cersica and Sardinia, and those other I lands
that now he had, so long as the rule should be continued to Antonie and Caesar.

That he should send to the people of Rome, the corn that now was due.

That he should also rule Pelopenesus, besides the former Isles.

That he should exercise the office of Consul in his absence by his freende,
and be admitted to the college of the Bishops.

That the noble me^ that were banished, might return home, except them that
were condemned by public judgment of Caesar's death.

That they that were fled for fear should be restored to their goods. And
they that were condemned, only to the fourth part.

That the slaves that had served under Pompey, should be free.

That the free men should have the same stipendes, that the old Soldiers of
Antonie and Caesar had.

These were the conditions of peace, which being written were sent to Rome, to
be kept of the holy Virgins.

Then they desired the one to banquet the other, and the lotte Pompey
banqueteth C^s^ and Antony* and they him.
fell first to Pompey, who received them in his great gally, joined to the
peer.

The next day, Caesar and Antony feasted him in their Tents, pitched on that
peer, that every man might eat on the shore, but peradventure for their more
safety, for the Ships were at hand, the guard in order, and the guestes with
their weapons Menedorus council.
under their clokes. It is said, that Menodorus when they banqueted in Pompeys
Ship, sent one to Pompey, to put him in remembrance, that now was the time
to revenge his father and brothers death, for he would see that none should
escape the Ship: Answer of Pompey.
and that he answered, as became him then for his person and place: Menodorus
might have done it without me, it agrees with Menodorus to be perjured false,
but so may not Pompey.

In that supper, Pompeys daughter, wife to Libo, was espoused to Marcellus,
Antonyes nephew, son to Caesar's sister.

The next day, the Consuls were appointed for four years, Consuls appointed.
first Antony and Libo, and that Antony might make a substitute, next Caesar
and Pompey, then Aenobarbus, and Sosius, lastly Caesar and Antony, thrice
Consuls, and as it was hoped, to restore to the people the government of the
common wealth.

These things being concluded, they departed, Pompey with his Ships to
Sicelie, and they by land to Rome.

At the news of this peace, the City and all Italy made great joy, by the
which, civil war, continual musters, insolency of garrisons, running away
of slaves, wasting of Countries, decay of tillage, and above all, most great
famine was taken away: therefore, sacrifices were made by the way to the
Princes, Rejoice for peace.
as to preseruers of the Country. The City had received them with a goodly
triumph, had not they entered by night, because they would not charge the
Citizens. Only they were not partakers of the common joy, that had the
possession of the banished men's goods, who should return by the league, and
be their heavy enemies.

The banished men, a few except that went again with Pompey, Banished men
return.
took leave of him at Puzzolo, and went to the City, where a new joy was
(...)de, for the return of so many noble men. The^ Caesar went t(...)ifye
France, and Antonie to make war on y^ Parthians. And y^ Senate having approved
his acts, as well past as Antonyes acts allowed by the Senate. Antony makes
Kings.
to come, he sent his Captains abroad, and did what he would. He appointed
also certain kings, only such as should pay a tribute. Of Pontus, Darius,
Pharnaces son, and Mithridates nephew. Of the Idumeans and Samaritanes,
Herod. Of y^ Pisidia^s, Amyntaes. Of part of Idumei, people betvveene Judea
and Arabia. Samtria, a regio^ of Pal^sta^, besides (...)e Pa(...)a. (...).
D(...).
Cilicia Polomon, and others of other nations. He sent his army that should
have wintered about him, into Parthiena, a nation of illyria, nigh to Epidamn^,
yt sometime entierly loved Brutus, that he might acquaint the^ to gain and
exceccise. Another army he sent to Dardanes, which is a people of Illyria also,
that was wo^t to make rodes in Macedonia. Other he commanded to abide at
Epirus, y^ he might (...), now G^nera, or Al(...).
have them all about him, intending to winter at Athens. He sent Furnius into
and frica, to lead vj. legions of Sextius against the Parthians, for he had
not yet heard, that Lepidus had taken them from Sextius. These things being
done, he wintered at Athens with Octauia, as he did at Alexandria with
Cleopatra. Only he looked on Antonyes behavior a^ Athens.
the letters y^ came from his armies, and leaving y^ habit of a General, used
y^ garments of a private man, and without a guard, went in company of two
friends, to hear the lectors and disputations of the Philosophers. His diet
was after the Grecia^ manner, having Octauia ever in his company, as one y^ was
fond upon women. Winter Change of Antony.
being ended, he changed his manner and government. He had his officers and
Captains attending at his gates, and all things were done to make fear. The
Embassagies that were differred, were now heard, audience was given, ships were
prepared, and all full of business. Whilst Antony was thus occupied, the
league between Caesar and Pompey was broken for some secret cause, but Caesar
breaks with Pompey. The pretense of the breach.
the open matter was this. Antony committed Morea to Pompeyus upon this
condition, that he should pay their debtes, or see them paid, or leave the
matter safe. He took not the province with this co^ditio^, but to have the
country with the debts. Being greened at this, of his perverse nature (as Caesar
said) or because he envy to that others should have greater armies than he, or
for that he gave too much credit to Menedorus, that said, it was no peace, but
a truce, he repaired other ships, and gathered his Galleys, and made an oration
to his army, declaring how war must needs follow, and troubled y^ sea by
rouers, so as little commodity came to y^ City by that accord: wherefore it
was spoken openly, that peace was not made for to relieve the^ of perils, but
to add the fourth to y^ number of Tyrants increased. Caesar took some of the
Pirates, and put Quareis (...) Pompey.
the^ to y^ torture, to make the^ confess, y^ Pompey sent the^. Caesar told it
to y^ people, and signified it to Pompey by letters. Pompey excused it, and
complained of y^ dealings touching Peloponneso. The noble me^ that remained
with Pompey, perceiving him to be always ruled by the^ that had bin his
bondme^, killed some of his freemade me^, either of themselves, or to please
Caesar, to kindle him against Menodorus his master. This they did of purpose,
for the hate they bare to Menodorus. At y^ time, Philadelphus, a freemade man
of Caesar's, sailed to Menodorus for corn: and Micilio, a most sure friend to
Menodorus, went to deal with Caesar for him, promising him y^ rule of Sardinia
and Corfica, with three legio^s, and many friends. This matter practiced either
by Philadelphus, or for displeasure of Pompey, Caesar would not at ye first,
but at length accepted it, thinking y^ peace to be broken in deed, and called
Antony from Athens, to Brunduse at a certain day Caesar calls Antony from
Athens.
for this war, and sent for the Galleys from Rauenna, and y^ army from
Lombardy, to lie at Bru^dusio and Putzolo, to invade Sicelie on both sides, if
Antony would agree thereunto. Antony came at his day, and not finding Caesar
there, tarried not, either for y^ he liked not of y^ war Antony comes to
^rundulio. A suspicion betvveene Caesar and Antony. A token in Antonyes Camp.
against y^ truce, or for y^ he saw Caesar make great preparation (for both of
the^ were ambitious of rule) or for y^ he was feared with a token, for one of
y^ watch of his te^t was devoured of a Wolf, al save y^ face, as though it
should be known who it was, which was done without any cry or noise. And the
Brundusians said, they saw Antony to Caesar
a Wolf run from his pauilio^s by break of day. Notwtsta^ding, he wrote to
Caesar, not to break y^ covenant made, and threatened Menodorus is claymed of
Antony.
to take Menedorus as his slave, for he was bond to Pompey ye great, whose
goods he had bought. Caesar sent his officers to receive Sardinia and Corsica
of Menodoro, and fenced y^ coast of Italy with many fortes, that it should not
be so subject to Pompeys rouing. He commanded that more Gallyes should be
made at Rauenna and Menodorus reuoketh to Caesar, and (...).
Rome, and sent for a great army from Illiria. Menodorus he made a freeman, and
to guide y^ Navy that he brought, as Vice admiral under Caluisius. He
continued leysurely in making preparation, and was angry with Antony, that he
would not tarry. With y^ Navy prepared at Rauenna, he badde Cornificius go to
Tarento. As Tarentum is a City in Apulia, which has a goodly port twelve
miles compass. An evil token to Caesar.
he went, a tempest rose, and crushed the chief Ship, wherein Caesar should
go, which was thought an evil token. And whereas the people thought that war
to be made against the truce, Caesar to avoid that suspicion, wrote to the
people of Rome, and spoke to the army, that Pompey had broken the league, by
sending Pryats to the Sea, which was plain by the confession of Menodorus,
Caesar affirms the peace broken by Pompey.
and the Pirates themselves. Whereof Antony wasnot ignorant, and therefore would
not let him have Peloponesus. When he thought himself well furnished, he
sailed into Sicelie, from Tarent, Caesar into Sicelie.
Caluisius, Sabinus, and Menodorus, from Tuscane, and his army came by land to
Reggio, and with great have all things were done. And Pompey did not know that
Menodorus was fled, till Caesar was come, and sailed against both the
Nauies. Himself tarried at Messina, and sent Menecrates against Caluisio, and
Menodoro, Menecrates with a great company keeping the sea.
that was a great enemy of his, being of his condition. He came in sight of
the enemy in the evening. They withdrew to y^ gulf of Cuma, and there rested
that night. Menecrates went to Cuma was a goodly ancient City, not far
from Pay, now nothing is left but marvelous ru^nes. Menecrates fights
with Caesar's Captains.
Aenaria. In the morning, Caluisius Navy coasted the shore of Cuma in the
form of a Crescent, to keep off the enemy. Menecrates came forth, and made
speed against the enemy, whom, because he could not draw into y^ deep
sea, he set upon them as they were, and kept the^ at the shore, where they
defended themselves. He might take the sea when he would, and come again more
fiercely, and change his Ships at his pleasure, but they could not stir,
but keep them from their adversaries on the one side, and from the rocks on
the other side.

When Menedorus, and Menecrates saw one another, they left the rest of their
Nauies, and came together with rage and noise, and it seemed, that which of
them overcame, should be the conqueroure The fight betvveene Menedorus and
Menecrates.
of the Navy. Their Ships with great violence crushed one another, so as y^
stern of Menodorus ship was broken, and the pump of Menecrates. Then
grapeling their Ships together, they stood firm. The mariners and
souldyoures fought with no less courage and footing, than as if they had hin
on the land. They shot, they darted, and threw stones, and did Fight by Sea.
cast bridges, to pass from one to another. And because Menedorus ship was
higher than the other, they did the more harm, Menedorus hurt.
with less pain. Many were killed and hurt. Menedorus was stricken through
the arm with a dart, the which was straight pulled out. But Menecrates was
hurt in the thygh with a forked Spanish arrowe, which could not be pulled out.
And not being Menecrates, drowned.
able any longer to fight, he exhorted his company, and lept into the Sea, and
then Menedorus took his Ship, and drew it to land, for he could fight no
longer. This was the fight on the left side of the Navy. On the right,
Caluisius chaced certain ships Demochares.
of Menecrates. Demochares a freemade man of Pompeys also, and viceadmirall to
Menecrates, entered upon the other ships of Caluisius, whereof he drove some
to shore, and some he made to flee, and some he set on fire. When Caeluisius
came from the chase, and saw Caluisius ships distressed.
his Nauie-scattered and fired, he stayde the one, and quenched the other, and
because it was night, both they withdrew to their former harborough. This was
the end of the first fight by sea, wherein Pompey had the better. Demochares
grievously taking the death of Menecrates, as a very great loss, (for Pompey
ever used Menecrates and Menedorus service by sea) leaving al other things, as
though not Menecrates body, and one ship had bin lost, but the whole Navy
went straight from the broyle to Sicelie. Caluisius lay still as long as he
thought Demochares would come against him, but when he saw him gone, he
refreshed his ships, and kept along y^ shore. On the other side, Caesar with
a great Navy from Caesar's and Pompeys shevve at Messina.
Tarento, and his army from Reggio, met with Pompey at Messina with forty
ships only. His friends exhorted him to take the occasion of the few Ships
that Pompey had, and to set upon him before the rest of his Navy came, but
Caesar would not, till Caesar refuses the fight.
he was joined with Caluisius, affyrming it to be a folly to hazard without
help. When Demochares was come to Messina, Pompey, made him and Apollophanes
his freemade man also, chief of the New Admirals of Pompeys Navy.
Navy, in stead of Menecrates, and Menedorus. When Caesar heard ^f the loss
that Caluisius had, he crossed the sea to meet with Caluisius, and as he
passed between Stylida and Sylla, Pompey set upon Seylla is one of the notable
cocks of the narrov^ Sea of Sicelie, so named (as they say) of Seylla, the
daughter of Phereu^. Charybdi^, now G^lof ^ro^s another rock over against,
named also as they write, of a greedy woman of that name. Stylidae. Scylla in
the coast of Sicelie under the hell Segp^, in the continent of Italy. Caesar
refuses the fight by Sea. Caesar's Navy hurt. Caesar leapeth a sh^re. Corn
ficius. Want in ^asar^ host.
y^ tail of his Navy, and provoked y^ fight by all means, but Caesar refused
it, either because he would not fight in the streights, or because he would
first find Caluisio. He commanded all to draw nigh the shore, and to lie at
anchor, and to stand to defense, if any did set upon the^. But Demochares
coming in, and setting two of his ships upon one of the other, so drove the^
together and upon y^ rocks, as many were crushed and perished cowardly. And y^
like luck was here, as was at the fight of Cuma. Caesar lept out of his ship
into the shore, and holp to save the^ that swamme for their lives, but
Cornificius and other Captains without commandment, hoysed anchor, and took
the sea, thinking it better to be overcome fighting, tha^ to perish foolishly.
And Cornificius with great boldness took the Ammirall that Demochares was in,
who lept into another. The fight ce^tmu^ng with great loss, Menodorus and
Caluisius were seen coming, not of Caesar's company, who traveled for their
lives, but of Pompeys people only, who therefore retired. It was near night,
and they would not ma^c^ with the Frechmen, they being weery, the which chanced
well for the other that were in danger. In the night, many forsook their
ships, and went to the mountains, and made many tok^s of f^^^ to the^ that
were in the sea, and were all that night without meat; and without rest,
wanting all things, Caesar being in like case; went about, and praid the^ to
hold out til the morning. It was not yet known that Caluisius was come,
neither was there any help from the ships, A good luck ^o Casar.
al being in danger of drowning, but by another good luck, the ^i^* legion
drew nigh by the mountains, which hearing of the loss, resorted to the fires
by the rocky places, and found their General, and the^ that were with him
weery, and wanting all things: then one did help another. And they brought
Caesar into an old house, without Caesar in distress.
any of his chamber, being dispersed in that nights tumult. When he had sent
about to show that he was safe, he understood that Caluisius was come, and so
being recomforted by two joyful news, he took rest. At break of day he looked
out, and saw his ships, some burned, some half burned, and some floting, and
some broken. Caluisius being come, he caused as much help, and repair to be
made as could be, and the rather, because the enemy was gone: but behold, a
vehement Southwind blewe, and made a rough sea, so as Tempest upon Caesar's
ships.
Caesar's ships were again crushed on the cliffes and rocks, and one against
another. Pompey was in the port of Messana. Menedorus fearing the violence of
the storm, went further into the sea, and many followed his example. The
other, thinking the storm would soon have ceased, as is wont in Spring
time, kept still about the shore, saving themselves with labor: but the wind
waxing greater, all went to wrack, Cabels burst, and ships brake. The escrie
was so The trouble in Caesar's Navy.
great, that no good advice could be heard, no difference between master and
mariner, no skill nor rule prevailed, all was alike, and so they perished. The
ships were slitte, the me^ were drenched, and they that could swim, were
broken at the rocks: and when the flood of that sea came, which is wont to be
great, the ships were with new rage tossed hither and thither, beating one
another, and the wind continuing toward night, made the^ fear the loss to be
in the darkness, and not in the light. Great lamentation was made, and
calling one to another for help, but all in vain. They that were cast into the
sea cried for help of the^ in the ships. They that looked for help of the^ on
the land, were crushed at the cliffes. So present death was in every place, and
so great darkness, as neither heaven nor earth could be seen, and so every
one looked for death, which was more grievous, than death it self. Suddenly
The looking for death grecuous. A vehement storm.
the wind ceased, and the Sun appeared, the storm having bin so great, as
the me^ of that country affirmed they had never seen the like, the which
destroyed the most part of Caesar's ships and Souldyoures, who being afflicted
with these new Caesar again afflicted. Vibo.
calamities, went to Vibo by land with impatient mind. He sent for the
Captains from every place, that no mutinies might be made, nor train laid
for him. He appointed his army by land, to keep y^ coast of Italy, that
Pompey being encouraged by this victory, The great negligence of Pompey.
should not invade, who neither attempted any thing by land, nor made an end
of them by sea, but suffered them to gather together as they could, and with
prosperous wind to get to Vibone, either because he thought the^ afflicted
enough, or could not use the victory, or (as I said before) slow to invade,
content to defend. Of Caesar's Navy, scarcely the half was left, and that
sore brusede, leaving some to ouersee them, with sorrowful mind he went into
Campania, for neither had he any other Ships, having Caesar's want.
need of many, nor time to make them, the dearth being great, and the people
crying for peace, and blaming that war, that was made against promise. Need
also he had of money, whereof was great want, the people of Rome not to be
moved to any payments. But Octauius Caesar, subtle for his own commodity,
Caesar's continuance in vva^^e.
sent Mecenas to Antony with instructions to call him to society of war,
which if he refused, he would tra^sport his legio^s into Sicelie, and try y^
matter by la^d. Being in these cares, it was known that Antony would join
with him in war, and that Agrippa had a victory against the French Aquitanes.
His friends Aquitan^^ ^s that they call ^ing^us.
also and some Cities promised him ships. So he leaving his sadness, prepared a
greater Navy. At y^ beginning of the Spring, Antonie came from Athens to
Tarentum, with iij. C. ships, to join with Antony comes into Italy.
Caesar in war according to his promise. He changing his purpose, tarried til
his Navy was furnished, and when he was told Caesar contemns Antony.
that Antonyes Navy was sufficient, he alleged he had other lettes, y^ it
might appear he had more quarrel against Antony, or despised his help,
trusting in his own. Antony taking it grievously, remained yet still, and
required him once again, For having much ado, to prepare money for the
Parthian war, and need of Antony desirous of Italian Souldyoures.
Italian souldioures, he would have changed ships for me^, although by
composition both of them might take up me^ in Italy, but it was y^ harder for
him to do, because Italy was another ma^s province. Wherefore Octauia went to
her brother, to move him thereunto. Octauia to her brother.
He said, Antony had forsaken him, whereby he was like to have bin lost in y^
sea of Sicelie. She answered, that matter was satisfied by Macenas. Then he
said, Antony had sent Callias his late Obiecting and answering of quarrrels.
slave, to confederate with Lepidus against him. She said, he went to treat of
marriage. For Antony, before he should go to the Parthians war, desired to
bestow his daughter upon Lepidus son, as he had promised, When Octauia had
affirmed this, Antony sent Callias to Caesar to try y^ truth by torture,
which he refused, and sent Metapontus was a fa^^e (...), now utterly
destroyed. Caesar and Antony meet.
word to Antony to meet him, between Metapontus and Tarento. Antony when he
saw Caesar lept into a boat alone, signifying y^ he trusted him, Caesar seeing
y^, did the like, and either of the^ made have t^ get ground on y^ contrary
side, but Caesar was the quicker, and arrived on Antontes side, and went in
chariot with Antonie to his sister Octauia, and lodged together without guard.
The next day Antonie did the like by him. Thus they were soon at debate for
suspicion, and soon agreed for necessity. Caesar deferred the war Exchange
of fortress.
against Pompey, till the next year. Antonie could tarry no longer there for
the Parthians war, so they made an exchange. Antonie gave Caesar a hundredth
and twenty ships, for the which, Caesar promised him twenty thousand
legions Soldiers Italians. Octauia presented her brother with ten ships,
that both served for burden, and ores. Caesar gave Octauia, one thousand
choice men for his guard, as Antonie would take. And because y^ time of three
men's authority was expired by decree of Senate, Continuance of three men's
authority.
they continued it for five year more, of their own authority, neither
lokyng for consent of Senate, nor confirmation of people, and so departed.
Antonie making haste into Syria, leauyng Octauia with her brother and her
son, Menodorus, being a traitor by nature, or fearing the threats of
Antonie, that said he Menedorus flees from Caesar.
was his slave, or not finding such reward as he looked for, or being moved
with the daily rebukes of his old fellows Pompeis late bond men, and after
Menecrates death exhorting him to return as unfaithful to his Master, having
assurance he fled to Pompey with seven ships. Which Caluisius the
admiral did not perceive, wherefore Caesar put him from his office, and placed
Caluisius, displaced and Agrippa placed.
Agrippa. When his navy was finished, he did purge it, after this sort.
Alters stand at the sea side touched with the water. Purging of the navy.
They with their ships stand about with great silence. The priests in
boats in the sea make the sacrifices and carry their purgations thrice about
the navy, the Capitaynes going with them, wishyng ano praying that all
unfortunate and unfaithful things might be removed from it. The bowels of the
sacrifices being divided, they throw part in the sea, and part they burn on
the A^ters, the people wishyng all good luck. It The manner of inuading Sicelie.
was determined that Caesar should in^^de from Putei^l^ Lepidus from Africa,
and Taurus from (...) and so b^^e^^e Sicelie, East, Weast, and South. And a
(...) was the tenth after the longest day of the year, which the Romans call
Calendes, in the honor of old Caesar, called Iulie, which before was named
Quint^lis (...).
Quintilis. This day Caesar appointed, because of the honor of his father,
whose felicity was perpetual. Pompey placed Plennius at (...) is one of the
three el^ovves called (...) of (...), looking tovvarde^ (...), and a Cittye of
that name. The Isles of I^pare, otherwise, Love be seven.
Lilibaeo, against Lepidus, with one legion, and much shot. The East and
Weast part of Sicelie, he laid with garrisons chiefly the Isles, of Lipara and
C^ssyra, least Lepidus should get the one, and Caesar the other, and be
continual annoyance to Sicelie. He kept the strength of his navy at Messina,
to be ready at the euentes. After the day was come, they all took ship in
the morning. Lepidus came out of Africa, with a thousand ships of burden,
lxx. Galleys, and. xy. legions, five thousand Numidian horse, and other
provision. Taurus from Tarent, of Antonies, a hundred and thirty ships,
brought only a hundredth and two ships, the other were disfurnished by the
pestilence that was the winter passed. Caesar departed from Putzolo, having
first sacrificed to Neptune, Caesar sacrificed to the Sea.
and the calm sea, to favor him against the killers of his father. Certain
scoutes went before, to espi^ the ^east. Appius led the reregarde, with a
multitude of ships. The third day after they were entered, a South wind
arose and drowned many of Lepidus ships, yet he got to Sicelie, and
besieged Plennius in Lepidus. Taurus.
Lilibaeo, and took many towns of that coaste. Taurus when the wind turned,
returned to Tarent. Appius saylyng by the point Appius. The point of Minerua.
of Minerua, had shippewracke by tempest, part were lost upon the rocks,
part in the shalowes, and part crushed one with an other. Caesar so soon as
the tempest rose, went to the The port of Velino.
port of Velino safe, except one Galley of six ores on a side. After the
South wind followed a Southwest wind, which so stirred that port, that the
ships could not go forth opening to The loss of Caesar's Ships.
the West, nor be stayed with anchor, but were broken against the rocks, or
crushed of themselves, which evil was augmented by the coming on of the
night. When it was calm, Caesar huried the dead, healed the hurt, clothed the
swimmers, and amended the loss as well as he cold. He lost six great
ships, and.xxvj. of the less sort, and very many of the small vessels. To
amend this want.xxx. days were required, and now summer went away. Therefore
it was thought best to defer the war til the next Su^mer. But because the
people was oppressed with penury he repaired his nauies as well as he could,
and got of his friends some help, which he sent to supply Taurus number.
After this loss, Maecenas was sent to Rome, to appease them that yet had
Maecenas goes to Rome.
remembrance of Pompey, by the way himself went into italy, and bad the new
landed men be of good cheer, and with great speed Caesar goes to cheer to
soldiers of Italy.
came to Tarent, to view Taurus navy, from thence he went to Vibo, and cheered
the legions, and trimmed the ships, to invade Sicelie shortly again. Pompey,
took none advantage of this occasion, Pompey loses occasion. He is puffed up
vainly.
only he made sacrifices to Neptune, and to Salatia, whose son, now forsooth,
he would needs be called, thinking certainly, that Gad favored him so much,
as he would give him victory still. And was so inflamed with this success, as
he changed his purple Salatia is the sea, here put for the Goddess of the sea.
robe, into an azure, as adopted of Neptune. He thought Caesar would not have
stirred, but when he heard he returned again, he was stricken down, because he
saw he had to do with an invincible mind. Yet he sent Menodorus with.vij.
ships which he Menodorus inaketh a nevve stir on Caesar's navy.
brought to epsy his doyings. He disdayning that he had not his old
authority, and perceiving he was had in suspision, because he had no more
ships than he brought, determined to flee again. And thinking that it would
turn to his good, if he showed any feate worthy praise, he gave all his money
to his companions, and with great have came upon Caesar's navy, with such a
violence, as he took the ships y^ lay for the guard of the navy, sometime two
at once, sometime three, and the ships of burden he drowned, burned, and led
away, and made great affray in y^ coast. Caesar and Agrippa being absent, who
was gone to prepare matter for the navy. Than he fell Menodorus illudeth his
enemies.
to flouting of his enemies, he drove his ship into a soft o^e, and
pretended he had bin a ground, which they thought to have been true, and ran
to catch him, as a common pray: which when he perceived, he went away and
laughed: whereat Caesar's Soldiers were much agrieued. When he had showed what
service he could Menodorus delivers Rebilus ^ Senator.
do, he delivered Rebilus a Senator whom he had taken, making his way so. Than
he feigned that Vinidius a familiar of Caesar's would flee away to him, and
sailing nigh the enemy, he desired He makes his devise by Vinidius.
to speak with Vinidus, of matters that concerned them both. Which when it was
granted, and they meeting alone, he told him, that his fleeyng again to
Pompey was for despightes that Caluisius had done him. But now that Agrippa
was the Admiral, he would return again to Caesar's service, so Vinidius
Messala.
would bring him assurance from Messala, that was Agrippas Leiftenant,
promysing to recompense his fault with singular service: but till he had his
assurance, he said, he would molest them as he had done, to avoid suspicion,
and so did. Messala doubted at the first, as of a matter not honest, but at
length he granted it, either for the necessity of time, or for that he knew
Caesar would be content. Thus once again he fled, and when Menedorus
reuol^eth once again.
he came so Caesar, he kneeled to him and asked pardon, before he showed the
cause of his former fault. Caesar because of promise was content to pardon
him, and appointed keepers to him, and Tauromino a low of Sicile. Taurom^io
was builded of the Casidians, and after a Colonie of Rome having the name of
the bull of Minos which they bear in their arms, Stylida. Scyl^uc^^o, is
now called Capo di Squillaccia dangerous place. V^b^no or Hipponao^a city
with a gulf, now called S. Eu^^n^a in Calabris. Papias. Lepidus ships
distroyed. Tis^^nus. Strongile, now Sho^^^al^, not far from Sicelie. Pelorus,
a point of Sicelie, over against Scylla. My^e, now My^^zzo. Ty^^aride is not
far from Mile.
gave leave to the Capitaynes of his Galleys to go whither they would. Than
Caesar took his journey again, commaundyng Messala to take two legions and
join with Lepidus, and go to the haven that is next Tauromino. He sent three
others to Stilida in the furdest part of the Sea to abide occasion. He
commanded Taurus to go to mount Silatio, that is a mountain against
Tauromino. Which he did, being both fit for the fight, and for the
passages. The army by land followed, and was scouted with light horsemen: the
navy, with Brigandines and Foystes. Caesar came from Vibone and praised the
order, and returned to Vibo. Pompey placed garrisons on the coast of Sicelie,
and kept his navy at Messina, to help when need were. To Lepidus came out of
Africa the other four legions, with whom, Papias a Captain of Pompeis met,
and by a pretense of friendship, destroyed them. For they thought he had been
sent of Lepidus to conduct them and gave place. Two of y^ legions perished in
the sea, if any escaped by swimming, Tisienus killed them on land. Caesar,
sailed from Vibone, into Strongile, one of the Aeolian Ila^ds, sending foystes
to epsy the coast, and perceiving many ships about Pelorus, Milis, and
Tyndaride, he thought Pompey had been there. Therefore he left Agrippa his
Lieftenaunt, and went again to Libon. From thence he went again to Taurus
camp with Messala and three legions, minding to take Taurominio in Pompeis
absence, and invade him in two places at once. Agrippa passed from Stongyle to
Hiera, now Judah, an I Will between Sicelie and I^paris. Pompeis navy.
Hiera, and took it. The next day he went to Myla, to match with Democharis,
who had.xl. ships. Pompeius, doubting of Agrippas purposes, sent other.xlv.
ships, to Democharis, under the leading of Apollophanes his late bondsman, he
following with.lxx. more. Before day Agrippa set forth with half his navy to
fight with Agrippa goes to the fight.
Papia alone, but when he saw Apollophanes navy, and the rest of Pompeis
ships, he signified to Caesar, that Pompey was at Myla with the greater
part of his navy. He kept the battle with his great ships, commanding all the roste, to keep course to Hiera, the preparation was great on both sides,
and the ships had turrets both at stern and pomp. When the exhortation was
given, they began the fight, Caesar's upon the face, the others The fight by
sea. The difference of the Ships.
upon the sides fetching compasses. Pompeis ships were light and little, apt
to turn and return about the enemies. Caesar's, were great and beauie, and
therefore the slower, but of more force both to offend and defend. In them,
the Soldiers were more The difference of the men.
manly: in the other, the mariners, they got advantage by compassing about,
and breaking the sternes and sides of the enemy, and with a violence sometime
gave as great a blow as they took. On the contrary side, Caesar's ships, with
their sternes, easily put back these other being little, and either crushed,
or pierced them, and when they fought at hand, they combred them with shot,
and with hooks, held them hard, and then would they Icape into the sea, and
were taken up again of the little botes that waited on the ships. Agrippa
gave an onset upon Papia his ship Agrippa drives Papia from his Ship.
with such force as he slitte it. They that fought in the top fell down, the
water entered, the lower sort were drowned, and the other escaped by swimmyng.
Papia, being received into another Papia fights again.
ship, fought again. Pompey standing upon an hill, and perceiving that his
ships were too weak and weary, and Agrippa continually refreshed with the
rerewarde, commanded Pompeis Ship ^ retire.
them to retire in order, which they did in a show of fight. But when Agrippa
followed, they fled, not to the rocks, but to the soft ooze, that was
brought in by the flouddes. Agrippa being advertised by his Masters, not to
adventure in those shalowes, did cast anchor abroad, as though he would give
a new charge if need were, in the night. But being admonished not to follow
anger more than reason, and not ouer-labour the weary Soldiour with watchyng,
nor trust too much the caulmenesse of the Sea, he hardely departed. Pompeis
men got to their ports when Pompey has the lo^se by sea.
they had lost thirty ships, of the enemies, five were drowned, and many
hurt. Pompey praised them for so manly resistyng the Pompey prayseth ^^^
Soldiers.
great ships, which he said seemed to him, not a fight by sea, but an
assault of a wall, and rewarded them as victours, puttyng them in hope, that,
in that narrow Sea, their ships would ever be the better, and that they
might so be, he would add somewhat to their height. This was the end of the
fight by sea at Myla, between Agrippa and Papia.

Caesar in the mean season sailed from Sylati^ to Leucopatra, being
Leucopatra, an hill in the sea nighe Reggio. now Capo de larme, or Spartament^
di Calabria.
certified that Pompey was gone from Messina to Myla, because of Agrippa: and
when he was determined to have passed from Leucopatra to Tauromeno by night,
after he had heard of the late fight, he changed his purpose, and thought it
more for his honor to pass by day. For he believed that Pompey would not long
tarry Caesar came forth again.
nigh Agrippa. And when day was come, he looked from the mountains and could
have no sight of his enemy: he filled his navy with as many as might be,
committing the rest to Messala, till the ships should return for him.
Aproching to Tauromeno, he sumoned the^ to render. But they wtin denying it, he
passed y^ flood Onobala, and y^ temple of Venus to Archegeta, making his
prayers, to overcome Onobala.
his enemies. Archegeta is a little image of Apollo, which y^ Archegeta.
Naxians, of Naxo an I Will in Aegico, now Niesia. Caesar falls.
Naxians that were sent to inhabit Sicilie, did first erecte. Going here out
of his ship, he had a fall, but he rose again, and stayed. Pompey came in
sight with a great navy, whereat every man marueled, for they thought he had
been overcome of Agrippa. His horsemen ranged the shere to be even with his
navy, and his footmen were seen on every side. The camp of Caesar was
afraid, Caesar in fear.
and himself dismayde, because he could not send for Messala. The horsemen
set upon the enemy as they were planting their ca^pe. And if an onset had been
given by sea also, it had been like that Pompey had done a great feate: but for
lack of knowledge of Pompey loses for lack of experience.
war, and not understanding in what fear the enemy was, and doubting to
begin the fight so late, they went to harborough at Coccineo, and the footmen
to Phenice, to have some distance from Coccineo, a point nigh a lake.
their enemy. That night was quiet, and Caesar's men had leisure to finishe
their trench, but for labor and watch, they were unfit to fight. Caesar had
three legions, five hundredth gentlemen without horse, one thousand light
harness, two thousand venturers, and his soldiers for the sea. Delivering his
footmen to Cornificio, Caesar orders his battle.
to resist the enemy as much as he could by land, he before day took the sea,
before he should be shut from thence. To the right battle he appointed
Titinius, to the left, Carcias. In a Brigantine he went about the navy, and
exhorted them, which Caesar leaves the robe of a general.
being done, he put of his robe off honor, as he was wont to do in extreme
perils. Pompey twice gave him the onset that day, and the night ended, the
fight, in y^ which diverse of Caesar's ships were taken and diverse burned, and
diverse fled to Italy for all that he could Pompey gains.
do, which were chased of Pompey: and such as swa^me to the land, were
dispatched of the horsemen or taken: some got to Cornificius camp, whom he
received, sending only light horse to conduct the^, for he thought it not good
to stir his legions, being out of heart, and the enemy so nigh, in triu^ph of
that victory. Caesar passed Caesar in doubt departs with one page.
that night among his nauies, uncertain what to do, whether to send for
Cornificio amiddest the wreckes of the sea, or to flee to Messala: and even by
chance, departing with one only page, without servants, soldiers, or
families, he came to the port of Abala, Abala. Caesar in desperatio^ is brought
to Messala.
where some found him out, in great fear and desperation, and carrying him
from ship to ship, they brought him at length to Messala, which was not far
off, where before he took rest, he sent Caesar signifies that he is well.
a Brygantine to Cornificio and to all the shore, to signify that he was
alive, and promised he would shortly help them. When Caesar goes to Stilida.
he had a little rested, he went by night to Stilida, from whence Messala
carried him to Carinate, who was ready to sail with three legions, whom he
willed to go to Lipari, and he would follow Lipari be the Islands next
Sicelie, seven in number.
straight. He wrote also to Agrippa, to deliver Cornificio from danger so
soon as he could, and sent Laronio to help with speed, He sent Macenas
again to the city, because some went about new troubles which were punished
openly. He sent Messala to Messala.
Purzolo to bring the first legion. This Messala was condemned at Rome of the
three men, and reward was promised to them that would kill him. Then he
fled to Brutus and Cassius, and after their death, he gave himself and his
navy, to Antonie. This Roman virtue.
I thought good to remember, as an example of the Roman virtue: that where
Messala had him that condemned him in his power, cast into utter desolation, he
restored him to his state and preserved him. Cornificius, although he might
easily have kept the enemy from the camp: yet because he wanted victual,
he provoked them to battle. Pompey thought not good to fight with them that
were desperate, hopyng to subdue them by famine. Cornificius marched receiving
into his battle the unarmed that escaped the sea: being greatly annoyed with the
horsemen in the plain, which were most part Affricanes and Moors. The fourth
day he came to a dry place called ye parchyng plotte of the The dry place.
fire, burned and dried even to the Sea, the which the inhabitants dare not go
too, but in the night, so great is the heat. Cornificius Danger of
Cornificius.
burst neither pass that way in the night, because the Moon did not show,
nor they skillful of the way, nor could not abide by day, the heat was so
intolerable. Thirst could not be aswaged: nor they go but fast, because the
horsemen so followed them. And being come to the issue, they saw naked men, who
ran upon Naked citizens upon the armed Romans.
them, and claspyng with them, put them in danger of choking, with yt which
being yet troubled, the soldiers were in desperatio^. But Cornificius
comforted them, and told the^ there was a well at The Romans grievously
troubled.
hand, and so they put back those rude people till they came to the well,
which they found possessed with other enemies of like sort. Then they were
utterly out of hope. For they saw an army coming, and could not tell whether
it was friend or foe, but it was Zaronius, whom when they that kept the well
saw, they fled, fearing Zaronius.
to be interclosed. Whereat the weary soldiers made great joy with shoutes and
cries, which Laronius answered. They run on heaps to the well. Their
Captains forbidding the to drink Soldiers perished with hasty drinking.
too hastily, they that would not follow that counsel, died presently.

Thus beyond all hope, Cornificius brought his army safe to Myla to Agrippa,
who had taken Tyndarida, furnished with all Agrippa takes Tyndarida, which
was a City named of Tindarus father of Led^.
things necessary, and fit for the war by Sea, whither Caesar sent both
footmen and Horse. He had in Sicelie one and twenty Legions, twenty thousand
horsemen, and above five thousand light Horse. Pompey held yet with garrisons,
Mylas, Nauloco, and Peloro, and all the Sea coast, who being afraid of
Agrippa, kept Peloro is one of the four hills of Sicelie tovvarde Italy. Myla
is a flood and a City both, with a Port, now called Melazzo Dianio is a
City also in Spain. They were the Oxen of Phaetusa, which she and her two
sisters kept. Myconio. Caesar in peril^ again.
continual fyres to use against the Ships. He kept the mouths of Taurominio
and Myla, and shut the paths of Mountains with walls. He also molested
Caesar beyond Tyndarida, who would not yet fight, and supposing that Agrippa
would arrive, he went with speed to Peloro, leaving the streightes of Myla,
which Caesar forthwith did take, with a little town called Dianio, notable by
the tale of the goodly Oxen, which were taken away when Ulysses slept. When the
noyce of Agrippa his coming was ceased, and that Pompey heard the streightes
of Myla were possessed, he called for Tifieno with his army. Caesar going to
encounter with him, missed his way in the night in the hill of Myconio, where
he lay without a tent. And whereas the rain was very great, as is wont in
Autumn, he stood all night under a French target, The hill Aetna, now
Mongibello, that spouteth fire.
the Souldyoures holding it over him. The horrible and fearful sounds of the
hill Mongibello were heard, and the flashing of fire was seen, and y^ sauoure
of y^ brimstone was felt, in so much as the Germans lept out for fear, and
thought it no tale that they Germans afraid of the noyce of Aetna.
had heard of that hill. After this, he wasted the Country of Palesteno, where
he met with Lepidus, taking up corn, and they Palesteno. Messana beseeged.
both laid seege to Messana. Many skirmishes there were, but no great battle.
Then Caesar sent Taurus, to keep victual from Pompey, and take the Cities
that remained for him, by the which difficulty, being driven to his trial, he
determined to adventure all at one fight. And because he thought himself too
weak by land, he sent his Herald to require the fight by Sea. And albeit
Pompey desires to try all by a fight of equal number of Ships.
Caesar had no good will to match by sea, having hitherto had evil luck: yet
thinking it dishonorable to refuse him, he appointed a day to the fight, with
three hundred ships on a side, furnished with all weapons and defense that
they could device. Agrippa invented a graple, that is, a raster of five
cubits long, laid over with iron, having a cricle or ring in either end, and
in the one, Graple, the inueu^ion of Agrippa.
a crooked hook of iron, and in the other, many ropes, which drew the hook by
gynnes, when it was cast with a sling against the enemies Ships. When the day
was come, the first onset was of the small vessels, not without escries,
throwing darts and The stout and last fight by Sea.
stones, and shot fyred, as well by hand as by engine. The ships rushed one
against another, some on the sides, some on the stern, and other on the Poupe,
thereby the Souldyoures were shaken, and the vessels broken. Some used their
shot and darts a far off, and there were little boats to take up all that
fell in the water. The Souldyoures and the Mariners contended who should do
best. The exhorting of the Captains did good, and the engines did help, most
of all the graple, which reached the small Ships a far off for the
lightness, and held them fast, drawyng them by the ropes: neither could it be
cut off, because it was covered with iron, nor the ropes be touched, because
of their The profit of the graple.
length. Neither was this engine known, that they might have armed their
weapons with iron. They rowed on the sudden, thrusting their Ships on the
stern, to get aloose. When the enemies did so, then was the force of me^
equal, but when the graple came, it was a thing by it self. The Ships fought
joined together, and leaping out of one into another, and scarcely could the
one be known from the other. Their armor and weapons was alike, their shape
was all one. Their privy token was understood Liken esse of armor makes
confusion.
to both, which was cause of much deceyt, and after, of confusion, for they
distrusted. their own, for fear to be deceived, and so did not know what they
might do. In the mean time the hurt was great, the sea was full, as well of
men, as of armoure, and rumes of the broken and crushed vessels. For after they
came to fight at hand, they threw no more fire.

Both the armies of footmen stood upon the shore, with doubtful mind
whyther the victory would incline, for in a multitude of six hundred Ships,
they could not discern, being all alyke, except it were the couloure of
their tops, wherein they only differed, and only they coniectured by the
marks they had, and by the noyses and voices, how the matter went. But when
Agrippa understood that Pompey had Agrippa get^^^^ the victory.
the worse, he exhorted his Souldyoures to stand to it, that they might
obtain the victory, which was in their hands, and so they did, with such
fury and violence, as the enemy fled, and ran themselves a ground, where
they were either taken or burned, which when they that kept the Sea, did see,
they yielded.

Then the Navy of Caesar sang the song of victory, the which Rejoice of
victory by Caesar's ^^en.
the footmen on the shore answered with no less gladness. but

Pompey perceiving the overthrow, fled to Messina, not remembering his forces
of footmen, the which by and by yielded Pompeys army yeldeth to Caesar.
to Caesar, and shortly after the Horsemenne did the like. The which when
Pompey heard, he commanded to put all things into the seauenteene Ships
that were left, and leaving the habit of a General, would flee to Antony,
whose mother he Pompey faints, and provides to flee.
had saved in like danger. And that he might be the better welcome, he
sent to Plennius to bring the eight legions that he had at Lelisbeo, which
he would lead with him. But when he perceived that his friends and
Souldyoures did continually yield to Caesar, and that the enemy was entered
the narrow sea, although he was in a strong and well furnished City, yet he
would not tarry for Plennius, but fled with his seauenteene Pompey flees
with ^^vij. ships
ships. After he was gone, Plennius came to Messina, and kept that City.

This was the end of this last fight by sea, in the which, only three of
Caesar's ships were sonke, and seven and twenty of Pompeys. The remnant were
all defeated by Agrippa, except xvij. with the which Pompey fled away.

Caesar remained at Naulecho, and commanded Agrippa to beseege Naulechi.
Messina, which he did with the fellowship of Lepidus. Plennius sent for
peace. Agrippa thought it good to defer the answer till the morning. But
Lepidus was content, and to win Plennius Souldyoures to him, permitted half
the spoil of the Messina sacked.
City to them, which they having obtained beyond all hope, being glad to have
gone with their lives that night, sacked ye city with Lepidus Souldyoures. By
this means Lepidus wanne Plennius legions, who swear unto him, so as now,
having two and Lepidus divides the spoil of Messana with Plennius, and
receyuesh his army. Lepidus thinks to be Lord of Sicelie. Quarelling
betvveene Caesar and Lepidus.
twenty legions, with a great navy, was not a little proud, and thought to
win Sicelie, because he had gotten diverse places before, to the which he sent
his garrisons to keep out Octauian.

The next day, Caesar expostulated with Lepidus by his friends, saying, he
came as a confederate to resort to Sicelie, and not to get y^ I Will for himself,
and he alleging, that his authority was taken from him, and that Caesar had
it alone, he could be content to render Africa and Corfica for Sicelie. Then
Caesar was angry, and came unto him, and charged him with ingratitude, and
departed, so as they stood in doubt of each other, keeping ward severally.
The Shipyes lay at anchor, and it was suspected that Lepidus intended to have
burned Caesar's ships. The armies fearing a new civil war, had not the like
estimation of Lepidus, that they had of Caesar: for him they accounted wise and
diligente, and y^ other remiss and negligent, because he suffered their
enemies to be partakers of the spoil. When Octauian understood this, he
caused his friends to deal with the Captains secretly, and to promise them
liberally, and many were won unto him, specially of Pompeys band, thinking
their state not sure, except Caesar consented to it. Caesar came in person
with many Horsemen, which he left without the trench, and entered the Camp with
a few, vnbeknowing to Lepidus, for lack of foresight, protesting that new
Lepidus army reuolteth.
war was moved against his will: wherefore the Souldioures saluted him as
General, and Pompeys part that were corrupted, asked him forgiveness. To the
which he said, he marvelled that Pompeys Souldyours yield to Caesar.
they should ask forgiveness, not having yet done that was convenient for
them. They understanding his meaning, took their ensigns, and brought them to
Caesar. Other pulled down their Tents. But when Lepidus heard the tumulte, he
came out armed, and straight a fray began, where one of Caesar's Pages was
Caesar stricken.
killed, and himself stroke through the breast plate, but not hurt, wherefore
he departed in have to his Horsemen. A garrison iested A Castle beaten down,
whose garrison iested at Caesar.
at his running away, whereat he was so angry, as he was not quiet, till he had
beaten down that Castle, the which being done, other Castles gave over in
like sort, some presently, and some the night following, some never spoken to,
some pretending Castles given o^^r to Caesar.
some occasion, by being vexed of the Horsemen: yet some abode the brunt, and
repulsed the^, for Lepidus every where sent helpers to them, the which
reuolting also, the rest that were willing to him, changed their mind. And
first again the Pompeyans that yet remained with him, for sooke him by little
and little, Lepidus caused other to be armed to keep the^ in, who being armed
to that intent, took their ensigns, and with the aid of others, joined
themselves to Caesar. Lepidus threatened them that went, and prayed them also,
and he took the Standerds, and said, he would never deliver them, but when a
Souldyour said, Thou shall deliver Lepidus utterly. forsaken.
them dead, he gave place. The last that for sooke him was the Horsemen, who
sent to Caesar to know, if they should kill him, The horsemen send to
Caesar, to know if he vvoulde, houe Lepidus killed.
which he denied. Thus Lepidus being for saken of all men, and having lost his
army, changed his habit, and went to Caesar, and many ran to see that sight.
Caesar rose when he came, and would not suffer him to kneel, but depriving him
of all authority, reserving only a priestly office, in y^ apparel that he
came, he sent Lepidus ^e^ri^ed, only a special living reserved. The
mu^abiliti^ of Fortune.
him to Rome. Thus he that had bin many times a General, and sometime one of
the three rulers, making officers: and condemning many as good as himsolfe,
lived a private life, under some of the^ whom he had attainted before. Caesar
would not persecute Pompey, Caesar vvon^^^ not follovv Pompey.
nor suffer other to do it, either because he would not meddle in another man's
jurisdiction, or would behold Antonyes doings, to have just occasion to fall
out with him. For now that al other adversaries were taken away, it was thought
ambition would make them two quarrel, or because Pompey was none of the
conspirators, as Caesar did after affirm. Now had he an army o^ Caesar's
mighty army.
^ld, legions, of xxv. M. Horsemen, and of other Souldyoures: as many more,
which he gathered together. He had six hundred Gallyes, and many ships of
burden, which he sent to the owners. He gave the Souldyoures a reward for
victory, and promised more in time to come. He distributed crowns, garlands,
and other honors, and fo^gaue Pompeys Captains. This so great felicity,
Fortune did ^u^ie; for his own army fell to Enuic follovveth Fortune
mutiny, destring to be discharged, and requiring the reward Mutiny of
Souldioures.
promised at the field of Philipps. He answered, that this war was not like
any of the other, notwithstanding, he would reward them for all, together with
Antonyes Souldyers, when he should return. But as concerning their discharge,
he put them in remembrance of their oath and obedience. But seeing them still
obstinate, he ceased his rebukes, least the Souldyoures lately yielded, should
follow their trade, and promised that Antony and he, would discharge them in
conueniente time, and that he would now not use the^ in any cruel war, for
by the help of God, all was ended and done, and now he would lead them into
Slauonia, and other barbarous nations, where they should get great booties.
They said they would not g^^, unless he would reward them thoroughly. He
said he would reward them, and also give them gariano^s and garments of honor
and praise. Then said Ofilius, one of the Tribunes, Garlandes and Ofilius
rudely speaks to Caesar.
purple garments be rewards of Children, Souldyoures had need of money and
lands. The multitude said it was true. Then Caesar was grieved, and came from
his scate, and they that stood next the Tribunes, praised him, and rebuked
the other that would not agree with them. He said, he was sufficient alone
to defend so just a cause. The next day he was not seen, nor could be
known where he was become. Then the Ofilius not scene again.
Souldyoures not one at once for fear, but altogether, required to be
dismissed. Caesar spoke as fear, as he could to their Captains, and
discharged them that had served at Philippi and Modena, as the most old
Souldyoures, and commanded them to depart the I Will, least they should corrupt
the rest. Thus much he said to them that he discharged, that thought ^
discharged them Souldyoures dismissed.
now, yet he would reward them. Speaking to the other, he made them to
witness the perjury of them that departed, not discharged by the leave of
their General, and praised th^^d, and promised to dismiss them shortly, and
that they should not repent their duty done to him, and that now he would
give to every of them five hundred drammes. Then he set at ^she upon Sicelie
of fifteen hundred Talentes, and appointed Lieutenants for Sicelie and
Barbary, and divided his army. Antonyes Shippe^ he sent to T^drent, the rest
of his army he sent partly into Italy, and partly he took with him, when he
went out of the I Will. Coming toward Rome, the Senate received him with all
kind of honors, permytting to himself to receive, Honored offered to Caesar
at Rome.
which he would, either all or some at his pleasure. He was met a far off
with them that had garlandes, as well of the Senate, as of the people, of whom
he was first brought to the Temples, and then to his house.

The day following, he made an Oration to the Senate and to the people, he
declared his doyngs in order, and the administration Caesar declares his acts
to the Senate and the people. Caesar's Orations published.
of the common wealth, from his beginning to this day, Which Orations written
of himself, he published with many examples, and pronounced peace and
tranquillity after so long civil wars. Tributes vnpayd^ he forgave, and
likewise the gatherers of the tolles, and the synes for offices.

Of the honors of the Senate, he accepted a Chariot in the Theater, and yearly
solemnities of the days of his victories. Modestic of Caesar.
And an image of gold in the common place, with this inscription. For peace
gotten, after so many wars both by land and Sea. But he refused the chief
Byshopshippe, which the people Inscription of peace.
offered him, which by auntiente custom was not used to be taken from any man
alive, for Lepidus had it, and when they would have had him killed Lepidus
as an enemy, he denied it. Then he wrote many letters to the armies, with
commandment to be opened all at a day appointed, and then to do as they
were commanded, which was, to restore all bondmen in Rome and Italy, to their
masters or their heirs, that had freedom given them at the request of
Pompey, all the which Bondmen restored to their masters.
returned to their old state. The like he did in Sicelie. If any were
vnchalenged, he put them to death in the City from whence they came. This
seemed to be an end of civil war, when Caesar Caesar honored as a God, at
xxviii. year of his age. Robberies in the City.
was eight and twenty years of age, and consecrated as a God. The City and
Sicelie was troubled very much with robbers and rouers; with such boldness, as
they openly committed their lewdenesse.

To correct these, Sabinus was sent, who put many of them to Sab. ^^us.
the sword, and spent a year, before he could rid them, and at that time
(they say) the bands of watches were appointed, which Watches appointed in the
night in the City.
continue to this day. The speedy redress of this, brought great estimation
to Caesar, who exercised many things after the old manner by yearly
officers, and burned all the letters that were written in the time of war,
and promised to restore the common The hope of restorement of the common state
by Caesar's words.
wealth so soon as Antony returned, for he knew that he also would give up
his offices, now that there was no civil war. Therefore, being extolled
with immortal praises, the Tribuneship was given him for ever, with a meaning,
by the Tribune perpetual.
taking of this, to leave all other, of the which he wrote privately to Antony:
and he gave his advice by Bibulus going from him, and placed Lieutenants in his
provinces, intending to be his companion in the war of Slauonia.

Pompey fleeing out of Sicelie, came to the shore of Lacinie, where Lacinie, a
hill in the furthest shore of Italy. Pompey spoyleth the Temple of June.
Mitylene a City in Lesbo, now Mitcline. Vain hope of Pompey. Lalien^^.
he spoiled a rich Temple of June. From thence he went to Mitylene, where his
father left him and his mother, when he made war with Caesar. And because
Antony was gone to the Parthian war, he intended to yield to him at his
return. But where it was reported that Antony was overcome, and he believed
it, he conceived an hope to succeed him in all the provinces, or that at the
least in part, taking example of Labienus, who ran over Asia. Being occupied
with these cogitations, he heard that Antony was come to Alexandria. He
prepared himself to both courses, and wrote to Antony, to be his friend and
fellow, only meaning Pompey uses double device.
to epsy his doings. And secretly he sent other Ambassadors to the Princes
of Thracia and Pontus, minding to pass into Armenia, if he did not obtain his
purpose.

He wrote also to the Parthians, hoping they would take him for a Captain in
the war, being a Roman, against Antony their Roman adversary.

He prepared Ships and Souldyoures for the same, pretending to be afraid of
Caesar, and to prepare them for Antonyes use. But when Antony heard of his
purposes, he sent (...) sent against Pompey by Antony.
Titius chief Captain against him, that receiving an army and navy Syria,
he should resist Pompey with all his power, but if he had rather receive
Antonies trust, he should bring him to him honorably. The Ambassadors of
Pompey made this request.

We are sent to thee from Pompey, not that he could not be admitted into
Spain, a province that owes him good will for his Pompeis Ambassadors to
Anotonie.
fathers sake, if he listed to make war, which help him when he was
younger, and now offers him their aid: but because he had rather enjoy
peace with thee, or under thy banner, make war, if need be. Which is no new
intent, but when he ruled Sicilie, and invaded Italy, and saved and sent thee
home thy mother, he desired thy friendship, which if thou had accepted,
neither had he been driven out of Sicilie, whereto thou did lend thy
ships, nor thou been overcome in Parthia, Caesar not sending thee, such army
as he promised. Yea thou might have brought Italy under thy power. But
although he were refused when time was, he now desires thee, not to be illuded
and deceived with so many fair words and affinity, remembryng that Pompey
also after promise to the contrary was iniustly invaded of Caesar, and spoiled
of his portion, whereof no part has redou^ded to thee. Now thou only art
the let, why he has not the only Monarchy, which he has long thirsted
after. For you had bin at war before this, if Popey had not been. And thou
ought to foresee these things of thy self, so for the good will, which he
bears thee, he had rather have the amitio of a plain and liberal man, than
of a subtle and crafty fellow. Pompey is not angry that thou lentest ships
against him, being constrained, that thou might have men of him, but puts
thee in remembrance, how much y^ army not sent thee, did hinder thee. And to be
short, Pompey commits himself to thee, with all his ships, with a trusty
army, which have not forsaken him though he fled, thou shall purchase a
great praise, if being in peace, thou will preserve the Son of Pompey the
great: that if the war be broken, which is feared, thou may have a
confederate of such might and estimation. When Antonie heard this, he said,
Antonie to Pompeis Ambassadors.
If Pompey means good faith, I have given commission to Titius to bring him
to me. In the meake (...), Pompe^^ messengers that were sent to the Parthians,
were taken of Antonies officers, and (...) messengers taken.
brought to Alexandria, of whom, when Antonie had learned all things, he sent
for Pompeis Ambassadors, and showed them to them. Then they exell^^d him,
being a young man and in extreme necessrie, fearyng to be re^^^^ed of him, and
dry^^en so Excuse of Po^pey.
prove the most mortal enemies of the people of Rome* but if he were sure of
Antonies mind, he should need no further suyte. He be^eeued it as a plain
man, and nothing suspicious. Furnius Antonie a plain man. Furniu^.
being president of Asia, received Pompey very gently, not being hable to
re^ect him, nor sure of Antonies mind. But when he saw him train his
Soldiers, he gathered an a^my Pompey trayneth his men. O^^ob^rbus. Amyntas.
Practice disco^^red.
of the country, and sent for (...), captain of the army, and for Amyntas
a freende, who assemblyng* quickly together, Pompey complained that he was
used as an enemy. When he had sent Ambassadors, to Antonie, and looked for
answer from him. In the mean while he practiced to take (...), by Curio put
to death.
the help of Cu^^^ne his freende, but the practice being discovered, Curio was
put to death, and Pompey killed his la^e bondsman Theodorus killed. Lampsaco
taken by Pompey. Capsico, a city in the shore of Hellesponte. He besieges
Cyzi^^s, an I^a^de in Propontide, and a city of that name of great strength.
Theodorus, who was ^nely priute to that counsel. And because he doubted of
Furnius, he took the city of Lampsaco by composition, where many Italians did
inhabit, appointed by Julius Caes^r, whom he allured to his pay with great
promyses. Now had he two hundredth horse, and three regions, and besieged
Cyzicus both by sea and land, from the which he was repulsed. For there was a
little band of Antonies, and certain sword players that were brought up there.
And where Furnius absteyning from battle, old cuermore encampe nigh him, and
kept him from soraging, A^^^i^ a part of Gr^^^^.
which he went about in the territory of the Acheans Pompey set upon the fore
part of his camp, and sent other about Pompey di^^odgeth Furnius.
to do the like behind. Whereby Furnius resisting him, his camp was taken of
the other, and driven to flee by the fields Scama^tria a little town at the
port of Ili^.
of Scamandria, where Pompey killed many of them, for the field was moist with
the shoures. They that escaped durst not turn again to the field. The people
of Mysia, Propontide, and other pla^es, People resort to Pompey.
that were pore and consumed with payment, came to (...) service, being
renoun^ed for his late victory. But wantyng horsemen, and being shrewdly
hand^ed in foragyng, he heard of (...), now the sea of said George Mys^^,
now (...) ^^ (...). Pompeys money taken.
a band of Italian horsemen going to Antonie (which Octauia had sent from
Athens) and sent to corrupt them with gold. The president of the country
took them, that brought the money, and distcibuted it to the horse men. Pompey
at N^cea and Nic^media gathered much money with great success. Furnius
again He gathers more. Nicea, a city in diverse places. N^comedia, now
(...), a cuie in (...). Proco^n^so, now M^^mor^, an I Will in Propontide.
coming into the field and encamping nigh him, there came.lxx. ships out of
Sicelie in the spryng, which were lest of them that Antonie had lent Caesar.
And Titius came out of Syria with a hundred and twenty ships and a great
army, all the which arrived at Proconnesco, of the which Pompey being afraid,
burned his ships and armed his Mariners having more trust in the land. But
Cassius of Parma, Nasidius, Saturninus, Therinus, Antistius, and other
honorable friends of Pompey, and Furnius, most Pompeys friends yield to
Antonie.
dear unto him and Lib^ himself, his father in law, when they saw that Pompey
was always to weak, they yielded themselves to Antonie. He being thus
forsaken, went into y^ midland of Bythinia, entending to go into Arm^nia.
Furnius and Tituis followed him: he being secret, departed out of his tents,
and with great journey they ouertooke him at night, and severally encamped
about an hill without ditche or trenche, being late and they weary. Pompey
assayleth his eninues by night.
That night Pompey set upon them with three thousand men as they were
sleeping, and put them to flee naked shamefully: but if he had assailed them
with his whole power, or followed them as Pompey loses occasion.
broken, he had gotten perfect victory. But fortune would not suffer, and he
got nothing thereby, but that he went on his journey. They recovering, horses,
followed him, and kept him from victual, so as being driven to speech, he
desired to speak with Furnius that was some time ^^ freende of his Fathers,
and a man of great dignity. And st^ndyng on the bank of the river, he
said, he, had sent Ambassadors to Antonie, Pompey desires speech with
Furnius.
and in the mean season wantyng victualles, did that he had done. If you make
war upon me by (...)ies commaundeme, he sees not well for himself not
receiving a greater war to hang over him. But if you do it upon your own
authority, I pray you and beseech you that you would ceasie till my
Ambassadors return, or carry me safely to him. And to you, O Furni, I will
commit my self, so you will promise me to deliver me safe to Antonie. Thus
much he said, hopyng in Antonie, as a gentle man, and seeking to pass his
journey quietly. To whom Furnius thus answered. If thou would have
committed Furnius to Pompey.
thy self to Antonie, thou should have done it at the first, or being
quiet, have looked for answer at M^^yiene: but making war, thou haste
brought thy self to this case, if thou repentest thee, blame not us. Antonie
has appointed Titius to receive thee, to him therefore, commit thy self, of
whom thou may require that thou requirest of me. For he commanded, that if
thou playest the part of an enemy, to kill thee: if not, to bring thee
honorably unto him.

Pompey was offended with Ti^i^, as unthankful: because he Pompey hates
Ti^^^.
had made this war against him, whom he once took and saved him. Therefore
Pompey was the more grieved to come into his hands, that was but a mean man:
whose fidelity he suspected, either of his behavior, or of the former injury
he had done him, before he did him pleasure. Wherefore once again he yielded
to Furnius, and desired to be taken, but it was not granted. Pompey yeldeth to
Furnius who vvoulde not take him nor suffer Amyntas to do it.
Then he desired Amyntas ^ight take him, which when Furnius said, he should
not do, because it were a wrong to him that had commission from Antonie, and so
they brake. Furnius Soldiers thought he would have yielded the next day to
Titius, But he in the night, making fires after the (...), and founding the
trompe at every relief of the watch, with a few went out of the camp, not
tellyng them what he would do, for he meante to have gone to the sea, and
have set Titius camp a fire, which (...) he had (...), had not (...) gone
from (...), discovered by (...).
him and (...) his departure, and which may he went. Then Amyntas followed him
with (...) hundred horsemen, to whom whom he drew nigh, his people fors^^ke
him, some openly and Pompey forsaken of all hands.
some secretly. When he saw himself forsaken of all sides, he Pompey yeldeth
to Amyntas without condition.
yielded to Amyntas without condition, refusing Ti^^^^ conditions. Thus the
younger (...) of great Pompey was taken* losing his father when he was very
young, and his brother, when The conn^ing up of Pompey.
he was toward mane estate. Which two being taken away, he lay close a great
why, and vexed Spain with privy robberies, till he had good rescet to him,
and then he professed himself to he Pompeys son, a^^ made open rodes: and
when Julius Caesar was slain, he moved plain war, being aided with great
multitudes and forces of the suddayne, gayning Ships, and public treasure.
He ^ppressed Italy with famine, and brought his enemies to what conditions he
would, and that most is, when the wicked condemnation was executed in Rome, he
saved The good acte^ of Pompey.
many of the noble men, that enjoyed their Country by his benefyte: but
Fortune not favoring him, he would never Negligence v^d^d Pompey.
take the advantage of his enemy, neglecting many occasions, he would lie
still.

This was he that now is in bondage.

Titius commanded his army to swear to Antony, and put Titius puts Pompey
to death at Mil^to, a City in the ends of Ionia and Caria.
him to death at Mileto, when he had lived to the age of fortye years,
either for that he remembered late displeasure, and forgot old good rurnes, or
for that he had such commandment of Antony.

There be that say, that Plancus and not Antony, did command Plancus.
him to dye, which heeyng president of Syria, had Antonyes signet, and in
great causes wrote letters in his name. Some think it was done with Antonyes
knowledge, he fearyng the name of Pompey, or for Cleopatra, who favored Pompey
the great.

Some think that Plancus did it of himself for these causes, and also that
Pompey should give no cause of dissension between Caesar and Antony, or for
that Cleopatra would turn hy^auour to Pompey.

When he was dispatched, Antony took his journey into The Illyrian^ now
(...). con^nuall enemies of the Romans.
Armenia, and Caesar against the Slauonians, continual enimyes of the
Romans, never obeying the Roman Empire, but re^oltyng in every civil war.

And because the wars of Illyria are not thoroughly known unto me, nor
sufficient to make a just volume, and can not ^e declared commodiously
otherwise, I have thought it good to refer them to the time, that the^ were
subject to the Romances, and making a compendious Treatise of them, to join
th^^ with the affairs of (...).



FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing of the five Books of civil vvarres of Rome.
Page Line. Fault. Correction. 1 1^ should shall ^ 35 Li^bia Libya 4 1 duke
of Loma gulf of Ionia 4 vlt. Colligant Colligauit ^ 20 of that of them that 13
2 Paperius Papirius 16 33 pastime pasture 25 25 Hirsians Hirpinian^ 29 17
Falerno Ealerno 32 16 Canue Can. ^8 2^ Cithegus Cethegus ^0 17 means malice.
54 14 wars ways 69 vlt. Garinus Garganus 70 8 birds burdens 73 20 Cateline
Catilina ^3 35 that Milo Milo that 85 26. 28. 29. Ptotolomie Ptolomie 95 3
Dirrachium Dyrrachium 97 2 Sypris Sycoris ^^2 ^4 mnaly^ manly ^05 1 Baron barn
106 ^31 seyning seeming ^07 34 os.viij. C. saving. 800* ^^0 1 Ve^ona Velona 114
7 slingers slingers 110 ^^ any. 120. only. 120. 115 2 forty 40^. 115 27 so
so 126 9 Methridates Mithridates ^40 ^7 came coming ^61 2 4^. 400. ibid. 5
horse ho^^e ibid. ^^ (...) Tu^rci^^

A CONTINVATION of Appian of Alexandria:

Wherein is declared the last act of the woeful Tragedy of the Romans
bloody Dissentions, in the which Marcus Antonius was ouerthrown by sea at
Actio, and by land at Alexandria:

Where both he and Cleopatra killed themselves, after the which, Octauius
Caesar was the only Monarch of all the Roman Empire alone.

In this we be taught: That Gods vengeance is sharp, although it be ^^^vv, and
that peoples rule must g^^^ place, and princely power prevail.



AT LONDON, Imprinted by Raulfe Newberry and Henry Bynniman.

Anno, 1578.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, his singular good Master, Sir Christopher Hatton,
Knight, Captain of the Queens Majesty's Guard, Vicechamberlaine to her
Highness, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
AS the loss of old possessions, is a grief to the landed men: eue^ so the
decay of au^tient books, is a smart to the learned sort. Titus Liuius father of
the Roman history (whom to see, repair was made of Gentlemen from far
places, vvhiles he lived) has not escaped the injury of time, but bin left
vnperfitte, to the great sorrow of posterity, after he dyed, Cornelius Tacitus
that followed him both in matter and age, could not avoid that iniquity,
although the Emperor Tacitus commanded his books to be written ten times
every year. This Author Appianus Alexandrinus, has had the like luck, for all the estimation he was in, the half of his labor being lost, and the last
part of the whole civil tumult not now to be had from him, but briefly
supplied otherwise, that the end of the Romans woe, and the beginning of our
joy, might be declared, the one successively following of the other. The which
it may please your honor to accept, according to your accustomed goodness,
beseeching the living Lord long to preserve the same.

Your Honors humble servant. H. B.

A Continuation of Appian of Alexandria, till the overthrow of M. Antonius,
which was the last civil dissension after the which, Octauius Caesar had
the rule of all the Roman Empire alone.
AFter that Octauius Caesar, and M. Antonius had agreed with Sextus, the younger
son of Pompey* the great* it was determined that Antonius should make war
upon the Parthians, to revenge the death of Crassus. Wherefore presently he
sent Ventidius to repress the Parthians, and he to gratify Octauius, was
content to marie his sister, and to Antonie marieth Octauia.
be made the holy minister of Julius Caesar that was dead, he remaining in
Rome, ruling by common consent, with Octauius Caesar, as well the matters of
the City as of the whole Empire. And as it befalls between such Princes,
to make pastimes in play and matches, Antonie always had the worse, at the
Antonies fortune* is overcome* of Caesar's.
which he was somewhat moved. He had in his company an Aegiptian, after ye
manner of a Soothsayer, who, either to please Cleopatra, or to show the very
truth, told Antonie then, that his fortune was obseured by the fortune of
Octauius. Therefore he advised him to go further off. For, says he, when thou
art abroad, thy nature is noble and coragious, but when thou art with him, it
is deiect and afraid of his. Antonie, whether by this motion, or his own
inclination, was content to leave all there to Octauius, and to go toward his
old love of Aegipt, yet carrying his new wife with him into Graecia, pretending
an earnest desire to revenge the injury that was done to Crassus, which was
after this sort:

Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, were all suitors for the Consulship Crassus,
Pompey and Caesar.
in Rome, against them stood Cicero and Cato: Crassus and Pompey were chosen,
and they continued Caesar's authority in France for five years longer, which
he only desired. In castyng lottes for the provinces, Spain fell to Pompey,
whereof he was glad, being given to please his wife: and the people was glad,
being desirous to have Pompey nigh the City. Syria fell to Crassus, whereof
Crassus goes to the war against order.
he was only glad, and all other sorry. For they perceived he was wholly
given to spoil the country of Parthia, which was not comprehended in the law
of the provinces. Wherefore Atteius the Tribune of the people, forbad Crassus to
invade Parthia, but he being animated by Caesar's letters out of France, and by
Pempeys presence in Rome, went forward, notwithstanding that the Tribune, at
the gate of the City did stand by, with fire and Sacrifice, coniuryng him in
the name of most strange and searefull Gods, not to proceed, the which
kind of execration, Execration.
the Romans think to be most horrible, both to him that does pronounce
them, and to him, against whom they be pronounced: when Crassus had pasion the
seas, and lost many of his ships, sailing before due time, and after he had
gotten some cities by accord, and won one by force, he would needs be
called Imperator, for the which he was mocked, because that name was not
Imperator.
given to any by the Romans, before he had in a plain battle, overthrown.x.
M. and spending one winter like a rent gatherer, without any exercise of his
soldiers, and in spoiling a Temple at Hierapoli^ an holy city in As^^, full of
marvelous things.
Hierapoli, in the entry of the which, he and his son, fell one upon an
other, and being offered help of the king of Armenia, if he would make his
journey thorough his country, which was the better way, he refused it, and
went rashly through Mesopotamia. And at the passage over a bridge which he had*
made, it thundered and lightened in his face, and blew down a part of the
bridge, and after he was come over, his camp was twice set a fire by
lightning. These and many other tokens might have moved him, but he went forth,
Tokens.
till both he and his son and.xx. M. Romans were slain, and.x. M. taken,
and all the despite done to them that could be devised. Upon Antonie goes
against the Par^^^ans to revenge Crassus. Antonie did better by his Li^^tenants
than by himself. Ventidius.
this occasion did Antonie lead his army against y^ Parthians, and by his
Leiftena^t Ventidius gave them a great overthrow, whiles he was at Athens.
Wherefore he made great feastings among the Graecians, and being ready to go
forth, he ware a garland of holy Olive, and to fulfill an oracle, carried with
him a vessel of water. In the mean time Ventidius gave an other overthrow, in
y^ which, Pacorus y^ kings son was slain, the which although it seemed a
sufficient revenge for Crassus death, yet he gave the^ the third euerthrow
between Media and Mesopotamia. Then Ventidius thought it good to stay, least
Antonie should envy him. And when he had subdued them y^ revolted, he besieged
Co^magenus Antiochus, in Samosatis, Samosatis* a city where is a lage* of a
marvelous nature. Antonie refuses good offer.
who promised to give a thousand talents and obey Antony. Unto whom Ventidius
willed him to send his Ambassadors, because he was at hand: which being done,
he would not recerue y^ offer, that it should not seem that Ventidius has
done all. But Antonie returns.
when the city stood at defense, and would not yield, he was sorry he had
refused the condition, and was content, to take three hundredth talents, and go
his way again to Athens, having done little or nothing in Syria. He rewarded
Ventidius very well, and sent him to Rome to triu^ph, and only he had triu^ph
of the Parthians, a man of base blood, and aua^ced by Antonie, who confirmed y^
saying of Caesar and Antonie, y^ they did better prevail by their Lieftenants,
than King Orodes killed by his son. Moneses to Themistocles compared Antonies
liberality, to cou^ternayle kings of Persi^.
by themselves. Now was Orodes the king of Parthia, killed by his son
Phra^^e^* from whom many fled away, and among other Moneses a noble man came to
Antonie, who co^paryng his misery, to Themistocles, and his own felicity, to
y^ kings of Persia, gave him three cities: eue^ as Xerxes gave.lij. cities to
Themistocles, for his bread, drink and meat, and as some say, two more, for
his lo^gyng and apparel. And when the king sent for Moneses to be restored,
Antonie was content with it, and offered him peace, so he would ^^nder the
Ensigns and the captives that were taken at the loss of Crassus. Then he
took his journey by Arabia and Armenia, where he increased his army by the
consederate kings, whereof y^ greatest was y^ king of Armenia, who lent him.
6000. horse, and. 7000* footeme^, he mustred his army, and had of Roman
footeme^. l^. M. of Spanish, French, and Roman horsemen. x M* of other nations
of horse and footeme^.xxx. M. And this great power, y^* did cast a terror
Vain* lo^^.
even to the Indians, only the vain love of Cleopatra, brought to none effect.
For the desire he had to come again into her company made him do al things
out of time and order. He had left his last wife Octauia with her children,
and the children he Octa^^^*
had by his first wife Fuluia, with Octauius Caesar. And being now in the East
parts, was wholly given to the wanton desire of Cleopatra, to whom he gave
the provinces of Cypres, Caelosyria, Cleopatra.
Phaenitia, and a part of Cilicia and Jury, wherewith he Romans Antonie
kills the king of Jury. Vanity of Antonie.
were much grieved, and also with his cruelty to Antigonus king of Jury, and
with his vanity in the children he had by Cleopatra, calling the one,
Alexander, the Sun, and the other Cleopatra the Moon. Yet was Cleopatra not
the fairest woman in the world, but very witty and sull of artificial
devises, and had the cast to beguyle Antonie, who was easy to be led. For
haste, he would not suffer his army to rest after so long a journey: for
haste he left his engines behind him, whereof one was called a Ram of
four score foot long: for haste he Haste makes waste.
left Media, passing by the left hand of Armenia into Atropatia, which he
spoiled. Then he besieged the great City of Atropatia one part of Media.
Phraata, where he found his error, in leauyng his artillery behind.
Therefore to cause his men to do somewhat, he made them cast up mountes. In
the mean tune the king (...) forth with a mighty army, and hearing that the
artillery was left behind, he sent a great part of his horse men, which slew
Tatianus, and ten thousand that were left for the custody of the Engines, The
artillery of the Romans taken.
and took and spilled the munitio^. The which did much discourage his
Soldiers, and caused that the king of Armenia for soke him, for whose cause he
made the war. The Parthians were very brag upon the Romans, wherefore
Antonie took ten legions, and all his horsemen to range the country, thereby
to provoke the enemy to fight. When he had gone one days journey, he saw the
enemies round about him, therefore, in his camp he determined to fight, yet
would not so seem, but raised his camp as to go away, commaundyng that when
the foot men were at hand, the horsemenne should set upon the enemy,
which stood in a triangle battle to behold the Romans good order, shaking
their darts. When the time served, the horsemen gave so fierce an onsette
upon them, as they took away the use of their shot, notwithstanding they
stuck to it. But when the foot^ men came, with shoute and fearful show, the
Parthian Horsemen were disordered, and turned their backs. Antony thinking to
make an end of the war that day, gave them the chase, and yet took but
xxx. and kyl^ed lxxx Which again did much discourage the Romans, since they
lost so many (...) a small victory.
at their carriage, and wanne so little at this victory.

The next day Antony returned to his Camp, and by the way at the first met
with few of his enemies, afterward more and more, and at the last all, so as
being much molested with them, with much ado he got to the Tents, where the
enemy a^saulted the trench, the which, diverse for fear did forsake. Wherefore
Antony punished every tenth man, and fed the rest with Punishment. To be
fed with barley, was a punishment among Souldyoures.
barley. The war was grievous to them both, for Antony could no more go a
foraging without great loss. And the King feared, that if his men should lie
in the field all Winter, they would forsake him. Wherefore he devised this
policy. The noble men of the Parthians suffered the Romans to carry away
Crast of the Parthians.
their prays, with great commendation of their worthiness, and that the king
would be glad of peace, and so riding nearer the army, would rebuke Antony for
keeping them there in so strange a country, out of the which, though the
Parthians were their friends, it should be hard for them to escape. When
Antony heard of this, he caused to be enquired, whether these men did speak
by the Kings consent, which they answered to be. Then he sent to the King,
that if he would restore the Captives and ensigns, he would depart. The King
said, he would send them to him, if he would depart quickly. Therefore Antony
made up, and retired. At his going away, he did not speak to the Souldyoures
as he was wont to do, being very elaquente that way, whereat many were
offended, committing the matter to be done Antony omitteth a Generalles part.
Mardus.
to Domitius Aenobarbus. Being in his way, one Mardus, well acquainted with the
Parthian manners, whose faith the Romans had proved before, told Antony it was
best for him to go so, as he might have the hills on his right hand, and
not to hazard his army laden with armor to the Parthian archers and horsemen
in the plain way. Antony consulted with his counsel, pretending yet not to be
afraid of the breach of peace, and accepting the counsel as compendious.
Antony required surety of Mardw, he had him bind him, till he came into
Armenia. So being bound, he brought him two days quietly.

The third day when Antony looked for nothing less than the Parthians upon the
Romans.
Parthians, Mardus espied the bank of a river to be broken down, and the
water flowing abroad, which he coniectured to be done by the enemy to hinder
the passage of Antony. Therefore he wished Antony to look to it, for they were
not fair off. Antony set his men in order, and by and by the Parthians came
upon him, whom he received with his shot. So there was much hurt done on
both sides, till the French horsemen brake upon them, and put them by for that
day. Antony being taught hereby, went on with a square battle, fencing the
same thoroughly with the shot. The Horsemen were commanded to give repulse
to the enemy, and that done, not to cha^e them far. So Parthians trouble the
Romans.
when the Parthians these four days had received as much hurt as they had
done, they minded to retire, because the winter was at hand.

The fifth day, Fuluius Gallus a valiant man, desired Antony Fuluius Gallus
takes an evil enterprise.
to have a greater band of shot, and more Horsemen, and he would do some
notable feate, which when he had received, he put back the enemy, not
returning to the army again as they did before, but pursuing them along
without fear, which when the leader of the rerewarde did see, he called him
back, but he would not obey. And whereas Titius took the banner to turn
Titius.
back, he put it forward again, and badde him meddle with his own matters,
and went so far, as he was compassed of his enemies, and compelled to send
for help, wherein Canidius Canidius.
that was in great credit with Antony did not well, for he sent but a few
at once, which were soon put back, and utterly had bin lost, had not
Antony come with his legions in time, and abated the courage of the enemy.
Notwithstanding Romans slain.
three thousand Romans were slain, and five thousand hurt, and Gallus
wounded with four darts, of the which he dyed. Antony Antony vveepeth.
went about weeping, and comforting them: they desired him to be content, for
all was well, if he were well. Great lone bare the souldyoures unto him, for he
was compted one of the best Captains of that time. The enemies were so
encouraged by this victory, as they waited at the Camp all night, thinking the
Romans would have bin gone: And in the morning the number was much increased,
for the king had sent the horsemens guard of his person, but came at no fight
himself, so as there was now forty thousand horsemen. Antony would have
gone among the Souldyoures with a black gown, but his friends would not
Antony lamenteth.
suffer him: so he went general like, and praised them that had done well,
and rebuked them that had done otherwise. They prayed him to pardon them, and
to punish every tenth man. Only they desired him to leave his sorrow. Then he
held his hands up to heaven, saying: If any disdeyne of God remained of his
Antonyes prayer
former fortune, he desired it might fall upon him, so the Romans army might
be saved, and have the victory.

The next day, he went more warily, when contrary to their looking, the
Parthians came ^rolling down the hill, thinking to have gotten pray, and not
to have found war. The Romans Policy of the Romans.
took in their archers and such other, into the midst of the battle,
causing the^ to kneel, and they stouping, covered them with their shields,
upon the which the Parthians arrows slided off. And the Parthians thinking
that the Romans had stouped for weariness, made a shoute, and came upon them
with their staves, at the which time the Romans rose, and so encountered with
them, Parthians repulsed.
as they drove them away. Thus were they troubled diverse days, and made but
little way.

Now was there want in the Camp, for they could get Want in the Romans
Camp.
no corn, and their Cattle was spente, partly by loss, and partlye by
carrying the wounded and sick men. A barley lofe was Barley bread. Herbs
venomous. Fren^ye in the Camp.
sold for the waighte of silver. They eat strange herbs and roots, and
some that brought present death, with a kind of madness, for they could do
nothing else but roll stones, so as all the Camp was almost occupied in
picking and turning of stones. The remedy of this was wine, which wanted in
the host, Wine.
therefore when they had vomited the melancholy, they dyed. Many thus dying,
and the Parthians still coming upon them, Antony oftentimes cried, Oh the
ten thousand, meaning the ten thousand Greeks, which, under the leading
of Xenophon, passed safe a far longer way, in despite of their enemies. The
(...) of Xenophon.
Now when the Parthians perceived they could not prevail against the
Romans, nor break their order, but were always put back, they began to
deal gently again with the forragiers, showing the strings of their bows
vnbente, and to make an end, only a few Medians should follow the tail,
to keep the Towns from spoiling. These words made the Romans glad, and
Antony minded to go the champion way, and leave the hil^es. And being entered
this way, one Mithridates, a Antony warned
cousin of that Monesis that fled to Antony, came unto him, and required to
speak with one that could the Parthian tongue. To whom Alexander of Antioch, a
friend of Antonyes, was appointed. He told him that Monesis, for good will to
Antony, had sent him to show, that under the hills which he saw before him,
next unto the which the plain way did join, the Parthians lay in secret, to
beguile him again by their fair words. Therefore if he would save himself
and his host, he should not leave the way by the hills, where in deed he
should find labor and thirst, but the other way he should not escape
Crassus misfortune. This said, he went his way. Antony communicated this with
his friends, and with Mardus, who affirmed it to be most like the truth.
Therefore he said it was best to go by the hills, though it were paynefull, and
should lack water one day. Now Antony took this way, and commanded every
man to carry as much water as he could: but there was lack of vessels, and
Water.
the most part carried it in their sallets. When the Parthians spies had told
which way Antony went, contrary to their manner, they came upon him by night,
and by break of day, set upon the rereward, weeryed with labor and watching.
So they were compelled both to march, and to resist the enemy. Now was the
foreward come to a flood, which was very clear, but salt, that who Salt
water.
soever drank of it, was full of pain. Mardus gave them warning of it, but
the Souldyoures would not be ruled. Then Antony ran about, praying them to
refrain and pass on, for a little further was a flood of healthsome water,
and so chose a way, that the Parthians could not follow them. And to cause the
Souldyoures to have some shadow, he blew the retreat, and pitched his tents,
Which being done, and the Parthians going back, as they were wont,
Mithridates came again, and spoke with Mithridates
Alexander, telling him, that after the Souldyoures had rested a while, they
should remove and pass over the next flood, for so far the enemy would
follow. When Antony heard this, he took many cups of gold to Alexander, to
give Mithridates as Antonyes gifts.
many as he could carry away. So Antony departed, and had much ado, for the
enemies followed so hard, as they sacked his Antonyes treasure spoiled.
carriage, and took his tables and plate of gold, and as many as had any
thing, they killed and spoiled, whereby it was thought that all the army was
disordered, and scattered, in so much as Antony called one of his chamber to
him, and wylled him, if he commanded him, to kill him, he should do it upon
Antony in dread.
his oath, and take away his head, that he might not be known when he was
dead. Antony being in this sorrow, Mardus did comfort him, affirming that the
flood was at hand, which he knew by the coldness of the air that there was
felt. Antony, Cold air ^oke^ of water.
to bring all to quiet, commanded to Camp even there. By break of day, the
Parthians again charged upon the tail, in defense of whom, the shot was
sent, and the battle defended them with their shieldes. The Parthians durst
not come to handstrokes, so as by this time the fore-ward was come to the
flood, ^uer the which, Antony sent first the hurt and sick souldioures, and
appointed all the Horsemen to encounter with the enemy, by the which mean,
they that went over, might have leisure to drink. When the Parthians saw the
floude, they vnbente their bows, and said, the Romans might now drink at
leisure, for they had so deserved by their virtue.

The Romans being past the flood, did march in order, not yet trusting the
Parthians.

The sifth day after their last fight, they came to the floude Araxes, which
divides Media and Armenia. And because this Araxes divides Armenia from
Atropatia.
flood was hard to pass, they were again afraid (...) their enemies had
^ayne in awayte, but passing quietly, as soon as they came to land, they
rejoiced at it, as they do that s^^ it from the Sea, and embraced one another,
weeping for joy. Now followed there another inconvenience, for the Country
being plentiful, and the Souioyoures taking too much, fell into many
diseases, (...)
and dyed. Antony then mustered his men, finding he wanted Lo^^^ of the (...).
twenty thousand foot^men, and four thousand Horsemen, half of the which dyed
of diseases. From the City of Phra^tis, they had b^^ coming seven and twenty
days, in the which they had fought eyghteene times with the Parthians, of
whom they could not have perfect victory, because the king of Armenia
forsook them, whose army had bin most expert to have dealte with the
Parthians: wherefore every man counseled Antony to be revenged of the King:
Antony using policies, showed all courtesies to the men of the Country, and
sent so fair messages to the King, as he came unto him, whom he co^^^itted by
and by, and carried him to Alexandri^, where he triumphed over him, Antony
takes the King of Ar^ ^^^i^ by fl^ght. Ant^^yes triu^p^ displeasant to the
Romans. (...).
which thing grieved the Romans, that Antony would defraude his Country to
please his Concubine. The winter was so great, that he lost eyghte thousand,
before he could come to a Castle called Leuce, where he was in great agonyes,
till Cleopatra was come. Then like a foolish young man, he gave himself to
wantonness and riot, running from his table to the sea side every Antonyes
^ond^^ss^.
day to see if she were come. When she came, she brought much apparel, and
money to give the Soul^youres. Some say, Antony took them to her* to give the
Romans.

Now was there a variance fallen between the Kings of Parthia and Media, for
the spoil of the Romans goods. The Median King sent to Antony to come
again, and he would join with Antony c^lled by the Med^^^ again.
him with all his power which was very great. Antony was not a little glad
hereof, because the help of the Medians might be the mean for him to
conquer Parthia, and so intended to make a new i^urney.

At Rome Oct^uia des^red to go to her husband Antony. C^sar was content with
it, not so much to pleasure his sister, as to take occasion C^s^r seeket^
occasion to ^^^^ Antony.
by the evil handling which he suspected would follow o^ her, to move just
war against Antony. When she was come to Athens, she received letters from
Antony, to stay there, because Antony forbids his wife Octauia to (...) to
him.
of his new voyage. She smelling the matter, wrote unto him to know whether
she should send the things which she had brought him, that is to say, many
coats for his Souldyoures, great plenty of Cattle, money, and rewards for his
Captains, and two thousand fresh Souldyoures, for the guard of his person,
all the which, were well set out to him by Niger his messenger. Niger.
When Cleopatra heard this, fearing that if Octauia came, she would put her out
of conceyt, she bestirred her, she pined hirselfe, Craft of Cleopatra.
she wept, and wayled, and would needs dye for Antonyes sake, who said, he
would take his journey in hand. Some there were that blamed Antony as rude and
hard hearted, that h^e would put so loving a Lady and so great a Queen in
danger of her life, either for his wives sake, or for any other cause, in so
much as Antony was made a tame fool, and deferred unto the Antony doteth.
next summer his expedition, and returned to Alexandria to winter with
Cleopatra. Now was Octauia returned to Rome, and her brother Octauia.
willed her to go to her own house, but she went to Antonyes house, which she
kept with so good order, and cherishing as well the children he had by Fuluia,
as by her self, as it did aggrauate the fault of Antony, that he would
forsake so virtuous a Modesty of Octauia.
Roman Lady, for an Egiptian stranger. Octauia desired her brother, that if
there were none other cause of war but by her, that he would not move it, for
she should bear the blame. Therefore ^^ all requests she did help Antonyes
friends, whereby unwillingly she hindered Antony, who was now so fond waxen,
as he would have Cleopatra called by the name of the Goddess Isis, Antonyes
fo^lishnesse. Isis. Caesarion.
Queen of Egypt, Cyprus, Affr^ke, and Caelosiria: and Caesarion, whom it was
thought she had by Julius Caesar, to be her companion in these Kingdoms. The
sons that he had by her, he called Kings of Kings. To Alexander, Armenia,
Medi^ and Parthia: to P^olomeo, Ph^enitia, Syria, and Cilicia, he appointed. In
Rome Caesar accused him of this gear before ye Senate, Antony by letters,
accused Caesar likewise. First* that he had not made him Accusations betvveene
Caesar and Antony.
partaker of Sicilia* out of ye which he ^ad wrong Pompey. Then, y^ he had not
restored the Ships which he had lent him. Thirdlye, that having deposed
Lep^dus his fellow in authority, he kept Ob^e^^^o^s of Antony.
those profits and provinces to his own use, and that he had divided Italy to
his own souldioures, and not remembered his. To these Caesar answered, that
because L^pidus ruled out of order, he An^vveres of C^sar.
had brought him to order, his provinces he would participate with him, when
he would divide with him Armenia* As for his Souldyoures, they had no portion
in Italy, no more than he in Media and Par^h^a. When Antony heard of this, he
sent by and by Canidius C^^^^^us.
with xvj. legions to the sea. He carrying Cleopatra with him, went to
Ephesus, whither all his Navy assembled, to the N^^i^ of Antony.
number of eight hundred ships of burden, of the which, Cleopatra gave him
two hundredth, and two hundredth talentes for the expenses of the war. Domitius
and other of Antonyes counsel, Domitius.
would have had Cleopatra to have g^ne to Egypt, till the war were ended.
But she corrupted Cantdius to tell him, that it was ^leop^t^a labors to
^arry with Antony.
not honorable to remove her that was at such charge for the war, nor sure
to exa^perate the Egyptians mind^s, in whom was great part of his forces by
sea. So Antony must live with Cleopatra, ^^l they were both brought to death.
From Ephesus they Progress of Antony and ^leopatra. (...).
went to Sam^, where they made lusty theere. For as all Kings, Princes, and
provinces were commanded to bring all manner of munition for the war thither,
even so all kind of players, and people of pa^^^^^, were willed also to be
there, that at what time Pastime out of ^^me.
all the w^^ld as it were was in ^orrowe for y^ ^uine that was toward, that
only Ila^d was ^n all joy and pleasure. The Kings sent all prou^^^^ ^h^^her,
stri^ing who should make greatest ba^^uets, in so much as it was said, if
there be such cheering before the w^^, wha^ (...) will there be, when the
victory is gotten. (...) they (...) P^^en^* where were showed all y^ Come(...)
(...).
^ ^^ (...), and the^ ^^ A^^ens, where a^ kinds of new shows were deui^ed.
^eere (...) ^^^ emulation of Oct^uia, to (...) (...).
who^^ the Athenian^ had d^ne great honors, gave a great ^^^gesse to ^he
people, and they again made a decree of honors Antony a ^iti^e^ of (...)*
A^^^^^ p^^yeth ^he (...).
^o ^e done ^o h^^, a^ ^he ^^^^he, Antony was as a ^^^^zen of Ath^^^^ ^^^ ^^
the (...) of the (...) a^ ^ra^^on unto her.

Antonie had sent to Rome* to remove Octauia out of his house. She went from
it, with all his children, weeping and lamen^^ng that she should ^e any cause
of the war. The people lamented, ^ctauia is put out of Antonies house.
both her and Antonie, specially they that had seen ^leopatra, who did not
excel Octauia, neither in beauty, nor in flower of years. Caesar Octauius
was afraid, when he heard of Antonies C^sar in want.
expedition and great preparation, for he had nothing ready, nor S^acknesse of
Antonie.
money to prepare, in gathering of the which, if Antonie had come on, Caesar
had been in great danger. For whiles money Exaction of money.
is so e^acted, men are tumultours, but when it is gathered, they be quiet.
Therefore it was thought a great folly in Antonie, to detract the time. But
what shall a man say, That that will be, shall be.

Titius and Plancus two chief about Antonie, and they that Titius, Plancus*
Antonies friend^ forsake him.
gave him advise he should send Cleopatra away, fled from him to Caesar,
because Cleopatra began to malign at them: and they did bewray Antonies
Testament, being privy to it. It was kept Antonies testament bevvrayed*
of the Uirgines Uestalles, to whom Caesar sent to have it: they would not
deliver it, if he would take it from them, he might. So he went, and took it
away, and first by himself read it, and noted what might be said against it.
Then he called the Senate, C^sar objected against Antonies testament.
and read it openly, whereat many were grieved, thinkyng it not reasonable
that a man's mind for his death, should be scanned whylest he was alive. The
greatest fault that was found, was this, that he had willed wheresoever he
died, that his body should be carried to Alexandria, and sent t^ Cleopatra.
Furthermore, one Caluisius a freende of Caesar's, objected against Antoni^, That
he had given her the Library of P^rgamo, in the Library of P^rg^m^.
which was two hundred thousand books. That he would rise from the table, and
t^ample upon her feet by compacte. That he suffered the Ephesians in his
presence, to call her Sovereign. That when h^gaue audien^e to Kings and
P^i^ces, he would receive letters of love from her written in tables of pearl
and Cristall, and read them. That when Furnius, a man of authority in Rome
and very eloquent, did plead a cause before him, ^le^p^tra came by in a
litter, and he left the court, and ^a^^e down ^^ ^^^, and l^^nyng upon ^^e
l^tter, went away with her. Many men thought Caluisius forged these crimes.
Therefore Antonies friends made means to the people of Rome for him. And sent
Geminius Geminius.
unto him, to warn him to take heed, that he lost not his power, and be
pronounced rebel to Rome. When Geminius was Cleopatra tau^teth Geminius.
come into Graecia, Cleopatra suspected he came to entreat for Octauia. And
being at supper, she taunted him, and used him spitefully: but he bare all,
till he might have Antonie alone. But what? yt would not be, but he was
commanded to tell why he came cue^ Answer of Geminius.
at supper: he said that other things required a sober conference, but one
thing he knew both sober and drunk, that all should be Geminius tells truth
and is blamed.
well if Cleopatra went into Egypt. Antonie was angry at that. And Cleopatra
said, Thou haste done well, Geminius, to tell the truth without any torture.
Geminius went his way out of hand. The Parasites of Cleopatra did cause many
other to flee from them, because they could not bear their despites and
contumelies, Romans flees from Antonie.
among whom was Syllanius and Dellius, who said he feared to be destroyed of
Cleopatra, for so Glaucus the Physician had told him. When Caesar was ready,
the war was denounced War proclaimed.
against Cleopatra, the authority taken from Antonie, because he had committed
it to a woman's lust, and not in his right wits, being bewitched by her. And
left all the war to be directed by her Eunuchs and Ruffians, who also had
the commandment in civil affairs. Diverse unlucky tokens were seen at the
beginning of this war, both in Italy and Graecia.

Antonie had a navy of warlike ships to the number of five Navy of Antonie.
hundred, whereof 110. were made for triumph. He had an hundred thousand
footmen, and.xij. M. horsemen. B^chus king of Africa, Tarcondenus Confederate
kings.
king of upper Cilicia, Archelaus king of Cappadocia, Philadelphus king of
Paphlagonia, Mithridates king of Commagena, and Adallas king of Thracia, were
present at this war. Polem^n king of Pontus sent aid, likewise Manchus of
Arabia, and Herod the Jew, and Amyntas the king of Licaonia and Galatia. Also
the king of Media sent him succor. Caesar had. 250. ships for the war,
N^nie of Caesar.
lxxx. M. footmen, and as many horsemen as the enemy. Antonie had rule from
the flood Euphrates and A^^^enia, to the sea of Ionia and Countries of either
side.
Illiria. Caesar had al from that sea to the west Ocean, and from then^^ to the
Tuscan and Sicilian sea. So much of Africa as bent toward Italy, France,
Spain, and the pillars of Hercules, Caesar had. The rest from Cirene to
Aethiopia, Antonie held. So much was he thrall to this woman, that where he
far passed in good footeme^, for her pleasure he put all his strength in a
navy. And when he understood that the Captains of the navy found fault for
lack of good seamen, he supplied the want with roges, cariers, harvest men,
and laborers of wasted Graecia, and yet was not the navy furnished, but many
ships void and unable to fight.

Caesar made not his ships huge and for ostentation and show, but The manner
of Caesar's Ships.
light and swift, and them well furnished, which he held at Tarent and
Bru^duse. From thence he sent to Antonie to require him to loose no Caesar
provoke Antonie.
time, but to come forth, and he would give him safe rodes and ports for his
navy, and give him convenient ground in Italy, to land his men surely and
quietly. Antonie on the contrary side bragging Antonie chalengeth combat with
Caesar.
challenged to fight with him hand to hand, which if he would not do, then to
fight with him in Pharsall field, where Caesar fought with* Pompey. But
Caesar, whiles Antonie lay at anchor at Actio, Actio.
which is now Nicopoli, passed the sea to get the town of Epirus, which is
now called Toryne. Antonie being afeard, the enemy Toryne.
should set upon his ships unfurnished, made a show of great readiness by
shippyng oars on every side, and so kept the port. Whereby Caesar being
deceived, went back, and Antonie devised to take away the water from him,
which was scant and naught. He dealt gently concerning Domitio, contrary to
Cleopatras opimo^, for he being sick, took a little boat and fled to Caesar,
yt which although it grieved Antonie, notwithstanding he sent him all his
goods and servants. The which, because it was openly known that he was fled,
so grieved him, that he died. The kings Amyntas and Deiotaras, went to Caesar
also. And because Antonies navy was not sufficient, he was compelled to look
and trust to his army by land. And Canidius yt was general of the footeme^,
persuaded him in any wise Canidius.
to send Cleopatra home, and go to Thracia or Macedonia, and try ye matter by
la^d. For Dicomes king of the Getes was ready to help him with great numbers.
And yt it should be no shame to him to refuse y^ fight by sea, because Caesar
had y^ practice of it by reason of ye Sicilian wars: but it should be a great
blame unto him not to use his forces by land, wherein he was most expert,
and suffer the same to be Antonie hears not good counsel.
abused by sea. But Cleopatra urged him to fight by sea, although she despayred
of the victory, and secretly provided all means Antonie in danger.
to flee away. In this time Antonie was in some danger, there was a certain
narow space of ground, between him and his navy, over the which it was his
manner to pass without fear, of the which, when Caesar was advertised, he
laid wait for him, he which, being a little to quick, took him that came
before Antonie, and he hardely escaped and ran away.

When it was determined to fight by sea, they burned all the unprofitable
vessels, and kept the Galleys of the best sort, into the which he put
twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand Archers. Then a certain Captain,
that had been a good seruitour, A good request of an old Captain, not
granted.
and was an expert Soldiour, showed his wounded body to Antonie, crying, O
general, why do thou distrust these wounds and weapons, and put thy
trust in brittell vessels? Let Egyptians and other like make their fight by
sea, give us the land, in the which we have been wont to stand and die, or
else to conquer. Antonie answered nothing to him, but with his Antonie
refuses al good counsel.
hand and head, signifying he should be of good cheer, passed by, all hope
laid aside, for where as the masters of the ships, would have taken away
the sails, he commanded them to be carried into the ships, that none of the
enemies should escape him, as he pretended. That day, and.xiij. days more,
the rough weather deferred the fight. The fifth day, the weather being fair,
they made the fight. Antonie and Publicola had the right wing, Caelius the
left, and Marcus and Iusteius the midde battle. Caesar appointed. Agrippa to
the right, he held the left. Canidius, had The fight.
Antonies land Soldiers. Taurus, had Caesar's, being in order and quiet on the
shore. Antonie went about his navy in a foyste, e^horting his Soldiers, to
fight without remeuyng, because of the weight of the ships, and commanded
the masters, that standing (as it were) at Anchor, they should not stir at
the onset of the enemy, but avoid the disadvantage of the place, in the mouth
of the port.

They say, that when Caesar went out before day to view his navy, he met a
man leadyng an* Ass, and asking his name, A token.
he said, my name is Fortunate, and mine Asses name, is Victory. The form of
this place, with the figure of the man and the Ass, he did set up afterward
in a table of Brass, in the common place of Rome. When he had ouerlooked the
residue of his navy, he betook himself to the right battle, and beheld
his enemies quiet in the straights: For it seemed they had lien at anchor: and
so held his ships back a good while, being two miles off. At six of the
clock, a good gale began to blow, when as Antonies Soldiers would tarry no
longer, but trustyng in the greatness of their ships, moved the left
battle. When Caesar saw that, he was glad, and held still his right
battle, that he might the more get his enemies out of the straightes, and
with his swifte ships, fight with the huge heavy vessels of his enemies,
which were nothing well manned. When the onset was given, they did not
courageously encounter, for Antonies ships could not well stir to give a good
assault* which is best done by mouyng. Caesar's ships were not sit to give
the charge upon the front, because of the others sharp and strong beakes: nor
durst do it on the sides, for breakyng of their own beakes, for the great
timber and iron work of those mighty vessels. Therefore it was like a fight on
The diversity of the fight.
land, or rather, as I may say it, an assault of a wall. For three or four of
Caesar's, did set upon one of Antonies, and fought with their darts, pykes, and
fyred weapons. And Antonies men flong down their weapons from their towers
out of their casting Engines. Agrippa began to stretch forth to compass the
rest, which when Publicola did see; he was forced to do the same, and so
divided from the midde battle. And the fight being very sore on both sides,
and uncertain to whom the victory Cleopatra flees.
would fall, Cleopatra, with her threescore ships, which were placed
behind the great ships, brake thorough to their great disorder, and took
themselves to flight.

Here did Antonie show himself to have forgotten his office Antonie follows.
and charge, and verified the old saying, That the mind of a lover, lives in
an other body. For as though he had been annexeb Lover.
to her, and could neither live nor die without her, by and by, so soon as he
saw her ship under sail, he forsook all, and left his soldiers to the
slaughter of his enemy, for whom they shed their bloudes, and with two
companions of Egypt, got into a Brygandine, following Cleopatra, to bring both
her and himself to reproachful death. When she did see him coming, she set
out Antony is hoysted into Cleopatras Ship.
a flagge to call him, so he being hoysted up to her, did not look upon her,
nor she upon him, but went and satte solitary in the foreparte of the
ship, holdyng his hedde with both his hands.

Shortly Caesar's swifte ships that did follow him were in sight, whom
Antonie put back, saving one, in the which Euricles was, who fiersly pursued,
shaking his spear with threatnyng Antony is pursued.
words. Antonie standing still and askyng, who is he that follows Antonie?
it is I (quoth he) Lacharis son, that Euricles.
by the good fortune of Caesar do pursue thee for my Fathers death. Yet did he
not take Antonies ship but the other that was of the same goodlinesse, in the
which was all the rich furniture of Cleopatra.

When he was gone, Antonie satte still after one sort Silence of Antonie.
and in one place, and spoke not to Cleopatra, either for anger or for shame.
But when he was come to T^naro, the womenne T^naro, a forelande.
that were familiar to them both, brought them to talk, and then to board and
bed. Entendyng to send from thence into Africa, he choose one of the Queens
rich ships, full of Gold and Silver, and gave it to his friends, wishyng
them to provide for themselves. And when as they wept and prayed him to be of
cheer, he desired them to follow his request, Antonie gives his friends
leave to shift for themselves.
and wrote to Theophilus his officer at Corinth, to give them quick dispatch,
and to help to hyde them, till Caesar might be pacified.

Many of the ships of burden, and some of his friends, were come from the
fight, declaryng that the navy was lost, but they thought the army by land
was safe. Wherefore he wrote to Canidius to make haste by Macedonia, and bring
his army into Asia.

In this case was Antonie.

Caesar had a long fight with Antonies navy, the which at Caesar's victory.
length, by the vehemency, both of the rage of the Sea and courage of the
enemy, gave over, only five thousand being slain, and three hundredth
skippes taken.

There were but few, that knew of Antonies fleeyng, and Men amazed a^
Antonies madness.
when they heard it, they wondered, as at a thing incredible, That he, having
ninetene legions of footmen, and twelve thousand horsemen, would forsake all
and run away, as though he had not known the unstableness of Fortune, and
had not Soldiers good opinion of Antonie.
proved the chance of war, full many a time. The Soldiers thought still
he would come among them, in so much as when Caesar sent messengers to
them, they rejected them, and so continued seven days, but when their
Captain Canidius was Antonies footmen yeldeth.
stolen away by night, and they left comfortless, they yielded to the
Conqueror, who sailed unto Athens, and making unity with the Gretians,
distributed corn among them, being afflicted before, with all kind of
exaction and servitude. When Antonie had sent Cleopatra into Egypt, from
Paretonio, he went into Paretonio a port town.
Africa, with two friends only, the one a Gretian, and the other a Roman,
and there lived solitarily, till he heard that his Antonie in despair.
Lieftenauntes there, had forsaken him: Then he would have killed himself,
but his friends did stop him. And so he went again to Cleopatra, who was
diuising by great expenses A devise of Cleopatra for hy^ safety.
to carry her navy into the nooke of the strayghtest place of the Sea, that
is thought to divide Affrike and Asia, that she might be safe from invasion.
But, because the first ships that came, had evil luck, and for that Antonie
hoped his footemenne were safe at Actio, he causod her to leave off, and
^ensed the mouths of the floudde Nilus. This being done, Antonie Antonie
follows the trade of Timon.
builded him an house in the Sea at the Lantern, and ramped it about,
separating himself from the company of men: Affirmyng he would follow the
trade of Timon, that was surnamed, Hater of men. For when as he was forsaken of
his friends, and deceived of such men, as he had brought to advancement,
he took this ingratitude so to the heart, that he would refuse all men's
society: even as Timon did, who was a Citizen of Athens, and called that house
Timons Tabernacle. Timons tabernacle.
The first that brought him news of the loss of his footmen at Actio, was
Canidius himself. And shortly after it was Evil nevves one after an other.
told him that Herod the Jew was gone to Caesar with certain legions, and
that other Princes did the like: none of these things did move him but as being
well wyllyng to leave both hope and care, contented himself with Timons
Tabernacle. But being otherwise persuaded by Cleopatra, he came to the court
to Alexandria, and there gave himself to feasting and banquettyng, so as the
Alexandrians did nothing else a Antony renueth his riot.
great while, but make good cheer. This manner of fellowship, used among them
that would live, they forsook, and began an other, which was called, of
them that would die together, the which was not inferior to the other, in
delicacie Feasts of the dying sort.
nor superfluity, and as many as had sworn to dye together, made such
feasts in order by course, one to an other.

Cleopatra beside all this gave her self to the search of most Cleopatra
seeks for poison.
speedy poison and venom, and caused not only such growyng things, as were
accounted most effectuous, to be sought, but also the living beasts and
Serpents, and made a proof of them all in some of her folks. Then both she
and Antonie Request of Cleopatra. Requests of Antonie.
sent to Caesar. She required that the kingdom of Egypt might be entayled
to her children. Antonie desired he might live a pryuate life in Athens, if
he might not do it in Egypt. For lack of other friends they were feign to
send Euphronius their Schoolemayster to him. For Alexas of Laodicia had
Euphronius. Alexas of Laodicis. Infidelity punished.
deceived Antonie, and by the mean of Herod the Jew, gave himself to
Caesar, who did not accept him, put him in chains, and sent him to die in his
country. This reward had he for his unfaithfulness to Antonie.

Caesar would not hear Antonyes requests, but promised Cleopatra all kind of
courtesy, if she would reject Antony. He sent Caesar promises much to
Cleopatra.
his Liberte Thyrenus a learned man, that might move that magnificall Lady with
the hope of so lusty a young Emperor. He used so long and pleasing oration,
that Antony had him in suspicion: therefore he took him, and caused him to be
whipped, Antony vvhippeth the messenger of Caesar.
wrighting to Caesar, that he was stirred by his pride and insolency, which
would move a man though he were in misery. And if Scornful message of Antony.
this (quoth he) does grieve you, take my Liberte Hipparchus y^ is with you,
and whippe him, and then we shall be even. Now Cleopatra, that she might wipe
away all suspicion, honored him maruellously, and celebrating her own birth
day, meanly, as Birth day.
her case required, she honored his, so nobly and princely, that many that
came pore to the feast, w^nt rich away.

At this time Agrippa wrote to Caesar from Rome, that in any Caesar goes to
Rome.
wise he should repair thither, for the case required his presence. By this
occasion the war against Antony was deferred till the next somme^, when
Caesar sent forces against his Captains in Affrike, and went himself against
him in Asia. And when he Pelusio a part of Egypt. Cleopatra in suspicion.
had taken ^elusio, it was suspected that Cleopatra was contented that Seleucus
should deliver it: but she to purge this crime, took the wife and children of
him to be punished. She had a goodly sepulcher made, joining to the Temple of
Isis, in the which she Sepulcher of Cleopatra.
had placed all her treasure, and princely things. And Caesar being afraid,
that if she were driven to desperation, she would set all on fire, put her in
great hope always. Now was he come with his army to the City, and his
horsemen lay at the horserace, upon the which Antony came out so fiercely, as
he drove them to Antony issues out of Alexindria, and repulseth Caesar's
horsemen. Cleopatra revvardeth the valiant Souldyoure. The second challenge of*
Antony upon Cleopatra.
the Camp. Then he returned into the Court, and took Cleopatra in his arms,
and kissed her, and recommended him unto her, that had fought best, and she
gave him an head piece, and a coat armor of gold. Yet he that night fled
to Caesar. Then Antony challenged Caesar once again to fight hand to hand.
Caesar answered, there were many ways for Antony to dye. Then seeing there was
no way so honorable to dye, as in fight, Antony determined to set upon Caesar
both by Sea and land, and at supper bad his me^ drink and make merry, for he
could not tell if they should Antony cheereth his men.
do so any more, or serve other Lords, for as for himself, he should not live.
And when they wept at the words, he said, he would not lead the^ to a fight,
by ye which he might rather hope for a glorious death, tha^ a sure and
triumpha^t victory. About midnight, was A noise in the City in the night of
svveete music.
heard over al ye city such a pleasant noise and music, as is went to be
used in yt sacrifice of Bacchus, the which went forth of y^ City into the
enemies Camp. It was expounded, that the God, whom he had most served, did now
also forsake him. In ye morning, he brought forth his footmen, and placed the^
upon the hills about the city, where he stood to see yt success of his
navy, the which coming nigh to yt enemy, saluted the^ as friends, and they
did the like, and Antonyes ships forsake him.
so yielded to the^. When this was perceived, Antonyes horsemen fled to Caesar
also: his footmen did fight it out, and were overcome, His horsemen forsake
him.
which being done, he retired into ye city, crying, he was betrayed of
Cleopatra to the^, against whom he had made war for her sake. Antony
complayneth of Cleopatra. Cleopatra sleeth from Antony. Message of Cleopatra.
She being afraid of his fury, got her into her Scpulchre, causing the bridge
to be drawn, and to be kept close and shut. This done, she sent one out to
tell him that she was dead. When he heard it, he said, Why te^ptest thou
Antony? The^ he went into his Chamber and vnharnessed him, saying, O Cleopatra,
I am not tormented that I am without thee, for I will soon be with thee, but
that I being Antonyes grief
so great a Captain, should be prevented of thee, y^ art but a woman, in such
a case of fortitude. Heroes his faithful servant was with him, whom before he
had sworn to kill him when he should command it: Now (says he) is the time
for thee to do it, and took him his sword. He turned his face and killed
himself, and fell dead at Heroes Antonyes man, kills himself.
Antonyes feet. Ah good Eros (quoth Antony) where thou could not abide to
do it to me, thou have taught me to do it my self, and so he thrust the sword
into his belly, and laid down upon Antony thrusts his svvord into himself.
his bed. The stroke was not so great, as it could dispatch him, there fore he
commanded them that were by, to make an end of him, but they went out of the
chamber, leaving him crying and lamenting, til Diomedes came from Cleopatra, to
bring Antony to Diomedes.
her, who hearing she was alive, commanded to be carried to her Antony is carried
half dead into the Sepulcher.
in their arms to y^ door of the monument, which Cleopatra would not open, but
lot down sheets and lines to heave him up, which she and her two women did,
that only were with her there. It was a pitiful sight to see him all bloody,
and yielding the ghost, A pitiful sight.
to be halled up so hardly, holding forth his hands, and stretchyng himself
toward her, as well as he could, the pore women not having strength enough to
do it, till Cleopatra with both her hands, be^ding downward as much as might
be, got him up, they yt were below, crying upon her to have pity upon him.
When she had him in, she laid him upon a bed, lamenting and tearing her
mourning weed, and wiping the blood from his face, called him Lord, husband
and Emperor, forgetting her own sorrow, for compassion of him. He being
somewhat comforted, desired a cup of wine, either for that he was a thirst,
or yt he might the sooner be dispatched. When Words of Antony at his death
he had drunk, he wished her to provide for her self, so well as she could,
her honor being saved, and among Caesar's friends, to trust Proculeius most: and
that she should not afflict hirselfe for him, in this Proculeius.
great alteration, but rather comfort hirselfe, yt she had dealt with him yt
was most mighty and full of power, who being a Roman, was not thorough
cowardice overcome of a Roman. This said, he yielded Antony dies.
ye ghost, when as Proculeius was come from Caesar, for when Antony had
stricke^ himself, and was drawn up to Cleopatra, Derceteus one Derceteus.
of his guard took his bloody sword, and carried it to Caesar, telling him Caesar
vveepeth for Antony.
how it stood: which when he heard, he went into his closet, and wept for
Antonyes chance, that had bin a valiant man, and his companion in many battles.
Then he red his letters to his friends, declaring how proudely and arroga^tly
he answered to his gentle letters, and he commanded Proculeius to do all yt he
could, to get Cleopatra alive, for he feared the destruction of her treasure,
and thought it would be no small honor to him, if he might bring her in triu^ph.
She would not talk with Proculeius wtin, but far of, so as hardly her voice could
be heard. Her request was, that her kingdom might be established Request of
Cleopatra.
to her children. Proculeius bad her be of good cheer, and remit al to Caesar,
and marking ye place, sent word to Caesar, who sent Gallus to Gallus.
talk with her, and he of purpose prolo^ged the communication, till Proculcius
having got scalling ladders, with two more, got into y^ window where Antony was
taken in, and went straight to ye place Proculeius gets into the secret
Scpulcre of Cleopatra.
where she was talking with Gallus. The^ one of ye women cried, O unhappy
Cleopatra, thou art taken alive. The^ she would have stricke^ hirselfe, for she
ware a dagger: but Proculeus ran quickly, and Proculeus stays Cleopatra
^^om ^^lling hirselfe
embraced her with both his hands, saying: O Cleopatra, you do injury both to
your self, and to Caesar, in taking from him the act of clemency, and
casting an infamy of unfaithfulness. Then he took the dagger from her, and
cut her garments, that she should have no poison about her. Then Caesar sent
his freemade man Epaphroditus, with commandment, that he should
Epaphroditus. Care of Caesar to keep Cleopatra alive.
in any wise see her kept alive, in all other things doing most gently and
courteously. Then he entered the City with Arrius the Philosopher, holding him
by the hand, that the Citizens might Caesar honors a Philosopher.
see in what honor he had him. Being come into the common hall, and the
Citizens lying prostrate for fear, he willed them to rise, saying, he forgot
them, first for Alexanders fame that Caesar's mercy to the Alexa^^^nes.
builded the City, then for the beauty of it, thirdly, for Arrius sake. The
body of Antony, Caesar was content that she should bury, which she did with
her own hands, by the labor whereof, Cleopatra buryeth Antonyes body very
princely. Cleopatra kept from killing her self by hunger.
getting an agew, she was glad she had such a cloak, to refrain from meat,
and kill hirselfe with hunger, which, when it was perceived, Caesar threatened
her the loss of her Children. Then she was content to be relieved again. And
after a few days, Caesar came to see her, and comfort her. She lying very
homely in her night gown, lept out of the bed, and fell down Caesar comes
to Cleopatra.
at Caesar's feet with trembling voice, and heavy cheer. Her body was
deformed with her own stripes, whereof the printes were seen: her eyes were
sonke, and her couloure swart: yet did her behavior declare, that her grace
was not extinct, which did appear out of that forepined and wasted corpse.
Caesar willed her to sit, and he sat by her, she making excuses, that she had
done al for fear of Antony, all the which when Caesar had reproved, she
Cleopatra submit* to Caesar.
gave her wholly to his mercy, and took him a note of such treasure as she
had. The which, when one of her Treasurers Seleucus had corrected, that she had
hid somewhat from him, she lepte unto him, and knocked him about the pate,
whereat Caesar smyling She beats one of her servants.
and blaming her, O Caesar said she, is it not a grief, that seeing thou do
not disdeyne to visit me in this woeful estate, to be accused of my servants
for keeping a few women's things, wherewith I would win thy wife Liuia, and
thy sister Octauia, to make thee the more favorable to me. Caesar was glad of
these words, thinking she had desire to live, and granted her all that and more
to, beyond all hope, thinking he had deceived her, but she Caesar grants
all things to Cleopatra.
deceived him. Cornelius Dolabella a noble yo^g man in Caesar's camp, had a
great desire to Cleopatra, to whom Caesar gave leave to come and tell her, that
he would go home by la^d through Syria, and that Dolabella is sent to Cleopatra.
she and her children should be sent to Italy by ship. When she understood
it, she desired Caesar she might first celebrate Antonyes funeral, wherewith
he was content. She came to the grave with her women, and said, Of late (noble
Antony) I did bury Cleopatra celebrateth Antonyes funeral.
thee, being free: now I honor thy burial, being captive, and guarded, that I
should not consume this wretched body with too much lamenting for thee, which
is reserved to be showed in triumph of thee. Other honors at my hand thou
shall not look for, being ready to be carried away from thee. Nothing did
separate us living, Words of Cleopatra.
but now in death we must be parted: thou a Roman, must lie here, and I
unhappy Egiptian, in Italy, so farforth to be partaker of thy Country: but if
the Gods there can do any thing, (for our Gods have deceived us here) forsake
not thy wife, which is alive, neither suffer in me a triumph to be made of
thee, but bury and close me here with thee. For of infinite greefes, there is
none so great to me, as this short time that I have lived without thee.

When she had ended these laments, and put on garlands, and kissed the grave,
she commanded a bath to be made ready for her. When she was washed, she went
to meat, and had great cheer: then a chest was brought out of the Country
to her by a man, and the guard asking what it was, he took away the leaves,
Cleopatra deceyueth Caesar.
and showed them the figs. They maruelling at the form and greatness of
them, the man smiled, and desired them to take the^. The Guard is deceived.
They suspecting nothing, bad him carry them in. After this, she sent Caesar
her writings sealed. Then all other being removed, but her two women, she shut
the doors. When her letters were come to Caesar, he read them, and found her
only request to he Cleopatras last request to Caesar.
with great petition, to be buried by Antony, which when he saw, he
suspected by and by what was a doing, and was minded to have gone straight
thither himself, yet first sent to see what was done, but she was dispatched
suddaynely. For they that ran thither, found no alteration in the Guard, and
opened the doors, and found her dead, lying in a bed of gold most royally.
Cleopatra is found dead upon a ded of gold, and hit two women by ^ir.
One of her women called Iris lay dead at her feet. The other, whose name was
Charmium, being ready to fall down dead, trimming the Crown upon her head, to
them that cried, is this well done Charmium? yea very weli (quoth he) for one
that is descended of so many progenitors Kings. When she had said thus much,
she fell down dead by the beds side. They say a Serpente called Aspis, was
brought among the figs, and covered with Aspis brought among the figs, did
sting her to death.
the leaves, the which did sting her to death, whose nature is, to give an
heaviness and sleep, without any shrinking or mark in the skin, only
putting forth a gentle sweat out of the face, as ane were in a trance, and hard
to be wakened. Some say, there were two little spots in her arm, which
Caesar either ^eleeued, or else would so have it believed, for in her Image yt
he brought into triumph at Rome, he set forth the Serpent, and two marks in
her arm. Howsoever it was, Caesar was ^ory it was so chanced, yet did he
highly commend her noble mind, and caused her to be royally laid by Antony, and
her women to be nobly buried also. Cleopatra was.xxxix. years of age, and
had reigned.xxij. whereof.xiiij. was with Antony, who lived.liij. years; or
at the Age of Antony and Cleopatra.
most.lvj. Antonyes Images were thrown down, Cleopatras were not removed, for
Archibius her friend had obtained that of Caesar for a thousand talents. Antony
had seven children by three Antonyes children.
wives, whereof Attilus the eldest was only killed of Caesar, the rest Octauia.
brought up with hirs. Attilus was betrayed of his Scholemaister Theoderus, who
took a goodly jewel from his neck when he was killed, the which being
required, and denied of him when he had it, caused that he was hanged.

Cesarione, whom Cleopatra had by the first Caesar, being also betrayed of his
scholemaster, who^ she had sent with him, and a great Caesar besto^^eth.
Cleopatras children.
treasure into India, was slain, after she was dead. Her daughter called
Cleopatra of her name, he married to the flourishing king Iuba. He promoted
Antonie, that was son to Fuluia, to so high favor, that next Agrippa and
Liutas children, he was chief. She He uses one of Antonies sons in great
favor.
had by Marcellus two daughters, and one son named Marcellus, whom Caesar did
adopt and made him his son in law. The other daughter was given to Agrippa.
Marcellus dying shortly after this marriage, Octauia desired that Agrippa might
marry his Change of marriage.
daughter, and Antonie, hyrs. Her other daughters were bestowed upon Domitius
Aenobarba, and Drusus Liuias son, and steppechilde to Caesar, of whom came
Germanicus and Claudius. Germanicus died, Emperors of Antonies issue.
and Claudius was Emperor. Of Germanicus came Caius who was Emperor also.
Agryppinae that had E. Domitio by Aenobarba, did marry with Claudius the
Emperor, who adopted Domitius, calling him Nero Germanicus, and was Emperor.
Thus of Antonies race diverse Emperors issued. Albeit himself had the
lamentable end that you have heard, and was the only cause why the Roman
state was not restored to a common wealth again Anthony, the cause of the
alteration of the Roman estate.
as the noble Brutus protested when he died, al whose execrations came upon
Antonie before he died. Either for that God would plague Antonies evil life:
or that he would change the state of that mighty common wealth, which had all
the world at such a beck, as they might do what they would, whose
outrageous dealings as well in foreine as civil murders, it pleased God to
punish with so great alteration, or else for some secret determination for the
nativity of his only son Jesus Christ our Lord. For now is Caesar the only
Monarche without any competitor at all, and yet had no child to whom to leave
it, but adopted Tiberius his wives son, whom, that she might see Emperor,
it is thought she help to dispatche Caesar before his time, who had the title
of Augustus given him, a thing never done before to any Augustus.
Roman, not only for augmentyng and increasing the Empire of Rome, but also
for the de^^nation and destiny, by which it was assigned unto him. And after
he had shut the gates of Ianus temple, for that a general peace followed
through out the Ianus temple shut only twice before i^ token of general
peace.
world, he disposed himself to set good orders in the city, and made many good
laws for the preservation of the same, in the which time diverse tokens
appeared of the coming of a greater Prince than he, the Prince of Princes and
king of kings, who was borne into this world in his time, to the glory of God
in the highest, Birth of Jesus Christ.
and the peace of the earth to men of good will.

The great envy that Julius Caesar his great uncle had procured, Envy.
never fell upon him, either because men were weary of tumultes, or for that
they saw such modesty in him, as he would attempt no such matter that was so
odious, that is to say, to be The name of Emperor.
called a king: Either for that both he and the people had in memory the
mal^diction and cursing of the old Decree, against al the^ that should bring in
the name of a king again, which his father Julius did not utterly refuse, or
for that he passed not of the name, having the rule, or for that the name of
Emperor was then so great, as Dictator was wont to be, which before was no
otherwise than a gratification of the Soldiers to their Captain, when he had
stricken a battle manfully, and slain ten thousand Imperator.
enemies, at which time it was lawful for him to be called Imperator, as among
all other, Cicero was in Asia, when he overcame Cicero was called Emperor in
Asia.
the Amanianes, at Isso, where Darius was overcome, of Alexander. The which
name has continued ever since to that sovereign Magistrate, as well, when the
whole Empire was in the hands of one Monarche, as when it was divided into
two, the one of the East, and the other of the Weast. The which began with
Charles the Great, and has continued unto R^dulphus that now is Emperor among
the Germane nation in the weast Empire, and ended in the East, about us years
since, when the City of Greek Emperors. Mabumetes. Amur^ies.
Constantinople was taken by Mabumetes the son of Amuretes that made himself
a Turkishe Monk, and the Emperor Constantine slain, and all the villainy in
the world, showed to the poor Christians. So as to him that will have a
Register of the whole number of Emperors, reckening Julius Caesar for the
first, shall find Germane Emperors.
them to be. 118. Whereof. 42. have been Germans.

FINIS.
A Table to the five Books of the civil wars of Rome.
A.
Abundance in Pompey^ camp. page ^^^ Abundance in Brutus and Cassiu^ camp.
page 280 Acclamation of Pompey^ Soldiers. page 10^ Acclamation of Brutus and
Cas^^^ Soldiers. page 284 Acclamation of the people to ^. Caesar. page 130
Acclamation of revenge of Caesar. page 150 Acts of Sulpitus abrogated. page 37
Acts of Caesar ratified. page 151 Acts of Caesar briefly rehearsed. page 250
Acts of Brutus and Cassius. page 302 Acts of Pompey. page 123 Accrre a city
besi^ged. page 27 Adoption greatly regarded in Rome. page 224 Adrumeto ^^tie
where Caesar loses. page 148 Adriaticail sea quiet to Caesar in vvinter. page
103 Adrian the Emperor ordeyneth Lieftenants page 25 Aeneas builded Iauino.
page 84 Aegles seven in Manus lap. page 38 Aegels two flght in Casius camp.
page 299 Aenobarbus touched of conspiracy. page 335 Aenobarbus clear from
conspiracy. page 335 Aenobarbus waste the three men's dominions page 31^
Aenobarbus reconciled to Antonie. page 330 Aenobarbus sent into Pythima. page
336 Aenaria, now Ischia. page 336 Actna affrayeth the Germans. page 357
Aem^lius condemned. page 244 Affection of Lucius and Caesar's Soldiers. page
338 Africa ^ province of two names. page 260 Africa appointed to Lepidus.
page 311 Afranius valiantly d^eth. page 29 Agamemnon, a taunt to Pompey. page
111 Agrippa most trusty to Caesar O^lauius. page 320 Agrippa has a victory of
the French. page 2^^ A^^ Telemininus resembled by Pompey. page 110 Al^^nou^nus
joins vvgh Marsus. page 37 Alexandriane killesh their king. page 61
Altercation of ^ibulus and Caesar. page 78 Alexander compared with Caesar.
page 100 Altar ^ dedicate to Caesar. page 157 A^naria, where the meetyng was
to make peace with Pompey. page 350 Antonie a light man. page 310 A(...) let
up an Altar to Caesar. page 10^ A(...) killed by Antonie page 16^ Antonie
vv^ll have Caesar's a^tes ratified. page 151 Antonie takes Caesar's money and
vvaytinge. page 146 Antonie afraid of the killers page 146 Antonie contemns
Octanius. page 171 Antonie gardeth his house. page 141 Antonie put out of the
Senate house. page 92 Antonius the Orator killed of Marius. page 44 Antonie
gives cities to the Atheniens. page 300 Antonie seeks henenolence of the
people. page 166 Antonie recryueth Cas^us brother. page 300 (...) takes
Cassius camp. page 200 Antonie crovvneth him that brought Cicero^t head. page
140 Antonie sends Brutus body to his mother. page 304 An ou^^ ^^placable to
the conspirationes. page 300 Antonie ordeyneth kingdoms at his pleasure. page
300 Antonie vieth the Greek fishion. page 3^1 Antonie vvinteth vv^^^
Cleopatrae. page 3^1 Antonie calls Octinus ^^ busy Long man. page 182
Antonies answer to Octunius. page 1^4 Antonies answer to the messengers of
the killers. page 145 Antonies answer to (...) decree^. page 204 Antonies
answer to the Capitaynes. page 184 Anth^ses and P^nus, Caesar's ^uncellers.
page 163 Antonie helps Octanius. ^ page 338 Appolonia, now Pallo^^, got by
Caesar. page 110 Antium city a treasury. page 317 Arabio, king takes Pompeye
part. page 26^ Api^l^^ns renoi^e from the Romans. page 25 Antonie overcome
at, Actio. page 4 Ar(...)o taken by Caesar. page 93 As^ulames kill the Roman
officers. page 25 Asinius Polli^, against S Pompey. page 2^5 Arsinoe delivered
to death to please Cleopatra. page 310 As^^ius killed sacrifising. page 35
Attiliu^ Seran^^ killed. page 44 Aurilia ^r^stilla causes Cateline to kill his
son. page 73 Ait^ius, in Orphane bewray eth himself. page 246 Augustus,
title first given to Octanius. page ^4 Augustus most mighty. page ^4 Antonie
uses Pompey^ help. page 333 Antonie fond on women. page 342 Antonie
chalengeth Menedorus for his slave. page 343 Archegeta, an image of Apollo.
page 354
B.
B^ Alh^^ killed of the three men. page 141 Basillus Minutius killed. page 227
(...), cause of renolre from Lucius. page 320 Bebius killed of Maruis. page 44
Beginning of civil war. page ^4 Beginning of war betvveene the three
me^. page 33^ Benevolence of the people, turned to hate Antonie. page 166
Tibulus leaves his office. page 7^ Tibulus chief of Pompeys navy. page 10^
Bibulus receyned to Antonies savor. page 252 Pocchus takes Cyrta. page 120
Bocthus against Carinas. page 318 Bo^^ano taken by Sylla. page 53 Boldness of,
Antonie at Philippi. page 202 Boldness of Clodius. page 81 Boldness of
Caesar. page ^28. 133 Boldness of Sylla. page 36 Boldness of Iucius Antonius.
page 320 Bold act of Carbo. page 55 ^rytaine sea sailed by Caesar. page ^51
Brundus^ins receive Sylla. page 48 Brundusians reject Antonie. page 333 Brutus
kills a flane accusing his Masters page 274 Brutus speaks boldly of his
fact. page 153 Brutus inuadeth the Lycians* page 271 Brutus all night in
a^^ni^e on an hill. page 301 Brutus takes Octauius his camp. page 200 Brutus
gets treasure by chance. page 271 Brutus names Antonie Caesar's drudge. page
301 Brutus ouerruled of his Soldiers. page 207 Brutus bad angel appeared to
him. page 303 Brutus overthrow, the work of God. page 303 Brutus most gentle
and learned. page 303 Brutus ^a^to against Caesar punished by God. page 303
Byth^^^cu^ killed by S. Pompey. page 33^ Brutus warned of his death. page 303
Britt^^^^ sea first sailed by Caesar. page 160
C.
Cassius plagueth the ^^odes. page 268 Cassius excuses his fa^te. page 152
Cassius delivers his nau^e to Caesar. page 124 Cassius loses his camp. page
200 Cassius dispayte^h to soon. page 2^^ Cassius offi^th himself to be
killed. page 201 Cassius of Parma gathers the scattered. page ^^6 Caesar
pr^^^^ to Ca^^^^nes conspirac^e. page 76 Caesar spends all to get the peoples
favor. page 80 Caesar lets Pompeys soldiers go free. page 97 Caesar
planteth his camp at Pharsalo. page 110 Caesar exhorts his Soldiers to
take Pompeys camp. page 120 Caesar receyneth C^tos son to grace. page 131
Caesar says he is no king. page ^36 Caesar recey^eth. 200. da^tes on his
shselde. page 133 Caesar puts away his gard^. page 136 Caesar has the
falling sickness. page 136 Caesar consult for ten years if he will. page
135 Caesar asks the consu^ship by his friends. page 77 Caesar wise counsel
in saving the Romans* page 134 Caesar killed of them he lo^ed. page 14^
Ca^^^sius overthrown of Pompeys father in law. page 107. Caesar body brought
into the common place. page 157 C^l^^i^^^ prese^^e ^^rius. page 330 (...)
killed of Octauius. page 330 Car^^ overthrown. page 55 Carinas killed of
Sylla. page 56 Capitol set a fire. page 50 Capitol a common treasure house.
page 3^7 Capitol taken by the killers of Caesar. page 143 Capito killed in his
own house. page 243 C(...) ^isteth Caesar. page 130 Ca^^ ^leeth to Pompey*
page ^0 Causes of Soldiers disorder. page ^43 C^^^egus joins with Ma^^us.
page 37 C^^^^gus put to death by Cic^^o. page 76 Cic^^o made Consul. page 74
Cic^^o ^^^led father of the countr^^. page 76 Cic^^o most eloquent. page 74
Cic^^o and his brother condemned. page 239 Cic^^o his son sent into Gre^^^.
page 259 Cinna cruel. page ^9 Cinna killed of his Soldiers. page 4 Cicero
accuses Clodie. page 87 Clodie accuses Cicero. page ^^ Clodius killed of
Milo. page 84 Clu^^tius dies valiantly. page 37 Cassius killed on his birth
day. page 2^0 Caluisius put from his office. page 349 Causes of Lucius
hinderance. page 32^ Cocc^^us, friend to Antonie and Octauius. page 334
Comparison of ^rutus and Cassius. page 138 Commo^^on ^^ Italy for division of
land. page 311 Consp^racie three headed. page 7^ Competitours Pompey and
Crassus. page 77 Competitours Pompey and A^n^barbus* page 8^ Concord of the
three men. page 229 Co^ditio^s of peace between Antonie and Octaui^. page 338
Con^u^ation of Cat^line. page 74 Constancy of Iutius. page 332 Condition of
Lucius to his Soldiers. page 324 Constancy of Metellus against Marius. page
20 Consulles created in Sylla his time. page 60 Contempt of law among the
Romans. page 2 Contention between Gracchus and Octauius. page 10 Contention
for division of land. page 22 Counselles diverse in following of Caesar. page
110 Copon^us is saved by his vviues means. page 252 Co^^elius Scipio made
arbiter. page ^^ Cornelia Pompeys wife fair. page ^2^ Cornutus saved by his
servant. page 44 Crowns of gold in Caesar's triumph. page ^3^ Clodius
body brought to the Senate house. page 84 Crastinus his valiantness. page 120
Crixus svverdplayer overthrown. page 69 Cruelty of Sylla against the
Romans. page ^7 Curio most accepted to the people. page 8^ Curio succeeds
Ca^o in Sicilia. page 98 Curio, defends Caesar. page ^^ Curio his head
brought to luba. page 99 C^^opatra justifies her self to Antonie. page 30^
Cleopatre favors Dolabella. page 264 Cleopatra cause of Antonies
destruction. page 306 Curio works for Antonie. page 217 Courtesy in a
Captain is hinderance as i^ proved by Pompey and Brutus. page 296 Conditions
of peace with young Pompey. page 340 Conditions with Antonie. page 337
Contamelie of Soldiers. page 312 Conditions between Octauius and Antonies
Soldiers. page 315 Codropoli^, a city of Illyria. page 336
D
DAtus city now Philippi, sometime Cr^nides. page 277 D^mostheues compared
with Cicero. page 81 D^^^mus besieged in M^tina. page 206 D^cimus killed. page
226 Deceit of rich Romans. page 6 Death of Caesar. page 141 Death of
Ca^^lin^* page 76 Death of Curio. page 99 Death of Dolabella. page 262 Death of
Trebonius. page 1^0 Death of ^^ntidius. page 2^1 Death of Ca^o. page 130 Death
of Brutus and Cassius. page 301 Death of Hircius 2nd Pansa. page 213 Death of
Brutus. page 24 Death of Fuluia vexed Antonie after a ^orte. page 334 Death of
Pompey the great. page 122 Death of Pompeys elder son. page ^34 Death of
Pompeys younger son. page Death of Mem^^^^ and Drusus. page 21 Death of
Scipio. page 14 Death of S^^torius. page 67 Di^deme set on Caesar's head. page
133 Dictator perpetual Sylla. page 59 Dictator perpetual Caesar* page 334
Discipline destroyed. page 314 Di^ssention in the Senate for Caesar's death.
page 146 Discord of Citizens. page 33 Dissension of the Senators and
Gentlemen. page 24 Dissension of Antonie and Oct^uius. page 336 Division of
Italy to the Soldiers. page 311 Discouragement of Lucius Soldiers. page 323
Dolobella against Cinna. page ^48 Donatiue of Cassius to his Soldiers. page
^84 Donatiue of Brutus to his Soldiers. page 294 D^mitius overcome of Caesar.
page 94 Dyrhacus slain of Hercules. page 95 Dy^^achio, whereof so named. page
95
E.
EDict for money. page ^49* 338* Edict of the proscription. page 232 Eloquence
of Caesar. page 73 Eloquence of Curio. page ^8 Eloquence of Cicero. page 74
Epitapho of Pompey. page 122 England invaded by Caesar. page 154 Enemy to the
country Caesar. page ^1 Enemy to the country Cinn^. page 47 Enemy to the
country Dolobella. page 204 Enemy to the country Sylla. page 45 Enemy to
the country Antonie. page 25 Error of Caesar at Dyrrachio. page 1^^ Errors
of Pompey. page 116 Errors of the Senate. page 218 Eruptions out of Perugia.
page 323 Example of Fortune in Mur^^^ and Barb^l^^ page 2^8 Example of Fortune
ut Mari^* page 38 Example of a wicked father in Catiline. page 73 Example of a
wicked son. page 239 Example of a good son. page 252 Example of a good
li^ter. page 2^0 Example of good servants. page 253 Example of good vviues.
page 253 Example of a kind Soldiour. page 252 Execration for money of the
Capitol. page 100 Exclamation of Pisa against the killers. page ^^^ Excuse of
Antonie to Octauius. page 174 Excuse of Caesar to Cocceius. page ^^5 Excuse of
Octauius to ^uci^^. page 315 Excuse of Sylla to the people. page 36 Exclamation
against Octauius. page 312 Extremity of famine in Perugia. page 322
Expectation for death gil^^ou^. page 347
F.
FAble of the oxe^ of the sun. page 357 Fable of the plovv man. page ^0
Famine causes Caesar to fight. page 115 Famine causes Antonie and Octauius to
fight. page 280 Famine in Perugia. page 322 Famine in the City. page 314
Famine causes peace. page 339 Famine in the city by Pompey. page 337 Favor
gotten by liberalitte. page 278 Favor of the people against Sylla. page 36
Faith of servant to their Masters. page 256 Faith no where to the miserable.
page 117 Fear without cause in Pompeys camp. page 10^ ^^sul^ taken by
Manlius. page 74 Freedom denied, causes dissension. page 14 Fanius assayleth
the Roodes by land. page 270 Fagio killed. page 31^ Fagio kills himself.
page 318 Felic^^ie of C. Caesar. page 129. 350* Fear in Caesar's camp at
Corduba. page 133 Fires at Fulgin^ signifying aid. page 32^ Fight between
Sextius and Ventidius. page 26^ Fight first in the city. page 36 Fight
between Caesar and Pompey the great. page 118 Fight between Caesar and
Pompeys elder son. page ^33 Fight with Petreius in Africa. page 128 Fight
with the Alexandrines. page 12^ Fight with Pharnac^. page 126 Fightes at
Philippi. page 102 Fight on the sea with Mur^us and Caluisius. page ^^3 Fight
by sea between Caluisius and Pompey. page 246 Fight of the Martial legion
against two. page 208 Fight by sea with equal number. page 357 Fight by sea
with Cal^^sius. page 345 Fight by sea with Cor^^ficius. page 200 Fight
between Mened^^^^ and Menecrates. page 344 Fight between Agrppa and Papia.
page 354 Fortune forsakes (...) second Pompey. page 359 For^itude of Lucius
soldiers. page 323 Fruits of peace. page 341 Friendship ^ayleth Pompey* the
younger. page 339. 340 Friends and fortune forsakes S. Pompey. page 3^7
G.
GAbinius most dear to Caesar. page 80 Gabinius destroyed. page 106 G^^a
escapes by his son. page 252 Gra^^hu^ both, die in s^d^e^on. page 12
Gra^^lation made to Ci^^ro. page 76 G^atians hate vs^rie. page 33 Goods of
Octauius sold. page 176 Goods of the condem^^^ set to sal^. page 247 Gen^rall
ta^e by the three men. page 249 Good acts of Pompey the younger. page 3^9 God
wrought the change of the Roman state. page 237 Grass eaten in C^s^rs camp.
page ^07 G^^ph^^ taken and a vvonder there. page ^10 Gricuously taken the
fleyng at D^^a^^^. page ^^^ Gricuous impositio^^vpon the people. page 24^. 338
G^^euously taken the revolt at Placentia. page 100 G^^^dy desire of rule. page
^43 G^^dus (...) to the Rhodian^. page 100 Galls detested enemies of Rome.
page 161 Germans afraid of the noise of A^^^. page ^57 G^^g^^^ floudde. page
387 G(...), fair vvom^n of Cappadocis. page ^00 Graple invented by Mac^na^.
page 358 Grace given by An^oni^ at ^ph^s^^. page 3^^ Gold and silver taken
from the Rhodes. page 270 Gold re^ected of Spar^^cus. page 70 Good men
vnco^^^p^ed. page 174 Godd^^ have care of just war. page 1^4 Gold ^ines
called Sanct^^^^e. page 284 Godde^ reueng^ C^sars death. page ^^^ God would
have i^ so. page ^14 Gladness for the death of Fuluia. page 334 Gladness for
the peac^. page ^40 God str^keth Pompey with discourage. page ^12 God strikes
C^s^^us with desper^^ion. page 124. 2^^ Glory of Antonie great. page ^12
H.
Harness made in Spartatus camp. page 70 Hate of Drusus how ^^ came. page 23
Hate of people against Scipio. page ^4 Harpalus destroyed Xan^^u^. page ^73
Hard hap of ^^^tus and C^ssiu^. page 30^ Hardines^e of Antonie. page 200
Hazard of Oc^^ui^^. page 338 Heart fails (...). page 330 Harpessus a floudde
page 285 Herodes ^^de a king by Antonie. page 343 He^^^^^ is driven on^ of
(...). page 337 Het^^^ians destroyed. page 30 H^^mpsal restored by Pompey. page
48 H^rpines return to the Rom^^^^ socie^^^. page ^^ Hartius overthrows
A^^o^^^. page 209 H^siu^ flees to (...) Pompey. page 253 H^no^r^ done so
C^^^^. page ^^4 Hor^^^^^^ speaks for the con^^^^^ vvom^n. page 247 Hos^^a
C^^^^ taken. page 41 Holy hill. page ^^ Hope, not to he gi^en over. page ^4^
Hu^te done by ^er at (...). page 320 Hu^te by sea to O(...) and Anto^^^. page
^^^ H^^te by sea to ^ (...). page 107 Hu^te done by fire in Rome. page 84 Holy
money taken by ^^s^^. page ^^ Holy money taken by (...). page ^17 Hono^r^ not
accepted of (...). page 1^5 Homely piaces fought for (...). page 245 H^nge^
killed many. page 24^ Hu^^ done by naked Si(...). page ^^^ H^^derance of Senate
by Soul^^our^. page 230 ^^^ Honors given to Oct(...), and he consecrated among
the Gods. page 36^ Hephessiones death, susp^tio^s for Alexander. page ^^^
I.
I^^ius escapes, yet only denying Octauius. page 245 Ides of March, day of
C^sars death. page ^63 In^u^^^ion against the killers. page 225 Ini^r^^ offered
^o Octauian. page 313 Ignorant of war Pompey the elder son. page ^32
Ignorant of war Pompey the younger. page 318 Ingratitude of ^ru^^s and
Cassius plagued. page 303 Immun^^i^ given to the ^rundusians. page 48
Indignation present d^ovvneth favor paste. page ^4 Iniu^^es ^ause of contemp^.
page 2 Inu^e of Soldiour^ against Perpenna. page 68 I^^^^^ beset by Antonie.
page 3^^ Itali^ vexed by young Pompey. page 318 Iuba and P^^r^^us kill one an
other. page ^31 Iuba helps Pompeys part^. page ^28 I^da^^l^^s succoureth the
Asculan^s^ page 29 I^da^^l^^s dies. page ^9 Judges made of gentlemen. page 15
Iul^a, Antonies mother sent by Pompey. page ^^ Just se^meth Pompeys cause to
the people. page 8^ Iul^a Pompey^ wise dies. page 8^ Idleness corr^pte^h
Italians. page 6 (...) father and son, killed at one stroke. page 24^ (...)
of Soldiers. page 34 I^^^cement of women. page 73 Intertainement of A^^o^^e
and Oc^^uius. page 340 Intertainment by Oc^^^^^. page 348 In^arle^^^one to
please Cleopatra. page 310 I^l^^^ Sextus killed. page 213 Ire ouervvhe^^eth
reason. page 140 I^^os temple spoiled by S. Pompey. page 164 I^uasion of
Italy. page ^49 Insa^^^^lenesse of Soldiers. page 3^^ Insole^cie of
Souldiou^s. page ^^^ I(...)o honored of the T^s^^^es. page 330
L.
LAbeo burned quick in his tent. page ^04 Labienus calls for the killers.
page ^44 Lamentations for division of land. page ^ (...) a treasure house.
page ^17 (...) a city spoiled. page ^6^ Law of lands. page 6 Law of
Judgments. page ^5 Law of corn. page ^5 Latins called to the freedom of
Rom^. page 30 Law of (...). page ^7 Law of the three men. page 23^ Legions
of Antonie se^^ to ^nhabite. page 315 Legions reuol^e from An^on^^. page 103
Legions of Macedonia punished by Anto^^^. page ^^^ (...) kills C^c^ro. page
(...) (...) killed. page 262 Lepidus deprived and restored. page (...) Lepidus
con^ull next^ ^yll^ (...) in (...). page 6^ L^pidus depr^ued vtter^ie. page 360
L^pidus vvayteth, and is hardly heard. page 2^8 (...), where M^^o dwelled. page
84 Licenc^ous dealing after Cl^dius death. page 85 Licencious behavior of
Souldyoures. page 244. 314 Likeness of language and a^mour breeds confusion.
page 358 Liburnians people and Ships. page 95 L^bo t^eateth for peace. page
33^ Letters read by young Cicero of Antonyes fall. page 25^ Lucanes revolt from
the Romans. page 3^ Luceius saved by hy^ sister. page 250 Lucius Antonius
lover of the common wealth. page 315 Lucinus taken for (...). page 304 Love
^hevved to the condemned. page 250 Love of Antony and Cleopa^^a. page 306
Lycians deny aid to Brutu^. page 271 Lalius kylleth himself. page 26^
M.
MAcedonia taken from ^rutus and Cassius. page ^63 Marius killed of Antony.
page 337 Martius headed of Sylla. page 56 Mar^us s^pt. killed by his vviues
means. page 243 Marius flees to Mint^^^ie. page 37 Marius taken into the
City by a rope. page 52 Marius the younger kills himself. page 56 Marsi^ns a
valiant nation. page 29 Martial legion forsakes Antony. page 103 Martial
legion named for their vallan^ness^. page 202 M^ssala flees to ^rutus, and
after is ^^ great credit with Antony and Octauiu^. page 251 Merula kills
himself. page 45 Metellus the pit. full. page 22 Metellus banished. page 21
Maru^llous to Octaui^^, is the noble heart of Iucius. page 328 Mi^bridates
overcome by Sylla. page 46 Minutius a P^etor killed. page 228 Macenas punishes
the seditions. page 356 Men^dorus flees to Pompey agaynt. page 340 Minturni^^s
vvil not kill Mari^s. page 38 Miserable state at Rome. page 249. 337 Menedorus
flees again to Octa^i^s. page 352 Menedorus forsakes Sextus Pompey. page 343
Menecrates succeeds Menedorus. page 345 Mutia compelled to sue for peace.
page 330 Mutius S^cuola killed. page 52 Mutat^on suddaynely of Antony. page 166
M^ta^ion suddayne in the Senate. page ^^1 (...) Ach^^cu^ b^nished. page 24
M^rcus saved by ^arbula. etc. page ^58 Mule brought forth. page 93 (...) killed
by Sextus Pompey. page 33^ Mationes of Rome condemned. page ^4^ Miseri^ of
Italy. page 312 Missaia presetu^th Octauius, a rare example of (...). page 356
(...) procur^^ of vvar^^. page ^15
N.
NEvves of C^sars death. page ^20 New men. page 74 Negative Kingdom. page 61
Neptune countersayted by Pompey. page 350 New Como ^u^lded. page 87 Negligen^e
of Pompey. page ^6^ Noble men of Pompey. page 120 Noble men of (...) and
Cas^i^^. page 304 Non^us k^^led of the Souldyoures. page 313 Norba^^^ flees
and dies. page ^^ No faith to the afflicted. page 266 No s^riuing against
fate. page 237 Na^ye purged. page 349 Nonius receives Iuci^^ into Rome. page
320 N^^^ auntiente inhabitants of Si^^lie, dedicated Arch^geta to Apollo. page
354
O.
O^^^lla killed. page 60 O^^il^^s killed. page 362 Octauius Consul killed
contrary to o^h. page 43 Octauius C^s^r accepts his adoption. page 224
Octauius C^sar conte^^ed of Antony. page 17^ Octauius shows courage from his
youth. page 172 Octauius speaks holdly to Antony. page 172 Octauius goes for
Sou^^^youres. page 18^ Octauius is forsaken of his Souldyoures. page 1^0
Octauius is resorted to again. page 1^1 Octauius practices against Antony.
page 1^2 Octauius is ho^oured of the Senate. page 1^^ Octauius is joined with
the Consuls. page 206 Octauius suspecteth the Senate. page 206 Octauius and
Hirtius overthrows Antony. page 210 Octauius conferreth with his
Souldyoures. page 210 Octauius stands all a rayny night under a fren^^
Target. page 357 Octauius burns all letters written in time of troubles.
page 363 Octauius causes al slaves to return to service. page 363 Oppression
of Cities by Octauius. page 313 Octauius denies to deal with D^^imus. page
21^ Octauius pract^seth reconcil^a^^^ with Antony. page 217 Octauius stirre^h
soul^yours against the Senate. page 2^^ Octauius comes to the City with
^error. page ^2^ Octauius enquireth of his fathers death. page 222 Octauius is
chosen Consuli, he takes the money that was co^^^yd, a ^oken of ^^lici^^e
appeared a^ did to Romul^s. page 224 Octauius is agreed with Antony. page 225
Octauius agrees to the horrible proscription. page 2^0 Octauius d^^^deth with
Antony and I^pidus. page 22^ Octauius sends S^l^d^nus against Pompey. page
276 Octauius promises priuided ges to the (...) and Hipponea^s* to have fre
his passa^e into Sicilie. page 2^7 Octauius passes the Sea, for all that
M^^cus could do^. page 2^7 Octauius is left sick at Epidamnum. page 287
Octauius is not at the first field^ at Phili^pi, being vva^^ed by a dream.
page 20^ Octauius is made Tolbane perpetual. page 363 Octauius falls going
out of his Ship. page 354 Octauius puts of the general habit. page 355
Octauius is danger ou^ly sick at Brunduse. page 311 Octauius is troubled by
^^l^^^ and Manius. page 315 Octauius put goth ^^de^^^ touching this nevve
stir by A^^o^^^ beather. page 310 Octauius is (...) by his own soldiers.
page 313 Octauius picketh quarrels against Pompey. page 342 Octauius besi^geth
and gets Perugia. page 331 Octauius seeks to discredit Antonie. page 331
Octauius seeks a marriage to setue his turn. page 331 Octauius and Antonie at
debate. page 333 Octauius and Antonie agreed, and divide the whole Empire
betvveene them. page 3^6 Octauius is desponsed to Antonie. page 336 Octauius
sick at Canusio. page 333 Octauius dedicate a temple to Caesar. page 357
Octauius is driven to make peace with S. Po^pey. page 330 Octauius in danger
^^eyng with one page. page 357 Octauius stricken in the breast. page 366
Octauius is saved by Antonie. page 338 Octauius in distress. page 346 Octauius
afflicted. page 347 Octauius subtle for his commodity. page 348 Octauius
dallieth with Antonie. page 348 Octauius deals betveene Antonie and
Octauius. page 348 Octauius has more loss by tempest. page 350 Octauius
leapeth a shore and lies all night in a cotage, and has great loss by sea
through tempest. page 346 Octauius has shipvvrecke at the point of Minerus.
page 347. 350 Octauius bears with Soldiers insolency. page 317 Octauius an
invincible mind. page 351 Octau. co^ueyd from boat, to boat, to be saved.
page 355 Octauius drives Pompey out of Sicelie. page 359 Octauius over comes
Antonie at Actio, which is not told in this History: he vvrote it in his
book of Egypt, and that book is lost among others. The matter shall be* ^^
forth by another mean, vvherin it may appear that it was the o dinaunce of
God, to bring Octauius to the rule of al, that the state of Rome might be in
the best kind of government, as the Author says, that the birth of the king
of kings might be in his time, as we say, when there was peace thorough out
the world. Which if it had not been the determination of God, it had been
impossible for Octauius to have escaped so many perils. page 4 Orders of
Caesar's and Pompeys battayles. page 116 Order of Antonie^ and (...) battayles.
page 288 Order of the last battle by sea. page 358 Ou^^^ h^ovv of S. Pompey
utterly. page 359 Order of inuading S^^^lie praised by Octauius. page 352
P.
PAulus vvon by. 1500. talents. page 87 Patara vvonne by Brutus. page ^74
Papias vexes Lepidus Ships. page 352 Peace pleases not Menodorus. page 339
Peace broken betvveue Octauian and Pompey. page 342 Pe^^^^tation of men and
Ships. page 349 Perpenna kills Sertorius. page 68 Perpenna is killed of
Pompey. page 69 Petitions of Pompeys. page ^7. 340 Perugia oppressed with
famine. page 329 Philippi, the field of two battayles. page 286 Pierie of
Arrianus to his father. page ^ 253 Piety of servant. page ^ 254 Pindarus
page to Cassius. page 2^0 Plancus a fearful man. page 337 Plancus uses
Antonies signet. page 87 Plancus hinders Iucius. page 322 Polemociatia a noble
woman yields hi^ treasure and child to Brutus. page 273 Policy of Antonie
p^enayleth. page 290 Pompey appointed by the Senate. page 91 Pomp of Caesar
and Antonie. page 341 Portion of land given to Sittius. page 260 Pompey the
younger, had great advantage. page 318 Pompeys device to win the Senate. page
83 Portius Cato killed of the Marsians. page 31 Pompey called king of kings.
page 111 Pompeys ambassadors are taken, and brought to Antonie. page 364
Pompeys gold is taken. page 305 Pompeys great folly. page 368 Pompey the
younger cannot use victory. page 374 Pompey loses occasion. page 35^ Pompeyes
three, the father and two sons had like advantage of the enemy and lost
it. page 111. 133. 351. 347. Proscription to death. page 233 Promise made to
Soldiers. page 117. 230 Presidentes sent by Caesar. page 40 Prenestines
sacked by Sylla. page 56 Punishment omitted. page 249
Q.
QVestion what death was best. page 39 Quarrel of rich against poor; page
7 Quarrel of poor against rich. page 8 Quintus Ancharius killed. page 45
Quintus Lucrecius killed. page 50 Quintus Cepio killed. page 28 Quintus Flaccus
choseth his own death. page 18 Quintilis, named, Iulie, in the honor of
Caesar. page 134 Questions civil, first tried by fight. page 34 Quickness of
Caesar's. page 103 Quick attempts, preuente in war. page 103 Quintus that
betrayed Dolabella, denied pardon. page 30^. Quareling between Octauius and
Antonie. page 331. 334
R.
RAscus and Rascopolis two brethren, divide themselves, to save themselves.
page 304 Ravenous flaues punished. page 45 Re^^io saves his master. page 254
Rebulus saved following Themistocles example. page 257 Reggio exempt from
Soldiers. page 277 Rhodes taken by Cassius. page 270 Roman soldiour kills
Pompey. page 122 Roman Empire enlarged. page 131 Romans use in subdued
lands. page 5 Roman discipline decayed. page 314 Roman virtue shevved in
Messala. page 356
S.
SAburra killed by Sittius. page 206 page Sabinus, appointed by Octauius, to
punish malefactors. Sacrifice for the navy. page 337. 350 Sacrifice to Venus
and Mars. page 112 Salerno taken. 27. Salapia burned. page 33 Saluius the
Tribune killed. page 238 Saluidienus killed. page 337 Sardinia taken with
Menadorus. page 337 Scapula burns himself. page 133 Scaurus bevvrayeth
Pompey. page 367 Scaua his valiantness. page 107 Scipio killed. page 14
Scrapion delivered by Antonie to die to please Cleopatra. page 310 Sextus cause
of the burning of Perugia. page 392 Sedition in Caesar's camp. page 100. 126
Sedition in Octauius camp. page 313 Sedition for debte. page 33 Sedition for
inhabitaunce. page 24 Sedition for Amatius. page 106 Sedition of the country
men. page 20 Senators and Gentlemen condemned by Sylla. page 57 Senators and
Gentlemen condemned by the three men. page 231 Sertorius an other Anniball.
page 67 Security given to Pompeys men. page 119 Seregius escapes. page 255
Sepulcher of Pompey restored by Adrian. page 123 Serpent borne of a woman.
page 50 Shoppes shut up in Rome. page 314 Sittius banished in his own
country. page 257 Sittius escapes Rome, serves well in Africa. page 261
Soldiers perishes with hasty drinking. page 356 Solitary way disclosed by
to much joy. page 286 Soldiers practice friendship. page 334. 337 Southsayer of
Tuscane kills himself. page 230 Spartacus rejects silver and gold. page
70 Statius the Samnite killed. page 243 Stratageme of Antonie. page 207. 289
Stratageme of Pomponius and Arnutius. page 255 Syria under kings till Seleucus,
Antiochu s last successor. page 261
T.
TAbles delivered to Caesar of his death. page 140 Taberius Caesar's secretary.
page 167 Tempest destroys Octauius navy. page 347 Temples dedicate to Caesar
alone, and to him and clemency, hand in hand. page ^34 Testament of Caesar
published. page 15^ Temple of revenge dedicate by Caesar at Alexandria, pulled
down of the Jews in ^raianes time. page 125 Temple of Venus dedicate by
Caesar with the Image of C^opatra. page 132 Theater put down by Scipio. page
1^ Theodotus hanged by Cassius for being worker of Pompeys death. page ^35
Thoranius being Octauius tutor is condemned to death. page 235 Three men's
power hateful. page 276 Title see upon Sylla his picture. page 58 Titius
vnkin de to S. Pompey. page 368 Titinius killed himself. page 290 Title and
honors given to Octauius. page Token evil in Antonies camp. page 343 Token
unlucky to Octauius. page 290 Trouble by naked men. page 356 Tribuneship
perpetual offered to Caesar. page 134 Trebonius killed of Dolabella. page 180
Triumphs four of Caesar. page 131 Triumph of Lepidus. page 247 Tributes upon
the Grecians. page 308 Tributes upon Asia page 308 Tribunes ought to be
considered page 15 Tribunes killed. page 12 Tumult at Rome. page 338 Tumult at
Alexandria. page 125 Tumult of Soldiers in Sicelie, in the which Ofilius was
flayne: page 303
V.
VArinius Glaber, against Spariacus. page 69 Varro escapes. page 257 Varus is
killed. 245. Vatinius accused. page 80 Venus, the word of Caesar. page 127
Venus temple dedicate to Caesar. page 171 Ventidius repressed the Parthians.
page 337 Venusians rebel from the Romans. page 32 Vestall virgins keep the
laws of peace. page 340 Vestines reuolte. page 25 Vesu^iu^s hill where
Pliny perished, taken by Spartareus. page 58 Vetius Cato overthrows S.
Julius. page 26 Virtue is not caught of the evil. page 300 Ventidius escapes.
256. Ventidius slain. page 261 Viboneans exempt from bondage. page 227
Victory of Caesar at Pharsalo. page 126 Victory of Caesar in Spain, where
he said he fought for his life. page 97. 133 Victory at Alexandria. 125.
Victory in Africa. page 129 Victory of Pompey at Durazzo. page 103 Victories
of Sylla at Rome. page 36 55 Victories of Octauius at Mutina. page 209
Victories of Octauius and Antonie. page 290. 300 Victories of Cassius. page
213. 264. 269 Victories of Brutus. page 214. 272 273 Victory of Octauius by
Agrippa. page 246 Unskillfulness of Pompey. page 318. 355 Victory of ^rutus and
Cas^ius by sea. page 202 Victory of Octauius at Perugia. page 320 Victory of
sextus Pompey at Cuma, page 345. 346 Victory of Octau^is. page Vitulinus dies
manfully. page 243 V^l^sius flees to Pompey. page 253 Vaginius escapes. page
257 V^ca forsaken and pardoned. page 130 Vultures twelve to Octauius. page 224
Unkindness of Antony to his vviues. page 33 Vria^, Antony takes part of
Octauius horsemen. page 334 Vision of tautus. page 303
VV.
WAterlesse place of Sicelie, called the flood of the fire. page 356 Water
infected, kills Caesirs men. page 98 Wife of Coponius saves his husband by
spilling her self. page ^52 Want of Corn in Rome. page 322 Watches first
appointed in Rome. page 364 Want of flood, forces Pompey to yield. page 307
VVolle eats a man in Antonyes tent. page 343
X.
XAnthus diverse times sacked in defense of their liberty. page 273
Y.
Yearly offices appointed with a promise of ancient form of rule. page 364
Year ordered by Caesar, according to the course of the Sun. page 164
Z.
Zygactes a flood, taking his name of the broken yoke of Plutoes Chariot. page
27 Zeal of Country passes all. page 332
FINIS.
The Table of the Continuation of the civil wars.
A*
ACcusations betvveene Octauius and Antonie. page 381 Age of Antonie and
Cleopatra. page 396 Amuretes a Turkishe monk. page 398 Antonies footmen
yield. page 380 Antonie in despair. page 380 Antonie follows Timone trade.
page 300 Antonie ^enevveth his riot. page 300 Antonie vvluppeth a messenger of
Octa. Caesar. page 301 Antonie repulleth Octauius horsemen. page 301 Antonie
^he^reth h^s men. page 3^2 Antonies ships forsake him. page 392 Antonies
horsemen forsake him. page 3^2 Antonie complayneth of Cleopatra. page 3^2
Antonies grief. page 3^2 Antonie shyketh himself. page 393 Antonie halle
dead, is haled into Cleopatras sepulcher. page 3^2 Antonies children. page 306
Antonie the c^tt^e of the alteration of the state of Rome. page 3^^ Antonies
pictures thrown down. page ^^^ Antonies ^^^ld^en. page 3^^ Antonie ^^^^eth
(...). page ^^1 Antonies fortune is overcome of Octauius fortune. page ^^1
Antonie did better by his (...) then by ^^m^elle. page 3^1 Antonie omitteth a
generalles part. page 3^^ Antonie vvcepeth. etc. page 3^6 Antonie doteth. page
381 Antonie forsakes his namie. page 183 Antonie is hoysted into Cleopatras
sp^ppe. page ^^^ Antonie is pursued. page 38^ Antonie is buried princely. page
394 Artillery of the Romans taken. page 344 Aspis Serpent brought to
Cleopatra among figs. page 596. Augustus what name. page 397
B.
Barley for food, a punishment. page 375 Barley bread dear in the Romans camp.
page 377 Blame put to Antonie if he should forsake Cleopatra. page 381 Blame
put to him because he did not forsake her. page ^8^. Birth day of Antony
celebrated by Cleopatra. page 3^2
C.
CAnidius forsakes Antonie. page 384 Canidius error. page 3^6 Canidius in
^^n^ed by Antonie. page 3^6 Casar g^a^nteth all things to Cleopatra. page 3^5
Change of M^^^age. page 397 (...) called Imper^t^r. page 3^8 Cleopatra (...)
for po^ion. page 3^0 Cleopatra celebrateth his birth day. page 3^1 Cleopatra in
insp^tion. page 3^^ Cleopatra vv^ndeth the valiant soldiers. page ^^^
Cleopatra flees (...) Antonie. page ^^^ Cleopatra celebrateth Antonies
s^^ciall. page ^^^ Cleopatra deceyueth C^sar. page ^^^ Cleopatra^ last request
to Caesar. page ^^^ Cleopatra found (...) upon a bed of gold. page ^^^
Cleopatra beats one of his treasourers. page ^^^ Cleopatra flees. page 387
Cleopatra would have killed her self. page 394 Cleopatra would pine her
self to death. page 304 Cleopatra dies like a Queen and is royally buried.
page 304 Countries confederate. page 386 Combat challenged by Antonie. page 385
Crassus goes to war against order. page 372 Craft of the Parthians. page
375 Craft of Cleopatra. page 381 Cruelty of Antonie. page 374
D.
DAnger of Antonie. page 380 Death of Cleopatra^ page 396 Death of Antonie.
page 392 Death of Heroes. page 392 Death of Carmium. page 396 Death of Iris.
page 396 Death of Caesarion. page 396 Decree of honors at Athens for
Cleopatra. page 382 Despair of Antonie. page 380 Determination of war
against the Parthians. page 371 Diversity of fight. page 387 Devise of
Cleopatra to keep her from invasion. page 399 Dotyng of Antonie. page 381
Doubt of Antonie. page 372 Doubt of Octauius. page 383
E.
Emperor what name. page 398 Emperors of Antonies issue. page 307 Envy
eschevved. page 398 Error acknowledged. page 379 Evil nevves one after an
other. page 390 Euphronius is sent to Octanius. page 300 Euricles persueth
Antonie. page 383 Exaction of money. page 388 Execration against Crassus. page
372
F.
Fair figs deceyueth the guard. page 395 Fear of Antonies fury is fled by
Cleopatra. page 393 Fear of Antonie. page 379 Feasts of the dying forte. page
300 Fight by sea. page 387 Folly in Antonie. page 383 Fondness of Antonie.
page 380 Frenzy in the Romans camp. page 377 Fury of Antonie.* page 391
G.
Guard deceived. page 305 Germane Emperors. page 3^8 Geminius blamed for
truth. page 384 Geminius is sent from Rome to Antonie. page 384 Generals part
omitted by Antonie. page 375 Gifts of Antonie. page 370 Gifts of Cleopatra.
page 3^1 Good counsel not accepted of Antonie. page 386 Good offer refused.
page 373 Greek Emperors. page 398 Grief of Antonie. page 392 Grace comely in
the waste corpse of Cleopatra. page 394.
H.*
HAte hyndreth. page 374 Heroes Antonies man kills himself. page 3^2 Herbs
venemouse. page 3^^ Herod king of Jury forsakes Antonie. page 390 Horsemen
forsake Antonie. page 3^2 Horsemen repulsed. page 391
I.
IAnus temple shut for peace universal. page 3^^ Jews king, killed by
Antonie. page 3^4 Jealousy of Antonie. page 3^2 Imperator, how the name came.
page 3^2 Imbassage sent to Antonie from the people of Rome to leave Cleoparra.
page 384 Injuries done by Antonie, revenged at last. page 367 Iri^ lies dead
by Cleopatra. page 360 Isi^, name of a goddess given by Antonie to Cleopatra.
page 3^^ Just judgment of God, the punishment of Antonie. page ^97
L.
LAmentation of Cleopatra. page 3^3 Lamentation of Antonie. page 377 Last
words of Antonie. page 393 Last words of Cleopatra. page 3^9 Last request
of Cleopatra. page 3^5 Leave given by Antonie for his men to shifte for
themselves. page 388 Library of Pergamo. page 383 Liberality of Antonie. page
388 Loss of the Romans. page 374 Love, loss of all to Antonie. page 373
Lovers mind, in an others body. page 381
M.
MAhu^netes takes Constantinople. page 3^8 Mardu^ true to the Romans. page
2^8 Men amassed at Antonies madness. page 389 Moneses flees to Antonie. page
373 Modesty of Octauia. page 373 Moneses used by Antonie, as Themistocles by
the Persian king. page 373 Munificence of Antonie. page 373
N.
NAnie of Antonie at Ephesus. page 382 Negligence of Antonie. page 383 Niger,
messenger from Octania to Antonie. page 381 Nilus defended by Cleopatra. page
380 Noise in Alexandria like to music in the night. page 392. Number of
Antonies ships. page 384 Number of Octauius ships. page 384 Number of the
Romans loss. page 380 Number of the loss of Crassus. page 372
O.
OCtauius bestows Cleopatras children, one of Antonies sons in great
favor with Octauius. page 3^6. 397 Octauius is forbidden to come to Antonie.
page 381 Octauius is put out of Antonies house. page 383 Octauius v^epeth for
Antonie. page 3^^ Octauius honoreth Arrive a Philosopher. page 394 Octauius
rules alone. page 398 Octauius secketh occasion against Antonie. page 380
Octauius provoke Antonie. page 385 Orodes king of Parthia, killed by his
son. page 373
P.
PAstime out of time. page 382 Phraata city belieged. page 374 Pictures of
Cleopatra saved. page 3^6 Plenty soden, cause of snif^^te. page 380 Plays
exhibited to Antonie and Cleopatra. page 382 Plague upon Antonie. page 367
Pompey a please wife. page 372 Policy of the Romans. page 377 Progresie of
Antonie and Cleopatra. page 382 Player of Antonie. page 377 Prounces given to
Cleopatra. page 374
R.
Requests of Cleopatra and Antonie. page 300 Recorders part playde by Antonie.
page 382 Rewards of Cleopatra page 380 Renuyng of ^^ot by Antonie. page 300
Reuengment of Antony. page 307 Romans flees from Antonie. page 384 Romans
great lo^^e. page 380 Romans praised of the Parthians. page 37^ Rude dealyng
of Antonie. page 3^^ Ruin of Antonie. page 388
S.
Sepulcher of Cleopatra. page 301 Second challenge of Antonie against Octauius.
page 301. Scornful message of Antonie. page 301 Sight pitiful. page 393
Science of Antonie. page 388 Slacknesse of Antonie. page 383 Soldiers good
opinion of Antonie. page 289 Soldiers great love to Antonie. page 377 Son^^
sayer vvarneth Antonie. page 371 Suspicion against Cleopatra. page 391
T.
TAti^nus killed. page 374 Testament of Antonie. page 383 Timo^es Tabernacle.
page 390 Tunon of Athens, who for his inhumanitie was called (...) an hater
of men, and he made this Epitaphe of himself: After a poor and wretch^d life,
so here in grave like, Ask not my name, and so the Gods, O reader, thee
destroy. page 300 Token to Octauius. page 387 Tokens of the coming of Christ.
page 3^0 Tokens to Crassus. page 372 Treasure of Antonye spoiled. page 379
Triumph of the king of (...). page 380 Triumph displeas^nt. page 380 Trust
fails in adversity. page 38^
V.
Vain love. page 373 Vanity of Antony. page 374 Ventidius is sent by Antony
to triumph at Rome. page 373 Ventidius plagueth the Parthians. page 373 Victory
of Octauius Caesar by sea against Antonie. page 380 Victory of small
importance. page 375. 380
VV.
Want in the Romans Camp. page 377 Water salt hurtful. page 377 War
proclaimed. page 384 Want of Octauius. page 383 Warning vvoulde not serve
Antony at none of his friends. page 383. 385 Wine remedy against melancoly.
page 377 Words of Antony at his death. page 393 Woeful end of Antony. page
393 Woeful end of Crassus. page 372 Words of Cleopatra. page 3^5
X.
Xenophon his army of ten thousand, often remembered of Antony, by an
acclamation after ^^^^ sort, Oh the ten thousand, because with them only
Xenophon passed without hurt, as long a vyay as the Romans went. page 378
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing of the Books of Civil vvarres.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 1 18 (for should (read shall 3 35 Liabia
^^by^ 4 1 Duke of Loma guife of Ionia 4 vlt. Colligant Colligauit 5 20 of that
of them that 12 13 Paperius Papirius 16 33 pastune pasture 25 25 Hirsians
Hirpians 29 17 Falernio Falerno 32 16 Ca^ne Can 38 21 Cithegus Cethegus 50 17
means malice 54 14 wars ways 69 vlt. Garinus Garganus 70 ^ birds burdens
73 20 Cateline Catiline 83 35 that Milo Milo that 85 26. 28. 29 Ptotolomie
Ptolomie 95 3 Dirrachium Dyrrachium 97 2 Sypris Sycoris 100 22 that any that
only 102 14 mnaly manly 103 1 Baron Barn 107 34 of.viii. C. saving. 800. 110 1
Vetona Velona 114 7 slingers slingers 115 18 forty 400. 115 27 so see 126 9
Methridates. Mithridates 128 33 which with 129 5 Corta Clita 140 17 came
coming 161 2 40 400. ibid. ^ horse holy ibid. 18 Titurus Titureius 167 14
Phaberius Taberius 172 33 These words, but as a successor of his tyranny, must
be red in the text. after this word (think) 174 the thy 175 1 striker
strikers 178 1 heart have 210 3 hest hurt ibid. 22 fouing following 213 30
Crassus Crispus 223 19 Cornurus himself Cornutus ^i^^eth himself 232 33 leave
out all the line 248 27 for or for 27^ 2^ Ciceronians Cizicenians 285 7
Caldeans Calcidonians ibid. 15 of Saporea for Saporea 289 3 of with ibid. 21
Case Thaese 290 9 flock flank 292 17 legates legion 294 21 yet after 296 11
Achis Achaia ibid. vlt. Generalles General 30^ 1^ naue none 307 30 Pergama
Pergamo 309 8 add this, other Tributes were commanded to Kings and Princes and
free Cities, according to every ones ability ibid. 25 Galace Galaceans ibid.
22 Paleshia Palestina ibid. 31 Sinna Sicinna 315 17 add this, that the
Consulles should rule after the ancient manner, without any let of the
three men. 324 2 enuies enemies 326 4 and state estate 339 21 Bithinus
Bithinicus 341 15 wife ncese 343 11 Menedorus his Menedorus as one ruling his
358 2 cingle circle 359 10 add but Pompeis part was sad 380 19 flight sleyght
378 14 Antioch Antioche 379 vlt. of that 382 1 sent lent ibid. 38 as all

The second part of Appian of Alexandria.

Wherein be contained so many of the Romans expeditions against foreign
Nations, as have been defended from the spoil of War, o^ the decay of time,
and bin brought into light and come to our hands.

That is to say:

1 Against Mithridates King of Pontus, with his miserable end. 2 Against the
Hiberians, now called Spaniardes, and among many notable things, the pitiful
overthrow of the City of Numantia. 3 Against the Carthagies, with the
lamentable destruction of that City. 4 Against Antiochus the Great, who after
many losses, made a dishonorable peace. 5 Against the Parthians, where
Crassus was slain, and Antonie foiled. 6 Against the Illyrians, of whose
Conquest Octauius Caesar glories. 7 A fragment of the war with the French,
with whom Julius Caesar fought ten years together, and triumphed of them.
Translated into English by W: B. Imprinted at London by Ralph Newberie and
Henry Bynniman.

Anno. 1578.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, his singular good Master, Sir Christopher Hatton,
Knight, Captain of the Queens Majesty's Guard, Vizchamberlaine to her
Highnese, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
THe first translatour of this Author into Latin, did make his dedicatio^ to
two sundry Princes: but we have thought good to make your Honor the whole
patron of our english Appian, as wholy as we could set him forth.

In the former part he showed to your Honor, the conquestes that the
Romans made, one of another. In this part he shows the conquestes that
they made of other nations: wherein they went so far, that at last they
fell down, being ouerpreste with their own vvayght. To these two kinds
of conquests, a third is to be added, when a man conquereth himself, as
Alexander did in containing from Darius most fair wife and daughters, and
Caesar, in sparing to punish his greatest enemies. To whom Cicero say de, that
in other victories, fortune, policy, and soldiers, might claim a part, but
in this, he alone should have all the glory. And when Darius died, and was
helped thereto, by Polycrates, he said, for thy pains Alexander shall give thee
thanks, but the Gods immortal, shall give Alexander thanks, for his
magnanimity shevved to my mother, wife and children. By such manner of
conquest, your honor shall attain to most sure triumph, the guide of whose
Chariot, shall be Grace given from above, that shall never fail you. How
worthy this author is to be read in Stephanus in his Greek addition to the
Greek Preface.
these matters, his testimony may be enough to prove, that wishes him to be
read in the same, before all other. Then may it please your Honor to accept him
at the hands of your most humble servant, that continually prays for your
increase of fame and honor, to the service of your Prince, and the glory of
God.

Your Honors most bounden servant: H. BYNNIMAN.

coat of arms or blazon

The Authors Preface to the books of the Roman wars, with foreign Nations.
BEginning to write the History of the Romans, I have thought it necessary
to declare first, the borders of the nations that the Romans ruled. In the
main Sea, the most part of the Britains is theirs. And going to the sea,
by the pillars of Hercules, and sailing about these pillars, they be These
pillars or hylls of Hercules be in the straightes of Gades, beyond the which
it was though no man could go. Moors inhabit Ma^^^^^ni^ west ward.
^^bi^, otherwise called Africa, is the third part of the world, divided from
Asia by the floude Nilus, and from Europa, by the sea, that is called Med^*
^^rrancum. Nomades were they that alvvai follovved their flocks, and chan^ged
their places of past^re There be two ^hallovve seas called Syrtes. Marmaridans
be those people of Africa, among which be they that be called Psilli, whose
spettle kills serpents, as Cato proved when he went against Iub^. The
holloyve part of Syri^ is called Calosyri^. P^lusium is the furthest City of
the coasts of Egypt. Palmyra is a free Cittye in the confines of the Rom^^^ and
Parthian kingdoms.
Lords of all the Islands, and the firm land, that is inhabited alongest the
sea.

The first on the right hand of that sea, be the Marousians, the other be the
nations of the Lybians as far as Carthage, beyond whom be the Nomadians,
whom the Romans call Numidians, and the Country Numidia. The other Lybians
do inhabit about the shallowe seas, to Cyrene. Then Cyrene, the Marmaridans
and Ammonians, and they that dwell at the lake of M^^ea, and the great city
which Alexander bid build in Egypt, with Egypt it self, as far as a man may
sail in Nilus to the East Ethiopians, and by sea, to Pelusio.

Then tourning the course to Syria and Palestina, and beyond them you go to
part of the Arabians. The Phaenitians bordure upon the Pal^stines at the sea,
and beyond the Phaenitians, the hollow part of Syria, unto the floude
Euphrates. From the sea above the port Minaris, and the sands of Palmiria to
Euphrates. They had the Cilicians of Syria, and the Cappadocians their
neighbors, and part of Armenia, called Armenia the less. And all the nations
about Euxinus Pontus, obeyed the Romans. And the Syrians and Cilicians that
be toward the sea. The Armenians and Cappadocians inhabiting the nations of
Pontus, and they of the middle land, which they call Armenia the great, of the
which the Romans take Prop^tis is now called Marc d^ San Georgio. Pamphilia
is in Asia the less, named as some think, of the plentye of t^e^^ Euxinus is
the sea that begins at ^^sphor^^ Trac^^s, and goes east and not the: it
was first called. Axenu^, that was Inhospitalis, because the m^abi taunts did
kill and eat the passengers: but after being mad^ ci^^ll by the Gre^^an^, it
was called Euxinus
no tribute, but they receive kings by their appointment. From Cappadocia and
Cilicia to Ionia, is the great land like an Island which has Pontus Euxinus
and Propentis, and Hedesp^nt on the right hand, and the Aegaean, Pamphilian,
and Egiptian sea on the left side, for they say it makes almost an Island on
both sides, and as men go to the Egiptian Sea, there be the Pamphilians,
Lycians, and after them Car^a to Ionia, and the Galatia^s, Bythinians, Mysians
and Phrygians be above Euxinus. In the midde land, the Pisidians and Lydians.
So many nations inhabit Cherronesus, of all the which the Romans have
rule. On the other side of that sea, they govern the nations about Pontus and
Mysia in Europa, and the Thracians that be about Euxinus. From Ionia begins
the Gulf of Aegeo, and the other from the sea of Ionia, and the narrow sea of
Sicelie, and the Tuscane sea to the pillars of Hercules. So great is the length
from Ionio to the Ocean sea, and in that coaste,, these be the Roman
provinces. All Grecia, Thessalia, Masedonia, and al y^ join upon Thracia and
Illyria, and the nations of Panno nia. Then Italy it self, the longeste of
them all, reaching from the Ionian, to the most part of the Tuscane sea, to
the Celtians, Rbenus is the floude that divides Germany from France. Iberia
etc. now Spain.
which they call Galatia^s, and of the people of the Galls, some belong to this
sea, and some to the north Ocean, and some at the river of Rene. And all Iberia
and Celtiberia, that end in the weast and north Ocean, and Hercules pillars. I
will declare evidently of all these Nations, when I shall write of every Nation
by it self.

Now we have told with how great borders their Empire is compassed by sea.
To him that will travail on the land, there is a part of Mauritania that goes
toward the Weaste to the Aethiopians, then the other more desert, and wild
part of Lybia, to the East Aethiopians: This is the bordure of the Romans
in Lybia.

Of Asia, the floude Euphrates, and the hill Caucasus, and the Euphrates is a
floude of Meso^ potam^^. Caucasus an hy^ dunding I^di^ from Scythi^.
kingdom of Armenia the great, and the Colchians that be about the Sea of
Euxinus, and the rest of that sea. In Europa two floods Renus and Hister does
chiefly divide the Roman Kingdom. Of these, Renus runs to the north Ocean,
and Hister into Euxinus ^^ster, is the s^^e flood in ^llyria, that Da. (...) in
G^r many the greatest flood in Europe. Dae^^ now Vallichia, the people were
called Da^^ or D^^a ioyuing to the G^^t^^ of whom the A^b^^a^s take their
names o^ i^ ^u^unts in C^^^d^^ as Da^us, ^^t^. Cy^la^e^. be the ^les in the
A^ge^^ Sea. S^o^ade* be ^^es about Creta in the Carp^^^i^^ Sea. Echi^^^^es, be
big Isles next to Aca^^i^. Tyr^^nide^ be the lands in the Tuscan^ Sea. Myr^o^n
sea, is part of the Aeg^^^se^. (...) now England so great as t^seemeth a moyne
land. A^^stacrasia is a rule of the best sort of men. C. Caesar. Kings
Emperors. Emperor^s he that is general of an army.
Pontus. And in some place they go beyond, and rule the nations that be
beyond Rene, and the Getes that be beyond Hister, whom they call Dacies.
These be their bounds by land, as near as I could gather. All the Islands
that be in the Sea, Cyclades, Sporades, H^ades, Echi^ades, and Tyrrenides, and
M^esia, or whatsoever other name they have, about Libya, Ionia, Aegipt, My^ro,
or Sicilie, or what otherwise they be called in the Sea: Al these be subject to
the Romans, and they that for their excellency, be named of y^ Romans great
Islands, as Cyprus, Creta, ^hodes, Lesbus, Euboi^, Sicelie, Sardus, and Cyrnas,
and whatsoever other else. Then passing the north O^ae^^, into y^ I Will of
Britain, which for yt greatness may some an other continent, they have ye
best part of it, more than half, the rest they pass not of. For that part
which they have, is not fruitful to the^. As great as al these nations be, was
yt greatest labor to the^ to conquer Italy, which they could hardly do after.
500. years, half of yt time being under kings.

But when they had e^p^^sed their kings and sworn that they would no more
receive them, they used the rule of the best mean, and had them yearly
chosen two hundred years after the.v. C. Their Empire waxed most great, and
they were Lords of ^^^nite for rain power, and subdued the most nati o^s.
The^ Caius Caesar getting the upper hand, made it a sure state, he kept still
the form and name of a Common wealth, but made himself a Monarchy over all,
and so the rule has continued in one to this day, whom they call not kings,
as I think to a^o^^e their old oath, but name them Emperoures, which is the
title of them that rule armies for a time: but in all purposes they be kings.
And Emperoures have continued to this time about two hundred years more, in
the which the City has bin chiefly be^tisied, and the revenue most
increased, and all things being in long and sure peace, brought to perfect
felicity. For the Emperoures have made some of these to be of their dominion
by force, and have holden in, them that reuolte^. Therefore by good skill they
had rather keep that be most profitable about the Sea, and encreace them,
than to extend their dominson to barbarous nations, poor, and unprofitable of
whom I have seen Embassadoures come to Rome, to yield themselves subject,
and not received of the Emperor, as unprofitable to him. To other many
nations they appoint Kings, because the Empires had no need of them, some
subjects must be kept, for a shame to forsake them, though they be pore.
Great armies be in every place, as in a circle, by the which they keep so
great land and sea, as one place. There was never Monarchy that was so
great, or continued so long.

The state of Grecia, if a man will begin from the tune of Darius army, in the
which they most flourished, unto the time of Phill^^, Amyntas son, though he
put together the power of the Athonians, Grecia. Darius the first king of
Persia, that had Cyru^* daughter to vvi^^.
Lacedaemonians, and Thebanes, shall not appear so mighty a thing, for they
contended rather for ^ig^itie among themselves, tha^ to get dominion, and
thought no matter so noble, as to maineteine their liberty against strange
kings that molested them. If some of them sailed as far as Sicel^^ in hope of
rule, they were overthrown. If any went into Asia, they did little there, and
returned. And to conclude, the power of the Grecians, though The Ath^ni^ns
vver^ overthrown in Italy.
it were ^o^te^tions for y^ rule, it proceeded not surely out of Grecia, but
showed they would keep it from servitude, and unconquerable as much as they
could; but after Philip and Alexander, I think they have done very evil, and
unworthy themselves. The Empire of The power of Grecia.
Asia, is not to be compared to the least of y^ feats and virtue of Europe,
for the weakness and faintness of their nations, the which The rule of Asia.
this present wrighting shall declare; for the Romans with a few battles got so
many nations of Asia, as now they command, although they were defended by y^
M^ced^nians; but they had great Europe.
labor about Europe and Libya; the dominion of the Assyrians, Medians, and
Persians, three of the greatest powers, til Alexander, Philips son, though he
reckon y^. C. years y^ they continued, can not compare with the Roman Empire
as it is now, and y^ greatness of Asia.
their Empire, is less by half I think, if it be well considered, for the
Romans reach from the West Ocean, to the hill Caucasus, and the flood
Euphr^^^s, and to the Aeth^^pians that be about Aegipt and Arabia, to the East
Ocean. And their bounds is, the Ocean of the sun rising and setting. They
rule all the inward^ sea, all the Islands, and the Brettanes that be in the
Ocean.

The Medians and the Persians, when they had most of the sea, Pers^c^^ Si^s
from the east has the red sea and from the vveast Arabia.
it was no further than the Gulf of Pamphilia, and one I Will of Cypres, or berie
little of the Ionian sea, for the sea of Persis which they had, was no great
matter.

The Macedonians before Philippe, had very little power, and Macedonia. Phillip.
to some they were subjects. The labor and travail of Philippe, is not to be
accounted light, but it was only about Grecia, and one region.

Under Alexander, for the greatness, multitude, felicity, and speedynesse,
this dominion in a short space, became infinite, and incomparable, but because
of the short time, it was like a bright Alexander.
lightning. The which being divided into many Provinces, part of them
continued noble a good while. But our kings only did maintain two hundred
thousand footeinen, forty thousand The power of the kings of Aegipt.
horsemen, three hundred Elephants used to the war, two thousand armed
Chariots, and so much armoure as would serve three hundred thousand. Besides
this provision for the land, they had two thousand of the small vessels, and
of galleys little and great a thousand five hundredth, with double furniture:
eyghte hundred ships of show, which they used for pomp, with stems, and
sternes of gold, seven hundred and forty talents of Egypt, in their
treasure, all the which appears by the Princes records, which be yet extant.

The second king of Egypt, after Alexander, who of al other, was most able to
spend, most bountiful to bestow, and most desirous to get, left this behind
him: Other Princes were not (...) Lagus, was the mightiest after Alexander.
much inferior, but by mutual discord of their posterity, which is the
only destruction of great kingdoms, they came to nothing.

But the Roman Empire passed for greatness and felicity, for continuance,
and wisdom in the Senate, neither wanted they At (...). At the lake of (...).
Al Can now (...).
manhood, nor patience, nor painfulness, til they had established their
power, nor gave place to misfortune: they lost sometime twenty thousand,
sometime forty and fiftye thousand at a battle* diverse times the City was
in danger by famine, pestilence and sedition. Yet all this would not abate
their ambition, by the space of seven hundred years, stryuing with pain and
peril, till they brought their dominion, (keeping stil^one ^rade*) to this
height, as they receive most ample fruits of their wisdom and happiness.

These things many Gretians and Romans have put in writing, and the History
is far exceeding the Macedonians: and where as I have considered their
valiantness, and would see it in every nation, my pen has carried me, from
Lybia to Vberia, and from Iberia into Sicilie or Macedonie, or to embassages,
and confederacies of sundry nations, and then brought me again as a forced
man to Sicilie and to Carthage, and eftsoons carried me away from these
imperfect, til I had gathered by parts, how of tthey sent ambassadors or
armies into Si^ily, and what they did in that Island, til they had conquered it.
The^ how many ambassages, how many leagues were made between them, what
overthrows on both sides were given, till Carthage was overcome, and Africa
made a province, and then Carthage restored again, to the state that it is
now. I have done the like in every province, because I would know, what the
Romans did every where, that I might see the manhood or faintness of al
nations, and the virtue and fortune of them that conquered, and whatsoever
other matter chanced. Thinking this would be acceptable to other also, to
understand the Romans acts, after this sort, I have written of every nation
by it self, leaving to write what was done in the mean time of other, placyng
them severally.

To set the times to every thing I thought it too much, the most notable, I
will express by their distance of time.

At the first the Romans had one name, as al other: after The Romans have
diverse names.
came another, and at length, the third also was added to some of them, to be
known by some mark of body or virtue of mind, as the Grecians had surnames
joined to their names. Some time I will put all, chiefly of the noble men, that
they may be the better The division of the works.
known, the most I will name by the one or the other, as shall be most fit.
And where there be three books that declare the Romans doings in Italy, I
call them three, the Romans acts with the Italians, and for the multitude of
matter, are thus divided. The first, conteyneth the reigns of the seven
kings, therefore I call them, The History of the Roman Kings.

Then follows the Book of matters done in Italy, beside them that dwell in
the coast of Ionia, the which Book for a difference is called, The Romans
war after the Kings. The last of all in that land were the Samnites, next the
Ionian sea, a nation most fierce and warlike fighting with the Romans
fourscore Samnites, now Abruzo, part of the Kingdom of Naples.
years, till they and the Grecians their fellows that inhabit Italy, were
subdued; and this book, for the difference from the other two, is called, The
Romans wars with the Samnites. All the other have their several titles, as,
The Romans war with the Galls, the Sicilians, the Iberians, with Hanniball,
with Carthage, with Macedonia, and so forth. The order of the which, is after
the order of the time in the which they were done, though that many other
things happened by the way.

The civil seditions and war among themselves most horrible of all the rest,
shall be declared by their names that were chief doers of the same, as Marius
and Sylla, Pompey and Caesar, Antony and Caesar Augustus, and the killers of
Caesar the elder.

Then shall be showed of Antony and Caesar, which made an end of civil war,
when Aegipt came under the Romans dominion. So all the wars are divided into
books of their nation, or to the names of the Captains, if they be civil.

The last book shall declare what armies they have, what revenue they take of
every Nation* what charges they be at with their ordinary garrisons by sea,
and such other. And seeing I shall wright of their virtue, it shall be fit
to begin of their original. Who I am that have written these things, many
know, and I have showed it before, and to tell it more plainly* I am of
Alexandria, accepted in my Country, and exercised at Appian a co^n^ellou^ to
the Emperoures in (...) causes.
Rome in causes of Justice, touching the Emperoures, til it pleased them to
think ine worthy their service. He that will know the rest, may learn it of
the Books that I have written.

The Romans war with Mithridates King of Pontus: by Appian of Alexandria.
WHen the Romans had overcome Mithridates the King, after. xl^j. years war,
they made Bithinia, Cappadocia, and other nations, bordering upon the^,
inhabiting the sea called ^^xinu^, subject unto them. And in the same war
they won of Cilicia, those that were not yet of their obedience, and of
Syria, Phoenitia, and Coelosiria, and Palestina, C^^le is one of the pa^tes of
Syria, the which is hollovv, for so signifies the word.
and the midde land, to the flood Euphrates, not being under Mithridates, but
by the violence of that victory. And to some they put tributes by and by, and
to some afterward. Paphlagonia, and Galatia, and Phrygia, and Mysia, joining to
Phrygia, and after them Lydia, and Caria, and Ionia, and all the rest of Asia,
that is about Pergamo, and old Grecia, and Macedonia, which Mithridates had
gotten, they recovered soon again: and to many of them appointed tributes,
that never had paid any. For yt which I think they call this chiefly the
great war, and the victory of it also great, and the Captain of it that
was Pompey in their proper language they name great to this day: for the
number of the nations that they took or recovered, and the long time of forty
years, and the boldness and paynesulnesse of Mithridates, mighty (as
appeared) at all assayes. He had above four hundredth Ships of his own. He
had fifty thousand Horsemen, and two hundred and fifty thousand footmen,
engines, and munition accordingly. Kings and Princes were his confederates. The
Armenian, the S^ythian, and Pontus, and the fenne of M^otis, and from thence to
the streightes of Thracius He sent to the Roman (...), (...) now the st^
eightes of (...).
Captains that were at war together, and to stir Spain against them, he
made amity with the French to move against Italy. He filled the Sea with
Pirates from Cilicia, to the pillars of Hercules, which made, that no
traffic nor sailing could be from one City to another, and wrought a great
famine in every place. And generally, he left nothing vndene or vndeutied that
could be done, to stir up the greatest motion among all men, from the East
to the Weast. For either they made war, or sent aid, or robbed or vexed
their neighbors. This war was variable, and in the end brought the Romans
to greatest dominions, for by this, their rule stretched from the West, to the
flood Euphrates. It was not easy for me to divide it by several nations,
being done together, and one wrapped with another. Those that could be
separated, be told particularly. The Greeks think, that the Thracians did
serve at Troy under Rhesus, and that Rhesus was killed by Diomedes in the
night, the which matter, Rhesus King of Thracia. 10. Iliad.
Homere tells in his Verses, and that they fled to the month of Pontus,
which is most straight to sail into Thracia, and that they that wanted
Ships, did remain there, and took the land named Bebrycia in Asia the
less.
Bebrycia. They that had ships, went beyond Byzance, to that part of
Thracia called Bithinia, and did inhabit at the floude Bithia, and being
driven by famine, returned to Bebricia, and named Byzantium is now Constant
tinople.
it Bithinia in stead of Bebricia, of the flood at the whiche^ they dwelled,
and so the name not unlike in time to be changed, because there is not much
difference between Bebricia and Bithinia. So do some think. Other suppose
that Bythis the son of Jupiter Some call her Seta, that was fister to Rhesus.
and Thrace, did first reign here, and so the name was given to both the
lands. This I thought good to show first of Bithiania. Of the Kings that were
before the Romans, in number nine and forty in order, it is meet for me to
make some mention in these matters of the Romans, Prusias that was called the
hunter, married Prusias Cyrigus.
the daughter of Perseus King of Macedonie, and the Romans and Perseus making
war not long after, Prusias stood as neuter.

Perseus being overcome, he met with the Roman Captains, wearing a Roman
garmente called Toga, and having shoes after The Romans were called Tog^^,
and the Greeks (...)
the Italian manner, and his head shaven, with a cappe, after the which manner
they go which be made free by testamente, being an evil favored man to
behold, and a little short one. Meeting with them, he spoke in the Roman
tongue, I am a freemade man of the Romans, which they call Libertus. He
appearing a sight The behauioure of Prusias disguised. Libertus that of a
servant is made free.
to be laughed at, was sent to Rome, where being laughed at also, he had
pardon. Not long after, vexing Attalus the King of Asia that is about Pergamo,
he wasted his land in Asia. Which when the Senate of Rome heard, they sent
to Prusas, that he should not molest Attalus, a friend and confederate to the
Romans. And when he thought much to obey, the Ambassadors sharply commanded
him to obey the Senate, and to come with a thousand Horsemen to the confynes
to decide the matter, and willed Attalus to be there with as many.

He despising the small number that was with Attalus, and thynkyng he might
entrappe him, sent his Embassadoures before, as though he would follow with
his thousand The crafty a^ ^ of Prusias.
horse, but bringing all his army, went as to a battle. When Attalus and the
Ambassadors heard of it, they fled, every man where he could. He took
the carriage of the Romans, and destroyed the town of Nicephor^, and burned
the Ships that were there, and beseeged Attalus in Pergamo.

When the Romans heard of this, they sent other Embassadoures, who commanded
Prusias to restore Attalus his losses. Then Prusias was afraid, and obeyed,
and went his way. The pain that they put upon him, was this, that he
should presently give him twentye armed Ships, and in time, fifty talentes.
The Ships he gave out of hand, the talentes he Prusias is forced to
recompense Attalus.
paid in time. He was hated of his subjects for his cruelty, and his son
Nicomedes well beloved of the Bithinians. Wherefore Prusias suspecting him,
sent him to live at Rome. And understanding that he was well beloved there, he
wylled him to obtain Prusias practices to kill his son Nicomedes
of the Senate, a release of the money he ought to Attalus, and sent Mena to
deal with him, and commanded Mena that if he could get him discharged of
the money, he should spare Nicomedes, but if he could not, he should kill
him. He sent to this purpose certain great Ships, and two thousand
Souldyoures. Mena, because the penalty was not forgiven (for Attalus had
sent Andronicus to tell, that the pain was less than the spoil,) neither
durst hill the young man, whom he saw to be worthy to be loved and honored,
nor go again into Bythinia. The young man, knowing of his tarrying, came to
talk with him with his good will, and conspired against Prusias, and took to
their practice the Ambassador of Attalus, that he should persuade him to get
Nicomedes to the Kingdom of Bythinia. They met together in Bernice, a little
City of Epirus. In the night they went into a Ship, there they consulted
what was to be done, and were secret all night. When day was come, Nicomedes
came forth of the Ship, cladde Nicomedes shows himself as King.
with a Kings robe of purple, with a crown on his head. Andronicus meeting
with him, saluted him as King, and sent him forth with five hundredth
Souldioures, which he had ready. Mena dissembling, as though he had not seen
Nicomedes till then, ran to the two thousand, as though he had bin
discontented. Being come to the talk, he said:

You have two Kings, the one at home, the other going on. ^^en^ to the
Souldyoures.
You must needs foresee safety, and conjecture your well doing, as in this,
to establish you security, by well appoynting, which of the two you will have
reign. The one is old, the other is young. The Bithinians hate the old, but
they love the young: and the chief of the Romans love this young man: and
Andronicus being his defendoure, has promised Attalus friendship, having a
great Kingdom joining to Bithinia, and an old enemy of Prusias.

When he had said thus, and withal declared the cruelty of Prusias, and what
mischief he had done to all men, and the common hatred of the Bithinians
against him, and perceived that they abhored the wickedness of Prusias, he
led them straight to Nicomedes, and was the second after Andronicus that
called him King, and guarded him with two thousand. Attalus received the young
man gladly, and required Prusias to give the young man some Cities to dwell in,
and lands to find him. He answered, he would shortly give him all Attalus
Kingdom, for whose sake he had invaded Asia before. When he had said thus, he
sent to Rome to accuse Attalus and Nicomedes, and to call them into judgment:
but Attalus went with his army into Bithinia, to whom the Bithinians by
little and little revolted. Prusias distrusting all men, and hoping that the
Romans would deliver him from this danger, obtained five hundred Thracians of
Diegelies his father in law, and to these only he committed his body, fleeyng
into the Castle at Nicaea, the Praetor of Rome not bringing Prusias Nicaea was
first called (...) afterward Nicaea, (...) wife.
messengers to the Senate speedily, because he favored Attalus, but at last
being brought, and the Senate commanding him to choose Ambassadors that might
end the war, he chose three men, of the which one had his head stricken
with a stone, and Ambassadors to be laughed at.
had an evil favored scarre left: another had his feet festered with a sore:
the third was compted an ydiot. In so much as Cato jesting at this Embassage,
said, it had neither mind, feet, Cato.
nor head. The Ambassadors went into Bithinia, and commanded them to cease
war. Nicomedes and Attalus dissembling to obey the Senate, the Bithinians
being set on, said, they could not any longer bear the cruelty of Prusias,
now especially that they were known to be against him. The Ambassadors because
the Romans had not yet heard of this matter, departed, doing nothing.
Prusias despayring of the Romans, in whom he had most trust, no help coming
by them, he went to Nicomedia to get the Now Nich^^, and of sailors Comidia.
City, and to defend himself against his enemies, but they forsook him, and
shut the gates against him: and Nicomedes came with his army, and certain of
Nicomedes host being sent of him, killed Prusias, fleeing to the Temple of
Jupiter. Thus Nicomedes Prusias killed.
reigned in Bithinia for Prusias, and he in time ending his life, his son
Nicomedes that was called Philopater* succeeded, the Romans* giving him his
fathers kingdom, by decree of Senate. Thus The Romans made heirs of Labi^^a
by testamente.
went the state of Bithinia, and if we will learn all, the nephewe of this
another Nicomedes, lest the Romans his heir by testament.

Who ruled Cappadocia before the Macedonians, I can not well tell, whether they
were under a King of their own, or under Darius. It should seem that
Alexander left these nations tributarie Arisus a sayre town in the confines
of Pa^phligon^a and Cappadocia.
to the rulers, when he went against Darius: and so it seems that Amisus, a
City of the Athenian kind, did bring in the peoples rule, according to the
Countries manner. And it is said of Hieronimus, that he did not subdue all
these Cities, but by the Hieronimus was an Historievvriter of Rhodes.
coast of Pamphilia and Cilitia, turn another way against Darius. Perdiccas
that succeeded Alexander in Macedonia, did put to death Ariarathe, ruler of
Cappadocia, either for that he revolted, or would have made it for the
Macedonians, and appointed for these nations Eumenes of Cardia. When Eumenes
was destroyed, being judged an enemy to the Macedonians, Antipater that after
Perdiccas ruled the Countries that Alexander had gotten, sent Nicanor to rule
Cappadocia. And the Macedonians not long after being at civil debate,
Antigonus got Syria, and expuised Laomedonta. Mithridates being his familiar,
and of the blood royal of Persia. Antigonus dreamed that he did sow the
ground with gold, and that Mithridates did carry the gold to Pontus, when
Dream of Antigonus.
it was reaped, wherefore he took him, and would have killed him, but he
fled with sire Horse, and fenced a place in Cappadocia, many reuolting to him.

In this tumulte of Macedonie by little and little, he got Cappadocia, and
the Nations confynes to Pontus, and greatly enlarging his Realm, he left it
to his Children. They reigned one after another, till the sirth after the
first Mithridates, which made war with the Romans. Of this stock the
Kings of Cappadocia and Pontus conuning, I think it to be known who divided
the Kingdom, some reigning in Cappadocia, and some in Pontus.

This Mithridates was first a friend to the Romans, and sent Ships and some
little help against the Carthaginiens, that was called Euergetes, which
ouerranne Cappadocia as a stranger. (...) beneficial.
And Mithridates his some succeeded, who was named Dionisius and Eupater. The
Romans commanded him to give place in the Kingdom of Cappadocia and to
Ariobarzanes, that sought to them, and thought himself to be nygher to that
Kingdom, than Mithridates, or else because they suspected the Kingdom of
Mithridates growyng so great, and under the hand, would divide it into more
parts, and he suffered it, but against Nicomedes, that was of Nicomedes
Prusia his son, and by the Romans appointed to reign, as in his fathers
kingdom, he sent Socrates, brother to Nicomedes, that was called Chrestus,
with an army, and Socrates took the kingdom Chrestus, good or profitable.
of Bythinia to himself. At this time, Mithrias and Bagoas, expuising
Ariobarzanes whom the Romans had set in the kingdom of Cappadocia, put
Ariarathes into it. The Romans did restore both Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes
into their proper kingdoms, sendyng certain Ambassadors for that purpose,
whereof Manius Acilius was chief: and commanded Lucius Cassius that had a
little army in Pergamo in Asia, to help to it, and also Mithridates Eupator.
But he being offended with the Romans for Cappadocia, and by them being put
from Phrygia, as we have showed in the Greek matters, did not help. Cassius
and Manius with that army they had, and gatheryng a greater of the Galatians
and Phrygians, sent Nicomedes into Bithynia, and Ariobarzanes into Cappadocia,
and persuaded them both, being neighbors to Mithridates, to molest his
country, and provoke him to war, and the Romans would be their mayntayners
in it.

But both they alyke affected, durst not provoke Mithridates fearyng his
mighty power. But the Ambassadors ^rgyng them, Nicomedes, that had promised to
give the Ambassadors much money for his restitution, and to the Soldiers,
which yet he ought, and being in debte further to the Romans for money lent
him for his other matters, unwillingly he invaded Mithridates land, spoiled
as far as the City Amastris, none Amastris, the ch^ese c^^^e so ca^^ed of a
woman of Persia, before being named C^^n^^^.
resistyng him or meetyng with him. For albeit Mithridates had his army ready,
yet he refrayned, to have the more and iuster cause of war.

When Nicomedes was returned home with a great pray, Mithridates sent Pelopida
to the Roman Capitaynes and Ambassadors, not ignorant that they were his
enemies and causes of this invasion, yet he dissembled, and sought more
manifest causes of The Ambassador of Mithridates to the Romans.
the war to come. Pelopida told them that Phrygia was taken from them, and
Cappadocia, that had always been his ancestors and left him of his father:
Phrygia was given him of your general, as a reward for the victory gotten of
Aristonico, and nevertheless redeemed of the same general with a great sum
of money.

Now you see (said he) that Nicomedes shuts the mouth of Pontus, and
spoyleth his land as far as Amastris, and carried away so great a booty as
your self well know. My King, having power and will, sufficient to revenge*
does suffer that you may be witnesses of sight of his injuries. The which
because you know and see, Mithridates desires you, friends and confederates,
as a friend and confederate, for so do the covenants term us, that you
would help us against Nicomedes that does us wrong, or forbid him to do us
any more. Thus said Pelopida.

Nicomedes Ambassadors making answer to the contrary, Emba^^^dors of
Nicomedes.
said, that Mithridates had long laid traynes for Nicomedes, and sent Socrates
with an army for that kingdom, which would have bin quiet, and justly suffered
his elder brother to reign. Thus did Mithridates against Nicomedes, whom you
(O Romans) appointed King of Bithinia. Whereby it is manifest, that these
things be done not more against us, then against you. By the like authority,
it being commanded to the Kings of Asia, that (...).
they should not meddle with Europe, he has taken much of Cherronesus, and
these be his a^es against you, of despighte, disdeyne, and disobedience. His
great preparation and so great furniture, as to a great and notable war, as
well of his own army, as of consederates of ^^racia and Scythia, and other
nigh nations. He has married with the King of Armenia. He has sent into
Egypt and Syria, to allure those Kings. He has three hundredth armed Ships,
and is making more. He has sent for masters and gouernoures of Ships into
Phen^^ia and Egypt. All this is not against Nicomedes, but against you (O
R^manes) done by Mithridates, disderning ever since you have commanded him to
leave Phrygia, as no right possession, which by decepte he bought for money of
one of your Generals. Being grieved also that Cappadocia is given by you to
Ari^barzanes, fearing your increase, and taking occasion against you by us, and
if (...), to deceive you. It is wisdom not to tarry, till he conf(...) make
war against you, but rather to look to his acts than to his words, nor to
be deceived with his counterfeit na^^ of friendship, and to forsake your true
and firm friends in deed, neither to see your judgment of our Kingdom to
be despised of him that is an enemy both to us and you. This said Nicomedes
Embassadoures.

Pelopidas came again to the Romans audience, once more accusing Nicomedes of
the things that were done of old, and prayed the Romans to be Judge. These
things that now be done (said he) he has done in your sight. Mithridates
Kingdom he has diminished, the Sea he has shut, spoils he has carried
away. This needs no debating or consultation, but we once again pray you,
either to correct that is done, or to help Mithridates do that, that has
suffered the wrong, or lastly (O Romans) not to forbid him to revenge
himself, but let them two try it out. This answered Pelopidas.

It was certain that the Romans favored Nicomedes, and for a fashion heard
their controversies: but somewhat they were moved at the words of Pelopidas.
And because Mithridates was yet in league with the Romans, and stood in doubt
what to answer presently, and having with wisdom considered the matter,
they answered thus. Neither will we have Mithridates The Romans aunsvvere.
suffer any thing wrongfully of Nicomedes, neither suffer war to be made upon
Nicomedes, for we think it not good for the Romans, that Nicomedes should be
hurt. When they had thus said, and Pelopidas would have made answer to
their sentence so doubtful, they went from the seat. When Mithridates saw
that he was manifestly injured of the Romans, he sent his son Ariarathes
with a great army, to reign in Cappadocia, and he expelled Ariobarzanes, and
had the kingdom. Pelopidas coming again to the Roman officers, said thus:

What Mithridates has borne at your hands (O Romans) being spoiled of Phrygia
and Cappadocia, you have heard. What hurt Nicomedes has done him, you see, and
let it pass, we appealing to your amity and leage. And as though we were the
accusers, and not accused, you answer, that you think it not profitable for
the Roman state, that Nicomedes should be hurt, as though he were injured.
You (O Romans) are the cause that things be done in Cappadocia, against the
state of Rome. For thorough your contempt of us, and your subtle aunsweres,
Mithridates has done this, and now he sends Embassadoures against you to
your Senate, to whom he sends you word to answer: and that you attempt
nor begin any thing to kindle this war, without the common consent of the
Romans. And that Mithridates has in his fathers kingdom containing in
length twenty thousand furlongs, gotten many nations about him, Colchos a
warlike nation, Eight of these furlongs makes a mile.
and the Greeks that dwell at Pontus, and the Barbarians that be next them. He
has friends ready to do his commandment, Scythians, Taurians, Basternians,
and Sarmatians, and all that be about Tanais, and Hister, and the fenne of
Maeotis* T^rbanes of Armenia Maeotis the great fenne in Scyth^^.
is his son in law, and Arsaces the Parthian his friend. He has a navy of
Ships, whereof some be ready, and some to be made* and a furniture
conueniente in all points. The Bithinians did not now say untruly to you,
of the Kings of Egypt and Syria, who be like, not only to take our part, if
war be made, but also Asia, that you have lately got. Grecia and Libya,
and many nations of Italy, that can not bear your ambition, do make an
endless war with you, which because you cannot cease, you set Nicomedes
and Ariobarzanes upon Mithridates by turn. You say you are friends and
confederates, and you answer so, but you use him as an enemy. Now then go
to, if of things past you repent ye, either forbidd^ Nicomedes to molest your
friends, and if you do this, I promise you that Mithridates shall aid you
against the Italians, or break that feigned friendship* or let us go to be
judged at Rome. This said Pelopida. And because it seemed too presumptuous*
they commanded that Mithridates should not deal with Nicomedes, nor
Cappadocia, and that they would set Ariobarzanes in his kingdom again, and
that Pelopidas should depart from their Camp, and no more return as
Embassadoure, except the King would stand to this order. Thus they answered*
and sent him away with kepers* that he should corrupt none as he went. The
Ambassadors make war without the consent of the Senate.


When this was said, not tarrying the Senates will for the war, or the
peoples consent, they gathered an army of Bithinia, and Cappadocia, and
Paphlagonia, and Galatia in Asia. Their own army which Lucius Cassius had in
Asia was ready, and all their confederates gathered together, which they
divided into The Romans force.
diverse Camps. Cassius in the midst of Bithinia and Galatia, Manius that way
that by Bithinia was against Mithridates. Appius with another army at the
hills of Cappadocia, hau^^g horse and footmen, to the number of forty
thousand. They had a navy of Ships, which Minutius Rufus, and Caius
Popilius governed, keeping the mouth of Pontus. Nicomedes came to them with
fifty thousand footmen, and six thousand horsemen. So great an army had
they ready. Mithridates had of his own two hundredth and fifty thousand
footmen, forty thousand horsemen, Mithridates forces.
three hundred armed Ships, and a hundredth Gallyes, with munition
accordingly. His chief Captains were Neoptolemus, and Archelaus breethren,
the greatest part he led himself. His son Arcadias brought the aid of
ten thousand horse out of Armenia the less. Do^^laus led the^ that were in
order of the main footmen, and Craterus brought a hundred and thirty
Chariots. So great provision was on both sides, when the Romans and
Mithridates began the war, the CLXX. Olimpiade. In the large field at the
flood Ammeum* did Mithridates and Nicomedes (...) a flood.
Captains see one another, and prepared for the fight. Nicomedes ^et al in
order, Neoptolemus and Archelaus the light harnesed only, and y^ horsemen y^
Arcathias brought, and some Chariots. The foteme^ were yet coming They sent a
few to take a stonyhil y^ was in y^ plain, y^ they should not be compassed of
the Bithinians which were the greater number. When they saw them beaten from
the hill, Neoptolemus fearing to be enclosed, came to the rescue with speed,
calling with him Arcathia* Nicomedes seeing that, set upon them, and there was
a great fight and slaughter. But Nicomedes The fight.
fiercely following, Mithridates men fled, till Archelaus coming on the
right side, did repulse the chacers. Then they coming all upon him, he gave
place a little, that Neoptolemus and his might return from the flight. And
when he saw that to be done in deed, he set the armed Chariots upon the
Bithinians, which with their violence, did tear some of the^ into two parts,
and some into more. This act did much* discourage Nicomedes host, when they
(...)en ^ut asunder yet breathing, or torn in many pieces, or violently
carried of the Chariots. The unpleasantness of the sight, rather than loss
by the fight, disordered their battle for fear. Upon them being thus broken,
came Archelaus on the front, and Neoptolemus and Arcathias returning from the
flight upon the back. They resisting on both sides, defended themselves a good
while, but after many of them were slain, Nicomedes fled with the rest into
Paphlagonia, the fotemen of Mithridates, Nicomedes flees
not being at the fight. The Camp, and the money, and many prisoners were
taken, all the which, Mithridates using gently, Mithridates uses courtesy.
gave them conduct money, and sent them home, making a show to his enemies of
humanity. This first feate of the great war with Mithridates, affrayd the
Roman Captains, as begun rashly, without the common consent. For a few
did overcome many, without any help of the place, or fortune of the fight, but
by the virtue of the Captains, and valiantness of the Souldyoures. Nicomedes
Camped by Manius. Mathridates went to the hill Scoroba, that is, the banks of
Cappadocia and Pontus. His Scoraba.
scoutes being a hundredth horsemen of the Sauromatanes, meetyng with eyghte
hundredth Horse of Nicomedes, took diverse of them, whom Mithridates again
suffered to go to their Country An other courtesy of Mithridates.
with money for the way. Manius going back, Neoptolemus and Nemanes an
Armenian meetyng with him, about the town Pachius, constreyned him to fight,
Nicomedes being gone to Cassius, Pachius a town at Proponsid.
having four thousand horsemen, and ten times so many footmen, of whom they
killed ten thousand, and took three hundred prisoners, whom Mithridates
being brought to him, did let go, to win the hearts of his enemies. Manius
camp was taken, A third courtesy of Mithridates. The Romans discontented.
Sangaris is otherwise called Corallus. Lentocephale.
he fled to the flood Sangaris, and passed over by night, and saved himself
at Pergamo. Cassius and Nicomedes, and the Roman legates, set their Camp at
Leontocephale, which is a very strong town in the further part of Phrigia, and
trained the people that they had of new husbandmen or artificers, and joined
more to them of the Phrigians. And when both these people were unwilling, they
durst not meddle with men expert in battle, therefore they licenced the^, and
departed, Cassius into Apamed with his army, Nicomedes into Pergamo, and Manius
to the Rhodes. They that kept the mouth of Pontus, hearing of this, forsook
it, and the keys and ships that Nicomedes had in Pontus, were delivered to
Mithridates. Thus he at one brunt, getting all Nicomedes land, went to it,
Mithridates lies in an harborough, where great Alexander once did lie.
and set order in the Cities. Going into Phrigia, and coming to an Inn where
Alexander rested, he took it for a lucky toke^, that Mithridates might lie
where Alexander had lodged. And he got the rest of Phrigia, and Misia, and
Asia, that the Romans had lately won. And sending to the places there
about, he got Lycia and Pamphilia, and so as far as Ionia, and the
Laodiceans that inhabit about the flood Lycus, and resisted, for Q. Oppius a
Roman Captain Lycus. Q. Oppius.
having Horsemen and some footmen hired, got into the City and kept it. He
sent his Trumpet to the walls, commanding him to say, that King Mithridates
did give surety to the Laodiceans, if they would bring Oppius to him. When
they heard this Proclamation, Laodiceans betray Oppius.
they let the hired Soldiers go freely, and brought Oppius to Mithridates,
with his mace-berers in scorn: and Mithridates Oppius led prisoner.
did no hurt to him, but led him lose about with him, showing he had a
Roman General in Captivity. Not long after, Manius is despighted of
Mithridates, and cruelly handled.
he took Manius Acilius, that was best of ye Ambassadors, and chief cause of
this war, and led him about, being set upon an Ass, and telling them that
looked upon him, that he was Manius, till he came to Pergamo, where he put molte^
gold in his mouth, reproving the Romans for taking of gifts. Appoynting
rulers in the country, he came to Magnesia, Ephesus, and Mitelena, every one
receiving him without resistance, and the Ephesians, throwing away the Images
of the Romans that were there, for the which they were punished afterward.
Going from Ionia, he took Stratonicaea, and punished it in money, and set a
garrison in the City, and seeing Mithridates takes a wife at Stratonicaea.
Monime is made a Queen.
a fair maid, he made her one of his wives, and if any man be desirous to
know her name, it was Monime, ye daughter of Philopaenos. The Magnesians,
Paphlagonia^s, and Lycians, yet resisting, he overcame by his Captains. And
thus did Mithridates.

The Romans hearing of this first force, and invasion of Asia, determined
war against him, although they were troubled with civil strife incessantly
in the City, and Italy was occupied with great war at home almost in every
place. The Consuls taking their charge, Asia fell to Cornelius Sylla, and the
war (...) appointed to the room.
against Mithridates. And where they had no store of money, they enacted to
sell the things, that Numa Pompilius the king had Want of treasure in Rome.
appointed for the Sacrifices of y^ Gods. So great want was there then, and so
great ambition. Some of these things were sold, whereof was raised.ix. thousand
pound weight of gold, and gave no more to so great a war. But Sylla was
long kept with sedition, as we have showed in the civil dissentions. In this
mean time, Mithridates made many ships against the Rhodians Mithridates
decree of murder.
and wrote secretly to all Princes and rulers of Cities, that they should at
the thirty day, being observed, kill all Romans and Italians, men, women and
children that were free, and when they had killed them, to cast them out
unburied, and to divide half their goods to the king Mithridates, and half
to themselves. He appointed a pain to them that buried any or hid them, and
a reward to them that bewrayed or killed them that were hid. To servants,
liberty, to kill their Masters: to debtours, half their debte, to kill their
creditours. These Mithridates sent secretly to all at once. The day being
come, diverse calamities were seen in Asia, whereof these were some.

The Ephesians dragged them that were fled into the Temple of Diana, and
embraced the images, and killed them. The Pergamenians, shot them to death
that were fled into the temple of Aesculapius, and would not be pulled from
the images. Adramitte, a city of the coaste of Mysia. Cruelty in Asia, against
the Romans. C^^^us, now Ro^e, a town of Caria.
The Adramiteans killed them that swamme into the Sea, and drowned their
children. The Cauneans being made tributarie to the Rhodians in the war of
Antiochus, and restored by the Romans a little before, pulled the Italians out
of their holy common place, whether they were fled, and first killed the
children before the mothers faces, then the mothers, and last the fathers. The
Trallians, to keep themself from the infamy of murderers, hired Theophilus of
Paphlagonia a cruel man, to do this act. And Theophilus killed them being
shut in the temple of peace, and cut of the hands of some, that embraced the
images there. The Italians and the Romans suffered these calamities in Asia,
men, women, children, free and bond that were of the Italian generation.
Wherein it was evident that Asia did not this so much for fear of Mithridates,
The Romans hated.
as for hate of the Romans. But they suffered double punishment, Mithridates
shortly after using them cruelly contrary to his faith, and after him,
Cornelius Sylla.

Mithridates sailed to Coo, the Coanes receiving him willingly: Co* Island now
Lo^go.
and he took the son of Alexander that reigned in Aegipt, lest in Co with
much money of his grandmother Cleopatra, and brought him up princely. And of
Cleopatras treasure, he sent much riches, works, stones, women's array, and
plenty of money into Pontus. In this time the Rhodians fortified their walls
and their ports, and Of C^ri^ and of ^yria.
prepared al defense, some Telmisians and Lycians being con^odered with the^.
All the Italians yt fled out of Asia, came to the Rhodes, among whom was L.
Cassius, the governor of Asia. Mithridates coming thither, they pulled down
their suburbs, that ye enemy should take no profit by the^, and prepared for
the fight by sea, some at the front and some at the sides. Mithridates coming
with his galies, commanded his men to extend themselves into wings a flote,
The war of Muthridates against the* Rhodes.
that by their swifte rowyng they might enclose their enemies which were
fewer. The Rhodians being afraid of co^passing, gave place a little, then turned
and fled to their port, and shutting it with bars, they resisted
Mithridates from the walls. He encamping at the City, and drawing nighe the
port, and attemptyng the same, tarried for footmen to be brought out of Asia.
And there was short and continual skirmishing with them at the walls, in the
which the Rhodia^s having the better, were a little encouraged; and had their
ships at hand to encounter the enemy when occasion should serve. A great
ship of the kings passed under sail, the Rhodians sent a little galie against
it, and either side helping other diligently, a great fight began on the sea,
Mithridates being superior in anger of mind, and multitude of ships, the
Rhodians with art setting upon his navy, and disordering the^ so, as they took
one galie with the men, and much munition and spoil, and brought her into the
haven: and being ignorant yt a great Galie of theirs was taken of the enemy,
they sent.vj. of their swif^est to recover her, and Damagoras their admiral
went with the^. Mithridates sent.xxv. after him, who gave place till it was
night. Waxing dark, the kings ships returned, and he set upon them and
took two, and chased other two into Lycia, and returned by night. This was
the end of the fight between Mithridates and the Rhodians, done against all
hope to the Rhodians, for their fewness, and to Mithridates for his multitude.
In the fight the king sailing about to encourage his men, a ship of Chia, in
his navy, crushed the kings ship in the confusion, the which the King not
dissembling, The Kings Ship crushed by chance.
punished both the Captain and the Master, which offended all the Xians.

At this time, the kings footeme^ being brought in great ships, and a Pery
risyng upon them, they were driven to Rhodes, and the Rhodians quickly coming
upon them, being yet troubled with the strome, they took some, they crushed
some, and some they burned, and took four hundred prisoners. Mithridates
preparyng Sambuca, was an engine used at the siege of Cities, because the
ropes were to stretched in it as the strings in the instrument of Music that
is so called.
for to fight by sea again, and to force the town, he made a certain engine
called Sambuca carried in two ships. The fugitives told him, there was a side
of an hill that might be scaled, where the Temple of Jupiter Tabyrius was, with
a weak wall. He put his army in the ships by night, to other he gave scaling
ladders: He commanded both to go with silence, till a fire was made from the
Temple, and then with a cry as loud as could be made, some to assault the
town, and some to force the Port, and they with silence drew nighe. The
watch of the Rhodians knowing this, made a fire, and the army of Mithridates,
thinking this had bin the fire at the Temple, from deep silence they cried all
together, as well the Scalers, as the Mariners. The The Rhodians put the kings
men away.
Rhodians cried as fast chearefully, and came together to y^ wall, so as the
Kings men did nothing that night, and in the day, were put back, although
the Sambuke, afraid the Rhodians much, casting out once, and many darts,
arrows and shot, being Isis is a Goddess in Aegipt.
brought against the Temple of Isis, and the Soldiers with many scalyng
ladders, from their ships, came forth as they would have given an asiaulte.
The Rhodians defended themselves manfully, till the engine brake for weight,
and a vision of Isis was thought to cast a great fire upon it. Mithridates
despairing of this enterprise, sailed from the Rhodes.

Being at Patara at siege, he cut down the holy wood of Latone Patara, a
Cittye of Lycia.
to make engines, till he was feared with a vision: then he left the wood.
Leaving Pelopida to continue the war in Lycia, he sent Archilous into
Grecia, to win it by force or friendship so much as was possible, and
committing many things to his Captains, he trained and furnished his army, and
passed the time with his woman of Stratonicede: He sat in judgment of them
that were thought to watch him, or make any mutiny, or help the Romans. And
whiles he was thus occupied, these things were done in Grecia. Archelous
sailing with a great navy well victualled, he took Delos that was revolted
from Athens and other places, by violence and power, killing twenty thousand
men, of the which the most were Italians, the places he appointed to the
Athenians, by the which, and by other mean they extolling Mithridates, and
greatly praising him, he brought them and other to his friendship. He sent the
holy money of Delos to them Delos an I Will in the Aegian sea. Aristion by
occasion of money plaieth the tyra^.
by Aristion a man of Athens, and two thousand with him for y^ guard of the
money, the which Aristion using to his purpose, played the Tiranne in his
country, and some of the Athenians he killed out of hand, as favorers of the
Romans, and some he sent to Mithridates: yet was he a scholar of Epicurus
learning. And not he alone in Athens, nor Critias that was before him, and they
being professors of Philosophy with Critias, were tyrannes, but in Italy they
of Pythagoras school, and in the other Grecia, they that were called the
seven Wise men, when they had rule, they Philosophers Tirannes.
took upon them and used tyranny more cruellye, than y^ unlearned tyrannes.
Therefore there is a doubt and suspicion of other Philosophers, whether for
virtue, or for poverty, or for lack of experience, they comforted themselves
with Philosophy: Of the which now, many being private and poor, and covering
need by sapie^ce, they speak bitterly against rich men and Princes, not for
contempt of riches, and rule in their opinion, but rather for envy being carried
there unto. But they that be slaundered of them, do more wisely contempne
them. This one may think to be spoken of Aristion the Philosopher, as by
occasion of matter moved by him. The Acheans, and Lacedaemonians did relent to
Archelous, Thespia a free Town in Boeotia. Magnesia in Ionia Demetriada in
Thessalie.
and all Boeotia, except Thespia, whom he beseeged.

At this time Metrophanes being sent of Mithridates with another army, did
make war upon Eubea and Dimetriades, and Magnetia, that resisted
Mithridates. And Brittius coming from Macedonia with a small navy did fight
with him by Sea, and sinking one great Ship and a foyste, he killed all that
were in them. Metrophanus beholding it, he being afraid, fled, and having a
good wind, Brittius could not overtake him, but took Scyathus that was a
receypt for the Barbarian rouers, he hanged up the Scyethu^ ^^ ^^e.
slaves, and cut off the hands of the free men. Then turning to Boeotia, a
thousand other Horsemen and footmen coming out of Macedonia, at Cherona he
fought three days with Aristion and (...).
Archelous, with equal and indifferent fortune on both sides: but when the
Lacedaemonians and Acheans were come in aid to Aristion, and Archelous,
Brittius thinking himself too weak to match Pire^, now Portolione, The port
of Athens, able to hold four hundred Ships.
with them all, went to Pire^, till Archelous came and kept it.

Sylla being chosen general for the war against Mithridates, then took
his journey out of Italy with five legions, and some other bands and
companyes, and arrived in Grecia, gatheryng money and mon and victuals from
Aetolia and Thessalia. When he thought he was sufficient, he went into
Attica against Archelous, and as he came, all Boeetia saving a few revolted to
him, and so did the great City of Thebes, very lightly taking Thebes in
Boeotia.
Mithridates part against the Romans, and now more swiftely turning from
Archelous, to Sylla, before they came to trial. He went to Attica, and sending
one part of his army against the City to beseege Aristion, he went to
Pireo, where Archelous was within the walls, the heygth whereof, was forty
cubits, being the work of Pericles, made of great stone Pireus was made of
p^nacles, vvalled two miles of length. Megara is in Achaia. Ele^sina in Attica.
and square, when the Athenians made war with the Pelopenesians: and because
he put all the victory in Pireo, he made it the more strong. Sylla being come
to the wall, gave the assault forthwith, where much hurt being done on both
sides, the Cappadocians manfully defendyng, being weery, he went to Eleusina,
and Megara, and made engines against Pireo, by mountes and rampires.
Artificers, and stuff, iron, and slings, and such other, were brought him
from Thebes. He cut down the wodde of Academia, and made great engines, and
took away Academia was a shadovvie place, a mile from Athens.
the long sides, to cast stones, timber, and earth upon the rampire.

There were two slaves of Athens in Pireo, favoring the Romans, Fidelity of
slaves to the Romans.
or foreseeyng their safety if any thing should hap: they wrote in pellets
of lead ever what should be done, and threw them to the Romans with their
slings.

This being often done, and come to knowledge, Sylla having regard to the
matter, found it thus written, To morrow, the footmen shall come upon the
face of your laborers, and the Horsemen shall set upon the sides of the
Romans. Therefore he laid an ambush ready, and when the enemy had thought to
have come ou y^ suddayne, he more suddaynelye did set upon them, killed many
of them, and drove the other into the Sea. And this was the end of this
attempt.

Now many great towers being set upon the mount, Archelous did make the
like on the other side, furnished with weapons. He sent for more power out of
Chalcidonia, and other Islands, and armed his mariners, as he that would
hazard all, Archelous had a greater army than Sylla, and now it was much
bigger. At midnighte he issued with lyghtes, and burned one of the great
engines, with all that belonged to it, Sylla in ten days made another, and
set it where the other was, and Archelous erected a Tower against them on the
wall. Another army being come unto him from Mithridates, which Dimoxetes
led, he brought them all forth to the fight, with whom he mixed his shot,
and stood under the wall, that the warders might throw upon the enemies.
Other stood at the gates with fire, lokyng for the token to sallie forth. The
fight was a long time equal, and now one and then another gave place. The
Barbarians began to flee, till Archelous coming upon them, made them turn
again, which greatly afraid the Romans, so that they fled from them,
but Murienas met them Romans flee and return again. The reproved sort,
were noted o^ some covvardlinesse, and called v^t^pera^i.
and returned them, and an other band was come from Foragyne with them, they
that were reproved, which seeing the fight so hot, gave a courageous onset
upon Mithridates men, and killed two thousand of them, and drove the other
into the walls. Archelous would have turned them back again, and in the
fight tarrying long because of his earnestness, he was shut out, and taken
in by a rope. Sylla released them of rebuke that were noted, because they had
fought valiauntlye, and rewarded the Souldioures with gifts accordingly.

Winter being come, he placed his army in Eleusine, and Eleusine.
made a ditche from the high places to the Sea, that the ennimies horsemen
should not easilye break upon them. The which he working every day,
there were diverse skirmishes sometime about the ditche, sometime at the
walls, the ennimyes coming and vsyng stones, darts and pellets* Sylla
wanting Ships, sent to the Rhodes, and where the Rhodes could not pass,
because Mithridates held the Sea, he commanded Lucullus diligence
Lucullus a Noble manne of Rome, and General of this war after Sylla, to go
priuilye into Alexandria and Syria, and to gather an army of the Kings and
Cities, and to send it to the Rhodians. He not fearing the Sea besette with
Ships, took a light vessel, and changing Ship after Ship, to be
unknown, he came to Alexandria.

The bewrayers at Pireo, wrote again in the pellets, that the night following
Archelous would send to Athens being in want, corn upon soldiors backs.
Sylla laying in wait, took the corn and carriers.

The same day Minutius did hurt Neoptolemus an other Chalcide now
Negropon^ey, chief cuttie of E^^boe^.
Captain at Calcide, and killed a thousand five hundred, and took more
prisoners.

Not long after in Pireo in ye night, y^ watch being asleep, the Romans
brought their seals from ye next mounts, and got the wall, and killed the watch
yt was next: wherefore some of ye Barbaria^s leapt down, forsaking the wall, as
though al had been taken: other turning to force, killed ye leader of the^ that
scaled, and flung down the other headlong: other getting out of the gates,
had near hand burned one of the Romans Towers, had not Scylla come with
the army, and fought with them all that night, and the day after, and with
great labor saved it. Archelous made an other tower at the wall against the
Romans, that they might fight together upon the towers, which they did so
often and so furiously, as it was hard, till Scylla* did cast twentye great
pellets out of his sling, and killed many, and so beat Arthelous tower, as it
was unprofitable, and Archelous was feign to lie behind the wall for fear. And
they in the City being more and more pressed with hunger, the slaves signified
again in the pellets, that victual should be sent that night into the
City. Archelous suspecting some treason in bewraying the carrying of the
victuals* sent the victual, and set some at the gates with fire, to run
upon the Romans if Sylla would force the victual: and both happened, for
Sylla took them that carried the corn, and Archelous burned certain of the
engines.

At this time Arcathias Mithridates son invaded Macedonia A^athias dies at
Tid^o.
with an other army, and easily overcame the few Romans that were left
there, and subdued all Macedonia, and appointed rulers, then he marched against
Sylla, and falling yet sick at Tid^o, died. At Athens the city being in great
danger of famine, Sylla made many forts about it, that none should flee, but
remaining there, be the more vexed for the multitude, and erecting the mount at
Pir^o very high, he planted his pieces upon it. Achilous digging under the
mount, and taking away the earth long before it was known, they made the mount
to sincke, which being soon perceived, the Romans took away the engines, and
filled up the earth again* and they using the like way in undermining the
wall, they met together, and fought with their short wepons A fight in the
night.
as much as might be in such a darkness. Whiles this was a doing, Sylla went
against the wall with many engines, till part of it fell, and made way to burn
the next tower, and carried many lights to cast upon it, and commanded the
boldest men to go to the assault. Much being done on both sides the tower was
burned, and Sylla had cast down a part of the wall, to the which he set a
guard by and by. The foundations of the wall being cast down which was bound
with wood* and being full of sulphur, pitche and flare, al was sone burned,
one p^^^e fell after an other, and overthrew them yt stood upon it. This tumult
being soden and great, troubled all the warders, as though that had fallen also
whereupon they were. Wherefore turning euerywhere hastily, being doubtful in
mind for fear, they resisted their enemies faintly. And Sylla came upon the^
still being thus affected, and cheered his The assault of (...).
own me^, ever putting fresh to them that were weary, and he went to the
assault, giving the^ courage by voice and person, and threatening the^ that were
unwilling, y^ in this short labor they might make an end of all Archelous
likewise came forth with fresh men for them yt were afraid, exhorting and
stirring all, as by ye only pain to work their weal. The great courage and
boldness being again on either side, great slaughter on both sides was equal
and alike, till Sylla coming forth and very weary, blewe the retreat, and
praised the soldiers virtue. Archelous by and by in the night repaired the
breaches, making up y^ was broken, against the which Sylla brought his whole
army, thinking he might easily beat down y^ which was new made and soft. But
being t^r^d again in that straight place, and beaten both at the face and the
side, as in slippery places, left of the getting of Pireus by assault, and
intended to win it by famine, and to continue the siege. And when he
understood that they in the city, were in greater want* and had spent all
their beasts, and sodde their skins and hides, and used the broth for (...)
gotten by (...).
meat, and that some did eat dead flesh, he commanded his army to compass
the city, that not one should escape: and when this was done, he went straight
to the assault, and won^^ the wall. And the weak men being fled, he entered
the City. And again great slaughter and murder was in Athens, for they:
could not flee for S(...) A(...) (...)y.
weakness, there was no p^ti^, neither of children nor women, Sylla
commanding to kill every man that they met, for anger, that so soon,
without cause, they had revolted to the Barbarian^^ and (...) was the (...)
the (...), in the which they sang and daunced, and ^^hersed their verses, and
went up to it, as to a used Theater.
resisted him so obstinatly. An so much as many hearing the proclamation, did
cast themselves* willingly to be killed. A few went no great pace into the
castle, and among them Aristio* the place of pastime being first burned that
Sylla should make no matter of it, for to force the fort. He would not suffer
y^ cirie to be burned, but gave the spoil to the soldiers. They found man's
flesh ready Man's flesh dressed for sustenance. Liberty given to the
posterity of the Athenians not to themselves.
dressed for sustenance in many houses. The next day Sylla sold the servants to
the freemen, that escaped from the murder by night* which were very few. He
said he gave liberty, and that liberty their posterity should have, and also
in free elections, which he forbad to the^ that were alive. Thus was the city
of Athens filled full of misery. Sylla besieged the castle* the which be easly
tookes Aristion and they yt were fled in with him, being ouercom with hunger
and thirst. Of the which, Sylla put to death Aristion, and the^ that Aristion
put to death.
served him, and such as had borne any office, or done* anything contrary to
the Romans order, since the taking of (...). The other he pardoned, and
appointed laws to al* the same* almost that were given them before of the
Romans. He took out of the (...)* pound weight of gold, and of siluer^^oq.
This was done at the castle a little after. Sylla immediately after the city was
take, not belaying to take Pireo by stege, he braught engines and munition* and
many men y^ should undermine the wall with their instruments and beat down
many of them that kept the wall by shooting and darting upon them* and
overthrew the bowing part of the wall, which was moist and weak being new
ma^e. Which Archelous* thinking before, made many y^ like within* that Sylla
might ever have somewhat to do, finding a new one like y^ other. But he using
continual assault with incessable violence, going among them* ^ exhorting the^ to
y^ matter, as a thing of great importance and praise* in y^ which all the hope
that they had done, did lie. They of themselves being ready enough, for y^ glory
of so great a feat as to win y^ wall, went to it so fearcely, y^ Archelous being
astonished at their vehement motion beyond reason, left* the wall unto the^,
and ran to the strongest part of Pireo, that was compassed with the sea, the
which Sylla for lack of ships could not attempt. From Thermopyle ^is the
great hill that divides Grecia, and be the straight of it with ho^e waters.
thence Archelous sailed into Thessalia by Boeotia, and gathered at Thermopyle
the rest of all his own army, and that was brought of Syndromichate. He
called also those that came into Macedonia with Archatias the Kings son a
fresh band and full, beside them that Mithridates continually sent, for he
never left sendyng: and this was done with great vehemency.

Sylla burned Pireo, which was greater labor to him than Pireo burned.
the City not sparing, na^y, munition, nor other preparation and then he went
against Archelous into Boeot^a. Being nigh together, Pho^is a little region of
Grecia.
they went from Thermopyle to Phocida, they being Thracians, and Scythians of
Pontus, and Cappadotians, Bithynians, Galatians, and Phrygians and al other
that favored Mithridates, all the which were Cxx* M* every one had their chief
captains, and Archelous was the general over all. Sylla had Italians,
Greeks, and those Macedonians that were revolted from Archelous, and some
other of the borderers, not the third part of the enemies number. Being
encamped together, Archelous* setting his men in order, always provoking to
the battle, Sylla delayed, considering the places and multitude of the
ennimies, and followed Archelous that went into Calcide, expecting time and
place, when he saw Cherona.
him vnquered at Cherin^^ in hilly places, from the which they that were
overcome could not flee. He being in a plain very nigh, ^^t his men ready, to
provoke Archelous to fight against his will, the plain being for him commodious
to march forth, or to retire at his pleasure, whereas Archelous was baset with
she hills, so as he could not use his men as he would, nor altogether place
them for the inequality of the ground* And if they should turn, the hard
place would hinder their flight. He waying the matter Sylla takes the
advantage* of the place.
with th^se difficulties, gave she onset, knowing that that great multitude
would little profit Archelous, who did not think the Romans would have fought,
therefore kept his camp neglygently. When the battle was begone, then he felt
the hardenesse of the place, and perceived it to late, and sent his horsemen
to keep him of, but they returning, and being oriuen to the hills, he sent out
l^. armed Chariots, to see if he could, by their violence, break and cut the
maine battle of the Romans, the which they The armed* chariots defeated.
suffered to pass the front to the end, dividing themselves where they were
overthrown of the shot, they being unwieldy to turn again. And though
Archelous might thus have kept his camp, being soon at the hills for their
defense, yet he set the whole multitude in order, and came upon Sylla on the
sodeyne in these straight places, because now he was at hand. First he brought
forth the horsemen with great violence, and cut asunder the Romans battle,
and easilye compassed both, for their small number.

They fighting very valia^tly, kept themselves in a ring. They were in greatest
danger that fought under Galba and ^^ortensius, against whom Archelous fought
himself, and the Barbarians in his sight, showed great manhood, till Sylla
came thither with his horsemen. Archelous thinkyng Sylla was he that came, by
the show of the Ensigns, and the raising of so much duste, leauyng his
compassing, went to his battle. But Sylla brought his horsemen that were
best, and two new bands that lay in ambushe, and charged upon them as they
were setting themselves in order, (for they were not yet al come from
compassing, nor in due form at the front,) and brake them, so as they were
confounded, and turued to flee, the which he followed. Beginning the victory
thus, Murena in the left wing, furthered the The overthrow of Archelaus.
same, very lustily, and with encouraging of his men, manly followed the chase.
When the wings of Archelous were turned, the midde battle did not hold, but
fled also. And then all that Sylla had foreseen, fell upon the enemy, for
not having a free place to turn them, nor a plain to flee, at the hills they
were slain of them that followed them: some fell into his hands, some that
were wiser, got to their camp, whom Archelous, ignorant of the feats of
war, commanded to turn upon the enemies, when there was no way. They obeyed
readily, but wanting captains, to set them in order, not knowing their proper
Ensigns, and being foully disordered, wanting place both to fight and to
flee, being driven into a straighte by them that chaced, they were killed with
ease: some of their ennimies, whom they could not kill again: some of
themselves, as in a confusion in so straight a place. They went again to the
gates, and there gathered together, rebukyng them that shut them out,
rehearsing their country Gods, and other natural familiarity, that not so
much of their enemies, as of their disdain they were destroyed, till Archelous
seeing the need, opened the gates too late, and received them running in with
disorder. The Romans perceiving this, calling one an other, with vehemency
and swiftenesse got into the ca^pe with the^ that fled, and brought the
victory to an end. Archelous and the other fled as they could, and saved
themselves at Calcide, of a hundred and.xx. M., not many more than.x. M.
remaining of the Romans, they say there died but.xv. and two of them returned,
this was the end of the field between Sylla and Archelous Cheronea is a town
in B^otia where P^^t^rch was borne.
capitain general of Mithridates at Cheronea, chiefly by ye wisdom of Sylla,
and the foolishness of Archelous, this hap had they both. Sylla having got
much armure and spoil, and taken many prisoners, ye unprofitable things
gathered on an heap, being girded after the Roman manner, he burned to the
Gods of war. Resting his army a while, he went to Euripus, with ye light
horse against Archelous, Eurip^s is the straight sea that flovveth seven times
a day.
w^o wa^dred the Islands without dread, the Romans having no ships to follow
him, and took the coast towns. And going to Zacynthus he ca^ped, as to
besiege the city: and where certain of y^ Zacynthus an I Will of the Ionian sea.
Romans ca^pe, came upon him by night, departing in have, he went to Calcida,
more like a Rouer tha^ a warrior. When Mithridates heard of this loss, he was
troubled again, and afraid, as in such a case he might, and gathered an other
army of all nations about him in have. And thinkyng yt many would now forsake
him for this overthrow, or for same other occasion, he gathered together all
the^ y^ he had in suspision before the war did wa^e sharper. First Cruelty
of Mithridates against the Galatians.
he killed the governors of the Galatians, which were with him as friends, and
not yet subject to him, with their wifes and children except three that fled.
To some he laid traynes, some he killed in a night at a banquet, thinking none
would keep their faith, if Sylla came, and confiscating their goods he made
Eumachus president of that nation. The rulers that escaped gatheryng an army of
their tenaunts of the country, drove him and his garrisons out of Galatia, so
as Mithridates had nothing of that nation but money only. And being angry with
ye Chians, euersince their ship crushed the kings ship in the battle at the
Rhodes, he came secretly upon them, and first leased upon their goods that
were fled to Sylla. Then he sent to inquire of them that took the Romans
part in Chio. And Zenobus that led the third army, as though he would Chio,
now S^io.
have hasted into Gretia, came to the walls of Chio and other naked places by
night and took them, and setting a guard at the gate, proclaimed that
strangers should not stir, and assembled the Chians, Mithridates spite
against the Xi^^ for a s^^l cause.
as to say somewhat to them from the king. When he was come he said the king
had the city in suspicion because they favored the Romans. Your ease must
be, to deliver your armure and your best children for pledges. They seeing their
city already taken, delivered both. The which Zenobus sent by and by to
Erythea, commanding Erythea is a city of Asia, not far from S^io, of the
which was one Sybilla.
the Chians to tarry for the kings letters. Mithridates letter came to this
effect. You be yet friends to the Romans with whom many of your Citizens be,
and you enjoy the Fermes that they have let you, for the which you pay nothing
to us. Further Mithridates letter to the Ch^^^.
a Galley of yours at the fight at Rhodes did shake and crushe my ships,
which fault I would put only upon the guyders of the ship, if you could be
recovered by love. But secretly you have now sent your chief men to Sylla, and
you have accused none of the^, as doing it without common consent, nor you have
punished any of them, as not privy to their doyngs: and whereas I might punish
you by death, being so counsayled by my friends, as seekers of my life, and
traitors to my kingdom, I punish you in two thousand talents. This was the
tenor of the letter. They would have sent Ambassadors to him, but Zenobius
would not suffer them. And when their armure was gone, and their chief
children taken away, and so great an army of Barbarians at hand, with heavy
hearts they took the treasure out of the temples, and their wives Jewels, that
they might make the.ij. M. talents. When they had done this, and Zenobius
finding fault with the wayght, he called the^ al into ye Theater, and setting
his soldiers about ye Theater with The lamentable* destruction of the Chians.
their weapons drawn, and the ways down to ye sea side, he called the^ out
severally and put them in the ships, the men by themselves, ye women likewise,
and the children by themselves, barbarously scoffing at the^. Thus being
spoiled of their country, they were sent into Pontus Euxinus to Mithridates.
After this sort were y^ Chians used. The Ephesians required Zenobius yt was
come to the^, to lean his army at ye gate, and to come in with a few. He did
so: and went to Philopaemena father to Monime, who^ Mithridates loved, and had
made The Ephesians kill Zenobius.
ouer^ee^ of the Ephesians, and willed the Ephesians by proclamation to come
together in their assembly. They lokyng for no good at his hands, deferred it
till the next day. And in ye night gathering together and exhorting one an
other, they took Zenobius and killed him in prison. They fenced their walls,
they put their people in order, they gathered in their corn, and kept all the
City by strength. The Trallians, Papenians, and Mesopolitans, and some other
afraid Trallis, at the flood Me^a^^rus. Papen^ of Triphylia.
by the calamity of Chio, did as the Ephesia^s had done. Mithridates sent his
army against them that revolted, and used them cruelly whom he took, and
fearyng the rest, he made the cities of Greece, Mithridates releaseth debtes,
makes free.
free. He proclaimed forgiveness of debtes, and the fermours he made Citizens,
and the bondmen, free, hoping, as it was in deed, that the released of debt,
the new made citizens, and freemen, would be sure unto him, thinkyng these
things could not be sure unto them, but by Mithridates rule. In the mean
season Mynio and Philotimus of Smyrna, and Clisthenes, and Asclepiodotus,
Lesbians, al A conspiracte bevvrayed.
friends to the king, and Asclepiodotus, sometime captain of the strangers,
did make a conspiracy against Mithridates. Of the which Asclepiodotus was the
bewraier: and for the more credit, he brought to pass, that the king, under a
bed, heard what Mynio said. The co^spiracie being bewrayed, they were
cruelly killed. The like suspicion was upon many more. The Pergameneans doing
the like four score of them were taken, and other, in other cities,
Mithridates sending searchers to every place, who finding out his enemies,
killed a thousand six hundred men, the accusers of the which, not long after,
were soon punished of Sylla, some killed themself, and some fled to
Mithridates into Pontus. Now had Mithridates gathered an army of.lxxx. M. the
which Dorilus did lead into Grecia to Archelous that had.x. M. left. Syllas
had his army Orchomenus at the flood of that name.
nigh to Archelous at Orchomeno, and when he saw so great a number of horsemen,
he dug many pittes in the plain, x. foot broad. And had his army in order
to receive Archelaus. And when the Romans did fayntly come to y^ fight for the
multitude of horsemen, he rode about, and exhorted them, and beside threatened
the^. But when he could not so bring them to the matter, he lept of his horse
and took the Ensign and ran to the enemies with his guard, crying: The
boldness of Sylla.
If any man ask you (O Romans) where you betrayed your general, Sylla, say,
when he fought at Orchomeno. The Capitaines ran from their bands to him
being in this danger. Then the multitude being ashamed, changed their fear
into courage. And when the victory began to appear, he mounted on horse
again, The victory of the Romane^.
and rode about the host, praising them, and in every place exhorting them,
till he had brought it to end. There dyed of the enimes about fifteen
thousand, whereof the most part were horsemen, and among them Diogenes, that
was Archelous son. The footmen fled to the Camp, and Sylla fearing least
Archelous would flee again to Thalcida, he having no Ships, all that night
he set watches in y^ plain, and in the day, not fully a furlong from
Archelous, he cast a trench (he not coming forth,) and exhorted earnestly his
army to finish the rest of all this battle, seeing their enemies durst not come
out, and brought them to the tre^ch of Archelous. The like mutation was among
the enemies, for necessity the Captains running about, showing the present
danger, and rebuking them, if they would not defend their Camp against their
enemies that were fewer than they. Force and cry being made on either side,
there was great might showed on both parts. The Romans covering themselves
with their shields, did now dig down a corner of the Camp, but the
defendours put them back with their short weapons, and none durst enter, till
Basillus the Captain of that legion first lept in, The valiantnes of Basillus.
and killed him that resisted him, all the army followed, then flight and
slaughter was made of the Barbarians, of some as they went, of other being
driven into a lake that was nigh, and where they could not swim, made
prayers in their Barbarian tongue to the killers of them that understood them
not. And Archelous was hid in a Fenne, where getting boats, he sailed to
Chalcida, and gathered together all the rest of the Kings army with diligence.
This garland or crown was called Vallaris, which was given to him that
first scaled the trench.
Sylla the next day gave Basillus a garland, and rewarded others with gifts
accordingly, and then spoiled Soeotia that was ever wavering. And being come to
Thessalia, wintered, and tarried for the Ships that Lucullus had. And
because he could not tell where Lucullus was, he made other Ships. In this
time, Cornelius Cinna and Gaius Marius his enemies in Rome, proclaimed him
Sylla is proclaimed Rebel at Rome.
Rebel, spoiling his house and his Villages, and destroying his friends. He
notwithstanding did all things as with authority, having an army valiant and
obedient. Cinna chose Flaccus for his Flaccus.
fellow in the Consuls office, and sent him into Asia with two legions in the
place of Sylla that was declared an enemy to be ruler of Asia, and make war
with Mithridates. Flaccus being inexpert in the wars, a man of the Senate, of
good will, and beloved of the army, named Fimbria, went with him. They sailing
Fimbria.
from Brunduse, many of their ships were lost by winters weather, and a navy
sent of Mithridates, burned their Ships, that went in espiall. All the army
forsook Flaccus, being a malicious, covetous, and cruel man, and part of them
that were sent into Thessaly, turned to Sylla. The rest, Fimbria being thought
of them a better Captain, and of a more gentle nature than Flaccus, stayed
from reuolting, and chancing that there was a contention for a lodging between
him and a treasurer, and Flaccus leaving the matter vniudged, and somewhat
touching the honor of Fimbria, he being disoeynefull, threatened to return to
Rome, and Flaccus appointed a successor to him for y^ things that were to be
done. Then Fimbria waiting him as he went to Calcida, first took the maces
from Thermo, whom Flaccus had made officer against him as so receiving the
charge by the consent of the army, and following Flaccus with anger, til he
drove him into an house, out of y^ which escaping by night, he fled first
into Calcide, and then into Nicomedia, and shut the gates. But Fimbria came
upon him, and killed Fimbria kills Flaccus.
him, being crept into a pit, being Consul of the Romans, and general of
the war, where he was but a private man, and was A^ rare cruelty of a Roman.
come with him as his friend at his request. He cut of his head, and threw it
into the Sea, his carcass he cast out unburied: so making himself General,
he fought diverse fightes valiantly with Mithridates his son, and drove the K
himself from Pergamo, Pitane a City of ^^^lide.
whither he followed him to Pitane, where he beseeged him, till by ship he
fled to Mitylene. Fimbria inuading Asia, punished y^ faction of Cappadocia,
and spoiled the lands of them that would not receive him. The Ilians being
beseeged of him, fled to Sylla, ^i^^, where Troy was.
who promised the^ to come, and willed the^ to say to Fimbria, that they were
yielded to him. When Fimbria heard this, he praised them as friends to the
Romans, and desired them to receive him as a Roman also, ^estingly showing
that the Ilians and the Romans were of affinity. Being entered, he killed all
that he met, and burned every thing, and the Ambassadors that were sent to
Sylla, he tormented diverse ways, neither sparing holy things, nor them that
were fled into the Temple of Minerua, whom he burned in the Temple. Cruelty
of a Roman.


The next day he bet down the walls, and went about to see, if any thing
stood in the City, which was worse used by him a Troy worse used of a Roman.
man allied, than it was in Agamemnons time, no house, no temple, no image
being left. The Image of Minerua which they called Palladium, sent from heaven
as they think, some suppose Palladium the Image of Minerua sent from Heaven.
was unbroken, being covered with the walls that fell, except Diomedes and
Ulysses carried it away at the war of Troy. This did Fimbria against Iliu^,
the. CIII. Olimpiad the^ ending, which some think was a thousand and fifty
years after Agamemnon.

When Mithridates heard of the loss at Orchomeno, considering the multitude he
had sent into Grecia, and the continual and great overthrows, he sent to
Archelous, to make truce in as good manner as he could, and being come to the
parley, said to Sylla. Mithridates being an ancient friend to you (O Sylla)
has made war for the covetousness of other Generalles. He is Archelous to
Sylla.
content to leave war for thy virtues sake, by the which thou will command
him that shall be just. Sylla for want of Ships and money, none being sent him
because of his enemies that had judged him a Rebel, having gathered money of
the Pythians, Olimpians, and Epidaureans, and given them* by reason for their
holy things, half the Thebans land that so often rebelled, and having an army
valiant and expert, to lead against the Rebellion of his enemies, he was
bent to peace, and said:

If Mithridates had bin injured, he should have sent Embassadoures, but doing
injury, he has invaded many lands of other men's, he has slain very many,
the common and holy things of Cities, and the proper goods of them he has
spoiled, being a like unfaithful to his friends and to us, of whom he has
killed many, and slain the Princes that were at a banquet with him in the
night with their wives and children, and has showed to us rather cruelty of
nature, than necessity of war, and used the Italians in Asia with all kinds
of evils, destroying and murdering men, women, children, and slaves that were
of the nation of Italy, so great an hate had he against Italy. He alleges
now ancient amity for a fashion, but not before he has lost a hundredth and
threescore thousand men by me, he makes any mention of it. Wherefore reason
would, we should take him for unfaithful, yet for thy sake, I will undertake
to get him forgiveness of the Romans, if he repent his doyngs: but if he
dissembleth Talk of peace.
now also, look thou well to it Archeloe, and consider the present state, as
well for thy self, as for him. Consider how he has used his friends, and
how we have used Eumenes, and Massinissa. He speaking thus, Archelous
disdeynefull brake his tale, as spoken to prove him, and said, that he would
never betray the army that was committed to him, yet hope I for peace at thy
hand, if thou make reasonable conditions. Sylla ceassing a while, said,
Archeloe, if Mithridates do deliver unto me all the Navy which thou have, and
deliver our Captains, Ambassadors, prisoners, fugitives, and slaves fled
from us, and let go the Chians beside forth, and all other that he has made
Captives in Pontus, and take his garrisons from every place, except those which
he had before the breaking of peace, and defray the charges of the war
whereof he has bin the cause, and conteyne himself within the limits of his
fathers dominions, I trust to persuade that the Romans will no more remember
what he has done. Thus he said. Archelous by and by took his garrisons from
every place, and of the rest sent to the King. Sylla to do somewhat in this
vacation, spoiled the Enetanes, Dardaneans, and Eiutians, nations (...) people
of Paphlagonia.
nigh the Macedonians, and always molesting Macedonia, he exercised his
souldyoures, and got money likewise. Embassadoures were now come from
Mithridates, who agreed to all things, having then excepted Paphlagonie, saying
that Mithridates might have more, if he would make peace with the other
general Fimbria. Sylla was angry at that, and said, he would punish Fimbria
well enough, and when he was come into Asia, he would see whether Mithridates
had more need of war than peace. When he had said thus, he went into
Cypsela by Thracia, and sent Lucullus before to Abydus, whether he was now come,
being in danger of rouers many times. He brought a Navy of Shyps from Cyprus
and Phoenitia, from Rhodus and Pamphilia, spoiling many coasts of the enemies,
and skirmishing with the Kings Ships. Sylla from Cypselos, and Mithridates
from Pergamo, met again to talk, and coming both into the plain with a
few. Mithridates recorded his, and his fathers a^^t^e and confederacy, and
accused the Roman Embassadoures and Lieuteuantes, which had used him
unjustly, setting Ariobarzanes into Cappadocia, and taking Phrygia from him,
and winking at Nicomedes, that did him open injury. And all this they did
(quoth he) for money, taken as well of me as of them. In this thing Talk of
peace between Sylla and Mithridates.
(O Romans) are you most to be blamed, because you will be corrupt with money.
The war being broken by your Generalles, what soever I have done in defense,
it has bin rather of necessity, than of will. When Mithridates had said
thus, he ceased. Sylla thus answered. Although thy coming is for peace, and
yet do renew other matter, I will not refuse to speak briefly of it. When
I was lieutenant of Cilicia, I set Ariobarzanes into Cappadocia, by decree of
the Romans, and thou did obey. Thou should then have spoken against it,
and not wrangled afterward, or swarued from the order. Manius Manius acts
reproved.
gave thee Phrygia for money. The injustice is indifferente to you both, and by
this thou do confess, that thou gottest it unlawfully, by giving of money.
Manius, both in this, and other things done for money, was reproved of us, and
the Senate dissolved all that he had done, by reason whereof, they would not
make Phrygia tributarie unto them, being given unjustly to thee, but left it
free. Then by what reason do thou usurp the things that we have taken by
war, and will not yet have thee to rule? Nicomedes accuses thee and
Alexander for woundyng his body, sendyng Socrates Chrestus into his Kingdom.
He to revenge this, invaded thy Realm. If he did thee wrong, thou should
have sent Embassadoures, and have tarried for answer. If thou dyddest make
speedy reuengeance on Nicomedes, why dyddest thou invade Ariobarzanes that
had done thee no wrong, for when thou had begun with him, the Romans
were compelled by their couenantes to restore him, and being restored, to
defend him. Thou made war, being thus persuaded, and in hope, that if thou
did overcome the Romans, thou should reign over all, making these
pretenses of thy purpose, of the which we have this conjecture, that before
there was any war, thou made league with the Thracians, Scythians, and
Sauromatians, and sendest to the Kings thy neyboures. Thou made Ships, and
gatheredst masters and mates, and the time does bewray thine intent. For when
thou hardest that Italy was revolted from us, waiting for our trouble, thou
did invade Ariobarzanes, Nicomedes, the Galatians, and Paphlagonia. Thou
dydst invade Asia our land, and when thou had got it, what did thou
against the Cities, over which thou made slaves and fellows in debt, rulers,
by giving of liberty, and releassing of debt? and against the Grecians, of
whom, for a small occasion, thou did kill sixeteene hundredth? or the princes
of Galatia, whom being at a feast with thee, thou did murder? And the
Italian nation, in one day thou did kill and drown, with their wives and
children, not sparing them that were fled into the holy places. How great
cruelty, how great impiety and extremity of hate, did thou show against
us, gathering every man's money? Thou did sail into Europe with great armies,
we forbiddyng all Kings of Asia, to enter into Europe. When thou were come,
thou did overcome Macedonia our province. Thou tokest from the Grecians
their freedom. Neither did thou repent thee, or make Archelous the mean
for thee, till I had recovered Macedonia, and delivered Grecia from thy
violence, and slain a hundredth and sixty thousand of thine army, and taken
thy Camps with their munition. Therefore I marvel now thou do iustifye thy
self in those things, which thou desire to be forgyuen by Archelous, which
I being far off, thou did grant, but being nigh, thou do call into
question whose time is past, thou making war, and we resisting mightily, and
will resist thee to the end.

Sylla speaking this with anger, the King was afraid, and granted and
confyrmed the conditions made by Archelous, and deliueryng the Ships, and all
other things, he went into Pontus his fathers Kingdom only. Thus the first
war between the Romans and Mithridates ceased.

Sylla encamping two surlongs from Fimbria, commanded War betvveene (...)
and Sylla.
him to deliver the army which he held against the laws. He taunted him
again, that he did not rule lawfully, and being beseeged of Sylla, and many
openly forsaking him, he called the rest to a counsel, and exhorted them to
tarry: and when they said Fimbria is forsaken.
they would not fight with their Countrymen, he tore his garmente, and
besoughte them: and when they refused that also, and many still went from him,
he went to the tents of the Captains, and winning some with money, he called
them again to a counsel, and commanded them to swear: and when the Enetans
cried, that he must call them to swear by name, he called them that had bin
benefited by him, and first Nonius, that was Nonius refuses to swear.
privy to all his doings. But when he refused to swear, he drew his sword,
and threatened to kill him, till a cry was made of all, and then he ceased for
fear, and hired a slave, for hope of liberty and money, to go as a fugitive
and kill Sylla. He being about the thing, and troubled, being thereby
suspected, was taken, and confessed it. And Syllas army with rage and disdeyne,
standing about Fimbria his trenche, did revile him, and call him Atheniona,
who a few days was a King over Athenion.
the servants in Sicelie that rebelled. By the which Fimbria despayring of
all, came to the wall, and desired to speak with Sylla will not speak with
Fimbria.
Sylla. He sent Rutilius in his place, that chiefly grieved Fimbria, that he
would not speak with him, which is not denied to enemies, and desired pardon,
if he had offended, being yet a young man. Rutilius said, Sylla would let him
go quietly to the Sea, if he would give place in Asia, in the which Sylla was
Lieutenant. He said, he would find a better way, and went to Pergamo, and in
the Temple of Aesculapius killed himself, and the wound not being
sufficient, he badde his P^ge dispatche, who Fimbria kills himself*
killed his Master first, and then himself.

Thus ended Fimbrias, doing much mischief in Asia after Mithridates, whom
Sylla gave to his freemade me^ to bury, saying, Hi b^ly is given to be b^rye^
otherwise then Marius used at Rome.
he would not follow Cinna and Marius in Rome, who killed many men, and would
not suffer them to be buried, receiving Fimbrias army that came unto him, and
set them with his own, and commanded Curio to restore Nicomedes and
Ariobarzanes into Cappadocia, and wrote to the Senate of all things, not
seemyng he was declared a Rebel. Then settling his province, he recompensed the
Ilians, the Chians, the Lycians, the Rhodians, and the Magnesians, and others
that were confederates, or that for their good will, had suffered, for the
which cause he The rewards of the faithful people.
dismissed them free, and registered them friends of the Romans. To the rest,
he sent his army, and proclaimed that all servants that had freedom by
Mithridates, should be restored to their masters. Whereof many disobeying,
and some Cities rebelling, The punishment of the reuolting people.
there followed great slaughters, of free, and bond, for diverse occasions, the
walls of many were pulled down, and made servile people very many. They that
were of the Cappadocians faction, both men and Cities were sharply punished,
and chiefly the Ephesians, which did impudently revile the Romans
co^mandeme^ts. After this, was there a proclamation made, that the chief of
every City should come before Sylla at Ephesus, who being come into the common
hall, he thus said unto them.

We first came into Asia with our army, when Antiochu^ king Sylla to the
Ephesi^^s.
of Syria did ouerrunne you, and driving him away, and making Aly and Taurus
the limits of his Kingdom, we took not from Holy a flood running out of Taurus.
you that was made ours by him, but left it free, except some, which we gave
to Eumenes, and the Rhodes our confederates, not to be tributaries, but
tenants. In proof whereof, we took the Licians from the Rhodians, making their
complaynt. Thus did we for you. And you did help Aristonicus four years
against us, after* Attalus Philometer had left his kingdom to us by testament,
till Aristonicus was taken, and many of you came again for necessity and
fear. Thus doing, and in four and twenty years coming to great riches and
substance as well public as private, thorough peace and abundance, you wrangle
again, and waiting our trouble in Italy, some of you brought in Mithridates,
and some received him when he came. He the most cruel of all men, in one day
killed all the Italians with the children and mothers. And you did not spare
them that fled into the temples to your Gods: For the which some
punishment you have had by Mithridates, being unfaithful to you, and ^^llyng
you with murders and banishments, making divisions of your lands, and
releasing of debtes, and liberty of slaves: and to some putting tyrannes, and
causing many robberies both by sea and land, that by your experience you may
know, by comparison, what governor you have received, and what rejected. The
beginners of these things have been partly punished by us, but the pain must
be public to you that have done the like, that it may be correspondent to
that you have done. But the Romans will not use wicked murders, or sudden
confiscations, or risings of servants, or other barbarous things which the
mind abhors. Regard shall be had to the nation and name of Greece, and to
the glory of Asia, and to the friends of the Romans for honors sake. We
put upon you the tribute of five years only to be brought presently, and the
expenses of the war which I have bestowed. For the rest I will take order,
and make the division according to the Cities, and I declare friendship to them
that shall keep these orders, and to them that will not, I appoint punishment,
as to enemies.

When Sylla had said thus, he divided the pain to the Ambassadors and sent
them for money. The Cities being poor and oppressed with debte, some did let to
Ferme their Theaters to creditours, some their common houses, their walls and
ports, and any other thing that was public, not without despite of the
Soldiers that gathered it. This money was brought to Sylla, and Asia had
enough of evils: for it was full of manifest robberies, rather like to armies
tha^ to pirates. For Mithridates not long before had set the^ in the sea, when
he wasted al things, as not long to keep it, then being most abundant, not
only Inconveniences. in Asia. Iassus* an I Will of Ca^a.
troubling men on the sea, but spoiling ports, towns and cities euidentlye.
Iassus, Samos, Clazomene, and Samothracia, Sylla being there, were taken, and
the Temple of Samothracia, was robbed of the value of a thousand Talents. He
either willingly, or leaving to punish the offendoures, or because of the
sedition at Rome, went into Grecia, and from thence to Italy, with all his
army, and what he did, we have written in y^ books of Civil dissentio^.

The second war with Mithridates began of this occasion: The second war
with Mithridates* Colchis is next Pontus.


Murena being l^^^e of Sylla with two legions that were Fimbrias, showed
certain forms of war for desire of Triumph. Mithridates being gone to
Pontus, made war upon the Colchians and Bosphoria^^. The Colchians desired
his son Mithridates might be given them for King, whom when they had
received, they obeyed Mithridates kills his son.
forthwith. But the king having his son in suspision, that he coueted the
whole kingdom, sent for him, and held him with cheynes of gold, and after
killed him, when he had done him much good service in Asia against Fimbria.
Against the Bosphorians he gathered a great army, and made a great navy. The
mightiness of the which preparation, raised an opinion, that it was not
against the Bosphorians, but against the Romans, for he had not restored all
Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, but kept part of it still, Archelous flees from
Mithridates. Comana, a City dedicate to Bellona. Murena cauilleth.
and had Archelous in suspicion, that he granted more in Grecia, than he needed
to Sylla, in making the peace: the which Archelous perceiving, and fearing,
fled to Murena, whom he incensed, and persuaded against Mithridates. Murena
by and by entered through Cappadocia, to Comana, the greatest City under
Mithridates, having an holy temple and treasure, and killed certain horsemen
of Mithridates: and when the Ambassadors alleged y^ leage, he answered he had
none such, for Sylla did not wright it, but confirmed it by word, and so left
it. When Murena had sard this, he fell to spoil by and by, not refrayning
from the holy money, and wintered in Cappadocia. Mithridates sent to Rome to
the Senate, and to Sylla, to compain of Murenas doings, who in y^ time passed
the flood Aly that was great, and the^ very deep, because of y^ rain,
Calidius comes from Rome with counter^e^ commandment.
and spoiled. 400. of Mithridates towns, the king not yet meeting with him,
but loking for his Ambassadors from Rome Having got a great booty, he went
into Phrigia and Cappadocia, whither Calidius came to him from Rome, touching
Mithridates complayntes, but brought him no decree, only said unto him in the
midst of the hearers, that y^ Senate commanded him to spare the king their
confederate. When he had said thus, he was seen to speak to him alone. And
Murenas ceased not of his invasion, but still molested y^ land of the king,
who evidently perceiving that he was used as an enemy of the Romans, he bad
Gordius to take the nigh towns. He gathered many beasts of carriage and
munition, and private men and souldyours, and camped at the flood over against
Murena. Neither of them began y^ fight, til Mithridates came with a great army,
then was there a mighty fight at the flood. Mithridates Murenas flees.
by violence passed the flood, being otherwise too good for Murena, who fled
the kings force into a strong hill, and having lost many, departed by the
mountains without any way into Phrigia, being followed and oppressed. This
victory being evident and quickly gotten, was soon spread abroad, and turned
many to Mithridates. He putting out Murenas garrisons of every place with great
speed, did make his sacrifice to Jupiter y^ warrior, after y^ manner of his
country, in y^ top of an hill, where they make a great pile of wood, to y^ which
the kings bring the first stick. Then they The manner of the sacrifice of the
kings in Asia made by Mithridates for the victory.
make another less in a circle. Upon the higher, they put honey, milk, and
wine, and oil, and all kind of perfumes, they give bread and meat of the best
to them that be present. And they make y^ pile after y^ fashion of the Persian
kings sacrifice in Rarsardis, the which for the greatness, is evidently seen to
many, a thousand furlongs off, and y^ one ca^ not come nigh the place many days
after, y^ air is so hot. This sacrifice did he make, after the custom of his
country. Sylla not content yt Mithridates being in league, should have war
made upon him, sent Aulus Gabinius, to command Murena not to molest
Mithridates, and that he should agree Mithridates, and (...) refuses
Mithridates gold
Ariobarzanes. Mithridates at y^ meeting, making sure a son of Ariobarzanes
of.iiij. years of age, and by y^ mean holding still that he had in
Cappadocia, and getting more, feasted all, and put gold in y^ cup, and y^ meat
for the iesters and singers, and al other, as his use was, of y^ which only
Gabinius touched none. Thus y^ second war of Mithridates did end at y^ third
year. Being now at quiet, he subdued Bosphorus, and appointed the^ his son
Macharis for their king.

He invaded the Acheans that be above Colchos, (which seem to be of them that
fled from Troy, and lost their way) and losing two parts of his army with
fight and cold, and deceiptes, he returned, and sent to Rome to have the
league ratified. Ariobarzanes sent also, either of himself, or stirred of
others, that he had not received Cappadocia, but that Mithridates kept yet
the better part from him. Sylla commanded Mithridates to give place in
Cappadocia, and he did so, and sent other Ambassadors Cochieus, came from
Troy.
for to have the conditions of peace registered, but Sylla being dead, and the
Senate not to be assembled, because of the vacation, he sent to Tigranes his
son in law, to invade Cappadocia Tigranes by persuasio^ of Mithridates
inuadeth Cappadocia.
as of himself. This cautele was not unknown to the Romans. The Armenian
compassing Cappadies as with a neste, led away three hundredth thousand men
into Armenia, and made them dwell with other at a place, where he first took
the Crown of Armenia, and of his name called it Tigranocertos, which is, the
City of Tigranes. And these were the doyngs in Asia.

Sertorius a Captain in Spain, did stir it, and all the places about it,
against the Romans, and made a Senate of them that were with him, for to
counterfeyte the Romans. Two of his faction, Mithridates sends to Sertorius.
Lucius Manius, and L. Fanius, persuaded Mithridates to join with Sertorius,
putting him in hope of a great part of Asia, and the nations about him. He
being persuaded, sent to Sertorius. He led the Embassadoures into his Senate,
and made a glorious tale, that his renoume spredde as far as P^ntus, and that
he beseeged the Romans from the West to the East. He couenanted to give
Mithridates Asia, and Bithinia, Paphlagonit, and Cappadocia, and Gallogrecia
and sent him a Captain Marcius Varius, and Lucius Manius, and L. Fanius, that
were of that counsel. With these did Mithridates begin the third and last war
with the Romans, in the which he lost al his kingdom. Sertorius being dead in
Spain, and Generals, sent from Rome, first Lucullus that was admiral of Syllas
Navy, then Pompey, under whom, all that Mithridates had, The third war
with Mithridates.
and all that was nigh it, to the flood Euphrates, by the pretense and violence
of the war against Mithridates, did fall to the Romans. Mithridates having
proved so often what the Romans were, and Medimnus was a measure that contained
six^ Modij, and Modius contained six Sextures, which in commonly called a
Bushel. Calybes people in Poute that dig iron naked. Heniochi, people of
Ponius living by theft. Thermodon.
thinking that this war, made without cause, and of the sudden, would not be
appeased, made all the preparation that he could, as now to try the whole, and
the rest of the somer, and al y^ winter, he made ships and armoure, he
brought to the sea, ij. C. M. Medimnes of grain, and got confederates, beside
his former power, the Chalibyans, the Armenians, the Scythians, the Taurians,
Achuians, Heniochans, Leucosyrians, and all that inhabit about the flood
Thermodon, that was called the land of the Amazones.

These had he got in Asia, to them he had before, and going into Europe, the
Sarmatians, Basileans, Iazugeans, and Coralleans, and all the nations of the
Thracians, that inhabit about Hister, Rodope, and Aemos, and the Basternans,
a most valiant people.

These had Mithridates in Europa, he had gathered an hundredth and forty
thousand footmen, and sixteen thousand horsemen, another great number of
venturers, piouers, and victualers.

When the Spring was come, he viewed his navy, and sacrificed Mithridates ^^
his soldiers.
to Jupiter warrior, the usual sacrifice, and to Neptunus, he did cast into
the sea a Chariot of white horses, and went to Paphlagonia, Taxilus, and
Eumocrates, being his Generals. When he was come, he made a solemn oration
to the army, setting forth his progenitors and himself very highly, that he
had enlarged his kingdom from little to great, and was never overcome of the
Romans, being present, whom he accused for their ambition and
insatiableness, by the which, (said he) they have made Italy and their
Country servile. He repeated the last conditions, which they would not
subscribe. Seeking time to invade him again, and making this the cause of the
war, he extolled his power and provision, and showed the Romans troubles,
being molested in Spain by Sertorius, and at home in Italy, by civil war.
Therefore (said he) thorough their negligence, the Sea has long time been
full of Pirates. Confederates have they none, nor willingly auye will be under
them. Do you not see these noble men, (said he) showing Varius and the
Lucians,) to be enemies to their Country, and friends to us?

When he had said thus and stirred his army, he went into Bythinia,
Nicomedes being dead, without a child, and leauyng Nicomedes leaves his
kingdom to the Romenes. Cotta flees.
his kingdom to the Romans. And Cotta that was president there, a man of
little skill in war, fled to Calchida with his power, and Bithynia was
again under Mithridates, all the Romans fleeing to Cotta into Calchide. And
Mithridates coming thither, Cotta Nudue comes to Chalcide where the port
coloyse is let down, and many Romans stayne.
for lack of experience came not forth. Nudus his admiral, with part of the
army, took the stronger part of the field, from the which being driven, he
fled to the gates of Chalcide, by many hedges, with great pain. At the gate
there was great thrust of them that would get in, so as no darte was cast in
vain, of them that followed. Wherefore the keepers being afraid of the gates,
they let the bars fall from the tower, and took up Nudus and other
Capitaynes by ropes. The other did perish between their friends and their
enemies, holdyng up their hands to the other. Mithridates using the course of
good fortune, brought his ships that day to the port, and breakyng the bar
that was of iron, he burned four of the enemies ships, and took the other
three score, neither Cotta nor Nudus resistyng, keepyng the^elues within the
walls. Three thousand were slain of the Romans, and Lucius Manlius a
Senator. Mithridates lost twenty of the Basternians, that first went into
the port.

L. Lucullus, being Consul and chosen general of this war, Lucullus is
general.
brought one legion from Rome, and had two of Fimbrias, and beside them, two
more, having in all thirty thousand footmen, and sixtene hundred horsemen,
and encamped against Mithridates at Cyzico. And understanding by the fugitives,
that the king had three thousand men, and his victuals brought by the
foragers, and from the sea, he said to them that were about him, that he
would take his enemies without any pain, and bad them remember Lucullus
espieth his advantage.
it. He espied an hill very fit for his camp, from the which he might get
forage, and keep it from his enemy. He intended to get it, as by it to win
victory without danger. Being but one way very straight to it, Mithridates
kept it with strength. For so did Taxiles and the other Capitaynes advise him.
Lucius Manius that came from Sertorius, and made league with Mithridates,
Sertorius being now dead, revolted secretly to Lucullus, and says being
received, he persuaded Mithridates, to let the Romans Mithridates abused.
go and camp where they would, for the two legions that were Fimbrias, would
straight revolt and come to the king then what need he use force and slaughter
when he might overcome without fight? Mithridates consenting to this very
unwisely and uncircumspectly, suffered the Romans to pass the straight
without fear, and to encampe at the hill, by having of the which, they might
have victuals behind them brought without fear, and Mithridates being shut
with fennes, hills and floudes, could have none by land, but very little,
neither having way to do it easily, nor by force to compel Lucullus for the
hardenesse of the passage, which when he had in his power, he neglected, and
winter being at hand, the coming of it by Sea would fail. Which when
Lucullus perteyued, he put his friends in remembrance Errors of Mithridates.
of his promise, and that he spoke, to be as it were performed. Mithridates
might then peradventure have passed thorough the mids of his enemies with
his multitude, but he let that pass also, and gave himself only to the
gettyng of Cyzico, thynkyng by that, to remedy both the want and hard
Cyzico, an Island and city in Propontide of great renown.
way, and having plenty of Soldiers, went about it by all means possible.
His navy he enclosed with a double wall, and entrenched the rest of the
City, and set up many rampires and engines upon them, and towers, and rams
covered, and one called Helepolis, of an hundred cubits, upon the which an
other Helepolis, is an engine to beat the wall.
tower was set, casting arrows, and stones, and diverse weapons. At the ports
two Galleys joined together, bare an other tower, from the which, bridges were
cast from the engine nigh the wall. When all this was ready, he sent three
prisoners to Cyzicus in ships to the city, holding up their hands, and
praying them to spare the people that were in danger, till Lisistratus
Lisistratus.
their Captaune, came to the walls, and by a trumpette exhorted them to bear
patiently their mischaunce. When Mithridites was deceived of this purpose, he
brought the engine by ships, which threw suddenly bridges upon the wall, and
four men ran upon them, at the which the Cyzians amassed, for the strangers
gave place, but no more coming forth, they took courage again, and killed
those four without, and threw fire and pitch upon the ships, and made them
turn with their engine. This at this enterprise of the sea the Cyzians had
the better. That day the third time, he brought al his engines by land at
once, they within laboring and putting them back for all their violence. The
rams they bet with stones, or put them by with collats, and brake their dint
with peltes of wool. The The valiantnes of the Cyzians.
fiery darts, they quenched with vinegar and water, and other with clothes
cast against them, or with sails wrapped together stopped the throw. They
left nothing undone, that men might do: and although they suffered all
labor, and resisted the evil, yet at night part of the wall was burned and
fell: but no man durst enter for the heat, and their Cyzianes made it up
again in the night. And not long after, a great storm of wind did break the
rest of the kings engines. It is read that this City was in dowry, of
Jupiter to Proserpine, and the Cyziens honor her most of all gods. When their
feast day came, that they should sacrifice a black cow, they not having one,
made one of paaste, when as a black cow came to them by sea, which going
under the bar of the haven, ran into the City, and came A sacrifice to
Proserpina.
to the temple and stood at the altar. The which the Cyzians sacrificed with
good hope. Mithridates friends counseled him to go from the City being
holy, but he would not. He went to Dindimus an high hill, and made a trench
from it to the City, and set it with towers, and with mines dug the wall.
He sent his horses, lean for lack of meat, and lame for labor, into
Bythinia, Lucullus met with them as they went to Rindacus, and killed and
took many prisoners, of men fifteen M. of horses six thousand, and many
beasts of burden.

At this time, Eumachus a Captain of Mithridates ran over Eumachus kills
the Romans ^sau^i, a people Asia the less.
Phrygia, and slew the Romans both women and children: then he invaded
Pisidus and Isaur^s and Cilicia, till one of the Princes of Galatia, Deiotar
us, stopped his course and killed many. And this was done in Phrygia. Winter
being come, Mithridates was without his victual that was wont to come by Sea.
Wherefore all his army was famyshed and many dyed.

Some eat dead men barbarously. Other eat herbs, and were sick, and
casting the dead bodies unburied, brought pestilence with hunger. But
Mithridates continued, hoping to get the City with the engines that he had at
Dindymus: but when the Ciziceans Dindymus the hill of Idea.
defeated his purpose, and burned his engines, and made many salyes upon their
enemies, being feeble for hunger, Mithridates intended to flee, which he did in
the night with his ships to Par^^, and his army went by land to Lampsaco.
When they came to the flood Aesepus, which was grown high, Lucullus Aesepus a
flood in the less Nisia* flowing from the hill Ida.
set upon them as they were passing, and killed many. Thus the Ciziceans did
escape the great preparation of the King, both by their own manhood, and by
the help of Lucullus that oppressed him with famine, for the which cause they
make plays at this day, which they call Lucullus plays. Mithridates conveyed
Lucullus plays.
away his army that was come to Lampsa^^^, and beseeged of Lucullus, and the
Lampsatians also with Ships that he sent them. And he committed ten
thousand of the best to be guided of Varius, that was sent to him from
Sertorius, and Alexander a Paphlagonian, and Dionisio an Eunuch: he with more,
sailed to Nicomedia, and winter weather destroyed many of them.

When Lucullus had wrought this feate by la^d through famine, he gathered
ships out of Asia, and betook them to Lieutenants. Triarius took Apamea,
and killed many that were fled into the Apamea in the coast of Bythinia.
Temples.

Barbas took Prusiade, builded under an hill, and Nicea, the garrisons Prusias
called before Chius.
of Mithridates fleeing.

Lucullus took of the enemies Ships thirteen, at the ports of Achaia. He
ouertoke Varius, Alexander, and Dionisius, at Lemnus Lennus now Statimene. The
monument of Philoctetes.
a desert I Will, where the alter of Philoctetes and the serpent of brass, the
bow and the brestplate, tied about with bendes, is seen, as a show of his
calamity. He sailed upon them with great have and contempt. They remaining
still, he sent forth two Ships at once, and stayed the rest, to provoke them
to come out, but they not coming out, but defendyng themselves from the land,
he sailed about the I Will with other Ships, and ^et footmen a land, which
made them to take their Ships. But they would not come aflote, fearyng
Lucullus army, but Lucullus ouercometh three Captains of Mithridates.
sailing by the land, and being followed both by land and sea, they were
hurt, and great slaughter and flighte was among them. Varius, Alexander and
Dionysius the Eunuche were taken hid in a cave, of the which Dionysius,
having drunk poison, as it is thought, died by and by. Lucullus commanded
Varius to be killed, for it was not seemly to bring a Roman Senator in
triumph. Alexander was kept for the pomp. And Lucullus wrote of his victory,
letters wrapped in Laurel to the Romans, as the manner Letters in Laurel.
is in victories. And he went to Bythinia.

As Mithridates sailed into Pontus, he had two tempests and Mithridates has
loss by sea, and is ^^^ed in a ro^ers bark. In Sinope was an vniuersit^e.
lost about ten thousand men, and threescore ships, the rest were scattered
as the wind drove them, his own ship falling in a leake, he went into a
rouers bark, his friends being against it, and going with the rouers they set
him safe at Sinope, from whence he went to Amiso to try all, and to his son
in law Tigranes the Armenian, and to Machares his son reyguing in Bosphoro,
he sent, that both should provide help. And to the Scythia^s that Diocles,
flees to Lucullus.
were confines, he sent gold, and many gifts by Diocles: but he fled to
Lucullus with his gold and his gifts. Lucullus going forward boldly after
the victory, overcame every thing as he went, and winnyng a wealthy country
that had been long without war, a slave was sold for four drammes: an Ox A
dram was a Roman penny.
for on: Goats, sheep and garments, and al other things after the like value.
Lucullus be^reged Amison and Eupatoria, which Eupatoria.
Mithridates builded next Amiso, and named Eupatoria* of himself, and made it a
kings Palace, and with an other army, besieged Themiscyra, that had the name of
one of the Amazones at the Themiscyra a region of Pontus.
^^o^dde Thermodonta. They lying at Themiscyra, set up towers and made
trenches, and wrought so great ^^nes, that there was ^ightyng under the
ground. The Themiscyrians opened them above, and threw in Bears and other
wild beasts, and swarms of Bees upon the workmen. They at Amisus went an
other way to work, the Amisians defendyng themselves, and many ^imies issuyng
out, and prouokyng also to fight hand to hand. Mithridates sent them much
vi^ual, armure and munition from Cabeiris, where he wintered and gathered his
army. He had o^ Cabeira a town of higher Asia.
fotemen forty thousand, and of horsemen four thousand.

When the Spring was come, Lucullus went against the king by the mountains,
which he had guarded to keep off Lucullus, and to make continual (...) if
any hap should b^. A man of the Kings blood named Phoenix, was chief of this
guard, who when Lucullus approached, made fires to Mithridates, but yielded
himself and all his power to Lucullus, so as he without stop, went to
Cabeira, and having a fight of horsemen with the King, Lucullus is overcome in
one fight of horsemen* Pompey the general of horse, brought before the King,
answered boldly. A princely saying of the king.
and being overcome, he retired to the hills, and when Pompeyus, the Captain
of his horsemen was taken, and brought to Mithridates wounded, he asked him
what thank he would give him if he were saved. He answered, if thou art a
friend to Lucullus, I will give thee very great thank, if thou be his
enemy, I will not deliber of it. Thus answered Pompeyus, and the Barbarians
would have had the King to have killed him. The King said, he would not hurt
virtue that was destitute of Fortune: Preparing continually to fight, and
Lucullus refusing it, he sought a way to come upon him on the hill. There was a
certain Scythian, named Olcabas, that had bin a long fugitive with Lucullus,
and because he had saved many at the fight of horsemen, he was admitted to
Lucullus table, and privy to his counsel and secrets. Octauius flees from
Lucullus.
He came to his tent at midde day when he was at rest, and would have gone in
by force (being girded only with a short sword after the manner) and being
angry that he was kept back, saying he had an earnest thing to tell him,
and therefore would have them awake him, they aunswering, that Nothing so good
as health of a ruler.
there was nothing so good for Lucullus as his health, he took his horse by
and by, and fled to Mithridates, either meaning evil, and suspected for his
doing, or for anger, compting himself dishonored. And he accused another
Scythian called Sobadacus, that he would flee to Lucullus: therefore Sobadacus
was taken. Whereas Lucullus would not go into the plain, because the enemies
Horsemen were the better, and could see none other way, he found in a cave an
Hunter of wild beasts, that was expert in unknown ways, by whom he passed
by secret ways, and came upon the head of Mithridates, and came down,
avoiding the fields, for the horsemen encamped at a flash of water, at the
enimyes face. Wanting victuals, he sent into Cappadocia for corn, and
skirmished with the enemies, and made them to flee, till the king came out of
his Camp in have, and amazed them, and made them The Romans in a great fear
ac^.
to turn, and so afraid the Romans, as they fled up to the mountains, and
did not perceive when the enemies ceased, but thought them that fled with
them their enemies, as well as they that chaced them, so greatly were they made
afraid. Mithridates sent letters every where of this victory. A great part of
Mithridates vvrighteth of his victory.
his horsemen, and they of the best, lay in awaite for them that brought
victual to Lucullus from Cappadocia, hoping to bring the^ to famine, as they
themselves were at Cyzico. And it was a great argument so to be, because
Lucullus had only from Cappadocia, from the which, he might be shut. The
Kings horsemen meetyng with the first of the forragers in a straight place, and
would not tarry, till they came to an open place, they made their horses in
that straight unprofitable unto them. The Romans therefore being quickly in
order by the help of the place, came forth to the fight, and killed the
kings men, being helped by the streyghte way, as fotemen, they drove some upon
their fellows, and some they made flee by heaps, and flong them down. A few
escaping A right of the Roman forragers, and the Kings horsemen in a straight.
by night, ran to the Camp, and affirmed that they only were saved, and as
the nature is, made the loss greater than it was. Mithridates before Lucullus
should know of this loss, and thinking that Lucullus for lack of horsemen
would by and by have The Kings fear.
set upon him, determined to flee for fear, and told his friends in his
tent. They before warning was given, sent away their gear hastily by night,
and their carriage made a great thrusting The Kings army flees.
together at the gates. The which the army perceiving, knowwing them that
carried, and coniecturing worse for fear, and being grieved that no token was
given, they brake up their trenche, and fled about the field confusedly,
every man as well as he could without Captains, or staying for warning.

When Mithridates heard of these hasty and disorderly doings, he ran from
his tent among them, and would have said somewhat to them, but no man giving
ear to him, and being (...) is thrust do(...) and flyo^^.
thruste of the people, he had a fall, and getting to his horse, he fled to
the mountains.

Lucullus understanding of the feate of y^ foragers, and seeing the flight of
his enemies, sent many horsemen to follow them, and bringing his footmen to the
cariera, and the rest that were in the camp, he commanded them not to
spoil, before they had killed al. But they seeing the vessels of gold and
silver, and costly garments, The soldiers ^lvvayes given to spoil.
forgot the commandment, and where they had taken Mithridates, and chanced
to cut the burden that one of the Mules bare, and the gold falling out, they
were so buy about it, that they let the King go, who fled to Comans, and from
thence to Mithridates flees to Tigranes, who vvoulde not see him.
Tigranes, with ten thousand horse. He would not see him, but commanded to
use him like a King in his Towns. Wherefore Mithridates being in desperation
of his kingdom, sent Bacchus an Eunuch to his Palace, to kill his sisters and
his wives, The king se^deth to kill his sisters, vvlues and daughters.
and his concubines. They were dispatched some with the sword, some with poison,
some with halters pitifully. When the capitaines of Mithridates garnisons saw
this, the most part yielded to Lucullus. He setting things in order, sailed
about the cities of Pontus, and took Armast, Heraclea, and other. Sinope
held out iustily, and by sea fought valiantly. But whiles they were besteged,
they burned their great ships, and fled with their small. A dream of Lucullus
saves the City of Sinope. Antolycus was one that lived by the^t.
Lucullus left the city free again, by reason of a dream, which was this.
They say Antolycus did make war with Hercules against the Amazones, and
being driven by tempest to Sinope, he took the City, and ruled there, and
the Sinopeans had his Image in great veneration. The which when they fled,
they wrapped it in linen, and bound it fast, to carry with them.

Lucullus knowing nothing of this, nor having heard of it, he thought he saw
him call him, and the next day, commanding them that carried that Image, to
show what it was, he said it was the same that he did see in the night. This
was his dream, and he caused Sinope to be still inhabited, and Amysios also,
out of the which they fled by sca. For understanding that it was inhabited
of the Athenienses, when they were Lords of the sea, and made a populare state
of it, it sometime obeyed the Sinope restored to liberty.
Persian Kings. And being restored to their liberty by Alexander, were
subjects again to the Kings of Pontus: and he taking pity of them, and
desirous of honor, after the example of Alexander, and the Athenienses nation,
he left it in liberty, and with all speed revoked the Sinopeans to their
own City.

When he had thus restored them after their taking, he made league with
Machare, Mithridates son, king of Bosphorus, offering him a crown of gold.

Then he sought Mithridates that was with Tigranes, and being come into Asia,
which did owe the fourth part of the fruits that Sylla put upon them
for a pain, he took a tax of their houses and servants, and made the
sacrifices of victory, as though the war had been fynished.

When the sacrifice was ended, he marched with two choice Lucullus with a
small army against a great King.
legions, and five hundred horse, against Tigranes that would not deliver
Mithridates. And passing Euphrates, requyring anlye money of the Barbarians, he
went on. The men made no war upon him, as they that thought not good to
intermedle between Tigranes and Lucullus.

No man durst tell Tigranes, that Lucullus was coming: Telli^g of truth evil
revvarded.
for he that told it first was hanged, as one that troubled his Cities.

But when he heard it, he sent Mithrobarzines with two thousand horse, to
stop Lucullus course. He appointed Mancaeo Mancaeus keeps the chief
City.
to keep Tigranocerta, the which City, as I have said, the King builded in
his own honor, to the which he called his nobles, and appointed a pain, that
whosoever brought not his The defense of Tigranocerta.
goods thither, should be confiscate. He made a wall about it of fifty^
cubits high. The bottoms of which, were full of stables for horse, and in
the Suburbs, he had builded his Pallaice, and Gardens very fair, with
Parkes and fishepondes: and hard by, be made a strong Forte, all the which
committing to Mancaeo, he rode about his country togather men.

Lucullus at the first conflict ouerthrewe Mithrobarzane and chased him. And
Sextilius shut Mancaeus in Tigranocerta, spoylyng all the places that were
without wall, and entrenched the Forte and the City, and brought his
engines, and undermined the wall. Thus was Sextilius occupied.

Tigranes, gathering two hundred fyfty thousand footmen, and fyftye thousand
horsemen, sent six thousand horse before to Tigranocerta, They passing
thoroughe the Romans, carried away the Kings Concubines that were taken. The
rest of the army, Tigranes sent against Lucullus. Then Mithridates coming
first into his sight, counseled him not to fight with the Romans, but to
range with his horsemen, and waste the country, to drive them to famine, if he
could, by the which mean, he was used of Lucullus at Cyzico, and lost his
feeble army. Tiranes laugheth at Mithridates. A quick saying of Tigranes.
Tigranes laughed at this counsel, and came forth in order of battle: and
seeing the little number of the Romans, said: If these be Ambassadors they
be too many, but if they be ennimies, they be too few.

When Lucullus had perceived a fytte hill beyond Tigranes, Lucullus vvinneth
an hill.
he commanded his horsemen to give a charge on the front, and then to turn
and give place of purpose, to bring the army out of order. He in the mean
time led his footmen to the hill, not perceived. And when he saw the ennimye
disordered, and runnyng by parts as though they had the victory, and all
their carriage under the hill, he cried: We have got the victory (my
fellows.) And first he set upon the carriage.

They fleeyng with confusion, ran upon the footmen, and the footemenne
upon the horsemenne, so as there was a foul fleeyng out of hand. And they
that were gone far to pursue the Romans, were killed of them tournyng upon
them, and the other disordered with the carriage, that they came as driven
among the^, al being afflicted, and none knowing ye Lucullus has the victory.
truth, how the overthrow began, there was exceeding slaughter, without any
spoil, for Lucullus had forbidden that with threats. Therefore treading upon
bracelets and chains, they continued y^ murder an hundred and twenty furlo^gs,
til night came upon the^. then in their return they spoiled, for Lucullus was
content.

After this victory, Manceus that was left at Tigranocerta, unarmed The
valiantnes of the Greek soldiers.
all the Greek mercenarie soldiers as suspected. They fearing to be taken,
got them staves and went together, and were quiet.

But when Manceus came upon them with the Barbarians armed, they wrapped their
cloakes about their arms in stead of tergales, and with courage fought
against them, and ever as they killed any, they kept their armoure, and
divided it between them. And when they thought they had got sufficient, they
took some of the little Tents, and called the Romans, and received them in.
Thus was Tigranocerta taken and spoiled, being very rich, and new builded,
and inhabited most honorably.

Tigranes and Mithridates went about gathering another army, of the which he
made Mithridates General, the other thynkyng it fytte, being taught with his
own losses. He sent also to the Parthians, requiring aid of them. And when
Lucullus sent his Ambassadors also, requiring the King either to A policy of
the Parthians King.
help him, or not to meddle with either, he secretly promised both, but
performed with none.

Mithridates gathered armor in every City, and had in a manner all the
Armenians in Camp, of the which he chose threescore ten thousand
footmen, and half of the horsemen, and let the other go. These being
divided into bands and companies after the Italian discipline, he took them to
be trained of his men of Pontus. Lucullus coming toward them, Mithridates
held all his footmen, and half his horsemen upon an hill. The rest of the
horsemen Tigranes led, and meeting with the Roman foragers, was overcome:
after the which the Romans foraged more safely, even in the places next
Mithridates, and encamped there.

By raysyng of much duste, it was perceived that Tigranes came, whose purpose
was to have shut Lucullus in the middst of them both. Which when he
perceived, he sent his best horsemen, to encounter with Tigranes as far off
as they could, and to compel him to leave his raungyng, and keep his camp.
He provoked Mithridates to fight, and encamped about him, but Tigranes amd
Mithridates flyelli.
he could not move him, till famme oppressed him, and disolued al their purpose.
Tigranes went into the furthest part of Armenia, Mithridates into Ponius with
the rest of his own army, having four thousand, and as many of Tigranes.
Lucullus followed him, being driven also for want. Mithridates outgoing him, he
met Mithridates over throvveth Fabrus.
with Fabio, that was left there of Lucullus, and overthrew him, killing five
hundred: Fabio taking fresh servants that were Fabius overthrows
Mithridates which is sore hurt.
in the camp, fought again the whole day, and the fight was doubtful, till
Mithridates was hurt on the knee with a stone, and under the eye with a darte,
and was carried away with speed, and many days the one refrayned from fight,
for fear of the kings health, the other, for the multitude of them that were
hurt. The Agarians a nation of Scythia, did cure Mithridates, using the
Agarenes the kings plusitions.
poison of Serpents for their medicines, and for that cause be ever about the
king. To Fabius came Triarius another Captain of Lucullus with his own army,
and received the power and authority of Fabio: and not long after Mithridates
and he coming A marvelous vvinde, breaks the fight.
to the fight, there was such a wind as never was felt. It tore the tents of
them both, it beat the beasts abroad, and stroke down some men, and thus
both went back. When it was told Triarius for have is ouerthrovve^
that Lucullus was coming, Triarius desirous to fight before he came, he set
upon the former watch by night, and the fight being equal, the king with his
wing, got the better, and dispersed the enemies, driving the footmen into a
foul mire where they were A Roman captain like a servant, vvou^deth the king.
killed, because they could not stir. The horsemen he sent to be chased in
the plain, using valiauntlye the brunt of the victory: til a Captain of a
Roman band, running by him as his servant, gave him a great wound on the
thyghe, because he thought he could not strike through his harness on the
back. They that were next, straight killed him. Mithridates was carried out to
y^ hinder part. The kings friends caused their retreat to be blowe^, the
soldiers having a manifest victory, and following it egrely, and because it
was strange to be called from it, they were much troubled, and in fear least
some other inconvenience badde ^ene.

Timotheus that was the Kings Physician, stopped the wound, and showed the king
unto the^, from above, that were come into the The King is shevved to the
soldiers.
field and stood thronging about his body, even as Alexander in India, when
the Macedonians were afraid for him, showed him self to be cured in a Ship.
When Mithridates came to himself, he blamed them that caused the fight to end,
and that day led The Romans forsake their camp. A great number of Romayne
captains flaine.
his army against the Romans camp. They were fled from it fearfully. When y^
dead were spoiled, the^ were found.xxiiij. Tribunes, and. Cl. Centurians, such
a number of Captains as seldom has bin found slain in a Roman army.
Mithridates went in to Armenia, which the Romans call Armenia the less,
taking with him the victual that could be carried, and that that could not,
he burned, that Lucullus, whom he thought did follow him, should have none of
it. A Roman Senator named Attilius, fled Attilius is killed of suspicion.
from his country, because he was condemned, and in great credit and favor
with Mithridates, was then taken as one that would betray him: and because he
was a Senator, the king would not put him to the torture, but killed him. They
that were of his counsel he tormented cruelly. His free made men he suffered al
to depart unhurt, because they did but their masters commandment. Lucullus
now was encamped nigh to Mithridates, when the Lieutena^t of Asia sent about
and proclaimed to the army, that the Romans Di^^entio^ with the Romans.
accused Lucullus, because he made war longer than he ought to do, and that
his army should go from him, they that did not obey, to have their goods
confiscate. Which being told, the army went al away save a few, which
being very poor, and not fearing Lucullus is left alone.
the pain, tarried still with Lucullus. Thus the war between Lucullus and
Mithridates, not surely ended nor finished, was broke up. For Italy being
rebelled, and they molested, and the sea being full of thieves, and they with
famine oppressed, they did not think it good for them to take another so great
a war in hand, till they were delivered of those incommodities. When
Mithridates heard of this, he went into Cappadocia, and fortified his own
kingdom, the Romans winking at his doings, till they had scoured the seas:
which when it was done, and Pompey that was y^ worker of it, was in Asia. The
war with Mithridates began again, and Pompey was sent to be the General.
Therefore because y^ acts that Pompey did in the sea, before he came against
Mithridates, is a part of Pompeis feats, and can be put into none other proper
writing, I will shortly repeat and run them ever. When Mithridates made
Mithridates fills the sea with Pirates.
his first war against the Romans, and ruled in Asia,, and Sylla was busied
about Grecia, thinking he should not long hold Asia, he spoiled every place,
as I have said, and set Pirates in the sea, the which at the first with a few
little boats, vexed such as they met. As the war grew, they were more, and had
gotten great ships, and taking of great gain, they did not cease, though
Mithridates were overcome, and had made truce, or was fled. For they y^ had
lost their liuyngs and countries through the war, and were fallen into extreme
poverty, left the land, and sought commodity by y^ sea: and first with
brigandines and foists, then with little galleys they roued, the Archpirats
being their leaders as generals of an army, unwalled Cities they spoiled, them
that were walled, The myshappes of the Rouers.
they undermined or beat down, or got by siege and destroyed. The best men
they brought to the sea for their raunsoms: and to avoid the infamy of their
rauine, they called themselves hired soldiers, in stead of sea-rouers. They
had workmen in chains to do their business, and carrying matter of wood,
brass, and iron, they neuerrested. Being proud of their gain, and not
thinking to leave their piracie, they thought they were like Kings and Tirans
or great generals, and supposed y^ if they gathered together, they should be
vnco^querable, they made ships and all kind of armor, specially about Cilicia,
that is called (the hard,) the which they made their common receptacle, or used
it, as their camp, having Cilicia, full of rocks on^ Mountains on the
coaste. Cilices were compted rouer^.
many forts and towers, and void Islands and shipping in every place. Their
chief trade was at Cilicia the hard, being without ports, and full of great
hills, of the which, by a common name, they were called Cilices, the which
evil begunthere, of the hard part of Cilicia, brought unto them Syrians,
Cyprians, Pamphilians and Ponticans, and almost all the nations of y^ East, the
which in the time of Mithridates war, rather choosing to do, than to suffer,
they used the sea for the la^d, that in short space they were many thousa^ds,
and they were not Lords only of the east seas, but all that which is within the
pillours of Hercules. For they had overcome some of the Roman Admirals in
sea fight, and some in Sicelie.

In Sicilia, no man durst sail, and the land wanted their laborers, because
of their robberies, and the City of Rome found this inconvenience most of
all, all their subjects being in want, and they, for their great multitude, in
grievous famine. This matter seemed great and hard unto them, to dispatch so
many armies of men and ships, divided by the whole circle of the land and
sea, easy to flee with their provision, and not to be set upon from their
countries, or evident places* not having any house or property, but all that
ever came to hand. So that the consideration of this war was far beyond
the rest, having no certentie, no surety, nor evidence, it wrought a doubt
with a fear. Murenas being sent against them, did nothing, nor Seruilius
Isauricus, after Murenas. Serui. (...).
Murena: but now they were come to the coaste of Italy, and the rouers were
brag at Brunduse and Tosc^ne, and had taken noble women, and two armies with
their ensigns. Therefore the Romans no longer suffering this loss nor shame,
did choose by law* Pompey chosen admiral against the Pirates.
Pompey, a man of so great fame, to be chief Admiral for three years, of all the Seas within the pillours of Hercules, and four hundred furlongs of la^d
from the sea, they sent al kings, princes and Cities to help Pompey with all
things, and gave him authority to gather armies and money. They sent also a
great army of their own ordinary, and as many ships as they had, and six
M. talents of Athens. So great and difficult a thing did they think it to be,
to overcome so many armies in so great a sea, lurking in so many holes easily,
and fleeing safely, and appearing again of the sudden. Never was there man
before that, was sent with such a power as Pompey was. To whom an army was
given of cxx. thousand footmen, six thousand horsemen, ships with small
vessels two hundred lxx. and ministers, which being of the Senate, they call
legates, xxv. to whom Pompey divided the sea, and gave them Ships, and horses
and footmen and ensigns of war. So was every man an absolute ruler of that
part that was committed to him: and he as king of kings, went about to see if
they kept the order that he appointed: neither would he have the^ chased so*
as they should be carried from one to another without profitte, but to meet
with them, as they might serve one another turn, and shut them up within the
compasses. The manner of the appo^^me^ts.
Pompey having thus ordered all, he appointed Tiberius Nero, to Spain and the
pillars of Hercules, and with him Manlius Torquatus: Marcus P^mpetus, to the
Ligurian and Cel^^can sea: Lentulus Marcelinus, and Publius Attilus, to Lybia,
Sard^^, Cyrnus, and all the nigh Islands about Italy. He appointed Lucius
Ge^^ius, and Gaius Lentulus, Plotius Varius, and Terentius Varius, to
Acarnania, and to keep Sicelie and the Ionian sea. To Lucius Cinna,
Peloponesus, and the coast of Attica, with Euboea, Thessalia, Macedonia and
Boeotia. To Lucius Cull^^, the Islands and all the A^gean and Hell sp^^^. To
Publius Piso, Bithynia, Thracia, and Pelopida, and the mouth of Pontus. To
Metellus Nepos, Lycia, Pamphylia, Cyprus and Phoenitia. Thus he appointed his
Captains to make their courses and their onsets, and to keep their places,
and to receive, when they fled from the other, that in their chase, they
should not exceed too far, nor be The diligence of Pompey.
carried about in their fighting, that it might be speedily done: and he
sailed to them all, and having ouerseene all in the Weast in forty days, he
came to Rome, and from thence to Brunduse, and from Brunduse into the East, so
long a way, he afraid them all with his sudden and quick passage, and great
preparation, and fear of his glory* insomuche as the Pirates that hoped to
have bin too good for him, or truly to have put him to pain enough, being
afraid by and by, left their expugnations of other cities, and resorted to
their wonted holds and holes. So that the Sea was scowred by Pompey without
any fight, and the Rouers were taken of the Captains in every place by parts.
He went into Cilicia, with a great army and many engines, thinking he should
have had many fyghtes and besiegings, at their rocky Towers: but he needed
none, for his glory and great power, making The Pira^^ give over.
them afraid, and thinking that if they came not to fight, they should find
the more gentleness: first they delivered Cragus Cragus and Anticragus* hills
^ Lycia, part of Taurus.
and Anticragus the greatest forts they had, then the mountain men of Cilicia,
and in order all yielded themselves, and also much armor, some ready, some to
be made ready, they delivered: and ships, some upon the stocks, some apt to
sail: brass and iron gathered for that purpose, and sails, cables and other
diverse matter, and a number of prisoners, some being in bands for their
ransom, and some for to work. Their stuff Pompey burned. Their ships he
took. The prisoners he sent into their Countries, of the which, many found
their gra^^s made, because Many restored beyond hope.
they were thought to be dead. The Pirates that seemed to come to this war,
not of malice, but for lack of living, he commanded them to inhabit Mall^^,
^dana, Epipha^^^, or any The Pirates appointed to inhabit hard places in the
coast of Cilicia.
other place, desolate, and void of men, in the hard part of Cilicia: some of
them he sent to ^yma in A^hai^. Thus the Pirates war that was thought to be
most dangerous, was ended in few days of Pompey. Of ships he took. ^^xij.
Of the that were delivered three hundred and six. Of Cities, Fortes, and other
strong places. 120. Of the Pirates were slain in fight. (...). These things
being done speedely, and beyond opinion, the Romans highly extolling Pompey
being yet in Cilicia, those him the General of the war against Mithridates*
with like authority of a ruler alone, where he would invade, and make war,
and to make friends or foes of R^me, whom he thought good, and of all the
army that was out of Italy gave him the authority, The large commission that
Pompey had.
which was never so given to none before him, and peradventure for this, they
called him Great, for the war of Mithridates was now ended by other Captains.

Pompey gathering his army out of Asia, did encamp in the confynes of
Mithridates. Mithridates had a choice army of his own, of thirty thousand
footmen, and three thousand horsemen, and he defended the place, which being
wasted before by Lucullus, he had want of victual. Wherefore many fugitives
went from him, some of the which, he threw down headlongs, some he pulled out
their eyes, and some he burned, therefore the fewer fugitives went from him for
fear of punishment. He was co^^umed with want, and therefore he sent
Ambassadors to Pompey, to know with what condition he might make peace: he
answered, if thou Answer of Pompey to Mithridates.
deliver our fugitives, and commit thy self to us: which when Mithridates
heard, he asked y^ fugitives what they thought, and when he saw them afraid, he
swear, he would never make peace with the Romans, for their covetousness: and
he delivered none, nor did nothing, but they were pryuye to it. Thus did he.

Pompey laying an ambushe of horsemen, bad other go to the front of the Kings
battle, and provoke them. And if they came forth, to give place as though
they were overcome, and Fight of horsemen.
bring them to the place of the ambushe, at the which, they retournyng, they
might get into the Kings Camp with them that fled: Which had been
done in deed, if the King fearyng it, had not brought out his footmen:
and so they retired.

This was the end of the first attempt of the horsemen between Pompey and
Mithridates:

The King being molested with want, was compelled to go back, and suffer
Pompey to come into that part, thinking that being in that wasted place, he
should suffer many inconveniences: but he had provided victual to come behind
him, and going eastwarde against Mithridates, made many Towers and trenches
against him, and compassed him in the space of five hundred Furlongs, that he
could not now easilye come by victuals. And the King did not stop his
entrenching* either for fear, or for ignorance, or for that all evils were
now to come upon him: and being oppressed again with want, he killed all
beasts of cariages, only horses he spared, which scarcelye The King fle^th.
serving for fyfety days, in the night he departed with great silence by hard
ways, whom Pompey could hardly overtake in a day, saving the tail. Then the
King being counseled by his friends to set his men to the battle, would not
fight, but with his horsemen only keep back them that approached, and in the
night hyd himself in thick woods. The day following, he took a rocky place,
to the which, was one way only to come, and there he was kept with four
hands. And the Romans kept on the contrary side, that he should not escape.
The next day, either of the^ armed their men. The forewarders of either part,
at the side of the hill skirmished, and the horsemen of the Kings were commanded
to help their fellows without horses. Upon whom, when y^ Romans came with
their horsemen, y^ kings me^ ran on heaps to y^ ca^p, to get their horses, and
to match with y^* Romans ^gallye. They that were above and armed, seeing them
come running with showt, and not knowing what was done, but thinking they A
discom^iture upon an error.
had fled another way from the Camp that was taken, threw away their
armoure and fled, and the place being hard, one fell upon an other in the
thruste, til they fell from the rocks. Thus the army of Mithridates, through the
lack of them that would without order take upon them to help their former
selowes, falling into a consusion, was lost. The rest of the matter was easy
to P^mpey, killing and taking the unarmed, and being shut in the rocks, of
the which ten thousand were slain, and all the Camp with the treasure of
gold was taken. Mithrdites with his guarde only, fleeing thoroughe the rocky
places, met with some of the hired horsemen, and three thousand footmen. They
conducted him to Sinoregia a castle, where he had laid (...).
up much money, and giving gyfts and a years wages to the companions of his
flight, he carried with him six thousan^e talents, and went to the fountains
of Euphrates, minding to go from thence to Colchos: and using continua^l
speed, passed Euphrates the fourth day^. Tarrying there three days, he took
them (...).
that were with him, or came to him, and went to Chotena of Armenia, there
overthrowing the Cotenians and Iberians that kept him off by slings and darts,
he went to the floude Apsares.

These Hiberians of Asia, some say were the progenitors, and Hiberians of
^rmenia and Spain.
some the posterity, of the Hiberians of Europe: and some say, they were only
of one n^me, for their manner and tongue is nothing like. Mithridates wintred at
Dioscuride, which City they of Cholcide, (...) a city in C^^hide. where
sometime occupved three h^n^red n^^^ons of diverse language.
think to be a Monument of the travail of Castor and the Argonants: and
thought he were yet flee^ng, he conceived no little matter in his mind, but to
go^ about all Pontus in a circle, and the S^y^hians beyond Pont^s, and the
Fenne of Meot^, and attemp^ B^sphorus, and to take the kingdom of Machares his
son, as unprofitable to him, and then to make open war against the
Romans, and to begin it from Euro^e, they being in Asia, and to put Porus in
the midst, which some think to be called Bespheros, of ^^ swimming over,
when she was made a Cow, and Porus. ^^.
fled ^he ^elousie of Juno.

Thus much beyond all reason did Mithridates think to bring to pass. He
passed by the Seythian nations both that were enemies or otherwise, either by
persuasion or violence. Thus fleing, and in miserye* he was honored and
seared. He p^^^d by the He^iochians, they receiving him. The Achaeans that would
have resisted him he put to flight. They as it is said, came from A^hain^ of
Troy
to P^ntus, being driven by tempest, and these suffered much of the
Barbarians, because they were Grecians. And when they sent into their country
for ships, and were demed, they so hated the Greeks, that as S^ythians, they
sacrificed as many Greeks as A ^acri^ice of men.
came first all for anger, then the fairest only, at last, them to whom it
fell by lotte.

And thus much of Acheans and S^ythians. Mith^idates coming to Meotis, of the
which were many Princes, they all received him, and sent to him for the glory
of his acts, kingdom, and power, yet worthy to be hanored, bringing him many
gifts and sending others. He made lignage with them, thinking to do strange
frats, as to go from Thracia to Macedonia, from Macedonia to Pannonia, and so
to Italy, and the mountains of the Alps, and made marriages for his daughters,
with the mightiest of his confederateurs.

When his son Machares heard that he had come so great a way in so little
time, through so many fierce nations, and the places called the Locks of
S^ythia, that no man had gone before, he sent certain Ambassadors unto him,
to excuse him, that for necessity, he obeyed the Romans. And when he saw his
anger extreme, he fled into Ponto Cherron^so, burning his ships that his
father should not follow him. But he sending other to take Machares kills
himself for fear of his father.
him, he killed himself. Mithridates killed all his friends that he betook
to him* when he went to that Kingdom. The familiars of his son, that were
come by private friendship, he let go unhurt. Thus did Mithridates.

Pomp^^ ^^llowed him flee^ng as far as Cholcos, not thinking good to follow
him an^ further, nor to pass about Pontus or the Fenne of Meot^^, nor
supposing, that in that case he would attempt any great matter, he went to
Cholcos, to see the history of Argonante, and Castor, and P^^lux, and the
journey of Hercules, (...) were ^^^ (...) that went (...) Jason. P^omethe^^
was tied at the hy^^ (...) Stre^^es of gold. A^^os.
and thiesly to see the passion of Prometheus, which they say he suffered at
the hill of Caucasus. There be many springs that run from Cau^^s^^, that
carry shr^ddes of gold that can not be seen: and the inhabitants put fleeses
into the strea^^, where it is deepest, and so gather the gold sand that is
contained. And peradventure such a one was the golden fleese that Aet^s bare on
his back. Whilst Pompey was b^holding this story, other nations that were
nigh, sent unto him: but O^azes the King of Alban^a, and Artocus, the king of
Hiber^a, with ^00. thousant, lay in wayt Artocus leyth^in vv^yre for Pompey.
for him at Circus, the flood flowing into the Sea of Cas^^ with twelve
mouths, many rivers running into him, and Ara^os greatest of all. When Pompey
heard of the trayn^s, he passed the flood, and drove the Barbari^^s into the
thickest woddes. They Pompey destroys the en^rutes in a vvodde.
are good fighters in woddes, hiding themse^ues, and appearing suddain^ly
again. He compassed the wodde with his army and burned it, and chaced them
that fled, until all sent hostages and gifts, of whom he trumphed in Rome.
Among the hostages and prisoners, there were sound women, having no less
wounds than men, and they were thought^ to be Am^z^^^s, ^yther because Women
^ound vvou^ded.
the Amazones that be a nation thereby, were come to help them, or for that the
Barba^ta^s call all warlike women Amazones. Amazones were the vvome^ that (...)
one of their breasts.
Pomp^y going from thence, ^nc^mped in Arme^ia, accusing Tigr^^es for helping
of Mith^^d^ies, marching to A^t^zata where the kings palace was Tigranes would
not have war. He had children by Mithridates daughter, of the which Tig^anes
killed two, one in fight making him war, the other, ^icause he would Tig^anes
ki^leth (...) of his children.
not take him up when he had a fall at hunting, and because he did set the
crown on his head. The third, byc^use he lamented his father in that hunting,
was crowned of him, but rebelling shortly after, he was overcome of his father,
and fled to Phraa^^^, king of the Parthians, that now succeeded in the
Kingdom to his father Sintrico. When Pompey was at hand, conferr^ng with
Phraates, and he agree^ng, and seeking private f^endship with Pompey, the young
man humbly fled to Pompey, being Mithridates (...) in great (...) for (...)
daughters son. But great was the estimation of Pompey among the Barbarians,
for justice and faithfulness, to the which, his father Tigranes also trusting,
came unto him, withou sen^ing any messengers a^ore, (...) himself and all his,
to T^granes sul^^^^tteth ^o Pompey.
Pompey, and the ^^dg^ment b^tw^^e him and his so^^e. Pompey sent his chief
Cap^aynes, commanding them to mee^e y^ King with all honor: they that were with
Tigranes, because they had not sent before, fled, but Tigranes we^^ on, and
honored Pompey as the better, after the Barbaria^ fashion. Some say, he was
brought by y^ sergeants, whom Pompey had sent to setch him. Howsoever he came,
he made an account of his doyngs, and gave to Pompey sire M. talents, and to
every common Souldioure. 50. drammes, and to a Captain of a band a M. and to a
collonell ten M. Pompey The (...) of Tigranes.
forgave all y^ was passed, and agreed him with his son, and appointed him to
reign in Sophene, and Gordene, (these be no^^e Armen^a the less) and his
father, in the rest of Arme^^a, in the which his son should succeed him. The
land that he had conquered, he commanded him to leave, and he left Syria from
Euph^ates to the Sea, for Tigranes had this, and a part of Cili^ia, putting out
Antiochus that was called the dutiful. The Armentans that for ^ooke Tigranes,
when he went to Pompey, remaining in suspicion, persuaded his son, being yet
with Pompey, to entrappe his father. He was taken and bound, and in that time
stirring the Parthians against Pompey, was brought in triumph, and dispatched.
Pompey thinking all war had bin ended, builded a city, where Tigranes son
is taken, ^ carried in triumph. Pompey ^^lde^^ Nicopolis.
be overcame Mith^i^ates, and of y^ act, called it Nicopolis, and it is in
Armen^^ y^ less. He restored y^ kingdom of Cappado^ia to Ariobarz^n^s, and
added Sophene and Gordene which he had given to Tigranes son, the which now
^e subi^ct to Cappad^cia H^ gave him also Cab^la a city of Ci^icia, and
others, y^ which kingdom Artobarzanes gave unto his son whiles he was alive,
in the which was many mutations, till Augustus time, in the which it was
made a province as other kingdoms were Pompey passing over y^ hill Taur^s, made
war upon Antiochus Con^gemus* ^^l he was accepted to peace. He overcame Darius
y^ Media^, either because he holp Antiochus or Tigranes before. He overcame y^
Arabia^s, y^ Ar^bians.
be called Nabathei* Areta being their king, and y^ Jesues yt re^olted from
their king Aristobulus, and took Hierus^lem y^ is y^ most Pompey take^^ (...).
holy city to the^, and the rest of Cilicia y^ was not y^^ subject to Rome, and
that part of Syria, that is about Euphrates, which is called Caele, Ph^nice
and Palestin^* and the Idumeans, and ^^^reans, and al other names of Syria, he
brought under the Romans dominion, without any war, having no matter
against Antiochus the A straight interpretation of ^ight.
pitiful, being present and suing for his fathers Kingdom, but because he
thought, that it being taken from Tigranes, who had put out Antiochus, it might
well ve judged to the people ^^ Rome.

Whiles he was about these matters, Ambas^adors came unto him from Phraates
and Tigranes, that were at war. They that came from Tigranes, desired help
as of their fryende. They that came from Phraates, desired to be received into
amity with the Romans. And Pompey not minding to make war upon the
Parthians without the decrae of the Senate, sent arbitrers to reconcile them.
And thus he did.

Mithridates had now gone about Pontus, and having taken Pa^ticup^on a city
at ^^sphorus ^^^eris Mithridates kyll^th his son.
P^^ticup^on, that is the chief city of Merchandise in Europ^ at the entry
of Pontus, he killed his son S^phares at P^^^, for his mothers fault, which
was this:

Mithridates had a castle, in the which were hid under the ground in brazen
vessels bound with iron, much treasure secretly. Stratonice, one of
Mithridates wives or women, which had the government and keeping of this
Castle, whiles Mithridates went about Pontus, delivered the Castle to Pompey,
and revealed the treasure that was unknown. Only with this condition, that if
Pompey took her son S^phares, ^^ should save him. He having the money,
promised to save her son, and gave her leave to carry away her own things.
When Mithridates knew what was done, he killed Siph^res at the narrow sea, and
threw his b^^ye unburied, his mother s^yng it on the other shore.

Th^s he killed the child, to be revenged of the mother.

He sent Ambassadors to Pompey being in Syria, and not hearing whither he were
alive or dead, that he might enjoy his fathers kingdom* and pay Tribute for it
to the Romans. Pompey bad h^^ come, and speak for himself as Tigranes had
done. That he said he would never do, being Mithridates, but h^ would send
some of his children and friends.

Thus he said, and withal gathered an army together of free and bond, bringing
much armor, shot, and munition, sparing no man's wodde, nor laboring Ox, to
make strings. He ^ette taxes upon every man, though he were but of small
substance, the collectors whereof did much spite, which he knew not of. And
being sick in his face of a bile, he was healed of y^ Eunuchs, Mithridates sick
in the ^ace.
and only sen^ of the^. When he was whole, and his army gathered, there was
threescore choice* bands, with six hundred in a company, and there was
another great multitude, and ships, and places which his Captains had got
whilst he was sick. He sent a part of his army to Phanagorea, which was
another mart town at the mouth, that he might have his entries on both sides,
Pompey being yet in Syria. Castor of Phanagorea b^yng injured of Triphon, an
Eunuch of the Kings, he killed Triphon as A mutenie at Phanagorea.
he entered, and called the people to liberty: and they because the Castle was
holden of Artaphernes, and other sons of the Kings, did bring woodde, and
burned the tower, by the which fear, Artaphernes, Darius, and Xerxes,
Ozethres, and Eupatra, Mithridates children, gave themselves to be taken.
Artaphernes The kings children taken.
was about forty years old, the other were fair young men. There was another
daughter of Mithridates called Cleopatra, who tarried still, whom the father
loving for her noble heart, sent diverse Foystes, and took her away. Other
Castles there about lately taken of Mithridates, following the b^ldnesse of the
Phanagoreans, revolted from Mithridates, Xerronesus, The^dosia, Cities reuolte.
Nymph^on, and all other that were fit for the war about Pontus. He seeing
these many reuoltings, and having his army in suspicion, not faithful, being
compelled to serve of necessity, and for the great tributes, and the
infidelity of armies always toward the Generalles that be in misery, he sent
his daughters by his Eunuchs, to be married to the princes of Scythia,
requyring an army to be sent him with speed, sending five hundredth
Souldyoures with them. They, being not very far off, Mithridates, killed the
Eunuchs, because they were ever injured of The Kings Eanuchs be killed.
the Eunuchs, that might do most with Mithridates, and led the maids ^o
Pompey. Mithridates being spoiled of so many children, Castles, and of his
whole kingdom, and not fit now for to make battle, nor loking for any
help of the Scythians, yet not conceyuing any small matter, as one that was in
calamity, but sent to the Frenchmen, whom he had made friends long before,
intending to go to them, and invade Italy with them, thynking many of Italy
were weery of the Romans, and hearing that Anniball* began the war in
Spain, and was most fearful to the Romans. He knew that of late almost all
Italy rebelled from Rome, and kept a long war with them, and that Sparta^^^
^ swordplayer, was stirred up of them, a man of no regard. With this opinion he
marched toward France. This most bold enterprise the army disappoynted, being
not content with so great a boldness, nor so long a journey, to be led into
a strange country, against men, whom they could not overcome in their own
country, thinking Mithridates to be in despair of all things, and would in
labor and like a king end his life, rather than in rest. Yet a while they
abode, and were quiet, for he was no small king; and not to be contemned even in
adversity. They standing thus, Pharnaces that was most dear to him of al his
sons, P^arnaces ^he kings son.
whom he had many times declared to be the successor of his kingdom, either
for fear of his kingdom by this army, being yet like to obtain pardon of the
Romans, but if his father should make war in Italy, like to lose all his
heritage, either for other causes and reasons, and desires, he laid wait for
his father. The conspiratoures being taken and put to the rack, Menophanes
persuaded Mithridates not to kill his son that was (...) sa^^^^ (...)ces.
^o much esteemed now in his voyage, for (said he) such mutations hap in
war, which being ceased* they be stayed also. He being persuaded, granted
pardon to his son: but he fearing the remembrance of it, knowing the army was
weery of the journey* in the night went to the fugitives of Rome that served
next his father, and showed what danger they should be in if they went into
Italy, which they evidently saw, and The army reuolteth from the King, by the
practice of his ^^^^e*
promising them many benefits if they would tarry, brought them to rebel
from his father. When he had persuaded them, Pharnaces sent to the other that
were next in the army, they also* ^onsenting, the fugitives were the first
that departed in the morning, that forso^ke the king, and other that were ever
next, made a great shoute, and the Navy answered them, not being all alike
disposed peradventure, but ready to mutations, and despising him that was in
adversity, always hoping for Princes for^^^^ in calamity.
better at every change. Other being ignorant of that was done, and thinking
all other to be corrupted, and that they alone should be despised of the more
part, for fear and necessity, rather than of good will, agreed to their
purpose.

Mithridates being stirred by the cry, sent some to know what they meante by
their cry, they not dissembling, said, they required the son to reign for
the father, a young man for an old, that was ruled by his Eunuchs, and that
had killed so many children, Captains, and friends. Which when Mithridates
heard, he came forth to say somewhat to them, and even then a number of his
guard fled to the fugitives. They said they would not accept them, unless
they did some notable feate, and withal showed Mithridates. They killed his
horse, and now The kings horse killed by his guard. A crown of paper in stead
of gold.
as obteyning their purpose, saluted Pharnaces King, and one brought a broad
paper out of the Temple, and crowned him with it in stead of a diadem. Which
when Mithridates did see from above, he sent one after another to Pharnaces,
to require safe flighte, no man of them that were sent returning, fearing least
they should be given to the Romans. He praising the gar^, and such friends as
yet tarried with him, sent them to the new king, and the army killed some of
them without any cause, he taking out of his sword a poison that e^^^ he did
carry about him, tempered it. Two of his daughters, named Mithridates Two of
the kings daughters die constantly before him. The poison would not work in
the king, because he had used daily medicines against poison, which of his
^^^e be called M^^^rida^^^^.
and N^ssa* espoused to the Kings of A^gipe and Cypres* that were brought up
with him, desired they might take the poison first, and were very instante,
and would not let him drink it, till they had taken it: and the potion
soon dispatched them, but it would not work upon Mithridates himself*
though he walked fast for the purpose, because he used to eat other
medicines, which he took ever against the violence ^^ poison, which
medicines at this day be called Mithridatum Seeing then one ^itaeton, a Captain
of the Frenchmen, he said unto him, I have had much profit of thy right hand
against mine eniemies, I shall now receive greatest pleasure, if thou will take
me away, that The words of Mithridates before his mise^able end.
am in danger to be carried to the pomp of a triumph, that have bin a ruler and
a king of so many and so great a dom^mon, and can not dye of poison, because
of the continual receipts of other medicines. But the greatest and most ready
poison which kings always faele, is the treachery of army, children, and
Treachery the greatest poison to Kings.
friends, I did not foresee, but all things, concerning my diet, I did foresee
and keep. Bitaetus weeping, obeyed the necessity of the king. Thus
Mithridates dyed, the eleventh after Darius last king of Persia, and the eight
from Mithridates that for sooke the Macedonians, and possessed the kingdom of
Pontus. He lived eight or nine year above threescore, and had reigned fifty
and seven years: for being yet an Orphane, the kingdom came to him. He
subdued the nigh nations of the Barbaria^s, and overcame many of the Scythians,
and made a sharp war against the Romans forty years, in the which he
often conquered Bithinia and Cappadocia. He ouerranne Asia, Phrygia,
Paphlag^^i^, Galatia, and Macedonia, and sailing into Grecia, did many great
acts, and was Lord of the sea from Cilicia to I^nia, till Sylla shut him
aga^e within his fathers kingdom, overthrowing 140. M^^^, and after so great a
^^^e, renewed the war ca^^^y, fighting with the best Ca^tayn^^ Being overcome
of Sylla, Lurullus, and Pompey he had many ^^m^s the better hand of them.
Lucius Cassius, Oppius Q^i^^^^, and M^^ius Acili^^, he t^ke pri^oners, and
l^dde The acts of (...).
them about with him, til he killed him that was the cause of the war, and
the other ^e delivered to Sylla. He overthrew Phimbria* Murena, and C^^^ the
Co^^^ll, and (...) and Triarius. He ^ ^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^ heart, and ^uen in his
mi^erie was mighty and ^ a^a^full* He left nothing unattempted against the
Romans, no, not when he was overthrown. He was consedered with the M^^tians
and (...) and sent to (...) into (...). He was wounded many times in his
person of his enemies and others The courage of the King.
by treason, yet (...), though he were ^^^e. Neither was any of the
conspiracies hid from him, no not in his last days, but where he willingly
let it p^sse, he was destroyed by ^^, so unthankful a thing is malice
o^teyning pardon. Bloody Mallce obteyning pardon unthankful. A cruel King.
he was, and always cruel. He killed his mother and his brother, and of his
children three sons and three daughters. His body was big, as his ar^oure
do declare, which he sent to Nemea and Delphos. He had good strength, and
even to the last, Nemea the place where teates were shevved in the honor of
Hercules. The strength of the King. The learning of the King. He loved Music.
could ride and throw his dart. He ran in one day a thousand furlongs by
changing of horses. He guyded a chariot with. xv^. horses. He was learned in
the Greek letters, and thereby did understand the Greek Ceremonies. He loved
music. He was temperate and paynefull in all things, and only he was
overcome of pleasures with women. Thus Mi^hridates called E^ipator Dionisius
dyed. When the Romans heard of it, they made great joy, as deliue^ed of a sore
enemy. Pharnaces sent his fathers corpse to Sin^pe to Pompey in Galleys, and
them that took Manius ^other many pledges, as well of Greci^ as Barbaria: he
desired his fathers kingdom, or to be king of Bosph^rus only, the which
kingdom Muchares his brother had of Mithridates. Pompey gave allowa^^e The
body of the King buried* at the charges of the Romans.
for the burying of Mithridates body, and appointed them that looked to it, to
bury it royally, and to place it in Sinope among the kings Sepulchers, loving
him for his noble heart, as a king most worthy in his time. He made Pharn^ces
that had delivered Italy from great trouble, friend and confederate of the
Rom^nes, and gave him ^^sphorus for his kingdom, Phanagorea excepted,
Thanag^^^^ ^r^^
which he left free, and of their own jurisdiction, which were the first that
re^isted Mithridates after he renewed force, and had gotten ships, and another
army, and places of receipt, and were leaders of rebe^^on to other, and causes
of his destruction. He in this one war ouerth^^^^ the pi^^^s, and subdued the
mightiest king, and ^oing brought to fight without^ the war of Pontu^, the
Ch^leans, Albanians, T^erians, Armenians, Medians, Arabians, and Jews, and
other nations of the East, he suboued, and I^nited the Empire of the Romans
unto Aegip^, into the which he would not enter, though they ^^^^ at ^^^ision,
and the king calling him, and sending him (...), and ^^^ey, and garments, ^ to
all his army, either fearing the greatenesse of that kingdom yet flourishing,
or a^oyding the hate of his enemies, or oracles, forbidding it, or for other
reasons which I will show in the story of Aegipt. Of the nations that he
wanne, some he left Aeg^^ ^ at touched.
free, because they were of the Romans amity. Some he made subject to the
Romans, some he gave to be kingdoms, as Armenia to Tigranes, Bosphorus to
Pharnace, and Cappadocia to Ari^barzanes, with the rest that I spoke of. He
committed Seleu^ia t^ Antiochi^, Comagines^, and all the other that he had got
in Mes^p^tamia. He appointed Tetrarches of ^allogrecia, which ^e now
Galatians, bordurers upon Cappadocia, D^^otaro, and others. At^alus Pompey
appoints kings ^^^ pr^^ces. The minister of Com^gena equal to king. Castor.
Cities b^ilded of Pompey.
had power over Paphlagenia, and Aristarchus of Colchus. He appointed
Archelaus, the holy minister of the Goddess in Comagena, which is as good as a
kings dominion, and declared Castor of Phanagorea, a friend to the Romans, and
he gave to other much land and money. He builded Cities in Armeni^ the less,
Nicop^lis, because of his victory, in P^ntu^, Eupatoria, which Mithrid^^^
Eupator builded, and named it of himself, and destroyed it, because it
received the Romans, and Pompey erected it again, and called it Magnop^l^. In
Cappadocia he reedifyed Mazaria, that Magnop^^^.
was utterly destroyed, and others that were decayed or afflicted he restored.
In Pontus, Palestina, and C^losyria, and Cilicia, where he placed the Pirates.
The City that of old time was called Sole, ^^ Pompe^op^li^. (...) full of
treasure.
now Pompei^pol^. In Talauris, which City Mithridates had as a storehouse for
his munition, were found two thousand cups made of precious stone, bound
about with bars of gold^, and pottes, and cannes, and lauers, beds, and
cha^ers most rich. Ther^ were bridles, saddles, and caparisons for horses,
beset with gold^ and pre^ious stone, the which were so many, as thirtye days
was spent in the delivery of them. Part of them were given by Darius
Hi^^apsis, some of y^ king P^^l^^ei, which Cleop^^^ gave to y^ Coans, and they
to Mithridates, and made and gathered more, being desirous of precious
appar^^^. At the end of ^^inter Pompey distributed gifts to his army, to every
man five (...) of Ci^^es to the ^^^^.
A^hens, and to the Captains accordingly. They say the (...) came to xv^. M.
Talents* He went to (...) and s^ye^ (...) and from thence went to Rome, leaving
his army at (...), and sending every man ha^^: which act being so (...) to
the people, made the Romans to wonder. There came to meet him The receiving
of pompey o^ Rome.
by several companyes, the young men furthe^^^^, then in order as every man
could for age, last the Senate, extolling his acts, ^or the^e was no man that
had overthrown so many enemies, nor taken ^o many nations, and measured the
Roman Empire with the flood of Euphrates. He triumphed most gloriously ^^ ever
did man at the.xxxv. year of his age, which continued two The triump^ of
Pompey.
days of many nations, front Po^tui, Ar^^enta, Capp^d^cia, Cilicia, and all
Syria, of Albania, Heniochia, Achaia, and S^ythi^, and the East Hiberians. And
he brought into the ports seven hundred sound ships, and to the pomp of
his tri^^ph Cha^iots, and Here a Millon is ten thousand.
Carts wrought with gold, and other fu^l of diverse treasure, as a bed of
Darius Histapsis, and the chair and Scepter of Eupater, and an image of gold
of eight cubits to the breasts, of silver coined seven thousand milions,
five hundred and ten, an infinite number of carts with armoure, and s^^^mes of
ships, and a multitude of prisoners and picates, none bound, but clad after
their countr^y. Before Pompey went the Captains of the kings that were
overcome, or their children or generals, some being captives, some given for
hostages, in number three hundred. xxiii^. Then was there T^gran^s, son to
Tigranes, and five of Mithridates, Artaphernes, Cyrus, Oxathres, Darius, and
Xerxes, and two daughters, Ors^baus and Eupatr^. There was brought^ Olthaces,
sceptr^^bearer of Colchos, and A^istobulus, king of the I^^es, and the Tirans
of Cili^^a, and women of the kings blood of Scythia, three Dukes of Iberia, and
two of Albania, and Menander of L^^dicea, that was general of the h^rsemen to
Mithridates. The Images of them that came not, were brought: of Tigranes and
Mithridates fighting, being overcome, and fleeing: of Mithridates the
beseeging, and the night, when he was fled was represented, and the silence,
and last it was showed how he dyed. The Virgins that chose to dye with him
were figured, and descriptions of his Sons and Daughters that dy^^ before
him, the pictures of the Barbarian Gods, and the ornaments of their
country. There was borne a table showing these things. The Ships that were
taken, were eighte hundredth, with beakes of brass. Cities builded, eight in
Cappadocia, in Cilicia and C^l^fyria twenty, and in Palestina, that which is
now called Seleucus. Kings overcome, Tigranes of Armenia, Artoces of Hiberia,
Orizes of Albania, Darius of Media, Aret^ of Nabathea, Antiochus C^m^genus, all
these did the picture show. Pompey himself was in a Chariot full of precious
stones, having on the cloak (as they say) of Alexander of Macedony, if it The
glory of Pompey.
may be believed, that by like he had it in Mithridates Guarderobe, being
brought to Co^ by Cleopatra. The Captains of the confederates followed the
Chariote, some on horse, and some a foot. Being come to Capitoli^, he killed
none of the prisoners as other in triumphs had done, but sent them to their
Countries with the common expenses, except the Kings, of the which only
Aristobulus was straight killed, and shortly after Tigranes. This was the
triumph.

Pharnace beseeged Phanagorea, and the borderours of Bosphorus, Pharnaces
makes war.
till the Phanagoreans driven by famine came forth and fought, and were
overcome, of whom he hurt none but took pledges, and went his way.

Not long after he took Sinope, and coveting Amisus, he made war with
Caluisio the Lieutenant, at the which time Caesar and Pompey were at debate,
till Asander his private enemy drone Asander.
him out of Asia, the Romans being otherwise occupied.

He made war with Caesar after he had overcome Pompey, returning from Aegipt
at the hill Scotio, where his father overcame Trian^, and being overcome, he
fled to Sinope with a thousand horsemen. Caesar having no leisure to follow
him, sent Domitius against him, to whom he delivered the City, and upon
conditions of peace, went away with his horsemen, whose horse he killed, they
being much grieved at it. Being conveyed by ship, he fled to Pontus, and
gathering some S^ythians and Sauromatians, took Theudocia and Panticapaea. His
old adversary Asandro coming again upon him, and his horsemen wantyng horse,
and not used to fight on foot, they were overcome, Pharn^ces alone fighting
valiauntlye, till he was wounded, and died Pharnaces slain by a privy ^o^.
when he was fiftye years old, and x^. years king of Bosphorus. This
Pharnaces lost his kingdom, which C. Caesar gave to Mithridates of Pergamo,
that had helped him well in Aegipt. Now they be free, but to Pontus and
Bythinia, a president is sent every year.

The other coutries that Pompey had given, although Caesar blamed Spiritual
office of Comagene.
them for taking Pompeys part against him, yet he let them have it, saving the
spiritual office of Comagene, which he translated from Archelous to Nicomedes:
but not long after, both these and those that C. Caesar and M. Antonius gave
to other, were made provinces of the Romans, by Augustus Caesar, when he had
w^^^e Aegipt, the Romans taking light occasions against every man. Therefore
their dominion encreasyng by this war of Mithridates, into Pontus Euxinus,
and to the sands of Aegipt, and the floude Euphrates from the Hiberians that
be at the pillars of Hercules, it may well be called a great Victory, and
Pompey the Captain even so. They have also Africa to Sirene, which Appion the
king of the house of Lagida, being base, gave them by his Testament: only
Aegipt was left for the compass of their inward sea. ()

The end of the Roman civil vvarres with King Mithridates.
The Romans war with the Spanyardes: by Appian of Alexandria.
THe mountains of Pyrene, stretche from ^he Tosc^ne sea to the North Ocean.
The Celtes which Iberia that part of Spayn^ on either fide of Iberu^ the flood
now Ebr^. Ce^^iberia that part which now is called Arragon.
now be called Galls, do inhabit part of them toward the East. The Iberians,
and Celtiberians from the Toscane Sea also, to the pilloures of Hercules, and
the North Ocean, be toward the Weast, so as Iberia is compassed with the Sea,
except the mountains of Pyrene, which be the greatest and highest hills of
Europe. The nations make a navigations with this compass, and come to the
pillars of Hercules. They do not go by the winter and Weast Ocean, but to
pass into Brittayne which they do, by Brittayne now England.
the commodity of the tides going and coming: and this passage is made by
sailing half a day. Other places of this Ocean neither the Romans themselves,
nor none of their Empire have passed. Therefore the greatness of Iberia, which
now is called Spain, being confedered as one province, is almost incredible,
Spain a great region. ^ight furlongs makes a mile.
for the brea^th of it is term thousand furlongs, and the length as much.
Many nations inhabit it, and be diverse in names, and there be many nauigable
floods in it. What people did inhabit first, or who got it after, and such
other matter, I am not minded to show, but only so much as may apperteyne to
the Romans. Only this I will say, that I suppose the Celtes passed the
Pyrenian hills, and dwelled among the other inhabitants of the Country, of
the which it is manifest, that the name of the Celtiberians came: and the
Phoenitians long before, sailing often thither, I think did inhabit a part of
it. Likewise other Grecians, that sailed to Tartessus, to Arganthonius king of
the same, did Tartessus now Taressa in Germania. Arganthonius lived a hundred
and fifty years.
stay in Iberia, for as I suppose, Arganthonius reigned then in Spain at
Tartessus, which was then a City at the Sea coast, that is now named
Carptesse. And I believe that the Temple of Hercules, was builded of Iphenia,
in that place which is called There were diverse Hercules, whereof one was of
Tirus borne of A^leria another of Th^bes borne of Al^umena.
the pillars, in the which at this day Ceremonies be used after the manner of
the Phoeni^ians, and he that was borne at Tirus, not he that was borne at
Thebes, was counted the God of that Country. But we leave this to them that
have care to search antiquities.

This coast so plentiful and rich, the Carthagies devised to get before the
Romans, and subdued one part, and vexed the other with continual invasions,
till the Romans put the out, and possessed al their places. Other towns after
ward came to their Empire by much labor and long time, which reuolting
diverse times, were again su^^ued by the Romans, who divided that region into
three parts, and sent to many presidents to it. Now they got every place, and
what war they kept with the Carthagies, and then with the Iberians and
Celtiberians, I will show in this volume. The Romans first made war with
the Carthagies, The first war of Carthage for Si^^l^^.
but because that war was made for Spain, I must needs show it in this
history, which I wright of Spain, and for that cause I have comprehended in
the book of the war of Sicelie, what ^doe was between the Romans and
Carthagies for that Islande, and that was, when the Romans sailed into Sicelie
to subdue that place.

The first war with the Carthagies was in Sicelie, for the dominion of that
Island.

The second was in Spain, for the possession of it, at the which time, either
of them invaded others lands with great armies and Navy. The Carthagies
destroying Italy, and the Romans Li^ya.

This war began about the C^L. Olimpiad, when the The old a^compt of
years was by the Olimpiades, which were plays made every five years, in
the honor of ^^piter, institute of Hercules at Olimpia, a City of ^lide.
Amilchar (...).
Carthagies had broken the truce that was made in the war of Sicelie, the
cause whereof was this. Amilchar surnamed Barcha, promised great rewards to the
Celtes and Libyans that were with him in Sicelie, the which rewards being
required of Amilchar when he was come to Carthage, was the cause of the war
with Affrike, in the which the Carthagies suffered much hurt, for they
delivered Sardinia to the Romans, for the injury they had done to the Roman
Merchantes in that war. For these causes, when Amilchar Barcha was accused of
In the first war vv^^o the Care th^gies.
the contrary faction, as by whom came so great detriment of the City, he,
by the favor of them that governed the common wealth, whereof H^sdruball
called the Great, was one, H^sdruball.
to whom he had given his daughter in marriage, and well beloved of the
people, was not only pardoned, but also chosen a Captain, together with Hanno
that was called Great, against Hanno.
the Numidians, the accusation yet depending, by the which, Amilchar must
give an account of his doyngs in the war.

When the war of Numidia was ended, and Hanno called to Ca^thage for certain
complayntes, Amilchar remained Captain of the army alone, having with him
Asdr^^a^ his son in law. And with this army, he sailed to G^d^s, and ^^de^
now Cale^. They be evvo ^lands in the ^^^thest part of ^ra^a^a next the
stre^ghte of ^^lla^ar.
did molest the Iberians, spoiling their land, not that they had deserved
any such thing, but that he sought occasion to be absente from his Country,
making that war, to win the favor of the people. For dividing the pray, he
gave part of it to the Souldyoures that were with him, and part he sent to
Carthage, and part he gave to the chief of the City that favored him.

Whilst he did thus, certain of the great men, and others of Iberia,
conspired together, an^ killed him thus.

They sent certain Carts laden with wodde, which they followed with their
armoure. At this the Carthagies laughed Stratageme of the Iberians.
at the first, not perceiving the policy, but when it was perceived, and the
fygh^e begun, the Iberians selte the Carts on fire, whereby the Oxen were
driven vpen the Numidians. And when the fire was dispersed every where, and the
Oxen ra^^e hither and thither, it much disordered the Affi^canes, and brake
their array, whereby the Iberians came upon them, Amilchar is ^^yne.
and killed Amilchar Barcha, and the rest that fought: but the Carthagies
being allured by the pray of Iberia, sent another arm^ to Asdruball that was
Barchas son in law, and Asdruball.
committed the rule of that army to him. He joined to him Anniball that was
son to Barcha, as his Lieutenant, and his wives (...).
brother, who after got so great a name by his valiant acts, being very young,
but expert in the war, and accepted to the souldyoures.

He wanne many places of Iberia by fair words, as he was very apt to
persuade, and when any thing was to be done by force, he did use the service of
the young man. By this mean, he went over Spain, from the O^^identall Sea, to
the flood Iberus, and made all subject to the Carthagies Empire, the Iberus
(...) from (...), ^o the sea o^ ^^^^or* a etc. Sag^nt was ^cyond (...) Iberus,
now (...), o^ Nomen^ro. (...), of an Island of the Ioman sea.
which flood dividing Spain in the midst, flows into the Oc^^n toward the
North, five days journey from the Mountains.

But the Saguntines, an old inhabitance from the Zathintians, which be in the
midst, between the mountains and the flood, and all other that were come of
the Greeks, about the place called Emporio, and all other that inhabited any
part of Ibe^^^, being afraid, sent four Ambassadors to Rome, wherefore the
Romans not willing the power of the Carthagies to grow too much, sent
Ambassadors to C^thage, where it was agreed, that Iberus should be the end of
the Carthagies dominion in Spain, and The coad^tie^s.
that the Romans should not make war upon their subjects beyoude that flood,
nor the Carthagies to g^^ beyond that flood to move war, and that the
Saguntines, and other Greek people which were in Iberia, should be free, and
live with their own laws, all the which were expressed in the league, that
was made between the Romans and the Carthagies. When this was done, a slave
killed Asdruball, whose master he had cruelly killed Asdruball killed.
before* whilst he was taking order for that part of Iberia that obeyed
Carthage, and gone a hunting, whom Ann^ball after tormented most cruelly, and
killed. The army made Anniball Barcha their Captain, a very young man, and
well-beloved of them.

The enemies of Amilchar Barcha in the Senate of Carthage agreed to it, who
fearing the power of Asdruball and Amilchar, did laughe at Anniball as a rong
man, and began ^o molest in law, the friends of them, accusing them of the
same ^aults that they accused the other that were dead, using the peoples
favor, which hated them for the losses they had, in the time of Barcha and
Asdruball. They required those gifts that Barcha or Anniball sent to them being
of the spople of the ennimies. They sent to Anniball for help, ^hewing that he
also would be despised of his fathers ennimies, except he had now some
regard of them that might defene his matters there. This was not unknown to
Anniball, for he knew well enough that the beginning of deceyts would be upon
him and thought it not good to suffer such enmities continuallye with sear,
as his father and grandfather had done, nor to live all his life, after the
lightenesse of the Carthagies, vs^ng them vnthanke fullye that were of their
side, and had done well for the common wealth.

There was a rumor, when Anniball was a child, and at his Anniball was
^vv^^ne in his youth to be an ^n^^^ye to the Romans.
fathers commandment, y^ he brought him into the place where he made
sacrifices, and made him lay his hand upon the Altar and swear, that so
soon as he had any rule in the common wealth, he should be a mortal ennimie
to the Romans. Therefore he purposed to put his country to great and continual
dangers, that by that fear, he might preserve his own and his friends matters
from per^ll. Therefore, when he saw that Aff^^ca was in good state, and the
Iberians that were under the Carthagies, like to continue in obedience, he
thought he should win unmortall fame, if he made war again upon the
Romans, by the fear whereof, the Carthagies should be occupied, and might,
by good fortune, suboue to his Country the Empire of all the world. For he
hoped, that if the Romans were brought down, that none should be able to
match with him, but if it cha^nced otherwise, yet his enterprise should be
honorable. And that the beginning might breed his estimation if he pasied the
floude Iber^^, he caused the Torboletanes, which be next the Saguntines, to
Anniball pic^^th a ^ua^^el* g^y^^te ^* (...).
come and comylaine that the Saguntines had made r^des upon them and ^one them
other hurts: Which being pers^aded by him, he sent their Ambassadors to
Carthage, and he wrote letters priuilye, in the which he signified that the
Romans practiced with ^he Iberians of the Carthage jurisdiction, to reuolte
from them, and that the Saguntines did procure the same from the Romans,
and that there was no deceit left undone. And of this he wrote many letters,
till the Senate appointed him to do with the Saguntines that should be
profitable to the common wealth. He haning got this occasion, practiced with
the Torboletans again, that they should come to him and complain again of the
Saguntines, who also sent fifteen Ambassadoures to him. And when Anniball
wylied them to declare their controversies, and they anu^^ered, they would
make the Romans their Judges, they were commanded of Anniball to go out of his
camp. And that night passing the river, he invaded that land, and set his
artillery against Sagunt besteged.
their City, which, when he could not take, he compassed with ditche, wall,
and trench. Then placing many garrisons, he continued the siege, and in few
days, went and came diverse times. The Saguntines being in great fear, with
these sudden evils, sent Ambassadors to Rome, to whom the Senate joined
their Ambassadoures, and sent first to Anniball, to put The Roman
Ambassadoures forbidden to ^^ter Anniballs Camp.
him in remembrance of the league, who, if he would not obey, they should go
to Carthage, and aceuse him. With these Ambassadoures they went to Iberia, and
when they came from their Ships to the Camp, they were commanded of Anniball
to go no surther: Wherefore they went to Carthage with the Saguntine
Ambassadors, where they she^^ed that the league was broken.

They on the other side accused the Saguntines, and said they had done hurt
to their Subjects. The Saguntines on the contrary side, called them to the
judgment of the Romans. They said the judgment was in vame, when the matter
must be tried by force.

Which when the Romans understood, some thought aid to be sent out of
hand^ to the Saguntines, some denied it, affyrmyng the Saguntines not to be
comprehended in the league, but The Romans help not the Saguntines.
left free. So as both the bes^^gers and the besieged, must use their own
laws, which sentence pr^ua^^ed.

But the Saguntines being destitute of the help of the Romans, and oppressed
of famine, and continuallye assaulted of Annibal: for he (hearing the City
was rich and full of gold) gave them no time to rest: they commanded all the
gold and silver both public and private to be brought into the market, and
mixed it with lead and iron, that it should be unprofitable to Annibal. And
because they had rather dye by sword; than by hunger, at mydnyght, when it
was most dark, they came out, and assailed the watch of the Carthagies,
looking for no such thing, and killed many of them whiles some sought and some
put on their armor. The sight was long, many Carthagies were slain, and all
the Saguntines^, whose decay being seen from the walls, some of the women leapt
from the top of their houses, some hanged themselves, some killed first their
little children, and then themselves. This was the end of Sagunt, which was a
great and mighty city. When Annibal understood what was cone with y^ money, he
took as many of the youth as was left, whom he tormented Annibal, names
Sagunt Carthage Spart^gena.
and kille^d. And not thinking it good for a City situate at the sea, and in a
fertile soil, to be uninhabited, he made it an inhabitation of Carthage, which
now, as I think, they call Carthage Spart^gena. The Romans sent
Ambassadors to Carthage, which should require Annibal as a breaker of
league, unless they would confess it to be done with ye common consent, and
except they The manner of the Romans de^^^ance to the Carthages.
would deliver him, to denounce the^ war presently. They did so, and where the
Carthagies would not deliver Annibal they gave the desyaunce, and they said it
was done after this sort. The Carthages scorned the Roman Ambassador. He
took up the ^^irt of his gawne, and said: In this garment, O Carthagies, I
bring you war and peace, chose which you will. They answered, give us which
thou listest, he giving war, they cried al with one voice, and we receive it:
and by and by they sent to Hannibal to ouerrun al Iberia, for the league was
broken. Wherefore he raunging every where, got some by flattery, some by
threats, and some by force. He gathered many souldioures, not showing to what
purpose he did it. His meaning was to go into Italy, to send Ambassadors to
the Galls, to search the way of the Alps, to carry his army to Rome, and leave
Asdrubal in Spain. The Romans thinking they must make war with the
Carthagies in Spain and Africa, not once suspecting their coming into Italy,
sent Tiberius so(...) into Africa with one hundred, threescore and two
ships, and two (...). What (...) Longue and other Generalles did in Labya,
all is shown in the book of the Libyan wars. They sent into (...), (...)
(...)
Scipio with threescore Ships, and ten thousand s^^temen and seven hundred
horsemen, to whom they joined for (...), his brother C^, Cornelius Scipio. But
one of them that is, (...), (...)
when he heard of the Merchants of (...), that Anniball was coming into Italy,
and had passed the Alps, being a^ra^^^ he should have taken the Italians
vnp^c^^ted, he delivered the army to his brother, and in a Galley sailed into
(...). What he or other Captains did, that succeeded him in this war, till
Anniball was driven out of Italy after sixteen years, it is showed of us in
the book that follows, wherein also we show all Annibals acts, and
therefore name the book by Annibals name.

Cneus in this war of the Romans, did nothing worthy of writing, till his
brother returned unto him. For when his time was expired, the Romans sent the
Consulls for his successors, to make the war against Anniball, and he was
vnderconsull to them, and sent again into Spain. And so the two Scipio^
did make war against Asdruball in Spain.

The Carthagies being provoked to fight, of Syphax king of Numidia, they called
home Asdrubal with part of his army, whereby the Scipios did easily get the
rest of Spain, and main Cities yielded freely. For they were apt to
govern armies, and also by persuasion, to win Cities to their obedience. The
Carthagies, compounding with Syphax, sent Asdruball into Spain with more
men, and with thyrtye Elephantes, adjoining other two Captains to them, that
is, Mago and Asdrubal, Gysgons sons.

After that time, the Scipios had sharp war, and yet were superiors, of the
which, many soldiers of the Carthagies and Elephants were consumed, till
the winter being come, the Carthagies went to winter at the Turditanes. And
Pub. Scipio stayed at Ca^^ulone, and Cncus, at Orsonae. To whom, when it was
showed Pub. Scipio killed.
that Asdrubal was coming, he went out of the City with a few, to see his
enemies power, but going too far unadvisedly, he was circumuented of the
contrary horsemen, and killed, and all that were with him. Cneus Scipio, not
knowing the chance of his brother, sent his soldiers to fetch artillery,
with whom (...). (...) killed.
the Affricanes made a fraye. Which Cneus understanding, came forth in haste
with the light harnessed to help his men, whereof the former being killed and
put back, Scipio was driven into a Tower, the which they set a fire, and
burned him and his company. Thus the two Scipios were killed, men certainly of
great worthiness and greatly loved and lamented of the Spaniards, that had
committed themselves for their sakes, to the Roman obedience.

When this was known at Rome, the Romans took it very grievously, and sent
Marcellus, which a little before was come out of Sicilie, and with him
Claudius, with a navy and ten thousand footmen, two thousand horsemen, and
money and victual sufficient to make war in Spain. Of the which, no notable
thing being done, the Carthagies increased very much, for now they had
wellnigh gotten all Spain, the Romans being driven into a little straight,
so as they were cast to the Pyrene hills.

The which when they at Rome heard, they were more grieved and afraid,
least, whiles Anniball wasted those Regions, which were at the sides of
Italy, the other army should invade another way: therefore though they would
never so much, they could not leave Spain, fearing the war of Spain
would stretch to Italy. Therefore they appointed a day to determine a General
for the war in Spain.

To the which province, when none now offered himself, they were in more
trouble and fear than before, for all the Senators were still for fear, till
Cornelius Scipio, son to Publius Carnelius Scipio offers his service in a
time of fear.
that was slain in Spain, a young man of. xxiiij years of age, but wise, and
accounted noble in mind, did step forth and boldly spoke lamentably the hard
hap of his father and uncle, affirming that he alone was left to revenge both
their deaths, and other things he added with great eloquence and vehemenete, so
as it were by The (...) of (...).
a divine inflammation, he promised to restore, not only Spain, but also to
take Carthage: wherefore he was thought to boaste too much like a young man,
but he got the favor of the people, which was stricken with great fear. For
they that ^eare, when better hope is promised them, they be comforted. And so
Spain was decreed unto him, as by a foresyght, that he would do some thing
worthy the nobleness of his mind, which the ancients did not call greatness
of mind, but rashness rather of courage.

Which when Scipio perceived, he spoke to the people again, after that sort
that he spoke of himself before, adding this, that his youth should be
impedunent to no man. He exhorted the Elders The modestle of Scipio.
to take that province, if any of them would: he willingly gave place. But
when no man was found to take it, he went with the more estimation and
admiration of all men into his province, into the which he led with him. ^M.
footmen, and five hundred horsemen. For Annibal vexing Italy, a greater
number could not be spared. He had money for their wages, and other furniture,
with eighteen Galleis, with the which, he sailed into Spain, where reteining
the footmen and horsemen that were left, he put them to other, and mustered
and purged his whole army, and then spoke to them very nobly, so as his fame
went shortelye over all Spain, which was wearye of the Carthagies rule.

The virtue of the Scipians stuck in their minds, and they thought the house
of Scipio was sent to them, by the will of God. Which thing Scipio
understanding, pretended he did all things by divine instigation.

And when he understood that his enemies were lodged in four sundry places,
and that in every camp was five and twenty thousand footmen, and two
thousand horse, and further, that al money, and munition, as well for Sea as
land, and also the captives and pledges of Spain, were in the City that
before was called Sagunt, and now named Carthage, and that Mago was there to
keep that treasure with.x. M. me^, he thought good to make his ^^st attempt
there, being moved by the small number, the great abundance, and the seat of
that City to be as a Forte and a receipte of the war both by sea and land,
against Spain, and the shorter passage into Liby^. By these considerations,
The diligence of Scipio.
conferring with no man, he marched at the sun set, riding all night toward
this Carthage, and by day he was there, and made a ditche and tre^che about
it, the Carthagies being amazed, and the same day prepared to give the
assault. He set engines and scales Scipio besieges nevve Carthag^.
against al parts, but only one, where the wall was very low, but compassed
with a poole and the sea, wherefore that place was negligently kept of the
soldiers, but y^ they made it strong in yt night with arrows and stones.
Scipio took the streightes of the Port, that the enemies ships should not
escape, as he that trusting in his virtue, haped to take the City. Before day
he commanded part of the soldiers to mount the engines, and to throw upon the
enemies from above, and other to run the engines at the wall by law, by sorce.
Of the other side, Mago placed. r. M. men at the gates, which taking their
occasion, should sally with their swords only: because in those streights they
could not use spears: other he commanded to keep the walls and towers, and
they there with their engines stones, darts and arrows boldlye abyd y^ n^ght.
The alarm being made, both parts omitted no endeavor, whiles the stones or
arrows were cast from hands, or engines. Some used slings, and euerym^n did his
best in that kind of armoure that he could handle. A band of Scipio was
hardly handled, for y^ Carthagies that kept the gates, issued with their
swords, and made a hot fray with them that brought the engines, and did as
much hurt as they took, till the Romans, whose courage increases ^^p^ril^
made them to retire they that defended that wall, be^^^ ^t^^ed, and they that
fought without sl^^ng, the Romans might eas^^^e set their engines to the
wall. Against whom, they that had skirmished, went up to the wall, and so
again the R^ma^nes were put to fight. Scipio that looked about him and
exhorted them in all places* perceived toward y^ south, ye place where the wall
was low, and that ye water did fall from it, according to the course of the
sea, so that ye was before to the breast, was now but to the ^^d leg. Which
thing being perceived, and the matter diligently examined, he spent the rest of
the day, that the sea did increase, by going about, and encouraging his
souldyoures to do it. My Souldyoures (said he) now is the time, and whilst
the help of God comes to us, scale the wall on this side, where the Sea
opens a way unto us, I will go before you: and saying thus, he took the
ladders first, with the which he began to mount before any other, but his
ga^d and others staying him, and the souldyoures taking the matter in hand, the
Romans got up, whom, when he perceived to be upon certain towers, he badde
the trumpetours and drums go up the wall, and encourage the Romans with
their noise. This thing affraying the enemy, they fled as the City had bin
taken, some of the Romans fought with them, seem ran, and opened the gate to
Scipio, who entered with his army. New Carthag^ is taken. Mago yields.
They of the City fled into houses, and other places. Mago brought his
souldyoures into the market place, which being soon overcome, fled into
the Castle with a few, which when Scipio assaulted, he not being able to
defend it, all his men utterly discouraged, he yielded to Scipio. This so
great a City being taken in one day, which was the fourth day after his
coming, he was extolled with infinite praise of all men, believing that he did
all things rather by the council of the gods than of men, An opinion of
Scipio, that he did all things by inspiration from God.
and so he persuaded himself, the which opinion he mainteyned all his life,
taking beginning at this time. For this cause he would many times go alone
into the Capitol, and shut the doors, as to be taught of God. Wherefore at
this day, only Scipio* image is brought out of the Capitol, whereas all
others are taken from the common place. Then Scipio having taken the City
which should be as a receptacle, and a storehouse of all things for war and
peace, in the which great plenty of armoure, shot, and engines, and
furniture for the Name, and thirty and three ships, and corn, and many
other things were laid up as in a common market, beside ^^^rie, gold* and
silver, as well coined, as uncoined, and the pledges of Spain, and the
captives of Rome. He made sacrifice to God, and ye next day triumphed. Then
after he had praised his souldyoures, he turned his tale to the townsmen,
renewing the memory of the Scipios, and delivering all them that were in
bondage, that w^e^ they came to their countries, they might win them to him.
These things being thus done, he rewarded him most liberally Rewards of the
Romans to him that first mounted the wall, ^ ground of gold was given.
that first mounted the wall, and to the second he gave half so much, and to
the third, and others by like proportion. The yuorie, gold, and silver, that
was left of the pray, he put in ships, and sent to Rome, where three days
together holy days were made, because it seemed, that the City was restored
to the auntiente dignity, after so many evils. All Spain, and the
Carthagineans were astonished with the great act that was done so valiantly,
and so speedely. Scipio leaving a strong garrison in the City, commanded that
part of the wall that was next the fenne, to be made higher, and he went to
subdue the rest of Hiberia, which he did by going himself to some of them, and
sending his friends to other, and taking them by force that resisted. Of the
Carthagies the Captains being both Asdrubals, the one son of A^ilcare, and
having an army of strangers in the furthest part of Spain, the other, the
son of Gisgo, exhorted the Cities that remained in the Carthagies obedience,
to continue in the same, for a great army should come shortly to help them.
He sent another Mago into the next places to gather men, and he entered the
Country of Lersanes, which reu^lled from the Carthagies, to beseege Lersan^
^^^^a Granata.
a City. But Scipio coming upon him, he went into Granata, and set his Camp
at the City, where the next day he was easily overcome, for Scipio put him
from his Camp, and got all Grannata. Mago was occupied in gathering of
Souldyoures, Cerbona.
which were yet in Spain at Cerbona, that with all his power, he might
encounter with the Romans. Many Spanyardes joined with Mago, and many
Numidians being commanded of Massinissa. Asdruball kept in his Camp with the
footmen of these nations. Mago and Massinissa, with the horsemen, had their
camp before the army. They being thus, Scipio divided his horsemen, and sent
one part with Lelio against Mago, and he went against Massinissa. The fight was
long, sharp, and dangerous, the Numidians setting on, and going back, and
coming again to the fight with their shot. But when Scipio gave a token to
his Souldyoures, that the Romans should follow them, and fight with them
with their spears, the Numidians being destitute of shot, were put to
flight, and retired to their tents. Scipio encamped ten furlongs from them,
in a strong place as he desired. The whole strength of the Carthagies was.lxx.
thousand footmen five thousand horse, and thirty Elephants. Scipio had not
the third part, therefore he was doubtful a while, and durst not join with
the whole battle, but continued with skirmishing, whose victual being almost
spent, and the army beginning to lack, he thought it vnhonorable to depart
and do nothing, The valientnes of Scipio.
therefore making sacrifice, and bringing his army where he might well be
heard, framing his countenance and look, as though he had bin inspired of
God, he said, his accustomed Angel had bin with him, and exhorted him to
fight, by reason whereof they should rather trust in the power of God, Scipio
takes occasion of every thing to encourage the Souldyoures.
than in the number of men, chiefly because his other attemptes were brought to
good effect, by the power divine, and not by the multitude of Souldyoures. To
make credit to his words, he caused the southsayers to show them the
sacrifices. And whiles he spoke thus, he espied certain birds fleeyng, unto
whom turning him self, he badde the Souldyoures behold them, saying that God
did send them that token of victory also, and that way the birds flewe, he
turned his body, as one rapte with a divine fury, and with his eyes fixed,
cried. Wherefore all the army turned with him hither and thither, and every
man exhorted other, as to a certain victory. When he saw the thing come to
pass as he would, not suffering the courage of the souldyoure to relent, he
made no delay, but as one taken with all one divine fury, the tokens and
ceremonies of their good luck being showed, he said, it must be obeyed, and y^
battle must be made. When the Souldyoures had refreshed themselves, he
commanded to take armor. He committed y^ horsemen to Sillano, the ^oteme^ to
L^lio and Martio, Asdruball, Mago, and Massinissa. When they saw they were
taken of the sudden of Scipio, being but ten ^urlongs between the Camps,
they blow the ^^^^^, nor without consusion and tumult: therefore the battle
being ^eg^^^^, the Roman horsemen using their old art, were sup^^^our^,
following hard their enemies, and beating the^ with their spear^s, though they
feigned to flee, and turn again, for the Romans being continually at their
heels, kept them from their shooting, because they were so nigh.

The footmen being ouerlayd with the Libyans, continued all day, and although
Scipio ran about and exhorted them to the fight* they would never give any
fierce onsette til he delyuering The courage of Scipio.
his horse to his squire, took a souldioures target, and went alone into the
midst between both armies, crying, help Romans, help your Scipio in this
peril. Therefore they that were nigh, seeing him in so great peril, and they
that were further off, hearing him, all being moved, both with shame, and
danger of their General, exhorted one another, and went against their enemies
with great vehemence, which when the Affricanes were not able to abide, they
turned their backs, therefore partly weerie with fight, and partly weak with
samine, the night being at hand, they were utterly overthrown. This was the
end of the fight at Cerbona, in the which the victory was doubtful: (...)
victory ^t Cerbona.
eight hundred Romans were slain, and ten thousand five hundred of the
enemies. From that time, the Carthagies made have to be gone, Scipio followed
and endamaged them al ways that was possible, but when they were come to a
place strong and well watered, and full of their necessaries, so as the matter
required a seege, Scipio left Sillanus to hold them in and he went to win
the rest of Spain.

The Carthagies that were beseeged of Sillanus removed, and went to Cales to
pass the Sea, and when Sillanus had done them as much hurt as he could, he
returned with his army to Scipio.

Asdruball, Amilchars son, which was gathering of men at the North Ocean,
was called of his brother Anniball, to come into Italy so soon as he could.
The which, that he might do Asdruball passes the mountains.
unknown to Scipio, be passed the Pirenian hills that were next the North,
with the Celtiberians that he had, and so the Romans being ignorant, Asdruball
came to Italy with great iourneys.

In the mean season, Liuius coming from Rome, told Scipio, that the Senate
minded to make him Captain of the war of Carthage, which thing Scipio looked
for, and trusting it would be so, sent Laelius with five Ships to King
Syphax, with many gifts, to remember unto him the friendship that had bin
between him and the Scipios, and to ask him, if he came into Africa, whether
he would be friend to the Romans, which Syphax promised to do, and received
the gifts, and sent Scipio others. When the Carthagies understood that, they
sent Ambassadors to Siphax also, to remember him of society and league, which
Scipio understanding, and minding to prevent the Carthagies, (...) (...) in
^^^^g to Syphax.
because it was a matter of great importance, with two Galleys only, and with
Laelius, went unto him, and when he came to the port, the Carthages which
were come before him, brought out their Galleys, unknown to Syphax, against
Scipi^, but he having the benefit of the wind, with full sail, entered the
port before them. Syphax received them both courteously, and talking privately
with them, and giving his faith, sent them away. He commanded the Carthagies
that laid new traynes against him, to be stayed. This peril Scipio escaped,
when he came to the coast, and when he went from thence. And it is said, that
whilst Scipio was with Syphax, he sat at the table with Asdruball, who when
he had asked him many questions, he The opinion o^ the Carthage Ambassador
o^ Scip^^.
greatly wondered at the sight and modesty of him, and turnyng to his friends,
said, that he was a man to be scared, not only in the war, but also at a
table.

At this time, some of the ^^erians and Celtiberians did yet serve under Hanno,
with whom Martius did encounter, and killed a thousand five hundred of them,
the rest fled home, other seven hundred horsemen, and seven thousand
footmen, being with Hanno, Martius drove into an hill, where wanting all
necessaries, they sent to Martius for composition, whom he commanded to
deliver their Captain Hanno, and the sugitiues, and ^^en tell their message:
so they took Hanno that was hearing of matters, and delivered him, and the
fugitives to Martius* he required also the captives, whom, when he had
received, he commanded the Souldyoures to bring a certain sum of silver
into a plain, because it was not fit for them that ask pardon, to keep
high places: which when they were descended, Martius said unto them, you are
well worthy death, The victory of Martius.
for where as every of you have your countries subject to us, you had rather
make war against us, than our enemies, yet I am content, and give you leave
to go safe, putting off your armor.

Which when they heard, being all grieved with it, and denying to do it, a
sharp fight was made, in the which, half Souldyoures will not deliver their
armoure.
of them were slain, the other half escaping to Mago. He not long before, was
come to Hannos Camp with sixty Ships, but hearing of his calamity, he
returned to Gades, where being in want, he was put in great fear, and there
he rested.

Sillanus was sent to the City of Castaces, where, when he Castaces.
was received as an enemy, he set his Camp before the Town, and made
Scipio to know of it, who sending before what was fytte for the seege,
followed, and by the way got Illiturga.
the City of Illiturga, the which in the time of old Scipio, was friend to
the Romans: and when he was slain, they revolted privily, and pretending to
receive the Romans armies as a friend, delivered it to the Carthagies.
Wherefore Scipio being angry, overcame it in four hours, and took it.

Here Scipio had a wound in his neck, but not so great, Scipio vvounded.
as he would depart from the fight, till he had got the City, for
this cause, the army despising the pray, killed women and children, and
utterly destroyed it.

When they came to Castace, he beseeged it in three parts, but did not
assault it, that he might give the Castaces time to repent, because he
heard they were about such a matter. And when they had killed the Captain
of the garrison which resisted, they delivered the City to Scipio: he leaving
a certain The Castaces Yield to Scipio.
honest man of the City to keep it, went toward Carthage, sending Sillanus
and Martius to the Sea, to spoil and wast all that they could.

There was a City called Astapa, which was always of Astapa.
the Carthagies devotion. When they saw they were beseeged, and knew that if
they came under the Romans power, they shou^lde be sold as slaves, they
brought all their goods and riches into the market place, and compassing the
same with wodde, they badde their wives and children go up to it, and swear
fifty of the chief of the City, that if the City were taken, they should
kill their wives and children, set the The desperatio^ of the Astape^^.
wodde on fire, and burn them and themselves.

When they had called the Gods unto witness of the same, they issued upon
Martius, looking for no such thing, with the which violence, the shot and
the Horsemen were put to flighte. The footmen stayed. The Astapeans fought
valiantlye without hope of remedy. The Romans were more in number, but the
Astapeans were not inferioure in virtue, who, when they were all slain, the
fifty which were in the City, killed all the women and children, and then
kindled the fire, and lepte into it. Martius maruelling at the virtue of them,
refrayned from burning their houses.

After these doyngs, Scipio fell sick, and Martius ruled the Scipio sick.
army, and so the Souldyoures that had spente all upon pleasure, and thought
they had not received worthy rewards for their service, because they had
nothing left, and to whom Scipio ascribed the glory of all his noble acts,
they revolted from Martius, and had their Camp by themselves, and many of
the garrisons and nygh Castles joined unto The Roman^^ souldioures ^^^tine.
them, and some were sent of Mago with money, to persuade them to him.

They received the money, but making Captains and officers of themselves, they
did all things of their own authority, and bound them to it by oath.

Scipio hearing of this, wrote unto them that were authoures, The pruden^^ of
Scipio.
and said, he could not yet reward them as they were worthy, because of his
sickness, and to other he The prudence of Scipio.
wrote, to appease them that were in rage, and wrote to all generally, as
though they had now bin reconciled, that he would shortly reward them all,
and willed them so soon as might be, to come to Carthage for forage. These
letters being read, some suspected some evil, other thinking no hurt, thought
good to give credit to them, and agreed to go to Carthage, whither when
Scipio understood they were coming, he commanded all the Senatoures that were
with him, that cache one of them should go with one of the Authoures of
sedition, and receiving them into their tents in show of friendship, to
take them privily. Then he commanded the Tribunes of the souldyoures, that the
next morning, every of them with their most trusty friends, with their
swords, should go privily, and place them in diverse parts of the city, and
when they had fit places, not looking for any other commandment, should
immediately kill them, if they made any stir while he spoke his Oration.

When it was day, he called all the Souldyoures to an assembly, and caused
himself to be borne to the Generalles seat. They hearing the sound of the
trumpet, being ashamed not to awayte upon their General, being sick, and
thinking they should have received their rewards, came from every place,
part without swords, part covered with a little coat, because they had not
time to make them ready.

Scipio having a guard secretly about him, did first rebuke Scipio to the
souldioures that made the mutiny.
them for their deed, then said, he would put all the blame in the authors of
the sedition, whom O Souldyoures, by your help I will punish.

Then he commanded the officers to remove y^ multitude further, which being
done, the Senatoures brought the authors The authors of sedition punished and
the multitude pardoned.
of sedition forth, who crying, and praying their fellows of help, the
Tribunes that were commanded, killed them that durst once make any noise. The
multitude when they saw them thus handled, and the other armed, they were
sorry, and held their peace, Scipio commanding them to be first killed,
that cried, the other he bound to the pale and beat them with rods, and
after beheaded them. To the rest of the multitude he signified by the Trumpet,
that he forgave them, by this order the army was reformed.

Indibil^ a certain Prince, that before obeyed Scipio, during (...).
the sedition of the soldiers, raunged the dominion of Scipio, he being
followed, would not refuse battle as a cowarde, and killed a thousand two
hundred of the Roman souldioures. But losyng twenty thousand of his men, he
was compelled to ask peace, whom Scipio punished by the purse, and received
him to grace.

Massinissa, unknown to Asdrubal, sa^led into Spain, and made Mas^inis^ all
(...) Romanies (...) the Carthagies had (...) to (...) enemies.
amity with Scipio, and promised if he came into Africa, to be his aider.
Thus he did being otherwise a co^sta^t man for this cause. Asdrubal, that led
him with him, had espoused his daughter to him, whom Syphax loved. Whereof the
Carthagies thought it needful for them, to hold Syphax against the
Romans, and gave the maid in marriage unto him without Asdrubals prinitie,
which thing being done, Asdrubal was ashamed, and kept it secreate from
Massinissa. Which when he understood, he made league with the Romans.

Mago the admiral of the Carthagies, despayring of the state This is part of
(...) and Liguria of Italy.
of Spain, went into Gallia and Liguria, and gathered men with all his might.

The Romans took Gades being left of Mago, and from that time, began to
send yearly officers to govern Spain a little before the. C^L. Olympiade,
which in peace had the office both of a Captain and a Justice. In the which
with no great army, Santio was brought into the form of a City, which of
the name of Italy, was called Italica, and after, was the Country of Adriane
and Traiane, who were chosen to the rule of the Romans. Sant^, the country
of Adriane and Traiane.
He returned to Rome with a navy well furnished and and filled with Captines,
money and spoil of al sorts, and was received of the people of Rome, with all
Islands, especially of the North, for the greatness and marvelous expedition
of his doyngs. And even they that first envied him, and noted him Scipio
honored of all sorts.
of boasting, confessed the thing to be brought to a glorious end. Indibilu
after Scipios return, revolted again. Wherefore the lieutenaunts of Spain,
gathering the ordinary garrisons together, Indibili^ is killed
and other of the province, killed him, and condemned the authors of the
rebellion, and confiscated their goods. Then y^ were privy to the mutiny,
they punished in money, spoiled them of their armoure, and took pledges of
them, and put greater garrisons in their Towns. These things were done straight
after Scipios departure.

This was the end of the Romans first war in Spain. After This is Gallia
To gate, that did in* ^^ there the place ^alled now ^^m ^^^der.
the which time, the Romans making war with the Galls that dwell about Poo,
and with Phillip king of Macedonie, the state of Spain began to be
troublesome again. Sempronius Tuditanus, and M. Claudius, and after the^
Minutius, were chosen Generals, and after, when there was greater stir, Cato
was sent with a greater army, a young man, but severe and painful, and very
notable for his wisdom and eloquence, insomuche, as of the people he was
called another Demosthenes, who was the principal Emporium Cato compared to
Demosthenes ^is courage.
Orator of all Grecia.

When he was come into Spain, to the place called Emporium, and understood
that the enemies were together in a place to the number of sortie thousand, he
kept his Souldioures certain days in exercise, and when he determined to
fight, he sent the ships which he had with him to Massilia, admonishing the
souldioures that it was not to be feared though the ennimie was more in number,
seeing the virtue of the mind is much more of price, than the multitude. And
that he had therefore sent away his ships, whereof they had no need, nor were
kept, but for them that overcame. And when he had said thus, he gave a fierce
onset upon the enimye, and afraying his Souldioures, rather than exhorting
them, as other were wont to do, when the fight was begun, he ran to every
part, and encouraged the soldiers. The fight continued doubtful night, many
^^t^ rather rebukes than chydeth his ho^t The valtantnes and diligence of Cato.
falling on both sides, and when he with three thousand had been upon an hill,
to see al parts of the fight, and saw his men were compassed of the enemy, he
came down with haste, offering himself to re^^^ with the foremost, and so
crying and fighting, he brake the The victory of Cato.
enemies array, and laid the first foundation of victory. He chased y^ enemy al
night, he got their camp, and killed an infinite multitude. As he returned, al
met with him, embraced and congratulated with him as the Author of victory.
These things being done, he gave rest to the army, and made destribution of
the spoil. Ambassadors came to him from al people, of whom he received
pledges. Besides he sent letters sealed to the Cities, commau^ding the bearers
to deliver al in one day, appointyng the day, A people of Cato pulling down
the walls of al Cities at once.
as by conjecture he considred the distance of place, as they might make their
iorny to the furthest City: He commanded the rulers of every city, to pull
down their walls, and threatened destruction to them y^ made any delay. Al
obeyed, being mindful of y^ loss they had received, and severally they durst
not resist, thinking it had bin comanded to them only and not to other, and if
it were to other, they were afraid if other did obey, they should be punished,
if they did disobey. And if they alone did obey, it was a matter of no great
moment. There was no respite for them to send to their neighbors, and of the
soldiers that brought the letters, they were urged to it: wherefore every
city, to save themselves, pulled down their walls, and that they might have
thank for their quick obedience, they did it with great speed. By this mean
all the Cities that be about the flood Iberus, did cast down their walls in
one day, by the only wisdom of their Captain, and they were quiet to the
Romans, for the space of four Olympiades. But after the Five years was
betvveene the Olympiades.
C L. Olympiade, great part of Spain rebelled from the Romans because they
were in want of al necessaries for food. Wherefore the matter coming to light,
Fuluius Flaccus Consul, overcame Fuluius has victory.
them, and many fled to their possessions. But they that were in most want,
and got their living with robbing, assembled al together at Complega, a City
new made and well defenced, that had increased Compolega.
in a short time: from hence they many times molested the The word is Sagum
which is core that soldiers were in war.
Romans, and sent to Flaccus, that he should leave a cloak, an horse, and a
sword for every one that he had killed, and flee out of Spain before worse
happened unto him. Flaccus answered, he would bring many soldiors coats, and
following their messe^gers, ca^ped at y^ city.

They not doing any thing according to their great crakes fled, and daily
spoiled the Countries. They use a certain garment double, of thick w^^ll with a
buckle fastened like a cloak, and that they count a Soldiers coat.

Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, succeeded Flaccus. The Celtiberians (...)
besieged Carab^^, a City friend to the Romans with twentye thousand
souldioures, and thought to get it quickly. Wherefore Gracchus, coming to
help them, and not having any mean to signify it to the besieged, a certain
captain of a band, named (...) ^^ploy^ of (...).
Cominius, told Gracchus what he had devised with himself, he put on a
Spaniardes coat, and went among the slaves of the camp, and as a Spaniard
came with them to the Camp, and from thence into the City, and told them
that Gracchus was at hand with help. Wherefore they abode the siege
valiauntly, and within three days Gracchus came, and so the C^l^^berians left
the siege.

One day twenty thousand came from Complega, bringing (...) o^ the (...)
branches of Olive like petitioners, asking pardon, which coming nighe the
Romans General, gave a violent onsette on the Romans, and put them in great
danger. Gracchus went from the Camp of purpose, and made as though he
fled, and whiles they were about the spoil, he returned, and set upon
them and killed many of them and got Complega. He appointed their la^^e and the
neighbors to them that had need: and made league with the inhabitants of that
country, with certain conditions, whereby they were received into the
Romans amity, to the which he bound them by ^th^. These conditions were
Conditions o^ (...).
much desired in the wars that followed, and for these things, the name of
Gracchus was great both in Spain and Rome, where he triumphed gloriously.

A few years after, great war was renewed in Spain* There was a City in
the borders of the Celtiberians that is called (...), named Seged^, great and
mighty comprehended in the (...) of Gracchus. This City enticing other little
Towns (...)d their walls, the compass whereof was forty ^ur*(...). (...)
example induced the Ti^^^^ans, an other (...) of the Celtiberians to do the
like. Which thing the Senate understanding, forbadde them the building of
their wall, and required the tribute appointed by Gracchus, and commanded them
to go to war with the Romans, to the which they were also bound by the
league of Gracchus. They answered, that touching their walls, they were bound
by Gracchus, not to build any new Cities, but not, that they should not
defend their old. As touching tributes and service in war, they were released
by the Romans, and so they were indeed, with this condition, so long as it
should seem good to the Senate and people of Rome, wherefore Q. Fuluius
Nob^^^or, was sent against them with an army of thirty thousand.

The Segetanes hearing that he was coming, their walls not Segetanes.
being yet finished, desired the Araschians to receive them, and so Araschians*
Carus.
they fled to them. They made their chief Captain, Carus, whom the Segetanes
thought to be a man expert in war. He three days after he was created
General, laid an ambushe of twentye thousand footmen, and five thousand
horse in a shadowy and woddy place, and from thence gave a charge upon the
Romans. The fight was doubtful a great while, at length Carus had a Carus
victory of the Romans.
noble victory, for he ^^ewe six thousand Romans, which was a great loss
to the City*

But when they used the victory rashlye and too proudlye, the Romans horsemen
that guarded the carriage, set upon them, and ^^ew Carus fighting valiantly for
himself, and six thousand Carus is slain.
with him, till the fight was ended by the darkness of the night.

This was done the same day that the Romans kept the feast of Vulcane.
After that day, none of them would come to The feast of Vulcane was in
August. Arathon, Leucon.
fight, but by compulsion. The Araschians assembled that night at Numanti^*
which is a very strong city. They chose Arathon and Leucon, Captains of the
war. Fuluius came thither the third day, and camped four and twenty
furlongs from the city, to whom, Massinissa had sent three hundred horsemen,
and thirtye Elephants, which being come, he went straight to the fight. Fuluius
vvinneth and loses.
He placed the Elephants at the back of the army, and when the fight was
begone, opened a way for the Elephants* whom when the Celtiberians saw, they
and their horse, were afraid, and fled to the walls. The Romayne had the
Elephants should be brought to the wall. There was a fierce fight, till one of
the Elephants being hurt in the head with a stone from the wall, began An
Elephant hurt loses the victory.
to rage and be unruly, and with fury turn upon his fellows, thrusting and
treading down every one he met, no difference between friend and foe: and the
rest of the Elephants being made afraid did the like, and trod and thruste
down the Roman soldiers. The which thing the Elephants, when they are in
fear, are w^nte to do, taking every man for their Elephants common enemies.
ennimye: wherefore for this falshoode, they are called common enemies.
Therefore the Romans without order fled away, which when the Numantines saw
from the walls, they came forth and chased them, and flewe four thousand of
them, and took three Elephants, and much armor, and many ensigns. Of the
Celtiberians The flight of the Romans.
two thousand were killed. When Fuluius had gotten from that slaughter, he
besieged Axenium, which was as a common Axenium.
market for the enimyes, for there was all things to sell* Where, when he did
no good, but lose his men, he retired by night Blesus killed.
to his camp. Wherefore he sent Blesus the Captain of the horsemen to a
nation that was nigh and his friend, (for he wanted horsemen) with a band of
horse. In the way, they fell into an ambushe of Celtiberians* which being
known, the friends fled, and Blesus fought and was killed, and many Romans
with him.

For the which losses and overthrows, Ocile, a City in Ocile in Galacia.
the which the Romans had their treasure and munition, yielded to the
Celtiberians.

Then Fuluius distrusting himself, and afraid of al things, kept within his
camp that winter, defending it as well as he The mountains be the cause of
cold in hot countries.
could, and getting victual* yet was greatly troubled for lack and for
bitterness of cold, wherefore many Souldyours partly going for wood, partly
for the sharpness and great cold, did perish.

The year following, Claudius Marcellus, came in Fuluius Claudius Marcellus.
place, bringing eighte thousand footmen, and.v. C. horsemen, against whom,
when the enemies likewise ha^ said trains, Ocile taken and pardoned.
he, by another craft, avoided them, and went straight to Ocile, and there
camped with all his power: and fortune favoring him, took the City at the
first assault, whom he pardoned, receiving some pledges, and thyrtie
talentes of gold. When this modesty was heard, the Nergobriges sent
messengers to Marcellus, Nergobriges use craft.
to know what they might do to have peace. He commanded them to send him an
hundred horsemen. They promised so to do, yet they followed the tail of the
army, and took some of the carriage. Notwithstanding, they came after, and
brought a hundred horsemen, and said, their hurt in the carriage, was done by
the error of some, that knew not the couenauntes.

Marcellus made the hundred horsemen prisoners, and sold their horses: then he
ranged their land, and gave the pray to the souldioures, and encamped at their
City, where, when they saw their engines brought, and their trenches made,
they sent out an Heraulte wearing a Woolfs skin, to ask pardon, which The
war was ended by him that brought a rod called Caduceum vvherof
ambassadors of peace are called Caduceatores.
he denied to give, except the Aruacceans, Bellans, and Titthians, would sewe
for them, the which those nations did willinglye, praying that a reasonable
pain being put upon them, they might be brought to the league of
Gracchus. Some of them denied that, because they had bin at strife. Marcellus
sent the Ambassadoures of both parts to Rome, there to dispute their
controversies, and secretly wrote to the Senate to compounde the matter, for he
desired the war might be ended in his time, thinking it would be for his glory.

The Ambassadoures of the friends were received into the Ambassadors diuersely
used in Rome.
City, they of the enemies were lodged without the City as the manner is.

The Senate would have no peace, being grieved they were not brought into ye
Romans power, as Nobilior would have done, that was General in Spain before.
Therefore the Senate answered the Ambassadors, that Marcellus should declare
their pleasure there, and forthwith sent an other army into Spain. And then
Soldiers ta^^ by lotte*
was the first time that soldiers were taken by lot, and not by choice, as had
been before. For many did reprove the Consulls, as not vsyng themselves
truly and sincerely in the choice of soldiors, that they might se^d to lighter
enterprises as cause req^^^^d. Therefore it seemed good then, to take their
soldiors by lotte, of whom L. Lucullus, was made General, to whom Cornelius
Scipio Lucullus. Scipio.
was lieutnant, that shortly after got Carthage, and Numantia.

Whiles Lucullus was coming, Marcellus proclaimed war against the
Celtiberians, to whom he rendered their pledges, they requiring them, yet he
deteyned him long with him that went Embassadoure for them to Rome, for what
cause it is uncertain.

There was a suspicion then, which was believed much more, by a thing that
happened, that is, that he persuaded these people to commit their matters to
him, for he did what he could to Marcellus procures peace.
make an end of the war before Lucullus came. For after those controversies,
there were five thousand Aruacceans, that took Nergobrigem, and Marcellus
went to Numantia, and encamped within five mile of the City, and drove the
enemies into it.

Wherefore Linteuon Captain of the Numantines, cried and said Linteuon.
he would deal with Marcellus. And being come in to talk, he said he would
leave the Bellans, Titthians and Aruacceans, whom when Marcellus had accepted
willingly, he commanded money and pledges to be delivered, which when he had
received, he let those people go free.

This end had the war of the Bellans, Titthians, and Aruaceans before the
coming of Lucullus.

But Lucullus, partly for desire of glory, and partly for need, (for he was
poor) led his army against the Vacceans, which Lucullus needy. Vaccei
people of the Island of nether Spain.
be a people in Celtiberia, next to the Aruacceans, notwithstanding the Senate
determined nothing of them, nor they had ever bin enemies of the people of Rome.

Therefore when he had passed the floude Tagus, he came to Tagus, the flood
Ta^a in Lusitama.
the city of Cauc^a, and there encamped. They of the town asked why he came,
and for what purpose he molested them that were in Carpetanes dwell at the
^^oud Taio.
quiet and rest. Who, when he had answered that he came to help the
Carpetanes, whom they had injured, they returned into ye city. And when the
Romans went for forage, they killed many, which being understood, the army
was brought forth, and they met and fought. The Caucaeans a while had the
better, til their Caucaeans slain at their City.
shot failed them, then they fled, not being good at a firm battle, and
so thrusting together at the gate, there were three thousand slain.

The next day, the old men came forth, and besought Lucullus to tell them what
they might do, to keep the Romans favor. He required pledges and an C.
talentes of silner, and y^ their horsemen should serve with him: which when it
was granted, he said, he would put a garrison in the City, and they did not
deny that. He put two thousand choice souldyoures into the city, whom he
commanded to take the walls, which being done, he brought in all his army,
and killed all without respect of age, and thus by extreme cruelty, they were
all slain, calling Extreme injury done to the Romans by Lucullus.
upon the Gods, and the faith of the oath, by the which the Romans had sworn,
and charging the Romans with infidelity, by the which they had murdered
twenty thousand, a few except, that were in the strong and rocky places.
Lucullus spoiled the City, and gave the prey to the Souldioures, purchasing an
immortal infamy to the name of Rome. All they of the Country assembled, and
came out of the playnes into the hills, and into the strong towns, carrying so
much with them as they could, burning the rest, that Lucullus should have no
profit of them.

When Lucullus had made a long journey by the hard and deserte way, he came to
a City that is called Enderacia, into the Enderacia.
which, more than twenty thousand footmen were fled, and two thousand
horsemen. Lucullus (such was his foolishness) invited them to composition, to
whom, they objected the calamity of the Vacceans, and asking, if he would
exhort them to such amity. Lucullus being angry for their objection (as the
manner is of them that do naught, whereas they should rather be angry with
themselves) wasted their land* and beseeged their City, made many trenches*
and continually provoked them to fight. One of them very fair in armor, came
many times forth on horsehacke, and provoked any Roman to fight hand to hand:
and when no man answered him, he laughed, and scorned the Romans, and went
leaping, and reioyeing home. Doing this very often, it grieved Scipio that was a
young man, who came Scipio fights a combat, and kills a Spaniarde.
forth, and took the matter in hand, and by the benefit of fortune, overcame
the great stranger, he being but of small stature, which gave courage to the
Roman. But in the night, they were diversely affrighted, for all the horsemen
of the Barbarians which were gone a foraging before the Romans came, and
could not get into the City, ran upon the Camp with great alarms, and they
of the City did the like with great vehemence, Romans made afraid.
sore troubling the Romans, who being afflicted with watch (for all that
night they were compelled to watch in armoure) and not accustomed to the
meats of that country, and having neither wine, salt, nor oil, nor vinegre,
and did eat Want of salt.
sodden wheat and barlie, and much fleashe of Dear and Hare without salt,
they fell into flixes, of the which, many dyed. Thus they continued, till they
had brought their trenches to due height, which being done, they beat down
one part of the Romans perish.
wall, and entered the City, but being valiantly repulsed in their retire,
unawares they fell into a fenne, where a great part of them perished. The
Barbarians the night following, made up their wall, but at length, when both
sides was oppressed with famine, Scipio promised them, that there should be no
fraud in their treaty, to whom faith was given for the opinion of his
virtue. This was the end of this war, that they should deliver Celtiberians
c^ficeme not gold.
ten thousand Souldioures coats, a certain number of caitell, and fifty,
pledges. The gold and silver, Lucullus could not have, for whose cause he made
the war, thinking Spain had bin full of it, for those people had it not,
neither do these Celtiberians much esteem such things.

After this, he went toward Pallantia, which was a City of Pallantia a City
^igh the (...).
greater name and power, into the which, many were fled: therefore many
counseled him to leave it, but he* because he heard it was* wealthy and
rich, did not follow their council. When he went to forage, ever he had the
Pallantine horsemen upon him, so as for lack of victual, he was feign to
remove his Camp, and so led his army in a square battle, the Pallantines
ever following, till he came to the flood Orius. Then they Orius. Turditanes,
people of Granata.
went away at midnight, and he returned to the Turditanes land, and there
wintered. This end had the war which Lucullus made with the Vacceans
without the authority of the Senate. Therefore that he should not come to
judgment being accused. etc.

Notwithstanding, another part of Spain called Lusitania, living Lusitania,
now Portugal.
after their own laws, with a certain Captain of Africa, did spoil the
Countries that obeyed the Romans, and when The Romans killed.
they had overthrown Manilius, and Calphurnius Piso the Roman Captains, they
killed six thousand of them, beside Terentius Varro, that was treasourer, by
the which thing, the Affrican being proud, did run over all the Countries,
to the Ocean Vettones in hither Spain, of whom the herb Fetonie is named.
Captain killed. Blastophenicians.
sea, and joining the Vettones unto him, beseeged the Blastophenicians, that
were subject to the Romans, with the which, they say, Anniball did mingle
some of the Carthage generation, therefore they were called Blastophenicians.
This Captain was hurt on the head with a stone, and dyed, and in his place
Cessaro.
succeeded another called Cessaro. He fought with Mummius that was come from
Rome with another army, of whom being The Romans overthrown under Mummius.
overcome, and Mummius chacing him, he returned upon them that followed
disorderly, and killed ten thousand, and recovered all his prey, and his
own Camp which he had lost, and beside spoiled the Romans Camp, and
took their Ensigns, the which they showing throughout Spain, made a
laughingstocke of the Romans.

Mummius now Campyng in a strong place, exercised the Souldioures which he
had left, which were five thousand, and durst not bring them into the
plain, till they had recovered their courage. The Lusitanes, albeit they
inhabit the other side of the flood Tagus, yet they took arms, and wasted
the Cuneans that were tributaries Cunistorges in Celtiberia.
to the Romans, Canchenus being their Captain, and took Cunistorges their
great City, and passed the Sea at the pillars of Hercules, so as some of them
went into Africa, and some beseeged the City of Ocilis. Mummius followed
them with nine thousand footmen, and five hundred horsemen, and killed of them
fifteen thousand that wasted the Countries, and many of the other, and
delivered Ocile from the seege, and then meeting with them that raunged yt
Country, he destroyed them all, so as not a messenger was left. The prey that
could Victory of Mummius.
be carried, he distributed to the Souldioures, the rest he burned in the honor
of the Gods that be the rulers of war, for the which things, he triumphed at
Rome at his return. M. Attilius succeeded him, which in one rode, killed seven
hundred Lusitanes, and destroyed a great City called Ostrace, and took all
the country Ostrace.
about, yielding for fear, in the which, some were of the nation of the
Bottanes, but so soon as Attilius departed to his ^ottanes.
winter station, they revolted, and beseeged certain of the Romans
tributaries, whom when Seruius Galba, successor to Attilius, would have put
from the seege of the sudden, when he had gone in one night and a day, five
hundred surlongs, he showed himself to the Lusitanes, and put his souldioures
weary of their Seruius Galba takes too much of his vvearie sold youres, and
loses.
journey to the fight forthwith, and when he had put the enemy to flighte, and
foolishly followed them with his Souldioures weak and weary, the Barbarians
seeing them scattered, and many times resting them for faintenesse, turned,
and gave a charge upon them, and killed seven thousand of them. Galba, with
the horsemen about him, recovered himself at the City of Carmena, where he
gathered all them that escaped, and when Carmena.
he had twenty thousand of the tributarie souldyoures, he went into the borders
of the Cuneans, where he wintered at Cunistorge. Cuneans.
Lucullus, who made war with the Vacceans, without the authority Lucullus.
of the Senate, coming that time into Turditania, understood that the
Lusitanes made war upon their neighbors, therefore he sent some of his
best Captains, and killed fifteen hundred of them as they passed a water, and
others that were fled into an hill, he compassed with trenches and mountes,
and killed a great multitude. Then entering Lusitania, he wasted one part, and
Galba another. Some, that sent Ambassadors to confirm the league made with
Attilius, and broken of them, he received into friendship, and compounded the
master with them. Also he feigned that he was sorry for them, and kllwel* that
they, for continual want, were driven to spoil, and so breaking league, made
war. I know (quoth he) that you were compelled to it by the barennesse, and
want of your Country* but I will put you into a plentiful soil, and divide
you into three several places full of abundance. They being allured by this
hope, went from their own houses, whom being divided into three parts, he
showed them a plain, where he had them stay till he came to show them the
place, where they should build their City. When he was come to the first,
he willed them to leave their armor as friends, which they did, then he
enclosed them with ditches and trenches, and sent in his souldyource, and
caused them all to be killed, not one escaping, they calling upon the Gods for
the breach of faith. He did the like to the second Another manifest ^^iurie of
Lucullus.
and third, before one understood of another calamity: and thus he revenged
fraud with fraud, following the Barbarians use: no respect he had to y^ honor
of Rome. A few escaped, among whom was Viriatus, who after was Captain of the
Lusitanes, Viriatus.
and did great feats, and killed many Romans. Those things that were done
afterward, I will show in the other books.

But Galba, who passed Lucullus in covetousness, distributed a few things
among the souldyoures, and took the rest to himself, although he was most
rich of all the Romans. He was a Galba described
man that in peace where profit appeared, would not refrain from perjury and
lies. And when he, being hated of all men, was accused, yet for his riches,
whereof he had great plenty, he was ever quitte and discharged. Not long after,
as many as remained of the unfaithfulness of Lucullus and Galba* gathering
together to the number of ten thousand, wasted the land of Turditania.
Against them* M. Vettilius with another army went, and joining to him all
other that were in Spain, which was ten thousand, he went against them
that wasted Turditania, and killed many of them, and drove the other into a
Castle, in the which, if they would tarry, they must perish for hunger, if
they departed, they must fall into the Romans hands, so narrow was the place:
wherefore they sent Embassadoures to Vettilius in humble wise, desiring to have
a place to Vettilius.
inhabit, that they from henceforth with all these, might be tributaries to
Rome: which he accepted, and they ready to come forth. But Viriatus that had
escaped from Galbas cruelty, and The policy and hardiness of Viriatus.
was then with them, put them in remembrance of the Romans falsehoode, and
told them how often they had bin deceived by color of promise, and that all
the Romans army was now like unto the deceytefulnesse of Galba and Lucullus:
but if they would be ruled by him, he would tell them how they might all
escape safe. They being moved with his words, and conceyuing good hope, chose
him their Captain. Therefore when he had placed all the horse in the front
of the battle, as though he would fight, he commanded the other, so soon
as he took his horse, to divide themselves, and by diverse paths to flee over
the hills, as well as they could, to Tribola, and Tribola.
there to tarry him till he came. He kept with him choice Horsemen, of every
number, and then he lepte on Horseback, and the other fled with speed.

Vettilius, afraid to follow them that were thus separate, and divided to
many parts, stayed to see what Viriatus would do, who abode still. He with
his swifte Horse now coming upon the Romans, now going back from them, and
now coming again upon them, spente so that whole day, and the next also,
going on, and coming of from that plain. And when by conjecture, he thought
them that were gone, to be come to a sure place, at midnighte with most speed,
by diverse hard ways, he got to Tribola. The Romans could not overtake him,
partly for the weight of their armoure, partly for the ignorance of the way,
and partly for the diversity of their Horses. Thus Viriatus saved his men that
were in desperation of themselves. This policy wanne him great fame over all
the places about, and so they came unto him in great numbers.

He kept war with the Romans three years together, and it is well known,
that this war much troubled the same, and in the end, was very dangerous
unto them. And if there were any other stir in Spain, that was the cause
that it continued the longer. Vettilius followed, and came to Tribola. Viriatus
laid an ambushe in an hill, whyther when he knew that Traynes on the Romans.
Vettilius was come, he fled. And when Vettilius was past the ambushe, he
turned, and they of the ambushe came forth, and besette the Romans, kylling
and taking, or throwing them headlong from the high places. Vettilius was
taken, whom, Vettilius taken and killed.
when the taker knew not, but saw him to be a fat old man, he thought him
to be of no regard, and killed him.

Of ten thousand Romans, scarsly six thousand saved themselves at
Carpesso, a Sea Town, which I think was Carpesso.
called of the Grecians Tartessus, in the which Arganthonius reigned, who
(they say) lived a hundred and fifty year. The Arganthonius the old King.
Treasurer that came with Vettilius, followyng them that went to Carpesso,
seeing them afraid, kept them in the City, and made them keep the wall. And
when he had gotten five thousand of the Bellans and Titthians, according as he
desired, he sent them against Viriatus, whom he killed, not one being
Viriatus kill (...) the Spaniards sent against him.
left to bring tidings home. The treasourer remaining in the City, lookyng
for newesfrom Rome, durst do nothing.

Viriatus in the mean season, invaded the plentiful and abundant soil of the
Carpetanes, which he spoiled without fear, till Caius Plautius came with
ten thousand footmen, C Plautius.
and three hundred horsemen. Then Viriatus pretended to flee. Plautius sent
four thousand to follow him, upon whom Viriatus The (...) killed.
turned, and killed all save a few. Then he passed the ^^oud Tagus, and camped
in an hill full of Olives, yet called by the name of Venus. Plautius finding
him here, and desirous to heal his former wound, gave him battle, wherein
he was overcome with great loss of men, and fled with shame, and kept
Plautius is onescome.
in strong Cities, and as men be wont, in winter, he durst never come forth
all that Summer. Viriatus raunged the Country, and took money of the owners
for the save their harvest, which if they denied him, he wasted all. At Rome,
when this was known, they sent Q. Fabius Maximus, that was Paulus Q. Fabius
Maximus.
Aemilius son, that overcame Perseus King of Macedonia, and gave him
authority to gather men himself. He, because of late they had got Grecia,
and Car^hage, and made a prosperous end of the third war of Macedonia, to
give some respect to the old Souldioures that were come from thence, he took
up two legions of young men inexpert in war, and sent for aid of his
friends, and came to Orsona, a City in Spain. Orsona.
The content of his army, was fifteen thousand footmen, and two thousand
Horsemen, in the which place, not myndyng to begin the war, till he had
trained his Souldioures, he went to Gades, to sacrifice to Hercules. Viriatus
meeting with some of them that were gone a foraging, killed the Viriatus
spoyleth the Romans.
most part of them, and put the rest in fear, who being called again to
their Ensign of their Captain, he overcame them, and spoiled them of a great
prey. When Maximus was come, he was often in the field, and provoked him to
fight. Maximus thought it not good to adventure the whole fight, but continued
in exercising his Souldioures, and suffered his souldioures to skirmishe, that
by that mean, he might try the hearies, both of his own, and of his
enemies. When they Maximus refuses fight till he had trained his men.
should go for victual, he guarded them with many shot and Horsemen, he
riding to them, as he had seen his father Paulus do in Macedonia.

When Winter was past, and he had sufficiently exercised his Souldioures, he
was the second, of whom Viriatus was overthrown and put to flighte, doing
all the parts that belongs to a General. And so, of two Cities which he
hel^, he took one, and burned another. And when he had driven him to a strong
place, which was called Vecor, he killed many, and in winter, he went to lie
at Corduba.

Wherefore Viriatus, not illuding his enemy now as he was wont, he induced the
Aruacceans, the Titthians, and Bellans, warlike people, which were at a war
of themselves, to reuolte. And so of them, he made the war with the
Numantines, which was long, paynefull, and dangerous to the Romans, the
which (when I have done with Viriatus) I will show briefly.

This Viriatus fought in an other part of Spain, with another Captain of the
Romans, Q. Pompeius. And being overcome, he fled to Venus hills. From the
which coming again upon the enemy, (...) kille^^* Romans. (...).
he killed many of Quintus me^, took diverse ensigns, and drove the rest to
their camp, and cast out the garrison at Vtica, ^ wasted the land of the
Basitanes. For Quintus did not help them for Basitanes. Corduba. Cordon^.
cowardlinesse and unskillfulness, ^ut rested at Corduba, in the midst of
Autumn, although Martius did move him to it, sending a Spaniarde unto him
from an Italian City. The next year Fabius Maximus, brother of Aemilianus,
came successor to ^. M. Aemilianus
Quintus, with two other Roman legio^s, and some friends So he had in all
eighteen. M. footmen, and a thousand six hundred horsemen. He wrote to
Micipse, king of Numidia, so soon as the time would serve to send him
Elephants: and he with part of his army Micips^.
went to Vtica: whom Viriatus encountering by the way with six thousand, with
great escries and alarms, after their Barbarian manner, with long and ugly
hear Maximus withstoode him, and without his loss repulsed him. And when the
other army was come, and out of Africa, ten Elephants, and three hundred
horses, he took a large place to encampe, and fortified it. He beeganne first
to ^ame Viriatus, and to put him to flight, and chase him. But when the Romans
followed him once out of order, he perceiving it, turned upon them, and killed
three thousand Romans killed
of them, and chased the rest to their camp, the which, he assaulted, and
found few at the gates to resist him, for they were fled into their Tents
for fear, from whence the General and Captains, could hardly remove them. In
that fight, Fannius, the son in law of Laelius, behaved himself
valiauntlye, Fannius.
and saved the Romans by his coming. Viriatus running by the darkness of
the night, and heat of the day, suffered no moment of time to pass, in the
which he did not molest the enimye with his shot and light horsemen, till
Aemilianus encamped toward Vtica.

Then Viriatus victual failing, and with a small army burning al his tents,
he went into Lusitania, whom when Aemilianus could not find, he spoiled five
Towns that hol^e Viriatus.

Then he led his army into the bor^ures of the Cuneans, and from thence, into
Lusitania against Viriatus: and as he went, two Curious and Apuleius captains
of the ^ues. Iseadia. Semella. Oballa.
Captains of thieves, Curious and Apulcius, troubled him and made spoil. But
Curio being killed in the fight, Aemilianus recovered the pray shortly after,
and took the Cities Iseadia, and Semella, and Oballa, in the which the
garrisons of Viriatus were. Some of these he spoiled, some he pardoned, and of
ten thousand captives, he headed five hundred, and the other he ^ade to be
killed Great murder by execution.
confusedly: which being done, he went to winter the second year of his
province and this war. These things being done, he went to Rome, leaving Q.
Pompeius his successor. etc.

His brother Maximus Aemilianus, having taken a Captain Here ^ackhth. Conoba.
of thieves, called Conoba, who yielded unto him, he pardoned only him, and the
hands of the rest he cut off. After following Hands cut of. Erisana.
Viriatus, he entrenched his city Erisana, into the which, Viriatus entering
by night, he set upon the Pioners and workmen, till they left the army and
their tools, and fled. And he drove other to the hills and hard places, from
the which it was impossible for them to come. But Viriatus that was never
insolent by his good fortune, thinking he had now gotted a goodly occasion to
make an end of the war, by showing such a benefi^e to the Romans, (...)
content to make peace, when he had ^auntage.
made peace and league with them, which was approved of the people, that is to
say:

That Viriatus should be a friend of the Romans.

That al y^ were with him, sholo be Lords of the land that they possessed.

So Viriatus thought he had made an end of a great war with the Romans,
and was quiet, but the peace continued not long. For Caepto the brother of
Aemilianus did not allow those conditions The peace not allowed.
y^ he had made, and wrote to Rome, that it was dishonorable. The Senate at the
beginning privily agreed to him, thinking for the common wealth, to profess
emnitie against Viriatus. And when he had wrote many letters thereof, and urged
the matter, they decreed that he should break the league with Viriatus, and
renew y^ war. Then Capio trusting upon this decree, made open war upon Capio.
Viriatus, and took Arsa a ^itie that he had left into his power. And Arsa.
following Viriatus that went about wasting the Countries, he ouertooke him at
the country of the Carpetanes, far exceeding him in number. Wherefore Viria^us
not minding to fight fo: his small number, sent away the great part of his army
by a certain bypathe, and placed the rest on an hill, as though he would
fight.

And when he thought they were come to the sure places, he Viriatus saves
his ^^^ again by policy.
took his horse with the spurs, and with the rest of his company, with
great scorn of the enemy: he went forth so speedily, that they that followed
him could not tell which way he became. Then Caepio wasted the Countries of the
Vettones and Gallecians, many followed Viriatus, and spoiled Portugal. Against
them, Sextus Iunius Brutus was sent, who being wearye of the long way, Inn.
Brutus. Rodes of Spain^
which Tagus, L^the, Darias, and Betis, nauigeable floudes, conteyne, staide
from following him. For they like thieves, conveyed themselves out of sight in
a moment. Wherefore Brutus thought it a great labor to overtake them, and not
to do it, a great dishonor: and supposing final glory to be in overthrowing
them, he went to spoil their camps, both because he thought he might so
chastise them, and also get a great booty for his soldiers and further that
that band of robbers would scatter when they should think of the danger of
their several countries.

With this intent and purpose he spoiled whatsoever was in his way. The women
that came into the war with their husbands, Valiant (...).
and were killed with them, and showed such constancy, that they would not
speak a word, when they were slain. Many went to the Mountayns with as much
as they could carrye, to whom desiring peace, he gave it, and divided their
land.

When he passed the floude Orius, he wasted a great region, Orius.
and required hostages of them that yeeded, and so came to the floude Lethe,
and he was the first Roman, that thought of the passage of it. Which when he
was past, and gone forth, he came to Nibene. Battarans.
the river Nibene, and led his army against the Battarans, because they
intercepted his victuals.

These be people that go also with their women armed to the war, which with
good courage, abide death ^oldly* not sparing themselves, neither ^leeing from
the fight, nor lamenting when they dye Some women that were taken, would kill
themselves, and some their children also, rather than they should be ^^aues.

Many cities that then held with Brutus, rebetled shortly after, and were
subdued of him again. And for these causes when he came to Labrica, that had
often made peace with him, and Labrica.
then were disobedient, they desired pardon, and would do all things at his
commandment. He required hostages, the Roman r^nneawaies, and all their
armor, and lastly that they should leave their City. All the which, when
they had done, he called them quietly to an assembly, and when he had
compassed them with his army, he put them in remembrance, how often they had
revolted, and made war, and made them so afraid, Cap^o uses mercy.
as they might fear a worse punishment. In the end ^eing satisfied with that
rebuke, he refrayned from ^urder pain. But he took from them horse, corn,
and common money, and all other public preparation, and beside all their hope,
suffered them to live in their country* Which things, when he had thus done, he
returned to Rome. I have declared all this in the history of Viriatus.

In this time, other following his example, exercised robberies: and Viriatus*
that he might come to some end, sent Dital^one and Pra^^^se to kill Viriatus*
Min^r^ to Caepio, the which being corrupted by many promises^, undertook to
kill Viriatus. The matter was t^us handled.

Viri^tus v^ed little sleep after most great labors, and ^or the most
part, slepte armed, that he might be ready at all so^^^ne The manner of
killing Viriat^s.
chaun^es. For this cause it was lawful for his friends to come to him by
night. Which manner, the conspiratoures knowing, and marking the first hour
of his sleep, entered his house armed* as for some great matter, and cut his
throat* for in any other part they could not hurt him. And when no man
^eard^ the noise of the deed, for the facility of the cut, they escaped to
Caepio, and required their reward: To whom he ^orthwith gave al they did
possess, and whatsoever was in their power: but as touching their reward, ^ee
sent them ^o Ro^e.

Viriatus friends, and the whole army, when it was ^aye, ^arried for him, and
thinking he had rested, marvelled at that alteration, and so went in and found
him dead in his armor: wherefore great sorrow was made in all the Camp, every
man lamenting his hard hap, thinking on the danger they were in, and the
Captain they had lost: and it most grieved them, that they could not find
the killers. Therefore they burned his Honor done to Viriatus at his b^riall.
body with much honor, upon a great stacke, killing many sacrifices in his
reverence, and as well the footmen as the horsemen, after the Barbarian manner,
went about the fire, and extolled him to heaven with their praise. At last
when the fire was out, and the funerals finished, they made many turneyme^ts
hand to hand at his sepulcher, so great love and desire did Viriatus leave to
his men, who, though he were a Barbarian, yet he was The praise of Viriatus.
most skillful in government, most wary in perils, and above all other,
bold in ^espisyng them, and most just in dividing his pray. For he could
never be brought to take any whitte more, than the rest, although he were
desired, and that he took, he gave to the valiant ^ort: Whereby it came to
pass, (that is most hard, and to this day has not happened to any Captain)
that his army gathered of all kind of nations, eighte years together, which
the war continued, was ever most obedient to him without mutiny, and endured
to the uttermost most ready to abide all danger.

And when they had created Tantalus for their Captain, they Tantalus.
went toward S^gunt, which City, when Annibal had destroyed and restored, he
called it Carthage, of the name of his country. And being driven from the^^e by
Caepa, that was always at their backs, when he had passed the floude Betis,
being wearye, he yielded himself and his army to Caepa. He took al his
armor, and appointed them a good land to live in, that they should no more be
driven to rob.

Now our history shall return to the wars of the Vacceans, and the
Numantines, whom Viriatus caused to revolt.

Caecilius Metellus, sent from Rome with more men, shortly overcame the
Vacceans, whereby the rest were disco m^^ted and put in fear. etc.

There remained yet Termantia, and Numantia, in an hylly Here wants.
Termantia. Numantia.
place, divided with two floudes, and compassed with hills and thick wooddes,
bending into the plain only one way, at the which part, it was fortified
with many ditches, and pill^urs overthwart. The Numantines were good eight
thousand me^, both on horse and foot, and with so small a number, (such was
their manliness) they put the Romans to much pain.

Metellus at the end of winter, delivered his army to Q. Metellus Aulus his
successor, in the which was thirty thousand footmen, and two thousand horsemen
well armed and practiced. etc. Here wants


And when Pompeius had his camp at Numantia, and from thence went into a
certain place, the Numantines, descending from an hill, destroyed his horsemen
that ran to him. Who, when he was returned, brought forth his battle to
fight in the plain.

The enemies coming down, gave a charge upon him, and by and by, as though
they had bin afraid, retired unto the hill, till they had brought the^ to the
places where the ditches and overthwart beams were laid, so as Pompey
perceiving he was in Pompey loses.
these skirmishes ouermatched of them that were inferioure to him, he turned
his army toward Termantia, thinking to do better there, where they fought
with him to his loss of seven hundred. Beside that, the Termantines put a
Tribune to flight, that was coming with victuals, and in one day giuyng three
onsets on the Romans, they drove them thrice into sharp and rocky places,
and threw many of their footmen and horsemen (together with their horses)
from the hills and rocks, so as the rest being afraid, remained al night in
armor, and when it was day, coming forth in order of battle, they fought
doubtfullye, till night ended the fight. Pompey in the night made have to Malia
with his horsemen, which place the Numantines held with a garrison. But the
Malians killing the garrison by treason, Malia nove Malgrad^, i^ deli^ered to
^^pey.
delivered the City to Pompey, who, receiving armoure and pledges of them,
went to Sueditania, which a certain Captain, Sue^^ta^i^. Ta^ginus.
named Tanginus, did spoil with his army. Pompey fought with him, and
ouerthrewe him, and took many of his souldyoures.

But such manhood was in these thieves, as none of them Manhood of th^^ues.
would live Captive, but some killed themselves, some their Masters, and some
made holes in the ^hip that carried the^, to sincke it.

Pompey being returned to Numantia, went about to turn the floude that was in
the plain, an other way, that he might press the City with famine.

The Townsemen drove the laborers from their work, and The Romans killed.
coming by bands, without trumpet, they threw darts and arrows upon them,
that they should*not turn the floude, and fought at hand with them that came
to aid the Pioners, and dro^e them to their Camp. and encountering them that
went for forage, killed many of them, and the Tribune that was their leader,
and giving a charge o^ an other side on the Romans that made a ditche, they
killed one thousand four hundred with their Captain. By the which
discommodities, certain men Counselors sent to Pompey.
of the Senate came to Pompey, to help him with their counsel: also young
souldioures, not yet exercised, were gathered for the old, that had bin now
six years abroad. With the why^he old souldioures, Pompey having received
so many displeasures, remained the winter in camp, to recover his estimation.
Where they were cursedly vexed with cold, warding and watching. And then the
nature of that country began to be Flixe among the Roman soldiers.
perceived, for they were taken with the flyxe, and many dyed.

When any of the soldiers should go out of the camp for victual, the
Numantines lying in awayte, would not cease to hurt the Romans with their
shot and darts. Which when Numantine h^rt^ the Romans.
they could not abide, they would needs go against them: then they come from
their trains, and do them much harm: And once again the Numidians meeting
with them that brought victual, destroyed many of them, as well noble men as
other.

Pompey therefore being vexed with so many evils, by the counsel of the
Senators, removed, that he should lie the rest of the Winter in sure places,
and the Spring, in Cities. And because a Successoure was to come to him, and he
afraid to be accused, he began to practice secreatly with the Numantines, the
which also for the loss of many their chief citizens, and for that they
could not till their ground, and for want of victual, and for ye continuance
of war, which was longer than they thought, they sent Ambassadors to Pompey, to
whom openly he spoke, yt they should yield themselves. For he said, that he
knew none other way out that, how to agree with them, for the dignity of the
Romans. But pri^^ly he told them, with what conditions Pompey practices
peace with the Numantines.
he would use them.

And so when the thing was agreed, they yielded to him.

Pompey required pledges and fugitives, which he received. He required also
thirty talentes of silver, of the which the Numantines paid fifteen
presently. Pompey looked for the rest.

When his successor M. Popilius Lena was come, the Numantines Popilius.
paid it.

Pompey being delivered of the fear of war, knowing the composition that he
had made was unlawful, being done without the Romans consent, when his
successor was come, he denied Pompey goes from his peace.
he had made any agreement with the Numantines. They proved it by witness
present, of men of degree, of Senators and Tribunes, and also of the
Capitaines of his horsemen. Therefore Popilius sent both parts to Rome, to
plead the matter before the Senate. The Senate thought best to hold war
still with the Numantines.

In the mean season, Popilius entered the land of the Lusones, Lusones.
which were neighbors to the Numantines, and returned dooyng nothing. And C.
Hostilius Mancinus succeeded him, and he went to Rome. When Mancinus came to
fight, he was often overcome, and at length when he had lost many, he kept
within his camp. There was a rumor that the Cantabrans and Vacceanes, would
come help Cantabri. ^^^scage.
the enemy, wherefore in the night, without light, he fled to the abandoned
Camp of Nobilior, where being shut, neither having fortifyed the place, nor
otherwise able to defend, the Numantines, beseeging him and all his army in
hard state, least he should make a dishonorable peace with them, he made a
league and amity between the Romans, and with the Numantines, with equal
conditions, to the which, he bound himself: which thing, when it was known
at Rome, they were all very sorry, because the league was shameful. Therefore
Aemilius Lepidus Mancinus makes peace dishonourably. Aemilius.
another Consul was sent into Spain. Mancinus was called to judgment,
whom the Ambassadors of the Numantines followed, Aemilius looking for answer
from Rome, being weerie of rest, for now such Generalles driven by desire of
false glory, Generalles of provinces for profit.
or profit, or triumph, went to their provinces, not for their countries
profit, prete^ding a false crime against the Vacceans, accusing them, that
they had helped the Numantines with victuals, and invaded their land, and
beseeged their chief City Pallantia, which had not offended against the
league. And when he had sent Brutus his son in law into other parts of
Spain, to make him partaker of the war, Cinus and Caecilius came Ambassadors
from Rome to them, showing the Senate did dote, that after so many losses
received in Spain, Aemilius would sow new wars, and declared the decree of
the Senate, that he should not make war upon the Vacceans. But he having
begun the war, and sent Brutus abroad, because he thought the Senate did
not know that the Vacceans did help the Numantines with victual, money, and
souldyoures, fearing also, if he left war, all Spain would revolt, as done
for fear, he sent the Embassadoures without delay, and so wrote to the Senate.
He fortifyed a certain Castle, and bestowed the time in gathering of men and
victual. Flaccus being sent a foraging, and falling into traynes which came
upon him, a word was craftily cast forth, The army saved by a word.
that Aemilianus had won Pallantia, at the which, when the Souldioures made
a cry, as the manner is in victory, the Barbarians hearing it, and believing
it to be true, were afraid, and departed. And by this mean, Flaccus delivered
his men from peril, and his forage from spoil.

The seege continuing long at Pallantia, the Romans wanted Pallantia.
victual, and having consumed all their Cattle, they waxed so weak, that
some dyed for hunger. The Captains Aemilianus and Brutus, suffered the want as
long as they could, but at length being overcome with the mischief, Aemilius
commanded to break up, therefore the Tribunes and Centurians went about the
Camp, and commanded the souldioures to depart before Covvardly departure of
the Romans.
day, so they forsook all, even the sick and wounded souldyoures, who
embraced them, and recommended themselves unto them. They departing confusedly,
and without order, as men that flee, the Pallantines ran upon them every
where, and much troubled them, following them from morning till night. When it
was dark, the Romans being scattered, went into diverse places as l^^ke
served them. The Pallantines left chasing of them, as being called from their
purpose by the power of God. These things chanced to Aemilius Lepidus, which,
when the Romans vnderst^^de, they put Aemilius from his province and
Consulshippe, Aemilius put from his office.
and so he returned a private man to Rome, and was punished. The Numantines
and Mancinus were heard in the Senate. They brought forth the capitulations of
the league. He laid all the blame upon Pompey, that was ruler of the province
before him, of whom he received a rude and cowardly army, by y^ which, being
often evil handled and overcome, he made peace with the Numantines, being
thereto compelled, as Pompey had done, by whose league, he affirmed this
war to be unlucky to the Romans. The Romans were angry with both, yet
Pompey was acquit, being accused of the same before. The Senate decreed, that
Mancinus, who had made so dishonorable a league, without consent of the Senate,
should be given to the Numantines after the old St. (...) Consul, was
delivered to the Samnites.
example, which gave the Captain to the Samnites, because he agreed to so
shameful a peace. So they commanded Furius to lead Mancinus into Spain,
deprived of al things and naked, who was Mancinus is delivered to the
Numantines. Calphurnius.
not received of the Numantines, against whom Calphurnius Piso was made
General. He entered the land of the Numantines, and then wasted part of the
Pallantines, and spent the rest of his time in harborough in Carpentania. The
people of Rome being weery Carpentania.
of this long and tedious war with the Numantines, that is might once be
ended, chose Cornelius Scipio Co^sull again, y^ wo^ne Carthage, as one y^ only
could overcome y^ Numa^tines. And where he could not be Consul for his age (for
he was but young) a decree of y^ Senate was made, that the Tribunes should
dispense with the law for that year, and restore it ye year following.
Therefore A disputation to make Scipio Consul.
Scipio being made Consul, made speed to go against ye Numantines. He led
none with him of the souldioures by choice, both because they were troubled with
war, and also because many of them were in Spain. He had some voluntary, which
were sent of kings and cities, by the consent of the Senate. He led many
servants with him from Rome, and made one band of five C. companies Philoni^ a
band of friends.
and friends, which he called Philonida, that is, the band of friends or
felows. And when he had appointed four M. of his soldiers to his cousin
^uteo, he went before with great speed to the ^uteo.
army, which he understood was corrupted with idleness, riote, and sedition,
knowing he could not overcome his enemies, except he restreined and kept his
soldiers in awe, with y^ temperance and integrity of his government. So
soon as he was come, he put out all merchants, harlots, and southsayers, whom
the souldioures in their fear, would ask many questions: and forbad any thing
to be brought to the Camp that was not necessary. And he forbad the sacrifices,
by the bowels whereof, things to come were enquired. And he would suffer but
few slaves and drudges, and commanded Scipio reformed his Camp. Cokes,
souldioures in the Camp.
to sell all the beasts of burden, except a few needful. He would have the
souldioures have no cokes. He forbad any other instruments, or vessels of
kitchen to be carried, but a spit, a pan, and a vessel for drink. He would
have the^ eat no flesh otherwise dressed, but sodde or roast. So he appointed
measure to their diet. He forbad the^ featherbeds, and he was the first yt lay
upon a bed of hay. He forbad his soldiers in their iourneys, to ride on Asses
or Mules, for he said, there was little good to be hoped of that man in war,
that could not go afoote. Likewise, he reproved them y^ used ministers in hot
houses, and called the^ Mules, which for yt they wa^ted hands, had need of
other to rub the^. And thus he made his soldiers obedient and temperate, and
by little and little, acquainted the^ with reverence and fear, being hard to
hear their quarrels, or gra^ting any thing yt was not just. He had often yt
sentence in his mouth, that easy, favorable, and affable Captains,
Favorable Captains.
were profitable to the enemy, which though they were beloved of their
souldyoures, they set little by them. They that be hard and severe, have their
souldyoures ready and obediente at all assayes: the which though he has thus
instructed, yet he durst not bring them into the field, till he had exercised
them with much labor. Therefore going daily by one field or another, he made
diverse Camps, one after another, which being defaced, he called the
Souldyoures to work again, to dig the ditches higher, and to fill them
again, to make high walls, and to pull them down again, and he stood from
morning till night to ouersee the pioners. When he made any journey, he went
with a square battle, that it should not be scattered by any sudden
attempt, as had happened to other. He rode about the army, and sometime to the
hindermost, and bad the sick should be borne on the horsemens horses. He took
the burdens from the Mules that were too much laden, and divided it to be borne
of the footmen. When he kept himself in the house in summer, the troops of
horsemen that he sent to espy, he commanded at their return to stand without
at the tre^ch, till another band of horsemen had viewed all: and all the
labor and work was divided among the pioners, that is, some to make trenches,
some ditches, and some walls, and some to pitch tents, and to every of them a
certain time was appointed to do it. When he perceived his army to be made
fierce, obediente, and paynefull in summer, he encamped nygh Numantia, yet did
he not choose places very strong for his Camp Numantia now of some is called
Caesar Augusts, of some S^^a.
as other were wont, nor divided his men, least if any loss should hap at
the first, he should be contemned of his neighbors, which were wont to
laugh at him. Neither did he encounter with the enemy, waying the nature and
end of war, and the strength of the Numantines, least they would come upon
him with all their force. Therefore he commanded to wast all things the corn
to be cut whilst it was green, which being wasted, he must needs go
further. The way that went to Numantia, by the plain, was shorter, and many
persuaded him to go that way, to whom Scipio said, he considered the way to
return, Hard way sure:
for the enemy was full of shot, to come out to the sight, and had the City
at their back, to return safely again. But we (said he) being laden with
victual and weery, should be far too weak for them. Beside that, we have
beasts of burdens, and carts and carriage, so the fight should be hard, and
very unequal, for we being overcome, should be in great peril, and if we did
overcome, we should have no great gain, and it were a folly, to put himself
to peril for a small matter, and he is an evil Captain that fights without
profit, and he is valiante and wise that enters the danger of fight, when he
is constreined by necessity. He brought an example of Physicians, which come
not to cut and burn, till they have tried the sick place with medicines,
which when he had said, he commanded the Captains to lead y^ further way.
Then he commanded to go further to the land of the Vacceans, where the
Numantines had their victual. Their fields being wasted also, and the corn
gathered for the use of the souldioures, he burned the rest. The Pallantines
had laid many in awayte under certain hills, adjoining to that plain,
called Coplanium, and then openly molested the^ that were Coplanium.
at harvest. Therefore Scipio sent Rutilius Ruffus that was his Tribune (who
after committed this war to wrighting) with four bands of ^orse to stop their
rangings. Therefore Ruffus began Rutilus Ruffus in danger.
to follow them (...) and to chase them to the t^ppe of the hills where the
ambush was, which discovering themselves, Ruffus commanded his me^, neither to
follow, nor to encounter the enemy, but hold them at the spears poylite.
Scipio seeing Ruffus going further to the hills than, was appointed him, began
to follow him which his army, fearing the worst, and when he was come to the
place of the traynes, he divided his horsemen, and commanded to give onset upon
the enemy both ways, and when they had cast their darts, to return, not
right on, but a soft pac^, that they that were behind, might join with
them: and by this mean he brought his horse safe into the plain. After this,
when Scipio would remove, there was a water hard to ^^ passed, and myrie, at
the which, the enemy lay hidden, which when it was known, he left that way,
and led his army by another longer way, but sure from deceyts, and went by
night, and commanded many wells to be made for thirst, in the most Salt water.
part of y^ which, salt water was found. Nevertheless Nevertheless the army
went on safe, though with great pain, but some horses and Mules were killed
for drought. Then he entered the lands of the Cauceans, whom Lucullus had
invaded, contrary to the league, all the which, he commanded by his crier, to
go quietly every one to his own. From thence, he went to the Numantines
ground to winter, where he remained, till Iug^rtha, the nephewe of Massinissa,
Iugurth.
came to him with.xij. Elephants, and archers and slingers well armed. And
being occupied in wasting and spoiling the countries that were nigh, he was
almost entrapped at a Uillage, the which was enuirened with a great fenne of
one side, and Scipio like to be entrapped.
of y^ other with an hilly place, in y^ which y^ traynes were laid. And where
Scipios host was divided into two parts, entering the town, and leaving their
ensigns without, they went to spoil. Other a few horsemen rode about the
town, who were beset of the ambush, and defended themselves. Scipio being
about y^ ensigns, called y^ souldioures out by trumpet, before y^ which could
come, he with a M. horsemen, ran to help the^ that were in distress. And
when the most part of the soldiers were come out of the town, he made the
enemy to flee, yet did he not follow the^, but a few being killed of both
sides, retired to his camp. Then laying two Camps before Numa^ti^, he made his
brother Maximus ruler of the one, and the other he governed himself. Whiles he
was in this sort, the Numantines came forth, and offered to fight, Two Camps
before Numan^^^.
but Scipio contemned them, thinking not better to fight with the^ that were in
desperation, than to came them by famine, and drive them to yield. And when he
had made seven trenches about the City to press them the rather, he sent
letters to the confederates, in the which it was contained, what and how many
souldioures they should send, which when they were come, he divided them
into many parts, as he did his own, and commanded their Captains and
leaders, to make ditches and enclosures about the City. The compass of
Numantia was four and twenty furlongs. The enclosure was as much, or Three
miles.
more, and all that was distributed to the Tribunes, which, if they were let
of the enemy, they should signify it by day, with a red cloth upon a
spear, and in the night, by a fire, that he and his brother might aid the^
that were circumuented, which being done, and they that were set for guard,
were sufficient to resist the enemy. He commanded another beside that to be
made, and to plant stakes about it, or next them, to build a new wall, the
breadth of the which was five foot, and the height, ten, beside the
pinnacles and towers distant by equal space. The fenne that was next the
wall, because he could not compass it with a wall, he made a trench as high
as a wall, and that might serve for a wall about it. And this Scipio was y^
first as I think, A wall about a Camp. Dunas.
that compassed a City beseeged with a wall, the which did not refuse to
fight. The flood Dunas that ran by the Camp, was very commodious to the
Numantines, to bring in victual, and to receive men out and in, or to swim
under water, or to send boats out full sail, when the wind was big, or to
row, when the time served. And because a bridge could not be made upon it for
the breadth and vehemence, Scipio caused two Castles to be made on either side
the bank, and between both, he hanged certain long beams with ropes, and
let them go into y^ water. In the beams were laid plates of swords on every
side, and other weapons pricking, which with the continual course of the
water being turned, did not suffer the enemies Ships, nor swimmers to pass.
This was the thing that Scipio most desired, that none should go to the
beseeged, to tell what was done Policy of Scipio.
abroad, whereby they should be destitute both of council and comfort. These
being thus disposed, engines were placed in the towers, and instruments y^ cast
arrows and darts, and stones. The walls were full of stones and shot. The
Castles were kept of shooters and s^ingers. He placed also many men in the
trenches, that should both day and night signify what new thing happened, in
ra^kes, one from another, holding up an en^^gne at y^ tower y^ was in need, and
that the other towers should do the like, when the token was seen that y^ first
made. This was done, that in a moment of time he might know what happened, and
for those things that must be declared in deed, he would have brought to him
by certain messengers. He divided his army, which, with the confederates
was.lx. M. into two parts, of the which, he set one to guard the sea, and used
the other to go for things requisite, as occasion required. Twenty thousand
were appointed to fight when need was, to the aid of the which, other xx. M.
of confederates were assigned. Every man had his place, from the which, he
might not go without leave. So every man repaired to his place, and to the
token that was made, when the enemy made any thing ado: so orderly and wisely
had Scipio considered every thing. The Numantines made many salies upon the
ordinary wards, now here, now there, but they were soon made afraid of the
dreadful sight of them that came so soon to help, and also with the ensigns
that were set upon the wall to show y^ matter, and with y^ keepers of the
towers and trenchies, and with the sound of the trumpets, in so much, as all
the compass of y^ tre^ches, which was 50. furlongs, was in a moment a terror
to them all. This place Scipio rode about every day to see it, and by that
mean having shut in his enemies, he thought they could not long continue,
seeing they could be helped by no man, neither of victual, me^ nor armor.
Rit^genes Rit^genes auen^ureth for his country.
a Numa^tine, and chief of the^, with v. fellows, persuaded by him, and so
many servants and horses, in the dark night, passing that space that was
between the town and the Camp, and coming over y^ trenches, with a ladder
made to scale, got up, and killed the watch, and sending their servants back
into the city, they got away* and went to the Aruaccea^s, holding up their
hands, and praying Aru^cceans. ^^*
the^ to help y^ Numantines their kinsfolk. The Aruaccea^s would not receive
the^, but bad the^ go their way. There was a City of power xxx. furlongs from
Numantia, called Lucia. The youth of this* City much favored the Numantines,
and moved their City to help the Numantines, of the which the auntientes
certified Scipio. Therefore Scipio at the eight hour of the night, took his
journey, and by day was at Lucia, and be^eeged the City, and required the
heads of the youth to be given him. The Lucia.
townsmen answering, that they were fled, he threatened spoil of the City,
unless they obeyed. Which the Citizens feating, Four hundred young men's h^ds
cut of.
brought forth four hundred young men, whose hands he cut off, and went
away with great speed, and the next day betimes, was at his camp.

The Numantines, now oppressed with famine, sent five men Numantines sue for
peace.
to Scipio, with commission to know, that if they would yield to him, if he
would use them mercifully, and be content with a moderate fine. But Auarus the
chief of them, a man of an high courage, did much set out the valiantnes and
entente of the Numantines, affirming they did not offend, then being in so
great Bosting o^r of time.
danger, fyghting for their wives, children, and liberty of their Country.
Wherefore Scipio (said he) it shall be almost rightful thing, if thou being a
noble man of so great virtue, wilt pardon so noble a people, and appoint us
that pain, that we shall be able to bear. We know the mutation of fortune,
and that the safety of our Country, was not in us, but in thee. Then take our
City being content with moderate punishment, or if thou haste us in
contempt, thou maiste hope to see it perish and be overthrown, by defending it
self.

When Auarus had said thus, Scipio knowing by the Captives what was done in
the City, said, he would have them freely yield themselves, and their
City, with their armoure: Which when it was told the Numantines, and
thought so before, inflamed with anger, for the great desire of liberty,
because they had never bin acquainted to obey, and being more taken with rage
and fury, they killed Auarus and his company, The Numantines kill them that
went for peace
as bringers of evil news, and conspiring with Scipio to save themselves.

Not long after, all victuals faylyng them, having neither fruit, nor
cattle, nor herbs, first they eat leather mollified The necessity of the
Numantines.
in water, as other in necessity have done. When leather failed them, they
eat dead men's flesh sodden and roste. Then having no respect to the sick,
the stronger forced the weaker, thinking now none act cruel or violent,
their minds being turned into wild creatures, and their bodies into beasts
for the meat they did eat. Therefore being killed with hunger, and consumed
with pestilence, with hear and beardes horrible, they at length yielded to
Scipio, which commanded them the same day to bring their armor into a place
appointed, and the next day, to come themselves into another place assigned.
But they deferred a day, confessing there were yet many in the city, that for
the love of liberty, would end their lives with sword and famine, Numantines
kill themselves*
and desired a time to kill themselves: so great love of liberty, so great
virtue was there in a barbarous and little city, which when they flourished in
peace, were eight thousand good men, the which, what things they had done
against the Romans it is evident, and how many leagues they made with them
with like and equal condition, which could never be brought to do it with
any other nation. Who their Captain or General was, I need not to rehearse:
yet Scipio he being in the field with.lx. M. men, was many times provoked of
the Numantines, to fight. But Scipio was better and wyser than other generals,
for he thought not good to deal with those wild men, by the force of arms,
but to conquer them by famine, which is a thing in^uitable, by the which
evil, the Numantines could be only taken* as they were. These things I had
to say, of the Numantines, when I consider their small number, their
sufferaunce of labor, and noble acts, and how long they were invincible.
Therefore of the Numantines they that so determined, dyu^rslye killed
themselves. The rest the third day came to the place appointed, al ugly,
filthy, and horrible to behold, which had bodies A pitiful yelding of the
Numantines
foul and full of hear, with long nails, full of filth and stincke, worn
garments of evil sauoures, by which things they were miserable to their
ennimies, and yet fearful to look upon: therefore they were beholden of the
Romans with admiration, considering in them, the strange affection of their
bodies that was felt in the air, of the dolor and labor which they had
suffered* and also of their conscience, that one had eaten another flesh.
Scipio choosing out some of them for the pomp of his tryumphe, commanded the
other to be sold, and their City utterly to be destroyed. This General of
the Romans, these two Cities being taken, hard to be won, Carthage for the
greatness of the City and the power thereof, by the decree of the Romans
he preserved, for the commodity of the land and sea. Numantia he rased, a
little City that held but a few, of the which the Romans had not
determined, either because he was irefull and hard of nature against them
that he took by violence, or because (as some say) he thought his glory to be
the greater, by the greatest calamities of other. Therefore to this day he is
called Affricane and Numantine, of the destruction he gave to those Cities.
Then the places nighe Numantia being assigned and settled, and if any were
suspected, put in fear by payment of money, he returned to Rome.

The Romans as the manner was, sent ten men of the Senatonres into the places
of Spain, that were of their government, that those that Scipio, or Brutus had
taken, might be brought into the form of a province. After a certain space,
when new stir Calphurnius Piso. Ser. Gall^.
was made in Spain, Calph. Piso was sent thither with authority, to whom
Ser. Galba succeeded But a multitude of Cimbrians coming into Italy, and
Sicilie, afflicted with y^ second servile war, they sent no army into Spain,
because of these wars, but would have lieutena^ts go to pacify al as well as
they could. When the Cimbrians were repulsed, Tit. Didius went thither and
killed twenty thousand Aruacceans, and brought Termentum a great City, which
Termentum.
scarcely would ever obey the Romans, the strong place in which it was
situated, into the plain, willing them to dwell in houses dispersed without
walls. And when he had besieged a city called Colenda, he took it the ninth
month of the siege. Didius sold all Colenda*
the Colendans with women and children. The Celtiberians inhabited an other
City next to Colenda, with other mixed, to whom, M. Marius, because they
served him against the Portugalls, he gave those places to kill by decree of
the Senate. But they compelled for need, exercised robberies. Therefore Didius
minding to kill them by consent of the x. men that were with him, told their
Captains, y^ he would join to them the lands of the countrymen, because they
were in need. Which offer when he perceived they accepted, he bad them tell y^
people y^ they might come with their wives and children to divide the lands.
Who when they came, he willed the soldiers to go out of the camp, ano that
they should enter, as though the number of the men and women should be told,
and so be appointed to the lands, and when they were entered within the
trenches, they were al killed of the souldioures by his commandment, for the
which act he triumphed. And when the Celtiberians revolted again, Flaccus
being Celtiberians killed by c^ait. Flaccus. Belgeda.
sent to that province, killed.xx. M. in the City of Belgeda when the people
was turned to rebel. etc. with whom was authority to assemble the Senate, when
he was doubtful what to Here v^^^teth
determine, he burned the whole Senate. Flaccus when he came, punished all the
Authoures of that wickedness.

I have found these things of the Romans against the Spaniardes worthy of
writing. After a while, when the civil war was hot between Cinna and
Sylla, the country being divided in that sedition. Q. Sertorius of the faction
of Cinna, being Sertorius.
created a General in Spain, allured the Spaniardes to rebel against the
Romans. Then getting a great army, and a number of his friends, chosen after
the form of the Romayne Senate, he determined to come toward Rome. Sertorius
was a bold man, and of a noble heart and known virtue and strength, insomuch
as the Senate being afraid of him, created many worthy Captains, C^cilius
Metellus
Caecilius Metellus first with a great army, that any way he could, he should
keep war from Italy, which was vexed with great dissentions. A certain man
called Perpenna, of Sertoriu^ faction, Perpenna.
killed him and made himself General, and Pompey killed him in battle. And
so had that war an end the which put the Romans in a great fear. But these
things be showed more plainly in the book of Syllas civil wars. After the
death of Sylla, when Sylla.
C. Caesar was chosen General to make war against all men, Caesar.
he appeased all the tumultes in Spain, and any other nation that molested the
Romans, and compelled all to obey the people of Caesar August.
Rome. Also Octauius Caesar Augustus, son to C. Caesar, made some war with
them that practiced rebellion. From that time the Romans divided Iberia,
which is now Spain, into three parts, into two of the which, the Senate sent
yearly officers, and the Emperor sent a president into the third, the time of
whose province, depends of the pleasure of the Emperor.

The end of the Romans vvarres with the Spaniardes.
The Roman wars with Antiochus the Great, King of Syria: by Appian of
Alexandria.
ANtiochus descended of Seleuchus and Antiochus, King of Syria, Babylonia, and
other nations, the sixte from that Seleuchus who reigned in Asia to the floude
Euphrates after Alexander, inuading Media and Parthia, and other cegions y^ had
revolted, being a prince of great courage, and named Antiochus the Great,
aduauncing himself by his acts and this name, did violently take from
Ptolomeus This part of Syria is called in Greek (...) that is Syria the
ho^ovv, because it ^^eth between the floods Euphrates and Tigris and is named
Mesopotamia. Cherronesus is a place compassed with water, saving none part.
Lysimachus is restored by Antiochus.
Philopat^r King of Aegipt, and yet a child, Coelesyria and Cilicia, and now
conceyuing no small matters, invaded them of Hellespont, the Aeoleans and
Ionians, as subject to the ruler of Asia, because they of old time, did obey
the Kings of Asia. Then he sailed into Europa, and subdued Thracia, and all that
would not yield, he compelled. He fortified Cherronesus, and builded
Lysimachia, which Lysimachus king of Thracia after Alexander, erected, to be a
bridle to the Thracians, and they after his death pulled it down, and this
Antiochus set it up again to be inhabited, and called home the banished men
of the City, and redeeming any that were in thraldom, to whom he joined
others, and gave them oxen, and sheep, and iron for their tillage, leauyng
nothing that might help to the speedy renuyng of it. For he thought it a
very fytte place for to deal with all Thracia, and a storehouse most
commodious for all the rest that he intended to do.

Many obeyed him and received his garrisons for fear of his power.

But the Smyrneanes and Lampsaceans, and some others, refusing so to do, sent
to Flaminius the Roman General, wh^ lately (...)*
had overthrown Philippe of Macedonie, in a great batt^^ ^^ Thessalia. For the
time was, that the matters of Macedonie and This is left out in the Italian.
Grecia, have been intermedled, as the state and time served, as we have
showed in the history of Grecia. Between Antiochus and Flaminius, were
diverse Ambassages, and practices in vain. And the Romans and Antiochus, y^
one had y^ other in great suspicion: They, because they thought Antiochus
would not be quiet, being proud of his great kingdom, and happy success.
He, because the Romans only, might be most great impediment to his
increase, and resist his passage into Europe. But no evident cause of enmity
being given by him, there came Ambassadors to Rome from Ptolomeus Philopat^r,
praying he might be restored into Syria, and Cilicia, which Antiochus had taken
from him.

The Romans gladly took this pretense coming in good season, Ambassadors
from Ptolomie of Egypt.
and sent Ambassadoures to Antiochus, in show, to reconcile Ptolomeus and
Antiochus, but indeed, to espy the meaning of Antiochus, and to hinder it as
much as might be. C^eus the Ambassador, required of Antiochus, that Ptolomeus
a friend to the Romans, The Romans se^d ambassadors to Antiochus.
might enjoy the Kingdom that his father left him, and that the Cities of
Asia, which Philip of Macedonie had taken, might be free: For it was not
just that Antiochus would enjoy, y^ places that the Romans had taken from
Philip. Finally, he said it was to be doubted, why Antiochus should bring such
a nauye and an army from Media out of Asia into the sea, and invade Europe,
build Cities in it, and subdue Thracia, but for to lay a plat The answer of
Antiochus.
to another war.

He answered, that Thracia, belonged to his ancestors, and was for lack of
quietness revolted, and now he having leisure, recovered it again, and he
restored Lysimachia to be a dwelling for his son Seleuchus. That he would leave
the cities of Asia free, if they would thank him, and not y^ Romans. As for
Ptolomie (quoth he) I am his kinsman, and shortly I shall be his father in law,
and I will cause him to give you thanks. But I do doubt also, by what right
the Romans can meddle with Asia, since I do not deal with Italy.

Thus breaking up without any conclusion, they uttered A report of death of
Ptolomie.
manifest threatenings, one against another. It was reported and thought that
Ptolomeus was dead, wherefore Antiochus went with speed toward Egypt to get the
kingdom void of a prince. And being at Ephesus, Annibal of Carthage came to
him, fleeing his country for the hate of his enemies, accusing him to the
Romans, as contentious and seeking war, and could not live in rest. For
then the Carthaginenses did agree with the Romans as confederates. Antiochus
received Annibal gloriouslye for the fame of his valiantness, and had him
about him, and understanding at Lycia that Ptolomie was alive, he refrayued
from Egypt, and thought to take Cyprus in stead of it, and sailed thither with
great Anticchus has ^^ipvvracke a^ Sarus.
speed. But being Winter, at the floude Sarus, he had a wrecke, and lost many
ships with diverse of his men and friends, and sailed to Seleucia in Syria,
and there repaired his shaken navy, and made a marriage of his children
Antiochus and Laodice, joining them in matr^^onye.

And now because he knew that evident war would follow between the
Romans and him, he allied himself with the Kings his neighbors, and sent
Cleopatra called Syra to Ptolomei Antiochus makes alliance with* his
neighbors.
giuyng him Coelosyria for her dowry, which he had taken from him, so to
please the young man, that he might be quiet in the war with the Romans.
Antiochida he sent to Ariarathes king of Cappadocia, and an other that was
left, to Eumenes, king of Pergamo, Enemies refuse his alliance*
but he perceiving he meante to make war upon the Romans, and for that
purpose, would make affinity with him, did refuse him. And when his brethren
Attalus and Philetayrus, did marvel at him, that he rejected the alliance of
so great a king his neighbor, and seeking it, he answered, that it was like
that war would be, which in the beginning would be equal on both sides, but
in time the Romans would overcome for their good conditions and taking of
pains. Then (quoth he) the Romans being Conqu^rors, I shall hold my kingdom
surely. But if Antiochus overcomes, I fear al will be taken away of my
neighbor, and I fear, if I have my kingdom, I must be a King under him.
For these considerations did he refuse this marriage.

Antiochus straight went from thence, to Hellespont, and sailed to Helespont is
the straight of ^alip^^.
Cherronesus, where he subdued and ouerthrewe many places of Thracia, he made
free the Grecians y^ inhabit Thracia, and granted many things to the
Byzantines, having a City very commodious Bizane now Constantinople. These
be called the French Greeks.
at the mouth of that sea. The Galathians he pleased with gifts, and drew by
fear also, to the society of his determination, thinking them good
confederates for the bigness of their bodies.

Then he went to Ephesus, and sent Ambassadoures to Rome, Antiochus sends
embassage to the Romans
Lysias, Egeseanactes, and Menippus, in deed to feel the minds of the Senate,
but in word, Menippus said, the King was desirous of the Romans amity, and
that he would be their confederate, if they would accept him. Yet he did
marvel that they would require him to leave Cities in Ionia, and lose his
tributes, and not to deal with certain of Asia, and to forgo Thracia, that had
ever bin his progenitors, which were things, not for friends, but for
conquerours to command to the conquered. The Senate perceiving their coming
to be but an espiall, shortelye answered: If Antiochus do suffer the Greek
Cities in Asia to be free, and refrain from Europe, he shall be a friend to
the Romans The answer of the Romans
if he will. Thus the Romans answered, and made none other show of cause.

Antiochus minding first to invade Grecia, and there to begin the war
against the Romans, asked Annibals opinion in the The opinion of Anniball
touching the war.
matter. He said, that Grecia was easy to be overcome, because of their long
affliction. The war that is made at home, is most grievous for dearth that
follows of it, but abroad it is more tolerable: neither should he overcome
the Romans in Grecia, seeing they might have sufficient provision and help
from home. Therefore his opinion was, he should invade the Romans in Italy,
whether, if he went, he should find the Romans weaker, both at home and
abroad. I have, said he, experience of Italy, and with.x. M. men I can take
fit places of it, and I will write to my friends at Carthage, to stir the
people to reuolte, being sorry for me, and angry with the Romans, and being
full of hope, and heart, will think I will once again get Italy.

The king hearing this advice very well, and thinking the access of Carthage
to make much for the furtheraunce of this war, badde him send^letters to his
friends, eute of hand, but he sent not, for he thought it not sure, the
Romans lying in wait every where, and the war not being yet proclaimed, and
many being in discord at Carthage, and the common wealth having no firmness
nor certentie, which shortly after was the destruction of Carthage. Yet he sent
Ariston a merchant of Tyrus, under pretense of merchandise, to his friends,
exhorting Anniball sends Ariston to practice at Carthage.
them, that when they understood that he invaded Italy, they should stir the
people of Carthage to be revenged. Ariston did so, but when Annibals enemies
perceived Aristons purpose, they made much ado, that any innovation should
follow, and diligently sought for Ariston. He, that the friends of Anniball
should not bear all the blame, secretly in the night, set up a The device
of Ariston to save Annibals friends.
writing at the common house, in the which Anniball exhorted all the Senate to
revenge their Country under Antiochus, and when he had so done, he sailed
away. When day was come, all the suspicion was taken from Annibals friends,
because the matter belonged to all the state. The people was full of uproar,
angry with the Romans, but not able to hurt them. And thus went the matters
at Carthage.

The Romans sent other Ambassadors, and with them Scipio Scipio goes
Ambassador to Antiochus.
that overcame the Carthagies, to prove the kings mind, and to epsy his
preparation. And when they found the king to be gone to Pisidia, they tarried
his return at Ephesus, and in the mean Pisidia, a country in Asia, nigh to
^ycaonia and Pamphilia.
time, had many times talk with Anniball, that seeing Carthage was in league,
and Antiochus not yet a manifest enemy, they blamed him that he would flee
from his country, seeing the Romans had not offended against him, nor any
other of the Carthagies since the league was made. This they did, to make
Anniball suspected to the king as they did in deed, by their often resorting
Anniball is brought into suspicion with Antiochus.
and talking with him. And though Anniball were a very circumspect man, yet he
did not foresee this. For when the king heard of it, he suspected. Anniball,
and was not so ready to trust him. Beside, an envy and hatred grew against
him, least he Envy.
should have the praise of the things that were done. Among other The talk of
Anniball and Scipio touching the best Captain.
talks, they say, there was one between Scipio and Anniball, in a
Scholehouse, where many were to learn, and present to hear, touching the
excellency of a Captain: And whereas Scipio asked him, whom he thought to
be the best Captain, he answered, Alexander of Macedonia. Scipio stayed at
that, and gave place to Alexander. Then he asked him, whom he thought the
second next Alexander, he said Pirrhus of Epirota, putting the virtue of a
Captain in boldness, for there can not be found a more courageous King, than
he. Scipio now was grieved, and again asked him whom he thought to be the
third, thinking verily he would have named him: he answered my self, for
being a young man, I subdued Spain, and with mine army passed the Alps into
Italy, the first after Hercules that so have done. I invaded it, when none of
you durst do any thing. I ouerthrewe four hundred Towns, and brought your
City many times into danger, having neither money nor men sent me out of
Carthage. When Scipio perceived he did so of purpose advance himself, he
smyled and said, in what place would thou have put thy self (O. Anniball)
if thou had not bin overcome of me. He perceiving this emulation, said, I
would have set my self before Alexander. So did Anniball continue in his
lofty talk, and yet secretly please Scipio, as making him better than
Alexander.

This talk being ended, Anniball desired Scipio to his lodging, Scipio said
he would come very gladly, but that it should cause suspicion between
Antiachus and the Romans. Thus these noble Captains ended their malice, when
the war Malice ends in some, when watter cesseth.
was ended, but so did not Flaminius. For when Antiochus was overcome, and
Anniball fled, and saving himself in Bithinia, he being sent Ambassador
for other purpose to Prusia, not being injured by Anniball, nor commanded of
the Romans, nor to be feared, because the power of Carthage was abated, killed
him with poison by Prusias consent, of the which it is said, he was warned
before by an Oracle after this sort.

The land of Libyssa shall cover Annibals body. Oracle of Annibals death.


He thought he should have dyed in Libya, but Libyssus is a Lybissus.
flood in Bithinia, and the Country is called Libyssa of the flood, This
remembrance have I made of the noble minds of Noble minds.
Anniball and Scipio, and of the cowardly heart of Flaminius.

Antiochus coming from Pisidia toward Ephesus, gave audience to the
Embassadoures of the Rhodians, and promised that the Rhodians, the Byzantines,
and Cyzioneans, and other Greek Cities in Asia, should be free, if he entered
league with the Romans, the Aet^leans, and the Ionians, he would not grant so
to be, because for the most part, they had bin used to obey the barbarous kings
of Asia.

The Roman Embassadoures bringing nothing to pass, for they came not to do
any thing in deed, but to epsy, they returned to Rome.

The Ambassadors of the Aetolians came to Antiochus, of the which, Thoas was
chief, offering him the leading of their army, and wishing he would sail
into Grecia as to a sure thing, not tarrying for his army to come out of high
Asia, but setting forth their own strength, promised him the aid of
Antiochus i^ persuaded by the Aetolians.
the Lacedaemonians, and of Philip King of Macedonie, (angry at the Romans,) so
he would make his voyage with speed.

He was moved very lightely, and would not stay his have, although he heard
out of Asia that his son was dead, and with ten thousand only, sailed into
Eub^ia, all the which he got, they yielding for fear. Micithion his
Captain setting Micithio kills the Romans. The Romans be killed at Delos.
Aminander king of Athamanes people of Aetolia. Megalopoli^, one in Arcadia,
another in Asia. Counterfeit Philip.
upon the Romans at Delos, which is an holy place of Apollo, killed part of
them, and part took alive.

Aminander King of the Athamanes came into league with Antiochus by this
occasion.

One Alexander of Maecedonia, being brought up in Megalopoli, and made free of
that common wealth, feigned himself to come of Alexander, son to Philip: and
to give credit to his device, he named his children Philip and Alexander, and
Apamea, whom he married to Amynander. Philip her brother going with her to the
marriage, and perceiving that Amynander was a weak man, and of little
experience, remained with his brother in law to govern the Kingdom.

This Philip Antiochus promised to restore the kingdom of Macedony as his
own, and by this mean, had the Athamaneans his confederates. He had also the
Thebanes, and went to Thebes to speak to the people. Thus he very rashly, in
so great a war, put his trust in the Aetolians, Thebanes, and Amyna^der. Then
he consulted, whether it were better to invade Thessaly out of hand, or to
tarry till Winter were past.

Anniball being at this consultation, and saying nothing, the king commanded
him to say his opinion first, and thus he spoke.

Thou may easily overcome the Thessalians, either now, or Anniball shows
his opinion touching the war.
after winter, for the people, having bin much vexed, do turn to thee now, and
so will do to the Romans if any innovation comes. We be come with our own
power, giving credit to the Aetolians persuasion, that the Lacedaemonians and
Philip will take our part, of the which, the Lacedaemonians be our Enemies, as I
hear, and so be the Acheans. As for Philip, I can not see, that he can be any
great aid unto thee in this war, being on thy side, nor make any great power
whatsoever part he takes: but this is mine advise, that thou sendest for thine
army with all speed into Asia, and not put thy trust in Amyna^der, or the
Aetolians: when the army is come, to send it into Italy, that being occupied
with troubles at home, they may leave them untouched, and being afraid of
themselves, may not vex other men. And now, that manner is not to be held of
us, that I spoke of before; for we must use the one half of our na^ie, to wast
the coast of Italy, the other half we must have a flote, to use as occasion
shall require, and thy self, with all thy footmen, must remain in that part
of Grecia that is next Italy, making a show of invasion, and if need be, to
invade indeed, and to induce Philip by all means possible, to agree with
thee: for it shall much avail, which part he takes in this war. If he will
not be brought in, thou shall send thy son Seleucus into Thracia, and
molest him with evils at home, that he be not profitable to thine enemies
abroad.

Thus Anniball said, and it was the best of all, but for envy of his fame and
wisdom, as well other, as the king himself, that Anniball should not seem
to pass them all in the art of war, nor he have the praise of that should
be done. All his counsel was rejected, saving that Polyxenides was sent into
Asia Polyxenides.
for the army.

When the Romans heard of the entering of Antiochus into Grecia, and of the
killing and taking of the Romans at Delus, they determined war. Thus
Antiochus and the Romans war The war begins.
growing long before of suspicion one of another, did now first break out in
deed. And because Antiochus had the rule of many nations in high Asia, and of
all that inhabit the sea coast, saving a few, and for that he was entered
Europa, and had a dreadful name, and a great preparation, and otherwise
had done many notable things, by the which he had gotten y^ name of Great,
the Romans thought this war would be dangerous, and of long continuance.
They had Philip of Macedome in suspicion, being overcome of them not long
before. And in the league with the Cartheginians, they had no great trust,
Anniball being with Antiochus. And of their other subjects, they had some
do^ubt, least the glory of Antiochus should make them seek new attemptes.
Therefore they sen^e garrisons to every one, to govern Consuls. Proconsuls.
Officers of six axes.
them in peaceable manner, and sent Captains to the armies, whom they call
of six axies, because the Consuls had twelve, and twelve rods, as the old
Kings used: and because these officers had half authority, they had half
the Foresight of the Rhodians.
show. And as in a great fear, careful for Italy, least some disturbance
might happen to them, either by the violence, or favor of Antiochus, they
sent a great band of footmen to Tarento, there to be ready at all assayes,
and a Navy sailed over all the coast. So great a fear of Antiochus was at the
first.

When they had thus at home given order in all things at the beginning, they
gathered their army against Antiochus. Of themselves, they had twenty
thousand, of their confederates twice so many, with the which, they would
pass into Ionia. And in this preparation they spente the whole Winter.

Antiochus went into Thessalia, and being come unto Cynoch^phalia, where the
Macedonians had a great overthrow of Cynochephalia is a place or people
like a dogs head. Antiochus b^^^e^h the dead.
the Romans, he honorably buried th^se that lay unburied, thynkyng thereby to
win the Macedonians to him, and withdraw them from Philip that had left
his Souldyoures unburied, that served under his Standerd.

Philip hearing this, was in a great perplexity with himself which part he
should take, but yet did cleave to the Romans, and streyghte sent to Bebius,
a Captain of the Romans, Bebius.
lying not far off, to come to him to a certain place, assuring him, that
he would take the Romans part against the King. For the which, Bebius
thanking him, was the Appius.
more bold to send Appius Claudius out of Macedonte into Thessaly with two
thousand footmen. And when Appius was at Tempe, and perceived where Antiochus
lay with his army, Tempe, is the pleasant place that is so much praised of
Poets. Antiochus remoueth, and is caught in love when he was above fifty
years of age at Calcide now Negroponte.
he made many fyres to cover the fewness of his army. But Antiochus thynkyng,
that Bebius and Philip had been come together, was afraid, and brake up his
Camp, making Winter the pretense, and went to Calcida. There he was caughte
with the love of a maid, being above fiftye years of age, and having so
great a war in hand, he would needs marry her, and make pastymes,
whereby he brought his army to great idleness and change that Winter.

When the Spring was come, he went to A^arnania, A^arnania part of Epir^s,
bringing forth very good horses.
where he perceived that his army was utterly unprofitable through idleness,
and then repented him of his marriage and feastings: and when he had gotten
some of the Country to his obedience, and subdued the rest, hearing that the
Roman^s were passed into Ionia, he returned to Chalcide.

The Romans with diligence, and two thousand good Horsemen, and thirty
thousand footmen, and some Elephantes, Acinius Manius Glabrie being
General, from Brunduse arriving Acinius. Manius. Glabrio. Appolonia now
^allona.
at Appolonia, went to Thessalie, and delivered the Cities of their enemies.
And where they found any garrisons of the Macedonians, they put them out, and
Philippus of Magalopolis was taken prisoner, hopyng yet for the kingdom of
Macedonia, and they took three thousand of Antiochus men.

And whiles Manius did this, Philip invaded Athamania, and made it all subject,
Amynander fleeing into Ambracia. Which when Antiochus heard, and the speedy
doing of the things, he was in fear, because of the suddayne change and
alteration, and then understood that Annihall gave him good counsel.
Therefore he sent one after another to Polyxenida to stir with all speed,
and he gathered as many as he could in all places, and this done, he had
of his own footmen ten thousand, and five hundred Horse, with the which,
and some confederates, he took Thermopyle, that his enemies might have the
harder passage, and he tarry for his army out of Asia.

Thermopyle is a streighte, and a long passage, the which a Thermopyle is the
long ^ill of Grecia, where the straight passage i^, and the ho^e waters.
Tichiunta. Callid^^mus.
rough Sea without ports, does partly compass, and a Fenne deep and
without way.

Two tops it has in the rocks of the hills, the one is called Tichiunta,
and the other Callidromus.

The place has wells of h^te water, and thereof is called Thermopyle.

Antiochus made a wall double at it, and placed engines at the wall, and sent
the Aetolians to the tops of the Mountains, that no man should pass by
that that was called Atropos, where Xerxes came against Leonida the Xerxes.
Leonida.
Captain of the L^cedemonians, when no man kept the hills.

The A^tolians placed one thousand in either top, and with the rest,
beseeged the City Heraclea. Heraclea, many Cities o^ that name.


When Manius perceived this preparation of the enemies, he gave order to
fight the next morning, and commanded two of his Tribunes, that is, Marcus
Cato, and Lucius Valerius, that they should assail in the night which The
order of the Romans.
of the hills they would, and if they could, drive the A^tolians from the
tops. Lucius was repulsed from Ti^hiunta, the A^tolians there being too good
for him. Marcus Cato went Cato dothae great fea^e*
against Callidram^s, and passed the enemies being asleep, to the last
watch, and then had a great conflict, striving to get the high and rocky
places, and the enemies to keep him back.

Manius led his army on the face of Antiochus, divided into small bands,
for so could he only do in the streightes.

The King commanded the light harnessed, and target men, to fight before the
main battle, the which he placed The order of the Kings battle.
before the Camp.

On the right side, he set the slingers and archers in the high places, and
the Elephantes on the left side, and the band that was ever about him, he
wylled to stand at the Sea side.

The fight being begun, the shot running hither and thither, did much
trouble Manius, but he ^esisting manfully, Here the Italian misseth, and so
does the Latin.
and gyuing back, and again coming on, he put^e them to flighte. Then the
battle of the Macedonians opening themselves, received them, and closed
again, and thrust forth their long pykes, (...) together in order. By this
manner, the Lacedemontans under Alexander and Philip, did trouble This was
called the Phalanx of the Macedonians as the legion among the Romans.
their enemies that d^r^^ not approach to the pykes so long, and so many. Then
of a suddayne was seen the fleeing and crying of the Aetolians, driven to
Antiochus Camp, the which at the first, was not known what it was, which
ignorance caused trouble and doubt, till Cato appeared, followyng them with a
great shoute, and being come to the Kings Camp, Antiochus men that had
heard much of the Romans valiantness, were afraid, and acknowledged The
fight that was first made betvveene the Romans and Antiochus.
their own idleness and delicateness the Winter passed, to be the cause why
they this time were the worse to do their office, and not seeing perfitlye
what number Cato had, and for fear thinking he had more than he had, and
being afraid of the Camp, they fled to it out of order, to keep away the
enemy. The Romans coming upon them, entered the Camp with them. Then was
there another ^oule fleeyng of Antiochus men. Manius followed them to
Scarpheia, killing and taking some: then coming from Scarpheia, Scarpheia an
(...) The kings cape spoiled.
he spoiled the Kings camp, and he drove the Aetolians from the Romans camp,
which they had taken in his absence presently. In this fight was slain of the
Romans two hundred, with them that followed the chase. Antiochus lost ten
thousand with them that were taken. The king himself at the The king flies
first change ran with five hundred horse to Velatia never staying, and from
Velatia to Calcida, and to Ephesus, with Eubia his Velatia. (...) the young
vv^^e of old Antiochus.
new wife, for so was her name: with his ships he ^ledde, but not with all,
for the admiral of the Romans, had taken some that came to him laden with
victuals.

At Rome, when this victory was heard, and seeming to be very happily and
speedily obtained, they gave thanks to God, all men being glad that the
first trial had so good success, in the war that was so fearful to them
for the fame of Antiochus. And to requite Philip for his true confederacte,
they sent him his The Romans gratifye Phillip.
son Demetrius, that was pledge with them. Marius released the Phoceans and
Calcideans, and other that followed Antiochus, of the fear they were in. But
the A^tolians, together with Phillip, he invaded and ouerthrewe their Cities.
He took Damocritus Damocritus.
their General that was hidden, and had threatened Flaminius, that he would
encampe at Tiber.

Then he went to Calipolis, by the hill called Coraca, the highest Callipolis a
city and an ^^e also.
and hardest to be passed of al other, being very rockye, with his army laden
with spoil^. Many fell from the hard way into The Romans pass the hills
laden to their loss.
the stony parts, and tumbled down with their armor and burdens: And where
the A^tolians might have troubled them, they appeared not, but sent
Ambassadors to Rome for peace.

Antiochus with great diligence called his army from the land rulers, to the
sea side, preparing his nauye, of the which, Polixenides an outlawe of the
Rhodes, was Admiral, and ^ayled to Polixanides admiral to their king
Cherronesu^, and fortified it again, and sent garrison to Sestus and Abydus,
by the which, the Romans must pass into Asia. He made Lysimachia the store
house of the war, bringing thither much armoure and victuals, thinking the
Romans would soon be there, with great power and na^y.

The Rom^aynes appointed L^^^^^ Scipio, brother to Publi^^ (...) and Publi.
Scipio be sent into Assa.
Scipio, that overcame Carthage^, and was first named Affricanus, successoure
to M^nius in this war, being then Consul: And because he was not practiced
nor experienced in the war, they sent his brother with him as a
Counselloure: and these brethren prepared themselves.

Liuius that had the chardge of Italy, was sent successoure to Att^lio in
the nauye, and straight with his own Ships, with the which he scowred the
coaste of Itali^, and with certain that were lent of the Carthagies, and some
other friends, he sailed to Pirae^* and receiving the nauye of Atilius
Carthagies lend ships to the Romans. ^ircu^.
with fourscore and one armed Ships, E^menes followyng him with fyftye of
his own, half of them being armed, they arrived at Phocida, subject to
Antiochus, who for fear, received them, and the next day, they went forth
to the fight by sea.

Polixenides the Admiral of Antiochus came forth with two hundred Ships,
lighter than the enemy, which was happy for them, the great Ships of the
Romans not being yet practiced.

Seeing two of the Carthagies coming before, he took The fight on the Sea.
them both with three of his, but emptye, the Lybians being leapte into the
Sea.

Liuius, with great vehemence gave the first charge upon these three, with
his Admiral ship, going far before the rest of the nanye* They not ^earing this
one Ship, did cast their hooks of iron, and the Shyps being grapled
together, it seemed a fight upon the land. The Romans being more valyant,
they bourded and overcame them, and with one ship, carrying away two, they
returned.

Th^s was a skirmishe to the fight: For then the whole nauyes fought
together, the Romans being the better in strength and courage. But because
of the heaviness of their vessels, they could not overtake the other light
Ships, The Romans have the victori by Sea.
when they fled, which they did with all speed, to Ephesus* And the
Romans went to Xio, whither seven and twenty of the Rhodian Ships, their
friends, came to them.

When Antiochus heard of this fight by sea, he sent Annibal is sent for
ships, and ^^^seth part of them.
Annibal into Syria, for other ships, from Phoenitia and Cilicia, and when he
came, the Rhodians drove him into Pamphilia, taking part of his Ships, and
lying in wait for the other.

Publius Scipio came into Aetolia with the Consul, and having Courage of
Scipio.
the army of Manius, he disdayned to make siege to the Cities of Aetol^a, as
a small matter, and gave them leave to send another Embassage to Rome. He
would try it with Antiochus, before his brothers office should end. And so
passed by Macedonia and Thracia, to Hellesp^n^, which was a paynefull and
hard way unto him, notwithstanding that Phillippe of Macedonie did guide him,
making brydges, and preparing victuals for him. For the which, the two
Scipions released Philip is released
him of the rest of the money that he had to pay, for so they had order of
the Senate, if they found him faithful.

Then they sent to Prusias King of Bythinia, declaryng how many Kings the
Romans had advanced, that were their confederates. And now to Philippe of
Macedonie, whom they had overcome of late, they granted his kingdom, they
restored his son that was pledge for him, and forgave the money be ought them.

When Prusias heard this, he joined with them against Antiochus. Prusias
joins with the Romans.


When Liuius the Admiral of the Roman nauye, heard that the Scipions were
coming, he left Pausimachus the Rhodiane with the Rhodian ships in Aeolide,
and part of his own n^uy, and with Sc^^us. Rh^^^ion.
all the rest, he sailed to Hellespont, to receive the army. And Sestus,
Rhateion, the ports of the Acheans, yielded to him. A byd^^ that disobeyed he
besieged.

When Liuius was gone* Pausimachus made many diuises and inventions, and
sundry engines, and fastened iron vessels carrying fire, ^o long Ship
staves, to heave up many* fyres in the Sea, and to cast it out of his own
ships, when he should join with his ennimyes.

Whiles he was thus devising, Polyxenides the Admiral of A false country man
Antiochus, a Radian also, and banished from his Country for certain causes,
went about to deceive him, promising to deliver to him Antiochus navy, if he
would help to restore him to his Country. He suspected this crafty subtle
man, and took good heed of him. But when Polyxenides did write a letter of
his own hand of this treason, and departed from Ephesus, and sent the army a
forragyng for a fashion, Pausimachus, seeing his departure from thence, and
that not trusting any man with this treason, he would write it with his own
hand, which was not like to be done of a dissembler, he gave credit to it,
and kept less guarde, and sent his men to forage abroad also.

When Polyxenides perceived he had deceived him, he gathered his army, and sent
Nicander a Pirate with a few to Samos, to come upon Pausimachus on the back
by land. At mydnyghte he set forward, and at the morning watch, being
asleep, he assailed him. He being taken thus sodainelye and unprepared,
commanded his souldioures to leave their ships, and resist the enemy by
land. But when Nicander came upon him on the The Rodian ships are distroyed
by falshode.
back, thinking the land beset also, not only of them whom he saw, but of
many mo, being yet night, he returned again to his ships with much ado,
and was the first that fought, and the first that fell, using himself very
valiauntlye. The other were either taken or suncke, saving the seven that
carried fire, with whom none durst meddle for the flame, which fled. The
rest Polyxenides led away as pryses to Ephesus.

After this victory, Phocea once again, Samos and Cyme revolted Cyme in
Aeolia.
to A^i^^ochus.

Liuius being now afraid of his Ships that he left in Aeolide, sailed
thither in haste, and Eumenes with him.

The Rodians sent the Romans twentye Ships more, making no delay, all, with
good courage, sailed to Ephesus, preparing themselves to the fight.

But when none of the other came against them, they left the half of their
ships, a good time in the sea, and with the other half, they spoiled the
coaste of the enemy, till Nicander The Romans driven to their Ships.
came upon them from the land, and taking their pray from them, drove them
to their Ships. They came again to Samos* and now was the time of Liuius
office expired.

At this time Seleucus, Antiochus his son, invaded Eumenes Eumenes is
besieged.
land, and besieged Pergamo, shutting the men within the City. Wherefore
Eumenes sailed with speed to Elaea, which is the port Town of his Kingdom,
and L. Aemilius Regulus with him, that succeeded Liuius in the matters of the
sea. There came to Eumenes from his confederats, one thousand footmen, and a
Diophanes.
hundred choice horsemen. Whose General Diophanes, when he perceived the
Soldiers of Seleucus to play and drink, he passed little of them, and
required the Pergameneans to sally out with him upon the enemy.

But when they durst not do it, he armed his own thousand The valiantness of
the Acheans.
footmen, and hundred horsemen, and leading them to the wall, stood there
quietly, the enemies lookyng still upon them being so few, and yet durst not set
upon them. But when they were at dinner, he gave ye onset upon ye warders, the
other arming themselves, The covvardi^^ of the Pergama^^
or taking their horses, or fleeing from them that followed, or being in
confusion, durst not abide it. He had a noble victory, the Pergamenians
then crying out of the wall, but yet durst not come forth. He, having slain
as many as he could in that short onset, and carrying away some horses and
men prisoners, he took his place, and the next day brought the Acheans to y^
wall, when as the Pergamenians durst not yet come out. Seleucus with many
horsemen drew near and provoked him, but he stood still at the wall, and
kept his charge.

When Seleucus had tarryed till middaye, he turned and Seleucus the kings
son*
went away. Diophanes set upon the hindermost, and scattered and hurt many
of them, which being done, he retired to the wall: And vsyng this manner
continuallye, and always laying in wait for them, when they went for forage
and wood, he so troubled them, as he made Seleucus to leave Pergam^, and drove
him from the other place of Eumenes Between the Romans and Polyxenides, not
long after, was Myonesus* is an lie before Ephesus.
a fight by sea, at Myones^m, in the which Polixenides had ten hundred armed
ships. Lucius the Romans Admiral, had.83. of the which five and twenty
were of the Rhodians, whereof Eudorus being captain, had the left wing.

When he did see the other of Polixenides to be much above the Romans, he
feared to be enclosed, therefore he sailed about with his light ships, and
well practiced in the Sea. And with his ships that carried fire, he set upon
Polixenides, flaming on every side with fire.

They durst not deal with them, because of the fire, but in a circle sailed
about them, and avoiding them, keeping the sea, The fight by sea
stroke the sides of them, till one Rhodian ship fell upon one of the
Sydonian Ships with such a vehemence, as an anchor fell from the Sidonian
Ship in to the Rhodian, and held them fast together. So as there was a
fight of ships not moving, as it had bin upon the land. Then coming of
either side, very many to help their fellow, there was a noble fight.

By this me ane, th^midde battle of the Ships of Antiochus, being left
naked, the Romans sailed forward and enclosed their vnexperte ennimyes,
which, when they perceived, they turned and fled, in the which, the King
lost nine and twentye, whereof thyrteene were taken, men, and all.

The Romans lost but two: Polixenides having taken one Rhodian, went to
Ephesus.

This was the fight by Sea, at Myonesium.

When Antiochus heard of this, he fortified Cherronesus and Lysimachia very
stronglye, thinking it a great matter, as it was indeed, to heepe the Romans
from passing with their army to the rest of Thracia, where they should have
an hard and painful way, except Philip did convey them.

But Antiochus being a^^^ies light and soon changing, when he heard of the
loss at Myonesus, he was vlterlye dysmayed, and thought God was against
him. For where the Romans had the better on the sea, beyond all reason, in
the which, he thought himself very mighty, and Anni^al shut up in
Pamphilia, and Philip conducting the Romans by the unknown ways, whom he
thought would rather have remembered the hurt he had by them, by all these
things being In calamities sense fails.
meruellously troubled, and God taking his wi^^ from him, as commonly happens
in all calamities, he left Cherronesus very fondly, before his enemies were in
sight, not regarding how great preparation there was of victual, armoure,
money, Antiochus gives over.
and munition, which he did not burn, but left it whole to his ennimyes:
and he forsook the Lysimachians, as though the City had been taken,
which fled unto him with their wives and children weeping: only his care
was to keep the Romans from Abydus, putting the rest of his Abydus in.
Asia, over against ^^stus in Europe.
hope of this war altogyther in it. Neither did he keep this passage, God
taking his sense from him, but went to the midde land in ha^^e, to preuente
his ennimye, leaving no guarde there.

When the Scipions heard of this departure, they went to Lysimachia in all
haste, and took all the armoure and money in Cherroneso, and quicklye passed
Hellespont, void of defense, and came to Sardies, where the King was, before
he perceived it.

Then he was confounded and utterly dejected, and laying his own faults
upon Fortune, he sent Heraclides of Byzance, to the Scipions to make an end
of the war, Granico a flood in little Asia.
offering Smyrna and Alexandria at Granico, and Lampsaco, for the which, the
war beeganne, and half the expenses of the war. And he willed him, (...)
need were, to grant the Cities of the Ionians and the Eoleans, that took
the Romans part in this war, and whatsoever thing the Scipions Antiochus
seeks peace.
would require, and this he wylled Heraclides to speak ^penty^, ^ut
priuatelye to offer Publius Scipio promise of much money from Antiochus, and
also the liberty of his son: For Antiochus had taken him in Grecia sailing
from Calcide, to Here the Author seems to take one for another. Scipio the
younger prisoner to Antiochus.
Diametriade.

And this son of Scipios was he that took and destroyed Carthage the second
time, and the second man that was named Affricanus, son of Paulus, that
overcame Perseus of Macedonia, being Scipio his sisters son by degree, and
his son by adoption.

The Scipions openly made this answer to Heraclide,

That if Antiochus will have peace, he must not only leave the Cities of
Ionia and Aeolia, but all the Country about Taurus, and defraye the whole
charges of the war, of the which he has bin the cause. Yet priuatelye
Publius said thus to him.

If Antiochus had offered these conditions of peace, when he had Lysimachia
and Cherronesus, the Romans would willinglye have accepted it, and
peradventure, if he had forbid, only to pass Hellespont. But now that
they were upon the land, The Romans have both the bridle and the horse.
and in safe place, and had not only the bridle, as they say, but also were
mounted the horse, with the bridle, they would not accept such conditions by
words. And that he did give the King thanks, for his great offer, and would
give him greater, if he sent him his son. And for the present time, would
wysh him to take the conditions, before he were driven to the proof of
greater burden.

When that Publius had said thus, he went to Elaea, for his health, leaving
Cneus Domitius, legate to his brother.

Antiochus, as Phillippe of Macedonie, thinking no more could be taken from
him by this war, than was propounded, gathered his army in the plain uf
Thyatira, not far from his enemies, and sent Scipio his son to Elaea, and
be counseled Elaea an I Will in Propontide, and a town in E^ld^
the bringers, that the King should not fight, till he came again to the
Camp. Antiochus giving credit to him, encamped at the hill Sipyl^, and
defenced his Camp with a strong wall, and put the flood Phryg^^ between him
and his enemies.

Domitius being desirous to try the fight by himself, passed the flood very
boldly, and going within two mile and an half of Antiochus, encamped there
four days together. Either of them set their men in order before their Camps,
neither of the^ beginning the fight. The fifth day, Domitius set in order
again, and came forth very proudely, and when Antiochus came not against him,
he removed his Camp nigher to him. One day being past, he proclaimed in the
hearing of the enemies, that he would the next day fight, whether Antiochus
would or no. He Antiochus provoked to fight.
being troubled again, changed his purpose, and where he might have kept within
his Camp, or manfully resist these, till Publius had come, he thought it a
shame to refuse the fight, being more in number: wherefore he took order for
the battle, and both of them came forth at the last watch, being yet night,
and either of them thus arrayed themselves. Ten thousand of the Roman
footmen held the left wing at the very flood, and with them were other ten
thousand Italians, in three several bands.

With the Italians, the army of Eumenes was placed, and the target men of
Achaia, about three thousand. This was the left The order of the Romans.
battle.

The right, was the horsemen of the Romans, Italians, and Eumenes, and they no
more but three thousand. There was mixed with them all the light armed, and the
archers. And about Domitius was four bands of horsemen. All these made
thirty thousand.

Domitius led the right battle. In the middle he placed the Consul.

The left battle he committed to Eumenes*

The Elephants that he had out of Libya, he thought to be to Elephants of
Libya less than of India, and afraid of the greater.
no purpose, for they be less that be at Libya, and afraid of the greater,
and they were but few, and therefore set them last of all. This was the
Romans order.

Antiochus army was. l^x. M. of the which, the surest was the Macedonians
battle, called Phalanx, containing.xvj. M. men The Phalanx of Macedonia
first appointed by Alexander, and Philip. It stands in the midst, divided
by a thousand and six hundred into ten parts, and of every part of these in
the front, were fifty men, and in the midst two and thirty, and in y^ side
of either part two and twenty. The sight of this Phalanx was like a wall, and
the Elepha^ts seemed like Towers. This was the midde battle of Antiochus.

The Horsemen were on either side of it. The men of arms of the Galatians, and
the choice horsemen of Macedonia, called of them Agema. These were equally on
either side the great Agema signifies the exercised battle of horsemen or
footmen that went before the Captain. Tro^mi people of France, that did
inhabit Asia. To^^^, by that went out of Galatia to Bithynia.
battle. There were wings beside these. In the right wing were light armed
Souldioures, and other Horsemen with silver shieldes, and archers on horseback
two hundred.

The left wing held the nations of the Galatians, Tectosagans, Trocmans, and
Tolistouians, and certain Cappadocians, whom Ariarathes sent, and other
strangers mingled.

To these were joined another company of men of arms, and of his confederates
with light armor. This order made Antiochus, seeming to put his trust in the
Horsemen, whom being many, he placed in the front, and very unskillfully he
thrust the great battle in a streighte place, in the which, he ought to
have put his trust, being most strong.

There was also a great number of ^^ingers, archers, darters, and target men,
of Phrygians, Lydians, Pamphylians, Pisidians, Cretes, Trallians, and
Cilicians, all armed after the manner of Creta. There were other archers on
horseback to these, Daceans, Museans, A^lymeans, and Arabians, which being set
upon most swift Camels, they shoot easily from high, and when they be
Arabians fight upon Camels.
at hand, use long and narrow swords. The armed Chariots were placed at the
beginning in the first f^oute, and were commanded when they had given the
first push, to give back. The fight was like two armies, the one to begin the
battle, and the other to lie in wait. Either of them being made to as much
terror as could be, both in number and form. Antiochus himself led the
horsemen of the right wing. The left side, his ^onne Seleucus governed. Of the
Phalanx, Philip the master of the Elephants had the charge. Of the fore-ward,
Medis and Z^^x^^. The day being cloudy and dark, the sight was taken away of
Shot hindered by moyst^ayre.
this preparation, and all the bows were the worse, as in the air moist and
thick. Which, when Eumones considered, he passed not of all the rest, only he
feared most the violence of the armed Chariots. Therefore he gathered together
the archers and dariers, and other light harness, commanding them to go
against the Chariots, and to shoot against the Horses, and not the men, for
the horse in the Chariot striving with his yoke, the rest of the Chariot is
made unprofitable, and many times breaks the other battles, men being afrayne
of the sithes, as it came then to pass. For when the Horses were stricken so
thick, and the Chariots carried back of the horses, the Camels felt the
disorder first, being next the Carts, and after them the men of arms, whose
horse for the waighte of the armoure, The Chariots were armed with ^ythes.
could hardly escape the danger of the sithes. Great was the trouble, and the
confusion diverse, which began chiefly of these, and went through the whole
battle, and for ignorance, was more than it needed. For in a long row and
thick multitude of men, with a diverse cry, and great fear, the truth was
not perceived of them that were next the hurt persons, and suspicion made every
man think the thing greater than it was.

When Eumenes did see the first succeed happily to him, and the fore-ward,
with the Chariots, that the Camels did cover, to be naked, he set his own
horsemen, and as many as he had of the Romans and Italians against the
contrary part of the Galatians and Cappadocians, and the other route of
strangers, exhorting the^ with loud voice to dispatch these ignorant men,
being destitute of their defense. They were ready, and giving a fierce onset
upon them, they made the turn, and ye men of arms that were joined to them,
which were disordred before of ye Chariots, and because these could most
hardly flee or turn, by reason of their weight, they took the^, and killed
the^. And this was done at the left battle of the Macedonians. In the right
wing, where Antiochus Antiochus at ^iside puts the Romans to flight.
was, breaking the battle of the Romans, he made them flee, and followed
them. The great battle of the Macedonians being set with the Horsemen in a
straight place and guadrate, and void of Horsemen on either side, received the
skirmishers that fought at the front of them, dividing themselves, and closing
again. Domitius with his Horsemen, and light harness, easily compassed
them, as a thick square, neither fit to give onset, nor enlarge themselves
being so broad. They manfully abode much force, and were grieved, that for all
their experience they could do no good, but stand to receive the stripes and
wounds of their enemies on every side. Only they stretched forth their pikes
in square manner, and challenged the Romans to try their manhood hand to
hand with them, for the which they had so much praise: yet did they not
march forth, being on foot and heavy harnessed, and seeing their enemies with
horse, chiefly that they should not dissolve their sure array. The Romans came
not upon them, nor would fight with them, fearing the experience and strength
of so valiant men, but running about them, did shoot and dart at them, and
never missed, so many being closed in so little room, for neither could they
avoid the darts, nor approach to them that threw upon them. Wherefore when
they had endured a long time, of very necessity they gave back, and turned
their way with threats, very orderly, and fearful to the Romans, for neither
then durst they set upon them, but hurt them as they could go about them,
till the Elephants brake upon the Macedonians battle, which would not be
ruled by The main battle is difordred by the Elephants.
their guides, and then there orderly retiring, was altered. In this, Domitius
had the upper hand, and passing to the Camp of Antiochus, forced them that
kept it. Antiochus chaced the Domitius enters the kings Camp.
Roman legions a great way, which had neither horsemen, nor light harness to
guard them, Domitius thinking they should not need because of the flood, till
he came to the Romans Camp, Antiochus chacern one part of the Romans to
their Camp.
where the Captain that had the charge with fresh Soldiers resisted his
violence, and to them joined they that ^edde, and were the more bolder. So the
king returned, being very proud and haulte for this victory, nothing knowing
yet of that was happened on the other side. Attalus brother to Eumenes, with
many Horsemen encountered with the king, through the which he passed, and hurt
them, keeping his course with the loss of a few, not caring for them. But when
he did see the loss, and all the field full of his dead people, men, horse,
and Elephants, and his Camp taken by force, he fled without ceassing, in he
came to Sardeis, about midnight, and from Sardeis, to Celaena, which Celaena.
they call Apamea, whither he understood his son was fled.

The next day he went from Celaena to Syria, leaving his Captains at Celaena,
to receive and gather together them that fled, and sent Ambassadoures to the
Consul for to cease war, who was burying his dead soldiers, and spoiling his
enemies, and gathering the captives. Of the Romans that were of the City,
there was slain, four and twentye horsemen, and three hundred footmen,
chiefly of them whom Antiochus slew. Eumenes lost no more but fifteen
horsemen. The Kings loss with his confederates, was judged to be fifty
thousand, which could not well be numbered for the multitude: all the Elephants
were slain, save fifteen, which were taken. After this victory so noble, and
beyond all reason, as some thought, not being like, that so few, in a
strange Country, should overcome so many, especially, where the Macedonian
Phalanx was furnished full of men, which for the valiantness, was terrible,
and thought invincible, the friends of Antiochus accused his rashenesse, in
falling out with the Romans, and his unskillfulness, and foolishness from
the beginning, that he left Cherronesus and Lysimachia out of his hands,
full of munition and money, before the The errors of Antiochus.
Romans came alande to try it, and neglected the guarding of Hellespont, the
which the Romans thought they could not easlye pass by force. They blamed
also his last oversight, making his chief strength unprofitable, by plaeing it
so straight, putting his trust more in mingled multitude of men that were fresh
soloures, than in men, that for experience and time, were acquainted with the
war, and by the continuance of the same, were endued with valiantness and
courage. These speeches were made of Antiochus.

The Romans increased encourage, and thought nothing too hard for them, both
for their virtue, and the favor of the Gods. This did make to the opinion of
their felicity, that being so few against so many, in an expedition, and in
the first fight, and in a strange land, they should overcome in one day, so
many nations so princely a power, both for the virtue of the hired soldioures,
and the glory of the Macedonians, and for the great dominion of the King, as
he had gotten the surname of Great: For in their speech and talk, King
Antiochus the Great, was a great word among them. The Romans thus gloried of
themselves. The Consul, after his brother Publius was come recovered from
Elaea, answered Antiochus Ambassadors, which required to learn, what Antiochus
should do to be a friend to the Romans, Publius answered thus unto them.

Antiochus has bin the cause both of these and former troubles Answer to
the kings ambassadors.
through his ambition, who having a great Kingdom, and the Romans suffering
him to have it, took from Ptolomie his kinsman, and friend to the Romans,
Caelesyria, and invaded Europe, where he had nothing to do: he subdued Thracia,
he fortified Cherronesus, and builded Lysimachia. He came into Grecia, and made
the Grecians bond, whom the Romans had made free, til he was overcome in
battle at Thermopylei, from whence though he fled, he left not his ambition,
but being overcome diverse times of us by sea, when we were passed Hellespont,
he desired peace: The conditions whereof, through pride, he contemned, and
gathered a mighty army, and with great preparation he made war again against
us, and by compulsion was brought to try it with his betters, till he was
overcome, to his great loss. It were fit that we should set a greater
punishment upon him, that so many times has violentlye dealte with the
Romans, but we will not be insole^t for our felicity, nor aggrauate others
calamity. Therefore we give the same conditions that we appointed before,
adding a few more which be profitable for us, and shall be commodious for his
safety in time to come.

That he refrain from al Europe and Asia on this side Taurus, The conditions
of peace.
and to these, limits shall be appointed.

That he deliver all the Elephantes he has, and as many ships as we shall
command.

That hereafter he have no more Elephants nor more ships, than we shall appoint.

That he deliver xx. pledges as the President shall prescribe.

That he give for the expenses of the war, begun by him, five hundred talents
of Euboea; presentlye, and when the Senate The least talent was lx. ^i.
shall approve the league, ij. M.v. C. talents, and in.xij. years after, other
xij. M.v. C. talents, part whereof to be brought to Rome every year.

That he gives to us all the prisoners and bondmen.

That he restore to Eumenes all that he ought to do, by a league between
Attalus his father and him.

If Antiochus will faithfully perform this, we give him peace and friendship,
when the Senate shall ratify it. Thus did Scipio determine, and the
Ambassadoures accepted it, and paid part of the money in hand, and delivered
twenty pledges, whereof, Antiochus the Kings younger son was one, whom the
Scipioni Antiochus son i^ sent to Rome.
sent to Rome with the Ambassadors.

The Senate agreed to the conditions, and subscribed to the confirmation of the
peace made by Scipio, and of some things that were not determined, they made a
little addition.

That two forelandes called Calycadnum, and Sarpedon should These be i^ Cilicia.
be the limite of Antiochus Kingdom, and that he do not pass them to niake
war.

That he keep twelve armed ships only to rule his subjects in obedience and
if war be made upon him, to use more.

That he harborowe no Romans, nor receive fugitives.

That he change his pledges every iij. years, his son only excepted.

This was written and set up in a table of brass in the Capitol, where
other covenants of peace be placed, and a copy was sent to Manlio Volsoni,
successor to Scipio. He gave oath to Manlius Volso.
Antiochus Ambassadors, at Apamaae in Phrygia, and Antiochus to Thermo a
Tribune that was sent to him. And this was the end of the war between the
Romans and Antiochus, that was called Great. And it seemed that he obtained it
only for the kindness he showed to Scipio in restoring his son: and some
there were that accused Scipio for it: and the two Tribunes noted him of
corruption and prodition, he despysyng Scipio i^ accused
and contemning the accusation, after he was come to the Court that day, that
before he had overthrown Carthage, sent to make sacrifice in the Capitol, and
came himself into the Pallaice of Judgment with goodly show, and not sad or
mourning, like an accused man, every man wondering at him, and favoring him as
a worthy man, and of great courage being clear in conscience. The courage of
Scipio.


When he began to speak, he said nothing of the accusation, but made a
rehearsal of his life, his service and al his acts, how many wars he had
finished for his country, whom he had overthrown, how often he had victory,
in so much, as it was a pleasure to the ^earers, for the noble declaration of
his history. And when he came to the war of Carthage, most of all he delated
the manner thereof with great vehemence, and audience of the people, saying:
This day, Romans, did I conquer, and made Carthage to obey you, which til
then, was most terrible unto you. This day do I go to sacrifice in the
Capitol, and as many of you as love your Country, accompany me in the
sacrifice that is made for you.

Having said thus, he went forth to the Capitol, not passing of his
complainte.

The people followed him, and so did many of the Judges, praising him with
open voice, and said the like, whiles he was sacrificing. The accusers were
discoraged and durst not prosecute the cause, as of no purpose, nor blame the
peoples favor, perceiving that his life was of more price, than their
suspicion and calumniation.

Scipio seems to me more wise, in the stout behauioure and contempt of this
accusation, than Aristides, being accused of Aristides not so constant as
Scipio. Socrates.
fraud, and Socrates, in the things whereof he was charged, neither of them
answering in the like discredit, saving that Socrates speaks as pleases
Plato: Yea he was more courageous than Epiminondas that was ruler of the
Booetians, with Pelopida and an other. The Thebanes had sent them, gyuing
either of them an army to help the Areadians and M^senians, that were at
war with the Laconians. And because things (...) ^^.
were not done as they intended, they were accused and called home. They
delivered not their armies to their successoures in six months, in the which
time, they expelled the Lacedemonian garrisons, and placed other of the
Arcadians, Epaminondas compelling his companions to do it, promising that the
doing thereof should not be hurtefull to them. When they were come home, their
accusers prosecuting the matter against every of them, they were condemned to
dye. For the Law judged him to die, that by violence would rule in an other
man's office. The other escaped, using lamentation and many words, and laying
all the blame in Epaminondas, for so he willed them to say, and he would affirm
it.

He being condemned to dye, said: I confess it is against the law, to rule
this time, and that I compelled them, whom Epaminondas m^ne: of answer.
you have delivered now. I do not desire to be pardoned, having transgressed
the law, but I beseech you, that for the service I have done, you would
wr^ie thus.

This is he, that got the victory of L^nitra, and that brought his Country
to Sparta it self, which before could not abide those enemies, nor no
stranger that ware a Lacedemonian hatte, he is condemned of his Country,
offending the Law for the benefit of his Country. Having said thus, he came
from the Tribunes, and offered his body to them that would take it.

The Judges, by the reproach of this speech, and marvel of the answer, and
reverence of the person accused, durst not abide the trial, but ran out of
the Court. These every man may judge as he lists.

Manlius the successor of Scipio, went to the land that was taken from
Antiochus, and gave order for them, and the Galathians Tolestouij were people
that came out of Spain to dvvell in Bithinia.
that aided Antiochus, called Tolestouians, fleeing to Mysios Olymp^^. He
followed painefully thorough the Mountains, and killed them in the chase, with
such a slaughter and bloodshed, as it could not be numbered for the multitude.
He took prisoners forty thousand, he burned their armor, and sold their
bodies to the next Barbarians* because he could not carry such a company,
about in the war.

The Tectosagans and Trocmans put him in danger by deceit, Mo^ius in danger.
from the which he escaped. And returning again upon them, remaining and
staying, because they were so many, he brought his shot, commanding them to
discharge upon them, neither all together, nor too nighe the enemy, and where
no arrow was shot in vain, for the thickenesse of the enemies, he slew eighte
Aly^ a flond running out of Taurus.
thousand, and chased the other to the flonde Alys.

Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, and a confederate of Antiochus, being afraid,
and praying peace, and with his prayer sending two hundred talentes, he did
not ouerrunne his land, but went to Hellespont, with great riches, and
infinite money, The error of (...).
much spoil, and army laden: And surely he did very unwisely, that being
Summer, he would not go by sea, not regarding the waighte of the carriage, nor
how he could lead his army to continewe and abide so long a journey, not
marching to war, but going home with spoils.

He went by Thracia, a straight, long, and hard way, in the hot Summer,
neither did he send to Philip of Macedonie to conducte him, neither divided
his army into many parts, that they might go the lighter, and be the more
ready for all purposes, nor distributing the burdens into several bands, that
they might be the better kept, but carried al together on an beape, so long a
way, and that in the midst, so that neither they that went before, nor they
behind, could help in time for the lenath and straightness of the way.
Wherefore the Thracians setting upon the fl^nks of him every where, he lost
great part of the pray, and of the common treasure, and of his army, and with
the rest, he saved himself in Macedonie. And then was it well perceived, how
much pleasure Philip showed the Scipions, and how much Antiochus e^^ed in
leaving Cherronesus. Thus Manlius went from Macedonia to Thessalie, and from
Thessalie to Epirus, and from Epirus sailed to Brunduse, where sending his
army every manne home, he went to Rome. The Rhodians and Eumenes king of
Pergamus, aduauncing themselves for their service against Antiochus* Eumenes
went to Rome, and the Rhodians sent Ambassadors.

The Romans gave to the Rhodians Lycia and Caria, the which, Rewards g^ to
the Rhodians
not long after, they took from them, because, when they had war with
Perseus of Macedonie, they seemed more inclined to him, than them. To Eumenes
they gave all the rest Revvard to Eumenes. Rewards to the Greeks.
that they had taken from Antiochus, except the Greeks there: and to them
that paid any tribute to Attalus his father, they commanded to pay it to
Eumenes. The tribute that they paid before to Antiochus, they forgave them,
and granted them to live free.

Thus the Romans divided their conquest, and when Antiochus Antiochus the
great dies.
the Great was dead, Seleucus his son succeedyng him, he sent for his
brother Antiochus that was pledge at Rome, and put his son Demetrius in his
place.

When Antiochus was come to Athens, Seleucus was killed of one Heli^d^rius that
was about him. And Eumenes and Attalus drove Heli^d^rus out of the Kingdom
which he usurped, S^leutus killed.
and restored it to Antiochus, to have his friendship, for now they were
grown into some suspicion with the Romans.

Thus Antiochus the son of Great Antiochus was king of Syria, who of the
Syrians was called the Notable, because when Antiochus the Noble.
his kingdom was ravished by others, he showed to be their natural king.
Making league with Eumenes, he reigned over Syria, and the nations about it
mightilye. He made Tymarxus lieutenaunt of Babylon, and Heraclides his
Treasourer, being brethren, and in great favor with him. He made war upon
Artaxes King of Armenia, whom, when he had taken, he Antiochus the second
dies.
dyed, leaving Antiochus his son of nine years of age, whom, for his fathers
virtue, the Syrians called Eupater Lysias brought Antiochus Eup^ter.
up this child.

When the Romans heard that Antiochus was dead so soon, who in a little time
had got great fame, they were glad. Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, brother
to Antiochus the Notable, nephew to Antiochus the Great, and cousin to this
child, being pledge at Rome and of three and twentye years of age, required to
be admytted to the Kingdom, as more near to him, but it was denied him, not
thinking it good for them, that a lustye young man should reign in a childs
place. And understanding that there were many Elephantes in Syria, and more
Shyps than was agreede, they sent Ambassadoures to kill the Elephantes and
burn the Ships. It was a grievous thing to see those The ships and Elephants
b^rned.
beasts tame and rare killed, and the ships to be set on fire. With the
which fight, one L^ptines in L^^dicia, being offended, finding Cneus Octauius
that was chief of this Embassage in a The Roman Ambassador is killed.
School house, killed him, and Lysias buried him.

Demetrius coming again into the Senate, desired only to be released of his
Ostageship, being put there for Antiochus, and now Antiochus being dead.

The which when he could not obtain, he fled away ^^^etrius flies from
Rome.
privily, and being received gladlye of the Syrians, he took the Kingdom
upon him, and killed the child, and Lysias, and drove away Heraclides, and
killed Timarchus resisting him, and evil using the Babilonians, for the which
the Babilonians gave him the ^^^^ou^.
name of S^ter, and of them it had the beginning.

Demetrius having the rule, sent a Crown of ten thousand Crowns to the
Romans, to thank them for the time he was pledge with them, and also,
Leptines, that killed Octauius. They accepted the Crown, but would not take
Leptines, reserving that quarrel against the Syrians.

Demetrius drove Ariarathes out of his kingdom, and put Demetrius puts
out Arisrathes.
in Ol^fernes, that was accounted his brother, for a thousand talentes, the
Romans thinking it good, both brethren should rule together.

These being gone, and Ariobarzanes afterward overcome of Mithridates king of
P^nt^^, the war of Mithridates followed Occasion of the war with (...).
brid^^es.
of this and other occasion, the greatest and most variable, made with so many
nations, and continuing forty years in the which time, there were many Kings
of Syria in a little time, yet all descended of the royal blood. There were
many changes and tumults in that kingdom. The Parthians reuolting from the
Seleucides, the royal blood. Parthians.
rule of Seleucide took from them Mesopotamia, that was wont to obey them.

Tigranes, the son of Tigranes King of Armenia, took certain Tigranes.
nations about him that had their proper princes, thinking to be their King,
and overcame Seleucides subjects that would not obey him. Antiochus the Good,
not able to resist him, he got all Syr^a to Euphrates, and all the generation
of Syria to Aegipt. He got also Cilicia that obeyed the house of Seleucides,
making Magadates Lieutenante, who ruled them fourteen years: but when
Lucullus the Roman General did follow Mithridates, fleing to Tigranes,
Magadates went with this army to help Tigranes, and so Antiochus, son of
Antiochus the Good, was brought into Syria, whom the Syrians obeyed with good
Lucullus favored the ancient Kings. Pompey seeks cause to put the king!
from Syria.
will. And Lucullus that first made war against Tigranes, and put him from
the lands he had won, did not envy the ancient kingdoms. But Pomp^yus that
followed Lucullus, and overcame Mithridates, and compelled Tigranes to rule in
Armenia, did cast out Antiochus from the kingdom of Syria, having not offended
the Romans in deed, because it was an easy thing with such an army to
spoil a king that had no army, but in pretense, because the Seleucidians were
expelled of Tigranes, it was not reason they should rule Syria any longer,
Tigranes being overcome of the Romans. And thus the Romans got Cilicia and
Syria the midde region, and Caelosyria and Phoenitia, and Paphlag^nia, and all
other parts of Syria, from Euphrates to Aegipt, and to the Sea coast, without
any fight. The nation of the Jews Jews conquered.
only remaining, Pompey conquered, and sent their King Aristobulus to Rome, and
beat down their greatest and holiest City Jerusalem, which Pt^lemeus the
first King of Aegipt did overthrow Vespasianus.
also, and Vespasianus again destroyed it, after it was reedifyed, and in my
time Adrianus, and therefore the Jews Adrianus.
have a greater tribute set upon every body, than their substance is worth. The
Syrians, and the Cilicians also, paid every man the hundred part. And Pompey
put several kings and Princes in Pompey makes Kings and Tetrarches.
the realms, that obeyed the blood of Seleacus, as he did to the Galathians in
Asia. To these Princes he confirmed the jurisdiction of a fourth part, that
served him against Mithridates. And not long after, they fell to the Romans in
Caesar's time, and chiefly to Augustus as the case stood. Pompey appointed
Scaurus to rule Syria, who had bin a Treasourer in his camp. And after Scaurus
Scaurus. Philippus. Marcelinus, Lentulus.
the Senate sent Philippus Marcus, and after Philippe, Marcelinus Lentulus,
being of the degree of Pretors. Both these spent their time in s^bduing the
Arabians that were tumultuous. And for this cause Lieutenants were sent
afterward into Syria, of them that ruled in the city, that they might have
power, both in peace and war, as the Consulls had. The first of these was
Gabinius that Gabinius bannished for making war upon Egypt.
came with an army to make war. And Mithridates king of Parthia being driven
out of his kingdom by Herodes his brother, came to Parthia again by the
Arabians. And Ptolomie the eleauenth King of Egypt, being also put out of his
kingdom, obtained by much money, that he would invade Alexandria in stead of
Parthia: and so Gabinius making war upon them of Alexandria, restored Ptolomie
into his kingdom, wherefore he was banished of ye Roman Senate, for that he
made war without commission, that was thought unlucky to the Romans. For it
was forbidden by Sibylla. After Gabinius, I think, that Crassus ruled Syria,
and making war upon the Parthians, received a great loss. And Crassus. L.
Bibulus. Sax^. The race of the ^ings of Syria.
Lucius Bibulus governing Syria after Crassus, the. Parthians invaded it. And
Sax^ ruling after Bebulus, they ranged as far as Ionia, the Romans being
molested with civil wars one against another. But this shall be declared
perfectly in y^ book of y^ Parthians war. In this book, being of Syria, shall
be showed how the Romans got Syria, and held it, as they do now. It shall
not be amiss to show how the Macedonians got Syria, and reigned there before
the Romans. For Alexander the King had Syria beyond Persia, and was king of
al y^ he won. When Alexander was dead, leaving children, one very young, another
in his mothers womb, the Macedonians for the love of Philips house, chose
Arideus to be their king, that was Alexanders brother, although he was thought
not to be well in his mind, calling him Philip in stead of Arideus, Alexanders
children being yet with tutors, and the mother with child diligently kept. The
friends divided the nations, and Perdiccas was y^ diuider, under king Philip.
And the kings being Perdiccas.
dead not long after, the great men were made Kings. The first Prince of Syria
was Laomedon of Mitilene, set in by Perdiccas, and Laomedon the first prince in
Syria. Ptolomie takes Iaomedon. who escapes.
after by Antipater that were kings. Ptolomeus sailed to Laomedon that was
ruler of Siria, and persuaded him by much money, to let him have Syria,
being an entry to Egypt, and a defense to Ciprus, the which he denying, he
took him. And he deceyuing his keepers, fled to Alcetas into Caria. And a
certain time Ptolomie had Syria, and when he had left garrisons in the City,
he sailed into Egypt. Antigonus was prince of Phrygia, Lycia. and Pamphilia,
being left ouerseer of all Asia, of Antipater, when he sailed into Europe, to
make war upon Eumenes, that was Prince of Cappadocia being judged to be an
enemy of the Macedonians, he fled and got Media for himself. But Antigonus
followed and killed him, and proceeding, was royally received of Seleucus
prince of Babylon. But when Seleucus had punished one of the Captains, and not
made Antigonus of counsel, being present, he was angrye, and called him to
account both of money and substance. He being too weak for Antigonus,
fled to Ptolomie into Egypt.

Antigonus straight after the fleeyng of Seleucus, removed Blitora Blitora
from his office, that ruled in Mesopotamia, because he furthered Seleucus in
his departure, and took to himself Babylon, Mesopotamia, and other nations of
the Medeans to Hellespont. Antipater being dead, he was by and by suspected to
all the other provinces, having so much land. Therefore by the persuasion
chieflye of Seleucus, Ptolomie, and Lysimacus Prince of Thracia, and Cassander,
son to Antipater and ruler of Macedonia after his father, they confederated
together, and sent a common Embassage, requiring him to divide the land and
money, that he had got, among them and the other Macedonians that had lost
their provinces.

Antigonus laughing at the matter, they made a common war A common war against
Antigonus.
against him. He prepared against them, and threw onte all the garrisons that
Ptolomie had in Syria, and seyzed to himself, Phoenitia and Cael^syria that
yet obeyed Ptolomie. Then he went to the straights of Cilicia, and left his
son Demetrius, two and Gaze a City ^^. Persi^e.
twenty years of age, in Gaze with an army, to resist Ptolomies invasions
from A^gipt. But Ptolomie overcame him at Gaza in a great fight, and the young
manne fled to his father, Ptolomie sent Seleucus by and by to Babylon, to
recover his rule, and gave him a thousand footmen, and three hundred horsemen.

And with these few, Seleucus went to Babylon, where he was gladly received
of the inhabitants, and in short time had a mighty dominion.

Antigonus was revenged of Ptolomie, and overcame him in a great fight by
sea, at Cyprus in the which Demetrius his son was Admiral, by the which
being much renoumed, the army called them both Kings, Antigonus and
Demetrius, the Kings being dead, Arrideus Philips son, and Olimpiades, and
Alexanders children. And Ptolomeus army called him King, that he should seem
not to be inferior to them that had the victerye: and thus a like effect
followed of a contrary cause. The other straight followed these, and of rulers
they were made Kings. So was Seleucus king of Babylon, and King of Media,
Nican^r being killed of him, who was left Gouernoure of Media by Antigonus: he
made many wars against the Macedonians and Barbarians, and two chieflye
against the Macedonians. The last whereof was against Lysimachus king of
Thracia, Ipsum.
and the first, against Antigonus at Ipsum in Phrygia, where Antigonus, being
four score years of age, playde the part both of a Captain and Soldier,
and being slain at that field, as many Kings as took part with Seleucus
against Antigonus, The valiantnes of Antigonus an old prince.
divided his kingdoms between them.

Now had Seleucus all the rule of Syria beyond Euphrates, to the sea, and
of the midde land of Phrygia. And ever he laid for the nighe nations, and
being able both by force to compel, and by word to persuade, he got
Mesopotamia, Armenia, and Cappadocia called Seleucida, and Persia, and Parthia,
and Bactuae, and The great dominion of Seleucus.
Arabia, and Tapyria, and Sogdia, and Araxosia, and Hyrcania, and all other
nighe nations to the floude Indus, which Alexander overcame, so that he, after
Alexander, had most regions in Asia. For, from Phrygia to the floude Indus,
all the high lands obeyed Seleucus, and going into Indus, he made war upon
Sandracoto Sandracoto.
king of those Indians that dwelt about it, till alliance being made, they
came to peace. Some of these things he did before the death of Antigonus, and
some after his death. They say, that being a soldier, and following the King
into Persia, he sought the Dracle in Didumaeo, to know of their return into
Macedonia, and it was answered. Make no haste to Europe, Asia is much better
for thee. And in his fathers house in Macedonia, Tokens of Seleucus his kingdom
the harth did cast forth a great fire, no man touching it, and his mother
had a dream, to give a ring that she should find, to Seleucus, for he should
be a King where that ring should fall from him, and she found a ring of iron,
with an anchor graven in it, and he lost his signet at Euphrates, and it is
said also that going to Babylon an other time, he stumbled on a stone, and the
stone being removed, an anchor was seen: and where the Soothsayer contended
that it was a token of delay, Pcolomeus Lagus that went with him said, an
Anchor was a token of Anchor, token o^ safetye.
safety and not of delay. And for this cause, Seleucus being a king, used an
Anchor for his Signet, some think also, that Alexander being alive, and
beholding it, another token was showed to Seleucus of his kingdom. As Alexander
returned from India to Babylon, and sailed the Fens of Babylon, because
Euphrates had ouerflown yt land of Syria, a sudden wind did blow off his
Diadem into Alexanders Crown blovvn off his head.
a place full of reeds, where was a Sepulcher of an old king, which was a
token also of Alexanders death. And that a mariner did swim to it, and set
it upon his head, to bring it dryt to Alexander, and for his good service, the
King rewarded him with a talent of silver, the Soothsayers counselling
Alexander to kill him, and some say Alexander did so, and some say no. And
some affirm, that the Mariner did not swim for it, but Seleucus, and that he
put it upon his head, to bring it dryt, and that it was a token of both their
fortunes. For Alexander died at Babylon, and Seleucus had the greatest part of
Alexanders lands of any of his successors. Thus much have I understood of the
tokens of his felicity.

Immediately after Alexanders death, he was made captain of the Guarde of
horsemen, which Ephesteon had in Alexanders time, and after him, Perdiccas.
After this office of horsemen, he was Governor of Babylon, and of a
Gouernoure was made a King, and because he was victorious in his wars, he was
called Nicator, and therefore (I think) he had this name, rather than Nicator
is a conqueror.
for killing of Nicator. He was of a great and mighty body, in so much, as when
a wild Bull did break his bands at a sacrifice that Alexander made, he only
stopped him, and with his hands only staid him, therefore they put horns upon
his Images. He builded Cities al over his kingdoms, sixteen, named Antiochia,
Cities builded by Seleucus.
of his father, and five Laodicea, to his mother, nine of his own name, four
for his wives, three named Apamea, and one Stratonicea, of the which, two
remain most noble to this day, Seleucia at the Sea, and Seleucia at the flood
Tigris, of his own name, and Laodicia in Phoenitia, and Antiochia at the hill
Libamo, and Apamea of Syria. He named other of Greece and Macedonia, either of
some feate, or in the honor of Alexander the King, whereby there be in Syria,
and in the barbarous Countries beyond them, many Cities of the Greek and
Macedonian names, as Berroia, Aedessa, Perinthus, Maronaea, Gallipolis, Achaia,
Pella, Orotos, Greek names to di^^rse Cities.
Amphipolis, Arethusa, Astacos, Tiegea, Chalcis, Ecato^polis, Achaia, in India,
Alexandrinopolis, in Scythia, Alexandrescata, and after his victories,
Niceporaeon in Mesopotamia, Nicopolis in Armenia that is next Cappadocia.

They say, that when he builded Seleucia at the Sea, there Seleucia at the Sea.
was a token of a lightning, therefore now they sacrifice, and sing Himnes to
the lightning, because it was then sent as a token from God.

When he builded Seleucia at Tigris, he commanded the Seleucia at Tig^^s.
Southsayers to appoint a good day, and an hour of that day, when the work
should begin. The Southsayers told a false hour, because they would not
have that work to prosper, and Seleucus sat in his tente, tarrying for the
hour, when the army of themselves, on a suddayne, having tarried with silence
for the hour that Seleucus appointed, began the work at the happy hours in
deed, thinking some man had commanded them, and wrought so vehemently, as no
Proclamation The wonderful chance in building a City.
could call them back, till they had made an end.

Seleucus being very sorry, asked the Southsayers what should become of this
City: they craving pardon said: O king, the destiny that is appointed, be it
good or badde, neither man nor City can avoid. For there is a destiny of
Cities, as well as of men. And this City shall be of most long continuance by
the appointment of God, being begone at this hour. We, fearing this building
would have been a bridle to us, went about to put by the destiny: but that is
of greter force than either the subtlety of the Soothsayers, or the ignorance
of the king: For god gave the happy time to the army, and by that only, you may
learn, and think we can not now deceive you. For thou the king did set
with thine army, and thy self did command they should tarry. And where
they have always bin most obedient to thee in perils and pains, they could
not now hold nor stay at thy commandment, but went to it, not by parts, but
altogether with their captains as they had bin commanded, and they were
commanded in deed, for when thou commaundedst to the contrary, they would not
hear it: what is there then greater among men, than a king, but God, God
guides kings.
who is the ruler of thy will, and thy guide of this city in stead of us, and
being ofte^ded with us, and al our nation here about, for how can our things
stand, when a stronger generation rises upon us? This city shall be happy,
mighty, and long continuing. Confirm thy pardon to us, that have erred for
fear of the loss of our private goods. When the wiseme^ had said thus,
Seleucus was glad and pardoned them. And this much have I learned of Seleucia.

Seleucus being alive, made his son king of all the high lands. And although
this may appear a princely and royal act, yet more princely and moderate was
the taking of his sons love, and the tempering of the affection thereof.

Antiochus loved Stratonica wife to Seleucus and mother in law to him, and had
borne a child to Seleucus. Antiochus being ashamed of this strange passion,
neither prosecuted so evil a thing, nor uttered it, but was sick, pyning
away, and gladly procured his own death.

The notable physician Erasistratus, of counsel with Seleucus in The
marvelous love of Antiochus
most waightye affairs, could not conjecture the disease, till he had
perceived that his body was sound in all parts, then he judged the disease to
be of the mind, by the love or affection of the which, the body is afflicted.
Sorrow, anger, and care, be commonly discovered, but love is kept secreate in
a modest mind. Of the which, Antiochus would utter nothing to him, though
he used all gentle means to learn it secretly. He sat by him and observed
all the mutations of his body, how they stood when any came in, and finding
that at all other his body was quiet and feeble in like sort. But when
Stratonica the Great came in, to see him, his mind was vexed with
shamefastness and conscience, and he then most disquiet and silent, and his
pulses of it self, more lively and moving, and when she was gone, feeble
again. The Phifition therefore told Seleucus that his son was sick of an
incurable disease.

The King asking how, and crying out for grief, he said, the sickness was
Love, and the love of a woman, but it was impossible to have her. Seleucus
maruelling, that there should be any, that he, being King of Asia, could
not persuade to marry with his son, either for favor, for money and gifts,
and for his whole Kingdom, which should descend to the sick prince, the
which he would give him presently, if any would preserve his health, and
only praide him to tell him whose wife it was. Then said Erasistratus, it is
my wife that he loves. Then Seleucus spoke thus: O good Erasistratus, for the
friendship and benefits A singular Physician.
that thou have received of us, for the rare wisdom and virtue that is in
thee, will thou not save a young man and a King, and the son of thy friend
and a King, unfortunate and temperate, hiding his evil, and more ready to dye?
will thou so little pass of Antiochus? will thou so little regard Seleucus?
He framing still his matter, said, It is a thing by reason, that cannot be
avoided, for though you be his father, you would not let him have your wife,
if he loved her.

When Seleucus heard this, he swear by all the kingly Gods, that he would
willingly and gladly let him have her, and be a noble example, of the love of a
good father to a son, sober, and continent in affliction, and unworthy such
adversity. Speaking many such things, he began to be grieved that he could not
be a Physician to the sick man, but that he must have need of ^rasi^tratus in
the matter.

When he perceived the King to be so earnest in deed, and not to dissemble, he
declared the case, and showed how he found it out, for all his hiding of it.
Seleucus being marvelous glad, had yet two things to do; the one to persuade
his son, and the other to persuade his wife. When he had so done, he called
the A rare example of a princely fatherly love to an afflicted modest son.
army together, which peradventure had heard somewhat of the matter. He
rehearsed unto them the acts that he had done, and the great dominions that he
had got above any of Alexanders successoures, he set out at length. And
because it was too much for an old man to govern, I will (quoth he) divide
the greatness of it, for your better assurance in time to come, and I will
give part to them that I love best. It is reason that all you do join with me
in all thing, who have bin increased to so great rule and power under me,
after Alexander. The chiefest things that I have, and most worthy my kingdom,
is mine eldest son and my wife. They shall not be long without children,
being young, and so shall you have more stays of this state. In your presence I
join the^ together in marriage, and I send them to be kings into the upper
regions. And I institute, that not rather the custom of the Persians, or other
nations, be a law among you, than a common law to you all, that it is ever
just, that is ordained among you by the king Thus he said. The army made
acclamations, that he was the most noble King since Alexander, and the most
worthy father.

When Seleucus had said as much to Stratonica and his son, he celebrated the
matrimony, and sent them to their kingdoms, A most glorious act*
an act more glorious and victorious, than all that ever he had done in the
wars. He had under him threescore and twelve Princes, of so great a
Country was he king. Having given the most part to his son, he kept only y^
sea coast at Euphrates. The last war that he had, was with Lysimachus in
Phrygia, next Hellespont, in the which he overcame Lysimachus that was killed
in the fight. He passing Hellespont and going to Lysimachia was killed. For
Ptolomie following killed him. He was called The noble king Seleucus, is killed
by treason, of Ptolomie C^r^^^ ^o, whom he kept from his fathers fury.
Ceraunus, the son of Ptolomeus S^teros, and Eurydices, daughter to
Antipa^er. He fled out of Egypt for fear, because he suspected that
Ptolomie would give the Kingdom to his youngest son. And Seleucus received
him and kept him, as the son of his friend, and led him about with him that
should kill him.

Thus dyed Seleucus at.lxxiij. years of his age, and.xltj. of his reign. And
I think the saying was meant of him. Make no haste to Europe, Asia is better
for thee: for Lysimachia is in Europe, and this was the first time that he
sailed into Europe since he followed Alexander in the war. They say that
asking once of his death, it was answered by Oracle:

If thou auoydest Argos, thou shalt have thy natural age,
But if thou go to Argos, thou shall dye before thy time.
There is Argos in Pelloponeso, and Argos Amphilochion, and Argos.
Argos in Orestiade, of the which come the Macedanians called Argeades,
Diomedes.
the which Diomedes did build when he fled into Ionia. And whatsoever Argos was
named in any place, he fought for it, and took heed of it. But when he went
to Lysimachia from Hellespont, there was an Altar in his fight great and
goodly, and when he understood the name was Argos, he did ask if the
Argonants made it, when they sailed into Colches, or the Achaians, when they
went to the battle of Troy, and, if therefore the inhabitants call the Altar
Argos, or for that the ship was perished there, or for yt it was the Country
of Atrida. And whiles Ceraunius is a name given for boldness and svviftnesse of
vvitte. Ph^leterus bought the dead body of Seleucus to bury it.
he was asking these questions, he was killed of Ceraunus coming behind him
and dispatchyng him. Philet^rus ruler of Pergamo, did bring Seleucus, buying
his body of Ceraunus for a great sum of money, and sent the ashes to his
son Antiochus, who did make a Sepulcher for him at Seleucia next the Sea,
with a temple and a Chapel, and named the Chapel Nicat^rio. We learn that
Lysimachus was one of Alexanders guard Token of Lysimachus reign.
and on a time runnyng by him a great while, as fast as he rode, being
weary, he held his horse by the tail, and ran on, and being hurt in the
foreheade with the end of the Kings spear, and bleeding, the King, for lack
of other cloth, stopped the wound with his Crown, whereby the Crown was full
Aristander southsayer.
of blood: and that Aristander, that was Alexanders prophet, seeing this
chance of Lysimachus, said, he should be a King, but he should reign with
great difficulty.

He reigned.xl. years, with them that he was a ruler, and reigned with great
pains: and being.lxx. years of age, fought a field and was s^aine, Seleucus
that killed him, living not long after him. His body lying on the ground, a
dog of his kept a long Thorax.
time, defending it safe from fowls and beasts, till Thorax of Pharsali^
found it and buried it. Some say that Alexander his son, did bury it, fleeing
for fear to Seleucus, because Lysimachus had killed Agathocles an other son of
his, long seeking his body yt was The faythfulnes of a dog.
kept of the dog, and finding it putrified. His bones were buried in a Temple
of Lysimachia, and called it the temple of Lysimachus. This end had either of
these Princes, most valiant of mind, and Two noble princes. The succession
of Seleucus. Antiochus Sot^r that is savior.
big of body, the one being.lxx. years of age, and the other three more,
fighting with toeir own hands to the death. When Seleucus was dead, his
children succeeded him in the Kingdom of Syris, after this sort. First this
Antiochus that loved his mother in law, who was called Soter, driving away
the Galatians that came out of Europ^ into Asia, the second, another Antiochus,
gotten in this marriage, whom the Milesians called first a God, Antiochus Deus.
because he killed Timarchus their Tyranne. But this God his wife killed with a
potio^. He had two wives, Laodice, and Berenice, Laodice. Berenice.
being despoused for love, both the daughters of Ptolomie Philadelphos. Laodice
killed him, and after him Berenice and her child. And Ptolomeus the son of
Philodelphus in revenge, killed Laodice, invaded Syria, and took Babylon. And
the Parthians did begin to reuolte from the Kingdom subject to the
Seleucid^ns, because it began to be molested. After him that was called God,
reigned Seleucus his son by Laodice, named Callinicos.

After Seleuc^^, two children of Seleucus in order, Seleucus and Antiochus.
Scleucus being weak and feeble, and having a diso^edient Seleucus, Calinicus.
army, was poisoned of his friends, after he had reigned two years. Then
Antiochus the Great, of whom I have written, Seleucus Antiochus M^gnus.
who was overcome of the Romans. He reigned xxxvij. years. Of him and his
children I have spoken before, both being kings, Seleucus and Antiochus,
Seleucus twelve years weak and doing nothing for his fathers misfortune:
Antiochus not fully Artaxia king.
two years, in the which, he ouerthrewe Artaxia of Armeni^, and invaded Egypt
against Pt^lomie the sixte, who, with his brother, were left Orphans. And
whiles he was in camp at Alexandria, Popilius the Roman Ambassadoure came,
bringing a decree, The Senate of Popil^^s.
in the which was written, that Antiochus should not make war upon the
Ptolomies, which when he understood, he said he would take deliberation.
Then Popilius made a circle with a rod, and said: In this take thee
aduisement. He being afraid, brake up his camp, and spoiled the Temple of
Venus of Elymaea, after the which he died of a consumption, leaving Elymaea at
the coast of Eupat^r,
a son of nine years of age, Antiochus Eupat^r, of whom I have spoken, and of
Demetrius his successoure, who being pledge at Rome, fled and was King, and
called also Sotor of the Syrians, the second after Seleucus Nicator^ son.
Alexander coun^erfaiting Alexander the counterfaite gets the kingdom of
Sy^i^, ^^ca^^^.
himself to be of the house of Seleucides, rose against him, whom Ptolomeus
King of Egypt maintained for hate of Demetrius. And Demet^ius losing his
kingdom by Ptolomie, dyed, but Demetrius, son to him that was called Sotor,
expelled Alexander, and because he did overcome a bastard by birth, he was
called Nicator of the Syrians, the second after Seleucus. He also, after
Seleucus, made war upon the Parthians, where being Captive, he lived with
Phraarta the King, whose sister Radogine, he married. For want of a king
Diodotus a servant of the kings, brought D^odotus brings in the ^astards
son R^phon
in Alexander, son to Alexander the bastard, and Ptolomies sister, and made
him king, then he killed the child, and reigned himself, changing his name
into Tryphon. But Anti^chus, brother to Demetriu^ the captive, hearing of his
captivity at the Rhodes, with much add killed Tryphon, after he was come into
the Country. Then he made war against Phraartes, requiring his brother,
Phraartes was afraid of him, and deli^^ered Demetrius. Antiochus nevertheless
Antiochus ^^^leth him (...) D^metrius is ^^^led o^ his wise. Selencus is
killed o^ h^^ mother.
fighting with the Parthians, was overcome, and killed himself. And when
Demetrius was returned to his kingdom, Cleopatra his wife killed him, for
jealousy of his other wife Radogine, for the which cause he was married to
Antiochus Demetrius brother. She had two children by Demetrius, Sele^thus and
Antiochus called Grypus: by Antioch^s, she had A^tiochus called ^izicenus. She
sent G^ypus to Athens, Cyzicenus to Cyzic^, to be brought up, Seleucus, y^
succeeded after his father, she killed with an arrow, either fearing y^
reuengement of his father, or y^ she used a furious hate in all things. After
Seleucus, Gripus was king, who caused Grypus killed his mother to save
himself. Cyzicenus drives ou^ Grypus. Seleu^us drives out Cyzicenus. Mopsus
is a ^ree City in Cilicia which S^^a^o calls Mopsu^^^^ E^sebes good or
devvtifull.
his mother to drink y^ poison that ^he had prepared for him. Thus was she
punished. Gripus was a fit son for such a mother, for he laid wait for
Ciziceno, though they were both of one mother, which, when he perceived, he
fought with him, and drove him out of his kingdom, and reigned in his steed in
Syria. But him did Seleucus y^ son of Grypus overthrow, though he was his
uncle, and bicau^e he was a very cruel tyran, he was burned in a schoolehouse
at Mops^estia, Cilicia. Antiochus, so^ of Cyzicenus succeeded him, who y^
Syrians think escaped the trains of his cousin Seleucus, for his goodness,
therefore they call him the God. But his woman sau^d him, b^ing in love with his
person. Yet I think the Syrians gave him this name in derisio^. For this
Eusebes married Selene, Pompey takes the kingdom^ of Syri^.
y^ was first his fathers wife, and then Gripus his uncles wife. Therefore by
the will of God, he was expulsed his realm by Tigranes, who sent his son y^ he
had by Selene, to be brought up in Asia, and therefore was called Asiaticus,
whom Pompey put from y^ Kingdom of Syria, as we have said, being y^, xvij. K.
of Syria of the house of Seleucus. For I leave out Alexander, and Alexanders
son as bastards, and their servant Diodotus, reigning but one year, whiles
Po^pey was about other business. The rule of Seleucus race continued 270. years.
And if a man look from Alexander to the Romans time, he must add to these
270. years. 14. of Tigranes.

This I thought good to write of the Macedonians, ruling in Syria, as in a
treatise by the way.

The end of the R^^^^^s vvar^e with Antiochus the Great, King of (...)
The Romans wars with the Carthaginenses: by Appian of Alexandria.
THe Phoenitians did build Carthage in Libya, fifty years after the taking of
Troy, the builders of it, Xorus and Carchedon. But as the Romans and y^ The
proper name of Dido, was (...) who killed hirselfe rather than she would
mary with a Barbarian king Tyrus is now called P^^^ ^^ ^^^. It was ^^ Island.
Alexander joined ^^ to the land. Pygmaleon son to (...) kin of Tyrus, killed
Sycheas his sisters (...).
Carthaginea^s themselves think, Dido a woman of Tyria, whose husband Pygmaleon
a Tiran of Tirus had killed, and kept the act secret. She knowing it by a
vision, ^^edde with a great deal of money, and as many as hated the Tirannie
of Pigmaleon, and sailed to Libya, where now is Carthage, and being driven
away by the Libyans, they desired so much place to inhabit, as they could
compass with the hyde of a Bull. A laughter was made of this t^^fling speech
of the Phoenitians, who were ashamed to deny so little a matter: but chiefly
they marvelled how a City could be made in so little a space, and being
desirous to see the subtilty, by oath they promised to give it. They cut the
hide into one thin thong, and compassed that part, where now the castle of
Carthage is: and of this it was called Birsa. In time ro^^ng from thence, and
fighting with their neighbors, for whom they were to good, and by the use of
their ships, keeping the sea after the Phoenitian manner, they builded the
City that is without Birsa, and waxed so mighty, as they were Lords of Byrsa
is an ^yde or a skin.
Libya, and a great part of the sea* Then they made wars in far Countries,
in Sicelie and Sardinia, and other Isles, that ^ee in the sea, and in Spain.
They sent out many inhabitations, and Ph^^i^^^ is in Syria next the I^w^.
In^^entrice of letters and navigations, they^ two chief c^^^^^ were Tyrus and
Syd^^.
had a dominion in power comparable to the Grecians, and in riches to the
Parthians 700. years after the beginning, the Romans took from them Sicelie
and Sardinia, and in the second war Spain also. Thus they inuading one
another with gr^^ armies, they by the con^^^^ of Annibal, xvj. years together
wasted Ital^e, the other Cornelius Scipio the elder being Captain, afflicted
Libya, t^^ they took from Carthage, rule, navy, and Elepha^ts, and appointed
them to pay ^^ny by days. Then the second peace ^^ing made between the Romans
and them, continued. 50. years, til being broken, they made the third and last
war between the^. In y^ which, the Romans ouerthrewe Carthage, Scipio the
younger being The Greek word is (...), which signifies accu^sed or a place
that may not be inhabited The habitation was ^edde by ^. Grac^^us and Flaccus,
when the city was troubled for the ^avv of lands but not then allowed.
General, and determined it should never be inhabited. Yet they sent an
habitation thither of their own people, very nighe the former place, to be a
fit defense against Libya. The matters of Sicelie, be told in that
Treatise: The doings of Spain, in the Spanishe History: And what Annibal did,
when he invaded Ital^e: in the war of Annibal. This book does comprehe^d all
that was done in Libya from the beginning. The Romans entered this war, after
that of Sicelie, and with.v. C. and xxx. ships, sailed into Libya, and took
many cities, and left Attilius Regulus with a power* General there, who
took.ij. C. ^ities more, which being wearye of Carthage, yielded to him and
he went on, and wasted their land. The Carthagineans sent to the Lacedaemonians
for a Captain, thinking that they were overcome for lack of a good leader,
they sent Zantippus unto them. Attilius encamped at a Fen* and in the hot
time, went about the Fen against his enemies, laden with heavy harness, ^^e
^arthagi^^ send to Lacedemonia for a Captain.
and vexed with thirst, heat, and hardness of way, and beaten with the shot
from the ^igh places. When it was almost night, he drew ^igh and a floude did
divide them* therefore he passed the flood, that so he might afray Zantippus.
But he having set his army in order, brought it forth of his ca^p, thynking to
ouermatch Santippus is sent from Lacedemonia.
them that were hot and weary, and that the night should help his victory:
and he was not deceived of this hope, for of.xxx. M. men which Attilius ^ed, a
few hardly escaped to the city of Aspis, the rest were al slain or taken, and
with them Attilius the General and Consul was captive. The Carthaginians being
weary, sent him not long after, with their Ambassadors to Rome, to work their
Aspis or Cl^^^^ of the likeness of a buck^er, is a City in Affric^ in the
pro^^nt^*rie of Mercury. Regul^^ di^^^ad^^th peace in Rome, and is tormented
to death at Carthage. The ingratitude of the Carthaginians tovvard Santippus.
peace, or to return, and he, in secret, with the best of the Romans,
persuaded them to continue the war ernestly, and returned willingly to the sea.
The Carthaginians put him in a Cave beset with iron pricks, and killed him.
This felicity of Zantippus, brought his own calamity. For the Carthaginians,
pretending to send him home honorably with man^e gifts to Lacedemonia, in
certain galleys, commanded the Captains to drown him and them that sailed
with him. This reward had he for his well doing. And these were the good and
evil happes that the Romans had in the first war in Libya, til the
Carthaginia^s gave place to the^ in Sicelie: and how they gave place, it is
declared in the wa^re of After 24. years war, the Cartha g^^s were driven
out of Sicelie C. ^^ct^tu^ Catullus being Consul.
Sicelie, after the which there was peace between Rome and Carthage.

The Libyans that were under Carthage and served them in Sicelie, and the
French, that were hired, had a quarrel against the Carthaginians, for
withholding their ways, and made them sharp war. They of Carthage sent
for help to Rome, as to their friends. The Romans only granted them to
gather men of Italy for this war. For this also was doubtful in the
capitulations: and they sent some to pacifye the matter, whom the Libyans would
not hear, but would make their Cities subject to the Romans if they would,
but they did not accept the^. The Carthaginians with a great navy molested
their Cities, and The Carthagies kill the Roman mercha^ts.
kept victuals from them by sea, and being in want also by land, as is wont in
war, the Libyans were overcome, and the merchauntes that passed, were spoiled
of the nee^y sort: and such of the Romans, as they killed they thre^^ over
boorde, that it should not be seen: and it was not known a great while: and
when it was known, deuying to make recompense, wa^re was decreed against them
by the Romans, in the which they gave Sardinia for a pain, and it was
written in the former conditions. Not long after the Carthaginians i^^aded
Spam, and got it by little and little, till the Saguntines, fleeing the
Romans, the limits of Carthage in Spain, was not paste the floude Hi^eris.
These ^^erus now ^^b^^is a flood in Spain ^at diuide^h Ar^^on.
agreements the Carthaginenses brake, and went beyond, Anniball being their
Captain, leauyng Iberia to be kept by other Captains, he went into Italy.

The Romans Captains in Iberia, P. Cornelius Scipio, and C. Cornelius
Scipio, being brethren, and having done many noble An openion of divine
iuspu^^^o^ in Scipio.
a^^e^, were both slain of the enemies, and the Captains after them did but
^uill, till Scipio, the son of Publius Scipio that was slain in Iberia,
sailed th^ther, and putting an opinion in all men, that he went in gods name,
and used a divine counsel in all his do^^^s, he had a glorious victory, and
being therefore of great r^^oume, hedeliuered his army to them that were sent to
be his successors, and went to Rome: he obtained an army to be sent Contention
in the Senate for Scipio going to Carthage.
into Libya, to drive Annibal out of Italy, and to plague the Carthaginia^s in
their own country. Some of the rulers of the city, spoke against it, that
because Italy was troubled with so great war, Annibal yet wasting of it, and Mago
in y^ sides of it, hyring strange soldiers in Ligurie and France, it was not
good to make war upon Libya, nor to invade another Country, til the present
hurt were healed at home. Some thought that the Carthaginians, which now
without fear, did ouertunne Italy: because they were not vexed at home, if
war were made upon them, would send for Annibal. Thus it was obtained to
send Scipio into Libya, not suffering him to gather men in Italy, being yet
wasted by Annibal, but granting him to lead such, as would willingly go with
him, and to use them that were yet in Sicelie, gyuing him leave to prepare
ten galleys, and to make supply for the^, The slender setting forth of Scipio
to so great a war.
and to take them that were in Sicelie. Money they gave him none, except any
man for friendship would contribute unto him. So slenderly began they this
war at the first, which after redounded to their great honor. Thus Scipio,
inflamed as from God, against Carthage, and gathering.vij. thousand horse and
footmen at the most, sailed into Sicelie, having with him The policy of
Scipio to arm 300* Italians.
for his guarde three hundred chosen young striplings, whom he commanded to
follow without armoure. He appointed three hundred of the wealthy Sicilians, to
come at a day assigned, furnished with as good armor and horse as they could.
When they were come, he granted them, if they would, to give other to serve in
their place: where with being all content, he brought forth the three hundred
that were unarmed, and willed them to change with them, they willinglye
delivered both horse and harness: and so Scipio had 300. Italians, for as many
Sicilians, very well furnished with goodly horse and armoure, who gave him
great thanks, and he had the^ continually most ready in service.

The Carthaginians hearing this, sent Asdrubal Giscanes son, Ligurie is that
part of Italy which now be longs to the Genowais.
to hunt for Elephants, and sent to Mago, that made men in Liguria, six
thousand footmen, eight hundred horse, and seven Elepha^ts, commanding him
with as many more as he could, to scour the Tuscane sea, and to keep Scipio
from Libya, Mago made no have, because he could not join with Annibal being so
far of, and also for that he ever foresaw the end. Asdrubal coming ^r^ the
hunting, gathered of the Carthaginians and Libyans six thousand footmen of
either and, 600. horse, and he bought 500. slaves, to row in the galleys, and
2000. horsemen of the Numidians, and hired strangers, and trained them all,
200. furlongs from Carthage. The Princes that were in Libya, were of several
dominions, of all the which, Syphax was of gretest honor with all men.
Massinissa also the son of a noble king of high blood of Massulia, was
nourished and brought up in Carthage, of goodly body and Massinissa is made
sure to Sophinisba.
good behavior. Asdrubal G^sgo, inferior to none in Carthage, had dispoused
him to his daughter, though she were of Carthage and he a Numidian: when he had
ensured them, he carried the Syphax in love vvitin Sophoniba makes war upon
the Carthaginians and allieth with Scipio. Missinissa allieth with Scipio.
Sophinisba is given to Syphax.
young man with him into Spain, where he was Captain. Now Syphax that was in
love with ^^^ ma^de, m^^ded the Carthaginia^s, and made league with (...),
(...) from Spain to invade Carthage. The Carthagini^^ hearing of it, and
thinking it a great furtherance to the ^^^anes war, to have Syphax aid, they
gave the Virgin to him, unknown to Asdru^al and Massinissa, being in Spain.
Massinissa disda^ning at this, did also confeder with Scipio in Spain, keeping
it secret, as he thought from Asdrubal. Who understanding of it, was grieved
at the injury that was made to his daughter and the young man, yet thought it
best for his Country, to dispatche Massinissa, and where he should go into
Libya from Iberia after the death, of his father, he sent some to conducte him,
commanding, as secretly as they could, to kill Massinissa. He perceiving it,
fled, and got his Massinissa escapes traynes.
fathers kingdom, and gathered horsemen with continual exercise day and
night, using them with much shot on horseback, to give onset and retire, and to
charge again, all their fight consisting in flying and chasing. And having
gathered twentye Massinissa trayneth his men.
thousand of them, he led them to huntings or prays of other nations, by
the which he thought to make them endure pain The hardness of the Numidians.
and labor. For the Numidians can abide hunger, and use herbs in stead of
corn, and drink water altogether. Their horse never tastbarley, but always
eat grass, and drink but seldom.

The Carthaginians and Syphax, thinking this exercise that this young man made,
was against them, for they were not ignoraunte wherein they had offended him,
determined first to make war, and overcome him, and then to meet with the
Romans. Syphax and the Carthaginia^s were many more, with chariots and carriage
for abundance. Massinissa would himself begin The manner of Massinissa in
the war.
the labor, having only horsemen, no carriage nor forage, that he might the
more easily fly and turn again upon his enemies and retire to strong places,
and being many times circumuented, divided his army, that they might the
better flee by parts, he hiding himself with a few, till they might come to
him by night or day, as was appointed. He being the third man, did once lie
hid in a have, the enemies camping about it. We never stayed in camp, but
ever led his army, to be unknown where he was, so as the enemies could not come
to hands with him, but only keep him back, when he came to them. His food was
every day, what he could get at night, were it in field, town or City,
catching and spoiling every thing, and dividing it to his companions. Wherefore
many Numidians came unto him, no wagies being appointed, but to take the gayn,
that was much better. Thus did, Massinissa war with the Carthaginians. When
Scipio had made all thing ready in Sicelie he sacrifised to Jupiter and
Neptune, and came toward Libya with. 52. long ships 400. ships of burden, and
many pinesses and foysts followed. He led an army of sixteen thousand footmen,
a thousand six hundred horsemen, he carried also much armor and munition, and
much victual, and sailed ^^. The Carthaginians and Syphax hearing of it,
purp^sed to de^^^ue, Massinissa, and to (...) him to society, till they had
overcome (...). He not being ignorant of their deceites, Vtica was the
fayre^^ city in Aff^^c^ next Carthage, thirty miles of, in the which Cato
killed himself when Caesar followed him.
laid the like for them* and communicated al with Scipio, and as he had ^in
reconciled, came to Asdrubal with his horsemen. And being all ^^^ camp not
^^rr^ asunde^ at the ^itie of V^i^^ unto the which, (...) being brought by the
(...) (...) ^^^^mpe there also.

Asdrubals camp was not much from him, having twenty thousand footmen.vij.
thousand horsemen, and a hundred sixty Elephantes. Syphax either afraid, or
being distrusted of Syphax goes from the camp
bothpretending his kingdom in diverse parts to be molested of his neighbors,
went to his country. Scipio sent to skirmish with Asdrubal, and took some of
his Cities. In the night Massinissa came secretly to Scipios camp, and giving
him his hand, wished him the next day to send v. M. to lie close at a
place.xxx. Agathocles was Tira^^^ of Syracus^ and bu^^ded this tovver when he
made vvat against the C^^thagi^s.
furlongs from Vtica, where is a tower, that Agathocles Tiran of Syracusa did
make, and by day he persuaded Asdrubal, to send Hann^ the Capytaine of his
horsemen, to epsy the number of the enemies, and enemies, and to ride to
Vtica, that they made no mutation when the enemy should be at hand, and he, if
he would so command, would follow. Hanno took a thousand choice horsemen of
Carthage, and a number of Lybians: and Massinissa led his Numidians. When they
were come to the tow^, and Hanno road toward Vtica with a few: part of the
ambushe appeared, and Massinissa then commanded him that had the charge of
the Carthaginian horsemen, to set upon them being but few, and Scipio gets*
a day by the policy of Massinissa.
he followed straight as to help them. The Libyans being in the midst, and
still more of the traynes appearing, they were all killed on both sides, of the
Romans, and Massinissa, except ii^j. C. which were taken prisoners. When this
was don, Massinissa Massinissa takes Hanno and claymeth him for his mother.
went to Hanno as his friend, and took him, and brought him to Scipio, and
changed him for his mother, that was with Asdrubal. Scipio and Massinissa
spoiled the land, and delivered the Romans that were bound, and dygged the
fields, being sent of Annibal, from Iberia and Sicilia, and from Italy it
self. They besieging a great City called L^cha, and had much a trouble at
it, Locha is spoiled by souldiou^s fury.
when the assault should be given, the Lochaians, signifying to yield upon
conditions. Scipio called the retire. The soldiers for anger of the business
they had about it, would not hear it, but mounting the walls, killed women
and children. Scipio let them go safe that were left, and ^oke the sp^yle from
the soldiers, and the Captains that had ^^^ended, he took by lot out of all,
and three he punished with death, and this done, wasted the country.

Asdruball had trains for them, sending Mago with the horse A secon^ vi^^orye
^^ ^^^pi^.
before, he following behind with the rest. The Romans being in the midst,
divided themselves, and either of them giving charge upon the other, they
killed five thousand Numidians, and took a thousand eight hundred prisoners,
the rest they drove to the ground headlong.

Now Scipio besieged Vtica both by sea and land, and set a The si^ge of V^^c^
Tower upon two galleys, from the which he threw darts of three cubits, and
great stones upon the ennim^es. Much did he an^y them, and was much annoyed
himself: his ships being crushed, he made great trenches, and beat the
walls with his These hooks were like s^th^^ to pal the sto^^^ out of the
vva^^.
rams, and pulled with his hooks all the hydes and lether couertes that they
had upon the walls. They within undermined the rampires, and caught the
hooks with strings, and brake the force of the rams, casting beams against
the breasts of them, and sallied out against the engines with fire, when the
wind bare the force to them. Wherefore Scipio despayring so to get the City,
determined to win it by long ^^^ge.

When Syphax heard of this, he came with his army, and lodged Syphax comes
again to the field.
not far from Asdruball, dissemblyng to be friend to both, and delaying the
war of purpose, till the other ships that were come, were arrived at
Carthage, and the hired Souldi^rs of Liguria and Lumbardi^ were come also, and
practiced a peace, thinking it just, neither that the Romans should war
upon Libya, Siphex deals for peace.
nor the Carthaginians upon Italy. That the Romans should have Sicili^,
Sardinia, and the other Islands, and Iberia. And them that did consent hereto,
he would help^, and be against them that did not. He practiced also to win
Massinissa unto him, offering, The practice of Syphax.
to confirm him in the Kingdom of Massilia, and of his three sisters, to give
him which he would in marryage. He that was the messenger,* carried gold
with him, that if he could not persuade him, he should give it to one of his
servants, that would promise to kill him: When Massinissa had refused A
pract^^e to ^^^ Massinissa.
these offers, the messenger gave the gold to one to kill him. He that took
it, showed it to Massinissa, and bewrayed the gyuer. Syphax, thinking he could
not any longer delay, openly aided the Carthaginians. He took a city in the
vpland called Tholunta, having the Romans munition and victualles by treason,
and killed (...) takes (...), ^n the which was the Romans pro^nion. The
determination of the ennim^e against the Romans.
the keepers of it, because they would not go away upon trust, and he sent
more great a^de of the Numidians.

Now were the Merceanrie soldiers come, and the Ships well appointed, when
they agreed of the battle that Syphax should set upon them that were at the
^^ege, that Asdrubal should force Scipio his camp, and Ships should fight
with ships, and all at once the next day, that the Romans, because they
were so few, should not be able to resist. At night Massinissa understanding
of it by certain Numidians, told it Scipio. He being Massinissa saves the
Romans from a great danger.
in doubt and afraid, least, if his army were much divided, it should be
too weak in all points, he called the Captains that night to a counsel, and
when he saw them in some doubt, he said:

Boldness and speed, (O friends) and fight of desperation, The oration of
Scipio, touching the sudden assalting of the ennimye.
now beseems us. Let us go and set upon our enimyes. What we shall win
thereby, now learn. Our sudden coming upon them, shall amaze them, and the
strangeness of the feate, that a few would adventure upon so many. We shall
not divide our army into many parts, but use it all together. Nor we shall
not set it against all the enimyes, but against* the first that we shall
choose. They are lodged seuerallye, and we shall be equal to every part of
them. ^et us only prevent them with boldness and good luck, and if God
grant us to overcome the first, we shall contemn the rest. But who be
first to be set upon, and what time and manner of our assault we shall take, if
you think good, I will tell you mine opinion. When they al agreed to him: The
time is (said he) to do the matter, as soon as we go from this meeting, being
yet night, by the which, the thing will be the more fearful, and they the
less prepared, and n^^e of their confederates able to help them in the dark.
Let us prevent their purpose in inuading us to morrow all at once. And where
they be three Camps, their Ships are far off, and it is no fight with
Shy^s by night. Asdrubal and Syphax be not far asunder. Asdrubal is the head
of the war. Syphax shall dare do nothing in the night, a man barbarous, full
of daintiness and fear. Then let us go against Asdruball with all our
army. We shall appoint Mas^inissa to ^ye in wait for Syphax, if he hap to
come forth, contrary to our opinion. Let us go a foot to Asdrubals camp,
and assault it round about, with good hope and lusty courage: This for the
present, is most ^it for the horsemen, for we cannot use the^ in the night: I
will place them far off, to compass the Camp of our enemies, that if we be
driven back, they may receive us, and we flee to our friends, and if we do
overcome them, they may chase and destroy them.

Having thus said, he sent away the Captains to arm the host, and he
sacrificed to Boldness, and Fear, and that no sudden This ear is (...)
such as comes of a cause vnk^ovven, and can not be stayed, as Iu^^t^r put
among the Ti^^a^s.
fear without cause should hap, but his army continue bold. The rest of
the third watch, was signified with the Trumpet, and with a marvelous deep
silence, so great an army went, till the horsemen had compassed the ennimies.
The footmen went to their Trench. Then a broken showte being made, and many
soundes of trumpes and horns to make the more terror, they drove the watch
from their place, they took the Trench, and pulled down the rampire. Some of
the boldest ran in, and set the Tents afyre. The Libyans being waked of Fear
in the Carthagies camp.
their sleep with terror, and running out of order, to their order, and taking
their armor, and not obeying the commandments for the confusion, neither the
General himself certainly knowing what was done, the Romans took them that
leapte out, and were arming themselves in great turmoile, they set many Tents
on fire, and killed some of them as they came, and some being made afraid with
the cry of the enemy, and with the fight and most fearful business, being
in the night, and ignorant of the evil indeed, thinkyng the Camp had
been taken, and fearyng the fire of the burning Tents, leapt of themselves
from them, and went into the field, as into a more sure place, where as they
came by parts, they were miserably killed, and as they fell into the Roman
horsemen that had compassed al, they were dispatched.

Syphax hearing this cry in the night, and seeing the fire, An other victory
of the Romans.
came not forth, but sent certain horsemen to help Asdruball. Upon whom
Massinissa came suddenly, and killed out of hand. When day was come, and
Syphax had learned that Asdrubal was gone, and that part of his army was
destroyed, and part taken of the ennimye, and some dispersed, and that the
Romans had his camp with all the munition, he departed and fled to the
midde land for fear, leaving all behind him, thinking that Syphax flees.
after this overthrow of the Carthaginians, Scipio would follow him: so his
Camp and all the furniture Massinissa took. Thus the Romans, in a little
part of one night did take two camps, and overthrew two armies greater than
themselves. There died of the Romans about an hundred, and of the enemies,
little less than thirty thousand: and of prisoners, two thousand six hundred
were taken, and six hundred horsemen yielded to Scipio as he returned. The
Elephants, some were wounded, and some were killed. Scipio, of the gold,
silver, armoure, and much yuorie, and horses, as well of the Numidians as other
which he Scipio revvardeth his souldioures.
had got, and by one victory most noble, casting the Carthaginians on
their knees, gave gifts to the souldioures, and sent the most precious things
to Rome, and exercised his souldioures chearefullye, thinkyng that Anniball
would shortelye come out of Italy, and Mago from Liguria. And this did
Scipio.

Asdruball the General of the Carthaginians in the fight by Asdruball flees
and is condemned, and ryseth against his Country. Anea.
night, being hurt, fled to Anea with five hundred horsemen, where he gathered
some of the hired souldieures that were escaped from the fight, and the
Numidians, and called bondmen to liberty. And when he heard the Carthaginians
had determined his death, as an evil General, and had chosen Hanno,
Bomilchares son, in his place, he made an army of his own, and received all
malefactors, and led them where he might have relief, and trained them,
having three thousand horse, and eight thousand footmen, as having his trust
only in fight. In doing this, he kept it long hid from both from the Romans
and Carthaginians, Scipio led his army to the walls of Carthage, and boldlye
called them to fight, but none came forth.

Amilchar Admiral of Carthage, with an hundred ships came upon the navy of
Scipio, thinking to destroy it in his absence, hoping easily to take twenty
galleys with an hundred.

When Scipio saw him under sail, he sent to shut the mouth of the Port, and
that the great Ships should lie at anchor with a distaunce one from another,
that the galleys might come by them, as out of a gate, when need should
require, and that they should fasten and tie the ships together with their
sail yardes, that they might be as a wall: and he came to them and furthered
their work.

The Carthaginians were received both by sea and land, and Scipio saves the
Roman ships.
from the wall with shot and artillery, their ships were bruised, and other
being weary, went away at night. And when they were going, the Roman galleis
went out of the spaces, as was appointed, and set upon them, and when they
were too weak, they retired, one they took void of men, and brought her to
Scipio. Then they went both to their wintring harbors. The Romans had plenty
from the sea: the Vticenses and Carthaginians being in want, robbed the
Merchantes, till other Roman ships were sent to Scipio, which, in set
places, kept the ennimie from robbing. They were more and more in hunger.
Toward the end of Winter, Syphax being near, Massinissa desired the third
part Massinissa and the Romans against Syphax.
of the Romans army to be joined to his, the which he received, and by the
leading of Lelius, pursued Syphax, he fleeyng till he came to a floude, and
there stayed to fight.

The Numidians (as their manner is) made shot very thick one against an
other. The Romans being covered with their shieldes, went to the fight. Syphax
came with fury upon Massinissa, The fight betvveene two Kings, Syphax and
Massinissa.
who went cherefully against him, and the fight being great between them,
Syphax men fleeing, he passed the fioude, whose horse being hurt, ouerthrewe
his Master. Then Massinissa ran Massinissa takes Syphax.
upon him, and took him, and one of his sons, and sent them straight to
Scipio. There were slain ten thousand of Syphax side: of the Romans. lxxv. of
Massinissa three hundred: of Syphax four thousand were taken prisoners,
whereof two thousand five hundred were Massulians, which fled from Massinissa
to Syphax, Massinissa desired them of Laelio, whom, when he had received, he
killed. Then they ouerranne the Massulians and the land of Syphax, part whereof
they appointed to Massinissa, part they received by submission, and the
disobedient sort they destroyed. There Cyrtis, now Constan^, where Iug^rth
killed Adh^^b^^.
came Ambassadoures to them from Cyrtis, to deliver the Palaice of Syphax to
them. And some came privately to Massinissa, from Sophonisba, Syphax wife, to
excuse the necessity of that marriage. Massinisse receives her gladly, and
went again to Scipio, A privy message ^^o^ Sephoni^b^ to Massinissa.
leaving her at Cyrta, to see what was best to be done hereafter. Scipio said
to Syphax: What Spirit took thee, when thou wast a friend to me, and praying
me to come into Libya, to break thy faith with God, by whom, thou did
swear, and after God to break it with the Romans, and to choose to make war
for Carthage, against the Romans, seeing the Carthaginians not long before
were thine enemies. He said: Sophonisba the daughter of Asdruball, whom I
loved to my loss, she loving her Country so deatly, and able to persuade a man
to what she list, turned me from you, to her country, and from so great
felicity, has brought me to so great misery. Therefore I counsel thee (for
now being yours, and put from Syphax bids Scipio bevvare of Sophonisba.
Sophinisba, I ought to be sure unto you) to keep Sophonisba, least she turn
Massinissa to what she will: for it cannot be hoped that she will take the
Romans part, so greatly does she love her City: This he spoke either truly,
or for gelousie of Massinissa, to hinder him as much as he could. Scipio
perceiving Syphax to be wise, and Scipio uses Syphax friendlye as Cyrus
Craesus.
expert in that country, led him about with him, and made him privy of his mind
and counsel, as Cyrus used Craesus king of Libya. When Laelius was come, and
said he heard as much of Sophonisba to be of many reported, Scipio commanded
Massinissa to deliver Sophonisba Syphax wife. He refusing it, and excusing that
was done before, Scipio Massinissa is loath to leave Sophonisba.
commanded him more sharply not to with-holde by violence a Roman prisoner,
but to bring her forth, and then to allege and say what he could. Then went
Massinissa with the Romans to deliver Sophonisba. But privily he came first
to her, and brought her a poison, and told her she must presentlye drink it,
or remain a flaue to the Romans: speaking no more, he took his horse. She
showing the cup to her nurse, prayed her not to bewail her noble She dies
l^^e a noble hearted Lady.
death, and drunk the poison. Massinissa showed her to the Romans, and when
he had buried her honorably, he returned to Scipio. He praised him, and told
him he was rid of an evil woman, and crowned him for his service against
Syphax, and gave him many gifts. When Syphax was come to Rome, some thought
Syphax is sent to Rome.
good to save him, because he had bin a friend to the Romans, in Iberia: some
thought to punish him, because he had made war against his friends: but he
being sick for sorrow, dyed. Asdrubal having well exercised his soldiers, sent
to Mago y^ was general Syphax dies in prison.
of the Carthaginians, that he would make him his fellow in y^ war, she wing
that there were many Iberians with Scipio, whom if a man would corrupt with
gold and promise, they might burn Scipio his Camp: and he, if the time were
prescribed, would be at the feate. When Hanno heard this, he wrought wiles
against Asdrubal, yet he did not refuse the enterprise, but sent a faithful
Practice against Scipio.
man with gold, as a runaway into Scipios Camp, who persuading such as he
found, corrupted many, and the day being appointed, he returned to Hanno, who
sent to Asdrubal of the day. When Scipio sacrificed, evident danger of fire was
signified, who sent about Sacrifices signifying fire.
the camp, to see if there were any great fire, and to put it out. And thus
he sacrificed many days, and always the sacrifice showed fire: wherefore he
was grieved, and determined to change his camp. An Iberian, servant to a
horseman of Rome, being told of y^ conspirators, fained as he had bin made
privy, and so learned al. and told it to his master, who brought him to
Scipio, and The conspira^^ bevvrayed.
bewrayed al. Scipio killed them, and threw their heads out of the camp.
Hanno percevued it soon, being so nighe, and came not at the day appointed.
But Asdrubal being ignorant, came, and when he saw the number of y^ dead, he
suspected the matter and retired. The^ Asdrubal is accused falslye.
did Hanno greatly accuse him to the multitude, that he should come to Scipio
to betray him, and he would not receive him. And Asdrubal after this was in
more hate at Carthage.

About this time, Amilchar secreatlye sailing upon the Roman Nauye, took one
galley, and six Ships. Roman shi^^ taken.


Hanno came upon them that besi^ged Vtica, and was repulsed. Scipio having bin
so long at the siege of Vtica, and doing no good, Scipio leaves ^h^: siege at
Vtica
dissolved his camp, and sent his munition against the City of Hippon, and
doing no good there, burned his vnprositable engines, Hippon, this socmeth to
be the country of saint Aosten.
and ranged the Country, some he received to amity, and some he destroyed.

The Carthaginians being weary of so many displeasures, made Annibal General
and sent an Admiral with a navy, to haste his coming, and in the mean time,
they sent Ambassadors to Scipio for peace, thinking to obtain one of these
either to have peace, or delay of time, till Annibal came. Scipio gave them a
truce, and taking the costs of his Camp, gave them leave to Exp^n^^^.
send messengers to Rome. They sent and yet kept ward in the City, as they
had bin still enemies.

Being brought into the Senate, they desired forgiveness of their fault.
The Senatoures partly accused the Carthaginians of their infidelity, which
they had so often made and broken, and what hurt Annibal had done the Romans,
and their confederats, A^^catie of peace. D^eise opin^^s ^n the Sen ^^e.
the Iberians and Italians. Part of them thought this peace was as profitable
for them, as for the Carthaginians, Italy being wasted with so many evils,
and uttering their fear of things to come, Anniball saylyng out of Italy, and
Mag. from Liguri^, and Hanno from Carthage, with great armies against Scipio.
Upon the which, the Senate doubting, sent counselloures to Scipio, with whom,
he might from hencesorth confer, and do that should seem expedient. He made
peace with Carthage with these conditions.

1 That M^go should sail from Ligunia out of hand, and ^^ om henceforth
leaden^ strange armies. 2 That they should have no more but thirty gal^tes* 3
That they should not meddle beyond the ^^^ch^ called Ph^^^ti^^. 4 That they
should deliver all the pri^oners and run awaics to the Romans. 5 That they
should pay them in time. 1600. talents of silver. 6 That Massin^ss^ should have
the Mas^lians, and what he could get of ^^^hax land.
These were the conditions, and ambassadors sailed to Rome to swear to them
before the Consuls, and so did some from Rome, to have them sworn at Carthage.

The Romans rewarded Massinissa, with gifts of consederacie: they sent him a
crown of gold, and a signet of gold, and a Chair of Juori^, and a purple
garment, and a robe of Rome, and a horse trapped with gold, and an armor for
his whole body. When this was done, Annibal sailed to Carthage against Annibal
in Africa.
his will, suspecting the unfaithfulness and disobedience of the people to
their ralers, and thinking the peace would not be made, and if it were made,
would not long hold, he went to a City of Libya, Adrumete, and gathered
victual, and boughte Alrumeta is so fat from Carthag^ as Annibal rode in post,
two days and two nights. Areacides. Masi^la^. Vermina.
horses. And he made friendship with a prince of Numidia, called Areacides.
Four thousand horsemen that fled unto him, from Massinissa, that had been
Syphaces, as suspected he shot to death, he divided their Horse to his
soldiers. And Mesorulos another Prince, came unto him with a thousand
horsemen, and Vermina one of Syphax sons, having the most part of his fathers
kingdom.

The Cities of Ma^^inissa he got, some by yelding, and some by force. Narces
he got by treason after this sort: having Annibal gets Narces by t^^as^.
want of victuals, he sent to them as his friends, and when he saw it
frame, he sent many with secret weapons, commanding to deal justly with the
sellers, til they heard y^ trumpets, then to kill every man, and keep the
gates* and so was Narces taken.

The people of Carthage, lately making peace, and their ambassadors People of
Carthage do spo^^e the Romans ^^ time of peace.
not yet come from Rome, and Scipio still present, spoiled the victual of
Scipio, that was driven to Carthage by winds, and bound the bringers o^ it,
the Senate of Carthage sore threatening th^^, and warning them not to break the
league lately made. They blamed the league, as unjustly made, and said there was
more fear to be had of famine, than of breaking league. Scipio would not
begin war again, after the peace, but de^^red, as of his friends, that
the offenders might be punished.

They would have stayed the ambassadors also, till theyrs came from Rome. But
Hanno Magnus, and Asdrubal Eriphus, d^^ take them from the multitude, and sent
them away with two galleys: other perswade^ Asdrubal the admiral, to go to the
^^wer of Apollo, and when the galleys did return, to set upon Scipios
ships, and be was persuaded. So some of the ambassadors were shot to
death, other wounded of them, got to the port of their power, and leapt out of
the ship, ready to be taken: so nere were they to be taken prisoners. When the
Romans in the City heard this, they commanded the ambassadors, that yet
were there about the peace, to depart as enemies. They in their journey were
driven to Scipios navy. When the admiral asked Scipio what was to be done with
them, he said, not as the Carthaginians have done with us, and let them go
untouched. When the old men of Carthage saw this, they rebuked the people of
their rashness, and counseled them to desire Scipio to keep the league, and
to receive punishment for their offense of y^ Carthaginians. They being
offended with the Senate for y^ long Modesty of Scipio.
evil government, and being styrred of y^ common sort, as not loking well to yt
common profitte, and being deceived with vain hope, called Annibal with his
army. He considering the greatness of y^ war, caused them to call home Asdrubal
with his power. Thus Asdrubal being quit of his offense, delivered his armor to
Annibal: yet ourst he not appear at Carthage, but hid himself in the city.
Scipio placing his shipe before Carthage, kept victual from them by sea. At
this time was a fight of horsemen between* Scipio and Annibal at Zama, in y^
which, Scipio had y^ better: and there was Zama.
daily skirmishes berwixt the^, til Scipio heard y^ Annibal was in great want,
and looked for his f^ragers to come, and in the night sent Thermus against y^
bringers of it. Thermus took an ^il in a straight A fight of horsemen. Victual
taken from Annibal.
passage and killed 3000. Libyans, and took as many, and brought y^ victual to
Scipio. Annibal being driven to e^treme want, and ^^^ising how he might help y^
present necessity, sent ambassadors to Massinissa, Annibal makes mean to
Massinissa to escape present fami^^.
remembering to him his norishirg and bringing up in Carthage, and desiced him
to move Scipio to come to accord again, for y^ offense was of the people, and
of y^ foolisher sort of y^ people. Massinisa sa remembering in deed, y^ he was
brought up in Carthage, having y^ worthiness of the city in reverence, and
many friends yet there prayed Scipio, and brought them again to accord after
this sort.

1 That the Carthaginians should deliver the shipp es, menand victuals, that
they had taken of the Romans, and all that they had taken beside, or the price
of it, as Scipio should value it.
2 That they should pay a. M. talents, for a sine, for the fault.
This was agreed, and tr^ce taken, til the Carthaginians should Annibal
escap^^^ fam^^e.
hear them, and so Annibal escaped beyond al hope. The Senate of Carthage,
allowed well of the accord, and exhortet the people to stand to them, remembering
the long adue^sity that they had, had, and the present need in the army both
of meat and money: The rude people of Carthage
but they, as rude people be wont, soolishly thought their governors agreed
with the Romans for their own commodities, that by them they might rule their
country, as Anniball did now, and Asdrubal had done before, betraying the
army to y^ ^nimies in y^ night, not long after meaning to yield to Scipio, and
then coming to the camp, and now lurking in the city, upon The malice of the
people against. Asdrubal. Asdrubal kills himself. The spite of the people
against him.
the which, a ^^ye and tumult being made, some of them went out of the
assembly to seek Asdrubal round about. He prevented them, flying into his
fathers Sepulcher, and killed himself with a poison: they dragged out his
carcass, and cut off his head, and put it upon a spears point, and bare it
about the City. Thus Asdrubal, first vniuslly iniuried, and secondly falsely
accused o^ Hanno, and then thus brought to death by the Carthaginians, was
spyted after his death in this wise. They sent to Annibal to break the truce,
and to make war upon Scipio, and to try it out by speedy fight, because of
want. He brake the truce. The pea^^ broken. Parthos. Scipio c^^^ leth Annibal^
espies ^o be led about his army.
And Scipio taking a great City called Parthos, camped near to Annibal, and
he removed, sending three spies to the Romans, whom Scipio took, and did not
kill them according to the law of arms, but commanded them to be led about the
camp, to see the store of armor and munition, and then let them go to tell
Annibal of eueryething. He desired to come to talk, which being granted, he
said the Carthaginians were grieved with the first Talk between Scipio and
Annibal.
peace, for the money, if that might be remitted, and the Romans contented
with Sicilia, Iberis, and y^ Isles which they have, y^ peace should be sure.
Scipio answered Annibal should get a great reward, by flying out of
Italy, if he might obtain this of Scipio and forbadde him to send any more
to by ^.

And so threatening one another, they departed to their several ^ampes. There
was a City nygh called Cilla, at the which Cilla. Annibal in straightes.
was an hill, fytte for the camp, the which Annibal perceiving, sent to take it
up, and followed with his army, but finding it taken before of Scipio, he was
left in the plain field without water, and spent that night in digging of
water pittes. The army pickte out the heaps of sand, and drank little water
full of sand, and was grieved without meat or rest, and some were The order
of Annibals battle.
in their armor all night. Which Scipio perceiving, came upon them by day,
they being weary of their way, watch and thyrst.

Annibal was loath to come to fight, yet because he should want water if he
tarryed, and, if he fled, his enemy would take courage and set upon him,
considering all this, he thought it good for the necessity, to try it. He put
in order fifty: M. and lxxx. Elephants. He placed them before the battle with
spaces between to make them most terrible. After them was the third Gym^a^i^ be
the Islands called ^a^eares now Ma^^^c^ and Nicorea. E^camas.
part of the army, the Celtians and Ligurians: with these were myred archers
and slyngers of Maerrusia and Gymnasias: after the^ was the second army,
which was of Carthagians and Libyans. The third were of them that followed him
out of Italy, in the which, he trusted most, because they feared their case.
The horse men were about the wings. And this was Annibals order.

Scipio had about.xxiij. thousand, and horsemen of Italy and Scipio his order.
Rome, a thousand five hundred. Massinissa was there with many horsemen of
Numidia, and Lacamas another prince with six hundred horse. He set his
footmen in three battles as Anniball did: he made a particion between the
bands, that the horsemenne might pass easily by them: he made to every band
a defense at the front with strong pertches laid over with iron of two Cuvits
long and very thick, to keep back the Elephantes as an engine, and he warned
them and the other footmen, to give place to the fury of those beasts, and
to cast their darts upon them as fast as they could, and when they were nigh,
to cut their sinowes if they could. Thus were they placed of Scipio. The
Numidian horse he placed in the wings, being acquainted with the fight and fury
of the Elephants. The Italians horse, because they were not used to them, he
set last of all, to be ready to pass by the distances, when the footmen had
bidden the first violence of the Elephants. Both sorts of horsemen, had
companies of shot joined to them, to annoy the beasts. Thus were his
horsemen set. The right wing he gave to Laelius: the left, to Octauius: in the
midst, was both he and Annibal, to keep their glory, having horsemen
attending upon them, to help where need should be. Annibal had three thousand,
Scipio had two thousand, and the three hundred Italians, whom he armed in
Sicelie. When all was ready, both of them encouraged their men. Scipio called
the Gods to witness, before his army, against whom the Carthaginians had
offended, as often as they brake their promise, Scipio to his soldiers.
and required his army not to look to the number of their enemies, but to their
own virtue, whom, being more in number they had overthrown even in that
land: and if they that overcome, have any fear or doubt, much more of
necessity must they have that have bin overcome. Thus did Scipio encourage and
stir his few number. Annibal recorded to them the feats that he had done
in Italy, as an enterprise of most Annibal to his soldiers.
great renoume, not among the Numidians, but among all the Italians in Italy,
and showed how few the enemies were now, and exhorted them, not to be worse
than a few they being more and in their own country. Both of them did declare
unto their soldiers the danger and greatness of the present fight.

Annibal showed that Carthage and all Libya was to be tried in this fight,
whether they should be slaves being overcome, or rule hereafter over all they
had won. Scipio told his, that if they were defeated, they had no safe
return: if they did overcome, a great dominion should fall unto them, and a
rest of their present pains, a going home to their country, and a renouine for
ever.

Thus either of them encouraging other, they went to the fight: Annibal sounded
first: Scipio commanded to answer him.

The Elephants began the fight in most terrible manner, being spurred with
pricks of the riders. The Numidian h^^^emen The Elephants put back at the
vvings.
ran about them, and threw their darts thick upon them, so as being
wounded, they fled, and troubled their own part, that their kepers led them
away: and this was the first The Elephants trouble the Romans fotemen, in the
battle
enterprise with the Elephants at the wings of the army, but in the midde
battle of the Romans, they trod down the footeme^, being unacquainted with
this fight, and so heavy harnised, that they could hardly give place, or go
forewarde, till Scipio Scipio leaves his horse to fight with the B^ephan^s.
brought forth the Italian horsemenne that were placed behind, and with them
the shot, commaundyng them to leave their horses that were afraid, and to
go about and shoot at the Elephants. He was the first that alighted, and
wounded the Elephant that came before.

The other soldiers encouraged thereby, and hurtyng the beasts, made them
also to go out of the battle. The fight being cleared of the beasts, and now
only of men and horses, the right wing of the Romans which Laelius led,
put to flighte the Numidians that were against them, when Massinissa had
wounded Massintha their prince, and Annibal coming Massinissa vvou^deth
Massintha.
quickly unto them, set them again to fight.

The left battle* which Octauius governed, had very much ado with their
ennimies, the French and Ligurians.

Scipio sent Thermus to help them with choice men. Anniball, having stayde
his left battle, road to the Ligurians and Frenchmen, brynging another
band of Libyans and Carthaginians. Which when Scipio saw, he came against
them Scipio and Annibal fight.
with another band.

When these two most noble captains did thus contend, there was euidente
emulation and care on both sides, no diligence was left on either part: the
labor was no sharper, than their exhortations were vehement. The fight being
long doubtful, and the Captains having pity of their weary soldiers,
coupled together, that by them, the end might be the shorter. They threw one
at another, Scipio hytte Annibals shield, Annibal stroke Scipio^ Horse, and
the Horse, for the wound, ouerthrewe Scipio. He was mounted again, and threw
at Annibal, but missed him, and hurt the Horse was next him.

Massinissa understanding, came thither, and the Romans Massinissa comes to
the danger that Scipio was in.
seeing their Captain fighting like a Soldier, took the more courage
against their enemies, and put them back, and chased them, Anniball ryding
about in vain, praying them to stay, and persuading them to turn again to
the fight.

Annibal being in great doubt, brought the Italians The Romans skill in
^ight.
that came with him, and not yet styrring from the place of succoure, into the
fight, hoping to break the Romans array the more easily, because they were
following the ennimye: but they seeing that devise, called one another
diligently from the chase, and put themselves again in order for the fight.
Now having no Horse, and their shot being spent, they fought together with
their blades. Great was the slaughter, and many were the wounds and the
groans of them that fell, and the shoutes of them that did kill, till the
Romans put them back and made them fly also.

Then was the victory evident. Annibal seeing the Annibal renevveth the fight.
Numidian Horsemen stand still, ran to them, and prayed them not to forsake
him, whom when he had persuaded, he brought them against them that chased,
thinking to do a notable feate again.

First he met with the Massulians and fought with them: Massinissa and
Annibal fights.
and this fight was only between Massinissa and Anniball. They fiercelye
going to it, Massinissa stroke Annibals target, he hitte Massinissas Horse, who
being a foot, flewe upon Anniball, and killed his Horse, coming upon him
before all other. The darts of the other he received upon his shield, and
drew one of them that stuck upon it, and threw it at Annibal, missing him,
and killed the next Horse.

Then drawing out another, he was wounded on the arm, and went out of the
battle for a while. When S^^pi^ heard Scipio comes in relief of Massinassa.
of it, he was afraid of Massinassa, and came to the fraye, and found
Massinissa horsed and going to the field again, having tied his wound.

The fight was equal again, and very sore on both fides, either being afraid
of their capitaynes, till Annibal did see the Iberians and Frenchmen ne
staying upon an hill, and ^rrour in the battle.
road to them to bring them forth again. They that fought, not knowing the
cause, thinkyng his going had bin a flying, left the fight willyngly, and
fled disorderedly, not lookyng toward Annibal, but every man where he could.
Thus they brake, and the Romans, as the field had been fully got,
pursued them out of order, neither they understanding of Annibals purpose, who
returned with the Spaniards and Frenchmen.

Wherefore Scipio called his men again from the chase with speed, and set
them in order, being more than they that came from the hill, wherefore he
might the more easily resist them. Annibal ^yeth.
Annibal being deceived of this last hope, fled, now utterly dispayring of
all things.

Many horsemen followed him, specially Massinissa, being grieved with his
wound, ever at hand, and desirous to have brought him prisoner to Scipto: but
the night divided them, and Annibal flies to Thonne.
Annibal in the dark, with twenty horsemen, that could follow him, fled into a
City called Thonne, whither, when he understood that many horsemen of B^utia
and Iberia were come from the field, and fearing the Iberians as barbarous and
cruel, and doubting the Brutians being Italians and country men to Scipio,
least they would lead him to Scipio, to be forgiven their fault against
Itali^, privily he fled with one horseman, whom he trusted best, and running
three thousand ^urlongs in two nights Annibal comes in have to Adrume^^.
and two days, he came to a City at the sea called Adrumet^, where part of
his army was for victual, sending about, and gathering them that fled, he
made armoure and munition.

Scipio having got so noble a victory, burned the unprofitable Scipio ^e^deth
Lal^^^ with the nevves to Rom^
spoil, being gyrded, as the Romans Generals be went. He sent to Rome ten
talents of gold, and.ij. M.v. C. of silver, and wrought Iuorie, and the most
noble prisoners, L^lius being the messenger of the victory. The rest he took
to honor his soldiers, and gave gifts to them that did best, and to
Massinissa a Crown, and then he went, and took the Cities. And this was the
end of Annibal and Scipios fight in Libya, and the first time that they
fought together. There dyed of the Romans two thousand five hundred, and of
Massinissas, more: of the enemies, five and twenty thousand: of prisoners were
taken eighte thousand five hundred: of the Iberians three hundred yielded to
Scipio: of the Numidians eight hundred to Massinissa. Neither the
Carthaginians, nor the Romans yet hearing of it, they of Carthage sent to
Mago, gathering yet Frenchemen, to invade Italy if he could, or to sail
into Liby^ with his hired souldioures. The Romans intercepting these letters,
sent to Scipio an other army of horse, and footmen, and Ships and money.
Scipio sent Octauius Carthage se^deth to Scipio for peace.
by land to Carthage, and himself went by water. When they of Carthage
understood Annibals overthrow, they sent Ambassadors in a pynnesse, of the
which Hanno Magnus and Asdrubal Haedus were chief. They set up a banner of
peace on the stem, and held up their hands to Scipio, desiring pardon. He
Carthage ^ueth for peace.
willed them to go to the Camp, where he being placed upon an high seat,
gave them audience.

They, with tears fell to the ground, and being taken up of the officers,
were commanded to say what they would. Then Annibal (...) spoke.

It is my part (O Romans,) and this Hanno, and as many, as be wise in
Carthage, to clear our selves of this fault that you put upon us. For your
Embassadoures, whom our people, being driven by hunger offended, we saved and
sent home, yet we must not blame all Carthage, for some desired peace first,
and People in free cities disobedent.
they had it, and kept it firmly. Cities be soon drawn to the worst, and
that which is pleasant, preuayleth ever with the multitude, which we have
proved, being neither able to persuade them, nor to stay them. For they that
did accuse us, and take free speech from us, do not judge us (O Romans) of
our obedience or counsel: but if it seems a saulte to be slow to obey,
blame hunger and the necessity that drove us to it, for it was not a
constrained act of them, so desire peace before, and give so much money, and to
deliver al our long ships, save a few, and to yield a great part of our
dominion, and to swear to them, and to send our oath to Rome, our Ambassadors
being yet with you, and willingly to offend. But a man may blame God chiefly,
and the storm that drove your corn to Carthage. Beside the storm, hunger
took you, (that cannot consider well of other men's things) being in need of
all things, nor require good reason of a rude and miserable multitude. But if
you judge us to do unjustly, and not to be in miserye, we confess and pray
forgiveness. Justification Justification. Submission^
is of them, that do not offend, and submission of them that do offend, to the
which, the mercy of them that be in prosperity ought to be the readier,
beholding the chances of men, and considering the sudden mutations, that now
we do cry for pardon, that yesterday were able to do hurt: as the city of
Carthage, the greatest and mightiest of Libya, both in ships, money and
Elephants, and in army of foot and horsemen, and many subjects have flourished
these. 700. years, and ruled al Libya, and other nations and Islands, and so
great a part of the sea, and coming against you many times in contention, and
now neither in Ships nor Elephants, nor horse, nor subjects, (all the which
you have taken from us) have any hope of help, but in you, whom we have evil
used before. The which you considering, and marking the alteration of them,
ought to use your felicity the more temperately, and do that shall seem
worthy for your magnanimity (O Romans) and the fortune that Carthage
sometime had and to put the mutations of ^ate in our misfortunes void of envy,
you may be without blame before God, and deserve praise of all men. There is no
fear now that the Carthaginians will rebel, whom so great repentance and
pain of their former folly, does fall upon. Good counsel is the keeper of
Innocence to wise men, to offendoures to repent them, for that they have
suffered, whom, it is like to be the more constant in their duties, than they
that had never such experience. Neither is it fit for you to follow the
Carthaginians, whom you accuse of cruelty, and wickedness. For in them that
be in misery, want and calamity, is the beginning of offense: to them that be
in prosperity, it is at their pleasure to use humanity. It shall be as
honorable, as profitable for your authority, rather to save than to kill so
great a City: you be now the better Judges of your commodities. We bring
but two things to the assurance thereof: the worthiness of dominion that
Carthage sometime has had, and your moderation toward all men, which being
joined with arms, has brought you to so great Empire and power. What
conditions you will give us of peace, we will take them, of the which, we can
say no more, committing all to you.

When Haedus had said thus much, he ceased. Scipio willing them to avoid,
conferred with the officers a while, and when he had determined, he called
them, and said:

You be worthy no pardon that so ^ste have broken peace, Scipio to the
Embassadoures of Carthage.
and lastely de^^ied our Embassadoures, so manifestly and wickedly offending
against us, that you can neither purge your selves, nor show any matter to
the contrary, but that you are worthy extreme punishment. What need I to
accuse them that confess? you flee to prayer, that would not have left the
name of Rome, if you had got the victory: but we have done no such thing to
you, your Ambassadors being yet in Rome, after you had broken the league, and
violated our Ambassadors, our City delivered, and being driven to mine
army, I sent unhurt to you, when you made war on us. Therefore you ought
to think it gain, whatsoever you receive, having condemned your selves. I
will say what I think good, and the Senate shall determine what shall please
them.

We give you peace once again (O Carthaginians) if you give all your long
Ships unto the Romans, except ten, and all the Elephants you have, and
those you took before, and pay for the^ that be lost, I being judge of the
doubts, and all the prisoners and run awayes, and so many, as Annibal brought
out of (...) and thus within thirty days after the peace is made. And that in
threescore days Mag^ shall depart out of ^^g^^^, and that you take your
garrisons out of the Cities, which be without the ^^^^he of P^^^nicia, and
deliver the pledges you have of them.

And that every year you shall bring two hundred talentes, of Euboea, for fity
years.

That you shall h^re no more Frenchmen or Ligurians.

That you shall make no war upon Mass^^^ss^, nor any other friend of ours, nor
any of Carthage war against them by the common consent.

That you shall have your city, and so much land, with the Phoenicians
ditche, as you had when I sailed into Libya.

That you shall be friends to the Romans both by sea and land, if the Senate
do confirm it: and if they do confirm it, that the Romans shall go out of
Libya in a hundred and fiftye days, and if you will have truce, to send to
Rome.

You shall give us out of hand, an hundred and fifty Ostages, of such children,
as I shall choose.

And you shall give to the expenses of the war, a thousand talents more, and
victual for the army, and when the peace is concluded, you shall receive your
pledges.

When Scipio had said thus, the Ambassadors bare the faults to Carthage.

The people resorting many days to the counsel, the best sort thought it
good to accept the conditions, and not to put al in hazard, in sticking for
somewhat.

When the corn should go away, the people not considering People resist
peace.
more the present peril, than the taking away of that they had, did resist,
and were grieved, that the rulers should take away their corn for the Romans,
in their famme, and give it them in stead of Citizens, during the truce. They
stood about every of them, and threatened to burn their houses, and spoil
them.

In the end knowing that Annibal had gathered six thousand footmen, and
five hundred horsemen, staying at a City named Marthma, they called him to be
of counsel in these matters. He came, and the sober sort being afraid, that
he, being a man of war, would have stirred the people. He persuaded very
Annibal persu^. sa^deth peace.
gravely to receive the peace. The people outragiously spoke evil of him, and
threatened all, till the noble men fled, some to Massimssa, and some to the
Romans willingly, despayring of the City. The Carthaginians understanding
that Annibal had gathered corn plentifullye into a Storehouse, they made
much ado for it, till they got it, and divided it among them.

In this mean time, was news come to Rome, of the new In this place the
Greek text is imperfect.
peace, that Scipio had made with them of Carthage. And the matter being
debated in the Senate house, one of the Senatoures said thus:

If we should not agree to this peace, it were both injurious Discord in the
Senate house touching the peace.
and vniuste^o Scipio, the which he suspecting, as it seems, when he had
declared his mind unto us. He added: That if we made delay, he would make
peace. It is like that he considers the matter better than we, and sees
more in it, because he has al before him: if we do otherwise, we shall
offend his estimation, a good Citizen, and a noble Captain, who provoked us
unwilling to send into Africa, and having no army of us, did get one
himself, and has promoted us so far as we could not hope. Therefore it is
to be wondered, that you that were so faint at the beginning in the war, are
now so earnest and vehement. Now if any man thinks all to be well, and yet
fears that the Carthaginians will break this league, it is now most like
they will keep the peace, being so often afflicted for breaking of it, and that
henceforth they will keep Justice better, being fallen on the knee, by
unrighteousness. It is not a like counsel, now to despise the Carthaginians,
as of no power, and again to fear, that they might rebel. It is more easy
for us to keep them, that they shall no more rise, than to destroy them
presently. For now they will fight of desperation, whom we might keep under
with fear. They have evils ynow without us, with whom all their neighbors
are grieved for their cruelty. And Massinissa a man most faithful to us,
shall ever lie in wait of the^. But if any man do contemn all this, and
thinks only how he may succeed Scipio, and of his own commodity, and to
have the like success that he has had in the end, what shall we do with the
City if we hap to take it? shall we destroy it utterly, because they spoiled
our ships and victuals which they are content to deliver with much more?
Contention in Rome for peace with Carthage.
but we will not do this, to avoid the anger of Gods, and hate of men. Shall we
give it to Massinissa? though he be our friend, yet is not he to be made too
strong, but to let him and them contend together, for the common weal of
Rome. Will we make a rent of the Country? The army that we shall keep there,
What is to be considered in war.
will spend all the reuenne, for we shall stand in fear of many of the nighe
nations, and of all the Barbarians. But we will send inhabitants in the midst
of the Numidians, they being most strong of the Barbarians, will always work
our woe, and if they get the better hand, they shall be terrible and hateful
to us ever after, having so great a land, and much better than ours. The which
Scipio, as I judge, perceiving, thought good for us to hear the prayers of
Carthage, therefore let us consent to their prayers, and our General. Thus he
said.

P. Cornelius, Cornelius Lentulus kinsman, being then Consul, P. Cornelius
speaks against the peace that Scipio offered to the Carthaginians.
and thought good to succeed Scipio, spoke against it in this sort.

In wars only profit is to be considered: and because it has bin
declared, that this city being yet of power, is to be maintained, we ought
to take away their unfaithfulness, together with their power and might: but
their unfaithfulness we shall never take away. There is no time so fit for us
to be delivered from the fear of Carthage, as this present, in the which they
all be poor and weak, before they grow to strength again: yet do I not
swerve from consideration of Justice, nor think our City shall seem to
deal ^ute of reason with the Carthaginians, who when they be in weal, do
injury and despite to al men: in their woe, they fall to prayers: if they
obtain, they forsake their agreement again: neither have they regard of
promise, nor respect of oath, whom we must save for the fear of God and
envy of men. I think the Gods themselves have brought the Carthaginians to
that point, to suffer for their wickedness, which violating the peace they
made with us in Sicilie, Iberia, and Italy, and in Libya it self, and with
all other have wrought great mischief and trouble to us, of the which I will
show some examples of strange nations, before I come to ours, that you may see
that all will agree that Carthage should be punished. They destroyed Sagunt a
noble city of Iberia, confederat Sigunt is now called Mur^edre
to them, and a friend to us, sparing no age without cause.

When they had taken Nuceria, a City subject to us, upon Examples of the
Carthaginians cruelty and unfaithfulness. Nuceria, now Nocera. Acerra. one
in ^mb^^a, an other in Campania.
conditions, and swearing that every man should depart with two garments,
they shut the chief of them within the Baths, and set the Hot-houses afyre,
and killed them, and when the people went forth, they shot them to death. They
put the Senate of Acerra, after they had given their faith, into pittes,
and overwhelmed them with earth. They brought M. Cornelius our Consul, upon
their oaths, to see their Captain that was sick, and carried him out of
Sicilie into Libya with.xxij. ships. They killed Regulus with torments, an
other Captain of ours, returning to them to keep his oath. What Annibal has
done, by force, by deceites, by perjury, against our Cities and armies, and
at length against his own confederates, overthrowing cities, Four hundred
cities destroyed in Italy by Annibal.
killing his confederates, it were too long to tell. They defaced four hundred
of our cities, our prisoners they put in ditches and rivers, and used them
for bridges: some they threw to their Elephants, foam they commanded to fight
together, matching brethren against brethren, and fathers against sons.
Shortly after this, they sent hither Ambassadors for peace, they made request,
and gave their oath, and they spoiled our ships in Liby^, and put our
Souldioures in prison, whiles their Ambassadors sadoures were here present, to
so great inadnesse did their cruelty drive them. What pity or moderation
is to be used, with them of others, that use modesty or courtesy with none,
who, if they might overcome us (as (...) sa^eth) would not leave the name of
Rome? But Faith and Promise ^^ sure. What faith? what promise? what oath have
they not broken? what covenant or pardon have not they violated? but they say
we may not followed them. What covenant do we break, which yet have made
none? but we may not follow their cruelty, therefore we must make most
cruel men, our friends and confederates: neither of these is convenient. But
let them yield unto us after the law of them that be overcome, as many have
yielded themselves. We will consider of them, and what we give them, let them
thank us, and not think it to come of agreement, for those two differ thus:
As long as they covenant with us, they will break, as they have done before,
always making some pretense for their purpose, as not well used in the
conditions, for there are ever devises to be made to call a matter in question.
When they give themselves, we shall receive them and their armoure, and their
bodies shall be with us, they shall suppose nothing to be theirs, and so their
pride shall sall. They shall love whatsoever they shall receive of us, as of a
thing not theirs. If Scipio thinks otherwise, you have to judge by s^^^ce: if
he agrees with the Carthaginians, without us, why sends he unto us? I have
said my mind to you that be Lords, which I think fit for the City. This
said P^^^^us. The Senate gave their voices seuerallye, and the more part
agreed with Scipio.

Thus the third league was made between the Romans ^ (...)gin(...)io seemed
to move the ^^man^^ her^to^ether for Causes that ^^de S^^pio to make peace
with the Car^^a g^^ans.
y^ rea^^^ declared* ^^ ^^^^use he thought y^ R^m^ne^ felicity to be ^now, if
they took away the rule of Ca^thage. There be y^ ^hink, that he would have
this nighe City, and an enemy to be left to (...)h^ ^^man^^ in good
temperature, lea^^ then should grow (...) ^ goodlye (...) in the (...) an sea,
ad^oyning to Ca^^a.
(...) thorough great (...)* ^ (...)e. ^^e which conside(...) of Scip^^, not
long after, Cato rehearsed to the Romans, being grieuedy^ they were incen^ed
against the Rhodians. When Sc^^^o had set order, he sailed to Rome with all his
army, and entered with a triumph, more goodly than bad been before time. And
the manner of it, which they now use also, was this:

All ware garlands. The trumpetours go before, and the wagons laden with the
spoil. Towers are borne with the Images of the Cities taken, and pictures and
figures of the things done. Then the gold and silver uncoined and coined, and
other things of that sort, and so many Crowns as the Cities confederats, or
armies, had given y^ general for his virtue. (...)* The Greek word sometime
signified pypers but here it is S^^^^ after the T^sc^^^ manner.
Then the white kyne and the Elephantes. Then the Carthaginians and N^midians
that were taken. Before the general, the Macebearers went in purple garments,
and a company of musitia^s and Satyrs, after the Tuscane manner, being gyrded
and wearing a Crown of gold, they go in order again with song and dance.
They call them, Ludi, because as I think, the ^hoscanes be an inhabitance from
Lydia. In the midst of them* one in a robe of purple, decked with rings and
bracelets of gold, makes diverse shows to move laughter, as flouting of
enemies. After him a multitude of Perfumers, and the general among these
Perfumers in a chariote, diversely garnished, for it was set with gold and stone
of great price. He was clad with a purple robe with bars of gold, after his
Country manner, and a Scepter of Iuorie, and a laurel, which the Roman
thinks Laurel or Bay, dedicate to triumphs and to the gates of Emperors
houses.
a token of victory.

In the same Chariot be carried boys and gyrles, and on either side going men
that be of kin. Then follow they that have bin scribes, ministers, and pages in
the war. After them the army in bands and companies, with garlands and
Laurel, every man with his gifts according to his worthynesse: some of the
rulers they praise, some they mock, and some they taunt. For the triumph is
priuileged, and lawful to say what Privilege of triumph.
they will.

When Scipio was come to the Capitol, the triumph ceased, and he feasted his
friends as the manner is, at the Temple.

This end had the second war between the Romans and Carthage, begone in
Spain, and ending in Libya, with these conditions, about the hundred forty
four Greek Olympiade.

Massinissa falling out with the Carthaginians, and trusting to Massinissa
falls out with the Carthagies.
the Romans, took a great part of the Carthagies land, as belonging to him.

The Carthaginians desired the Romans to agree Massinissa Partiality of the
Romans.
and them. They sent arbitrours, with instructions to help Massinissa as much
as they might. So Massinissa had the land, and a league was made between
them for fifty years, in the which, the Carthaginians having peace, grow
into great power and wealth by the plentye of their ground, and traffic of the
sea: and again, as men be wont in prosperity, were divided, some for the
Romans, some for the people, and some for Massinissa. Of every of these the
chief in fame Factions in Carthage.
and virtue governed: for the Romans, Hanno Magnus: for the people, Amilchar
Sa^n^^, and Carthalo: for Massinissa, Annibal called Opsar.

They waiting the Romans being at war with the Celtiberians, Celtiberia is
that part of Spain which now they call Aragon. ^o^^^rch was an office of
the state highest as appears in Plutarch.
and Massinissa at debate with other Iberians, persuaded Carthalo the
Bo^tarche, and for that office going about the country, to make a fray upon
such as kept the land for Massinissa. He killed some of them, and chased the
other, and stirred the Libyans of that Country against Massinissa, and many
conflictes were between them, till the Romans sent other ambassadors to
agree them, to whom was said the like, that The Romans partial.
they should secretly favor Massinissa: and they confirmed to Massinissa all that he had taken by this craft. They said nothing, nor they heard nothing,
least Massinissa should have had the worst: but being in the midst between
the^ both, they held up their hands: and this was the commandment, and the
Atonement. To hold up hands in the greek phrase is to decide and determine.
Tysca a country of ^i^tie Cities.
Not long after, Massinissa called into controversy the great land and
playnes, of fifty Cities, which they call Tysca, in the which the Carthaginians
fled again to the Romans. They promised to send ambassadors, and
deferred so long, till they thought Massinissa had the better. Then they sent
the Ambassadors and Cato. They coming to the bateable land, Cato, Arbiter.
required both parts to stand to their arbitrament. Massinissa was content,
because he trusted the Romans and got by them. The Carthaginians suspected,
as them that before had judged not rightly. They said the league made by
Scipio needed no judgment nor correctours ^, because there was no breach of
them.

The ambassadors not allowed to judge of part, went their way, and
diligently marked the ground, very well labored* with great preparation,
and when they went into the City, perceived of what strength it was, and how
the people was increased since Scipio had overcome them, which was not long.
Being come to Rome, they said they had not suspicion enough of Carthage, a
City adversary, and a neighbor, that was exceedinglye increased. And Cato
chieflye said, Cato against Carthage.
that Rome could not be sure, nor in liberty, till Carthage was destroyed.
The Senate understanding it, minded to make war on the Carthaginians, but
tarried for an occasion, and kept their judgment close. And Cato continuallye
from that time, said in the Counsel, that Carthage must not stand. But
Scipio Nassica said the contrary, that Carthage Scipio contrary to Cato.
must be suffered, to keep the Romans in fear and good order.

The peoples part preuayling in Carthage, put out the friends of
Massinissa, about the number of sourtye, and they Tumult in Carthage.
made a decree of bannishmente, and swear the people, that they should neither
receive them again, nor suffer any speech to be had of their restoring.
They being bannished, fled to Massinissa, and provoked him to war.

He sent his two sons, Galossa and Missipsa, to require them Two sons of
Massinissa sent to Carthage. Amilchar Sa(...)
to receive the bannished men. The ruler shut the gates against them, least the
kinsemen of the bannished, might move the people with their tears.

And Amilchar Samnis lay in wait for them, and set upon Gelossa, and killed
some of his me^, and made him afraid. Wherefore to give occasion of war,
Massinissa took the City of ^^scopa, coveting it above the conditions.
Oroscopia.


The Carthaginians, with five and twenty thousand footmen Captains of
Massinissa ^euolte to the enemies.
and four hundred horsemen of the City, the ruler of y^ provision being
Captain, made war against Massinissa, and encamping nigh Asasis and Sybas,
Captains of Massinissa, contendyng with the kings children, fled from him,
and led away six thousand. Asdrubal encouraged by this, camped nearer
Massinissa, and in the skirmishes had the better. Massinissa to deceive him,
went back by little and little, as though he had fled, until he had brought
him into a desert field full of hills and rocks, and void of victual. Then he
turned and camped in the plain, and Asdrubal ran to the hills as the more
surer, and then intended to come the next day to fight.

Scipio the younger that afterward took Carthage, serving under Scipio the
yo^ger.
Lucullus in Celtiberia, came to Massinissa to desire him to send Elephants,
Massinissa preparing his body for the fight against^ The age, strength and
valtantnesse of Massinissa.
the next day, sent horsemen to receive him and diverse of his sons. He, by
break of day, ordered his army being.ixxxviij. years of age, ryding yet very
strongly, and leaping upon the bare horse, as the manner is of the Numidians,
being a good captain, and a fighting soldier.

The Numidians be most strong, and among them that live Numidians of long life.
long, of most long life. The cause is peradventure, that they have no sharp
winter, by the which every thing is destroyed, nor the summer so hot as the
Aethiopians and Indians, therefore this region brings forth most strong
beasts, and the men be always in the air and in labor, they drink little
wine, and their diet is very simple and thin.

Massinissa on horseback, directed his army, and Asdrubal brought his people,
which were very many, against Scipio beholds the fight^ between the
Carthagies and Massinissa.
him, for many were come to him out of the Country.

Scipio beheld the fight from an high place, as from a Theater. He was wont
to say that he had seen many fields, but never none with such pleasure, for
he alone without care saw a hundred and ten thousand men fighting
together, and he said that only two beside him, had seen the like Id^ an hill
in Troade.
war at Troy. Jupiter from Ida, and Neptune from Samothracia. This fight
continued from morning till night, and after many slain on both sides,
Massinissa seemed to have the better. Scipio met with him as he returned, and
rejoiced with him: he received him as an ancient friend, and showed him all
pleasure he could.

When the Carthaginians heard that Scipio was come, they Scipio is made ^mper
betvvix^ Massinissa and the Carthogies.
prayed him that he would make an end between Massinissa and them: he
brought them together, and for the agreement, the Carthaginians offered
Massinissa the land they had at Empurium, and to give him two hundred talents
of silver presentlye, and eight hundred in time: and when he desired the
outlawes to be restored, they could not abide to hear it. And so they
departed doing nothing. Scipio returned to Spain, with his Elepha^tes.
Massinissa lay about the hill of his enemies, waiting that no victual should
be brought them. There was none nygh hand, and to himself, a great way off,
it was brought with much Partiality of the Romans.
ado, and very little. Asdrubal at the first, might have passed through his
enemies, his army being strong and sound: but because he was better stored of
victual than Massinissa, he thought he would have sued for peace: and he
tarried also, hearing Privy instructions given the ambassadors.
that Ambassadors came from Rome to make peace: To whom it was said: That if
Massinissa were overcome, they should end the matter, but if he had the
better, they should encourage him. And so they did.

The famine cons^ned Asdrubal and the Carthaginians, who Famine in the
Carthagies camp.
were so weak in body, that they could not force the enemy. First they eat
their beasts, then their horses of carriage, then they sodde their horse
gyrthes and eat them. Many diseases took them, as well for their evil
sustenaunce, as for their lack of labor, and heat of the year. For a
multitude of men in a camp was thronged together in a little space, and heat
of Libya, and when wood failed them to sees their meat, they burned their
Targets. The dead men were not carried away, for Massinissa would not suffer
it, nor they were not burned for lack of wood. The pestilence was great
amongst them, and danger, for the savors and corrupted bodies. The most part
of the army died, and the rest had no hope of lise. Therefore The Carthegies
yield to Massinissa.
they promised to restore to Massinissa his runawayes, and to pay him 5000,
talents of silver in fifty years, and to receive their bannished men contrary
to their oaths, and they to pass through one gate, by their enemies, only in
their coats. Celossa, being yet grieved with them for the injury they did him,
whither by his fathers consent, or of himself, sent the Numidian horsemen upon
the^ as they went away, to be revenged of them, they neither having armor to
defend, nor strength to fly, so that of. 58000. The Carthagies flaine.
men few came safe to Carthage, and with them Asdrubal the captain, and other
of the noble men. This was the end of the war between Massinissa and the
Carthagies. Then followed the third and last war of the Romans in Libya.
When the Carthaginians were thus weakened by the overthrow of Massinissa, The
third war with Carthage.
and their City in most feeble state, they were afraid of Massinissa, being
at hand with so great an army, and of the Romans, ever their heavy enemies,
and seeking occasion, for y^ was done against Massinissa, in neither of the
which they were deceived: for as soon as the Romans heard of it, they
appointed an army over all Italy, not showing to what use, that they might be
ready when they should be called. The Carthaginians thinking to put away this
occasion, condemned Asdrubal Asdrubal is condemned. Boetharch was a chief
office in Thebes, and Baeotia. Ambassadors from Carthage to Rome.
that was Captain of the war against Massinissa, and Carthalone the
Boetharch, and all other that were occasions of it, putting the blame of the
war upon them. They sent ambassadors to Rome, that accused Massinissa, and
also accused these men, that so rashly and suddenly made the business, and
brought the City into danger of enimitie. One of the Senators asked them,
why they did not punish the authors of the war at the beginning, but after
they were overcome, and had good will to make war again upon us, and sought
occasion of it: to him they answered, that the Carthaginians in deed had not
yet satisfied the Romans. Therefore being troubled again, they asked if The
doubtful dealing of the Senate with the Carthagies.
they were thought to offend, what they might do to make amends? They said
thus, to this word: If you shall satisfy the Romans. Some thought, in
debating what this satisfaction should be, that the Romans would add more
money to that Scipio had appointed. Some thought to grant Massinissa the
land that was in controversy. Then they sent ambassadors again to Rome, to
know expreslye, what would satisfy the Romans, to whom it was answered,
that the Carthaginians knew well enough, and so sent the^ away. Then they were
in doubt and fear of this matter. Vtica was the greatest City in Libya next
Carthage, having fair ports, and a country plentiful to sustain an army,
lx. furlongs from it, and fit to make war against the^: being in doubt of
Carthage, and uttering their old hate Vtica is given to the Romans.
against the^ in time, sent ambassadors to Rome, to yield Vtica to the
Romans. The Senate that before was inclined and prepared to this war, by
the coming of so myghtie and convenient a City unto them, opened their mind,
and being assembled in the Capitol, where they were wont to consulte of war,
decreede the war against Carthage. They sent out of The third was with
Carthage is determined.
hand the Consuls, Marcus Manilius with the footemenne, and Lucius Marcius
Censorinus with the navy, to whom was given in secret, that they should not
leave the war, till Carthage were taken.

When they had sacrifised, they sailed into Sicelie, to go from thence to
Vtica. They had fifty galleys, a hundred foysts, and many Crayers, Barks and
Hoyes. They had an army of.xc. thousand footmen, and four thousand horsemen,
al of the best sort, every citizen and confederate, being desirous to go to so
noble a voyage, and many willingly put their names VVat made without
proclamation.
in the roll. Warning, and war it self was given the Carthagies by one
messenger. For he carried the decree of war, and showed the ships that sailed
against the^. They were amazed and in despair, for want of ships, and so great
a loss of their youth, neither having confederates nor hired soldiers, nor
victuals to endure a siege, nor any thing else in war soden and not proclaimed,
nor being able to resist the Romans and Massinissa too. They sent other
ambassadors to Rome with full authority, to satissie for the present, as well as
they could. The Senate said to the ^^^^f The Senate says one thing and
means another.
the Carthaginians within.xxx. days shall deliver to the Consuis that be yet
in Sicelie, three hundred of your most noble children for pledges, and shall do
in other things as they shall will them, it is lawefull for Carthage to be free
and of it self, and have all their land in Libya. Thus they decreed openly,
and gave the ^^ident deuble dealing of the Romans.
Carthaginians the decree, to carry to Carthage: but in secret they sent to to
the Consuls, to keep their former instructions. The Carthaginians suspected
this determination, that the peace would not be firm, though they delivered
their children: but beingin such a danger, nor having where to put their trust,
but with diligence to show their readiness, they carried their children to
Sicilie, their parents and their friends lamenting, specially their mothers,
the which, like mad women followed their children and the ships, and held
the soldiers and the Ancres, and pulled the tackle, and stopped the
Mariners, and stayed the sails: some followed swimming a great way in the
sea, weeping that they were taken from their children. Some upon the land, did
tear their hair and beat their breasts, as they are wont in a funeral. For
it seemed in word, a delivery of children, for a conformity, but in deed,
it was a very yelding of the City, their children being delivered upon no
certain condition: and many did prophesic in the delivery of their children,
that it should not profitte the City. This was the manner of the conueying of
the children at Carthage. When they were come to Sicelie, the Consuls sent
them to Rome. And there it was said unto them, that they should hear the
end of the war in Vtica. The Romans ^ri^^ at Vtica.


The Romans being come thither, lay with their army, where Scipio did
before, their nauye harbored in the ports of Vtica. The ambassadors being
come from Carthage, the Consuls satte on high seats, the Colonels and
Marishals standing about them. The army on either side in a great length,
apparelled with fair armor, their ensigns they hold up, that the
Embassadoures might see the multitude of them. Then the Firba^^^ lo^^es of
Cartha^^^^^, the Con^^^s at Vtica.
Consulls commanded s^le^ce with a Trumpet. The Trumpet called the
Carthaginians to come near. They were led thorough the long army, not very
nighe the sear of State but at a bar in the midst. The Consuls commanded
them to say their message. They spoke much to move pity, and diverse things,
touching the leagues made between them and the Romans, and of Carthage, a
City of so long continuance, of people and power, and both by sea and land
of most great dominion, which they spoke not, (they said) to extol
themselves, for in adversity it is Adversity.
no time to vaunte: but you (O Romans) may be moved toreason and modesty by
our sudden mutation. They be best that pity them that fall, for they make
their own hope the better, Mutation of Fortune*
that do not deal evil with them that be in misfortune. This is a thing fit
for you and your modesty, to have chiefly consideration of men, But if we
have found you sharp ennimies, the misfortunes we have suffered, may
satisfy you, which are spoiled of the power, vie had by sea and land, and
have given our ships to you and made no more, and have refrained from hunting
and possessing of Elephants, and have given our best pledges both before and
now, and have paid our tribu^es truly, which were wont to receive of other.
And this was sufficient to your fathers, Ancient Romans kept coue nauntes.
with whom we made war, who, when they had made peace with us, used us as
friends and confederates. The oath Oath in league.
that is made in a league, is alike to both: and they were faithful to us in
peace, after we had made an end of war. But you, with whom we have not
contended, what can you allege for breaking of covenants, or that you should
so suddenly decree war, and come upon us, before it was proclaimed? have we
not paid you our tributes? have we ships or Elephants to be envied? are we not
to be pitied, that of late lost fifty thousand men by famine? but we have
made war upon Massinissa, who is increased by it, and all we have suffered for
you, for being rigorous and injurious to us, and to the soil in which he was
nourished and brought up. He got from us our land at Emporio, which
Empori^*
when he had, he invaded more, till agreement was made between him and us,
by you: if this be the pretense of this war, we condemned the offenders of
him by proclamation, and sent Ambassadoures to you, that might purge us, and
others after that, with full power to make peace, as you would, What needs
then, ships, and navy, and army against men, not only confessing to have
offended, but yielding themselves unto you? That we meant no deceit to you,
nor refuse to suffer any pain that you would put upon us, it appears
plainelye, when we sent our best children in pledges to you, as you required,
and that within.xxx. days, as the decree commanded. The tenot of which decree
is, that if we deliver our pledges: Decree, if pledges were delivered.
that Carthage should be free, and of it self, and enjoy the land we have.
Thus said the Ambassadors. Then Censorinus stood up The Roman Consul to the
Carthaginians.
and said: What need we show the causes of war to you (O Carthaginians)
se^ding Ambassadors to Rome, and learning that of the Senate? what ye said
untruly of us, that I will reprove. For the decree is manifest, and we said
before unto you in Sicilie, when we received your pledges, that you should
have the rest of our commandments at Vtica. For the choice and speedye
bringing of your pledges, we praise you. What needs armor to them that keep
peace purely? Deliver all your public and private armoure that every man
has: Bring to us your shot and munition. Thus he said. The Ambassadoures
said, that they would obey this also, but were afraid, that Asdrubal being
condemned by proclamation, and leading.xx. M. men, and encamping at Carthage,
would reu^st it. The Consulls said, that the Romans would see to that. Then
they promised to deliver The Carthagit. nians deliver the ^ arm^ure.
this also: There was sent with them Cornelius Scipio Nasica, and C^eus
Cornelius Hispalus: they brought forth.ij. C. M. harnesses, arrows, and darts
an infinite number, and slings that threw headed arrows, and stones. 2000. The
sight of this carriage was fair and strange, so many wagons being carried of
the enemies. The Ambass^dours followed them, and the best of the ancient sort
in the City, the priests and other of estimation, and all to move the Consuls
to change, or to mercy. Being brought with that order to the Consulls,
Censorinus that was more eloquent than his fellow, stood up, and with a
severe countenance, said thus: The Carthaginians are commanded to forsake the
City.
We praise you of Carthage for your obedience, and readiness in delivering
both your pledges and your armor. To men in necessity, short speech
behooves. Forsake you Carthage, and dwell where you will, four score furlongs
from the sea, for we be determined to deface Carthage. Whiles he was saying
this, they held up their hands with a cry to the heavens, and called upon the
Gods, as men deceived, and wished all evils upon the Romans, as me^ that
would die, or were beside themselves, or provoke the Romans into hate of the
Ambassadors. They fell upon the earth, and with their hands and heads did beat
it, some tore their garments, and defiled their bodies, as driven beside
themselves. When the passion was paste, a great silence and astonishme^t
appeared, as though they had bin dead. The Romans were amazed, and the
Consulls knew they were stricken with the strange commandment, and would be in
that passion for a time, So ^aine pasion
perceiving very well, that greatest griefs do strike most vehemently at the
first, but in time, necessity causes boldness to obey.

Thus were the Carthaginians asflicted, and with their silence feeling greater
matter, they ceased their disdainfulness, and fell to weeping and lamenting
themselves, and their children, and their wives by name, and their Country, as
though it had heard them, as a man, speaking many lamentable things. The
priests called upon their holy things, and their Gods, as though they had bin
present, laying their destruction upon them. There was a confused and
miserable mourning of them that brought both public and private things, that
it made the Romans themselves to weep. The Consulls were also stricken with
such human mutation, and with severe manner abode the fullness of the matter,

When they had ceased weeping, they waxed silent again, considering that their
city was naked and unarmed, having neither ship, sword, dart, nor engine, nor
me^ sufficient to resist.l. M. being destroyed of late: strangers aid had
they none, nor friend, nor confederate, nor time. Their enemies had all, their
children, their armor, their land, and came armed against their City with
Ships, footmen, engines and horse. (...) another enimye, was at their sides.
They refra^d from rage and choler, as nothing profiting in calamities. They
turned again to reason. And Hanno that is called Gylla, obtaining (...) to
speak, said thus:

If there be any regard with you, (O Romans) of our former (...) Gylla, to
the (...).
speeches, we would speak, not as they that can bring forth any thing to
^usti^e us, for there is no resistaunce in time to the afflicted, but that you
may learn, it is not without reason or cause that you should have pity of
us. We having dominion in Libya and the sea, have many times contended with
you for the Soueraintie, and a^ length gave place to Scipio, when we delivered
our ships and Elephants to you, and agreed to give you tribute, and gave them
in time. Then forth Gods ^h^t be judges, spare us, spare us also for the oath
that Scipio made us, that the Romans should be friends and consederates to the
Carthaginians. There is not, wherein we have offended: we have neither ships
nor Elephants, nor have left our tributes, but we have taken your part
against iij. Kings, and it ought not to displease Ph^^^pp^s. (...). (...).
Misery cause of much spea^^^^.
you, if we said this before, when we delivered you ^^r armoure. For misery
makes men speak much: nothing is more strong in supplications* than
couenaunts made, nor we have any other thing for our refuge but words, seeing
we have delivered to you all our strength. Of these former things, (...) (O
Romans) was our assurance. Of the present, you Consuls Misery.
be ^^^^ours and witness with us. You required pledges, and he brought them to
you of the best sort. You required armor, and you have it al, which they
that are taken with ^iege, will not willingly deliver: we have trusted the
Roman custom and manner, for the ^^^nate commanded us, and you when ^^u
required pledges, ^a^^e that (...) should be free, when you had them, but if
it were added, that we should receive the rest of the commandments* it is
not right that you, affyrmyng in plain speech, that ^ure City should be
free after the re^^it of the pledges, to appointe the overthrow of Carthage it
self. If you think you may desiroy it, how can you give it liberty, or to be
of it self, as you say? This we have to say of the former league, and of
that your selves have done. If this will not be accepted of you, we give over
all, and that which is only left to men in miserye, we flee to complainte and
prayer: Much prayer is requisite for the multitude of evils. We beeseeche you
for the ancient City, inhabited by the Oracle of the Gods, and for the great
glory that it had, and the name that is spread over all the earth, and for the
holy things that be so many in it, and for the Gods that have not offended,
whose solemnities, pompes, and feasts do not spoil, nor the sepultures and
funerals, since none of the dead men have done you any injury. If any pity
be in you, saying, you pity us, if you suffer us to have dwelling place, spare
the place of public assemblye, spare the Country Ceremonies, spare the God
of Counsel, and all other that to them that be alive be fruiteful and
honorable. What need you have any fear of Carthage, when you have our
Ships, armoure, and our Elephantes that be envied? Touching our habitation,
if you will so comfort us, is it impossible for men that have lived in the sea,
to dwell in y^ maine land? of them an infinite number does occupy the sea. We
give you a choice more for our contentation, and your glory. Suffer the City
to stand* that has hurt none of you, and kill us, whom you would have
remove. So shall you seem to be angry with men, and not with holy things, Gods
and Sepulchers, and the City that has not offended. You Romans have had
regard of good fame, and rightwisenesse in all your works, and you show
modesty in prosperity, add this you use toward all that you take. Remember
Jupiter and the other Gods, that yet have Carthage, and do not bring evils
upon you and your children, do not blotte your good fame first upon us, nor
deface your glory with such an act, evil to be done, and evil to be
heard of, and begone first of you before all other living. There have been
many wars between the Gretians and the Barbarians, and many beetweene you
Romans and others, yet was there never any that defaced a City, giving their
hands before fight, and delivering their armor and children, and if there be
any hurt in the world, to sufer it patiently: Bringing to you the Gods
sworn, the fortune Reuengement belongs to God.
of man, and the most fearful Gods of reuengeaunce, to them that be in
felicity. We beseech you not to dishonor your selves upon our state, that
has prospered, neither to bring your felicity into infamye: give us leave,
if you will not suffer us to have our City, to send Embassadoures again to
the Senate, to make intercession. You see a little distance of time, but
bringing an heap of long torments in a short while, for the duty of the
thing to come: For it is in your power to do what you will, either now or
shortly after: Let pity and humanity be present with you. This said Hanno.

The Consulls evidently seemed sad all the while he spoke, because they could
grant them nothing, and when they had made an end, Censorinus said.

Of that the Senate has commanded, what need we The Roman Consul to the
Carthaginians.
speak much? for that it has commanded, it must be obeyed, neither can we
stay that they have commanded to be done. For what we command our
ennimyes to do, we do but speak it, and it must be done. And because the
common profit is in talk, both ours, and much more yours, ( O Carthaginians)
I will not refuse to speak to you by reason, if you can be persuaded rather
than compelled. The Sea putting you in Sea occasion of offense.
mind of your power and dominion, stirs you to offend, and by that to fall
into adversity. For by that, you have overcome Sicilie. Spain.
Sicilie, which being done, you sailed into Spain, and took it, in the time
of truce: ye robbed all Merchaunts, and chiefly cures: and that it might not be
known, ye drowned them, till ye were taken, and paid Sardinia for a penalty.
So you lost Sardinia, by the Sea, which naturally provoke all men to covet
too much, because of the speedy commodity of it. The Athenienses by being
Seamen, did win much and lost all. For the Sea is like merchants
gains, it has great increase, and is lost Sea like Merchants.
at once. You know that they whom I now named, dilating their dominion from
the Ionian sea, to the I Will of Sicilie, did not cease of coveting more, before
they had lost all their power, Athenienses ^ost al by covering too much by
sea
and given Ports and Ships to their ennimies, and received a garrison into
their City, and pulled down their long wall, and then were made to dwell
upon the high land, the which saved the most part of them. Surer is the
life ( O Carthaginians) upon the land, laboring the earth with quietness,
Gain upon ^^nd, less, but more sure.
peradventure the gain is less, but surer. And less dangerous certainly is
husbandry, than Merchaundise. And to me, a City A City in the sea like a
ship
in the sea seems rather a ship than a land, having much tossing of
business and mutabilitie. In the Inland, the profitte, is without peril, as
upon the ground. And for this, the ancient Kingdoms for the most part
were in the midst, The great Monarchies on the land.
and of it, were the greatest made, as of the Medians, the Assirians, and the
Persians, and others. But I will cease off examples of Kings, which do not
agree with you. Look upon your own Libya, in the which you shall have
neighbors, as you will choose, that you may take away the sight and
memory that stir you to the things that now trouble you, when you look to
the Sea, void of Ships, remembering the number of Ships you have had, and
the prays you have taken, and to what Ports you brought them plentifullye,
and filled your storehouses both of Ships and Treasure-houses of all
preparation. Whereto serves your walls, the receipte of your armies, horses
and Elephantes? Whereto is the memory of them to you, but grief and a
stirring, to come again to the same, if you can? It is the affection of man,
by the remembrance of former fortune, to hope to come again to the like. The
best remedy against evil fortune, Forgetfulness remedy against miserye.
is forgetfulness, which you cannot have, except you take away the sight. And
this is a manifest proof, that beingmany times pardoned for the breach of
your promise, you have broke it still, if you yet covet rule, and bear us evil
will, that have taken it from you, and wait your time: then have you need of
such a city, of such ports, and Arsenalls and walls to be made to receive your
army. And why should we pardon you, since we find you such adversaries? If
you will leave your dominion in deed, not in word, rather than in sentence,
being content with the land you have in Libya, and mind to keep without
dissm^lation with us, do it and show it in deed, go dwell in Libya, which you
have, and leave the Sea, which you have los^^. Neither counter^a^te pity by
holy things, country Gods, common place, and sepu^chres. Whose sepulchers
shall remain untouched, and to make the ceremonies to them, you may come and
sacrifice to your holy Gods if you will. The rest we will take away. For
you do not sacrifice in Arsenals, nor ye make no yeare-minds upon the walls,
Altares, houses, and Palaices, you may build where you go, and they shall
forthwith be your Country: as you Carthag^^^^ns con^e of Tyrus.
left Tyrus and came into Libya, and that you possessed here, you call your
country. And to be short, learn, that we do not (...) you this for evil will,
but for sure agreement, and public concord. Alba.
If you can remember, that Alba, not an ennimie, but a mother-citie, not of
evil mind, but willing inhabitaunce, for the common profit, we translated
to Rome, and it was profitable to both people. But ye say there be many with
you, that Sea men.
work for their living by the sea. This we have ^oreseene, that you may have
easy traffike by sea, and may carrye and receive very commodiouslye: for we
put you not far from the Sea, but four seore surl^ngs. We that do command
you this, be a hundred surlongs from it: we give you a place, choose it your
self, and when you are there, to be of your self. This is it we said
before, that Carth^ge should be free, i^ she obeyed us. We think you to be
Carthage, and not the ground. Men be the city, and not houses.
When Cens^^inu^ had said this, he ceased. The Carthag^es being astonished,
said nothing. Then he said again. I have spoken what I thought might persuade
you, and comfort you. But the Senates commandment must be done, and that
out of hand. Therefore go your way, for yet you be Ambassadors. Thus he
spoke, and they were removed by the Sergeants* And foreseeing what might follow
of it at Carthage, they desired leave to speak again, and being brought in,
they said:

We see your commandment must be obeyed, for you will Carthag^e^ speak
against.
not let us send to Rome, we do not hope to return to you, for we shall be
killed of the Carthaginians, while we tell them your commandment: we be^^^ch
you, not for our selves, for we be ready to suffer all things, but for
Carthage, if i^ may be driven to su^^er calami^ie by ^^are, send your ships
thither, whiles we go, that hearing and seeing your* commandment, they may
bear it if they can. Into such extreme necessity, we are driven* as we desire
you to send your ships against our own country. When they had thus said,
they went their way.

Censor^nus with twenty galleys, shoared about the City. Some of the
ambassadors fled in the way, the more pa^te went on with silence. The
Carthaginians loking for the ambassadors coming on the walls, were troubled
with their tarriaunce, ^ro^^le in Carth^g^ at the sight ^t the Ambassadors.
and some ^ore their hear, some would not tarry, but went to m^^te them, so
desirous to learn the truth. When they saw them heavy, they stroke their
faces, and did ask some, of them al, some of their friends and acquaintance,
and when they had saluted them, and asked them, and had none answer, they
lamented, as in an evident destruction: and some that heard them from the walls,
lamented with them, not knowing any thing, as in a manifest and great
adversity. At the entry of the gates, they had almost thrust one another to
death, and almost torn the ambassadors in pieces, but that this saved them,
that they must first speak with the Semors. Some le^t them, and some went on
with them, desir^us to know with the soone^^. When they were entered the Senate
house, the Seniors commanded the other to au^yde, and they only remained, the
people stood without. The Ambassadour^ showed the commandment of the
Consuls. The Senate cried ^ut, the people without did the like. The
amb^ssadours showing further what they had all^^ged to the contrary, and what
prayers they had made to send ambassad^urs to Rome, the Senate was in a deep
silence again, a bydi^g to hear the ^^de, and the people was in silence also,
but when they heard, they might not se^d Fury of the Carthagies*
to Rome, they were turned into an exceeding shryking. The people ran into
them. Then fell they to a surye like mad men without reason, as the ministers
of Bacchus be wont, which The fe^stes of ^^cch^^ be ^hevved by tunes, for the
dronken sort do differ little from mad folk.
they say, show their madness in diverse manners. Some were angry with the
Senators, which were the cau^^ why the pledgies were sent, and spoiled and tore
them, as authors of the deceyt: some for letting the armor go: some missused
the ambasadours, as tellers of evil news, and dragged them about the City.
Some tormented the Italians that were yet there, the The ^age of the people of
Carthage.
case being sudden and not proclaimed, sundry ways, saying they were revenged
of their pledgies and armor. The City was full of anger, fear, and
threats. In the way, they called upon their best beloved things, they fled
into the temples, as to Sanctuaries, they reviled their gods that could not
help them. Other went to the armaries, and cried when they found them empty.
Some went into the Arsenals and lamented their ships, as given to men without
faith, and called some of the Elephants by name, as they had been present:
some rebuked their ancestors and themselves, that should neither have given
ships, rentes, nor armor, but had dyed with their armed Country. And the
mothers of the pledgies, did most move them to rage, which, like unto tragical
Furi^s, ran to every man with shryking, and objected the delivery of their
children, and their speaking against it, and told them, God did punish them,
for their children. A ^ew, that were sober, shut the gates, and filled the
walls full of stones in stead of other weapons. The Senate decreed war that
day, and gave liberty to bond Carthage determined to stand to de^fence.
men. They chose generals, Asdrubal for the outward affairs, that was
condemned to death, having then together twentye thousand men, and one went to
him in haste to desire him not to forsake his afflicted country in extreme
p^rils, nor to think now on the injury that was done him for fear of the
Romans. Within the walls, another Asdruball was chosen, a nephewe of
Massinissa by his daughter. They sent to the Consuls for thirty days
respight to send to Rome. Being The Carthagies are denied to send to Rome.
denied this also, they fell into a marvelous change of courage, whyther they
should suffer it, or leave their City, and forthwith, were filled with
boldness, with a new change. The common houses, the public Temples, and all
the holy places, and every other work of any strength, they wrought upon
day and night, men and women, not ceassing, and gathered victualles by parts,
as the time did serve: every day they made a hundred shieldes, three hundred
The m^^u^^ous diligence of the Carthagies.
swords, and a thousand arrows to shoot, five hundred spears and pykes, and
as many bows and slinges as they could. The women shaued their hair to make
strings for them, because they wanted other matter, and continued in this
provision. The Consuls, peradventure stayed to begin so monstrous a matter
with leisure, thinking to take the city unarmed when they would, and supposed
that they would give over for want, as in hard cases men be wont at the first,
to be earneste, but with time and reason being persuaded, give place to fear,
by ye which one of the Carthagies, supposing fear had possessed them, durst
come into the common place, as though he would have spoken of some other
matter, and said, that they being unarmed, ought Of evils the lesser.
to take the meaner evil, even so playnelye speaking his sentence.

Now was Massinissa angry and grievously offended with the Romans, Massinissae
offended.
y^ he bringing the Carthagies force upon their knees now he saw other run for
the title, and came to the thing, not making him privy as they were wont to do
in other wars. The Consuls Massinissa offended with the Romans.
likewise, had him in some suspicion, and sent to him for aid: he answered,
he would send them aid, when he should understand they had need, and
sending not long after, asked if they had any need, They not suffering his
pride, and distrusting him as one offended, answered they would send to him
when they needed. For victual for the army they had only from Adrumeto,
Leptis, Saxo, Vtica and Colle. All the the rest of Libya was Asdrubals, from
the which, he sent victuals to Carthage. Being victualled for a few days,
the Consulles marched to the City of Carthage prepared to fight.

The City stands, in a great deep gulf, almost as an Island: a place called
a neck did divide it from the la^d, 25. furlongs broad, The description of
Carthage.
from the which, a narrow piece of ground called a town half a furlong
broad, goes to the weast in the ^^^dest of the poole and the sea, with a
simple wall among the rocks, toward the south land ward, where the old
City Byrsa was. In the neck was a triple wall. Every one of these, was
thirty Cubits high, beside the batlements, and towers, distaunt two acres
asunder, stayde by four planchers, thirty foot deep, at the pla^cher was
the higth of every wall, and in it, being round and strong, three hundred
Elephants were placed below, and the treasure of their store. Upon the^ was
stables for four thousand horses, with granaries for wheat and barley. There
was receytes for men, twenty thousand a foot, and four thousand on Horse:
so great provision of war, was appointed to be placed in the walls only.
One hook about the narow part, did bow from the wall to the ports, which was
only weak and One vveake place.
low, not regarded at the beginning. They sailed out of one port to another,
and from the sea there was one entrye lxx. foot broad, which they did shut
with chains of iron. The first was for merchauntes, in the which were many
and diverse places of receyt. Within this in the midst was an I Will, and both
the I Will and the poole was compassed with great holowe corners, the which were
full of munition for ships, able to receive two hundred and twenty ships,
and Cellers for preparation of ships and galleys furniture: two pitlers of
Ionian fashion, stood before every port of ships, like a gallery in the
sight of them that passed by the Island and the port. In the I Will The admirals
port.
was the store for the admiral, from whence the Trumpeter must give warning,
and the crier tell the time, and the Admiral see abroad. The Island was right
against them that sailed, drawn a great length, that the Admiral might see all
in the sea, and they that sailed by, should not see the places of the ports
perfectly. Neither could the Merchaunts in their port, see the store for the
ships For a double wall was set about them, and gates did receive the
Merchaunts to go into the City, not passing by the storehouses of the ships.
At that time thus stood the City of Carthage.

The Consuls divided their business and came against their The Consuls against
Carthage by sea and land.
enemies. Manlius, from the land, against the neck, to fill the ditch, to
beat down the little wall, and so to approach to the high walls. Censorinus
brought ladders both from the land and the ships, against the part of the
bowing wall. They both made little account, as of unarmed men: till they
sound them to have new armor, and great courage, at the wounder of the
which, they gave back, and at the beginning failed of their purpose, thinking
to get the City without any fight. The second time attempting, and again
rejected, the courage of the Carthagies increased. The Consuls being afraid of
Asdruball, which had his camp at their back not far off, at the poole,
defensed both their camps. Censorinus, at the Poole, under the walls of the
City, Manlius, in the neck, the way to the land. And thus their camps being
made strong, Censorinus with his, passed the Poole, for stuff to make engines,
where he lost five hundred workmen, and much armoure, Imilco the general
Imileo. Cesorinus Ioseth men.
of the horse of Carthage, coming sodaynely upon him, who was surnamed
Phameas. Yet getting matter, he made engines and ladders, and again they both
gave assault, and were repulsed. The Romans have three repulses.


Manlius beginning a little, and hardly breaking any part of the wall,
dispayred and left it off. Censorinus filling a trenche next the narrow earth
at the Poole, to make it the more passable, brought two great engines that
carried rams, the one was heaued with six thousand footmen, the Colonels
guiding it, the other of the Mariners by the conduct of the Admiralles. And
contention being which should do best, both of the Capitaines and soldiers,
a piece of the wall was thrown down, and they might see into the City.

The Carthaginians to repulse them, repaired the breach in the night: and
because they could not finishe all by night, and were afraid, that that was
already done, should be thrown down in the day by the Romans engines,
being new made and green, they ran upon the engines of the enemies, some
armed, some naked, having only burning lamps. They burned not The Carthagies
burn part of the Romans engines.
all, because they could not prevent the Romans, but that ^^^y came out: yet
they made them all unprofitable, and returned. Day being come, the Romans had
bolonesse to assault y^ place that was fallen and not fully made up: for within
apeared a plain fit for to fight, in the front of the which, the armed
Carthagies stood, and behind, the unarmed, with stones and staves: and other
placed in the next houses, to entertain the approaching enemy, the Scipio
shows his wisdom being an inferior officer in the camp.
which, seeing such contempt of naked men, leapt in boldly. Scipio (that not
long after destroyed Carthage, and was called Affricane,) being a Marshall at
that time, stayed, and dividing his bands into many parts, and standing a
distaunce from the wall, would not let any of his to enter the City, but
received them that were driven out by the Carthaginians, and saved them. And
this was the beginning of his glory, appearing more wise than the Co^sul. In
this place is a want of text.
The army of Censorinus was sick, lying at the Fenne full of standing and
corrupt water, and not receiving wind from y^ sea, because of the high walls.
Therefore Censorinus removed into the sea.

The Carthaginians, when y^ wind blew toward the Romans, The Carthagies burn
part of the Romans navy.
filled their boats with flax and brushe, within the walls, that the enimyes
should not see it from the ships, and when they came forth and should be
seen, they laid on sulphur and pitch, and then set up sail, and threw fire
into the vessels, the which being carried with the wind y^ blewe lustily, into
the Roman nauye, set the ships on fire and almost burned them all.

Not long after, Censorinus went to Rome for the election.

The Carthagies were the bolder upon Manlius, and in the night some armed and
some unarmed carrying bridges, assaulted the next trenche of Manlius, and
began to pull down the rampire.

The soldiers within being troubled in the night time, Scipio came with his
horsemen by a contrary part, where no enemies were, and feared the
Carthagies, when he was coming upon them, and they retired into the City.

In this fight the soldiers disordered by night, Scipio was thought to have
saved them once again very nobly, and Manlius kept his camp more sure,
making a wall where the rampire was, and erecting a tower toward the sea, for
the ships that brought him victual. Then turning to the land with ten
thousand footemenne, and two thousand horse, he wasted the country,
gathering wood, corn and victual, and one Tribune after another, did serve
the turn. Phameas the Captain of the Phameas.
horsemen, being young, and desirous to fight, and using little and light
horses, that were fed with grass, when they had none other, and to suffer
hunger and thirste, when need was, keeping secret in valleys and woods, when
he saw the^ negligent, came forth of the sodayn, like an Eagle, and when he
had spoiled, he retired, but when Scipio commanded ye army, he would not apeare.

For Scipio led his people ever in order, the horsemen keeping The
circumspection of Scipio.
on horseback, and in his raunging, would not dissolve his order, before he
had beset the field which he would spoil, with horsemen and armed footmen.
And he road about with other bands, and kept in the foragers, that left
their company, or went out of the compass. Therefore Phameas would not come
upon Envy against Scipio.
him. And this being often done, Scipio had great glory. The other Captains
envying, gave out, that there was friendship between the ancestors of Phamea,
and the grandfather of this Scipio. The Libyans that fled into towers and
fortes, that were Scipio just of promise.
many in ye country, the other Tribunes would covenant with them to depart,
and assail the^ as they went, but Scipio would send them home. Therefore there
was such a fame of his valia^tnesse and faith, as they would not trust, except
Scipio gave his word, so as he was honored both of his own and of his enemies.
Coming from foraging, the Libyans assaulted the castle of the navy, in the
night: and the confusion being great, by the escries yt the Carthagies made, to
cause ye more terror, Ma^lius kept his me^ within, not knowing the matter.
Scipio taking two bands of horsemen, came forth with burning lights,
commanding his men not to fight, because of the dark, but only to run about
with the fire, to seem ye more, and afray the enemy, so as the Carthaginia^s
being made afraid both ways, fled into the city. This also redounded much
to Scipio his glory. Wherefore he was well spoken of by every man, and
thought a worthy son, of Paulus that conquered Macedonie, and of the Scipios,
into whose The progeny of Scipio.
family he was adopted.

Manlius going to Nepheris against Asdrubal, Scipio was not Nepheris.
content, seeing al wooddes and hylly places, and the high places gotten
before: and as they were three furlongs from Asdrubal, and coming to a river
must ascend to Asdrubal, he stayed then, and counseled him to retire, and that
another time and policy should be more fit to match with Asdrubal. The
other Tribunes speaking against him for envy and malice, not thinking Scipios
Counsel is re^ected.
it good counsel to give place in the sight of the enimye, whereby they might
contemn them, and set upon them as flying, he again desired them, to put
their camp on the hither side of the river, that if they were put to it, they
might have a place to resort, where as now they had none, whereunto they
might fly. They laughed at this, and one threatened to cast away his sword,
if not Manlius, but Scipio did rule. Therefore Manlius went on, not very
skillful in the war. Asdruball encountered with him, and there was great
slaughter on both sides. Then Asdruball ran into a castle where was no peril,
The Romans are ouerthroven by Asdruball.
and waited to set on them as they went, who repenting that they had done,
they retired to the flood in order, but the flood being hard to pass, because
of few fourdes and painful, they were forced to break their order. Which, when
Asdrubal saw, he came down manfully, and killed many, that did not resist,
but fled, and three of the Captains were slain, that brought the army to
that conflicte. But Scipio with three hundred horsemen Scipio saves the Consul
and his army.
that he had, and as many as he could get together, divided into three
companies, gave charge upon the enemy with great vehemence, by portions
darting at them, and retyring then upon them, and again returning. For so he
told them, that half of them should assail the enemies, and throw their
darts, as being in a circle. This being e^t done, and the Libyans without any
stay, being shot at continuallye, and all turning upon Scipio, the other
had the less trouble to pass the river. And Scipio rode after them, being
stroke at very sore. Four companies at the beginning of the fray being put
from the floude by the enemies, ran to an hill, where Asdrubal besieged them,
unknown to the Romans, till they stayed. When they knew it, some thought
good to go their way and not to adventure many for a few. Scipio told them,
that before a Counsel before doing.
marter is begone, good counsel must be had, but so many men and
ensigns being in danger, the vtterme^^e boldness must be used. He chose
certain troops of horsemen, and said he would return with them, or gladly
die with them. He took with him two days victual, and straight went forth,
all the army being afraid, least he also should perish. When he came to the
hill where they were besieged, he with great speed took an other hill
ouer-againste it, divided by a little valley. Then the Libyans did give an
hot charge upon them that were besieged, thinking Scipio could not succoure
them, being in so long a journey. But he seeing the bottomes of the hills
compassing the valley, did not omit the occasion, but ran and took a place
above the enemies. They being now ^eset round about, fled without order,
Scipio suffering them to go freely, because they were a great deal more than
he.

Thus Scipio saved these also, that were in desperation. When Scipio saves. 4.
bands that were in danger.
the army saw him come a far off, being saved beyond hope, and having saved
the other, they made great rejoice, and thought Opinion of Gods vvorking in
Scipio.
God wrought with him, as he did with his Grandfather, that seemed to know
what was to come. Manlius led his army to the City again, putting great
fault in them that would not obey Scipio, when he counseled to retire with
the army. All Grief for ^^^ unburied souldioures.
were much grieved, that they that were killed, lay unburied, specially the
Tribunes. Therefore Scipio losed a prisoner, and sent him to Aslrubal, praying
him to bury the Tribunes. He sought among the dead bodies, and found them by
their rings of gold. For the Tribunes of an army wear gold, and the
inferiors, Tribunes were rings of gold, the other of y^on.
iron. He buried them, either as an act of humanity, and common among
warriors, or reuerencing and serving Scipios glory.

When the Romans were come from Asdrubal, Phame^^ troubled them, being yet
afraid of their loss. And some issued out of Carthage, and killed some of
their carriage.

At this time the Senate sent certain men to see the Camp, and to mark every
thing diligently. And Manlius and the counsel, and the Tribunes that were left,
envy being now extinct by virtue, and all the army, testified what acts Scipio
had done for the^. A general good report of Scipio
The which, the Ambassadors at their return, told the Senate what diligence
and experience was in Scipio, and what goodwill of the army was toward him.

The Senate was glad of it. And because of their many losses, they sent to
Massinissa, and required him to send friendlye aid to them against Carthage.
But he was not found of the Ambassadors. For being decayed with age and
infirmity, and having many base sons, to whom he had given much, and three
lawful, of diverse conditions, he called Scipio, for the amity that was
Massinissa makes Scipio his executor.
between him and his grandfather, to be a counselor for his children and
kinsmen. He went out of hand, but before he came, Massinissa dying,
commanded his children to obey Scipio, as he should take order for them.
Which, when he had said, he Massinissa dies. A fortunate man.
died, a man in all things fortunate, to whom, God granted to recover his
fathers kingdom from the Carthaginians and Syphax, and to increase it from a
great part of Mauritania by Sea, to the dominion of Cyrene by land, and
caused a great portion to Cyrene, now Corene, conrayning the province of five
Cities.
he inhabited. And many of the Numidia^s that lived with herbs, and used no
tillage, he left them with treasures of money and army well practiced. Of his
ennimies, he took Syphax prisoner with his own hand. Being the cause of the
variance with Carthage, he left it weak to the Romans. He had a body big,
and streng of nature, to his last age, and tried fight till his death, and
would leap on horse without stirrops. And this may be a great conjecture of
his good health, for having many children, and Massinissa of 900. years of age
had a child of four years old.
they sometime dying, he had ten little ones, and left one of four years
of age, when he was. 900. years old. Thus Massinissa, of these years and
body, dyed.

Scipio gave to the bastardes, other gifts, to the Legitimate, treasures and
revenue, and to have the name of a King common The order that Scipio took upon
Massinissas children. Micipsa, Gelossa, and Masta^ab^.
to them, and divided other things among them, as he thought good. To Micipsa
that was oldest, and most desirous of peace, he gave the City of Cyrta, and
all the royal things in it. To Gelossa that was a soldier, and second in
age, he appointed to be the Lord of peace and war. To Mastauaba the
youngest, and given to Justice, he gave the authority of judgments and
deciding controversies.

Thus did Scipio divide the kingdom and substance of Massinissa to his
children, and presently made Gelossa a companion of the war: and he found
out the traynes, by the which, Phameas many times vexed the Romans, and
stayed them.

In a winter Scipio and Phameas encamped nighe together, having in the midst
a valley that could not be passed, nor do any thing the one against the other.

And Scipio fearing that some train might be laid before him, went to view
it with three friends. When Phameas saw him, he came toward him with one.
Scipio thinking he would say somewhat, rode toward him with one also. And when
they might hear one another, Scipio said: The Carthaginians being gone The
talk between Scipio and Pharmeas.
before why do thou not consider of thine own health, seeing thou canste do
nothing for the common wealth? How can I (quoth he) see for my safety, the
Carthaginians standing as they do, and the Romans being so often hurt by me? I
promise thee (said Scipio) if I be worthy to be trusted, safety and
forgiveness of the Romans, and to have thanks. He accepting him to be most
worthy, said: I think so of thee, and if it be possible thou can tell, and
so they departed.

Manlius being ashamed of the loss he had of Asdrubal, marched A nevve ^odd^
of Manlius to Nepheris*
again to Nepheris, taking with him.xv. days vi^^ualles, and being at hand,
made a trenche, and encamped (as Scipio counseled him) in the former journey.
And dooyng no good, he was in a more fear and greater shame, least Asdrubal
should come upon him, as he went away. And whiles he was in this doubt, A
letter to Scipio.
one of Gelossa^ army brought a letter to Scipio, and he delivered it sealed as
it was, to the General. When they had opened it, they found this. Such a
day I will take such a place, come thou with as many as thou will, and bid
the foremoste watch, receive him that shall come in the night. The letter
without any name said thus much. Scipio thought it was touching Phamea.
Manlius was afraid of Scipio, least he should be deceived of a man that was
all bent to deceites. But when he saw him have good hope in the matter, he
sent him, willing him to give assurance for Phameas safety, but for his
thanks, to determine nothing, but to promise him that the Romans should
consider of him. There was no need of such premises. For when Phameas was
come to the place appointed, he trusted Scipio for his safety, Phameas
yields to Scipio.
giving him his right hand: and as for thanks, let the Romans consider it.
When he had said thus, he determined to fight the next day, and going before
with his Captains, as to consider some other matter, he said: If I could any
longer help my country, I am ready: But that standing as it does, I am to
soresee for mine Phameas to his Cap^taynes.
own safety, having received assurance for my self, I will receive it for
you, that will be persuaded by me: now is the time for you to consider for
your selves. Thus he said. Some of the captains with their bands yielded, and
were in number. 2200. horsemen. The rest, Hanno, called The White, did retain.
When Hanno the white.
Scipio came, Phameas army met with him, and extolled Scipio, as in a triumph.
Manlius being very glad, not thinking any longer his return to be rebukefull
to him, nor afraid that Asdrubal would follow him, he removed straight for
want, being now the.xvij. day, appointing but.xv. and so must suffer pain
for three days Scipio taking Phamea and Gelossa, with their horsemen, and
certain Italians, went to a field called the Great Dungeo^, The great dungeon.
and from thence brought much pray and victual for their camp by night.
Manlius understanding that Calphurnius Piso should come as his successor, sent
Scipio and Phamea to Rome before, and the army Scipio and Phameas to Rome.
following Scipio to the ship, praised Scipio, and prayed he might be sent
Consul into Libya, as he that only could overthrow Carthage. For it was an
opinion among the^ proceeding from God, y^ The peoples opinion of Scipio.
only Scipio could conquer Carthage. And many wrote so to their friends in
Rome. The Senate commended S^p^o, and honored Phameas with precious gifts of
gold and purple, and an horse trapped with gold, and an armor for his whole
body, and.x. M. silver drammes, and an hundred pound wait of silver plate, and
a tent and furniture according, and badde him hope for better gifts, if he did
his endeavor in the rest of the war. He promised so to do, and failed into Libyi
to the Romans camp. At the Spring, Calphurnius Piso the Consul came, and with
him, Lucius Manci^us to the (...)*
navy. They neither did any thing against Carthage nor Asdrubal, but besieged
Cities, and were driven from Clup^a, when they had beset it both by sea and
land. Piso took another city nigh, and spoiled it, offering to come to accord.
From thence they went to Hypozareta, Hypozareta. This city of H^p^^, v^^^
builded of the horsemen, and was the Country of S. A^^st^^. Another H^^po was
builded in the Fenne, and called therefore, D^l^tus, builded also by the
horsemen. They burn the Consull^ munition. Bythi^^ reuolteth to the
Carthagini^ns
a great City; well walled, with a Castle, Ports, ships and houses, which
Agatbocles the Tyranne of Scicil^e did build very fair. It was in the midst
between Carthage and Libya, which robbed the Romans provision by sea, and
therefore was very rich. Calphurnius thought to punish the same, and to take
away the profit, but being at it an whole summer, did no good, and they twice
sallying out with the help of the Carthaginians, burned the engines of
Calphurnius, and he having done nothing retired to Vtica to winter. The
Carthaginians having Asdrubals army safe, and they the stronger for the fight,
with Piso at Hypozareta, for Bythias Nonias was fled to them from Gelossa with
eight hundred horse, and seeing that Micipsa and Mastauaba the sons of
Massinissa, did ever promise the Romans armor and money, and deferred and
looked for the end, were increased in their hearts, and went boldly about
Libya, winning ground, and speaking evil of the Romane^, in the assemblies of
every city, showing their faintness at Nepheris twice, and what they had
lately lost at Hyppagreta, and could not yet get Carthage, being unarmed and
unprovided. They sent to Micipsa and Mastauaba, and to the free Mauritanians,
exhorting The Carthaginians procure friende^.
them, and also showing them, that they were in danger, if the Romans
overcame them. They sent some into Macedonia, to him that was thought to be the
son of Perseus, and at war The lustiness of the Carthaginians.
with the Romans, and persuaded him to follow the war earnestly, and they
should not lack ships nor money from Carthage. And in sum, set not a little
by themselves, now that they were armed, but increased by degree, in heart,
courage and preparation.

And Asdrubal for his part, was aloft to, chief of the warr^ Asdrubal
without, accuses Asdrubal within.
abroad* for ouercomming Manlius twice, and coneting the rule of the City
also, did accuse Asdrubal the General of it, to the Senate of Carthage, being
nephewe to Gelassa, that he would betray Carthage to him. When he was examined
of this matter, and for the sudden, could not answer for himself, he was
killed Asdrubal within is killed.
with the seats of the house.

When the small doings of Pis^, and the provision of Carthage, was told at
Rome, the people was grieved, and feared that if the war increased, being
great, continual and at hand, they could look for no rest, because they
had broken faith with them before. And remembering the acts that Scipio had
lately done in Libya when he was a Tribune, and comparyng them, with the
present, and the letters that were sent from the Camp every man to his
friends, they required that Scipio might be sent Consul into Libya, for the
Election was at hand. But the law forbad Scipio to be Consul yet, because of
his age. He desired to be an Edises had rule of houses and provision.
Edile, but they would have him Consul. Which being against the Law, and the
Consuls bringing forth the Law, they were grieved and offended, affirming,
that by the Laws of Romul^^ Authority of people.
and Tullius, the people was Lord of the Elections, and might allow and
disallowe what Law they would.

In the end, one of the Tribunes said, if the Consuls would not agree to the
people, they would take the Election from the Consulls. So the Senate
persuaded the people to break the Scipio is chosen Consul before his time,
and the Law broken for o^^ year, by example of the ^acedemonians. Pylus a
city or two i^ Pelope^^so. Scipio is appointed to Libya by the people.
Law for one year, and then to resume it again. As the Lacedaemonians in a
necessity dissolved a Law for them that were taken at Pylo, and said: Let
the Laws sleep for this day. So Scipio desiring to be Edile, was made
Consul, whose fellow Drusus required to allotte the provinces, til one of the
Tribunes said, that the judgment of provinces, was the peoples, the which
people chose Scipio.

An army was given him of ordinary, so many as might supply the number of the
dead, and to take as many confederates as he could persuade, and to write to
Kings and Cities in the people of Romes name, as many as he thought would
send him aid. So had he help from Cities and Kings. He went into Sicilie, and
from Sicilie to Vtica, Calphurnius Piso made war in the land, and Mancinus lay
at Carthage, a part of the wall he perceived to be neglected, where were rocks
that could not be attempted. He thinking he should not be perceived, prepared
his ladders Piso attempteth the wall.
to get the wall. He did so, and some of the soldiers went to it boldly.

The Carthaginians seeing them so few, despised them, and set open the gates
that go to the rocks, and ran upon the Romans. And the Romans driving
them back, and following them, ran into the City at the gate with them.
Then making a cry of victory, Mancinus leaping for joy, and in other Mancinus
gives a rash attempt.
things rash and light, with the other multitude leaving their Ships, ran
to the wall, half armed and naked. The Sun now being ready to set, they
took a forte before the wall, and rested.

And Mancinus wanting victual, sent to Piso and the rulers Mancinus in danger.
of Vtica, to help him in his danger, and to bring him food with speed. So
was he in danger, least by break of day, the Carthaginians should throw him
headlong from the rocks. Scipio Scipio at his arrival does a seat.
that night came to Vtica, and at midnight, understanding what Mancinus had
written, sounded to the battle, and sent the messengers to call the seamen of
Italy and Vtica. He bad the auntients carye victuals into the galleis, and
delivered a prisoner of Carthage, to go tell them that Scipio was coming. And
he sent to Piso horsemen after horsemen, to call him away with all speed. When
the last watch was come, he commanded to sail, and they to stand right up
in the decktes, to seem the more to the ennimyes. Thus he did.

Mancinus, when the Carthagies, early in the morning fell upon Mancinus is ^^^^
and beaten.
him, compassed three thousand being naked, with only five hundred which he had
armed: being hurt and beaten of them, he was driven into the rocks of the
wall. Then Scipios Ships were seen, sailing with all force, and every where
full of armed soldiers.

The Carthaginians hearing it by the prisoner, did not think the contrary, and
brought the Romans an help unlooked for. The Carthaginians giving place by
little and little, Scipio received Scipio. saves Mansinus.
the Romans that were in danger, into his ships, and by and by sent Mansinus
to Rome. Serranus was come to be his successor in Ser^n^^.
the navy, Scipio encamped not far off Carthage. The Carthaginians coming five
furlougs out of the town, made a trench against him. And to this trencho came
to them, Asdrubal the Asdrubal Bythias
Captain of the army abroad, and Bythias Captain of the horsemen, leading six
thousand footmen, and a thousand horsemen, practiced with time and diligence.
Scipio perceiving no order, nor good rule among the soldiers, but given to
idleness, and spoil, and rauine under Piso, and an other strange multitude
among them, that for spoil followed the bolder sort, and ran with them to
rob, going without warning, where the law of war Law of ^^m^^.
takes him for a forsaker of the army, that goes without the sound of the
Trumpe: and what offense they make, is imputed to the whole army: and the
desire of spoil to be occasion of other evils and contention among them. Many
contemning their fellows for luere, made murders, hurtes and mischief against
the laws, the which Scipio considering, and thinking never to overcome his
enemy, except he could rule his own, called them by an assemblye and going
up to the high seat, thus rebuked The exhortation of Scipio to the soldiers
that were out of order.
them: When I was a souldior with you under Manlius, I gave you experience to
witness of mine obedience: the which now being General I require of you,
having power to punish the disobedient to y^ uttermost, I have thought it good
to warn you: You know what you do, and what should I speak that I am ashamed
of Ye rob rather than make war: yea, and you scatter; not encampe, and be like
seekers of pray, and not s^egers of Cities. You will live delicatelye, yet
being in war without victory. Whereby the enemies power beyond all hope,
the little time that I have ^^n away, is grown so great* that by this
negligence, my labor is grown the greater. The causes, if I did find to be
in you. I would punish them out of hand, but because I impute them to
another, A ^^^^^forgiue all you have done till this tune. I come not to rob,
but to conquer: not to get money before victory, but first to beat mine
enemies, Go you al from the army this day that be no souldioures, except them
that shall have leave of me to tarry: and they that do go, I will not suffer to
come again till they bring some victual at for the camp and good. A time
shall be appointed, in the which they shall place their things, and the price of
them, I, and the treasorer, shall appoint. And this he said to the
superfluous. But to you that be my soldiers, let one commandment be common
to you all, in all affairs, that is, my manner and labor. For if you follow
them, you Example^ good lesson.
shall not err in your enterprises, nor be void of thanks. For now we must
labor where peril is. Let luere alone, till a fit time may serve us to
be merye. Thus do I command and the law. and they that will be obedient shall
be pertakers of much good, and they that be disobedient, shall repent. Thus
Scipio said, and by and by put away al y^ multitude of unprofitable me^, and
with them, al things that were superfluous, vain, and delicate. His army being
purged, and with reverence ready to do his commandment, he attempted a place
called Megara, in two places Megara one of the strong places of Cartbage.
in one night. Megara is a very great place in the City, joining to the wall,
into the which sending other about, he went with pike axes, ladders and bars,
unseen, and with silence. When they above heard them come near, they made a
cry from the wall, he made the country cry first, and after him the army,
and in diverse parts it was made very great. This was the first fear the
Carthaginians had, so many enemies in the sides of them, so sodainelye being
come upon them. He could do no good against the wall, though Scipio gaynerh a
Tovver.
he proved al ways, but he got a Tower, of a private Citizen, void, without
the wall, and as high as the wall, by the courage of his young men which drove
away ^^e: watch from the wall with their darts, and laying bridges and plan^es
the space between, got into Megara, and breaking down the gate, let in
Scipio. He entered with ^^ ^^en and the Carthaginians sted into Byrsae, as the
rest of the City had ^^^ taken. There was a strange cry and (...), Great
alteration in Carthog^.
some were taken, (...) their camy without, and ^a^ with other into By^^^*
(...) was, ful^ of ^^ harded and groves of fruit, divided with hedges, and
sets and briers, and with rivers running diuersely, fearing least the army
following him, should find a troublesome passage without way, and ignorantly
going in ye night, might happily fall into some traynes. blew the retreat. When
day was come, Asdrubal being angry with the taking of Megara, as many prisoners
as he had of the The cruelty of Asdrubal.
Romans he brought them to the wall, where the Romans might see what
should be done, he pulled out their eyes, their tongs, the sinowes, and privy
members, with hooks of iron: of some he pulled of the skin of their body:
some he cut the soles of their feet: of some he cut of the fingers, and
threw them down being yet alive, showing there was no hope of concord
between the Romans, and the Carthagies. Thus did he stir them to have
their hope only in fight. But it came otherwise to Cruelty out of time.
pass than he thought, for the Carthagies, by conscience of these horrible
acts, were made fearful in stead of blood, and they hated Asdruball that
had taken away hope of pardon, and specially the Senate who exclaymed
against him, as one that committed too cruel and proud deebes, in the
countries calamity. But he took certain of the Senate and killed them, and
being waxen fearful toward all, was rather a Tiranne, than a Captain, as he
that had his safety only in this, to be terrible unto them, and therefore wared
intolerable.

Scipio burned the camp of his enemies, which they left when The Carthagini^ns
fles into Byrsa.
they fled into Byrsa, and having gotten the ground between the water, he
trenched it from sea, to sea, separate from the enemy, as far as they might
cast a darte. They resisted it, and the work was from the head, five and
twenty furlongs, and was feign to work and fight at once: When he had finished
this, Works of Scipio.
he made another ditch equal to it, not far from the former, drawing it
toward the land, and after that, two more, that his whole trenche was a
quadrate. He made it strong with pale sharp at the end, and at the pale, he
made other ditches. That part that was toward Carthage, he fensed with a wall
five and twenty furlongs, in higth twelve foot, beside towers and holds, which
were set with a distaunce on the wall. The breadth was half so much as the
higth. The tower in the midst was highest of all, and in it a keep of woodde
four square, from the which he might see all that was done in the City.
This he did in twenty days and nights, all the army laboring, and working,
and fighting by turn, and not greatly passing for The great tre^ch that Scipio
mad^
their victuals. He brought the army within the tre^ch, which ser ued both as a
long wall against the enemy, when he would, and to take the relief that was
brought to Carthage by land also: for except this part that was called the
neck, the water did beat on Carthage every where. And this was the chief
cause of their hunger and destruction. For what the multitude of the
Straightness of victual in Carthage.
City had from the field, neither could it be brought for this flege, nor
strangers coming to them, for the war, only they had their victual of
Libya, a little, and by sea, when wind would serve, the rest came by land,
the which way after it was stopped, they were sore vexed with famine. Bythias
that was the Captain of horsemen, and was sent for victual a long time,
neither durst come near, nor pass Scipios trenche, but seldom and slowly
sent them food by ship, albeit the Romans navy, lay at the town, not
continuallye, nor many at once, because the sea was dangerous and tempestuuos,
and they could not approach the City, the Carthagies being on the walks, and
The only way to victual Carthage.
the waves being great there, because of the rock. Therefore the Hoyes of
Bithyas, or if any merchant came for gain caring nothing for peril, they
observed when the wind was great, and made full sail, the galleys not being
able to follow them, when they were blown in with such vehemence from the sea.
And whatsoever these ships brought, Asdrubal distributed it, Asdrubal feeds
his souldioures.
upon thirty thousand, which he had for the war, little regardyng the other
people: wherefore they were soar troubled with famine.

When Scipio perceived this, he purposed to shut the mouth of the port
toward the Weaste, and not far from the land, he made a long Trenche,
beginning from the streighte between the Fenne and the Sea called the Longue.
He wrought in the sea, and stopped the passage, making it sure with great and
thick stones, that it should not be broken of the billow. And the breadth of
she trenche, Scipio stops the part of Carthage.
was four and twenty feet, and square in the botte^^e. The Carthaginians at
the beginning con^emned the work, as a thing The Carthagies make a nevve port,
and new ships.
asking long time, and paraduenture, impossible to be done. But the army
applying it earnestly, ceassing neither day nor night, they were afraid, and
dug out another mouth on the other side of the port, into the midde sea,
where no trench could come for the depth and vehement winds: Women and
children dug within, and were not perceived: and they made ships of old
stuff, both great and little galleys, leaving for no want of courage and
boldness. They kept all so secret, that never a prisoner could tell Scipio
what they did certainly, but that there was a noise within their ports day
and night not ceassing, but to what use, they could not tell: till al being
ready, the Carthagies brake open the mouth by dauning of the day, and then
issewed with fifty galleys, Foystes and Brigandines, and many other small
vessels, well set forth for terror.

The Romans were so amazed at the sodayn opening of the mouth, and at such a
company of ships, that if the Carthagies Carthagies come forth with a new
navy, and lose their occasion. Fate irresistable
had then set upon the Romayne navy, the men being occupied at the wall, and
neither Mariner nor other present to defend it, they might have gotten all the
fame. But it was now come, that Carthage must perish. They made a show only,
with a bold countenance, and returned. The third day after, they came forth
to fight, when the Romans had their ships and other things prepared to
resist. The cry and call being made on both sides, and courage showed both of
Mariners and masters, The fight on the sea by the Carthagies.
the Carthagies, for their lives, and the Romans for the full victory, there
were many hurt and slain on both sides, til it was midde day. In this fight,
the little boats of the Carthagies, ran under the great ships sides of the
Romans, and now brake at the stemines, and now, the sternes and the oars,
and did Carthagies give place and confound themselves.
much other hurt, easily flying, and easily returning. The fight being
doubtful, and toward night, the Carthagies thought it good to retire, not as
overcome, but to prepare themselves against the next day. The small vessels
fled first, and shut the mouth, being altogether, so as the great ships
were put from the mouth, and fled to the trenche, which was made for the
Merchaunts before the wall, large to receive the packes of ye occupiers, and a
little bray was made in this war, that the enemies should not plant in so
plain a place. To this trenche, the Carthagies ships fled, for lack of a
port, and sto^e with their stemmes against their enemies, whom some resisted
from the ships, some from the trenche, and some from the bray. The Romans
easilye gave onset upon them, because they fought with ships that stood:
but their departing, for the turning of their long ships, was slow and
hurtful, so as they had little advantage, for when they turned, they were
beaten of the Carthagies.

Five ships of the Sidents that accompanied Scipio for good A feate of the
Sidents.
will, renewed the fight in this wise: They let fall their ancres aloof off in
the sea, and waying their longest Cables, being fast moored, charged their
enemy, and when they had encountered them, shortning up their Cables, retired
back, and so haled forward and backewarde, always fighting with their faces
upon the enemy.

The rest of the navy, seeing ye devise of the Sidents, followed it, and did
their enemies much hurt, night making an end. The rest of the Carthage ships
fled into the City. Scipio by day took the trench, for it was a place fit to
annoy the port. Therefore bea^ing the bray with his rams, and bringing many
engines, he took part of it. The Carthagies, although they were afflycted with
famine and diverse evils, they ran upon the Romans engines in the night, not
by land, for there was no way, nor by ship, for the sea was shallowe, but
naked, with linckes not light, that they should not be seen a far off. They
came by sea where no man would have thought, some to the breasts waded The
Carthagies run upon the Romans munition with desperatnesse.
in the shalows, some swamme, til they came to the engines, they threw the
fire, and were perceived, receiving much hurt, because they were naked, and did
much by their boldness, for being stroke on the breasts and faces, with darts
and spears, they would not give place, as wild beasts offering themselves to
the strikers, til they had set the artillery on fire, and driven the Romans
away that kept, them with confusion, as there was Fear in the Romans Camp.
Scipio is forced to kill his own solliors to keep them sro^ flying.
such fear and trouble in the Camp and whole army, as had not been before,
and all by the fury of naked enemies. Wherefore Scipio being afraid, came
forth with his horsemen, and commanded to beat them down that would not leave
their flight, And some he bear down and killed, till they returned to the
Camp, for necessity to save themselves, and watched that night in arms,
fearing the desperation of the enemies, who when they had burned the
artillery, swamme home again.

When it was day, the Carthaginians being sure from the engines, builded up
the fore part of the wall again, and made many Towers upon it, by a certain
distaunce. The Romans made other engines, and erected a trenche against the
Towers. The Carthagies trenche gotten.
making fire work of pitche and sulphur, and threw them upon y^ enemy. And
when they had burned many of the Towers, they chased the Carthaginians that
fled. But where the ground was slippery with blood and mire, they left the
chase of themselves. Scipio end miageth the Carthaginians by land.
Scipio having got all the trench, compassed it with a ditch, and with a wall
of stone, not very near, nor far off the ennimies. And when the wall was
up, he put in four thousand, which did not much pass of the enemy,
throwing darts and weapons upon them with contempt, and because they were of
like height, they were sure to hit them. And thus the Summer was spente. Winter
being come, Scipio determined to take from the Carthaginians, all the power and
friends that they had by land, and sent some one way, and some another, and
he himself went to Nepheris by water, where Diogenes that favored Asdrubal,
lay in camp, and sent C. Lalius thither by land. When they were come, they
encamped two furlongs from Diogenes. There he left Gelossa to molest The
asiaulte at ^^pheris.
Diogenes continually, and returned to Carthage, and so used to go between
Carthage and Nepheris, to see the doings. Two of Diogenes Towers fell, wherefore
Scipio went and laid a. M. choice seuldiors behind in an ambush, and brought.
3000. tried men against the front, and willed them to give the assault at the
broken towers, not al at once, but by ranckes, still following one another, that
the former being put back, should not hinder them that followed.

The Cry being great, and the fraye hot, all the Libyans turned to the
defense, the^ the thousand, as was appointed the^, came forth, and were not
seen: and when the first were entered they were soon perceived: wherefore the
Libyans fled, not seeing how many they were, but thinking they had bin many mo^
tha^ they were. Celossa set upon the^ with his Numidians and Elepha^ts, and
made great slaughter, so as there were killed, lxx. M. with Nepheris tak^^
with a great slaughter.
them of the country, and 10000 taken, and 4000. fied The^ was the City of
Nepheris taken, in xxij. days with great difficulty, for the winter and the
moist place: and this feate did chiefly cause the destruction of Carthage. For
this army sent them victuals, and by this camp, the Libyans were the bolder to
come abroad, but when it was taken, the other places of Libya yielded to
Scipios Captains without any business: and victual was to seek at Victual
kept ^^^ Carthage.
Carthage, neither having it out of Libya, being an other man's power, nor by
sea, because of the war and winter season.

In the beginning of the spring, Scipio set upon Byrsa, and the port called
Agatho, Asdrubal in the night burned that part of Agatho Agatho one of the
port of Carthage.
that was quadrate, and thinking that Scipio would have come upon him there, he
being ready to resist with the Carthagies, Laelius on the other side, set on
that part which was round. Laelius assault.
And shoute being made as in a victory, they were afraid, and the Romans
without dread, clymed up, and set their beams, engines and bridges, upon the
broken places, the warders being weak in bodies for hunger, and out of heart.
The wall yt was about Cat^on^ being taken, y^ market place that was nigh,
Scipio also took, and because he could not pass further being night, he
remained in arms till it was day, which being come he called other 3000. fresh
men, and they went into Apollos temple, and stale his picture, and the roufe
covered with leaves of gold, waying a M. ^alents, cutting it with their swords,
their captains for bidding them, til they had divided it, and then went to
their business. Scipio was earnestly bent to take Byrsa, which was ye
stro^gest place of Three streete^ to Byrsa.
the City, and the most part was got into it. And where there was three ways
from y^ market place to it, many houses and very high were on every side,
where y^ Romans being shot at, they took y^ first of the^, and there defended
themselves from the next, and when they had gotten them, they laid plan^kes
and boardes between the streygthes of them, and went as upon bridges. And the
battle The miserable murder.
was now, as upon chambers, and upon the streightes, as they met there. All
was filled with sighs, cries, and lamentes for diverse passions, some being
killed at hand, and some thrown down from the loftes to the ground, and
some received upon the spears being held up, or swords, or pykes. Nothing was
burned, for them that were on the Solares, till Scipto came to Byrsa. The
attempt against Byrsa.


Then were three narrow places burned at once, and as they were burned, they
were hidden to go to the next, that the army might have an easy way. An other
sight full of grief there was Grievous fight.
of the flaming fire consuming all, of men and houses, not falling by little
and little, but by heaps violentlye overthrown: a great noise followed, for
men some dead, some alive, specially old men, women, and children that fell
with the stones, that were hid in the secret places, some, full of wounds,
some half burned, making most pitiful cry. Other driven from the solares,
fell with the fire and timber, being broken and torn horiblye diverse ways to
behold. Yet was not this y^ end of y^ evils. For ye masons with their a^es and
ra^mers, and some with the points of their forkes, did rake the dead, and the
living also, into holowe places of the earth, turning and tossing them like
stones and timber. The holes were filled with men, turned vpside down. Some
were set on their heads, with their legs shaking above the ground. Some with
their feet downewarde, stood with their heads above the ground. The horses
treading upon them, brake their faces and their brains, not for that they were
put on by other, but of purpose, and the makers of y^ way, did all things of
purpose, the vehemence of the fight, and the glory of the victory that was at
hand, and the forwardenesse of the army, the Trumpets and the criers, making
noise every where, the Tribunes and the Capitaines, going with their men, and
encouraging them, made all men furious, and not to pass of that they did see
for great desire. This continued in this broyle six days and nights, ever
fresh men being set in, that they should not be ouerladen with watch and
labor, and slaughter, and grievous fight. But Scipio continued without
ceassing, encouragyng them, without sleep, and Scipios pain and abstinence.
taking meat as he went about his business, till being tired he stayed and
stood above to see what was done. Many being yet slain, and the evil like
to continue longer, some the seventh day fled with garlandes, such as were
used for Aesculapius, who had a temple in the Castle most rich and goodly.
Aesculapius temple, Carthagies ask pardon and. 50, thousand go out of Byrsa.
They desiring pardon, prayed Scipio yt they that would go out of the Castle
might have their lives only. He granted it, the fugitives only except, and
there came forth by and by fifty thousand men and women, being thrust together
in a marvelous straightness, whom he commanded to be kept. The runnawayes
Renavvayes of Rome.
of Rome which were about nine hundred, being without al hope, fled into
Aesculapius temple, with Asdrubal, his wife and two male children, from whence
they fought fiercely, although they were but few, from the high and rockye
places of the temple, to the which, in time of peace, men went up three score
pair of stayres. But when hunger, watch, fear, and pain of the evil at hand
beset them, they left the low part of the temple, and fled to the top of
it, in the which time, Asdrubal Asdrubal flies to Scipio.
fled secretly to Scipio with branches of Olive. Scipio put him at his feet,
and showed him to the runnawayes, which when they saw, they desired a silence
to be given them, which being done, they reviled Asdrubal many and diverse
ways, and then burned the temple and themselves. And they say that The
fugitives set themselves, on fire.
the wife of Asdruball, when the fire took, being over against Scipio, in as
good behavior as the time would suffer, and showing her children, said in the
hearing of Scipio: To the (O Romayne,) there is no revenge of god, for thou
do according to y^ order of war. But Asdrubal my husband, the betrayer of
his country, of the temples, and of me and his children, ye gods of Carthage
shall punish, and thou, with the gods. And turning to Asdrubal, said: Thou
wicked, unfaithful, and most cowarde of al men, me, and these children, this
fire shall burye, but thou shall honor the triumph, that art the great
Captain of Carthage, what pain shall thou not suffer, by him, before whom
thou now kneelest? When she had thus vpbraided him, she killed her children,
and threw them in the fire, and her self after. Thus The death of Asdrubals
wife.
they say Asdrubals wife spoke, and died, which had rather have bin fit for
Asdrubal himself to have done.

Scipio seeing the City that had continued seven hundredth years, ruling
over so many nations about them of such power on the land, and also of
ships by sea, and Islands in the same, full of armor, navy, Elephants and
money, equal with the greatest kingdoms, and in boldness and courage
surpassing: the which, when they were spoiled of their ships, and al their
armor, yet abode the war three whole years, with so great famine. Then
seeing it utterly destroyed by extreme siege, they say he wept, and openly
pitied*them that were overcome, calling to his Scipio vvrepeth at the sight of
Carthage ouerchrovvne. Mutations of states in the world.
remembrance, and perceiving, that al cities, nations and kingdoms, were
subject to mutation, as the destinies of men. So suffered Troy a noble city.
So suffered the Assyrians, the Medians, and Persians, which were the great
Monarchs of the world, and lastly, the most glorious state of Macedonie, so
that either of purpose, or by chance, this word fell from him.

The day shall come when mighty Troy must fall, The words of Scipio.

And Priamus and his warlike nation all.
Polibius that was his Schoolemaister, did ask him freely, what he meant by
that speech, and that he said, not for bearing to name his own country
plainly, of the which he was afraid for the Polibius was schoolemaister ^^
Scipio borne in Arcadia.
alteration of men. Thus does Polibius write of him that heard him. When
Carthage was taken, Scipio gave the soldiers leave for certain days to
spoil it, only excepting gold, silver, and holy things. Then he gave gifts
to al, except to them that had Scipio gives the spoil to the soldioures.
Scipio gives n^o gifts to them that spoiled Appollo.
spoiled Appollos Temple. Then he sent a swift ship laden with spoils, to
signify the victory at Rome. He sent into Sicilie, that all the sacred and
public things, that the Carthagies had taken from them in the war, which they
could challenge and know, should be restored, which got him great love of the
people, as one, that with The goodness of Scipio.
authority used humanity, dividing the spoil that remained to be sold, he
sacrificed the unprofitable ship-armes and engines, to Mars and Minerua, gyrded
after the Roman manner. They at Rome seeing the Ships, and learning the
news, in the evening, The Roman make feasts of the report of the nevves.
came into the streets, and spente all that night in joy and embracements,
as now made free of fear, now ruling other with safety, not having their
City firm and sure, and having such a victory, as they never had the like,
Many noble feats came to their remembrance, what their fathers had
Remembrance of former war in Rome.
done in Macedonia, in Iberia, and against Antiochus the great, and in Italy it
self: but no war was so fearful unto them as this at their own doors, for
the manhood, policy and boldness of the enemy, and the more dangerous for
their unfaithfulness. They rehearsed what they had suffered of y^ Carthagies in
Sicelie, Iberia and Italy it self, sixteen years, when Annibal took.iij.
hundred Cities, and ouerthrewe in fight only three hundred thousand men,
many times approaching to the City, and putting that in great fear: for all
the which, they were like men beside themselves, for the victory, that was
beyond their hope. And again, they asked one of another, if Carthage were
taken in deed? They spente all the night in talk, how the armor was taken
from them, and how they, beyond all hope, made more. How their ships were
taken from them, and how they made a new navy of old matter: how the mouth
of the port was shut, and how in few days they opened another, and how
high the walls were about the mouth, and the greatness of the stones, and
the fire which many times they brought against the Engines: and set out a
plat of all the war, as though they had then seen it done, and expressed
the fantasies of their minds with the motions of their bodies, thinking they
saw Scipio with the scalyng ladders, with the ships at the gates, at the
fyghtes ever occupied. Thus did the Remaynes spend the night.

When day was come, sacrifices and feasts were made to the Supplications made
at Rome. Ten men sent into Libya.
Gods by the companies, and plays with the^, and diverse shows. The Senate sent
ten of the best of them into Libya, to appoint that country with Scipio. They
commanded that Scipio should destroy The inhabita^ce of Carthage forbidden.
that was left in Carthage, and forbadde any man to dwell there. They accused al
them that should dwell in Byrsa, or in the place y^ was called Megara. But to
come thither they did not forbid. Puni^hments.
So many cities as help the enemies, they commanded to destroy, Rewards.
and to give to cities that were friends to y^ Romans, the land that was
conquered: and chiefly to Vtica, that, which was as far as Carthage and Hippo,
on both sides. The other they made tributarie, as well lands as bodies, men and
women alike, and determined to send every year a President to them from Rome.
When they had done this, they sailed to Rome. Scipio having done all things
accordingly, finished the sacrifices, and the plays for the victory. And
things being ordered, he sailed home, and made as (...) tri^pheth.
passing a triumph, as ever manne did, full of gold and monuments of holy
things, which the Carthaginians in so long time, and so often victories had
brought from all the world into Libya. Pseudophilippus Andrs^u^ counterfaited
to he Philippe^ son King of Macedonie. Mummius was Corinth. C. Gracchus
was brother to Sempro^us Gracchus. The pla^ of the habitation at Carthage is
confounded.
This happened when they triumphed of Macedonia the third time. Andrisco that
counterfa^ted himself to be Philips son being overcome, and the first of
Grecia by Mummius. And this was about y^ CLX. Olympiade. Afterward, when Caius
Gracchus was Tribune in Rome, and Insurrection being made for want, he thought
good to se^d. 6000 to inhabit in Libya. And when they had drawn the plat about
Carthage, the Wolves destroyed all the plat, and confounded it. So the Senate
refrained from seding that habitatio^. But again in time, when Caius Caesar,
who was made the second Dictator, after his victory, had driven Pompey into
Egypt, and Pompe^ friends from Aegipt to Libya, they say, when he encamped A
vision that Caesar had, caused a nevve city to be made, not fa^re from the
old, by his successo^ Octauius. The Author calls Augustus Julius Caesar.
at Carthage, a mighty army appeared to him in his sleep, weeping, which
troubling him, he called to remembrance, and made a note, that Carthage should
be inhabited. And not long after, the poor soldiers requiring land of him at
Rome, he gave order that some should be sent to Carthage and some to Corinth,
but he being shortly after killed in the Senate house of his enemies, his son
Caesar, called Augustus, finding three remembra^ces of his father, sent an
inhabitation of that Carthage, that now is, as nigh the old as might be, to
avoid the old execration. The Romans sent thither. 3000. to inhabit, and
to place the rest in the country about. Thus Libya, that was under Carthage,
was conquered of the Romans, and Carthage des^royed, and inhabited again
after the destruction two hundred and two years.

The end of the Roman vvarres with the Carthaginians
Appianus Alexandrinus, of the Roman wars with the Parthians.
AFter them that followed Po^pey to rule Syria being overcome, Gabinius an
officer of the Romans, was sent to govern the same. He marching against the
Arabians, Mithridates King of Parthia, Part^^^, a Region of Assyria, the
inhabitaunce, of the which came out of Syria.
^eing driven out of his kingdom by ^rodes his brother, turned him from the
Arabians to the Parthians. But Ptolomeus the eleauenth King of Aegipt persuaded
him by money, to leave the Parthians, and make war upon Alexandria. And he
ouercomming them of Alexandria, Gabinius is banished for making vvar^e upon
Aegipt.
restored Prolomeus to his kingdom, but being banished of the Romans, because
he made war against the Aegiptians, which they accounted unjust, because it
was forbidden by Sybyllas books, he fled. After Gabinius, I think, Crassus
governed Crassus.
Syria, and making war upon the Parthians, was overthrown Bibulus.
with great calamity, after whom Bibulus being president, the Parthians
inuated Syria. And in the time of Saxa ruling after Bibulus, Saxa.
they ran as far as Ionia, the Romans being at debate among themselves.
They ^idde no great thing worthy of writing, rather like robbers than
warriors. These things followed after the overthrow of Crassus, by y^ which
they took so great boldness, which was repressed by Antony. How Crassus made
his voyage against them, we think it meet to show.

When the day of election of chief officers was come, there were three
Competitors of the Consul^hippe, Caius Caesar, Pompey the Great, and Crassus
called Marcus. These rejecting Cicero, and Caesar* Pompey* Crassus.
Ca^^ and other resisters, by force got the office, and gave Caesar flue
years more, to be Lieutenaunt of France. C^ssius and Pompey casting lottes
for the provinces of Spain and Syria, Spain fell to Pro^nces by lotte.
Pompey, and Syria to Cr^ssus. The lot fell acceptable unto both. For the
people would have Pompey from the City, and Pompey Pompey, Vxorius.
loving his wife, was desirous to farrye most there. Crassus showed openly
that he was glad that the lot had so fallen, thinking Crassus proud of his
province.
no greater felicity could hap unto him than this province, insomuchas he
could not be quiet, but made great auauntes and brags among his friends
otherwise in all his life being a very small boaster or setter forth of
himself. But now being puffed and exalted, he had not only an hope to get
Parthia to Syria, and The Parthians were not in the decree. Lucullus.
Tigranes. Pompey.
up make it the bounds of his Dominion, making but a play of that Lucullus
did against Tigranes, or Pompey against Mithridates, but also to win
Bactria and Indus, and all beyond the Sea. Yet in the decree of war, the
Parthians were not contained.

Every man did fear that Crassus would meddle with it. And Caesar wrote
letters, praising his purpose, and provoking him to the war.

But when Atteius the Tribune did stop his voyage with threats, and many
consented to him, being grieved that any man should make war upon men that
had offended nothing, but also were in league, Crassus was afraid, and prayed
Pompey Caesar stirs Crassus to the war of the Paribians.
to help to set him forward: For great was the peoples opinion of him.
Notwythstanding, when he saw many ready to resist and exclame, then with a
gentle look and countenance he appeased the^, y^ they were quiet, and suffered
them to pass. Yet Atteius stopped them first with voice, forbidding and
protesting not to go. Then he commanded the officer to lay hands upon his body
and deteine him: which when the other Tribunes would not suffer, he let go
Crassus.

Atteius ran to the gate, and set there a burning harth, and as Execrations
again^ste Crassus.
Crassus came with insense and sacrifice, he pronounced sharp execrations, and
horrible, calling and naming cruel and strange Curses not to be used.
Gods therewith. The Romans think that these curses secret and ancient have
such a power, as no man can avoid them against whom they be made, and that
they do naught that use them. Therefore they be not used unadvisedly, nor in
many cases. And Atteius bla^ed.
many blamed Atteius, that by this cursing of Crass^s he brought the City
into misfortune. Crassus for all this went to Br^^d^^se, the Sea being yet
vnnauigable for the winter* and would not tarry the time, but took the Sea,
and lost many Ships.

And receiving an other power of footmen, he led them alongest Galatia, and
finding King (...) a very old manne, Galatia is Asia the less.
building of a City, he iested, saying: O King, you begin to build at
twelve of the clock. The King laughing said: And you (O Gen(...) as I can
see, go not against the Parthians A jest betvveen Deiotarus and Crassus* Age
of Crassus.
very early* For Crassus was threescore years of age, when he went, and older
to see to, than he was indeed. Marching forth, matters at the first tell ^^te
according to his hope. For easilye he made a bridge over Euphrates, and
conveyed over his army safely, and got many Cities in Mesopotamia, by
yielding unto him. In one of them, Appollonius was Tyranne, who had slain one
hundred soldiers. He brought his power thither, and wanne it, took the money,
and sold the men.

The Greeks call the City Zenodotium. By taking of this, Zenodotium a ^^tie
of Osr^^ne.
he would needs be called Imperator of his souldioures, which caused much
discredit unto him, and was the less esteemed, as one that distrusted of any
great victory, taking occasion of so little matter.

He set garrisons in the Cities that were taken, the number whereof, was
seven thousand footemenne, and one thousand horse. And he went into Syria
to winter, where his son Crassus son from Caesar.
came to him from Caesar out of France, rewarded with the great honors of
a souldioure, bringing one thousand picked horsemen. And this was the first
great error of Crassus, after the great offense of leading his army, that
where he ought Error of Crassus.
to have gone to Babylon and Seleucia, Cities ever ennimies to the Parthians,
he gave the ennimies time to prepare themselves. Babylon the chie^ city of
Chaldea.
His tarrying in Syria was blamed, being rather like a receyuer of Rentes,
than a Captain of Souldioures.

He did not search the number of his soldiers, nor use them with exercises,
but he gathered the revenues of Cities, and spent many days in waying and
peysing the Gods money, in the Hierapolis is ^^ec^ against L^odici^.
holy City, appointyng Cities and Princes to find him soldiers, and after
sending them away again for money, whereby he came into contempt and disdain.
The first token he had of this Goddess, which some call Venus, some Iun^, some
name ^ir The Godde ^^ of H^e^apolis. N^t^^re.
Nature, the beginning and seed to al things ministering cause by moisture: for
going onte of the Temple, first young Crassus fell at the doors. Then the old
man fell upon him.

Now gathering his power from the (...) places, Ambassadors came to him from
Arsaces, with a brrefe speech, for thus The Parthians message to Crassus.
Arsaces King of Parth^^, for whose good rule, the Parth^ans call all their
Kings Arsaces. Sele^cia, one in Syria Antiochena other at E^phra^es, third at
Belu^.
he said: If the army were sent against them of the Romans, the war was
made contrary to the league, and never would end. But if he, without
authority of his country, and for his own gain, (as they heard) did come
in arms against the Parthians, and take their land, Arsaces would temper
himself, and pity Crassus age, and let the Romans go, that were rather like a
garrison, than an army. Crassus swelling at this, ^ayde, he would make an
answer at Seleucide.

Then the most ancient of the Ambassadors Vagise, she wing the bare palm of
his hollow hand, said: Sooner shall hairs The Italian text varieth.
grow here, than thou shall see Seleucia. Thus he bold^lye spoke, signifying,
that Orodes must first be overcome.

They ^f the Roman garrisons in the Cities of Mesopotamia, escaping with much
danger, did tell fearful matter, that they A sharp answer
saw the multitude of their enemies and their exercises, and how they had
fortified their Cities, and some of purpose tell^ng all things to the
uttermost, that they were v^r^ su^table when they caine to ^^gh^, and
unrecoverable when they fled. Report encrea* Eng fear.


Their arrows ^^^^^te would prevent the sight, and before they could see the
shooter, he would be at hand to strike them thorowo. The men of arms beat
down all before them, and could not be resisted. When the army heard this,
they began A^meni^ is betvveene I^^rus and (...). Capa^^^^ a Region o^ Pontus.
called Leucosyri^.
to faint, thinking the Parthians had differed nothing from the Arn^^nians or
Cappodocians, whom Lucu^lus overcame without any resistaunce, therefore
thought all the pain should be in the long journey. But when they should come
to blows, the enemies would not abide them, whereas now otherwise than they
supposed, they had a great travail and danger in hand, insomuche, as some of
the officers of the Camp, thought it good to stay Crassus, and to take a new
advise of all the matter, and secreatlye the Masters of the Sacrifices, showed
that many evil and hard tokens appeared to Crassus in the Sacrifices:
Sacrifices shevve evil tokens.
But he, neither would hear them, nor no other, but them that exhorted him
to go forward. Among the which, Artabases King of Armenia did not let to
provoke him, who Art^base^ King of Armenia and dued with all le^^^ng, whom
Antony took by treason, and carried him in triuniphe at Alexandria to please
Cleopatra. Crassus refuses good counsel.
was come to the Camp, with six thousand horsememe, and these were called
the Guarde and Defense of the King promisyng other ten thousand men of
arms, and three thousand footemenne at his charges. He persuaded Crassus to
invade Parthia by Armenia, whereby he should lead his army not only safely,
he ministering all things for him, but also through Mountains and continual
hills, places combersome to the Parthian horsemenne, wherein consistes all
their strength* Cr^ssus praised the good will of him, and his goodly
preparation, yet he said he would enter by Mesepotan^ia, where he had left
many good Roman Soldiers, and the Armenian went his way.

Crassus ^^dde his army over a bridge, when many terrible ^^i^^ tokens to
Crassus.
thunders brake out, and great lightnings flashed in the faces of the
Soldiers, and a wind mixed with a cloudy perry arose, and brake and consumed
much of the matter of the made bridge. And the place that was appointed for
the Camp, was twice stricken with lightnyng. An borse of the Generals, very
fair cladde, carrying a way the rider by violence, was or owned in their
sight. And they say that the chief Standerd being first taken of the bearer,
did turn back of it self. Beside this, it chanced, that after* a journey,
when meat should be given the Soldiers, first of all, they had L^ntilles
and Soppes, which the Romans think (...) and be used at burialls. And when
Crassus made his Oration, his voice failed him, which the army took heavily.
He said he had cut down the bridge, that no man should return over it. The
which word being uncomely spoken, where A folish word pa^^eth Crassus.
he should have repeated it and declared it to them that were made afraid by
it, he would not do it for very frowardness. At last when he had killed the
sacrifice to make the sol^mne view of his army, and the minister given him
the bowels, they fell out of his hands: at the which, they that were present
being most grieved, he smiled, saying: These ^e the incommodities of age, but
my weapon shall never fall our of my hands. Crassus excuses ^^s weakness.
Then he led his army by the floude, having seven legiens, and little less
than four thousand horse, and a number of shot, equal to them.

The skoutes that went to see the way, returned and brought word, that the
country was void of men, but that there were prints of horse feet, that were
gone back. Whereat Crassus took good hope, and all the soldiers began to
Crassus in a vain hope. Seleucia, a plentiful place.
despise the Parthians, as afraid to come to hands: yet Cassi^^ and others
spoke to Crassus, persuading him to stay his men in some City where a
garrison was, till he was better instructed of the enemies force, if not, that
he would go to Seleucia by the floude, where he should have abundance of The
Counsel of Cassius not followed.
victuals, for the soldiers to be sold, and also a defense and safegarde for
the army, not to be environed, for the floude* being ever equal to fight
with the enimye at the face.

Crassus considering and pondering these things: there Acbar^s uses craft
with Crassus.
came to him a president of Arabi^, Acbaros by name, a subtle and dissembling
manne, the greatest prouoker of evil fortune, that was ^ente to their
destruction. Some of them that had served under Pompey, knew him, receyuiug
some humanity at his hand, and showing to be a friend to the Romans. He
was sent to Crassus, by y^ consent of the kings counsel, to turn him, if he
could, from the floude and foot of the hills, into the plain field, where he
might be compassed. For they devised to do any other thing, rather than to come
to fight ^yth she Romans at hand.

This Acbarus came to Crassus, and said probablye, first of the praise of
Pompey, that was his benefactoure, then of Crassas, blaming him, that having so
great a power Acbarus deceyneth Crassus.
he lost time in delay and preparation, as though he had need of armor, and
not rather of hands and ^ooif^e f^^te, against me^ that already seek and
gather their most precious riches, to carry them into S^ythia and Hircania:
but, said he, if you will S^ythia in Asia. Hir^ania, a play ^ region most
abundant.
fight, you must do it quicklye, before the whole power be gathered, the king
taking heart to him again. And now Suren^s Sillaces, comes to make the
war against you, but the king will not be seen. Al these were lies.

For the king went straight with his power to invade Armenia, The Fa^^bian king
inuadeth Armenia and se^deth Surenas against the Romans.
and punish Artabaze^, and sent Surenas against the Romans, not in contempt
of them (as some say) for it was not like, that he would contemn Crassus sent
against him and one of the chief Romans, and go against Artabazes to
destroy the towns of Armenia. But, I think he was afraid of the danger,
and lay in wait to see the end, and appointed Surena, being otherwise expert
and acquainted with the war. For Surenas was none of the common sort, but in
riches Surena^ is sen^ against Crassus.
and glory, and blood, next the King, and the chief of Parthia: in strength
and youth, in beautye and goodlynesse of the body, inferior to none. He
carried always with him a thousand laden Camels, and two hundred chariots of
Concubines, and a thousand men of arms, and more light horsemen. So as he had
of his tenaunts and servants, no less than ten thousand horse.

And as touching his blood, it was given him from the beginning, The nobility
of Surenas.
to set the Crown upon the kings head* when a new king was made* He called
Orodes out of exile into his Kingdom: Orodes is brought out of exile, by
Suren^^.
he took the great city of Seleucia, and was the first that s^aled the walls,
and with his own hand repulsed them that resisted, and was not yet thyrty,
years of age, yet had the greatest glory for wisdom and experience, by the
which, he did not a little beguile Crassus, first thorough his pride and
boldness, and after The text varieth.
by his fear and adversity, easily to be entrapped.

Acbarus that had brought Crassus from the flood into the plain fields,
without woodde and water, and without any end to rest as it appeared, and not
only traveled with thirst and dificultie, but also with an uncomfortable
prospect to the eye, seeing neither tree, nor river, nor apparaunce of hyl, nor
growing of grass, but a very shape like a sea of fearful deserts, did besette
the army. And then the cra^te began to be espied.

Furthermore, there came messengers from Artabazes the Artabazes signifies he
is invaded.
king of Armenia, showing how he was deteyned with great war, Orodes having
invaded him: and that he could send no help to Crassus. Yet he wished him,
in any wise to turn, and make his way by Armenia, that they together might
go against Orodes king of Part^^^.
Orodes, if not, always to march and encampe so, as he might avoid the
horsemen, and to go by the hills. Crassus writing nothing again, for anger,
and strangeness, answered, Crassus makes a froward aunsvvere.
that now he had no leisure to deal with Armenia, but when he returned, he
would punish Artabazes for his treason. Cassius and they, were again grieved,
and leaving Crassus, that would not hear good Counsel, they plainly rebuked
Acbarus. Crassus mis^iketh the journey.


O you naughty wight, O you most wicked man, who brought thee to us: with what
passion or witchcraftes have thou made Crassus to lead his army by deserts and
vglye wilderness, fitter for an Archtheefe of Numidia, than a chief general
of the Romans?

Arbarus a crafty man, did speak them fair, and comforted Arbarus deceives
him and all the rest.
and exhorted them, to endure a while, and riding among the soldiers, he
i^sted at them. You think you were going by Campania, by fountains, rivers,
shadows, brooks and brayes, and ostanes, all the ways.

Do you remember that you go by confines of Arabia and Arabia is two parts
b^r^nne. Assiria the furthest part of Sy^^^.
Assiria. Thus did Acbarus play the s^holer among the Romans, and before his
craft was perceived, he road about not unknown to Crassus, but agreeing to it,
as though he would provide and defeat the enemies. It is said, that Crassus
that More tokens of ^uil.
day came not abroad in purple, as the manner was of a Roman General, but
in a black garmente, the which he changed again, when he perceived it. Some
of the ensignebearers could not without great labor pull up their ensigns,
they stuck so fast. Crassus laughing, went the faster, and bad the legions
follow the horsemen. But then came some of the espyes that had bin abroad, in
haste, showing that their fellows were killed of the enemies, and they only
escaped, and that the ennimies came on, with great power and speed. This
troubled them all, and Crassus most of all, so as he set his men in order, not
very orderlye. But Cassius moved him to s^t his legions as thin as he could,
to fill the plain, for fear of compassing, and divide the horsemen into wings.
Then he altered and made the same to serve both ways, and a square battle,
and every of the ^^des going on with twelve bands, and with a troop of
horsemen, that no part should be void of the help of horsemen, but on
eueryside be a like defended for the fight. He appointed one wing to Cassius,
and an other to young Crassus, and he went in the midst* Thus marching, they
came to a river, which they call Balissus, not very great, nor full of water,
but acceptable to the Balissus.
soldiers, in that hot and dry journey, with so great pain and p^^^rie of
water.

Many of the Captains thought it good to stay there, til certain knowledge
were come* of the enemies force and purpose, and when day was come, to go
against them.

But Crassus commanded his son and the horsemen with him to go on, and to be
ready for the fight. He badde them that did ^a^^* to eat and drink as they
kept their order, and before all was well done, he led on, not with leisure,
nor pausing* as they that should fight, but with much speed and haste, till
they saw their enemies, not in so great a show, neither appearing many, nor
fearful to the Romans. For Sir^^^^ had put the multitude behind, and
hydden the bryghtnesse of the^^ ^arne^^^, with their ^lo^^s and skins. After
they were come nygh, and a token given of the Captains, first they filled all
The Parthians manner in going to fight.
the plain with barbarous noise and fearful shoutes. For the Parthians go
not to battle with horns and trumpets, out with drums, in many places at
once, made of leather, and hollow* stretched with iron bars, and beaten upon
continually. This makes a noise holow and deep, like the roaring of wild
beasts, intermedled with the sharpness of thunder, as nothing could be hard
for the sense of hearing, brings most trouble to the mind, and by it is
soonest moved, and most troubles the understanding. The Romans being
astonished at this noise, they of Parthia threw away the couers of their
harness suddenly, and appeared shyning with ^at^ and armoure made of the
best steel and bright, and the horsemen barded with Caparison likewise. The
goodliest and the greatest was Surenas.
Surenas, he being in finesse of his w^mannish array not like the glory of his
valiantness, but rather decked after the Median fashion, in the trymming of
his person, and division of his hair. The other Parthians being ugly of
purpose, to the terror sh^dding of their hear. First they gave y^ onset with
their spears, to divide and break the fore ward. But when they saw the
firmness of the battle, and the stable abiding of the men, they went back, as
though they would have scattered and divided their order: and they compassed
the battle in a circle, and went about it. Crassus commanded the light
h^r^^sse to give charge upon them. They went not far, but they were
ouerlaide with shot, and they turned again, and thruste among the The
beginning of disorder in the Romans Camp.
legions, and gave the beginning of disorder and fear, to them that saw the
might of the shot, and the continual course, breaking harness, and bearing
down alike the unarmed and well armed. The Parthians distant a little, began
to shoot at all ^^^ntures, not directing their shot, for the Romans
battle was so thick, as they could not mysse though they would, gyuing
continual hurt and wounds with their strong and great bows, and with their
violence of the drawing, driving the arrow the stronger. This was the undoing
of the Romans, for continuing in their order, they were stricken, and trying to
go upon their ennimy, or to keep close again, they suffered alike.

The Parthians, when they shot, fled, and this they think The Parthians
manner in the vva^^e.
the best ^eate according to the Scythians, being a most wise part, to hurt
other, and save themselves, and hid the shame of their fleeing, by this
pretense. So long as the Romans hoped, The Parthians re^^e their shot.
that their shot being done, they would have come to hands, they abode it: but
when they saw numbers of Camells come laden with new shot, ^o the which,
they that first spente their arrows, went to receive more, then Crassus
himself thought it would have no end. Wherefore he sent messengers to his
son, that he should set upon the ennimie, before they were enclosed, for
they were most busy upon him, and rode about him, to come upon his back. The
young man took.xiij. C. horse, whereof a thousand were Caesar's, and ^ight bands
of the next footmen, and badde them set upon the^r enemies. The Parthians that
were foremoste, either because they were in myrie ground, (as some say,) or
because they would draw Crassus by policy, as far as they could, turned
and fled. Then young Crassus ^rying, as though they Young* Crassus with
Censorinus and M^gaba^^us
would not have turned again, gave them the chase, and with him Censorinus,
and M^gaba^^us: these passed in valiantnes and strength, Censorinus being of
the order of a Senatoure and eloquent, friend to young Crassus, and of like age.
The horsemen going on, the footmen followed with courage and fearfulness of
hope, for they thought to have the victory by the chase. They had not gone
far, but they perceived the deceit. They that seemed to ^^ee, turned again,
many ^^ coming to them. Then they stayed, thinking they would have come to
hands with them, because they were so few: but they set the men of arms upon
the Romans, and with their other horse, confusedlye rode upon them, troubling
the plain, raising heaps of Sand, and making all full of duste, that the
Romans could neither see nor speak. So being driven and thruste The Romane^
killed.
together, they were overthrown and dyed, not easily, nor a short death, but
with shriking and sorrowful manner, laboring to break the arowes in their
wounds, proving by violence, to pull out the forked heads that were enited
their veins and stnowes, they fore and lamented themselves. When many were
thus dead, they that were alive were unprofitable to help, and Romans unable
to help.
when as Publius exhorted them to set upon the men of arms, they showed their
hands nailed to their shieldes, and their feet fastened to the ground, that
they could neither fly nor fight. Then he brought his horsemen fiercely upon
them, but he was too weak, stryking and defendyng both at once, with weak and
little spears, upon the strong armor of steel, and his Galatians being
stryken with long spears upon their unarmed bodies: in them he trusted much,
and by them he did marvelous feats. For they took the spears, and bare down
the men from their horse, which could not be moved for the weight The
valiantnes of the Galatians.
of their harness. Many left their horses, and stroke their enemies horses in
the bellies, the which for pain threw off their ryders, and trod upon them
and their enemies, till they dyed also. But the heat and thirst, most troubled
the Galathians, being accustomed to neither of them, and many of them having
left their horses, with their staves, fought with the contrary. Therefore they
did what they could to have gotten to the legions, having Publius Crassus sore
vvounded.
Publius among them, being evil bestadde for his wounds: and seeing an hill of
sand not far off, they went thither, putting their horse in the midst, and
defending the outward parts with their Targets, they thought they might
easilye put back the Barbarians: but it came otherwise to pass, for being in
the plain, the former kept the hindermost from hurt: but when they went to a
mounting ground, and all was in the danger, and they that came behind most
of all, there was none escaped, but al were shot indifferently, lamenting
their deaths void of revenge and glory. There were about Publius, Carria the
great* in Asis. Irna.
two men, both Grecians, dwelling in Carria, Ieronimus and Nichomacus. They
moved him to go with them, and fly to Irna, a town that held of the
Romans. He answered, there was A noble answer of a young man.
no death so grievous, for fear of the which, Publius would leave them that
dyed for him. Therefore he prayed them to save themselves, and gently sent them
away. He could not use his hand, for it was hurt with an arrowe. Therefore he
commanded his page to take his sword, and run him therowe the side. The death
of P. Crassus his two friends.
Censorinus died after that sort. Magabactus killed himself, and so dyed the
most noble of the other.

The rest, the Parthians killed with their spears, fighting for themselves;
and only five hundred were taken alive.

When they had cut off the heads of Publius and his Crassus in hope.
company, they turned toward Crassus. He stood after this sort. When he
had sent his son to encounter the Parthians, and one had told him that
there was a great fleeing, and a sore chase of the ennimies, and saw that
they came no more upon him, for they went also from that part, he began to
take comfort, leading his army to a rising place, thinking his son would have
come straight from the chase. They that were first sent of Publius to tell in
what danger he was, were taken of the enemies and slain.

The other hardely escaping, showed that Publius was undone, Crassus perplexed.
except speedy and great help were sent. Now was Crassus dynersly troubled,
he could not see by reason, how to use his matters: on the one side, fear of
the whole, on the other, desire to save his son, doubting if he might help
him, or not help him, yet in the end, went forward with his power. Now were
the enemies come, with terrible shewt declaryng Victory, and striking many
Armenians, and feared the Romans, looking for an other battle. They brought
the head of Publius upon a spears The Parthians shevve their spite.
point, approaching nighe, and with despite asking, who was his parents and
kindred. For they could not think that he was the son of Crassus so cowardly
and lewd a man, being a young man of so noble a renowned virtue. This fight
most of al was grievous to the Romans, directing and breaking their hearts, not
to anger and revenge, as it ought, but utterly to fear and dread. And then
did Crassus show him self most noble, as in such a case, (as they say) he went
about the host and cried: This, Crassus shows himself noble*
(O Romans) is my proper loss. The great glory and fortune of Rome, is in
you to keep unbroken and untouched, and if you have pity of me, that have
lost so good a son, show your anger upon your ennimies, take away this
joy from them; revenge The words of Crassus to comfort his souldioures.
the cruelty, be not dismaide with that is done, for they that do great feats,
must sometime suffer. Lucullus overcame not Tigranes without bloudeshed, nor
Scipio, Antiochus. Our Ancestors lost a thousand Ships in Sicilie. In
Italy many Capitames and armies would not let for their loss, but to get
the victory again. The Romans have not come to so great dominion by fortune,
but by sufferaunce and manhood in calamity. When Crassus had said this, to
encourage them, he did not see A declaration of the Romans faintness.
many willingly hear him, therefore he badde make a noise, the which,
bewrayed the faintness of the army, for they made a seeble and weak cry,
which was answered of the Barbartans, with cheerful and bold sound.
Coming together, the shot of the enemies, troubled the Romans on the sides.
The other coming upon them with their spears at the face, drove them into a
little roomth, yet some fleeyng death by the shot, came out to fight at
hand, to little purpose, being so dispatched with great The fight.
and mortal wounds, many times the sharp and long spears passing through
horse and man.

Thus the night brake the battle, they saying they would The Parthians
rest. Arsaces.
gratify Crassus with one night to bury his son, and to consider with
himself, whither it were better for him to go to Arsaces, or to be led to him.
They thus going to a place nigh hand, were in great hope. But the Romans
had an heavy night, neither burying the dead, nor healing the hurt, some
dying, and all lamenting themselves, for all things appeared without help.

They remembered the day would bring more care: if they should go away in
the night by those huge playnes, and carry the hurt souldioures with them, it
would be a let unto them: if they left them behind, they would cry and
disclose their going away.

And although they thought Crassus to be the Author of all this evil, yet
they desired to see him and hear him speak. He was by himself with his face
covered in the dark. An example to the common sort of fortune, and to the
wise, of want of wisdom, Crassus an exemple of Fortunes mutabilitie.
and ambition, by the which, he was not content to be one of the chief and
gretest among many thousands such as he was, but because he was judged
inferior only to two men, he thought himself the least of all. Octauius his
Legate and Cassius, raised him, and badde him be of good cheer.

But when they saw him in utter desperation, they called the officers and
captains, showing it was no tarrying there, but to depart without sound of
trumpe and secreately, which being done, and the hurt men perceiving they
were forsaken, a great lamentation with sorrowful cry was made in the Camp,
which staide them, with trouble and fear, as though the enemy had come upon
them.

Then resting to take the wounded men, and to bestow them, and carry them, it
was a let unto them, saving to three hundred Egnatius. Carras. Coponius.
which Egnatius led to Carras at midnight, and speaking latin to the watch, he
willed to tell Coponius, that was captain them of the garrison, that a great
field was sought between Crassus and the Egnatius evil. thought of, thought
he saved his band.
Parthians. More he said not, nor they asked what he was, and so he went to
the bridge and saved his band: yet he was evil thought of, because he forsook
his General: Notwithstanding, that word spoken to Copenio, did good to
Crassus. For he thinking that all was not well, because of the sudden and
strange speech, gathered his men together, and went to meet Crassus in the
way, and receive his soldiers into the City. The Parthians hearing the going
away by night, did not follow them.

But when day was come, they killed them that were left, Romans killed.
which were no less than four thousand. In the plain they ouertooke many
with their horsemen and killed them. Four bands that Vergunteius led in the
night, losing their way, were Vargunteius, his bands slain.
slain, not without resistance, except twenty.

They breaking through with their naked swords, the ennimies Twenty
souldioures are suffered to pass the enemies.
maruelling at their manhood, they suffered to pass a soldiers march to
Carras.

A false tale was told Surena, that Crassus with the chief, was fled, and
the common sort were received at Carras. He thinking the victory was not yet
gotten, standing in doubt, and coveting to learn the truth, that either he
might besiege the Suren^ uses an other (...) to (...) Crassus.
City, or follow Crassus, or let him go, he sent one of his men that could
speak both tongues, to the walls, commanding him to speak Latin, and to
call Crassus or Cassius, and to tell them that Surenas would speak with them.
He doing so, and it being told to Crassus, the message was received.

Shortly after came certain Arabians that knew Crassus and Cassius, having
bin in their camp before the fight.

They seeing Cassius upon the wall, said, Surenas would make them friends
with the King, and save them, so they would depart with Mesopotamia, for so
it were better to do, than try the uttermost.

Casius accepting if, and requiring a time and place for Crassus The deceit of
Surena.
and him to meet together, they answering so to do, departed.

When Surenas heard this of the messengers, being glad that they were in a
place as besieged, he willed the Parthians the next day to go with a great
cry, and require, that if the Romans would have peace with the Parthians, to
send Crassus and Cassius bound to the King.

They were grieved that they were deceived, and counseled Crassus to leave the
long and vain hope of Armenia, and to save himself, and to let none of the
Carrenans know it. But he made it known to Andromachus a very false fellow,
whom he trusted, Crassus deceived by Andromachus.
and made him guide of the way, so as nothing was kept from the Parthians, all
being told by Andromachus. And where it is not their custom to fight by
night, nor no sure thing to the^, and where Crassus went out by night, that
they should not be too far off in following the fleeing Capitaines,
Andromachus led the Romans this way and that way, and at last put them
in a fenny and marrish place, which should be hard for the footme^ to follow.
Some thought not well of Andromachus turning and compassing and followed not.
Therefore Cassius went again to Carras, Cassius retourneth
when y^ guids which were Arabians, willed him to make have, before the Moon
were paste Scorpion, but I, (said he) fear more Sagittarie, and then went
into Syria with five hundred horses.

They having got good guides, went by the hilly places, which are called
Synacha, and they were safe, and before day had Sy^^cha, (...).
overtaken about five thousand, Octauius a good man, was leader of them. The
day being come, Crassus had a weary journey by the Fenne and strange way, led
by Andromachus. He had four bands of Legatemen with him, and few horse, and
five Sergeants, with whom having this weary journey, and scarcely staying for
rest, the ennimies were at hand. He had a mile and half to join with
Octauius, and therefore to an other little hill, not able to keep the horse
back, nor otherwise sure, but joining to Synaces, and stretching with a long
space through a Octauius comes to help Crassus.
large field, that was nighe it. They with Octauius might see in what danger
he was, and first Octauius went with a few to save him. The other reproving
themselves followed, and kept the ennimies from the hill, and compassed Crassus
in the midst, and defended him with their Tergats, so as the shot of the
Parthians should not hurt the General, before, they all fighting for him,
were slain. When Surenas saw the Parthians slowly doing their feate, and if
the night came on, that the Romans by going Nevve vvyle^ of Surenas.
in hilly places, should not be overtaken of them, he wroughte wiles with
Crassus. He caused talk to be in the Camp, so as same Roman captains might
hear it, that the King would not Crassus continually deceived.
make war continually with the Romans, but would be glad of their
friendeship. And use Crassus gently. And they went and told it.

The Barbarians ceased from the fight. Surenas with the chief went quietly to
the hill, he unbent his bow, he offered his right hand, and called Crassus to
truce, saying: It was against the Kings will, that he had proved his force and
power, and now he should willingly feel his clemency and mildness, and
being confedered, suffer all to go safe. When Surena had said this, the
other were glad of it, and would have it followed. Only Crassus did not
credit it, and thought this sudden change was not to be taken, therefore he
thought it not good to do it, but to take advice: yet the soldiers cried,
and were angry, obiecting he would cast them to be villainously slain of the
ennimies, to whom he durst not go to talk, they being unarmed. He began The
soldiers compel Crassus to take the vvorst way.
to desire them to abide the rest of the day, and in the night to pass by the
hills and safe ways, and showed the way, and prayed them not to cast away
the hope of health, which was at hand. But they reuiling him, and bending
their weapons against him, compelled him: So he being afraid, went, and
turning him, said thus. Octau^^s and Petron's, and you other Captains of the
Romans Crassus to the army.
that be present, you see the necessity of my going, and you can tell being
with me, the soul violence that I suffer. Therefore tell al other men, if you
escape, that Crassus being deceived of his enemies, died, and not forsaken of
his citizens. Octauius souldioures did not tarry, but came from the hill. The
Mace-bearers Crassus put away.

The first that came to him of the Barbarians, were two half Greeks, who
alighting from their horses, honored him, and saluting him in Greek, wished
him to send some, to whom Surenas might show that he, and they that were
with him, were without armor and weapons. To whom Crassus answered, that if he
had any little hope of this life, he would not go to them (...)
at all. Yet he sent Riscous two brothren, to learn to what, and how many
should come, whom, being me, Surenas detained, and with the chief he came
down on horseback.

What means this (said he) the Roman General af^^te? and we mounted? and
commanded an horse to be brought for A (...) of Surenas.
Crassus. Crassus answered, that neither he nor they did offend: For they came
to talk after the manner of their Country. Then Surena said, that from
henceforth, good peace should be between Surenas without says.
the Romans and the King. But the conditions must be written at the floude,
whither they would go. For you* Romans A^aunt to the Romans.
(said he) are not mindful of your couenaunts, and hold forth his right
hand to him. When Crassus called for an horse, it shall not need, (quoth
Surenas) for the King gives thee this, and by and by an horse was brought to
Crassus trapped with gold. They setting him up, went about him, and stroke
the horse to go away Crassus ^^^sed and led away.
with him. Octauius was the first that took the bridle, and with him,
Petronius a Tribune, and then the rest stood about him* the one striving to
make the horse to go, and the other to keep them back, and to stay the
horse, by the which a tumulte and fray, began between them.

Octauius drew his sword, and killed one of the Barbarian horsekeepers,
Octauius slain.
an other killed Octauius, thrusting him through behind. Petronius had no
weapon, and being stroke on the Curet, he escaped unhurt. Maxarthes a Parthian
killed Crassus: they say an other Maxarthes. Crassus killed.
killed him, and that he did cut off his head, and his right hand. This is
rather coniectured than known. For they that were present, fought about
Crassus, and some were killed, and some fled again to the hill. The
Parthians went away, saying, Miserable end of Crassus and the Romans.
that Crassus had his worthy punishment, all the other, Surenas badde come down
boldly: some yielded, and some fled by night, of the which, very few were
saved. The other were chased by the Arabians and killed.

They say twenty thousand were slain, and ten thousand The number of the
Romans slain.
taken. Surenas sent Crassus head and his hand to Orodes into Armenia. He
spreading rumors at Seleucia, that he brought Crassus alive, sent messengers
to prepare a mocking sport, in jest calling it a Triumph. For one Caius among
the captines most like Caius. Spite done to Crassus after h^: death.
to Crassus, was cladde with a Queens robe, and commanded that whenever he
were called Crassus and General, he should answer, and was led on
horseback. Before him were certain Trumpeters and Mace-bearers, riding on
Camelles. Purses were tied to the rods, and the heads of the Romans that
were cut off to the axes. There followed a great company of Harlottes, and
Baudes of Seleucia, speaking many opprobrious and laughing matter against the
effeminate cowardice of Crassus, and all the other followed them.

Then calling the auntients of Seleucia together, he showed the Ballades found
and red in spite Aristides of Milesi. Rescius.
wanton writings of Aristides of Milesia, and therein he did not lie, for they
were found in the carriage of Rescius, and ministered great matter to them to
reprove and blame the Romans, that even in their wars do not refrain from
such fond manner of writing.

To the Seleucians, Aesopus seems a wise man, seeing Surenas blame a bag of
the Milesian ballads before him, and bringing the Aesopus a writer of verses,
by the which, Surenas takes occasion to rai^e upon the Romans. Sybaritida is
the word signifying the^ that follow all wantonness. Arsacidas the Kings
house of Parthia comes out of Milesia. League betvveene* the Kings of
Armenia and Parthia. Barbarian kings learned. Pacoro.
wantonness of Parthia, with so many wagons of Concubines, behind him, a
certain show of a new form of strange fight mortal and dangerous,
though the fore part were fair, fearful and cruel, carrying spears, bows,
and horses, at the tail of the host, ending with dancing, singing, and
saying, with women, and al kind of lewdness. Rustius was to be blamed, and
the Parthians shameless, that rebuke the Milesians, of the which, some of
their Kings, called Asacides, have come of ye Milesian or Ionian strumpets.
This being done, Orodes made league with Artabazes the Armenian, and gave his
sister to wife, to his son Paecoro. There were many feasts between them, and
other friendships, insomuche as they came to Greek pastimes. For Orodes was
not to learn the tongue nor the doctrine of Greece And Artabane^ made
Tragedies, and wrote Histories, of the which, some are saved.

When Crassus head was brought to the doors, the tables were spredde. Then the
setterforth of Tragedies, called Jason of Trallia, Agaue in her fury killed her
son. A play at the bringing of Crassus head. Silaces brings Crassus head.
Pentheus was the son of Agaue.
showed Bacchus of Euripides, touching Agaue. He being well liked, Sillaces
came into the dyning Parlour, and making reverence, threw Cassius head into
the midst. The Parthians making a rejoice with a showte of joy, the Ministers
put by Silaces, the King commanding it, and Jason delivered the preparation
of Pentheus, to one of the dauncers, and taking Crassus head, he sung these
verses of it, like a man caught with a fury.

We bring from the circuit of the Mountains a new killed game,
A blessed happy hunting.
This did al they repeat. And when it came about again, that the Quyre
should sing this, Mine, Mine is the reward, Maxarthes leapte forth, for he
was set at the Table, and took the head, saying, it appertained more to him,
than he that had it. The King was glad, for it was to be given to him with
reward The killers of Crassus revvarded.
after the Country manner, and to Jason he gave a talent. After this manner of
play did the travail of Crassus end as a Tragedy.

Both Orodes for his cruelty, and Surenas for his perjury, had worthy
punishment. For not long after, Orodes killed Surenas Surenas is killed of
Grodes, and Orodes of his son Phraartes.
envying his glory. Phraartes, Orodes son, after Pacorus was slain of the
Romans, and Orodes sick of the dropsy, gave his father poison, which when
he understood it would be consumed by a laske, he left poisoning, and took a
readier way, by choking him: and the Parthian army being gone to Mesopotamia,
the kings Captains made Labinius the Romayne their General, Labinius.
meaning to invade Syria, or to go with him as far as Alexandria, and he
leading the Parthians from Euphrates and Syria to Lydia and Ionia, wasting
Asia, Antonie hearing of it, prepared to Antonie.
go against the Parthians, but being called home by the letters of his wife
Fuluia, sent to him with weeping, he turned into Italy, and being at accord
with Caesar and Pompey that ruled Sic^lie, he sent again into Asia, Ventidius,
to repress the Parthians coming Ventidius.
forewarde, and for favor, was made the holy minister of the former Caesar.
Other things they did in common and friendly, Antonie is made minister of
divine Caesar.
in civil* and most great matters. There was a prophet with him of Aegipt,
that was cunning in men's natiuities: he either to gratifye Cleopatra, or to
tell the truth, spoke to Antonie A Southsaye^.
freely, saying. Thy fortune that is most noble and great, is ouerlayde of
Caesar's, and counseled him to be as far of, as he could from the young man.
For thine Angel, said the wise man, fears his Angel, and it appeared that
Antonie gave credit Antonies Angel, afraid of Octa(...)us Angel.
to it, and thought the better of the Aegiptian. So committyng his things to
Caesar, he sailed into Grecia. And whylest he was at Athenes, the first news
came of Ventidius good proceedings, Ventidius has good luck in Parthia.
y^ he had overcome the Parthians, and slain Labinius and Phraartes, the
chief Captains of king Orodes. After this, he feasted the Grecians, and was
made ruler of the Athenians schole. When he went to the war, he ware a
garlande of holy Olive, and according to an oracle, carried with him a vessel
full of ye fou^tain of Clepsidra. Then was it told y^ Ventidius had ouerthrown
Pacorus Clepsidra was well in the castle of Athens.
the kings son, with a great army of the Parthians inuading Syria again at
Cyristica, and that many were slain, among Pacorus slain.
the which, Pacorus was one of the first. This act was one of the noblest,
in the which she Romans revenged the misfortune of Crassus, and drove the
Parthians again into Media and Mesopotamia, being overcome in three battles
together. Ventidius Ventidius leaves to do further against the Parthians for
fear of Antonies envy. Samosata brings forth an earth that sets water
afire, in that part of Syria, that is called Comagene
refrayned to follow the Parthians, any further fearing the envy of Antonie.
Them that revolted he recovered again, and besieged Antiochus Comagenus in the
City of Samosatis, offering a thousand talents, and to do what Antonie should
command him. Ventidius badde him send to Antonie, for he was at hand, and
Ventidius would have Antiochus make his peace there, that this act might
redounde to his honor, least all should seem to be done by Ve^tidius. But
the siege continuing longer, and the inhabitance for desperatio^ of peace,
turning to courage Antonius is deceived of his hope and returns doing
nothing. Ventidius triumphs of the Parthians. Octauius and Antonie more
fortunate by their Lieutenaunts, than themselves. Sosius. Canidius. Phraartes
kills his father Orodes
of hearts, Antonie was content to let* Antiochus go for three hundred
talents. And when he had tarryed a while in Syria, he returned to Athens, and
rewarding Ventidius, as he was worthy, sent him to triumph. He only to that
day, did triumph of the Parthians, a man of base birth, coming to so great an
estimation of weighty matters by Antonies friendship, which he using wisely,
made the saying of Caesar and Antonie to be found true, that they were more
fortunate by other Captains, than by themselves. For Sosius, Antonies
Lieutenaunt in Syria, did many things, and Canidius left of him in Armenia.
He overcame the Hiberian and Albanian Kings, and drove them as far as This
Iberia is nighe the hill Caucasus, full of veni^^e, from whence, they came,
that now inhabit Spain. Antonie vvoulde give reward comparable to the
kings of Persia. Larissa, there be many of that name. One in Asia, nighe
Tralus. Arethusa, one in Syria, another in Lubaa. Hierapolis in Mesopotamia.
Caucasus, whereby Antonies name was renoumed among the Barbarians. After that
Phraartes had killed his father Orodes, and taken the Kingdom, many Parthians
fled away, and Monesius a noble and a mighty man, fled to Antonie. There he
waying this man's fortune with Themistocles, and comparing his power, with the
kings of Persia, gave him three Cities, Larissa, Arethusa, and Hierapolis, whom
before they called Bambyce. But when Monesius was called home again by the
king, he did let him go, meaning so to deceive the King by hope of peace, and
being desirous to recover the ensigns of Crassus, and the captives that were
alive, he sent Cleopatra into Aegipt, and went into Arabia and Armenia, to
gather his power and the confederate kings, for they were many. But the
greatest was Artabazes of Armenia, giving six thousand horse, and seven
Forces of Antonie. Bactrians, people in Scythia of Assia.
thousand footmen. When he mustred his men, there were.lx. M. footmen, and of
the Romans ordinary horsemen, and the Iberians and Frenchmen, ten thousand.
Of other nations there was thirty thousand with horsemen and shot. This so
great preparation and power, that made the Bactrians and Indians afraid, and
all Asia to shake, they say, that Cleopatra made to come to Cleopatra is cause
of the decay of a great preparation.
little profit, for making haste to winter with her, he took not due time for
the war, using al things confusedly, not as one that had his wits, but
abused with his sorceries and witchcrafts Antonie abused by Cleopatra.
of her, that he thought more to make haste to her, than to get victory of his
ennimies. For where he ought to have wintred Eight furlongs makes a mile.
in Armenia, and rested his weary army that had gone.viij. M. furlongs, and
before the Parthians had come from their winterings, to invade Media in the
beginning of ye Spring, he would not tarry the time, but so led his army, as he
had Armenia on his left hand, and when he came to Atropatea, he wasted that
region. Atropatea is part is a part of Media.
Then having engines necessary for to overthrow cities, which followed the
camp with three hundred Chariots, in the which, there was one called a Ram,
of the length of four Ram an engine to beat wales of a city. Antony
leaves his artillery behind him. Phraata besieged.
score foot, which if it were broken, could not be made again, because he
led the army in a Country plain and barren of wood of any length or
hardness, he left the^ behind him, as impediments to his haste, appointing a
^and and a Captain, to keep the same, and he besieged Phraata a great City,
in the which, the wife and children of the King of Media were. And then
Antonies error.
feeling the want of the engines, he knew he had erred in leaving them behind
him; and therefore would win the City by mountes, which was a great labor,
and a slow divise. Now came the King Phraartes with a great army, who hearing
of the The artillery is taken, and the keepers killed.
leaving of the carriage of the engines, sent many horsemen for the^, of whom
Statianus being chief of the Romans, was killed, and ten thousand with him.
Statianus and Polemon be killed.


The Barbarians took the engines, and destroyed many people, in the which
was Polemon a King. This made Antonies army afraid, as it might, to receive
such a loss at the beginning. Artabasses the Armenian king, dyspayring of the
Romans, returned Artabazes forsakes the Romans.
home with his army, albeit he was ye cause of the war. They that were
besieged, trusted upon the Parthians so much, as they used spiteful language.
Antonie, not thinking good his soldiers courage should be abated, by lying
ydly there, look ten legions, and three bands of the guarde, and all his
horsemen, and went to forage, thinking so to provoke his enemies to fight,
and to deal with them orderly. Being gone one only days journey, when he
saw the Parthians fetching their compass, and seeking to stop his way, he
commanded the token of fight to be given, and the camp to be leauied, not as
though he would fight, but march. He passed by the Barbarians, who were set
like a crescent, commanding the horsemen, that when the footmen were so nigh
as they might fight, that the horsemen should turn upon them. The Parthians
The Parthians marvel at the good order of the Romans.
did judge the Romans order to be better by reason, and beheld them marching
with equal distaunce quietlye, and with silence, shaking their weapons. When
the token was given, and they went on with shoute, the horsemen turned upon
the enemy, who received them with defense, although they were within the
shot. But when the footmen came with cry and clashing of armor, the
horsemen of the Parthians gave place The Romans have a victory of small
account.
with disorder, and fled before they came to hands. Antonie followed the
chase, having great hope to make an end either of the whole war, or of a
great part of it, when they had followed the chase, the footmen six miles, and
the horsemenne thrice so much.

They found no more taken but thirty, nor no more slain but four scour,
every manne thinking it an hard case, that they having victory, should kill
so few, and loosyng their Engines with so many. When they were overcome, they
fell into a great discourage and doubt of themselves.

The next day they passed to Phraartes Camp, and by the way, found first a
few enemies, then more, at last all, and as inuincibly, and not to be hurt,
they provoked him, and every where set upon him, so as hardly, and with much
ado, the Romans went to their Camp. And where they of the City had The
Romans hardly get to their Camp.
mace a sallie, and put some of the Romans from their trenche, Antony was so
angry, as he punished every tenth man by death, The Romans punished by lod.
according to the deserte, taking every tenth by lotte, that had forsaken his
place, and to the other insteade of wheat, he gave barley. The war was
painful to both, and the continuance more fearful, Antonie perceiving
hunger would follow, for he could get no forage without death and hurt of his
soldiers. Phraates knowing the Parthians had rather do any thing, than to lie
in field, and in an other land, in the winter, was afraid, that Autumn. A
crafty practice.
if the Romans did hold out and tarry, that they would leave him, the air
beginning to change, and the time of equal day and night being at hand: he
devised this craft. The best of the Parthians, used the Romans more gently in
their foraging and other encounters, suffering them to carry away some things,
and praising their virtue, as of men most valiant in war, and in great
estimation with their king, as they were well worthy. And by this mean coming
nearer together, and suffering the horsemenne to pass, spoke evil of Antonie,
because Phraates would gladly have peace, and spare so good and so many men,
that had given none occasion, but that he would tarry and abide two great and
hard enemies, that is, Winter and Hunger, from the which, VVinter and Hunger
tvvogreat enemies.
they could hardely escape, though the Parthians would suffer them.

Many declaring this to Antonie, and he deceived by this hope, Antony deceived.
deferred to send an Heraulte to the Parthians king, till he knew of those
well willing Barbarians, if they spoke so much with the Kings consent. They
affirming and promising, that he ought not doubt nor dread, he sent one of his
friends again, requiring to receive the ensigns and the Captives, that he
might not be thought altogether to save himself, and to escape. The Parthians
aunswering, be should not pass of that, but if he did depart, he should
have peace and safete ^^ and by wherefore within few days he brake up and
went his way. And whereas he was eloquent in persuading, and was went to (...)
the people, and the army by his orations, now for shame and heaviness, he
omitted to Antonie commits the, speech to his soldiers, another, contrary
to his wont.
speak to the multitude, and commanded Domitius Aenobarbus to do it. Some
were angry as though he despised them, but the more part were content and
perceived the matter, and therefore thought the rather to grant and obey their
General.

Being about to lead them the plain and barren way, a Mardi be people in
Hyrcania. Mardus takes upon him to lead the army the best way.
man that by kind was called Mardus, acquainted with the Parthian fashion,
faithful to the Romans, and at the field of the engines, came to Antonie, and
willed him to flee on the right hand of the hills, and not to cast his army
laden with harness, and weary with iourneys, to such a might of horse and
short, and that Phraates under show of benevolence, went about to ent^a^
him, and that he would lead him a shorter way, in she which he should have
sufficiency of all things.

When Antonie heard this, he took counsel, and said he would not seem too
distruste the Parthians, touching the peace, but for the shortness of the way,
and the plentiful Towns inhabited, he Mardus bound.
praised Mardus, and required says of him. He offered to be be and till he
brought them into Armenia. Being bound, he led them.ij. days very quietly.
The which done, Antony not looking for y^ The Parthians come upon Antonie on
the sudden.
Parthians, and going negligently because of his boldness, Marde saw the
bank of the flood new broken, and much water enterunning the place where they
should pass. He knew it was the Parthians work to make their way the
harder, and to set that floude as an impdeiment unto them, and willed Antonie
to (...) about him, for the ennimie was not far off. Whiles he set his men in
order, and commanded the shot to encounter with the, behold the Parthians
appeared, and came as they would have compassed and dissolved the army. The
shot coming upon them, and hurt being done on both sides, they retired,
and after French horsemen.
came again. Then the French horsemen encountered with them, and put them
back, so as that day they did no more attempt.

By this, Antonie learning what he should do, he placed many shot, not
only at the taile^ out one she sides, leadyng the army in a square,
commanding the horsemen to put back the ennimies, but not to follow them
too far. So the Parthians in these four days having done no more hurt than
received, waxed flow, and intended to go their way, making Winter Flauius
Gallus.
their pretense. The fifth day, Flauius Gallus a good Souldioure and a
forward in feats of war, required Antonie to give him some shot for his
rerewarde, and horsemen for his fore ward, and he would do a good service. He
gave him, and he kept back the ennimies. But now not returning to the
footmen as he did before, but following and fighting with more courage, when
The ^a^hencite of Gallus. The soberness of Titius.
the leaders of the ^aile saw him go too far, they called him back, but he
would not. They say Titius did take the Ensign to turn him back, and rebuke
Gallus, that would lose so many, and so good men, and that he rebuked him
again, and badde him meddle with his own matters, and so Titius went his way.

Gallus setting upon the face of them, was compassed at the back, and being
besette round about, sent for more help.

They bringing the footmen, among the which was Canidius, Canidius commits
a great error.
a man in great favor with Antonie, who seemed to commit a great error,
for he ought to have brought forth the whole battle, and to have sent them
forth in bands, one ready to help another, which being too weak, to have
supplied more, they perceived not that it wanted but little that the whole army
was not put to the worste, and to flight, if Antonie had not by and by
brought the legions, and set them in the face of them, and the third legion had
not passed among them that fled, and stayed the enemy from further chase.
There was slain no less than A slaughter of the Romans.
three thousand, and there came to their tents wounded five thousand And
Gallus among them, shot through with four arrows, could not be healed of
his wounds. The other Antonie went about and comforted, and with tears bad
them be of good Antonie comfort his men, and they him.
cheer, but they cheerfully taking him by the hand prayed him to comfort
himself, and not to be diseased, calling him Chief General, saying they were
well, if he were whole: for generally, Antonie a very good Captain.
there was no captain y^ led a more noble armi* neither in strength nor in
patience, nor in boldness, in those days, than he, nor more reverence and
obedience, with benevolence of all indifferen lie, noble, unnoble, Rulers, and
private men, was ever given to any Captain, than to Antonie, preferring him
before their own lives and health, where in he might compare with the
aunt^ent^ Romans. Diverse causes were of this* (as we have said) gentleness,
Causes of the soldiers love tovvarde (...).
eioquen^e, plainness* liberality, and magnificence, and courtesy in mirth
and speech, and for that he would pity and comfort the sick, and give what
they needed, he made the sick and the hurt, the more assured to him.

The enemies for this victory, were in such a pride, though they were weary
and almost refusing the fight, contemning the Romans, as that night they
encamped hard by them, thinking straight to have spoiled the void tents, and
sacked the money of them being fled.

When day was come, they were many more, and they say they were not less than
forty thousand horsemenne, the King sending still more unto them, as to a
sure and certain victory, but he was not with them, whither they won or
lost.

When Antonie should speak to the souldioures, he would Antony discoura^ed.
have a black garment, that he might the more be pitied, but his friends not
suffering it, he came in a Captains purple robe, and spoke unto the^, praising
the^ that had done well, and dispraysing them that fled, of the which, some
prayed him to be of good comfort, some con^essed their fault, and offered to
be punyshed every tenth man, or any other way to chastise them, only they
Antonies prayer
prayed him to cease his sorrow and grie^e. Then holding up his hands, he
prayed the Gods, that if ther^ were any revenge toward, for his former
felicity, that it might light on him, and that the rest of the army might
have health, and victory.

The next day, they marched better guarded: and the Parthians that followed
were much dec^iued of their purpose* for where they thought to come to spoil
and pray, and not to fight, being resisted with great cheerfulness of the
souldieures* they were weary again. And as the Romans went down certain
hills, The manner of the Romans against the Par(...).
they came upon them, and they made a sharp shot* The Target men turned upon
them, and covered their shot with their shiel^^s, for the Targets hid them
easily, they kneeling on their knees. They that stood behind, defended them
with their armor, and so did the other. This manner of form, bowing alike
every way, made a figure of a Theater, and it is the surest way to avoid
shot, the arrows sliding away. The Parthians thinking The Parthians
deceived. The fight at hand
the stouping of the Romans upon their knees had bin for hea^e and thirst,
unbent their ^owes, and with their spears came nig^* the^ then the Romans
rising ^odai^ly with a cry set upon them, and wringing their weapons out of
their hands, killed the foremost of them, and made all the other to run
away. The like was done other days. They giving little way, and famine falling
into the army, little mea^e being had, bi^ause of their often The misery of
the Romans.
fights, wanting* Milles to grind their corn, being lost with the engines,
for they were left behind, and because many of the beasts were killed, the
sick and wounded men were borne. So as they say, an Athens bushel of wheat
was worth fifty drams, Chani^ atti^^ contains. 2. Sextarij. and Sextarij, is
the sixte part of Corg^o. Dragm^ was as much as a Roman Penny. Herbs
hurtefu^ vvl^che* the soldioures eat. An herb making men mad.
and barley was worth the waighte in silver.

Then being driven to herbs and roots, some they ^ound of the usual sort*
but being compelled to prove them that were unknown, they first lighted upon
an herb that brought death with a maddenesse. For he that eat it remembered
nothing, nor knew nothing. Only one thing they did, move and turn a stone, as
a thing of great waighte to be done. The field was full of them that stowped
to the ground and dug, and removed stones.

At length vomiting their choler, they dyed, when wine, which was the only
remedy, was spent, many being dead, and the Parthians not ceassing. They say
y^ Antonie many times cried (O Ten thousand Grecians passed from the field of
their lost Captain without hurt.
the ten thousand,) praising them that with Xenophon did go a far longer
way from Babylon, and fighting many battles saved themselves.

The R^^thians could not draw them asunder, nor break their order, and being
diverse times put to the worse, they ^^ed, waxing quiet again: then they got
among them that went for forage, and showing the strings of their bows loose,
they said they would retire and make an end of their chase. A ^ewe Medians
followed ^et a day or two, doing no hurt, but only guarding the towns of
Media. By these words they gave salutations and went o^ with gentleness, in
so much as the Romans were cheerful again: Antonie soon led to hope.
which when Antonie heard, he said he would go by the plain, rather than
the hills, where was lack of water. And mindyng thus to do, one named
Mi^hrid^ies came from the enemies, being cousine to Moneso, that had been with
Antonie, and had the three Cities given him, and desired some might come to
him that could speak the Par^hi^n or Median tongue. And Alexander of
Antiochia, in cred^^^ with Antonie, being sent to him, he said, that he was
come to yield thanks for Mithrida^es sent by Mon^s^^ gi^eth Antonie warning.
Monesus, and asked Alexander, if ^ee saw those high and long hills before
him, and when he said he did, under them said he, the Parthians lie in wait
for you, with all their army. This great field stretches to those hills,
and they think that being deceived by them, you will leave the way by the
hills, because there is thirst and labor: but if Antonie go^ this way, let
him know to fall in Crassus calamity.

Antonie being troubled, when he hard this, conferred with Antonie gri^ued.
his friends, and Mardus the guide of the way, who thought no less, he knew
that though there were none enemies, the journey by the playnesse was waylesse,
uncertain, hard and strange to find. The way by the hills, had none other
difficulty, but want of water for one day. Being turned to this, he
commanded to go by night, and to carry water. There was The Parthians come
^by night.
want of vessels, therefore they carried water in their headpeeces, and some
in skins. Their going being known to the Parthians, they came upon them by
night contrary to their manner, and by the rising of the Sun, they molested
the tail, now weary with watchyng and labor, for they had gone that night
two hundredth and forty furlongs, and not thinking their enemies would have
come so soon, they were discouraged, for neither had they drink, and must
fight a^ they went.

The former chanced to meet with a floudde whose water Water ^^^tful
was cold and clear, but salt and venomous. The which ^eing drunk did
wring the belly with torment, and inflamed their drouthe* And though Mardus
gave them warnyng of it, notwithstanding, they ^eate them off that would have
stayed them and drunk it. Antonie came among them, and prayed them to be
content for a while, for there was an other floud^e of good water not far
off, and that the residue-of the way was sharp and not for horsemen, at the
which, their enemies would leave them.

Then blowing the retreat, he commanded to pitche their tents, that at the
least* the Soldiers might repose them in the shadow. The tents being s^tte,
and the Parthians going their wa^ as they were want* Mi^hr^d^^es came again,
and wil^ed A new vva^ni^g.
Alexander that came to him* to see that the army should take little rest,
but go and make haste to the floudde, because the Parthians would go no
further, but i^yther they would follow them.

This being told to Antonie, Alexander brought from him* cups and vessels of
gold, of the which Alexander taking so many as he could carry under his
^^^ke, went his way. They removed, and w^nt the rest of that day, without
any trouble of their enemies. But the night, they made to themselves most
vn^^^ot and fearful, for they killed them that had any Disorder in the
Romans ca^pe among themselves.
Gold ^^ Silver* and they spoiled the money that was carried, and in the end
^^nfacked Antonies carriage, and took away his vessel and tables of Gold,
and divided them amongst them.

There was great fear and confusion in the whole army, for they thought the
enemies had turned and spoiled their people. Antonie called one of hys^g^rde,
whise name was Ram^n^^, and Antonie in dispay^e.
made him to (...), that when he commanded him, he ^shoulde (...) his ^^^rde
thorough him, and cut off his head, that it might neither ^ee taken alive of
the enemy, nor known wh^^ he was dead^. His friends weepyng, Mar^^^
^omforted Antonie, that the ^^oudde was near at hand, for a moist breath was
felt, and a cold air came unto the^, that A cold air declares a floude to
be at hand.
made the breathing sweet: and the time (quoth he) of our journey, does agree
with ye measure, for there was but a little of the night left. And then came
other and said the tumult did rise of injury and spoil among themselves.
Therefore bringing the multitude from confusion and fear, to order, he
commanded to encamp.

Now day began to show, and the army beginning to take a little rest, the
archers of the Parthians, fell upon the hindermoste: wherefore token of fight
was given to the shot. The armed men covering themselves again with the
shields, stayed to ^ou^e with the enemy. The fore ward going on, a little
after the flood appeared, and the horsemen keeping the enemies off, they carried
over the sick men first, and whiles these were fighting, they had leisure and
quiet to drink.

When the Parthians saw the flood, they vnbended their bows, and badde the
Romans go on boldly, commending much their virtue. When they were passed with
quiet, they gathered together again, for they had no great trust in the
Parthians, as they went. The sixte day after the last fight, they came to the
floude, Araxes comes out of the hill that Euphrates does.
Araxes, dividing Media and Armenia, it appeared both deep and swift, and it
was said that the enemies came to set upon them in the passage. But when they
were quietly passed and come into Armenia, as though they had seen that land
from the sea, they kneeled down, and with tears and embracings one of another
for joy, they ran together.

But now going by a plentiful Country, and al using superfluity The
reioicing of the Romans being come into Armenia.
after their want, they fell into drop^^es, and Chollycke diseases.

And when Antonie made his muster, he found.xx. M. footmen This war was
not acco^p^ed, for lack of Armenian horsemen.
and horsemen to be slain, not all of the enemies, (...)ore than half of
diseases. They were going from ^h(...) sea^^^ and twenty days, and they
overcame the Parthians in eighteen battles, but their victories had no
substa^unce nor surety of them that made often and small chases. It was well
perceived that Artabazes the Armenian, was the cause why Antonie could not
bring this war to end. For the sixteen thousand horse that he led out of
Media, might have done best service against the Parthians, being armed like
them, and accustomed to fight with them: and when they ^^ed from the Romans
fight, they should have chased them, that being so overcome, they could not
have bin bold to set upon them again so often. All the army for anger moved
Antonie to be revenged of the king. He using discretion, did neither blame his
defection, nor change any of his wonted humanity and honor to him, his army
being yet weak and needy, but afterward being come again into Armenia, and
with fair words and promises persuading him to come to his hands, he took
him, and carried him bound to the triumph at Alexandria, which most grieved
the Romans, that the goodly Antonie takes the king and makes a triumph of
him at Alexandria which grieueth the Romans.
and comely things of their country, should be translated to Alexandria for
Cleopatras sake. Thus he did. Between the kings of Media and Parthia fell a
variaunce, begone as they say, for the Romans spoil: and the Median king
being in danger thereby to loose his kingdom, he sent to Antonie, promising to
make war with him with all his power. Therefore Antonie was brought into
greatehope, for he supposed, he wanted nothing to overcome the Parthians, but
horsemen and archers, the which he saw was now offered him to gratify him without
any asking. He prepared to go again into Armenia, and to join with the Median
at the flood Araxes, and there to move the war, but being called back by the
intercessions of Octauia and Cleopatra, he deferred the Median til the next
summer, although the Parthians were at division: yet going to him once again,
he made league with him, and when he had married one of his daughters with a
son of Cleopatra, he returned again to Civil war.

The end of the Romans war with the Parthians.
The Romans war with the Illyria^s: by Appian of Alexandria.
THe Grecians think them to be Illyrians, Illyria now Slau^^^^ Chaonia, part
that is mountains. Thesprotia, that is next to Chaonia* Paeonia is a part of
Macedonia. The breadth and length of Illyria.
that have their dwelling beyond Macedonia and Thraecia from Chaonia and
Thesprotia to the flood Hister. The greatness of it, reaches from Macedonia
and the mountains of Thracia, to Paeonia and the Alps, three days journey.
The length of it, is much greater by three parts, as the Grecians think. The
Romans measuring the ground, think it is six thousand furlongs in length,
and a thousand two hundereth in breadth. And they affirm that country to have
the name and beginning of Illyria, son to Polyphemus. For Polyphemus Illyrius
son to Polyphemus. Celte, by that part of France that is about Lions.
Taulantij, went from Illyria to Macedonia, and builded A^^iss^. Per^hab^ fled
into Aetolia. A^hillai Ilanders. Autarians were most warlike people of
Illyria first subdued of the Scordiscians, and last o^ the Romans. Parthene
of Macedonia. Da^aretians of Thracia.
had by Galatia, Celtes, Illyrius, and Gallus: And that they came out of
Sicelie, and gave name to the Celtians, Illyrians, and Galatians. And this I
like well of the opinions that have been taught hereof. Then they say that
Illyrius had these following: Achilles, Autarius, Dardanus, Medus, Taula^tius,
and Perrhebus: and these daughters, Partha, Daorta, and Dasera, with others, of
the which came the Taula^tians, Perrhebians, Achilleians, Autarica^s.
Dardauans, Parthenians, Dasaretians, and Darsians: Autarius had Pannonius or
Paeonius, and Scordiscus: Paeonius, had Tribalus, of the which these nations
have their names. And these be the ancient beginnings of the great country of
Illyria, in the which were the Scordiscians, and Triballians, of so great
possession, as they fought so long together, till the Triballians, that were
left, fled to the Celtes beyond Hister. This nation was thought mighty till
the time of Philippe and Alexander, and now so destroyed, as it has no man
left: and the Scordiscians become to naught Scordiscians. Paeonians.
also, for they being overcome by the Romans, came at length to dwell in the
Islands of Hister. And in continuance of time, some of them went abroad again,
and invaded the uttermost part of Paeonia, wherefore the Scordiscians, be now
among the Paeonians. Likewise the Ardeians, when they had invaded the best
part of the Autarians grounds next the coaste, they being seamen, they drove
them away. After them, the Liburnians had L^burn^. Light ships.
the name to be good with their ships, another nation of Illyria, robbing
Ionium and the Islands with their swifte ships. Wherefore the Romans call
the ships of speed, Liburnians. There is a saying, that the Autaria^s came
to utter destruction, by the wrath of Apollo. For they and the Celtians with
the Cymbrians, did encampe at Delphos, and by and by all were Cymbri came from
the north of Saxon into N^^^onne in France where Marius overcame them.
Punishment of God.
dispearsed and fled, and many of them before the fight, being stricken with
rain, tempest, and lightning, and when they that were left came home, they
found such a corruption made by frogs in their waters, that they all perished.
The vapor of the which so infected the Country of Illyria, as the Autarians
being most plagued with it, fled: and because no man durst receive them, they
went on.xxij. days together, coming to a Fennie ground uninhabited, and
builded a City next to Basternia. ^asturn^, ^e at the flood B^risthenes in
Scythia.
They say also, that Apollo did destroy the Celtians and their Cities, and did
not end the plague before they fled and left their houses, and came into
Illyria, that had offered with them, who^ being we^ke for sickness, they
soon ouer-came, and by handling ^irene, is the hill that divides France and
Spain.
of their things took the infection, and fled to Pirene. And when they moved
toward the east, the Romans being afraid of them with whom they had once
fought an exceeding battle, sent the Consuls against them, least they
should pass the Alps and come into Italy. And the Romans having the
Syllenus ^^i^lius and C^p^^, Consuls overthrown by the Cymbrians. etc.
loss of all their army, the name of the Celtians stroke al Italy with fear,
till they chose Marius their general, which before had overcame the Libyans,
Nu^^dians and Marusians, very valiauntly, and overthrow the Celtians, and did
them many times Marius overthrows them.
destroy as I have showed in the book of Celtian. And this end had the
Celtians and Illyrians for their wickedness, yet they did not withholde their
wicked hands from holy things, but the Scordiscians, Medans, and Dardana^s,
ran over Grecia and Macedonia, and spoiled temples, and once again besieged
Delphos, losing many of their men being then slain, two and thirty year
after the war between the Romans and the Celtians, who for their late
sacrileage made them war L. Scipio being Captain then, being Lords of
Macedonia and Grecia. An they say their neighbors that were their fellows in
this wickedness, then not ayding them, left them to Scipio, remembering the
plague of the Autarians which were utterly destroyed through all Illyria. And
that Scipio did overthrow all the Scordiscians, Corruption one ^^use of civil
discord at Rome.
and they that could escape went to Danubi^ and the Islands thereof, and that
he being corrupted with a covenant of holy gold, made league with the Medans
and Dardanans, by the which, as many Italians do show in their wrytings, the
state of Rome was stricken with civil discord, until it came to the rule of
one. These things of Illyria found among the Grecians, I have written at
large. The Romans call not only these Illyrians, Rhae^ia is at the Alps, part
of the which is now Gusoni. Noricia now Ba^^nis My^^a now Joshua and Ceruia.
but also the Paeonians beyond them, the Rhetians, the Noricians, and Misians
that dwell in Europe, and al other nigh that inhabit the right hand of Hister,
by a common name, although they do separate the Hillirians from the Grecians,
and call every of them by their proper names. Being led with this opinion at
the first, they changed afterward, and would have the end of The sea of
Pontus from Maotis to Tenedo. Agron. The Illyrian king having overcome the
A^^olians, ^ranke so much wine that he died presently. Agron. Py^rbus. Epirus,
C^^^ra or Albania. Corcira, Cor^u. F^^d a^^^s. D(...)sso. Pharus, is an ^land
in the Adriaticals^^.
Illyria at the beginning of Hister, to the sea of Pontus, which is tributarie
unto them. How the Romans brought them to obedience, when we wrote of the
Celtians, we showed that we did not well learn neither the beginnings nor
occasions of the wars.

And therefore we have exhorted them to write, that have more understanding of
the matters of Illyria. But as much as we know, we will declare it.

Agron was king of a part of Illyria, y^ is at the coast of Ionia which Pyrrus
king of Epirus, and such as came of him, had sometime. And he taking part of
Epirus, and Corcyra beyond that, and Epida^nus and Pharus, as a keeper held
them still. When he sailed the rest of the Ionian sea, an Isle called Essus did
reuolte to the Romans, and sent their Embassadoure to them, to declare what
wrong Agron had done them. The Illyrians sailing again to the^, killed
Calemporus the Ambassador of Essus, and with them Coruncaenius, Cal^mp^^^^.
Coruncanius Ambassadors slain Embassadoures killed, the cause of Illyrian
war. Pine.
the Roman, (as some say.) For this cause the Romans invaded Illyria both by
sea and land.

Agron dyed, leaving an infant behind him called Pine. He left the
government of the country to his wife, that she might bring up the child,
although she was not his mother. Demetrius that had Pharus belonging to
Agrons dominion, and after, getting Gor^^^ betrayed both to the Romans. They
made amity Pharus and Cors^ delivered to the Romans.
with the Epidam^ans, and sent an army to help them against the Illyrians
that besieged them: wherefore the Illyrians raised their siege, and some of them
called Atintani, yielded to the Romans. Atintani.


The wife of Agron sent Ambassadors to Rome, delivering the prisoners and
captives, requiring pardon for that was not done of her, but of Agron. The
Romans said that Cor^u, Pharo, Essio, and Epidamno, and the Illyrians that be
called Atintani, were Peace vv^^^ Pine.
of their jurisdiction, and if Pine would hold the other Region of Agron, he
might use the Romans friendship, if he would refrain from the rest, nor
the Illyrians should go to the Essians, but with two boats, and them unarmed,
all the which they admitted. And this was the first doings of the Romans and
the Appolonia now Vallona.
Illyrians, after the which, they gave liberty to Corcyra and Appolonia.

They gave also rewards to Demetrius for his reuolting, yet Demetrius.
d^spi^^ng his infidelity, that came from him afterward. For the Romans
contending three years with the Celtians about the Eridanus, now P^, the
great floude of Italy.
floude Eridanus, Demetrius not now passing of the Romans, because they were
troubled with war, got Histria, an other nation of Illyria, and compelled
the Atintanes, to reuolte from the Atintanes.
Romans. When the Romans had made an end with the Celtians, they went by and
by into Illyria, and took the robbers that had joined themselves with
Demetrius and the other Illyrians. And they killed Demetrius, that fled unto
Philippe of Macedonie, and returned with an Nauye, and spoiled the Gulf of
Ionia, and utterly ouerthrewe his Country Pharus, conspiring with him, and
(...), and pardoned the other Illyrians, that did agree with Pine.

This was the second war and truce with the Illyrians. The rest be
described of me not in order and time, but by the nations as I have found them.
The Romans invaded Macedonie when Perseus reigned after Philippe. Gentius an
other king of Illyria, allured Gentius imprisoneth the Roman Embassadoures.
with money, joined with Perseus, and stirred the Illyrians against the Romans,
and did cast the Roman Embassadoures into prison, alleging that they came
not as Embassadoures, but as espialls. Wherefore Anitius the Roman Lieutenaunt
took diverse Anitius.
of Gentius ships, and inuading the land, overcame him when he had shut
him in a place, and he asked forgiveness, he counseled him to yield to the
Romans: he desired three days respite, which being granted, and in the mean
time his subjects (...) contrary to promise taken.
forsaking him, he desired he might come to Anitius. Which when he did, he
kneeled on his knees with great shame, and spoke for himself. The Roman
President took him by the hand, and badde him be of good cheer, and took him
to a banquet, from the which as he was going, he was taken and made prisoner,
and carried to Rome in triumph with his son.

This war of Gentius was finished in twenty days. A^milius A^milius Paulus
(...) lxx. cities in a day. ^y cra^^^.
Paulus that took Perseus, and sent him to Rome, spoiled lxx. of his Cities
after this sort. Going privily to Rome, with great speed, and returning, he
promised the people forgiveness, if they would bring in all their gold and
silver. They agreeing to it, he brought part of his army to every City,
then commanding the Captains of the army, at a day in the morning, to charge
the Citizens by Trumpet, that they should bring all their gold and silver
within three hours space, which being done, he gave the rest to his
souldioures for spoil. So Paulus in one hour spoiled.lxx. Cities.

The A^^eans and Palerians, an other nation of the Illyrians, invaded A^^eans.
Palerians.
that part that the Romans held, to whom the Romans for other lettes sent
Ambassadors to affray them. They would not obey, wherefore ye Romans sent an
army against the^ of 10000. footmen, and* 600* horsemen. They not being
ready, sent Embassadoures to ask pardon for their offenses. The Senate
commanded them to recompense them, whom they had mi^ried, the which thing,
when they left undone, Fuluius Flaccus Fuluius Flaccus.
goes against them with a great army. The war consisted in Rhodes, and was
not fully ended. S^m^. Tuditanus. Tib. Pandusius. (...).


Sempronius Tuditanus, and Tiberius Pandusius overcame the Iapodes within the
Alps. Likewise the Segestanes did yield to Lucius Cotta and Metellus, all the
which shortly after forsook the Romans.

The Dalmatians, an other nation of the Illyrians, invaded them (...) by se^.
M. (...).
that obeyed the Romans, and would not admit the Roman Embassadoures that
came to them for that purpose: wherefore I think the Romans made war upon
them, when M. ^igulus was Consul. As soon as Figulus cante, they set upon the
former, and drove them from the army, into the field, so as they fled to the
floude Nar^, and then they retired, for Winter was at hand.

Figulus then thinking he might of the sudden disperse them, Romans dry^^ to
the flood. Narus. Delminium. Den^^
he drove them all from their places, till he came to the City of Delminium,
whereof the Dalmatians have their name. And where he could do nothing against
that City of the sudden, nor raise engines for the height of the wall, he
went abroad again, all being destitute and unfurnished. For the wasting
about Delminium, he made certain pearches of two cubits long, laid over
with pitch, sulpher and towe, and with his slings, threw them into Delminium,
the which being fyred by the violence, and Devise of Figul^.
like lamps fleeing in the air, did set on fire whatsoever they touched, so as
many were consumed by fire. Whereof ended the war of Figulus.

In time following, Cecilius Metellus being Consul, when the Cecilius Metellus
triumphs for nothing.
Illyrians had offended nothing, he would needs make war to triumph of
them, of whom being received friendly, and remaining in Salon their City
that winter, he triumphed of nothing. Salon of the Assyrians Pollig called his
son Salonus Promo^^


Caesar when he made war upon the Celtians, the Dalmatians flourished and
took a City from the other Illyrians called Promon^, which belonged to the
Lyburnians, The Lyburnians gave themselves to the Romans, and fled to Caesar.
Caesar sent Ambassadors to them, exhorting them to restore ^om^n^ to the
Lyburnians. They Caesar's army overthrown of the Illyrians.
desp^sing it he sent an army which was ouerthrown of y^ Illyria^s* Caesar
being occupied with other cares, the sedition of Pompey following, did nothing
to them, but sailed with his whole army, in a contrary tempest, to try ye matter
with Pompey in Macedonia. The rest of the army Antonie brought to Caesar by
Macedonia. Then in The Illyrians destroy the army that Gabinius beingeth to
Caesar.
a great tempest, Gabinius assayed to being to Caesar. xl. bands of footmen,
and.iij. M. horsemen by Illyria, whom ye Illyrians for fear of that he had
done, and thinking the victory of Caesar would be their confusion, resisted
Gabinius, and slew al save a few, y^ fled with him, and got a great deal of
money, and infinite spoil. Caesar dissembled at this for the necessity of the
war with Pompey. When Pompey was overcome, and Caesar went about to dispatch all the rest, he returned to Rome, and determined a war against y^ G^tes, and the
Parthians. When the Illyrians heard of this, and feared that Caesar would take
them ^^te, be people of Sey^^ia in Europe, of some called Daci, but divided,
that Daci be they that are next Germany, whom some call D^^^, which for
their servile behauior be used for names of servant in Comedies.
in his way to Parthia, they sent Ambassadors to Rome, to ask pardon of their
faults, and extolled the worthy nation of the Illyrians, and would become
friends.

Caesar being minded to go against the Parthians, answered them sharply, that
he would not have them for friends, that had used him so unfriendly, yet he
would spare them, if they would pay tribute, and pledges. They promising
both, he sent Atinius to them with three legions, and a great band of
horsemen, to take pledges and small tributes. When Caesar was dead, they
thought that the power of Rome would die with him, and so refused to obey
Atinius, neither paying tribute, nor giving hostages. Atinius se^ding.v. bands
against them, they overcame them, and their leader Bebius overcome Durazzo.
Provinces to M. Brutus and C. Cast^us.
Bebius a Senator. Atinius with the rest, fled to Epidamno. Then the Senate
appointed to M. Brutus and C. Cassius that killed Caesar, Macedonia and
Illyria, with Syria. So they making war with Antonie and Caesar that was
called Augustus, ye Illyrians had Paeone. Pannonia now ^^^g^rie.
no quietness. The Paeones, a great nation inhabiting along Hister,
stretches from the Iaepodans, to the Dardones. They are called Paeones of the
Grecians, and of the Romans Pannonians, and of them, (as we have said) they
be called part of the Illyrian^, of the which now I will speak somewhat,
being about Agrian^.
to show the Illyrian state. They glory much in ye Agrians which were
Macedonians coming out of Paeonia, and did great service under Philip and
Alexander. And after Cornelius was overthrown of Cornelius overthrown of the
Agrians.
the^ with all his army, the fame of the Paeonians waxed very great, and made
Italy afraid. Therefore of a long time after, the Consulls would not take
upon them to war with the Paeonians. And these great things have I found of
the Illyrians. But in Caesar's Commentaries of Augustus of his own acts.
Commentaries, that was called Augustus, I find no ancient matter of ye
Paeonians. It should seem, there was an other part of Illyria, that did obey
the Romans, but what the name was I can not tell. For Augustus did not write
other men's acts, but his own, how he brought them that revolted from the
Empire, to Tributes, and overcame other that lived under their own laws: and
lastely how he conquered the barbarous nations, that dwell in the height of the
Mountains, that were next Italy, and used by stealth to molest it. And
surely I marvel, that so many armies passing from Rome over the Alps, did
contemn these nations. For Caius Caesar so happy a man in war, and leading
so many armies against the Celtes and Iberians, did likewise little pass of
these nations, when he lay every Winter, not far from them, by the space of
ten years. But I think these men, making haste only to that they
purchased, did care for no more, but for passage over the Alps. C. Caesar
being long about Celtica, thought it enough to end that, the civil war of
Pompey calling Caesar did not pass of Illyria.
him from the rest. And where he seemed to chose both Celtica and Illyria, he
took rule not of all, but of them that belonged to ye Romans. But Caesar
Augustus got al, and when he accused the ydlenes of Antonie to the Senate, he
showed how he had made the fierce Caesar Augustus talks of his conquest of
the Illyrians. Nation of Illyria subdued by Augustus.
nation of ye Illyrians, so often rebelling, tame: he subdued with great
experience, ye Oxeans, Perthenetans, Bathiates, Taulantians, Cambians,
Cinambrans, Merromen^ns, and Prisseans. And the^ yt rebelled, which were the
Docleatans, Carinians, Interfrurians, Narisians, Clintidions, and the
Tauris^ans, which he compelled to pay their tributes after they had denied
them, the which being overcome, the next, that is, Melita, Malta, Corcyra,
Corfu* cruelly used of Augustus.
Ipp^sinans and Bessians for fear, did yield unto him. And he overcame the
Corcyrians and Melitinans with great fight by sea, because they were rouers on
the sea. The children he killed, the other he sold. And took the ships
from the Liburnians, because they also robbed on the sea. Of the Iapodans that
dwell within the Alps, Moentines, Aedetians. Aurupians.
the Moentines, and Aedeatians yielded to him when he came. The Aurupians,
which were many and warlike, of the Iapodan kind, went out of the countries
into their City, and when he came they lurked in wooddes. He took their
City, but would not set it afyre, thinking they would yield to him at length.
Which being Salas^i, Iapodes. Segestan^. Dalmatia. Daisi^, Paeones. The Alps.
done, he gave them their city to inhabit. Of al other, the Salassans and
Iapodans, that dwell beyond the Alps, made him to have most to do, with whom
the Segestanes, Dalmatians, Daisians, and Paeonans joined. They keep the
tops of the hills, that be mountains impassable, an hard and narrow way,
leading to them, by trust whereof they live of themselves, and take toll of
Veterus.
them that pass. Veterus coming sodainelye upon them, got the straightes of
the place by policy, and besieged them two years.

They wanting salt, whereof they had most need, received garrisons. Want of
salt.
After rebelling from Veterus, and casting down the desences, they got the
streights, and laughed at them that Caesar sent, because they could do little
against them. Therefore Caesar beginning war against Antonie, let them live
as they would, and forgave them that molested them that obeyed the Romans,
till Messala Coruinus.
Messala Coruinus sent of Caesar to subdue them, overcame them by famine. And
so the Salassians came into the Romans power. The Iapodans that inhabit
beyond the Alps, a most fierce nation; and almost wild, did reiecte the
Romans twice in.xx. Aquileia, is now o^ the Venetian jurisdiction. Torgius.
years, and ra^nged to Aquileia, and spoiled the Romans land called Torgius.
When Caesar went against them, they were the more fierce against him, and
cut down wood to stop him. And when Caesar went to an other wood, they fled,
and as he followed Caesar Augustus defeateth the Iapodans.
they laid trains for him. Caesar suspecting it, sent some of his, to the
tops of the hills, to set upon them on both sides. He coming easly, and
cutting the wooddes, they suddenly appeared from the trains, and hurt many.
But when the other were come from the tops, they were destroyed. The rest
flodde into the wooddes again, leaving their City, whose name was Terponus.
Terponus.
Caesar took it, but did not burn it neither, thinking they also would
render, as they did. Then he went to an other City, which they call
Metulio, which is the chief City of the Iapodans. Metulio.
It is situate upon two hills, in a woody place, between the which, a
little valley goes. And the youth to the number of three thousand well
practiced in arms, did easily repel the Romans from the walls. The Romans
set upon a mount, the which they within, and the other without, runnyng
day and night, did much hinder, having some engines, which they had
gotten in the war, whereby they made the Romans to lie further off. For
they had gotten their engines Engines taken at the place where Brutus and
Cassius fought with Caesar and Antony.
in that place where Brutus fought with Caesar and Antonie.

But when the Romans had beaten down part of their walls, they made
fortes within, and when they were wearye, they leapt into them that they had
now made.

The Romans taking the wall that they had left, burned Brydges made from
mountes to the walls, break.
it, and set two mountes against the other, from the which they made also
four bridges to the walls.

When all was ready, Caesar badde some go to the other side of the City, to
draw the Citizens asunder, and willed the other to go upon them on the
bridges, and he stood and looked upon an high Tower what was done. The
Barbarians came to resist them that gave the assault at the wall. The other
laying traynes behind, beating the bridges with their long spears, waxed more
fierce.

And when two of the bridges were broken, and the third like to fall, the
Romans were in such a fear, as none would go to the fourth.

Caesar rebuked them from the Tower, but they would never The boldness of
Caesar August^.
the sooner go. Wherefore he took a shield and ran to the bridge, and with
him Agrippa, Hierom and Lucius, that were Capitaines, and Volas one of his
Guard, only these.iiij.* and few other Tergatebearers went on the bridge. When
Caesar was on the bridge, the Souldioures being ashamed, ran straighte unto
him, by the reason whereof, the bridge being over laden, brake, and many fell
to the ground, of the which some dyed. Caesar being hurt The fourth bridge
breaks Caesar ^urte.
on the right leg, and the arm, went to the tower again, some of the chief
following him, yt he might show himself evidently to be Prudence of Caesar
Augustus.
alive, least some tumulte might be made for his death, or the enemies think
he had fled, and by and by commanded an other bridge to be made, which thing
chiefly made the Metulians afraid. The next day sending Ambassadors for peace,
they promised to deliver v. C. pledges, and receive a garriso^. And leaving the
higher hill, they al went into the other. When y^ garrison commanded the^ to
leave their armor, they were grieved, and putting their wives and children in
their Senatehouse, and receiving the garrison, they told the Romans, that if
they required of them any unreasonable thing, they would burn that place, and
set upon the Romans for desperation. Desperate at Metal^o.
Which when they had said, they al went from the low place to the higher. Then
the garrison set y^ house afyre, many of the women killed themselves, and their
children, some brought their children alive, and threw the^ into the fire. So
all the youth of the Metulians perished with battle, and the unprofitable sort
with fire, and the city was so burned, that as great as it was, there was not a
toke^ left of it. The Metulians being overcome, the rest of the Iapodans
yielded to Caesar. Thus the Iapodans beyond the Alps, became subject to the
Romans. When Caesar was gone, the Possemans Possenians* Metulians.
rebelled, whom Marcus Elbius overcame, and killed the^ that were cause of the
rebellion, and made the rest slaves. The Romans having gone twice against ye
Segestanes, neither took hostages nor Paeonians in the way to the Segestanes.
any thing else from them, wherefore they were the more boldened. Caesar went
against them, through the Paeonian land, who were not yet obedient to the
Romans. Their land is woddy, and stretches alo^g from the Iapodans to the
Dardanans. The Paeontans have no cities, but lands and houses together, nor any
common Justice, Paeonians have no Cities nor common place of Justice. Much
people without a head. Caesar burns the villages.
or Princes, to rule over them. They had an. C. M. fighting men of the best
years, but because they had none to command the^, they came not together. When
Caesar came, they ran into the wooddes and if they found any straggling, they
killed them. Caesar thinking they would have come to him, did neither burn
their fields nor their villages but because they came not, he set all on sire,
and eight days together, did them much harm, and so passed to the floude
Sa^us, Saeunus runs by the mountains of (...) into Danubius.
in the bank of the which was a City strong by the floude, and a great
ditche. Wherefore Caesar assaulted it as a store house for the war, against
the Daceans and Bastarnans, which dwell beyond Hister. This floude in that
place, is called Danubius, and going to other lower places, has the name of
Hister: Sa^us re^neth Hister. Danubius.
into it. Caesar had ships in the floude, that might bring victual to the
army by Danubio: for this Caesar would have the city of Segesta, as he went
forward. The Segestanes sent Ambassadors Segesta.
unto him to know what they should do, he willed the^ to receive garrison and
deliver pledges, that he might have Daci be Scythians of Europe, now Vallachia.
their city, as a store house, for his war against the Daceans, and as much
corn as they could bring. The chief men thought good to do it, but the people
began to rage, and cared not for the The people of Segesta, refuses the
garrison.
hostages, because they should be of the great me^: but when the garrison came,
they could not abide to see them, but ran upon them furiously, and shut the
gates, and showed themselves again upon the walls. Wherefore Caesar made a
bridge ever the floudde, and raised trenches and ditches about it. And when he
had shut them in their city, he erected two mountes, which they hindered as
much as they might: but when they could not defeat the mountes, they threw
fire and burning linkes upon them from an higher place. Aid was coming to
them, from an other nation of the Paeonians, against whom Caesar layee
ambushes, and so killed part of them, and part fled, so as there came no
more help to the Segestans. They enduring the siege very valiantly, were
overcome the.xxx. day at a hard fight, and then learned to make supplication,
whose ver ue Caesar spared the Segestanes for their valiantues.
Caesar marueling, and moved with pity of their prayers, did not kill them or
otherwise molest them, but punished them by the purse, and placed them in an
outward part of the City, and put in thirty bands for their garrison. This
done, he went False rumor causes Caesar to have a vvinter journey.
to Rome, to return again into Illyria. When it was told, that the
Segestanes had slain the garrison which was in the City, he came again with
all speed, though it were winter. Then hearing the rumor to be false, he
understood of truth that they were in danger: That the Segetanes had suddenly
set upon Segestanes, destroyed of the garrison.
them and killed many, but that the next day the soldiers had given an onset
upon the Citizens, and gotten the City. Wherefore Taulantians lea^^^g their
land, went to (...) that part of Macedonia, that is next the Gulf of ^enise,
not far from Durassa, and (...) a City Ar^^sse. Dalmatians now Slauonians
overthrow, Gabinius. Versus captain.
he turned his war to the Dalmatians, an other nation of the Illyrians, next
the Taula^tians; The Dalmatians after they had given an overthrow of five
bands under Gabinius, and taken five ensigns, they were proud of their
prosperity, and were in armor ten years together, and when Caesar came,
decreede to help the Segestanes. They were above 12000. good fighting me^, and
had made one Versus, their captain: He invaded again Pomona, a city of yt
Liburnians, and defensed it with trenche and ditch, and got other strong places
of yt country. For it is al hilly, the tops whereof stand up like pynacles.
The greater part of the^ were in the City, and the rest kept the hill tops,
so as they might easily see the Romans army. Caesar dessembled as though he
would enclose them al in a wall, but privily bad the bold sort to go to the
mountains, and to epsy what was to be done there. They going by the woods
secretly in the night, set upon the kepers, whom, being yet asleep, they
killed, and signified to Caesar that they were at the end of their journey, and
must have more men to get the City, and let some go from the hills to tell
others that were in other mountains. Wherefore the Barbarians were put into
great fear, when they saw themselves beset on every side, and chiefly they
that were in the higher hills, for lack of water, Lack of water.
and fearing the ways would be shut on all sides, they got the^ into Pomona.
Caesar enclosed the City, and two of the highest hills that were yet holden
of the enemies xl. furlongs about, and in the mean season gave an onset upon
Teutinus another captain of Teutinus.
the Dalmatians, and put him to flight, and chased him by the mountains, and
took the city in his sight. For y^ Citizens coming out before the preparation
was finished, they had a repulse, and the Romans, in the flight, got into the
City with the^, and when they Pomona taken.
had slain the third part of the Citizens, they drove the rest into the
Castle. There was one band of the Romans that kept the gats, upon whom, when
the Barbarians issewed the fourth night, they were afraid and forsook the
gates, but Caesar came and repulsed the enemies, and the next day they yielded
to them. Of Augustus punished^ his soldiers.
the band that offended, he punished every tenth man by lot. Of y^ Captains of
yt bands, he chastised two of every ten, the other, at the summer, he
commanded to eat barley in stead of wheat. Thus was Pomona taken.

Teutinus had divided his army into diverse parts in the hills, Teutinus.
wherefore the Romans did not follow them far, being ignorant of the way,
and fearing the unknown and consounded paths. For there is no entry into the
woods by any plain way, and the Dalmatians did lurk between two hills, when
they laid wait for Gobinius, in the which place they set also an ambushe for
Caesar: but he burned the woods on either side the way, and Caesar hurneth
vvooddes.
sent his army by the hills, and himself went up the valleys, cutting down the
woods, inuading the Cities, and burning what so ever was in his way. He
besieged the City Setouia, into aid Setonia.
of the which, came a great number of Barbarians, with whom Augustus hurt.
Caesar met, and would not suffer them to pass. Being hurt in that fight in the
knee, he lay sick many days. Being recovered, he went to Rome for the
Consulshippe; which he took with Bar batio Barbatius Tullus. Statilius Taurus.
Tullo, leaving Statilius Taurus to end the war, he entering his office at
the beginning of the month. That day, Antonie being The authority of three
men renewed in Rome.
appointed to his charge, he went again against y^ Dalmatians, keeping yet the
power of the three men, for now the second five years were expired, the which
they took of themselves, and the people confirmed it. Therefore the Dalmatians
being in want of victuals on every side, they came of themselves to Caesar,
humbly Seven hundred Hostagies.
yielding, and delivering seven hundred hostagies of their olune children.
Caesar commanded them to bring the ensigns that they had taken from Gabinius,
and to pay the tribute, which Ensigns re^^couered.
they promised to Caius Caesar, and had deferred to this time. And so they were
made the more obedient to the Romans ever after. Caesar set these ensigns in
the Gallerie that is called Octauia. When the Dalmatians were overcome, the
Derbanes Derbani.
came to yield themselves, and to deliver pledges, and pay tributes, which
they had so long omitted. Then Caesar came nearer to them, and they delivered
their pledges, which in his absence being sick, they refused to do. These are
thought to be the last, which Caesar brought to obedience, which before had
revolted and were not acquainted with others rule. Wherefore the Senate
appointed him to triu^phe of the Illyrians, which he did when he had overcome
Antonie. Caesar Aug. trium heth of the Illyrians* R^et^^n^, be they in the hills
that be called Gr^^^^es. Noritia, some think to be Ba^^ria, some S^^ria and
Carinthi^. Mysi^, now ^os^a and Sernia nigh Hungaria.
The other Illirians that the Romans had before the Paeonians, were the
Retians, N^rigians, and Mitians, which inhabit at the Euxine sea. I think C.
Caesar did subdew, the Retians and Noritians, when he made war upon the
Celtians, or that Augustus did conquer them, when he invaded the Paeonians,
for they have their habitation between both, I find no war made against
them of purpose, wherefore I think they were overcome, with their neighbors.
For M. Lucullus, L. Lucullus brother, that overcame Mithridates, did ouerrunne
all the region of the Mytians, and held his course to the flood, in the which
place there be four Greek cities next to y^ Mytians, that is, Histr^s,
Dionisop^l^s, Istri, Dionisopolis, Odisus, Mesembria, now Mesembler.
Odisus, and Mesembria. Then he brought out of Gallia that great Apollo that
stands in the palace. I do not remember that any other that ruled that common
wealth, did bring the Mytians to tribute, or Augustus, but Tiberius which
reigned after Tiberius.
Augustus, had them. But these things are showed of me in their place. Before
they had Egypt, what the Emperors did after Egypt was won, or how they
spedde in war, we have showed them, as their proper acts, after these common
enterprises: in the which many things be also contained of the Mysians. Now
seeing the Romans take the Mysians to be Illyrians, this book shall be named of
me the Illyrians, the which I wrote, that it might be an absolute matter, For
Lucullus ruling in the peoples Lucullus.
time, did ouerrun the Mysians, and Tiberius did receive them under his
Monarchy.

The Romans war with the Celtes.
THe Celtes did first invade the Romans, and took Celta be those Frenchmen
that inhabit from the flood Some to Gatona. Camillus.
Rome without the Capitol, and burned it. Camillus did overcome them, and
drive them away, and when they came again another time, he did overthrow them,
and triumphed of them when he was fourscore years of age.

The third time they came into Italy, when they were destroyed by the Romans,
under Ti^us Quintus their General.

After them, the Boians, a most fierce nation of the Celtes, came Bo^^ were
part of the French about Byons. C. Sulpitius his policy.
upon the Romans, and Caius Sulpitius Dictator, went against them, and used
this policy. He had the Souldyoures of the front to cast their darts, and
straight way to set down, till the second, third, and fourth, had done the
like, then every one stouping, when they had done their shot, that the
contrary weapons might be thrown in ^ayne, when the last had thrown, then
to run all with one force and cry with violence upon the enemy, for so they
should affray them, if they came so suddaynely to fight with them at hand,
after so great The French call their darts Gesa, The Macedomans Larisse, The
Romans Pila. Popilius. Camillus. P. Aemilius.
a brunt of strength. Their weapons were not like the darts which they of Rome
call Gese, the half of a square staff, with a piece of iron square also, and
that soft, beside the point, and even thus these Boyans were destroyed of the
Romans, with all their army. Popilius overcame other Celtes, and after him
Camillus, son to Camillus, did the same, and Paulus Aemilius set up tokens
of victory against the Celtes. Before the Co^sulships of Marius, a greater
number more warlike, and for age to be feared, invaded Italy and Gallia, and
overcame some Censuls of This Gallia was where now Lombardy is. etc.
Rome, and ouerthrewe their armies, against whom Marius went, and overcame
them all. The last and greatest fight with the Galls, was done by C. Caesar,
being general, there forty C. Casar.
hundred thousands of fierce nations did he overthrow in ten The victories of
Caesar.
years, which if a man will put together in one sum, he shall find they
were about four hundredth thousand, it is certain that a hundred thousand were
slain, a hundredth thousand taken, four hundredth nations, eight hundred
Cities, some reuoltyng, and some freely yeeldyng, he brought to obedience.
Before A^milianus.
Marius Fabius, Maximus A^milianus leadyng but a mean army, did overcome a
hundredth and twenty thousand Celtes, with the loss of fiftene men. And
though he were wounded on the knee, yet he rested not to ride about, and
encourage his army, instructyng them how to fight against the Barbarians,
sometime carried in his Chariot, and sometime led by hand. Caesar making
war against them, did first conquer the Luctians Luctians, Heluetians,
Tigrians, now Lurick, put the Romans under yoke. Labienus. Ap. Claudius.
Germans pass in greatness despising death in hope to live again. Triconi.
and Tigrians, to the number of two hundredth thousand. For the Tigrians before
time, Piso and one Cassius being leader, overthrew the Romans, and put them
under the yoke, as Aspinus Claudius writes in the old Monumentes. Labienus
the Lieftenant overcame these Tigrians, the rest Caesar subdued, and the
Triconians helpyng them. Then he conquered the Germans with Ariouisto, whose
greatness passed the greatness of all other: they have most fierce manner,
hardy in giuyng battle, not afraid of death, for the hope to rise again.
They can abide cold and hunger when need requires: their horses many times
are fed with shrubbes, yet they were, as is thought, not very paynefull in
war, nor going to it by order, but in rage like brute beasts, and so they
were conquered by the Romans patience and sufferaunce: for they would run
about the Romans battle with great violence, and the Romans keepyng order,
after the discipline of war, easily overcame the^, and at times, killed.lxxx.
thousand of them. After them Caesar Belga, is from Scalde to Sequane.
invaded the Belgian* with whom he met at a passage, and killed so many of
them, as he made a bridge of their bodies. Notwithstanding the Neruians made
him once go back, coming ^^eru^^, be people about Tornay
upon him suddenly, and killyng many of his people, for they slew almost all
the Capitaynes and Leaders, and besieged him in an hill, where he was driven
with his Guard: but when the tenth legion came on their backs, they killed
Teutones Germans. C^mbrians Danes*
lx. thousand of them, which were of Teutones and Cymbrians. Caesar also did
overcome the Allabrogians, nations of the Vsipetans Allabrogians Sauoyans.
Vsipetans, Tantharians. Sicambria Gelderians.
and Tantherians, some of them good in the war, and some not: the Sicambrians
with five hundredth horse put to foil five thousand of Caesar's by a sudden
onset, but they were plagued for it. Caesar was the first that passed the river
of Rhene, and carried Caesar had loss^ in the lovv countries, and sailed into
England.
his army into Britain, the greatest I Will in the earth, where was no fear of
him: he passed at the fleedde, and first had loss by sea, and was tossed with
the waters, which were first calm, and after violent, so as he got into
Brytaine by great pain and sufferaunce.

There is no more found of this matter.
Faults escaped in the Preface.
Line. 16. Ma^aea. line. 22. Palaestines. line. 21. Arabians. line. 24. put out
The first side.
pe^^ Mi^aris, and say Palmy^ians.

Line. 12. Thracius. line. 15. Axenus. The second side.


Line. ^ Daoubius. line. 6. Mnesiae. line. 7. Myrtoo. line. 13. seem. line The
third side.
22. the sentence beginueth at Two hundred years.

Line. ^^. the sentence begins at But after. line. 27. sentence beginnoth
The fourth side.
at But they had great. line. 28. sentence begins at The dominion. line. 30.
ye. line. 25. sentence begins at, For the.

Line. 3. Cyprus.

Line. 10. sentence begins at And this Book, for The fifth side. The
seventh side.


Faults escaped in the foreign vvarres.
FOlio. 1. line. 28. Thraclus. folio. 5. line. 25. make the co^ma at
suc^ceeded. folio. 6. line. 21. stock. folio. 6. line 29. put out and. fol. 8.
line. 29. Pericles. fol. 26. line. 26. a full point at remaining. fol. 28.
line. 2^. Sylla. fol. 29. line. 7. Chalcida. fol. 60. line. 19. Chotenians.
fol. 70. line. 20. Magnopolis. fol. 70. line. 28. Triario. fol. 40. line. 8.
Col^hians. fol. 61. line 17. alliance. fol. 51. line. 14. Tigranes. fol. 7.
line. 14. s^tt^. fol. 73. line vlt put out civil. fol. 74. line. 34. Granata.
fol. 76. line. 24. others. fol. 26. line. 32. Zenobius. fol. 87. line. vlt.
sentence begins at A^^^uball. fol. 93. line. 12. Sophonisba his wife. fol.
95. line. 8. precept. fol. 97. lyn. 1 of. fol. 101. line. 15. by. fol. 113.
line. 30. and* 32. Caepio fol. 98. line. 21. Blesius. fol. 115. line ^en^^.
N^^^^^ines. fol. ^^9. line. 12. companyons. fol. 49. line. 25. An^^lyc^^. fol.
119. line. 5. dis(...). fol. 51. line. 14. Tigranes. fol. 127. line. ^. ^^^^.
fol. 15^. line. 2. Ma^lius. fol. 189. line. 12. Adrumentu^. fol. 19. line. 29.
Dimochetes. fol. 197. line. 28. Asdruball. fol. ^^. line. 24. Dorilaus. fol.
173. line. 6. she. fol. 129. line. 16. (...). ibid. 20. o^e. fol. 131. line.
22. Fum^nes. fol. 137. line. 25. Romans. fol. 141. line. 17. Manius. fol. 140.
line 2. one. fol. 149. line. 29. India. fol. 157. line. 18. Leucra. fol. 168.
line. 12. Queen. fol. 176. line. 24. add to. fol. 205. line. 10. (...) that.
fol. 224. line. 3. tongue* fol. 261 line. 31. deiecting. fol. 265 line. 6.
legio^. fol. 257. line. 4. rodes. fol. 233. line. 29. Hipp^^^retu^. fol. 269
line. 3. Phraates. fol. 269. fol. 10. A^sacides. fol. ^82. line. 27. Getes.
fol. 138. line. 14. add at Larilla. fol. 262. line. 10. O^ode^. fol. 3. line.
17. Temples. fol. 280. line 1. put out famine. fol. 289. line. 32. Pyri^^eas.
fol. 249. line. 22. was. fol. 223. line. ^1. X^ll^. fol. 256. line. 30.
Acha^^s. fol. 175. line. 2. Zantippus. fol. 179. line 15. he. fol 216 line. 28.
w^. fol 244. line vir. Crassus. fol. 363. lin. 17. then. fol. 273. line. 3.
made. fol. 206. passer fol. 270. line. 25. Phraates fol. 25^. line. 29.
Ag^arus. ^o. 285. line. 10 Corfu. fol. 23^. lin. 24. Mastabales. fol. 164.
line. 15. Nicator. fol. 295. line vlt. put out and. fol. 288. line. Promo^a.
294. fo. 64. lyn. 17. X^phares. fo. 72.li. 28. Priario. fo. 250.li. 24. thou.

A Table for the Forrene* vvarres.
A.
ABsarus floode. 60 Acirius Manius procures war. 7 Acheans came from Troy.
61 Acts of Mitbridates. 68. 69 Adramittenians cruel. 14 Adrumetum. 180. 196
Aemilius seeks war and is deposed. 117. 118 Aegipte, for borne of the
Romans. 70. 162 Aetos with the golden fleefe. 62 Aemilius Lepidus reproved.
117 Aetolia waste. 141 Af^r Captain. 103 Africa, waste of Scipio. 174
Affricanes camps invaded by night. 183 Agathocles builded Hippo. 233
Agathocles tovver, victory of the Romans. 180 Agbarus deceyueth Crassus. 255.
256 Agares physicians. 53 Agaue tragedy, played in contumely of Crassus. 268.
Agema what. 150 Agron king of ^^^yrians. 284. 285 Alexanders sta^e divided.
162 Alexander the counterfayte. 172 Amastris. 7 Amnius, where they first fight
against Mithridates. 11 Amisus Achelous forsakes Mithridates. 38 Embassage to
be laughed to scorn. 5 Amazones what women. 62 Aminander. 135. Amilchar. 187
Amilchar Barcha. 76 Amilchar Admiral. 185 Amilchar Samu^s does wrongs. 108
Anniball. 78. 131. 132. 133. 136. 189. 190. 195. 196. 201 Antiochus. 130. 133
138 141. 147. 149. 152. 157. 152. 154. 155. Antiochus. marieth his mother in
law. 166. 168. Antiochus the God, why? 171. 173 Antigonns. A valiant prince.
163. Antip^ter. 163 Andrisco the counterfayte. 248 Anchor, what signifies.
165 Andronicus conspireth with Nico^^edes. 4 Antonie is called into Italy, is
made minister of Caesar that dead is 269. Co^pareth with kings of Persia. 270.
His errors, loss of his artillery, his Lieutenants. 272. His victories. 273.
His do^ing on Cleopat^^ 2^1. His estimation and conditions. ^76. His despair.
279 Antarij people plagned. 283 Antarius, his sons. 282 Antonies Angel,
fedreth Oct^^^us. 269 Arioha^^an^^ restored by the Romans. 7 Arist^o^, a
tyranne. 17. Is killed. 23 Aristo at Carthage. 133. Aristides. 156 Aristides
condemned of felony. 156 Arideus chosen king. 163 Argos in many places. 170
Aristander, southsayer. 171. A^tocus. 63 Araxes, greatest floodde. 280. 63
Argonautes visited of Pompey. 63 Armor delivered at Carthage. 214 Armed
Chariots. 24. 15^ Archelous overthrown. 25. 29 Arsaces the royal house of
Parthia. 10. 268. 262 Artabazes cause of the Romans loss. 290 Archelous
flees to Murena. 38 Aruaceans slain of T. Didius. 127 Aruaceans denies help
to the Numantines. 124 Aruaceans molested by Lucullus. 100 Artaxata, royal
city of Tigranes. 62 Asasis reuolteth. 208 Asclepiodotus, against Mithrida.
and with him. 28 Asdruball killed in Spain. 77 Asdruball overthrown by
Massinissa. 2^0 Asdruball wrongfully injured. 184. 187. He is killed and
despighted. 191 Asdruball called into Italy. 88 Asdruball Gisgo, into Spain.
181. 81. 177 Asdruball overthrows Manlius. 128 Attains. 3 Attilius killed.
54 Athens cruelly used of Sylla. 22 Athenion captain of Civil war. 35
Attalus gives his kingdom to the Romans. 36 Au^^pinans warlike nation. 501
Auarus. 12^ Augustus uses cruelty. 290. 295. 501 Autolycus companion of
Hercules. 49
B.
BAlissus. 257. Basyllus. 20 Barley given for punishment. 233. 295 Bacchus
Eu^^ke sent to kill. 40 Barathrum the great dongeon waste of Scipio. 232.
Basitanes hindered by negligence of ^. Pomp. 109 Bellians injured by Lucullus.
99 Bebrycia, beginning of Bythinia. 2 Betis floodde. 113 Benevolence of
Spaniardes gotten by Scipio. 86 Bernice a town of Epirus. 4 Bithynia given to
the Romans. 43 Blastophenices original. 103 Blesius killed, of the
Coltiberians. 98 Blesus Roman^* 98 Boetarchus a chief officer. 260 Boldness
of Sylla. 2^. Cruelty. 22 Bold answer of a vvounded Roman. 47 Bottones
reuolteth. 140 Bosphorus. 60. (...)aded. given to P^^^naces son of
Mithridates. 60 Bryttanie, not far from the continent. 74 Byrsa builded. 174.
Besieged. 244. Taken with L. M. 245
C.
CArthagies deliver their atmour. 214 Carthagies deliver. 300. Hostagies. 212
Carus overthrows Romans. 97 Cato of an embassage. 5. His manner. 94. 95.
Compared to Demosthenes. 94. 140 Calamities in Asia. 27 Causeans use the
Romans cruelly. 14 Castor destroys Mithridates children. 65 Causes of
Soldiers love to Antonie. 276 Cassius. 288 Calidius counterfaict message. 38
Carthalo. 210 206 Carthagies kill Roman Merchants. ^70. lend the Romans
Ships. 143. Have loss by Massinissa. 200. Break peace. ^89. Kille the
Roman Ambassadors. 189. 190. Make peace again. 191. Break it. 191. Their
courage. 238 239. Make a nevve navy. 240. Their error. 241. Their desperation
243. Canidius prospers in Armenia. 270 Calembrotus Ambassador killed. 285
Captives killed of Aemilianus. 110 Captives delivered by Scipio. 86 Captives
deliuere by Pompey. 58 Captives delivered by Mithridates. 12 Cappadocia invaded
by Tigranes. 40^ Cappadocia given to Ariobarzanes. 63 Caucasus full of springs
of gold. 62 Caecilius Met ellus. 287. Caepio. 113 Caesar stirs Crassus to
war. 250. Sends his son honorably. 251. his happiness in vva^^e. 289.
Cae^e holovv part of Syria. ^ Celtiberius uses craft. 96 Cessaro,
overthrows Mum^ius. 103 Ceraunus. 170. Cynegus. 2 Chariot with vvhight
horses. 41 Charchedon. 174 Chians cruelly used. 27 Cilicians called pirates.
why? 55 Cilicia, how it fell to the Romans. 161 Cilicia invaded of
Antiochus. 129 Cimbrians spoil Delphos. Clypeia. 175. called Aspis. 233 Cold
air signifies what. 280 Coleheans come from Troy. 40 Comagene. 73. Cotta. 43
Commentaries of Augustus. 299 Competitours of the Consulship. 249 Comintus his
hardiness. 96 Crassus his flougth. 251. His answer. 261. His discourage.
262. 263. His abusing. 264. 265. 266. His noble words before his death. 267
Cruelty of Asdruball. 238. 239 Cruelty of Mithridates. 26. 15. 14. 3^. 4^. 64
Cyrtis chief city of Syphax. 186 Cyrus uses Craesus, as Scipio Syphax. 186
Cyzians defends valiantly. 44
D.
DAdo. 174 Dalmatia. 287 Dalmatians deliver. 700. Piedges to Augustus. 295
D^nubius. 293 Darius the Median, invaded of Pompey. 63 Death of Mithridates
daughters. 67. of himself. 68 Deceipte noted in the Romans. 10. 39. 2^^
Deceit of Manius with Mithridates. 43 Delphos spoiled. 283. Deruetrius. 159.
160 Demetrius, why called king. 164 Demetrius, killed of his wife. 173
Demetrius inuadeth Romans, is killed. 285 Derbanes deliver pledges and pay
tributes. 296 Description of Carthage. 214 Desperation causes fury. 90 293
Devise of Scipio, to arm. 300. Romans. 177 Diadem blovven off Alexanders
hedde. 155 Dimochetes. 19. Dori^aus. 28. Capitanes of Mithridates. Diodotus
usurper, surnamed Triphon. 17^ Dioph^^es valiant. 145 Diocles flees to
Lucullus. 46 Diogenes, (...) son, slain. 29 Diogen^s ^^^nd to (...)
overthrown. 242 (...) himself. 45 (...). 60 (...). 119 (...) of the Romans.
9. 212 21^ Drea^^ of A(...)nus. 6 Dre^^ of Lucullus. 49
E.
EDeates yeldeth to Caesar Augustus. 290 Eliodorus vsurpe^, killed. 159
Elephants cause of Romans loss. 99. of Antiochus his loss. 152. Burned in
Syria. 160. Cause both of gain and loss. 194 Envy against Scipio. 227. 228
Ephestans despighte the Romans. 13. 14. Kill Zenobius. 27. Punished. 36
Epaminondas. 157. Ensigns recovered. 295 Erasistratus a good Physician. 168.
169 Erisana besieged. etc. 110 Error of Canidius. 275. Eating of herbs. 277
Etrurians descended from the Lydians. 205 Evil tokens of Crassus. 252. 253.
254 Evils, the less to be chosen. 223 Euargetes, why so named. 6 Eumachus
erected of the Galatians. 26 Eumenes refuses Antiochus. 251. 131 Eumenes
revvarded at Rome. Eupater. 169. Eusebes. 17^ Example good, a good lesson. 237
Execrations against Crassus. 250 Exiled from Carthage, flee to Massanissa. 207
Expenses paid by the Carthagies. ^88
F.
FAbius abateth Viriatus. 109 Fabius overthrows Mithridates. 53 Fab. Maximus
first tamed Viriatus. 109 Factions in Carthage. 206 Faintness of the Romans.
263 Faith of Carthage. 175. 176 Famine in Carthagies camp. 209 Famine in the
Romans camp. 118 Famine compels the Donatians to yield. 295 Famine the
way to overcome Lucullus. 501 Fate of necessity. 167. 240 Fear of the
Romans. 13. 242 Fear of Mithridates. 17 Fidelity of slaves to the Romans.
19 Fight with Mithridates. 12. with Archelous. 25. with the Rhodians. 16.
with the Miners. 21. At Orchomeno. 28. French horsemen. 274 Fightes with
Scipio and Anniball. 194. 195. 166 Fight by Sea. 16. 143. 144. 146 Fimbrius
kills Flaccus 30. Is killed. 35 Fire of Mithridates sacrifice, how far
seen. 39 Flaminius malicious. 135 Flesh of men eaten. 23. 125 Foresigbt of
the Romans. 137 Forgetfulness remedy against misery. 219 Fuluius loses in
Spain. 98
G.
GAbinius banished for making war wrongfully. 162 Gabinius forbids
Meurena to make war. Gabinius refuses Gold. 39 Galathians do valiantly. 260
Galba overcome. 104. Col^tonse. 105 Generals seek profit. 117 Gentius king of
Illyria. 286 Getes a nation beyond Hister. 282 Gift royal of Antonie. 270
Goods got of the Romans. 93 Golden fleese. 63 Gold spoiled, saves
Mithridates. 49 Gold not regarded of Celtiberians. 105 Gordena appointed to
Tigranes. 63 Gordius Captain against Murena. 39 Gracchus name great in
Spain. 96 Gravity of Scipio. 89 Greek cities take part with Antioch^^.
132 Greek letters known to Orodes. 268 Gulussa Asdruball killed at Carthage.
234 Gulussa, Masinissas son injured. 208 Guide followed in the mountains. 47
Gymnasij Islandes. Baleares. 193
H
HAnno one of the chief of Carthage. 76 Hanno is delivered to Martius. 90
Hanno works vvyles. 187 Harlot saves Atoichus the pityfull. 173 Health most
necessary for a general. 47 Herbs. 277 Heliodorus kills Seleucus. 159
Helepolis an engine to beat wales. 43 Helepolis an engine against Cyzi^^. 43
Hellespont, invaded of Antiochus. 129 Henetnais destroyed of Sylla. 32
Heniochians of Pontus receive Mithridates. 6^ Hercules of Tyrus. 74 Heralde of
Spain. 99 Heraclea, vvonne of Lucullus. 49 Hiber the floodde, limite of the
Carthag. 176 Hiberians, now Spaniardes which. 60 Jerusalem, holy city
dismanteled. 161 Histories written by the king of Armenia. 268 Hippozareta
rejects the Romans. 233 Horoscopa, got of Massanissa. 208 Human things,
subject to kings next God. 167 Husbandry surer than Merchandise. 277
I.
Jason Trallianus a writer of Tragedies. 268 Iassus taken of Pirates. 37
Iapodians overcome. 287. 290 Iberia now Spain a mighty country. 74 Idumea
vvonne by Pompey. 64 Jews how often overcome. 161 Jews taxed with great
tributes. 161 Ignorant Captains not obeyed. 166. 120. 122 Ignominy of
Soldiers, lewd by hardiness. 20 Illitinga taken. 99. Illyria. 282. 283
Illyrius, what sons he had. 282 Ilium, Troy, and Carthage had like luck.
299 Ilius, made fellows of Rome by Sylla. 36 Ilium. 30. Io. 60 Inconveniences
in Asia. 37 Incommodities by pirates. 55 Indus a floodde. 164 Indibilis
reuolteth. 94 Ingratitude of the Romans. ^^6 Ingratitude of Carthagies. 175
Injury done by Prusias. 7 Injury done by Mithridates. 14 Injury done by
Ambassadors. 10 Ioneans, used to obey kings of Asia. 135 Io turned into a
covve. 60 Joy of the Romans. 28 Ipsuma town of Pluygia, where Antiochus
was flaine. 164 Iphe^ia builder of Hercules pillours. 75 Ippasineans,
Interfrurians, yield to Augustus. 289 Iscadia taken by Aemitianus in
Portingall. 116 Isis honored of the Rhodians. Italians killed in Asia. 14
Ituraea, vvonne by Pompey. 64 Iugurtha comes to Scipio. 122 Juno, jealous. 60
Jupiter Fabirins temple at the Rhodes. 16 Justice of Pompey. 62
K.
KIngs ruled by God. 167 Kingly mind of Mithridates. 47. 64 Kings in Pompeys
triumph. 17 Kingly sacrifice. 3^ Kindness of Soldiers. 276 King Antiochus
the God killed of his wise. 171 Kiing Sele^cus poisoned of his friends. 172
King Antiocus dies of consumption. 172 King Alexander the bastard, killed of
Triphon. 172 King Tryphon killed of Antiochus. 172 King Antiochus kills
himself. 173 King Demetrius killed of his wife. 173 King Seleucus killed of
his mother. 173 King Grypus kills his mother. 173 King Antiochus Gripus
burned in a schole house. 173. King Seleucus the great killed of Cerau^us. 170
King Orodes killed by his son. 269 King Machares kills himself. 61 King
Mithridates desires to be killed. 68 King Prusias killed in lupi^^^s temple. 5
King Syphax dies in prison. ^^7
L.
LAbinius made general of the Parthians. 269 Lacedaemonians sends a Captain
to Carthage. 175 Lambrac^ vvonne by Caepio. 112 Lamentable destruction of the
Chians. 27 Lampsacenes, crave help against Antiochus. 120 Laomedon, first
Prince of Syria. 163 Laodicians deliver Oppius. 13 Larissa besieged of
Antiochus and forsaken. 138 Large commission of Pompey. 58 Laws sleep for
this day. 234 Laws restored by Sylla in Athens. 23 Leptines kills Octauius.
160 Letters in Lavvrell. 46 Lethes the ^looode, first passed by Brutus. 111
Liberty of Rome not sure, Carthage continuing. 207. Linteuon, captain of the
Numantines. ^00 Lisistratus Captain of Cizicus. 43 Los^e of Romans. 54 Love
of thertie, works extremity. 126 Locha spoiled, against Scipio his will.
180 Lucia plagued for helping their friends. 125 Lucia city punished. 125
Lucullus his diligence. 20 Lucullus espieth advantage. 41 Lucullus overcomes
Capitaines. 46 Lucullus overthrows Tigranes. 5^ Lucullus forsaken. 55
Lucullus does vvrong in Spain. 100. 101. 105 Lusitans make war. 103
Lusitans, overthrown. 104 Lycians, given and taken from Rhodes. 30
Lysimachus. 129. 1^4 Lysimachia restored by Antiochus. 129 Lysians admitted
fellows to Rome. 1^ Lysias killed by Demtrius. 160
M.
MAchares King of Bosphorus. 50. 61 Macedome invaded by Mithridates. ^. 34
Magnesians made fellows of Rome. 36 Ma^^cus resists valiantly. 52 Marcellus
does little in Spain. ^^ Marcus Figulus overthrown. 2^^ Masultan^ under King
Syphax and Massan. 17^ Maxaties Parthian, kills Crissus. 267 Mastabales and
Micipsa moved against Rome. 2^^. Mago yields to Scipio. 85 Massinissa allieth
with Scipio. ^3. 178 Massinissa vexes Carthage. 1^8* his manliue^le and
stature. 208. his age, his felicity and end. 230 Manlius. 157. 158 Mancinus in
danger. 235 Martius despighted. 13. 33 Marius denies burial. 36 Machares
kills himself. 6^ Manner of the Romans against the Parthians. 276 Martius
against the Hiberians. 90 Mardus faithful to the Romans. 274 Man's life
subject to mutation. 213 Meotian Princes receive Mithridates. 61 Media how it
increases. 12^ Me^itini of Illyria subdued. 289 Menas Ambassador of Prusias.
3. 4* Meromenaus subdued by Augustus. 280 Menophanes saves Pharnaces. 66 Men
saved beyond hope. 5^ Message of Hiberians 9^ Messala Co^^^inus. 290 Megata
taken. 237 Mind taken away by Misery. 247 Mithridates expelled by Orodes his
brother. 162 Mithridates expels Ariobarzanes. 7 Mi^^^h^^ overthrows the
Romans. 135 Minio of Smyrna conspireth. 28 Mithrobarzanes Captain of
Tigranes. 50 Mineruas Temple burned by Fimbria. 31 Micipsa sends and to F. M.
Aemilianus. 109 Misery of the Romans. 217 Misery makes much speech. 216
Minister of Comagena equal to a King. 70 Mithridates kills his sons. 64.
38. sends to Sertorius 40. is abused. 43 Mithridates flees in a Pirates
boat. 46. wills his vvines to be killed. 40 Mithridates overthrows
Fabius. 53. is hurt. 54. 53. fleyth Pompey 50. will not deliver fugitives
i^id. conceyueth great things. 60. will not come at Pompey. 64. gathers
forces. 65. his children killed. 65. his army reuolteth. 66. his end. 68
Mithridates Parthian saves Antonie. 278 Mothers f^^^i^ for loss of their
children. 212 Mo^^^^^^. 270 278 Mo^^^^e is killed. 4^ Money occasion of
mischief. 17 Malice obteyning pardon unthankful. 60 Multitude of Rouers. ^5
Mu^^^^^ence of Tigranes. 63 Music esteemed of Mithridates. 60 Mu^^^^^ of the
Romans. ^^ Mummius victory and triumph. 104 Mutation of Kingdoms. 249
N.
Narces gotten by Anniball. 188 Name of Kings given to Alexanders successors.
164 Name of Carthage. 185. 240 Na^i^^an^ overcome by Augustus. 28^ Necessity
without law. 234 Nepheris taken with great slaughter. 243 Nergobriges use
craft. ^0 Necessity of Numantines. 126 Neruians overthrow Caesar, and be
overthrown. 207 Nicanor killed of Seleucus. 164 Nicanor a name, why given to
Seleucus. 155. 164 Nicephoriu^ taken and desaced 3. Nicopolis. 166. 70
Nicomedes against his father. 4 begins war 7. flees. 12 Nonius refuses
to swear. 35 N^d^^ flees. 43 Numidians of long life. 208 Numantines kill the
Romans. 114. 115 Numantines kill themselves. 126 Numidians victory. 210
O.
Obstinacy of the Aslapians. ^1 Obo^^a taken. 110 Ocile pardoned. ^9 Octauius
killed. 160 Olcabas forsakes Lucullus. 47 Oppius delivered by the Laodicians.
13 Oracle of Seleucus death. 1^3 Oracle of Annibals death. ^34 Order of
Anniball. 192 Order of Scipio. 1^3 Oraces King of Albania. 62 Orodes. 25^. 256.
^70 Order of the Romans. 276 Order of the Romans affrayeth the Parthians.
272. Oration of ^s^^^l^^ll. 1^7 Oration of H^^^o. 216 Oration of Auarus. 125
Oration of Pelopides. 8 Ornaments of a thousand talents spoiled by Pytats at
Samothracia. 3^ Oration of Mithridates. 4^ Osta^es vvonne by Attalus. 104
Ostra^a taken. 99
P.
PAlladium image of Minerua. 3 Parthian King crafty. 52 Parthians deceive
Crassus. 256. 264 Parthians spighteth Crassus. 267 267 Parthians deceive
Antonie. 267. 268 Passion pitiful of Carthagies. 215. 216 Parthians manner in
war. 258. 259 Pacorus killed of Ventidius. 2^9 Pallantia. ^^^. 10^
Paphlagonia invaded of Mithridates. 1. 34 Pallantines overthrow the Romans.
11^ Pannonians Paeonians. 288. 202 Paphlagonia given by Sertorius. 4^ Paulus
Aemilius overthrows Perseus. 286 Parthia invaded by Antiochus. 129
Pausimachus deceived by Polyxenides. 144 Peace made with Carthage. 188. 77
Peace with Mithridates. 3^ Pergameneans use cruelty. 14 Perpenna. 12^
Pergamenians covvardes. 1^5 People of the Cities tumultuous. 191. 197. 20^.
^25. 207. Peace broken with the Numantines. ^^^ Peace broken with Viriatus.
11^ Perdiccas rules after Alexander. 6 Pharnaces against his father. 66. 7^
Phanagorea. 65. 69 Phraartes. 271. ^7^ Phalaux of Macedonia. ^40. 144. 15^
Phameas yields, and i^ revvarded. 2^2. 2^3 Philip clea^eth to the Romans.
138. 13^ Philip of Megalopolis prisoner. 1^^ Phileten^e buyeth a dead body. 17^
Philip is gratifyed. 141 14^ Philosophers Tyrannes. 17 Philoctetes monument. 4^
P^aenix forsakes Mithridates. 47 Pharnaces gets Phanagorea. 7^ Phares a
Country overthrown. 285 Pitiful state of the Romans. 263 Pine committed to
his stepmother. 285 Platte of City destroyed by Wales. 24^ Pompey his
diligence. 55. his justice. ^^ Pompey defaceth Jerusalem. 63 Pompey deals
straightly with Antiochus. 64. vi^^teth the monument of Argonantes. 62.
appoynteth Kings. 70. buyldeth Cities. 70. ^^ a pleaser of his vvile. 250
Policy of Augustus. 2^0 Policy of Figulus. 28^ Policy of Paul. ^^milius. 286
Popilius to Antiochus. 17^ Polibius. 249 Power of Mithridates. ^. 10. ^^
Policy of the Iberians. 76 Poliph^nius and his race. 282 Poison that Princes
can not avoid. 68 Pray of Sagunti sent to Rome. 86 Pray of Nergobugo given to
the Soldiers. 100 Pray of Spain allieth the Carthagies. 76 Prometheus
monument visited of Pompey. 6^ Promona taken from Liburnians. Prusias deceyueth
the Romans. 3 Prusias recompenceth Attalus. 3 Prusias practices to kill his
son. 3 Prusias is killed. 5 Princely word of a King. 47 P^olomen^ called
King. 164 Pusillan^mutie of Hamunus. 135 Pun^^hment of rebellious Souldy ours.
^2 Pyrisseans of Illyria subdued. 280 Pyrenec Mountains. ^4 Pygn^lcon, Ty^ant
of Tyrn^. 174
Q.
QVintus Fabius against Viriatus. 108 Quintus Fulutus Nobilis. 116 Quintus
Pompey 114. 115 Q^^k^ saying of Cas^ius. 264 Quick saying of Tig^anes. 51
Quick^ s^ying of D^^o^^^^s. 251 Quick saying of C^as^us. 251 Quick saying of
Vergises. Qu Sopho^isha dies of poison willingly. 187 Qu. N^onima dies by
commandment. 40 Qu. L^odice killed by Prolomie Philadelph. 171 Qu. Cleop^tra
of Syria killed by his sonn^. Qu. Oppius taken of Mithridates. 13 Qu. ^^p^o
breaks p^ace. 110 Qu. F. M^ximus Aemillanus, against Viriate. 109 Qu. F.
Nobilia against the Sogodan^s. 97 Qu. Pompe^us against Viriate. 110. 114 Qu.
Sertorius sty^reth Spain. 1^8
R.
Rashness of Gallus. 275 Regulus taken. 175 Report. 252 Renolt^ng people
punished. 36 Regions im^aded o^ Mithridates. 1 Rhodians val^antnesse. 15 16
Rhodians made f^llovves of Rome. 36 Rhodians join with the Romans. 144
Rhodians revvarded at Rome. 150 Rhodes beseeged of Mithridates. 15 Ritogenes
act at Nu^antia. 124 Roman Name saved. 185 Romans partial. 206. 207. 20^
Romans s^keth occasi^ against Carthage. 210. 211 Romans in what joy. 247
Romans ou^rcome. 12 Romans injured in Asia. 14 Romans hated. 15 Romans
flee. 48 Romans fall to spoil. 40 Romans resrayne from spoil. 5^ Romans
hate Mithridates. 5^ Romans re^oyce at the death of Mithridates. 6^ Romans
defiance of the Carth^gies. 80 Romans courage increases in perils. 84 Romans
killed at Delos. 135 Rom^nes ^layne. 275 Romans disordred. 2^^ Romans fall
into diseas^s. 280 Rommes a frayde of P^^onians. 280 Ruffu^ is holp^n of
Scipio. 121
S.
SAcrific^ to lightning. 166 Sacrifice to boldness and sear. 183 Sacrifi^es
signifying s^^^. 187 Sacrifice of a black (...) 44 Sacrifice of King^. 3^
Samb^ca an (...). 1^ Sa^^^o the Count^ey of France. ^3 S^^unt dest^^ved by
A^^iball. 80 Sagunt r^coue^ed by Sc^pio. 8^ Sala^^i trouble Augu^^us. ^00
Sa^^us and Samothraci^ taken of Pirates. 27 Sa^ga^^us the flood where Man^us
pas^ed. 12 Sa^us slovveth into Hister. 203 Sc^ptons two b^eeth^en killed in
Spain. 82 Sc^p^o accounted rash. 83 Sc^pio ^hevveth modestic. 83 Scipio
gets new Ca^thage. Scipio seems to work by inspiration. 87 Scipio
senere. 127 Scipio kills hand to hand. 102 Scipio reformeth the Camp at
Carthage. 236 Scipio is made Consul before his tu^e. 134. 135 Scipio sent
with his brother into Asia. 143 Scipio is m^de orderer of Mais^cluldre^. 230.
23^ Scipio is stenderly set forth. 177 Scipio is accused. ^56 Scipio kills
not spies. 1^1 Scipio saneth Romans. 226. 227. 228. 229 Scipio reformeth the
Camp at Numan^^a, and gets the City. 11^. 121. 122. 123 Scipio beholds
the fight betvveene Mass^nissa, and the Carthag^es. 209 Scipio is made arb^trer
betvveene them. 209 Scipio conte^neth his accusers. 150 Scoroba, bounds of
Cappadocia and Pontus. 12 Scordis^^ans overthrown by L. Scipio. 284 Scythians
aydeth Mithridates. 61 Sextus shuts Manceus up. 51 Sedition at Rome for
want. 248 Seleucidans reign, how long. 173 Segeda cause of Rebellton in
Spain. 96 Semella sharply handled of Ae^illianus. 110 Senate of Nucena choked
in a bath. 203 Senate of Acerra buried quick. 203 Se^torius. 40. 12^ Seleucus
of great dominion. 164. Tokens of his prosperiti^. 165. lus stature. 166. his
building of Cities. 166 Sele^cia at Tigris, what happened. 166 Sele^cus gives
his vvi^e to his son. 160 Seleucus is trayterousely killed. 170 Seleucus
son to Ant^ochus killed. 150 Seleucus buried in a Schole house. 173 Since
sayleth in cal^nuti^. 147 Sense of hearing soonest troubled. 258 Sea, occasion
of offense. 210 Serpents used in medicine. 53 S^leucules the royal house of
Syria. 173 Segestanes vali^nt. 203 Ships bu^ned in Syria. 160 Sharp speech to
Crassus. 252 Sicel^e recovered by the Romans. 1. 2 Sign^ to help one another
by Scipio. 123 S^^enes se^te at Carthage. 241 Sino^eg^a a rich Castle of
Mith^lda^es. 60 Sickness strange in the Romans host. 27^ S^^than^ resto^ed by
Sc^pio of the goods that the Carth^g^es h^d taken from them. 24^ S^^ne^s
resi^^ Ant^o^hu^. 12^ So^ovv^ull verse re^^arsed of Scipio. 240 Souldyo^es
fight taken by lotte. ^0 Sophonisb^. 186. 187 Sobodacas accused by Olcabas. 47
Soc^ates condemned. 156 Soter Demetrius. 160 Sostus prospers in Syria. 270
Socrates Chr^stus inuadeth Byth^nia. 7 Southsayer to A^^on^e. 269 Spiritual
state of Comagena. 73 Spite of the Parth^ans. 267 Stratonice con^ubiu^, privy
to treasure. 64 Stratonica Queen. 1^7. 64 Straight interpretation of fight. 64
S^reames of gold. 62 Suba reuolteth from Massanissa. 208 Suspicions betvveene
the Roma. and Antioch. 1^0 Supplications at Rome for victory against
Antio^hus. 14^ Superstition of the Romans. 250 Suraenas subtle. 255. 258
Suspicion betvveene Massinissa and the Roma. 223 Surer life by land than by
Sea. 2^0 Syphax goes from the Camp. 180 Syphax practices peace. 181 Syphax
practices to kill Massinissa. 185 Syphax is taken of Ma^sinissa. 185 Syphax is
well used of Scipio. 186 Syphax dies at Rome. 187 Syria ruled by Prolomeus.
163 Syria how it can ^ to the Romans. 163
T.
Talk of Anniball and Scipio. 192 134 Talk of peace. 3. 33 Tantalus Captain
yields. 113 Tanginus, a ^aptayne of manly th^^ues. 115 T^gus flood passed by
Lucullus. 100 Ta^tes^us the place of Argonthonius. 74 Taulentians subdued by
Augustus. 28^ Tanuscians of Illyria subdued by Augustus. 28^ Tau^us the hill
pas^ed of Pompey. 6^ Telling of truth punished. 50 Te^mantine^ distress the
Romans. Temples robbed. 38. 243 Tempest destroys Roman^ Ships. 30 Tempest
destroys Mithridates navy. 46 Temples turned into Shoppes at Carthage. 223
Terentius Varro overthrown of the Portugalles. 103 Tentinus Captain of D
^mati^n^. 294. 205 Tetrarches of G^litia eui^^ used etc. 26 Themiscinans
strange fig^^. 46 Thebes ^enolteth o^t. 18 Th^^mopyl^. ^^9. 14^ Themisto^les
compared with Mon^^us. 1^^ Thessa^^ cased of en^m^es. 1^8 Th^^u^tes taken of
Syph^x. 1^2 Thou nedde unto by A^^iball. 1^6 T^be^^us Pandusius. 28^ T^^oth^us
Plus^^^a. 54 T^^e^su^. 20^. Emperor of Rome. Tigrane^ speech of Lucullus
army. 5^ Tig^anes inuadeth Cappadocia. 40 Tigranes will not see Mithridates.
40 Tigranes kills two of his sons. 63 Tigranes submits to Pompey.
Tigranocerta. 50 Ti^h^unta part of Thermopyle. 130 Tithians help the Romans,
and be injured of Lucullus. 107. 100 Torg^^s Captain of the Iapodians. 200
Tre^lin^ of Mithridates hevvrayed. 64 Tragedies written by Artabazes King. 26^
Triballi people of Illyria. 282 Tributes for ^ue years upon Asia. 37 Tryphon
vsin per of Syria killed. 172 Trallians use the Romans cruelly. 14 Treason
greatest poison of Princes. 68 Trianus overthrown. 53 Troy cruelly used of
Embria. 31 Triumph of Pompey. ^1 Triumph of Scipio. 205 Triumph of Scipio. 248
Triumph of Augustus. 206 Triumph of Antony unpleasant. 281 Triumph
privileged. Tumult in Carthage. 207 Tysca a place containing fifty Cities.
206 Tygranes of Syria expelled by Antony. 270
V.
Valiantness of the Greeks at Tigranocerta 52 Vargunteius and four bands
killed. 263 Valiantness better than number. 94. 102 Valiantness and danger
of Augustus. 291. 292 Valiantness of twenty souldyoures. 20^ Vaccea^s
overcome by Metellus and Scipio. 114. 1^1 Varius a Captain sent from
Sertorius to Mithridates, is killed of Lucullus. 46 Vagises sharp aunsvvere to
Crassus. 25^ Virtue in Souldyoures better than number. 102 Virtue of Crassus
shevved in danger. 161. 266 Versus valiant Captain of the Dalmatians. 244
Vermi^a, Syphax son, aydeth Anniball. 189 Vettiluts slain by Viriatus. 107
Veterus a Captain of Augustus scorned, and resisted of the Sal^sians. 2^0. and
be pardoned. Ventidius prospers in Parthia. 260. 270 Ve^us Temple spoiled,
Antiochus perishes. 1^2 Victory of Manius. 140. 141 Victories of Mithridates.
12. 48. 3^. 5^ Victory of Sylla. 2^. 25 Victory of Lucullus. 46. 48. 5^
Victori^ of Pompey. 5^ Victory of L^uiu^ by etca. 142 Victory of Lucullus by
Sea. 146 Victory of Domitius. 152 Victory of Manlius. 157 Victory of
Martius. 90 Victory of Flaccus* 95 Victory of Cato. 95 Victory of Scipio.
93. 88. 190. 196. 180. Vision fears Mithridates. 17 Vision of Caesar. 248
Viriatus valian: Captain. 105. 106. 107, 108 Viriatus shows himself noble.
110 Viriatus is killed by treason. 112 Villages. 400 destroyed by Mu^aena. 38
Vovv made to destroy Carthage. 210. 207 Vovv made, not to reedifie Carthage.
247 Volso gives oath to Antiochus cu^bassadors. 155 Vtica forsaken of Scipio.
188 Vtica revvarded with Carthagles land. 248 Vtica resists Scipio. 188. is
yielded. 211
VV.
Want of Salt. 290. 501 2^0 Water Venomous. 2^8 War without
Proclamation. 211 Want of treasure in Rome. 11 What brought the state of Rome
to the rule of one. 284 Wise of Asdruball bold. 240 VVinter and hunger two
great enemies. 273 VViles laid against Pompey. 62 VViles of Pompey against
Mithridates. 59 VViles laid for Ve^^lius. ^07 VViles of the Par^lisans
discovered. 258 VVlues of Mithrida. commanded to be killed. 49 VVind extreme
breaks the fight. 52 Wise of the father given to the Son. 169 VViues taken
out of time. 139. 13 Wisdom of Scipio. 227. 182 ^2 VVilsuln ^^^ of women of
Metulio. 2^2 Words of Scipio at the taking of Carthage. 249 Women valiant.
62. 111. 80. 62 Words of Scipio. 238. 23^. 240 VVodde burned with Barbarians.
^2 VVoddes burned by Auguslus. 2^5. 230 VVonder at Rome at the nevves of the
taking of Carthage. 217
X.
XAntippus 157. overthrows the Romans. Xenophon, and his ten thousand.
277 Xerxes. 139 Xiphares killed of his father. 64 Xoras. 154 Xolla victualleth
the Romans. 223
Y.
Young Crassus pitifully killed. 261
Z
ZAcinthians, auncesters to Sagunt. 77 Zama, where Scipio fought first with
Anniball. 190 Zenodotia vvonne by Crassus. 251 Zenobius spoyleth the Chians. 27
Zenobius killed by the Ephelians^ 27 Zeuxis Captain of Antiochus. 150
FINIS.

