THE CHRISTIAN WARFARE.

WHEREIN IS FIRST GENERALLY SHOWED THE MALICE, POWER AND politic stratagems of
the spiritual enemies of our salvation, Satan and his assistants the world
and the flesh; with the means also whereby the Christian may vvithstand and
defeat them.

AND AFTERWARD MORE SPECIALLY THEIR PARTICVLAR TEMPTATIons, against the
several causes and means of our salvation, whereby on the one side they
allure us to security and presumption, and on the other side, draw us to
doubting and desperation, are expressed and answered.

WRITTEN ESPECIALLY FOR THEIR SAKES who are exercised in the spiritual
conflict of temptations, and are afflicted in conscience in the sight and sense
of their sins.

By I. DOWNHAM Preacher of Gods word.

Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the Devil.

Ephesians. 6.11. AT LONDON printed by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Cuthbert Burby, and are
to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1604.

TO THE GODLY, ZEALOVS, AND SINCERE PROFESSORS OF GODS TRVE RELIGION, SIR JOHN
SCOT, Sir THOMAS SMITH, and their Ladies; Master ROBERT CHAMBERLAIN Esquire,
and Mistress ANNE CHAMBERLAIN his wife, his well-beloved and most respected
friends: I. D. wishes the fruition of all the true comforts of this life, and
eternal happiness in the life to come.
MAnifold (right Worshipful) and most dangerous are the temptations and
assaults of our spiritual enemies, whereby they labor to hinder the salvation
of Gods elect, and to increase the greatness of their hellish dominions, by
withdrawing (if it were possible) Gods servants from their subjection and
allegiance, and making them their slaves and perpetual vassals. To this end
they take indefatigable pains, going continually about seeking whom they may
devour; sometimes like roaring Lions, compelling by violent force, and
sometimes like old Serpents, alluring and deceiving with treacherous policies.
Neither do they rest in the time of our rest, but waking and sleeping they set
upon us, one while enticing us to swallow the poison of sin, with the sugared
baits of worldly vanities, and another while driving us into their snares of
perdition, with the sharp pricking goades of misery and affliction. Before us
they set carnal pleasures, deceiving riches, and vain honors, to allure us
to come into the broad way that leads to destruction: and behind us they hold
the three-stringed whip of loss, shame, and punishment, to keep us from going
back, and to hasten us with winged speed to run forward in this hellish
journey. Neither do they greatly care what path we choose in this common way of
perdition; whether the spacious way of security and presumption, or the strait
path of horror and desperation, whether the toyling way of insatiable
covetousness, or the soft fair way of bewitching pleasures, whether the open
way of worldliness and atheism, or through the hidden thickets of hypocrisy
and dissimulation: in a word they regard not in what way we walk, so we go
forward in the ways of sin, for though they seem diverse and contrary one
to another, yet they have all the same end, meeting together in hell and
destruction. And howsoever they cannot with all their malice, power and
policies attain unto their desires, by bringing Gods elect and faithful ones
to perdition and endless misery; because God their heavenly father who has
taken upon him their protection, frustrateth all their subtle policies with
his all-seeing wifedome, and withstandeth all their might with his almighty
power, yet do they exceedingly with their assaults and temptations, foil,
vex and trouble them; by working in some, forgetfulness of God and of
themselves, security, and careless retchlesnesse; and turmoyling others with
horrible fears, desperate doubting, and bitter agonies. Whereby it comes to
pass, that the one sort securely go on in sin, forgetting the end of their
creation, redemption, and holy vocation, unto which God has called them,
until with Solomon they have found in the end of their worldly delights,
nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit: and the other are so affrighted,
astonished, and continually tormented with doubtings, fears, and the
continual assaults of their spiritual enemies, that they go mourning all the
day long, pining away in grief and anguish of mind, till at last they grow
weary of their lives, thinking their souls an intolerable burden to their
bodies, and their bodies to the earth. The consideration of which lamentable
and too too miserable effects, as it shall move all christians to stand upon
their guard, and to arm themselves with the spiritual armor, that they may
not be overcome of their temptations, and fall into these great mischiefs: so
should it move Gods faithful ministers (whose duty it is, not only
themselves to walk in the ways of righteousness, but also as spiritual
guides to lead others with them) in discharge of their conscience before God,
and in christian commiseration and compassion toward their brethren, to use
all good means both by speaking and writing, whereby they may be preserved
and freed from these snares which their spiritual enemies do lay to entrap
them; by beating down with the cannon-shot of Gods threatenings, the high forts
of their proud presumption, and rouzing them out of the deep slumber of
retchlesse security; as also by raising up and comforting those that mourn in
Syon, stooping, yea lying groueling under the heavy burden of their sins.
The which howsoever it is performed by many, in respect of their several
charges committed to them; and some also have briefly touched some points in
writing, which concerned the comforting and raising up of their private
friends: yet not any (that I know of) have in our language largely and
generally handled these controversies, and spiritual conflicts between the
christian and the enemies of his salvation, for the common good of the whole
Church. And therefore having with Elihu long waited to see if those who were
more ancient, better experienced, and more richly furnished with Gods gifts
and graces than my self, would undertake this work, which is to God most
acceptable, and to his saints and children so profitable and necessary: at
length after others long silence, I resolved to speak, and no longer to
conceal such true comforts as God has revealed unto me; to the end that
hereby I might relieve and comfort those who are poor in spirit, and humbled
in the sight of sin; or at least by offering willingly to this use my small
mite, I might give an occasion unto others better able, to unlock and open
their rich treasuries, that they may bestow upon their poor brethren their
great talents and gifts of better value. The which my labors as I did not
rashly undertake them, so I have not suddenly finished them; for almost three
years since I purposed to take this work in hand, which I have now by Gods
assistance finished; but at the first (I confess) I intended not that it
should come in to public view; but only (as others before me) propounded as
the end of my labors, the comforting and raising up of a most faithful
servant of God, and my most dear friend, who has bound me with many benefits
to the performance of all christian duties. But afterward finding it to grow
to such a volume that it was too great to pass in a written coppie, and hoping
that that which was profitable for one might be beneficial unto many, at
length I resolved to make my labors public by committing them to the press.
The principal things that I propounded to my self in this treatise are these;
first and especially I endeavor to comfort those who are afflicted in
conscience, in the sight and sense of their sins, by offering unto them
certain assurance, that their sins are remitted, and that themselves are
elected to eternal life, in the state of grace, reconciled unto God in Christ
and received in his love and favor. Secondly, I labor to lead the christian
in an even course, unto the haven of eternal happiness; that he may not run
aside, neither on the right hand, and so falling upon the rocks of presumption
make shipwreck of his soul, nor yet on the left hand, and so plunge himself
into the gulf of desperation. Wherein I have purposely and advisedly avoided
their practice, who scatter their consolations they know not where, to be
applied they care not by whom; whereof it comes to pass that those that are
most secure and presumptuous arrogate them, to whom they do not appertain;
and those that are afflicted and humbled dare not appropriate them to
themselves, because they are delivered indefinitly to all, without all caution
or any condition, whereby they might be restrai^ed rather to them than any
other in whom sin yet lives and reigns. Wherein they resemble negligent
physicians, who having made a good medicine for a sick man, do not give it
unto him, but cast it carelessly into some corner, whether the sick patient in
respect of his faintness and weakness is likely never to come: which being
found and greedily drunken up by those who have no need of it, in stead of
doing them good does turn to their baine and utter destruction. Lastly, I have
desired to give solid and substantial consolations, which are firmly grounded
upon Gods undoubted truth, and such infallible reasons as cannot be gainsaid;
and have withal delivered the conditions, upon which they are to be received,
and the undoubted signs and marks of those, to whom of right they appertain;
to the end that those who find these things in themselves, may not doubt to
apply them to their wounded consciences, whereby they may be soundly cured and
thoroughly comforted; and that those who find no such condition observed by
them, nor any such sign or mark in them, may be debarred from participating
of these consolations, which would nourish in them security and presumption:
and contrariwise examining themselves according to these rules, and finding no
correspondencie between themselves and them, may hereby be awakened out of
their lethargy of security, and attaining unto a sight and sense of their
miserable estate may never be at rest, till by using all good means for this
purpose, they may find these marks and signs of their election, vocation,
justification, and sanctification in them, that so they may boldly and fitly
apply unto themselves these comforts and consolations as rightly and truly
appertaining unto them. All which my labors I thought good to dedicate unto
your worships, partly because I desired to give this testimony of my true
thankfulness, for those manifold benefits which from some of you I have
received, and of mine unfeigned love which I bear to you all, for your virtues
and approved godliness; and partly because I thought none fitter to whom I
might commend this discourse of the Christian Warfare, than your selves who are
old experienced souldiars in fighting these spiritual battles, and
therefore have judicial feeling and sensible apprehension, of those things
which I have written and commended to your patronage. Now the Lord our God who
is the fountain of all goodness, and the sole giver of all true consolation,
increase in you more and more the gifts and graces of his sanctifying spirit,
and so fill your hearts with all sound spiritual comfort, and the joy in the
holy Ghost, that you may through the course of your whole lives, chearefully
go forward in the profession and sincere practice of his religion and true
godliness, and after this life may receive that crown of righteounsnesse,
which is prepared and laid up for you in his kingdom of eternal glory. Amen.

Your Worships in the Lord most assured. JOHN DOWNHAM.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THE CHIEF POINTS HANDLED in the first Book.
CHAP. I.
THat all Gods servants are assaulted with the spiritual enemies of their
salvation. page 1 That the strong faith whereof worldlings boast, is nothing
else but security and vain presumption. page 3.4 That Gods servants may rather
be comforted than dismayed by the assaults of their spiritual enemies. page 6
CHAP. II.
Why God suffers his servants to be exercised in the spiritual conflict of
temptations, namely for his own glory, and their everlasting good. page 7
CHAP. III.
Arguments to encourage the weak Christian to enter into this spiritual
conflict. page 10
CHAP. IIII.
Of the malice of our spiritual enemy Satan, joined with violence and
falsehood, and how we may withstand it. page 16
CHAP. V.
Of his strength, courage, and audaciousnesse, and how we may withstand them.
page 23
CHAP. VI.
Of Satan's aides; and first of the world. page 31 How the world tempts by
prosperity, and how we may resist these temptations. page 32 How it tempts
by adversity, and of the means whereby we may resist these temptations. 34
CHAP. VII.
Of the flesh what it is, and how we may subdue it. 39
CHAP. VIII.
Of Satan's policy, and how we may defeat it. 40
CHAP. IX.
Of the spiritual armor described Ephesians. 6.44
CHAP. X.
Of the particular parts of the Christian armor; and first of the girdle of
verity. 48
CHAP. XI.
Of the breastplate of righteousness. 51
CHAP. XII.
Of the preparation of the Gospel of peace. 54
CHAP. XIII.
Of the shield of faith, and what is meant by quenching Satan's darts. 55
CHAP. XIIII.
Of the helmet of salvation. 57
CHAP. XV.
Of the sword of the spirit, and how we must use it in the conflict of
temptations. 59
CHAP. XVI.
Of prayer, and the necessity thereof in the spiritual conflict. 64 Of the
properties required in prayer. 65 Of watchfulnes in prayer. 67 Of perseverance
in prayer. Where is also showed why the Lord delaieth to grant the petitions of
his children. 69
CHAP. XVII.
Of Satan's stratagems. First how he fitteth his temptations according to our
affections and natural inclinations, and how we may defeat this policy. 72
CHAP. XVIII.
How Satan fitteth his temptations according to our state and condition. And
how we may withstand these temptations. 78 How Satan tempts professors of
religion whose profession is only in show. 82 How he tempts the sincere
professor who is weak in grace. 84 How Satan tempts the strong Christian.
86
CHAP. XIX.
How Satan allureth us into heinous sins by degrees, and how we may
withstand his temptations. 87 How he labors to draw men out of one extreme
into another. 88
CHAP. XX.
How Satan moves us to propound bad ends to good actions. 90 How he moves
us to use evil means for the effecting of good ends. 91 How he tempts us to
be proud of our virtues. 92
CHAP. XXI.
Of the manner of Satan's fight. And how he takes all advantages against us.
93. How he tempts us most dangerously when we are most secure. 94 That he
is never weary in assaulting us. 94 How he often changes his temptations
for his better advantage; and that this is a probable sign he does not
prevail. 95 How Satan assaulteth us immediately himself. 97 How he
transformeth himself into an angel of light. ibid. That he is most to be
feared when he most flattereth. 98 How Satan uses the world as his instrument
to entice us to sin. 100 How he uses our own flesh as his instrument, and
of the manifold advantages that he takes hereby. 101 How we may avoid danger,
though we cannot discern Satan's temptations from our own lusts. 103 How
Satan's suggestions may be discerned from our own lusts. 104
CHAP. XXII.
Of the common affections of this spiritual conflict: namely, the Christians
standing in temptation and manfull resistance; and his falling in the time of
trial. 106 Of the general means whereby the Christian may be enabled to
withstand the temptations of his spiritual enemies. 106 1. To meditate on Gods
commandment encouraging him to this fight. 106 2. Assured hope of victory.
106 3. To be always in readiness. 107 4. To take occasion of Satan's
temptations unto sin, of doing the contrary virtue. 107 5. To resist the
temptation when it is first suggested. 108 6. To prepare himself for another
temptation when one is past: where also such reasons are set down as may
persuade him to persevere in this fight. 109 7. Not to believe Satan's
suggestions. 112 8. Neither to despise Satan's temptations, nor too deeply to
apprehend them. 113 9. To object Christ against all temptations. 114 10. To
leave disputing with Satan, and to send him to our advocate Jesus Christ. 115
11. To busy our selves continually in holy and honest exercises. 116 12. Not
to reuolue Satan's temptations, but to meditate on the contrary preservatives.
117

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Christians falling in temptation, and of the means whereby being foiled
he may be raised again: namely, faith and repentance. 118 Consolations for
those that bewail their want of faith and repentance. First they are to know
that the desire of Gods graces is accepted for the graces which they desire.
120 2. That Satan prevails against us, not by his absolute power but by Gods
permission, who would not suffer this but only for his own glory and our
spiritual good. 131 That horror, fear and despair following our falls,
argue our diffidence in God and selfe-confidence. 135 3. The last consolation
taken from experience which we have had of the Lords assistance. 135
THE CHIEF POINTS HANDLED in the second Book.
CHAP. I.
Answers to those temptatiens of Satan, whereby he persuades carnal men of
Gods love. 138 Temporal benefits no infallible signs of Gods love. 140
Satan's temptations whereby he persuades weak Christians that they are not
beloved of God, answered. 141 That carnal men have no assurance of Gods love
though they boast thereof. 143 That every particular Christian may be assured
of Gods love. 144 That doubting of Gods love is injurious unto him, and
pernicious to our selves. 145 The evils that accompany doubting of Gods love,
and the benefits which follow our persuasion thereof. 147
CHAP. II.
That our sins and unworthiness should not make us doubt of Gods love. 148
That we are neither beloved of God, elected, redeemed, called, justified,
sanctified nor saved for any respect of our own worthiness. 149 That being
unworthy in our selves, we are loved, elected, and saved in Christ. 156
CHAP. III.
That temporal afflictions are rather signs of Gods love, than of his hatred.
157 That spiritual afflictions are no signs of Gods hatred. 160 Examples of
Gods dearest servants who have bin exercised with spiritual afflictions. 162 A
dangerous temptation grounded upon our not profiting by afflictions, answered.
166 That it is no fit time to judge of our spiritual graces in the conflict of
temptations. 167 That Gods dearest children in the time of temptation have
showed impatiencie, and vttred inconsiderate speeches. 168 The objection out of
Eccles. 9.1. answered, and the place expounded. 171
CHAP. IIII.
Of Gods election, the causes, subject, object, and properties thereof. 175
CHAP. V.
Satan's temptations where with he assaulteth worldlings, answered: and first
that whereby he persuades worldlings that all in the end shall be saved. 178
Satan's temptation grounded upon the unchangeableness of Gods predestination,
whereby he persuades them desperately to go on in sin, proved to be foolish
false and impious. 180
CHAP. VI.
Satan's temptations whereby he moves the weak Christian to doubt of his
election, answered. 185 The causes which move Satan and his instruments to
persuade the weak Christian to doubt of his election. 185 The state of this
question between Satan and the Christian. 187 That we may be certainly assured
of our election, proved by testimonies of scriptures. 189 An objection grounded
upon the indefinitenesse of Gods promises, answered. 192 That we may be assured
that we are the faithful unto whom the promises of the Gospel are made. 193 A
temptation grounded upon our want of assurance that we have faith, answered.
195
CHAP. VII.
That we may be assured of our election, proved by many strong arguments. 197
That our assurance should not be mixed with doubting: and that doubting is not a
commendable property of faith, but a fruit of unbelief. 199 That faith is a
certain and particular persuasion, and not a doubtful opinion or general
notion. 201
CHAP. VIII.
That we may be assured of our election by the testimony of Gods spirit. 211
How we may know that Gods spirit dwells in us. 215 How we may discern the
testimony of Gods spirit from our own presumption. 217
CHAP. IX.
Of the means whereby we may be assured of our election. 221 The first means,
the testimony of the holy Ghost. 221 Diverse differences between the testimony
of the spirit and presumptuous security. 221 The second means, the hearing of
the word. 224 Thirdly, by the use of the Sacraments. 225 Fourthly, by the
effects of our election, vocation, justification, sanctification. 225 etc. That
our sanctification is the touchstone of all the rest. 229 That those who will
be assured of their election must begin at their sanctification. 231 Of diverse
kinds of counterfeit holiness which give no assurance of election. 232 Of the
fruits and properties of true sanctification. 233
CHAP. X.
Of ten signs and infallible notes whereby we may be assured of our
election. 235
CHAP. XI.
The objections alleged against the assurance of our election, answered: and
first those which are grounded upon testimonies of scriptwre. 248 That fear
and distrust in our own weakness, and assurance of our election may well
stand together. 253
CHAP. XII.
The reasons alleged against the assurance of our election, answered. 261 That
not assurance but doubting of our election proceeds from pride and
presumption. 261 Our unworthiness no cause why we should doubt of our election.
263 That weakness of faith and certainty of assurance may well stand
together. 264 That a weak faith does as truly assure us of our election as a
stronger. 265 How our faith though assaulted with doubting may be certain.
266 That the sight of our imperfections is no cause why we should doubt of our
election. 272 That this doctrine opens no way to security and presumption.
272
CHAP. XIII.
Of our redemption, what it is, by whom, from what, with what price, and to
what end we are redeemed. 274
CHAP. XIIII.
Satan's temptations concerning our redemption, whereby he moves the worlding
to presumption answered. 278 Satan's temptation grounded upon the doctrine of
universal redemption, answered. 279 That Christ's redemption is not universal,
but only of Gods elect, proved by testimonies of Scripture. 279 The same point
proved by diverse reasons. 281 Objections alleged against the former doctrine
answered. 283 In what sense Christ is said to have died for all men. 283
CHAP. XV.
That al who are redeemed by Christ are also by him sanctified. 287 Satan's
temptation persuading worldlings to live licenciously because they are redeemed
and shall therefore be saved, answered. 288 Of the three degrees of our
redemption wrought by Christ, and how the follow one another. 292
CHAP. XVI.
Of those temptations which Satan uses against the faithful concerning their
redemption, and how they may answer them. 295 That it is not repugnant to Gods
justice to punish Christ for us. 296 That Christ has offered an all-sufficient
price for our redemption. 297 Satan's temptations against the particular
application of Christ's merits answered. 299 Our falling into sin, no reason
to prove that we are not redeemed. 299 That God is not angry with the faithful
though he seems so. 301 Satan's assaulting us, no reason to prove that we are
not redeemed from his power. 302 That though we die, yet we are redeemed from
death. 304 That those who are once redeemed cannot again be brought into
bondage. 307
CHAP. XVII.
Of our vocation what it is, and the kinds thereof. 308 Of the parts of our
effectual calling, and first of our separation from the world. 310 Of the
second part of our effectual calling, namely the reciprocal donation of
Christ to us, and us to Christ. 312 Of the third part, namely our union with
Christ. 312
CHAP. XVIII.
Satan's temptations whereby he seeks to make our calling ineffectual
answered. 314 Of the necessity of our effectual calling. 314 Satan's
temptations, whereby he moves us to neglect the means of our effectual
calling. 316 Motives to persuade us to the diligent hearing of Gods word. 316
CHAP. XIX.
Satan's temptation, whereby he persuades men that the Scriptures are not Gods
word, answered. 323 Seven reasons to prove that the Scriptures were indicted by
Gods spirit. 324
CHAP. XX.
Four other reasons to prove that the Scriptures are the word of Gods. Where
also diverse objections are answered. 330
CHAP. XXI.
The last argument to prove the former point, taken from the testimony of Gods
spirit. 342
CHAP. XXII.
Satan's temptations suggested against the translations of the the holy
Scriptures, answered. 346
CHAP. XXIII.
Satan's temptations taken from the evil lives of the ministers of the word,
answered. 348 That the wicked lives of the Ministers should not make us neglect
their ministry. 353
CHAP. XXIIII.
Satan's temptations taken from sundry opinions, sects, and religions,
answered. 354 How the unlearned may discern the true religion from that which
is false. 356
CHAP. XXV.
Satan's temptations taken from our unworthiness and unfitness to bear Gods
word, answered. 360
CHAP. XXVI.
How we must arm our selves against Satan's temptations, whereby he laboreth
to make the word of God fruitles. 363 How we must prepare our selves before we
hear Gods word. 363 Of the duties which we must perform in hearing. 371 Of
the duties which we must perform after we have heard the word. 373
CHAP. XXVII.
Satan's temptations whereby he persuades men to delay their repentance,
answered. 375 Of three motives whereby we may be persuaded to hasten our
repentance. 376
CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the fourth motive taken from the difficulty of repenting, caused by
delays. 383 That the time of sickness, and the hour of death is most unfit for
repentance. 390
CHAP. XXIX.
Of five other motives to enforce the former point. 393
CHAP. XXX.
Two lets which cause worldlings to defer their repentance removed. 402 The
first taken from an abuse of Gods mercy. 403 The other grounded on the example
of the converted thief. 405
CHAP. XXXI.
Satan's temptations moving men to rest in a counterfeit repentance, answered.
408 Of diverse things required unto true repentance. 409 1. Knowledge and sight
of sin. 410 Of the means whereby we may attain to a true sight of sin. 414
2. That our sins be irksome and grievous unto us. 416 3. An earnest desire
to be freed from sin. 417 4. That we come to Christ for this purpose. 418
CHAP. XXXII.
Satan's temptations which he uses against those which are called to bring
them to despair, answered. 421 Reasons to persuade the weak christian of the
forgiveness of his sins. The first whereof are grounded on Gods own nature. 424
The first argument grounded upon Gods infinite mercy. ibid.
CHAP XXXIII.
Of the second reason to persuade the weak christian of the forgiveness of his
sins grounded upon Gods justice. 434
CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the third reason grounded upon Gods truth. 437
CHAP. XXXV.
Of other reasons to prove the forgiveness of sin, taken from the first Person
in Trinity. 445 Of other reasons to prove the former point, taken from the
second Person in Trinity. 446 Reasons taken from the office of Christ to prove
forgiveness of sin. 451 Reasons taken from the third Person in Trinity, to
prove the same point. 459
CHAP. XXXVI.
Diverse other reasons produced to the same purpose. 460 1. Because it is an
article of our Creed. 460 2. Taken from the testimony of Gods faithful
Ministers 461 3. From the contrary testimony of Satan. 462 4, From the
experience of Gods mercy in pardoning others. 464

CHAP. XXXVII.
Satan's temptation whereby he suggesteth that the christian is not effectually
called, answered. 470 How we may know whether we be effectually called; and of
the means of effectual calling. 471 Satan's temptation answered, whereby he
persuades the christian that he loves the world, and the world him. 475
CHAP. XXXVIII.
Satan's temptations obiecting to the weak christian vnrepentancie and hardness
of heart, answered. 482 Of the diverse sorts of hardness of heart, and first of
that which is insensible. 483
CHAP. XXXIX.
Of that hardness of heart which is joined with sense and feeling thereof. 487
Consolations for such as bewail their imperfections in hearing the word. 491
CHAP. XL.
Consolations for such as bewail their wants in prayer. 495
CHAP. XLI.
Of the infallible signs of true repentance. 504 That the assurance of the
remission of sins depends not on the dignity of repentance. 511
CHAP. XLII.
How we may prove against Satan's temptations that we have true faith. 513 Of
the diverse degrees of faith. 515
CHAP. XLIII.
Satan's temptations grounded upon our want of sense and feeling of faith
answered. 525
CHAP. XLIIII.
How the weak Christian is to comfort himself when he is deprived of the
sense of faith and other graces, and sensibly feels the contrary corruptions.
529
CHAP. XLV.
Of the means whereby our faith may be strengthened and increased. 537 Of the
means whereby we may be preserved from doubting and desperation. 541
CHAP. XLVI.
Satan's temptations concerning smalnesse and weakness of faith, answered. 549
That a weak and small faith may be a true and lively faith. 550 That all the
power of hell cannot prevail against the smallest measure of faith. 551
CHAP. XLVII.
Satan's temptation concerning the certainty and constancy of faith,
answered. 554 Satan's temptation grounded on the strong faith of other of Gods
children, answered. 555 That God both can and will uphold the weakest believer.
559
CHAP. XLVIII.
Of our justification what it is, and the causes and parts thereof. 563
CHAP. XLIX.
That we are not justified by our works and merits, proved first by the
scriptures. 570 Secondly, by diverse arguments. 576
CHAP. L.
That faith alone iustifietth; and how this is to be understood. 577 That faith
alone justifies, proved both by testimonies and reasons. 579 That not our own
but Christ's righteousness is the matter of our justification. 581
CHAP. LI.
Satan's temptations moving the weak Christian to doubt of his justification,
answered. 586
THE CONTENTS OF THE third Book.
CHAP. I.
Of sanctification what it is, and the causes thereof. 592
CHAP. II.
Of the effects, subject, object, and time of our sanctification. 598
CHAP. III.
Of the parts of sanctification, mortification and vivification, and how they
are wrought in us. 602
CHAP. IIII.
Satan's temptations whereby he inticeth us to commit sin, answered. 608 Many
reasons serving as preservatives to keep us from the contagion of sin. 610
CHAP V.
Of the two sorts of preservatives to keep us from falling into sin. 616
CHAP. VI.
Of some special means whereby we may be preserved from committing sin. 621
CHAP. VII.
Satan's temptations whereby he discourageth the Christian in the work of
sanctification, answered. 624 That in the most sanctified remain some relics
of sin, and the causes thereof. 624 That our wants and corruptions should not
discourage us, but redouble our care and diligence. 627 Consolations to keep
us from being discouraged when we see and feel our wants and corruptions. 628
The causes wherefore God does not perfectly sanctify us in this life. 631
CHAP. VIII.
Satan's temptations drawn from our slow going forward in sanctification,
answered. 636
CHAP. IX.
Satan's temptations whereby he aggrauateth our sins in general, answered.
640 What it is to walk after the flesh and after the spirit. 642 The
differences between the sins of the regenerate and the unregenerate. 643
CHAP. X.
That sins committed after repentance are pardonable. 645 That all sins of
knowledge are not presumptuous. 647 That sins committed against knowledge are
pardonable. 648 Of sins often committed. 651
CHAP. XI.
Satan's temptations whereby he persuades the Christian that he has sinned
against the holy Ghost, answered. 653 What the sin against the holy Ghost is,
and how it may be distinguished from other sins. 654
CHAP. XII.
Satan's temptations whereby he impugneth the certainty of our perseverance,
answered. 656 Diverse arguments to prove the certainty of our perseverance.
659
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK ENTREATING OF THE POWER and policies of our spiritual
enemies, and of the means how we may withstand the one and defeat the other.
CHAP. I. That all the godly are assaulted with the spiritual enemies of their
salvation.
All that will live like Gods servants must prepare themselves for the
spiritual combat.
Whereby he gives us to understand, that as soon as we seek for assurance of
salvation in Christ, and endeavor to serve the Lord in a holy and a Christian
life, we are to prepare our selves for a combat, unless we would suddenly be
surprised; for the spiritual enemies of our salvation bandie themselves against
us as soon as we have given our names unto God, and taken upon us the
profession and practice of Christianity, which are the liuerie and cognizance
of our heavenly Lord and Master. And this is manifest by the example of Gods
children from time to tim^ (...) though they lived in peace and security
before th^^ (...)tained into Gods family, yet no sooner were (...) ^itted to
be of Gods household servants, but Satan and the world have raged against
them, laboring both by inward temptations and outward fury, either to withdraw
them from Gods service by flattring inticements, or utterly to destroy and
overthrow them by open violence. No sooner had Abel offered a sacrifice of
sweet smelling savor unto God, Genesis 4.
but Satan stirs up Cain to become his butcher: whilst Moses was contented
to be reputed the son of Pharaohs daughter he enjoyed all prosperity, but as
soon as he joined himself to Gods people and Church, Pharaoh seeks his
life: as long as the Israelites worshipped the Egyptian Idols, they sat by
their fleshpots in peace, and quietly enjoyed the fruits of the land; but as
soon as they made but a motion of serving the Lord, the King stirred up by the
devil, does rage against them with more then barbarous cruelty: whilst Paul
persecuted the Church of God, Satan did not so much trouble him either
outwardly in body or inwardly in mind; but no sooner was he truly converted
to the faith and preached the Gospel, but presently he sets his wicked
impes on work to take away his life, which the Lord not permitting, he moves
them to persecute him by imprisoning, whipping, and stoning him; and not
content with these outward afflictions, he sends his messenger to buffet him,
2. Cor. 12.
that he might be no less vexed inwardly in mind then outwardly in body. Yea
he spared not our Savior Christ himself, but as soon as he began to show
himself to be the son of God and redeemer of mankind, in perfourming the
duties of his calling, then especially he bends all his force against him,
he tempts and assaulteth him forty days together, Matthew. 4.
and taking the foil himself, he stirs up his wicked instruments to
persecute him, and at length to take away his life.

Whosoever therefore resolve to be Gods servants, must make account to be his
soldiers also; and whilst with Nehemias followers, with one hand they
perform the works of their callings and Christianity, they must ^^^th the
other hand hold their weapons to repel th^^ (...)ll enemies, who continually
labor to hinder the L^^ (...)ings: for no sooner do we become friends to God,
(...)ently Satan assaulteth us as his enemies; no sooner do we receive the
Lords press money and set foot into his camp, but Satan aduanceth against
us his flagges of defiance, laboring both by secret treachery, and outward
force, to supplant and overcome us.

The two fold use of this doctrine.
and consolation and encouragement for Gods children. Worldly men in steed of
fighting the Lords battles, spend their time in chambering and wantonness, in
lusts and uncleanness, in Music and daliance, in surfeiting and all
voluptuousnes, in covetousness and idleness, as though there were no enemy to
assault them, and as if Satan were some meek lamb and not a roaring lion
ready to devour them; so that good Moses coming near them cannot hear the
noise of them that have the victory, nor the noise of them that are overcome,
but the noise of singing and meriment, Exodus 32.
for they are not fighting the battles of the Lord of hoasts, but solemnising
a Sabbath to the golden Calfe, sitting down to eat and drink and rising up to
play. The spiritual Cananites are quite forgotten, and they remember not the
blessed land of promise, whereunto like pilgrims they should be travailing,
but make this world, this wilderness of sin, the place of their joy and delight.
In a word, they flourish in their outward states, and never in their minds
feel any vexation of Satan's temtations. And what is the cause of all this? If
you ask them they will say, that they have such a strong faith and peace of
conscience, That the worldlings peace proceeds not from strength, but carnal
security.
that Satan's temptations have no power over them; neither were they ever
troubled with any of his encounters. And not content with these bragges of
their own happy estate, they censure and condemn Gods children, accounting
their state most desperate who are molested with Satan's temptations, and go
mourning under the burden of sin all the day long; supposing either that
they are in Satan's power, and have more grievously sinned then other men, or
that they are mad and frantic so to vex themselves with such needless
sorrow. But let such men know that of all others their state is most
dangerous, for they are grievously sick, and have no sense of their disease,
their wounds are so mortal that they deprive them of all feeling; they are
assaulted, yea taken prisoners whilst they sleep soundly in security, and
discern not the approach of the enemy. Non ergo repugnant quia se impugnari
ignorant: They make no resistance because they are ignorant of the assault. And
what can be more dangerous then to have the enemy approach and lay hands on us
before we be aware? But this is the state of those men: Hierom.
for as one says, Tum maxim impugnantur cum se impugnari nesciant: They are
most assaulted when they feel no assault. Let them know, that they are not the
Lords soldiers but the devils reuellers, and therefore he fights not against
them because they are his friends. For there was never any of Christ's soldiers
in the Militant Church which have not been exercised in this warfare; there was
never any so strong in faith but Satan durst encounter him, even the Apostles,
yea Adam in the state of innocence, yea our Savior Christ himself; there
were never any so constant in the course of Christianity, but the world has
sought to draw them out of the right way by her baits of prosperity, or to
force them to sin by threatening adversity; there were never any that have
had in them one spark of Gods spirit (Christ excepted) who have not felt it
assaulted and often foiled by the flesh. For the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and they are contrary the one to the
other, as it is Galath. 5.17. Yea the Apostle Paul himself when he was most
sanctified, Galat. 5.17. Romans 7.23.
saw another law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind, leading
him captive to the law of sin, as appears Romans 7.23.

peace with God nor the peace of conscience which makes them thus quiet, for
there is no (such) peace, says my God, to the wicked, Esa. 57.21. Esa. 57.21.
but it is a peace which they have made with Satan, a covenant with death and
an agreement with hell, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 28.15.
Esa. 28.15. When the strong armed man Satan (quietly) keeps the house, the
things that he possesses are in peace; but when a stronger then he comes to
dispossess him, he will never lose his possession without a fight; and we
cannot choose but feel the blows in so sharp an encounter. Luke 11.21. Luke
11.21.
If a man never enter the field to fight against Satan, or if at the first
encounter he yield himself prisoner, and be content to be tied in the pleasing
fetters of sin, it is no marvel that he does not rage in his conscience,
when as already he is in his captivity ready to perform all those works
of darkness wherein he employeth him; but if when Christ the redeemer is
preached unto them by his Ambassadors, they would show any desire of coming
out of his thraldom, surely this spiritual Pharaoh would never lose their
service but by force and compulsion, neither can so strong a man be forced but
we must needs feel the conflict. While the prisoner lies in the dungeon,
loaded with bolts and tied in chains, the keeper sleeps securely, because he
knows he is safe; but if his bolts being filed off and his chains loosed, he
have escaped out of prison, then the Iaylor begins to bustle and pursues
him speedely with Huean cry: so whilst Satan holds us imprisoned in the
dark dungeon of ignorance, loaded and tied with the heavy bolts and chains
of sin, he is retchlesse and secure; but if our Savior by his Ambassadors
in the preaching of the word, loose and unburden us of these chains and
bolts, and by the light of his spirit so illuminate the eyes of our
understanding, that we see the way out of Satan's dungeon of ignorance, and so
escape out of his captivity, then he rages against and pursues us as Pharaoh
did the Israelites, that either he may bring us back again into his bondage,
or else destroy us, if we make resistance. Lastly they feel not any fight
between the flesh and the spirit, because the flesh wholly rules them, and
like a flood which has a clear current carries them wholly into a sea of
sin without any stop or resistance, and therefore no marvel they feel not
this fight, when the spirit which is one of the combatants has no force nor
residence in them.

That the true Christian may receive comfort by feeling the spiritual conflict.
Gods children who continually feel the assaults of their spiritual enemies,
and see the breaches which are made in their souls with the continual
battery of their temptations, may receive no small consolation hereby, when as
they consider that all who profess themselves Gods servants, and resolve to
serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness are thus tempted and tried. Revel.
12.17.
For the Dragon is wroth with the woman (that is Gods Church) and her seed
which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ,
as is Revel. 12.17. and like a roaring lion seeks their destruction, because
they have renounced him, and fight under the standard of the Lord of hoasts
whom he maligneth: and hence it is that whilst we live without sense of
sin, we eat and drink and take our ease without disturbance, but after we
make any conscience of our ways and endeavor to serve the Lord, then Satan
casts against us the fiery darts of his temptations, and we feel many
conflicts between the flesh and the spirit, with which the worldly man is
never troubled. So that when we are thus tempted and assaulted by Satan, the
world, and our corrupt flesh, it is a strong argument to persuade us that we
are entertained for Gods soldiers, and have received the press money of his
spirit; for Satan's kingdom is not divided, neither does he fight against
those who are his friends and servants, but against those who wage war
against him and fight under the Lords standerd. True it is, that when his
servants have committed such abominable and grievous sins, as have made deep
wounds in their seared consciences, whereby they are awakened out of their
sleepie lethargy of security, then Satan fills them with horror and
despair, that he may keep them from true repentance, when he can hide from
them their sins no longer; and the Lord in his just judgment, and for the
example of others, does suffer Satan to begin in them the torments of hell in
this life; but if he can by any means hide their sins and keep them
quietly in his kingdom, he will never vex them. And hence it is that whereas
one perishes through despair, many thousands perish through presumption and
security. Let all those therefore who feel the burden of their sins, and
are vexed with the continual assaults of their spiritual enemies comfort
themselves; for hereby they have assurance that they are members of the Church
militant, into which none but soldiers are entertained, and that now they
begin to be Gods friends and servants when as Satan opposes himself against
them.

CHAP. II. Why God suffers his servants to be exercised in the spiritual
conflict of tentations.
But here it may be demanded, why the Lord will suffer his servants to be thus
tempted and assaulted, whereas the wicked are free from such conflicts. I
answer, first for his own glory, for whereas our enemies are strong and
mighty and we weak and feeble, hereby is the Lords omnipotent power manifested
to all the world, by whose assistance such impotent wretches conquer and subdue
such furious and puissant enemies.

Secondly, God suffers his children to be tempted, that so those spiritual
graces which he has bestowed upon them may the more clearly shine to his
glory. For who can know whether they be Gods golden vessels before they be
brought to the touchstone of temptation? Who could know the faith, patience and
valor of Gods soldiers, if they always lay quietly in garrison and never
came to the skirmish? Who could feel the odoriferous smell of these
aromaticall spices, if they were not punned and bruised in the mortar of
afflictions? For example, who would have discerned Abraham's faith, David's
piety, Jobs patience, Paul's courage and constancy, if they had been never
tempted, which now to the glory of God shine to all the world?

And as the Lord suffers Satan and his impes to try his children for his
own glory, so also for their spiritual and everlasting good: for first
hereby he chastizeth them for their sins past, and recalleth them to their
remembrance, that so they may truly repent of them. And this cause Job speaks
of: Job. 13.26.
Job. 13.26. Thou writest (says he) bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth.

Secondly, hereby he manifests unto us our secret and hidden sins, which
the blind eyes of our judgment would not discern, if their sight were not
quickened with this sharp water of temptation. For so long as we live in peace,
our secure consciences never summon us to the bar of Gods judgment; but when
we are roused up by temptation, we enter into a more straight examination of
our selves, and search what secret sins lie lurking in the hidden corners of
our hearts, that so we may repent of them and make our peace with God, without
whose assistance we can have no hope to stand in any temptation.

Thirdly, the Lord hereby preuenteth our sins to come: for when we have
experience, that the most sharp weapons, which Satan uses to inflict deep
wounds in our consciences, are our sins; this will make us most careful to
abstain from them, least thereby we strengthen him for our own overthrow. And
as these temptations of Satan are in this regard so many bridles to restrain
us from sin; so also they are so many pricks to let out the wind of vain
glory, wherewith like bladders we be puffed up, as we may see in the example
of Paul, who lest he should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of
revelations, received a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him. 2. Cor. 12.7.

Fourthly, 2. Cor* 12.7.
the Lord suffers Satan to assault us, that we may hereby come to the fight
of our own weakness and infirmities, when we have received many foiles; and
learn to rely upon his help and assistance in all our dangers; for so proud
we are by nature, that before we come to the fight we think that we can repel
the strongest assaults, and overcome all enemies which oppose themselves
against us by our own power; but when we see our selves vanquished and foiled
with every small temptation, we learn to have a more humble conceit of our
own ability, and to depend wholly upon the Lord. And this end is set down,
Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3. Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3.


Fifthly, the Lord permits Satan continually to assail us with his
temptations, to the end we may continually buckle unto us the whole armor of
God, that we may be ready for the battle. For as those who have no enemies
to encounter them, cast their armor aside and let it rust, because they are
secure from danger; but when the enemies are at hand and sound the alarm,
they both wake and sleep in their armor ready for the assault: so, if we
should not continually skirmish with our spiritual enemies, we would lay aside
the spiritual armor; but when we have continual use of it, both day and
night we keep it fast buckled unto us, that being armed at all points, we may
be able to make resistance that we be not surprised at unawares.

Lastly, by this conflict the Lord strengthens and increases all his graces
in us: for as by exercise the strength of the body is preserved and augmented,
and in short time decaieth through idleness and sloth; so the gifts of Gods
spirit, faith, affiance, hope, patience and the rest languish in us, if they
be not exercised with temptations. Romans 5.3.4.
For tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, as it is Romans 5.3, 4, 5. For when
once we have been tempted and tried, and the Lord has mercifully delivered
us from the temptation, afterward being so assaulted we patiently endure it,
hoping for the Lords assistance, 1. Sam. 17.37. Psalm. 27.9.
believing and assuring our selves that the Lord who has delivered us will
again deliver us, as it is Psalm. 27.9. Moreover, when we see the great need
of the graces of Gods spirit, this will be a strong motive to entice us to a
careful use of all good means whereby we may attain unto them, whereas if we
were free from this spiritual conflict, we should not so clearly see nor
apprehend the use and necessity of them.

CHAP. III. Arguments whereby we may be encouraged to enter into this
spiritual conflict.
Ephesians. 6.10.
So Ephe. 6.10. Finally my brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might. 11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the assaults of the devil, Iam. 4.7. 1. Pet. 5.8.
etc. And Iam. 4.7. Resist the devil and he will fly from you. And 1. Pet.
5.8. Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil as a roaring lion
walks about seeking whom he may devour: 9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

The cause of our spiritual war of great importance.
Secondly, the cause of our war is of great weight, as namely for the glory of
God and our own salvation; for in all satan's skirmishes, he seeks to
impeach Gods glory with false imputations, and to bring us to utter
destruction. And this may appear by his first conflict with our mother Eve,
Genesis 3.4.5.
Genesis 3.4.5. where he accuses God of a lie, who is truth it self; and of
impotencie and envious disdain, saying, that the cause why he did forbid them
to cate of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, was not
(as he had said) because they should die, but because he knew that when they
should eat thereof, their eyes should be opened, and they should be as Gods
knowing good and evil. Where first he seeks to dim the beams of Gods
glory by accusing him of a lie, and to persuade them that he was not
omnipotent, seeing that he was not able to hinder them from being Gods, if they
tasted of this fruit: lastly, that he therefore forbad them to eat thereof,
because he envied them so glorious an estate. And secondly he labors to
destroy our first parents both body and soul, by tempting them to
disobedience and the transgression of Gods commandment: and therefore our
Savior Christ Ioh. 8.44. does very fitly join these two together, saying,
Ioh. 8.44.
that he was a liar and a manslaier from the beginning. A liar, in that he
falsely accused God of lying; a manslaier, because he did it to this end, that
he might murder our first parents and all their posterity both body and
soul. So that you see that the end of Satan's fight is to dishonor God and
destroy us, and therefore if we have any regard of Gods glory (which should
be more dear unto us then our own souls) or any respect of our own
salvation, if we would not treacherously betray them both by our slothfulnes or
cowardice into the hands of Gods and our enemy; let us valiantly enter the
field, and never cease our courageous fight till we have obtained a full
victory.

The profit of this spiritual fight.
for if the getting of some booty and prize, or the receiving of some
trifeling pay will move the soldiers of earthly Princes to undergo all
dangers, and with wonderful peril of life to fight even at the Cannons
mouth; how much more should the stipend of our heavenly king move us to fight
this combat how terrible soever it seems to flesh and blood? For first that
is truly here verified, Pax belli filia, Peace is the daughter of war,
neither can we sooner enter the field to fight against these enemies, but
presently we shall have peace with God, and soon after the fruit thereof the
peace of conscience. Whereas if we betray Gods cause to Satan and our souls
to sin, well may we be lulled asleep in carnal security, but we shall
never enjoy this peace with God and peace of conscience: for there is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked. Esa. 57. And whosoever have taken this treacherous
truce with Satan, Esa. 37.21.
shall find that he will break it for his best advantage, if not in the whole
course of their lives, yet at the hour of death when as they shall be able to
make no resistance.

Promises made to those that fight. Apoc. 2. and 3.
Secondly, if we fight against these enemies and valiantly overcome, the Lord
has promised to give us to eat of the tree of life which is in Paradise, and
the Manna that is hid, and that he will write our names in the book of life,
Apoc. 2 and 3. that is, he will in this life bestow on us all his spiritual
graces, and in the life to come replenish us with such joys as neither eye
has seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived, 1. Cor. 2.9. Let us therefore
strive that we may overcome, Nam breuis est labor, praemium vero aeternum: Our
labor is but short, but our reward shall be eternal. On the other side, if
we consider Satan's pay which he gives unto his soldiers, we shall find
that it is nothing but the pleasures of sin for a season, and in the end
everlasting death and destruction of body and soul: For the wages of sin is
death, as it is Romans 6.23. Who therefore is so slothful and cowardly that
would not be encouraged, Romans 6.23.
to fight the Lords battles against our spiritual enemies, with such
promises made by him who is truth it self and cannot deceive us? Who is so
desperate and foole-hardie as to fight under Satan's banner, seeing the pay
which he gives is everlasting death, and utter confusion?

The honor that will accompany our victory.
is the honor which will accompany this victory: for if earthly soldiers
will purchase honor with the loss of life, which is nothing else but the
commendation of the Prince, or applause of the vain people; what hazard should
we not undergo in fighting the spiritual combat, seeing our grand Captain the
Lord of hoasts, and infinite multitudes of blessed Angels look upon us and
behold our combat, whose praise and approbation is our chief felicity? What
peril should we fear, to obtain a crown of glory which is promised to all
that overcome, and to become heirs apparent of Gods kingdom? On the other
side, the shame and confusion of face which shall overtake them who cowardly
forsake the Lords standerd and yield unto Satan, when as they shall not dare
to look the Lord in the face whose cause they have betrayed, should serve as a
strong motive to encourage us to the fight.

The necessity of undertaking this warfare.
is the necessity of undertaking this combat. There is no man so cowardly that
will not fight when there is no hope in flight, no mercy to be expected in the
enemy, no outrage and cruelty which will not be committed. But such is our
enemy that we cannot possibly flee from him, his malice is unreconcilable,
his cruelty outrageous, for he fights not against us to the end that he
may obtain sovereignty alone, abridge us of our liberty, spoil us of our
goods; but he aims at our death and destruction of body and soul: if
therefore we so carefully arm our selves against carthly enemies, who when
they have done their uttermost rage can but shorten a miserable life, how much
more carefully should we resist this enemy, who seeks to deprive us of
everlasting life, and to plunge us into an euerdying death?

Secondly, this fight is necessary, because in our Baptism we have taken a
military sacrament, and promised faithfully unto the Lord, that we will
continue his faithful soldiers unto the end, fighting his battles against
the flesh, the world and the devil. There we have given our names unto
Christ, to whom we owe our selves and lives by a double right, both because he
has given them unto us, and also restored them the second time when we had
lost them. There we are put in mind of his bloodshed for our redemption,
which should encourage us to fight courageously, that we may be preserved from
falling again into the cruel slavery of sin and Satan.

Thirdly, unless we fight this spiritual combat, and in fighting overcome,
we shall never be crowned with the crown of glory: for it is not given unto
any to triumph, who have not fought valiantly and subdued their enemies. The
everlasting peace of Gods kingdom is not promised to such cowards as never
entered the field, or being entered have presently yielded themselves to be the
captives of Satan: but unto those that fight courageously and gloriously
overcome. If any man (says the Apostle) strive for a maisterie, he is not
crowned except he strive as he ought to do, 2. Tim. 2.5. So the Apostle James
chap. 1. verse. 12. pronounces the man blessed that endures tentation; for
when he is tried (or rather as the words are, when by trial he shall be found
approved) he shall receive a crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him. Whereby it appears, that none are crowned unless they
strive as they ought, and therefore much less they which strive not at all;
that none are blessed but those who are tempted, and being tempted endure the
temptation; that first we must be tried, and by trial approved, before were
we can receive the crown of life.

Those that will fight against our spiritual enemies are sure of victory.
we may be encouraged to this fight by certain hope of victory, for we fight
under the standerd oof Christ Jesus, who alone is mightier then all our enemies
that assault us. If we did indeed regard our enemies strength and our own
weakness only, we might well be discouraged from undertaking this combat, but
if we look upon our grand Captain Christ, whose love toward us is no less
then his power, and both infinite, there is no cause of doubting, for he that
exhorts us to the fight, will so help us that we may overcome; August.
Deficientes subleuat and vincentes coronat: When we faint he sustaineth us,
and crowns us when we overcome. He has already overcome our enemies to our
hand, and has cooled their courage and abated their force. He has bruised the
serpents head, so that he shall not be able to overcome the least of his
followers, well may he hiss against them, but he cannot hurt them, for his
sting is taken away. Satan was the strong man who possessed all in peace, but
our Savior Christ who was a stronger then he, coming upon him has overcome
him, and taken from him all his armor wherein he trusted and divided his
spoils, Luke 11.21, 22. We fought against mighty enemies and great
potentates, Ephesians. 66.12. but our Savior has spoiled principalities and powers,
and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them upon the
cross, Col. 2.15. and so through death has destroyed him that had the power
of death, that is the devil, that he might deliver all them which for fear of
death were all their life subject to bondage, as it is Heb. 2.14, 15. He was
indeed a mighty prince of this worldly Canaan, Josh. 10.24.25
but our good Joshua has subdued him, and has left nothing for us to do who
are his soldiers and followers, but to tread in his neck in token of
victory. But we alas are faint-harted, like unto Iether the first borne of
Gedeon, Judge. 8.20, 21. for though our Savior Christ has conquered these our
spiritual enemies, and has put the sword of his spirit into our hands,
wherewith we might also vanquish them, yet we are afraid to draw the sword,
because we are but fresh water soldiers and white liuered; and therefore we
had need to encourage our selves, not only by looking on the victory of our
chief Captain, but also on the conquest of our fellow soldiers, who were
weak and frail like our selves. So likewise Christ has overcome the world,
and wills us to be of good comfort, seeing we shall be partakers with him in
his triumph, if we will join with him in his fight, Ioh. 16.33. Ioh. 16.33.
And though our flesh be a treacherous enemy and stronger to us then the
spirit, yet so we will fight against the lusts thereof we shall be sure of
victory, for he will assist us with his holy spirit, and therewith enable us
more and more to mortify this old man and body of sin. Well may we take a
foil in this spiritual combat, but the Lord will raise us up again; For
though we fall, yet shall we not be cast off, because the Lord puts under
his hand, as it is Psalm. 37.24. And the Lord has promised, that he will not
suffer us to be tempted above our power, but will give the issue with the
tentation that we may be able to bear it, as it is 1. Cor. 10.13. and he that
has promised is faithful and true, yea truth it self, and therefore he will
be as good as his word. Though therefore Satan encounter us with all fury,
let us not be faint-harted, but courageously endure his assaults, and so in the
end the victory will be ours: for if we resist the devil he will fly from
us, Iam. 4.7. if we fight the Lords battles valiantly, the God of peace shall
tread Satan under our feet shortly, as it is Romans 16.20. For the promise of
brusing the serpents head made by the Lord, Genesis 3.15. does belong not only to
Jesus Christ our head, but also to all those who are members of his body.

these sons of Anakim, for as one says: Nemo hic non vincet nisi qui vincere
noluit: Erasm. in Enchir. milit. Christ.
Every one shall be a conqueror who desires the conquest. For if we will be
the Lords soldiers, he will not suffer himself to be so much disgraced, as to
let us be overcome by his mortal enemies. He has armed us himself with his
own armor, and sent us out to fight his battles, and therefore he will not
have us vanquished, being fortified with his strength, for so should himself
be overcome in us, and his weapons would be esteemed weak and insufficient.
Yea he has ingrafted us into his own body, and we are lively members thereof,
and therefore let us never think that all the power of hell shall be able to
overcome us: for what head can with patience suffer his sound members to be
pulled from his body, if he be able to defend them?

CHAP. IIII. Of the malice of our spiritual enemy Satan.


Concerning the first, in an enemy who proclaims war against us we are to
consider two things: first of his will, and secondly of his power. For if he
have will to hurt us and no power, he is not to be greatly regarded; if power
and no malicious and unreconcilable will, he is not so much to be feared, but
if his power be great and puissant, and his will malicious, then is it time to
look about us, and to muster all our forces, that we may be ready to endure
the encounter.

First therefore concerning the will of our grand and arch enemy Satan, if
we consider thereof aright, we shall find that it is most maliciously bent
against us, Satan's will most malicious.
so that there is no hope of truce or reconciliation with him, though we could
find in our cowardly hearts to labor and sue for a dishonorable peace with
Gods and our enemy. For his malice is not newly conceived but inueterate, even
as ancient within a few days as the world it self, and much more durable; for
the world shall have an end, but Satan's malice to mankind is endless,
because the cause thereof, namely the love and favor of God toward the
faithful (whose estate he does envy and malign, himself being eternally
reprobated) shall be endless and eternal. And this appears in the example
of our first parents, who were no sooner placed in the garden of pleasure, and
possessed of Paradise, but Satan being almost burst with envy to see their
happy estate, never rested till he had disgorged his malice, and dispossessed
them of that happiness which they enjoyed. Neither does he less malign and
hate those who being fallen in Adam are raised up in Christ, and have the fee
simple of everlasting glory, purchased by Christ's merit, assured unto them by
the spirit of God and a lively faith. And hence it is that the Lord knowing
Satan's malice toward his children, and that whether he fawneth or frowneth,
he always seeks their destruction, has proclaimed open wars between us,
Genesis 3.15.
Genesis 3.15. that we may always stand upon our guard, and not be surprised at
unawares; that also we may not entertain a thought of peace, though Satan
offer it on whatsoever conditions: for what peace can there be between the
children of God and the children of Belial, between the seed of the woman and
the seed of the serpent, seeing God himself from the beginning has put
enmity between them?

Satan's malice joined with violence.
so also it is mortal and deadly, not to be satisfied by offering a small
injury, by taking away our goods and good name, or afflicting us with
sickness, no not by taking away our lives; for nothing will satisfy him but
our final destruction of body and soul. And this his malice is lively
deciphered unto us by diverse names which are given him in the Scriptures. For
he is called Satan, that is an adversary, still ready to cross us in all
our suites which we make unto God, Zach. 3.1. Matthew. 13.39.
as he did Iehoshua the high Priest, Zach. 3.1. He is called an enemy, Matthew.
13.39. and that a malicious one; for where Christ the good husbandman sows
wheat, there he sows tares, that is, hypocrites amongst true professors; to
the dishonor of God, the discredit of the Gospel, and the reproach of the true
professors thereof.

And least we should think that he is some mild natured enemy who will be
satisfied with some small revenge, he is called a murderer and a manslayer, as
though this were his profession and occupation. And least we should imagine him
to be one lately fallen to this trade, our Savior tells us that he has been
so from the beginning, Ioh. 8.44.
so that like an old hangman he is flesht in blood and cruelty; and therefore
seeing we can hope for no mercy at his hands, let us so much the more
courageously oppose our selves against him.

But for as much as the most savage man has some relics of humanity left in
him, therefore the holy Ghost compares him to beasts, that we may expect
nothing from him but brutish cruelty; as first to a lion, yea a lion roaring
after his pray, who is so hungry and ravenous, that he desires nothing more
then to seize upon that which he pursues, 1. Pet. 5.8. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Now who would not be most careful to keep himself out of the paws of such
a ravenous beast? or if he were incountred by him, who would not resist him if
he had any hope of victory?

But in truth Satan is far more cruel then the roaring lion, who (if we may
give credit to histories) spares those that fall down flat before him;
whereas if he should get us at such advantage, he would proudly trample us
under foot, and make us sure for ever rising; and therefore least we should
look for any mercy at his hands by submission, the holy Ghost calls him
the great red dragon, Apoc. 12.3.
Apoc. 12.3. which beast bears such natural malice to mankind, that he
deuoureth them not only for hunger; but also for sport or hatred, in
satisfying whereof he takes great delight; such a beast is our enemy, who is
so flesht in blood and cruelty, and so ouerca^^ed with malice and hatred, that
he esteems it his chief sport and pastime to destroy us. Yea he is far more
dangerous, for the other rages but against the body, this against both body
and soul; that beast we may easily avoid, but it is impossible to flee from
this winged Dragon, and therefore there is no other means to escape his fury,
but by arming our selves strongly, and fighting valiantly til we have put him
to flight.

Satan's malice joined with treacherous falsehood.
which he uses when he has any hope of surprising us by assault; but if he
find us strongly fortified with Gods graces, and at all points armed with the
complete armor of a Christian, if he perceive that we are hedged in and
fenced on all sides (as he speaks of Job chap. 1.10) that is, Job. 1.10.
guarded and protected by Gods almighty and alruling providence, so that he
has no hope of ouercomming us by assault and force, then he shows no less
malice and more subtlety in seeking our destruction, by fauning upon us, and
alluring us to sin, by offering the baits of honor, pleasure and
commodity, that so he may make entrance as it were by a posterne gate, and
subdue us while we are abandoned of the Lords assistance, and disarmed of our
spiritual weapons, whereby we should make resistance. And thus he dealt with
our first parents, who being enticed to sin, and also yielding to the
inticement, and so being deprived of Gods protection and the breast plate of
righteousness, were laid open to those deadly wounds which he inflicted on them.
For as soon as they had tasted of the forbidden fruit, they perceived their
nakedness, and therefore covered themselves with fig leaves, too weak an
armor to repel the fiery darts of Satan. Thus he disarmed the Israelites, by
tempting them to worship the golden Calfe, so that Moses saw that they were
naked, that is, disarmed of Gods favor and protection, Exodus 32.25. Exodus
32.25.
And this his policy he taught his servant Balaam, who when he could not
curse them whom God had blessed, gave this cursed counsel to Balaak, that the
Moabitish women should entice the Israelites to commit with them first carnal
and then spiritual whoredom, knowing that to be the only means to bring
Gods curse upon them. Numb. 25.1.2. and 31.16. Apoc. 2.14.
As we may see if we compare Numb. 25.1, 2. with the 31. chapter and 16.
verse, and Apoc. 2.14. And thus also this wild boar would have broken down
the hedge which defended Job, by tempting him to blaspheme God. And thus our
fubtill enemy Sinon-like inticeth us with deceiving allurements, even with our
own hands to break down the wall of our defense, and to make an open passage
for whole troops of sins to enter and furprize us, whilst we (overcome with
a false joy) glut and make our selves drunk with the cup of voluptuous
pleasures, and lie snorting in the dead sleep of carnal security, not so
much as once dreaming of our approaching ruin and destruction.

the tempter, Matthew. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
because he is a tempter of tempters, and as it were a tempter by profession,
Matthew. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.

The consideration whereof should make us most careful to withstand all his
temptations, whereby he allureth us unto sin. For if we yield unto them, he
will surely disarme us of Gods favor and protection, and so deadly wound our
souls when he has made them naked. There is no wise man will put off his
armor and cast away his weapons in the presence of his cruel enemy, though
he persuade him thereto with many flattring speeches and fair promises; and
shall we let Satan disarme us, because he allureth us thereto, by promising
some unlawful profit or vain pleasure, especially seeing we know him to be an
enemy no less treacherous then malicious?

But as he is a tempter to entice us unto sin, so also he is our accuser
after that we have sinned, requiring of God that he will execute his justice
upon the offenders who have deserved punishment. Of this there nee de no
further proof then his own testimony, Job. 1.7.
Job. 1.7. where he professes that he had been compassing the earth about;
like a promoter to spy out faults, that he might inform against the
offenders. But because we will not rest in his testimony, who is the father
of lies, we will add thereunto another of undoubted authority: Apoc. 12.10.
for Apoc. 12.10. it is said, that the Saints rejoice, because Satan, who was
the accuser of their brethren, was cast down, which accused them before God
day and night. So that Satan can spare no time, from accusing us for sin,
but that which he imployeth in tempting us thereunto, or in inflicting those
punishments which God permits him to lay upon us. Whereby we may perceive
the malice and treachery of our enemy, who though he be the chief cause which
moves us to sin, yet himself is the first that accuses us for it, and that
incessantly. Which may serve as a strong argument to make us wary of our
ways, least falling into sin, we give Satan occasion to insult over us, and
to prefer bills of indictment before our heavenly Judge, whose exact justice
will not let sin go unpunished. If there were a promoter continually prying
into all our actions, who were most maliciously disposed against us, and ready
to infourme of all our misdemeanour unto the Magistrate, how fearful would
we be to do any thing which would bring us within the compass of the law?
But such an informer continually observes all our behavior, even in our
secret chambers; who will not fail to accuse us even of those sins which he
himself has tempted us unto: and therefore seeing this malicious blab still
prieth into our actions, this should be of more force to withhold us from all
sin, then if all the world did look upon us.

But he is not only an accuser, but a slaunderer also, and thereof he has his
name (...). If therefore he can spy but an appearance of evil in us, he will
not stick to say, that we have or will commit that evil which he suspecteth
us of, for he will wrest and misconster all we do to the worst sense, and make
of every molehill an huge mountain. Thus wrongfully did he slander Job, that
he served God for that end for which Demetrius served his Goddess, namely for
advantage, because he preserved him and blessed all he had; affirming that if
he would take away his goods, and a little afflict his body, he would
blaspheme him to his face, Job. 1.10. And this also teaches us to look warily
to our actions, Job. 1.10.
abstaining not only from evil, but also from all appearance thereof, as the
Apostle exhorts, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
that so we give not to our malicious enemy the least advantage.

Neither is Satan only an accuser and slaunderer, but also an executioner or
hangman, ready with all alacrity and savage cruelty to inflict that
punishment the which the Lord adiudgeth us unto, as we may see in the history
of Job; and this also shows unto us the extreme malice of our enemy, which
makes him to forget that glorious state wherein he was created, and with all
willingness to execute so base an office.

Ephesians. 6.12.
yea malitiousnesse it self, as he is called Ephesians. 6.12. that is, the father
and author of all malice and envy, who labors might and maine to dishonor
God and work our destruction. The consideration whereof should rouse us out of
our carnal security (whereby men behave themselves, as though either they had
no enemy at all, or else such a gentle natured one, that they may have peace
with him at their own pleasure) seeing there is no hope of peace and truce,
unless we can be content to live in his thraldom to our utter destruction:
for whomsoever he keeps as his prisoners in this life, he will at the hour
of death and judgment bring out to execution.

Let us therefore oppose against Satan's malice, Christian resolution;
steadfastly purposing and endeavoring to continue our fight in resisting Satan
to our lives end, how troublesome soever it seems to flesh and blood. For
seeing there is no truce to be hoped for, nor to be desired if it were offered,
by reason of the enmity which is between us and our enemy; seeing his malice
is so inueterate and mortal, that there is no mercy to be expected, but all
barbarous and raging cruelty; seeing also we fight the Lords battles, who
has assured us of victory in the end: This should make us so resolute, that
though we be foiled, wounded, and as it were beaten down on our knees, yet we
should never yield, but make resistance even to the last gasp. For what more
honorable death then to dye in fighting the Lords battles? What death more
profitable, seeing by dying we shall overcome and obtain a final victoric
over all our enemies, and receive the crown of glory, everlasting happiness,
promised to all those who fight valiantly in this combat unto the end?

CHAP. V. Of the strength of our spiritual enemy Satan.


But with our enemy it is far otherwise: for as his will is most maliciously
bent to hurt, so is he strong and mighty to effect his will. And this his
power and ability to execute his will, consists partly in his strength, and
partly in his skill and warlike policy, whereby he imployeth all his strength
to his best advantage. His strength may be considered both in himself and in
his aides.

In respect of his own strength he is very mighty, Of Satan's strength
considered in himself.
so that if the Lord permits him he is able to raise the winds, stir up
tempests, bring down fire from heaven, and utterly destroy us in a moment. And
this his strength the holy Ghost expresses, by comparing him to things most
strong, either in the sea or on the land, that so we may be more careful to
arm our selves against him. He is compared to the great Leuiathan or Whale,
Esa. 27.1. Esa 27.1. Job. 41.
whose invincible force is described by the Lord himself, Job. 41.

He is compared to a lion, yea to a roaring lion. 1. Pet. 5.8.
1. Pet. 5.8. which rauenously hunting after his pray has his force redoubled
with his hunger. And also to a great red Dragon, having seven heads and ten
horns, whose strength is so great, that with his very tail he drew the third
part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth, Apoc. 12.4. Apoc.
12.4.
that is, he vanquisheth and subdueth many in the visible Church which make
some profession of religion, but in their lives deny the power thereof. And
this his strength is so much the more dangerous, by reason of his mortal
malice and deadly poison which he casts out of his mouth in great abundance.

a strong armed man, Luke 11.21.
Luke 11.21. who keeps in peace all that he possesses. And least we should
despise him because he is but one, the holy Ghost tells us that he is a
mighty prince, not of one land or country, but of the whole world, Ioh. 12.31.
Ioh. 12.31. who therefore has infinite multitudes at his commandment,
neither is there one of these princes alone, but huge multitudes of them; and
therefore the holy Ghost speaking of them uses the plural number, saying,
that we fight against principalities, Ephesians. 6.12.
against powers, and against the worldly governors, etc. Whereas therefore the
holy Ghost does call him the strong man, Satan, and the devil in the singular
number; he would not have us to conceive that there is only one, but it is
partly to note the chief of the kingdom of darkness, Matthew. 25.41.
according to that Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. And in this sense he is
called Beelzebub the prince of devils, Matthew. 12.24.
Matthew. 12.24. And partly to intimate unto us their great consent and agreement
in seeking the destruction of mankind; for though they be an huge multitude,
yet they combine themselves together, as if they were but one, in seeking our
destruction.

Otherwise the Scriptures evidently show us, that there is not one alone,
Matthew. 12.45.
but many to assault us. Matthew. 12.45. One spirit takes unto him seven more,
and they al enter into one man. Mark. 16.9. Mark. 16.9. Luke 8.30.
It is said that Christ had cast out of Mary dalen seven, that is, many devils.
So Luke 8.30. there is mention made of a man possessed with an whole legion,
that is, with an huge multitude. So that as our enemies are powerful in
strength, so are they in numbers numberless, enough to beset us all, on all
sides and in all places, and therefore our fight must needs be dangerous:
which danger the Apostle aggrauateth, by telling us that they are the princes
of darkness, and therefore as well able to assault us in the night as in the
day, Ephesians. 6.12.
which sight of all other is most terrible, when we cannot see our enemies, and
therefore cannot tell on which side to defend our selves.

Secondly, he tells us that we wrestle not with enemies of flesh and blood
like unto our selves, but with spiritual wickednesses, which are most
dangerous; because being spirits they can with incredible swiftnes pass from
place to place which are far distant, and therefore the more fitly take all
advantages, either in assaulting us at their pleasure, or withdrawing
themselves when they find resistance; being spirits they can lie secretly in
ambushment, even in our bedchambers, and so surprise us when they find us most
retchlesse and secure, for we cannot discover them before we feel their
assaults.

Thirdly, he tells us that they are in high places, to note unto us that they
have gotten the advantage of the upper ground; and therefore the fight must be
dangerous, when our enemy fights against us from an high place or fort, we
standing so low that we are scarce able to reach him. But because earthly
things cannot sufficiently show the power of our enemy Satan, therefore he is
called the god of this world, 2. Cor. 4.4.
2. Cor. 4.4. to note unto us, that in respect of worldly strength and humane
resistance, he is after a sort omnipotent, that is, able to do what he list,
if he were not restrained by Gods divine power, who alone is omnipotent, and
ouerruled by no superior.

Of the courage and audaciousnes of Satan.
yet if withal he were a dastard and void of courage, he were the less to be
feared; but as he is very strong, so also he is exceeding desperate and
audacious, for there was never man that lived, who^ he durst not encounter, yea
and that after (by Gods assistance) he had taken many overthrows. Though David
were a most holy man and according to Gods own heart, yet he assaulted him,
and gave him diverse foyles, by tempting him to adultery, murder, and in pride
of heart to number the people. Though Job was by Gods own testimony the
iustest man on earth, and therefore the best armed with the breast plate of
righteousness, yet Satan durst encounter him as long as God would suffer him.
He resisted Iehoshua the good high Priest, Zach. 3.1. He buffeted Paul the
chosen vessel of the Lord, Zach. 3.1.
2. Cor. 12.7. 2. Cor. 12.7.
Yea so ventrous he is, that he assaulted our first parents in the state of
innocence, when they were armed with free will, and might if they would have
resisted his temptations. Nay, so desperately audacious is this our enemy,
that he durst encounter our grand Captain Christ Jesus, who was God and man
able to destroy him with a word of his mouth; and that not once but many times,
after he was shamefully foiled and overthrown: yea so insolent and
foole-hardie he is, that he did not only assault him here on earth when he was
in the shape of a servant, and whereas in respect of his outward state he might
have some hope of prevailing; but also he wageth war against him in heaven,
sitting at the right hand of his father in all glory, power and maicstie, when
as he has no appearance of hope to prevail, but is most sure that he shall
have the overthrow. And this appears Apoc. 12.7. Apoc. 12.7.
And there was a battle in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, but they prevailed not, etc.
Where by Michael we are to understand Christ himself, for he only is the
prince of Angels; and this name signifying such an one as is equal with God
almighty, can agree to no other but unto Christ alone. And by the Dragon we
are to understand Satan, as appears verse. 9. who fought against our Savior,
though he prevailed not.

If therefore he durst encounter the most valiant soldiers that ever fought
the Lords battles, yea if he durst set upon our Savior Christ himself;
then surely there is no doubt but that he has courage enough to set upon us
who are weak and feeble, altogether unable in our selves to make resistance.

Seeing therefore our enemies are so puissant in strength, so innumerable in
multitude, so dangerous and so audacious, let us shake off all security, and
continually stand in readiness to endure the encounter: for what folly is it
for us with secure worldlings to contemn, and make no reckoning of such
enemies? Seeing every one of us must resist a huge multitude; seeing we which
are weak and feeble are to withstand those which are strong and mighty;
seeing we which are flesh and blood must enter combat with those which are
spiritual wickednesses, principalities, powers, and princes of darkness; seeing
we who are cowardly and fearful must sustain the encounter of those who are
desperate and audacious; lastly, seeing we have in our selves no advantages
against them, and they want no advantages against us: let us not therefore
foolishly contemn such puissant enemies, but with all care and diligence let
us arm our selves against them, and work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12.
as the Apostle exhorts, Phil. 2.12.

Job, so that he did with all extremity execute that which God suffered him to
do, yet he could not go one jot further then his commission, he could not
touch his substance till the Lord had said, All that he has is in thy hand,
Job. 1.12. And therefore not prevailing against him by depriving him of his
goods and substance, he comes again to the Lord to have his commission
enlarged, Job. 2.1. and then having gotten authority to afflict his body, yet
could he not touch his life, because the Lord had not given him so much
liberty. Though Saul were a wicked man, yet Satan could not hurt or vex him,
till the Lord sent him, 1. Sam. 16.14. And hence it is that he is called the
spirit of God, verse. 15. and chap. 18.10. because he is Gods slave and wholly
at his appointment. So he could not deceive the false prophets of Ahab, till
he had gotten license of the Lord, 1. King. 22.22. Nay, so far is Satan from
having absolute authority and power over the faithful, that it is limited and
restrained in respect of the meanest creatures; for a whole legion of devils
could not so much as enter into one heard of swine, till by earnest entreaty
they had obtained leave of our Savior Christ, Luke 8.31, 32. And therefore
much less can they prevail against any of Gods children, seeing the very
hairs of their head are numbered, Matthew. 10.29. Well may Satan malign us and
earnestly desire our destruction; well may he secke to sift us like wheat, as
he did Peter; but our Savior Christ makes intercession for us, so that our
faith shall never fail, Luke 22.31.

This also is manifest by plain testimonies. Jude 6. it is said, that the Lord
has reserved the wicked angels in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. 2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that had
sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of
darkness to be kept unto damnation. So Apoc. 20.2. Satan is said to have been
bound by the Angel of the Lord for a thousand years, so that he could not
stir till the Lord suffered him to be loosed. By all which the holy Ghost
notes unto us, that Satan is no more able to do us hurt, then a malefactor
who being bound hand and foot is cast into a deep dungeon, or then a band-dog
which is fast tied up in strong chains, till the Lord loses him and gives
him leave.

But here some man may object, that Satan is said in the Scriptures, to resist
God and to oppose himself against him, and even to fight a battle against
our Savior Christ himself and his blessed Angels, Apoc. 12.7. I answer, that
this resistance and fight depends on Gods permissiue providence, neither
could he so much as stir against God, if he did not suffer him. He is
indeed most maliciously disposed against the Lord, and by this his malice is
stirred up to do those things which he thinks most displeasant in Gods
eyes: but because the Lord chaineth and curbeth him in with his omnipotent
power, he is only able to do those things that God permits him, and, will
he nill he, he is constrained to obey his Creator and to be at his commandment.

Seeing therefore Satan's power is restrained by the omnipotent power of God,
this may serve as a strong reason to strengthen our faith in the assurance of
victory; especially considering that the Lord is not only omnipotent in power,
but also in respect of his will most ready to aid and support us in all our
conflicts. For he has promised us, that we shall not be tempted above our
power, 1. Cor. 10.13.
for he will give a good issue to the temptation, though the beginning and
middle are dangerous and troublesome, 1. Cor. 10.13. He has promised, that if
we will but resist the devil, we shall put him to flight, Iam. 4.7.
Iam. 4.7. Though therefore in our selves we are very weak, yet God will
assist us in this combat, which as well concerns his own glory as our good,
and being armed with his power, the gates of hell cannot prevail against us.
Well may the Lord suffer us to take a foil, that thereby learning to know our
own weakness, we may the more carefully rest on his power, and more earnestly
crave his assistance, but then he will raise us up though we be never so
feeble; for the more apparent our infirmities are, the more clearly will the
omnipotent power of the Lord shine unto all the world, when by his help we
have obtained victory.

If we will overcome we must wholly rely on the Lord. Col. 1.11.
Would we therefore resist Satan's force and strength? then let us not go
armed in our own power, for we are so weakened with sin and corruption, that
we are not able to withstand his least assault; but despairing in our own
ability, let us rely our selves wholly on the Lord: for we are strengthened
with all might through his glorious power, as it is Col. 1.11. and though in
our selves we are able to do nothing, yet we are able to do all things,
through the help of Christ which strengthens us, as it is Phil. 4.13. Phil.
4.13.
Of our selves we are not able to endure the least encounter of our spiritual
enemies, but yet if we trust in the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.57.
he will give us victory through Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 15.57. And hence it is
that the Apostle preparing us for this spiritual combat, does exhort us to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; Romans 8.37.
and to put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.10.11.
that we may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil, Ephesians. 6.10,
11. If therefore we would be safely protected from the fury of Satan's power,
let us not oppose against it our own strength, for then surely we shall be
overcome, (...) but let us rely our selves on the almighty power of God,
professing with the Prophet David, Psalm. 18.2. that the Lord is our rock and
fortress, Psalm. 18.2.
and he that delivers us, our God and our strength, in him will we trust, our
shield, the horn of our salvation and our refuge. Let us with him call upon
God which is worthy to be praised, and so shall we be safe from al our enemies,
ver. 3.

In like manner, when we consider of the infinite number of our enemies, which
daily assault every one of us, let us thereby be awakened out of the slumber of
careless retchlesnes, and be stirred up to stand upon our guard more
carefully: but yet let not this discourage us from the fight, because there are
many to one, for the Lord is with us whilst we fight his battles, and
therefore what mattreth it who oppose themselves against us? Romans 8 31. Exodus
14.14.
Romans 8.31. The Lord will fight for us, therefore let us hold our peace, Exodus
14.14. The battle is not ours but Gods, and therefore let us not be afraid of
this great multitude, 2. Chro. 20.15.
as it is 2. Chro. 20.15. for the greater the number is which fights against
us, the more will the Lord glorify himself in our victory, the greatness of
his power shining so much the more clearly in the weakness of the means, and
our infirmities serving as a foil, to make the riches of his omnipotency and
glory appear more glorious. So that the Lord standing on our side, it is not
material how many wicked spirits assaults us; if he take upon him our
preservation, we need not care though the whole power of hell seek our
destruction. But if such be the frailty of our faith, that we would oppose
number against number, let us consider that if we will fight the Lords
battles, he will send as many blessed Angels to our aid and rescue, as there
are wicked spirits which assault us; for the Angels of the Lord pitch their
tents round about them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7.
and deliver them, as it is Psalm. 34.7. So that if the Lord open our eyes, as
he did the eyes of Elishaes servant, we shall plainly perceive that there are
more with us then against us, 2 King. 6.16.
2. King. 6.16, 17.

be discouraged hereby from entering the combat: for though we be but flesh and
blood, yet the spirit of God dwelling in us, can easily discern and defeat
all Satan's ambushments; for light and darkness are to him alike. And whereas
Satan can with great agilitie give the assault and retire back for his best
advantage, Gods spirit far excels him, for he is present in all places at
all times; so that Satan can no sooner offer to strike, but Gods spirit is
ready to defend; no sooner can the devil tempt, then the Lord enableth us to
endure the temptation. And though Satan fights from high places, and so
takes the advantage of the upper ground, yet let not this dismay us in our
fight, for there is one higher then he who laugheth him to scorn, and makes
frustrate all his enterprises.

Lastly, when we consider that our enemy is desperate and audacious, we are
not to cast away our spiritual weapons and forsake the field, but let it
rather serve as a strong motive to make us arm our selves with Christian
resolution: for seeing satan is so audacious and venterous in the assault,
surely we should be as valiant and bold in giving him the repulse; if he be
desperate in seeking our destruction, it behooves us to be resolute in seeking
our preservation, seeing this much more concerns us then the other him;
especially considering that though we take many foyles, and be often beaten
down with the violent blows of his temptations, yet in the end we shall have
assured victory. And why therefore should Satan show more resolution when he
is sure to be vanquished, then we who are sure of the victory, if we do not
cowardly yield?

CHAP. VI. Of Satan's aides: and first of the world.
and all these are led under the conduct of two Captain Generals, the World
and the Flesh.

By the world I understand impious carnal and unbelieving men, with all their
baits and inticements unto vanity, and all their discouragements, afflictions
and miseries wherewith they hinder Gods children in travailing the path of
righteousness which leads to Gods kingdom. This wicked world, the devils
darling and chief champion, does assault us on both sides; on the right hand it
encountreth us with prosperity, offering us the bait of pleasure, How the
world tempts by prosperity.
that thereby it may allure us to swallow the hook of sin; it casts before
us the golden apples of riches, that by stooping down to gather them, we may be
hindered in running the Christian race, and so lose the goal and garland of
everlasting glory; it tempts us with the honors and glory thereof to
dishonor God, and to fall before Satan, worshipping him by our sins; in a
word, it promises whatsoever our corrupt minds desire, if we will live in
sin, and turn aside out of the narrow path into the broad way, which leads
to destruction. And how prone we are to listen to these Sirens songs, it is
but too manifest by lamentable experience: for does not our first love wax
cold, and our former zeal of Gods glory freeze as soon as the world fauneth
upon us, and quenches in us the heat of Gods spirit, by casting on us the
watrish vanities of pleasures, honors and riches? Do not hereby religious
servants become irreligious masters? and young saints in show, old devils in
truth? Do we not see that as soon as Demas has embraced the world, he
forsakes Christ? yea that Peter himself denies his Master, when he has
basted himself by the fire of this wicked Caiphas? Are there not many who have
been forward professors in the time of their adversity and want, which cast
off the cloak of their profession as soon as the warm sun of prosperity
has shined upon them? Is there not many amongst us who in the time of
affliction could not be enforced by torments to profane Gods name, by swearing
an idle oath; or his Sabbaoths by following their pleasures, or by doing the
works of their callings; and yet the same men after they have fallen into
wicked company, who have enticed them by their words and evil examples to
taste of the world and the vanities thereof, will not stick to swear with the
swearer, and follow their pleasures on the Lords Sabbath with the most
profane? so hard a thing it is to resist the world when it fauneth on us.

How we must resist the temptations of prosperity.
yet must we oppose our selves against this enemy also: for without a fight
we can never obtain victory, and without victory we shall never receive the
crown of glory. And to the end that we may be provoked to fight against the
world and the vanities thereof, we are to know, that though it faune upon us,
yet it is our mortal enemy; though it flatteringly profess it self our
friend, yet in truth it fights against our souls under Satan's banner, for
he is the prince thereof, Ioh. 12.31. though it have honey in the mouth, Ioh.
12.31.
yet there is deadly poison in the tail, for the end thereof brings
destruction; though it offer us many pleasing things to allure us, yet they are
but baits which entice us to come within the compass of Satan's nets of
perdition. Let us consider, that though it makes a show, and seems a
pleasant place like the paradise of God, yet it is a Sodom of sin, which one
day the Lord will destroy with fire and brimstone: Genesis 13.10.
and therefore let us with righteous Lot haste out of it, never turning back
with a desire to enjoy the vanities thereof, for the world wholly lies in
wickedness, as it is 1. Ioh. 5.19. 1. Ioh. 5.19.
Let us remember that it is impossible to serve God and this Mammon, Matthew.
6.24. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
Mat. 6.24. to love the world and God also: For if any man love the world, the
love of the father is not in him, 1. Ioh. 2.15. and as the Apostle James
tells us, The amity of the world is enmity with God: and whosoever will be
a friend of the world, Iam. 4.4.
makes himself the enemy of God, Iam. 4.4. Neither let us desire the love of
the world, for it loves those only which are her own, as for those whom
Christ has chosen out of it, Ioh. 15.19.
those the world hates: nay therefore hates them because Christ has chosen
them, as it is Ioh. 15.19.

Let us remember yt it will be to small purpose to enjoy these worldly pleasures
of sin for a season, and in the end plunge our selves into everlasting death;
that the worlds music is but the Sirens song, which allureth us to make
shipwreck of our souls on the rocks of sin, and while it tickleth the ear
it wounds us to the very heart; that though the cup which it offers be of
gold, and the drink sweet in taste, yet it is deadly poison in operation; for
they that drink thereof are so lulled asleep in pleasures and security, that
they never awake out of their spiritual lethargic; or if they do, yet like
Sampson, without strength to resist the spiritual Philistines, after the world
(like Dalila) has lulled them a while in her lap of carnal pleasures. Let us
remember, that they who drink of this cup of voluptuous vanities, must
afterward drink of that cup spoken of Psalm. 75.8. that is, Psalm. 75.8.
that is, the cup of Gods wrath; and shall be tormented in fire and brimstone
for evermore, Apoc. 14.10.
as it is expounded Apoc. 14.10. Let us remember that the worlds chief good is
uncertain in getting, and momentanie and mutable in the possession, it being
every day ready to leave us, or we to leave it. Lastly, let us remember that
for this short, inconstant, and vain joy, we lose an eternal weight of
unspeakable glory, and plunge our selves into grievous and endless misery.
What therefore will it profit us to gain the whole world, and lose our own
souls, as our Savior speaks, Mark. 8.36.
Mark. 8.36.

And if we have these meditations continually running in our minds, then
shall we easily stop our ears at the first hearing of this Sirens song; then
shall we constantly go forward in our pilgrimage toward our heavenly home: and
though honors stand before us, riches on the one hand, pleasures on the other,
alluring us to enter into the broad way which leads to destruction; yet shall
we not forsake the straight path which leads unto life everlasting, how
unpleasant soever it seems to flesh and blood.

How the world tempts by adversity.
her allurements into threats, her beds of pleasures, into miseries and
afflictions, her glorious offers of honors and riches, to proud menacings of
poverty and ignominy; all which being terrible in the eyes of flesh and blood
so far prevail with some, that they move them to make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience; and being weary in travailing through this desert and
unpleasant wilderness unto the land of promise, they desire to return back
into the bondage of the spiritual Pharaoh, that they may quietly sit by the
fleshpots of Egypt, Numb. 11.5.
and glut themselves with the cucumbers and pepons of carnal pleasures: that
is, they choose rather to walk in the broad way which leads to destruction,
because it is delightful, than in the narrow way which leads to everlasting
life, because they must pass through the briars of affliction and thorns of
tribulation, before they can receive the crown of glory; they prefer the
pleasures of sin for a season, before the recompense of reward, which God has
promised, even the eternal joys of the kingdom of glory. So unpleasant a
thing it is for flesh and blood to deny it self, and to take up the cross
and follow Christ.

But though the world be far more terrible to look upon when it frowneth,
then when it fawneth, yet is it far less dangerous. For oftentimes this
poison of adversity is so tempered and corrected with those wholesome
preservatives of faith, hope, patience and humility, that in steed of killing
us, it does but purge away our corrupt humors of sin; though the world whip
us, yet thereby it corrects us, and makes us better; though it burn us in
the fire of afflictions, yet it does not consume, but rather refine us from our
dross; though like a stormy wind it shakes us, yet in steed of blowing us
down, it causes us to take more deep root in all virtue and goodness: in a
word, as it plaieth the schoolmaster in scourging us, so also in instructing
and teaching us to know God, and to know our selves; to know the vanity of the
world, and to labor after a more permanent felicity.

How we are to arm our selves against adversity.
howsoever by the grace and blessing of God, adversity (the worlds churlish
son) oftentimes works these good effects; yet in it self it is a
temptation, and that a strong one, to draw us from God, by causing us to
murmr and repine: yea as Satan said of Job, to curse God to his face, to
envy all who seem unto us more happy then our selves, to despair of Gods
mercy, and to use unlawful means, that thereby we may better our estate. And
therefore it behooves us to arm our selves against the violence of this enemy
also, least building our houses upon the sands of security they be ouerturned,
when the winds of afflictions and floods of adversity and persecution blow and
beat against us. And to this end we are to remember, first, that these
fatherly corrections are evident testimonies to assure us that we are not
bastards, but Gods dear children, whom he gently chastises, that we may not
be destroyed with the world; Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
that now Christ has chosen us out of the world, seeing the world hates us;
Ioh. 15.19.
that now we are the friends of God, when the world (Satan's eldest son)
becomes our enemy: for so long as we are of the world the world loves us,
for it loves her own. Secondly, let us continually remember the recompense of
reward, and then shall we with Moses volu^tarily choose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.26.
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the rebuke of
Christ greater riches, than the treasures of Egypt, as it is Heb. 11.25, 26.
The^ shall we endure to be tried and purified in the furnace of afflictions, if
we know that after we are found to be pure gold, the Lord will lay us up in his
treasury of everlasting happiness. Lastly, let us remember, that eternal
blessedness is promised to those that mourn with a godly sorrow, and eternal
woe denounced against those who pamper themselves with worldly delights. Matthew.
5.4.10.
Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. So
verse. 10. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Luke 6.21.25.
Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye which hunger now, for ye shall be satisfied: blessed
are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh. And verse. 25. Woe be unto you that
are full, for ye shall hunger: woe unto you that now laugh, for ye shall wail
and weep. And least the tediousness of our troubles should discourage us, or
the weight of them press us down, the Apostle tells us, that they are but
light and momentanie, causing notwithstanding unto us a far most excellent
and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.
2. Cor. 4.17. Why therefore should this little spot of foul way, cause us to
stand still, or go out of our course, which leads to everlasting happiness?

CHAP. VII. Of the flesh, and the strength thereof.
What the flesh is.
but that corruption of nature which has defiled both body and soul, being
spread and mixed with every part of both, even as the light is mingled with
darkness in the twilight or dawning of the day; whereby we are made prone to
all sin, and ready to entertain all temptations, which promise the
satisfying of any of the lusts thereof. This secret traitor conspiring with
Satan and the world to work our destruction, does entertain and further all
their temptations; it fights and lusts against the spirit, it rebelleth
against the law of our minds, and leads us captive to the law of sin, it
hinders us from doing the good we would, and makes us commit the evil which
we hate, as it is notably set down Romans 7. So Gal. 5.17. Romans 7. Galat. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things
that ye would.

This enemy the holy Ghost in the Scriptures deciphereth by diverse names; for
it is called the old man, the old Adam, the earthly, carnal, and natural man,
the sin which is inherent and dwells in us, the adjoining evil, the law of
the members, the lusts of the flesh which fight against the soul; by all which
is signified our corruption of nature, which is derived from our first parents,
whereby we are made backward unto all good, and prone unto all evil, unapt to
entertain any good motions of Gods spirit, but most ready to receive and
embrace all the suggestions and temptations of the world and the devil, as the
wax the print of the seal, or the tindar fire. And this the Apostle James
shows chap. 1.14 Every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence and is enticed: Iam. 1.14.15.
15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it
is finished brings forth death. So that as Satan is the father, so the
flesh is the mother of sin, which receiving Satan's temptations as it were
into a fruitful womb, does conceive, nourish, and bring forth sin, which no
sooner is borne, but like a deadly stinging serpent, it brings death to body
and soul, unless the poison thereof be overcome and taken away by the
precious blood of Christ.

The treachery of the flesh.
and how it conspireth with Satan in seeking our destruction, whereby
appears the treachery and dangerousnes of this our enemy. The treachery
thereof is hereby manifest, in that being in outward show a dear friend, and
more near than an alter idem, another self, it notwithstanding aideth Satan
to our own ouorthrow. So as we may complain with David, Psalm 41.9. My
familiar friend whom I trusted, Psalm. 41* 9.
which did eat my bread, has lift up the heel against me. For this Judas
which daily follows us, and eats, drinks and sleeps with us, does
betray us into the hands of those enemies who seek our life; and that, when it
seems lovingly and kindly to kiss us.

And as it is most treacherous, so also most dangerous, and hard to be
overcome, for as much as it is in our self, and the greatest part of our self,
and therefore we cannot forsake it, unless we forsake our selves; Mark. 8.34.
That the flesh is a most dangerous enemy.
we cannot fight against it, unless we raise intestine and civil wars in
our own bowels; we cannot vanquish it, unless we subdue our selves; and if
we seek to run away from it, we might as easily flee from our own
shadows, yea from our selves, for we carry it in our own bosoms. How hard
therefore is this enemy to be overcome? how dangerous and irksome must this
fight needs be, wherein our selves must be enemy to our selves? So that we
cannot obtain the victory, unless we be overcome; we cannot be sure of life,
unless we mortify and kill our greatest part; we cannot sustain our selves,
but we nourish our enemy; we cannot famish our enemy, but we our selves shall
pine with hunger. Who would not think the estate of those citizens to be most
dangerous, who being besieged by foreign forces, harbor amongst them more
traitors which are hourly in readiness to open the gates and betray the city
into their enemies hands, than true subjects and loyal citizens to stand in
their defense? But this is our case, we are besieged with foreign forces, the
world and the devil; and we nourish in us secret traitors, even the flesh,
with whole legions of the lusts thereof, which are continually ready to open
the gates of our souls, even our senses of seeing, hearing, touching, tasting,
smelling, whereby whole troops of temptations enter and surprise us.

How the flesh is to be weakened.
The consideration whereof should make us most watchfully to stand upon our
guard, and to use such Christian policy to withstand our enemies, and prevent
their treacherous attempts, as true-hearted citizens would use in the like
case; who if they were besieged with foreign forces, and knew that they
harbored traitors, who sought all opportunities of betraying their city into
their enemies hand, they would if they were strong enough lay hand on them,
draw them to the place of judgment, condemn and put them to death; but if
they found them too great and strong a party, then they would use all good
policy to make them weaker, by depriving them of their food and provision,
weapons, armor and munition, and all other means wherein consisted their
chief strength; and then they would set upon them being thus disabled, and
proceed in the course of justice before mentioned: so we being in continual
danger to have the city of our souls sacked through the treacherousnes of our
flesh, must, if we be strong enough and powerful through Gods spirit,
mortify, kill, and abolish the flesh, and the lusts thereof; but if we find
the spirit weak and the flesh strong, we are to disable it by fasting and
watchfulnes in prayer, by withdrawing from it the food with which it is
nourished, that is, voluptuous pleasures and worldly delights, but especially
being weak in our selves, we are to implore the aid and assistance of Gods
spirit, whereby we may be strengthened and enabled to subdue and mortify the
lusts of the flesh, 1. Pet. 2.11.
which rebel and fight against our souls, being assured by Gods merciful
promise, that if we ask and desire his spirit, he will give it us, Luke 11.13.
Luke 11.13. and having the spirit of God to assist us, we shall be sure of
victory.

But if in steed of mortifying and taming the flesh and the lusts thereof, we
pamper them like Epicures with all voluptuous delights; Pro. 24.21.
we shall but strengthen our enemies to cut our own throtes: if we
delicately bring up this servant, which we should use as a slave, at length it
will be not only as our son, but a tyrannous Lord and master, which will
bind us hand and foot in the fetters of sin, and cast us into the prison of
hell. What folly therefore is it to nourish and arm our enemy to our own
destruction?

CHAP. VIII. Of Satan's policy.


If our enemy had great strength, and yet wanted policy, he might the more
easily be resisted, and the sooner vanquished; for strength without wit is like
a giant without eyes. But as our enemy is exceeding strong, so is he also no
less subtle and politic, in employing all his strength to his best
advantage; and therefore as in regard of his strength he is called in the
Scriptures a lion, and a mighty dragon; so in respect of his subtlety and
wilines he is called a serpent, yea an old serpent, which being the subtillest
of beasts, has his craft redoubled by his age and experience, Apoc. 12.9.
Apoc. 12.9. and hereof he is called in the Scriptures, (...), to signify unto
us his great knowledge.

No marvel therefore though Satan should be an expert soldier, seeing he is
not only of wonderful strength, but also of great knowledge by creation;
which though in respect of good things it was much decreased by his fall, yet
in sleights and stratagems it is much increased by his long experience from the
beginning of the world, even almost six thousand years; which is sufficient
to make one wise that is by nature foolish and simple, and therefore much more
Satan, who is by nature very politic; being also a spirit, and hereby fit to
diue as it were into the secrets of nature, and with incredible swiftnes to
pass from place to place, ready to intrude himself into all companies
secretly, and to learn the nature, qualities and dispositions of al men,
against whom he fights. And though he cannot know our thoughts directly and
certainly, for this is proper to God alone to be the searcher of hearts, yet
he has such intelligence from our affections, lusts, inclinations and outward
actions, that he can shrewdly guess at them, if he do but a while keep us
company, and see our disposition and conversation. So that we cannot give
Satan the least advantage, but he is ready to take it and make use thereof to
our overthrow; we can lay no plot against him but he discerns it, and is
ready to prevent it. And therefore in this respect our state is like the king
of Arams, 2. King. 6.12. 2. King. 6.12.
for Satan our enemy knows all our counsels and consultations which we
take and hold in our most secret chambers.

And thus you see what Satan's policy is: How we may defeat Satan's policy.
against which we must oppose no less wisdom and skill, if we will have the
victory. Whereas therefore we are foolish by nature, or wily to beguile our
selves; that wisdom which we have naturally being worldly and carnal, which
is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. Romans 8.7.
and therefore more fit to betray us into the hands of our enemy, than to
defend us from him; it behooves us to go out of our selves into the Lords
treasury of wisdom, and there to furnish us with such spiritual saving
wisdom, as shall be fit to oppose against the subtle policy of our
spiritual enemy. That is, we must continually hear and meditate in Gods
word, which will make us wise and skillful in descrying all Satan's stratagems,
and also in preventing them being discovered. For howsoever in the dark night
of ignorance and error we may easily fall into his ambushments, yet the light
of Gods word shining unto us, will plainly disclose them to the eyes of the
most simple.

But besides this theoreticall wisdom seated in the understanding, there is
also a practical or operative wisdom required in Gods word, which shows it
self in our affections and actions. And it consists in the fear of the
Lord, that is, true godliness and sincerity of heart. Of this Job speaks,
chap. 28. verf. 28. Job. 28.28. Psalm. 111.10.
The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.
So Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the Lord is the head or beginning of wisdom.
And Pro. 28.7. he is called a wise son which keeps the law. Pro. 28.7.
So that our chief wisdom consists in the fear of the Lord, and in a
godly endeavor of performing obedience to the Lords commandments.

If therefore we would attain unto such spiritual wisdom that we may resist
our spiritual enemy, we must be conversant in hearing and reading the word
of God, meditating therein with the Prophet David both day and night; Psalm. 1.2.
and withal we must by all means seek the fear of the Lord, laboring to
lead our lives in a constant course of true godliness. And though we are full
of infirmities, yet at least let us have an holy endeavor to perform service
unto God, in truth, vprightnes, and integrity of heart. And so we may assure
our selves that though we be never so simple and foolish by nature, yet shall
we be wise enough to withstand and overcome our spiritual enemies: for the
Lord who is wisdom it self will direct us in our ways, and he also will so
infatuate this cursed Achitophel, and turn his wisdom into foolishnes, that
we shall never thereby be hurt or circumuented.

But on the other side, though we be never so wise in carnal wisdom, and
though our heads be a storehouse of politic stratagems, yet if we neglect
Gods word, and voluntarily give our selves over unto sin and disobedience, we
shall be so besotted with folly, that Satan will easily deceive and circumuent
us. An example whereof we have in our first parents, who though they were more
wise by creation than ever were any living (Christ excepted) yet when they cast
the word of God behind their back, giving more credit to Satan's suggestions,
and withal transgressed Gods commandment; their wisdom was turned into
ignorance and folly, and they became an easy pray to their malicious enemy.
And whereas they thought by that means to have gone beyond the Lord in
policy, and to have obtained a far greater measure of knowledge and glory,
they were in steed thereof besotted with folly, and overwhelmed with ignominy
and shame, by being made the bondslaues of sin and Satan. And thus also the
heathen neglecting the true worship of God, and giving themselves to idolatry,
became fools, whilst they professed themselves very wise, Romans 1.22.
as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 1.22. for the Lord destroys the wisdom of
the wise, and casts away the understanding of the prudent, 1. Cor. 1.19.
as it is 1. Cor. 1.19.

Seeing then our chief wisdom consists in the study of Gods word, and in
vprightnes of heart, integrity, Christian sincerity and simplicity, and in a
holy care of perfourming obedience to Gods will, let us therefore continually
meditate in Gods word, Psalm. 119.
and with the Prophet David make it our counselor, Psalm. 119. And whenever
Satan does assault and tempt us to sin, let us have recourse to this our
counselor the word of God, there inquiring whether that whereunto we are
tempted be lawful or no; and if it tell us that it is a sin, let us with all
care and conscience avoid it: for though Satan lay over it never so fair a
gloss, and entice us to the committing thereof, by offering unto us the
greatest pleasures, riches and honors of the world, yet let us assure our
selves that he thereby seeks to circumuent us; and to purchase worldly
vanities, he inticeth us to sell our souls; and therefore in Christian
wisdom let us avoid his stratagems.

CHAP. IX. Of the spiritual armor described, Ephesians. 6.


That the weapons of our Christian warfare must be spiritual.
Now we are to speak of the last means which we are to use in our preparation
immediately before our combat; that is, we are to arm our selves against the
encounter: and to this end (because we are but fresh-water-souldiers and of
small experience) let us take the counsel and advice of the Apostle Paul, one
of Gods chief champions and expert soldiers, as he sets it down, Ephesians.
6.11. etc.
Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14, etc. where first he describes the quality, and as it
were the metal of our armor; in which respect he tells us, that we must
put on the armor of God which is spiritual, and that our weapons and armor
must not be carnal. 2. Cor. 10.4.
For being of this nature, though they were never so strong, they were to no
purpose, seeing our enemy is spiritual; neither do we wrestle against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, Ephesians. 6.12.
powers and spiritual wickednesses, as it is Ephesians. 6.12. In vain therefore it
were with the Papists to seek to defend our selves with holy water, or
Crucifixes, or rags and relics of Saints, from the violent assaults of this
our enemy; or else with desperate hacksters to trust in our sword, buckler and
spear: for well is that verified of this spiritual Leuiathan, which the Lord
speaks of the earthly Leuiathan, Job. 41.17.20. When the sword does touch
him, he will not rise up, Job. 41.17.20.
and he laugheth at the shaking of the spear. And therefore when we are to
encounter this great Goliath, we are to lay aside the carnal weapons of Saul,
1. Sam. 17.39.44.
which are altogether unfit for a Christian, serving rather to burden and so
hinder him, than to defend and further him in this spiritual combat; and we are
to go against him in the name of the Lord, strengthened in the power of his
might, putting on us the armor of God, that is, such divine and spiritual
armor as the Lord has given and appointed us to use. For it is not sufficient
that we prepare us this armor, if we let it lie by us, or suffer it (as it
were) to hang upon the walls, there to rust without use; but we are to put it
on, and keep it fast buckled unto us both night and day, that we may be
always in readiness to endure the assault of our enemies.

That we must put on the whole armor of God.
and like young soldiers leave off the rest for lightness sake, or else through
foole-hardines to show needless valor; we must not put on the helmet of
salvation, and leave off the breast plate of righteousness; nor take unto us the
girdle of verity and the shield of faith, and cast away from us the sword of
the spirit, but we are to put on the whole armor of God, and like valiant
soldiers, who mean indeed to stand to it, we are to arm our selves at all
points in complete armor of proof, which will keep us from fleeing, and our
enemy from ouercomming. For if we take none of the Christian armor, or but
some of the lightest parts, if we take the shield of faith, and leave behind
us the breast plate of righteousness, we shall either desperately fight and be
overthrown in the battle, or else cowardly run away and forsake the field.
But on the other side, if we buckle unto us the whole armor of God, we shall
not need to flee away for fear, being so well defended; nor to doubt of
victory, for we shall surely overcome; the Lord having having given, and we
having received this armor to this end, as the Apostle notes unto us in these
words; that you may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil, or his
treacherous ambushments, as the word here used, signifies. So that the Lord
has given us this armor, and we put it on, to the end that we may be enabled
to resist Satan; and therefore seeing it is armor of Gods own making and
bestowing, we may assure our selves that he will not suffer his workmanship and
gift to be so much disgraced, as that satan should pearce through it and wound
us. For the Lord knows the force of Satan's darts, and bullets of temptation;
and he has made his armor high proof; and therefore strong enough to repel
all the battery of Satan's suggestions.

The necessity of the spiritual armor.
And that we may be the rather stirred up with all care and diligence to provide
and buckle fast to us the armor which he after describes, he shows the
necessity thereof, by describing the daungerousnes of our enemies, who being
not flesh and blood, but principalities, powers, worldly governors, princes of
the darkness of this world, and spiritual wickednesses, which are in high
places, cannot possibly be resisted by our own strength and means. And
(therefore) for this cause he wills us to take unto us the whole armor of
God, that we may be able to resist in the evil day, that is, the time of
temptation, What is meant by the evil day.
which is therefore called the evil day, partly because therein Satan
tempts us unto evil, and partly because it is a time of trouble, adversity
and affliction, when Satan sifteth us with his temptations. And thus the evil
day is taken Psalm. 41.1. Psalm. 41.1.
The Lord will deliver him in the evil day, that is, (as our translation also
reads it) in the time of trouble. Ephesians. 5.16.
And thus also it is used Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the time, because the days are
evil, that is, full of troubles and afflictions. And therefore Beza does
translate in this place (...), tempore aduerso, the time of adversity.

By which we learn not to esteem our spiritual fight as a May Game, but as a
time of trouble and adversity, wherein we are assaulted by mighty enemies,
and oftentimes foiled and wounded; and therefore we must not voluntarily run
into temptations, seeing the time of them is evil and full of trouble; but
rather fervently pray unto the Lord that he will not lead us into temptation,
considering our own weakness and our enemies power; or if it please him to make
trial of us, that he will not suffer us to fall therein, but that he will
deliver us from evil, for as much as the kingdom and power and glory is his
alone, and therefore he is of power sufficient to save and deliver us.

That we must not cowardly flee in the spiritual conflict.
But as we are not securely to rush into the field of temptation against our
spiritual enemies, so we are not when our enemies sound the alarm to
battle and assault us, cowardly to cast down our weapons and to run away:
for the Apostle would not take away from us true valor and Christian
fortitude, but carnal security and retchlesnes; and therefore though our
enemies be mighty, and the time of temptation full of trouble, yet he bids
us not to cast off our armor and to run away, wholly despairing of victory,
but he exhorts us for this cause, to take unto us the whole armor of God,
that we may be able to resist in the evil day, and having finished all things
may stand fast; that is, having put our enemies to flight and obtained the
victory, we may like conquerors stand last in the field, as it were
triumphantly insulting over them; whereby he intimates thus much, that if we
will take unto us the whole armor of God, how weak soever we be in our
selves, yet shall we be enabled to resist our spiritual enemies in the evil
day; and not only so, but also obtain victory and triumph over them.

That every one must abide in his vocation.
neither with our enemies power, nor our own trouble, but to stand to it,
saying, verse. 14. Stand therefore: by which word he intimates unto us diverse
duties: first, as in the camp every man has his place appointed him, and his
proper colors under which he is to keep him; so all Christian soldiers have
their stations, that is, their vocations whereunto they are called of God,
within the limits whereof they are to contain themselves: and these are first
their general calling whereby they are entertained into the Church militant,
which is Gods camp or army, where they are to fight under the standerd of
their captain Christ: and secondly their special callings, whereby there is
appointed to every member of the militant Church, a certain standing, and
particular and proper duties and functions which he is to execute, as it is in
the armies of earthly princes. First therefore we must contain our selves
within our general vocation and station, that is, we must keep us in Gods
army and camp, the Church militant: for as those straggling soldiers who
depart from the army and raunge abroad to forage, or get some booty, are
easily vanquished by their enemies; so those who depart and make an apostasy
from Gods Church, to gain or retain their pleasures and worldly preferments,
are easily overthrown, falling into Satan's ambushments. And secondly, every
one is to contain himself within the limits of his special vocation, and to
keep his peculiar standing appointed him by God: for as there is nothing more
pernicious to an army than disorder, when as some intrude themselves into
others place, as when the common soldier will be an officer, the Lieutenant
Captain, and the Captain, General of the army; so nothing is more hurtful
to the Church militant, than when disorderly one usurps another place and
office, as when the Ministers will be Magistrates, and the Magistrates
Ministers, and when the common people usurp the office of them both.

Secondly, when as he bids us stand in our places, he restrains us from
two extremes: the one, that we do not wilfully thrust our selves into the
combat of temptations before we be assaulted, and so as it were run out of
our standings to seek an enemy: and secondly, that when we are assaulted we
do not flee away, but stand to it valiantly and endure the violence of the
assailants. Lastly, he exhorts us to watchfulnes and painful diligence, for
we must not drowsily and securely lay us down and give our selves to sleep,
nor yet sit idly as though we had nothing to do; but we are to stand upon
our guard, and to watch continually, that we may always be in readiness to
withstand the assaults of our enemies; otherwise if we sleep in security,
they will suddenly set upon us and surprise us at unawares.

CHAP. X. Of the particular parts of the Christian armor: and first of the
girdle of verity.
with true valor and Christian fortitude, Of the girdle of verity.
in the next place he describes the armor of God which we are to buckle unto
us. Where first we are generally to observe, that we are not curiously and
scrupulously to search out the reason why such and such virtues are likened to
these or those pieces of armor: as for example, why he calls truth a girdle,
righteousness a breast plate, faith a shield, etc. for it was not the Apostles
purpose so exactly to fit the similitudes, as may appear 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. where
he indifferently ascribes the name of breast plate both to faith and charity,
by which here he understands righteousness; but only briefly and generally
to show what virtues and graces of Gods spirit are most necessary for a
Christian, wherewith he may be enabled to resist his spiritual enemies,
continuing his former allegory taken from wars.

But let us come to the armor it self, which is both defensive and offensive:
the first part is the girdle of verity. The word here used signifies a broad
studded belt used in wars in ancient times, wherewith the joints of the
breast plate, and that armor which defended the belly, loins and thighs
were covered. And by this, truth is resembled: whereby some understand the
truth of religion and of the doctrine which we profess, others understand
hereby truth and vprightnes of heart, or the integrity of a good conscience,
whereby we perform all duties of religion belonging to God and our neighbor
in simplicity, without all hypocrisy and dissimulation. But because both are
notable and necessary parts of our Christian armor; I see no reason why we
may not take it in both senses, What we are to understand by the girdle of
verity.
seeing the Apostle does of purpose set down under these metaphorical words,
the chief virtues and graces wherewith we are to arm our selves against our
spiritual enemies. First therefore here is required truth of our religion which
we profess: and secondly, that we profess it truly, that is, with upright and
simple hearts.

That our religion must be grounded on Gods truth.
it is the foundation upon which all other duties to God or man are to be
built; for if they be not grounded on Gods truth, but devised by man's brain,
they are but humane dotages which the Lord will not accept; neither is it to
any purpose that we show our selves earnest and forward in religion, unless
it be true and consonant to Gods word. For as the faster that those travail
which are out of the way, the further they are from their iourneys end; so the
more earnest and forward that we are in travailing the bypaths of error, the
further we are from Gods kingdom: and therefore Satan cares not greatly
whether we be of no religion or of a false religion, whether we worship no God
at all, or a false God, or at least the true God after a false manner, whether
we perform no duties unto God, or such as being not agreeable to Gods truth
are abominable unto him. First then we must contain all our actions within
the compass of Gods word, and whatsoever we profess and practice, it must
have his ground and warrant from this truth, if we will be accounted true
members of Gods militant Church, 1. Tim 3.15.
which is therefore called the pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. because
contemning all errors and doctrines of men, it faithfully keeps the truth of
Gods word. And as soldiers were girt about with that strong and broad studded
belt, wherewith their loins were strengthened, and so enabled to sustain the
fight without wearines; so we are to compass our selves about with truth,
whereby we may be strengthened when as we know that we fight in a just
quarrel; neither shall we easily be deceived with Satan's temptations and
false suggestions, if we be girt about with the girdle of verity. And hereby
appears the necessity of this piece of armor: for seeing Satan is a liar
from the beginning, it behooves us to be compassed about with truth, that the
bright beams thereof may discover and disperse all the foggie mists of Satan's
errors and lies.

That we must profess the truth, in truth and simplicity of heart.
unless it be in truth, that is, in integrity and simplicity of heart,
without all hypocrisy and dissimulation. For how glorious soever our
profession even of the true religion be before men, yet it is abominable in the
eyes of God, if it be not in truth and from an upright heart, but counterfeite
and hypocritical. Whatsoever duties and good works we perform, though never
so excellent in themselves, yet are they not acceptable in Gods sight, if they
be not joined with integrity and simplicity. For example, prayer is a notable
part of Gods worship; but if we do not call upon God in truth, but with fained
and deceitful lips, that we may have the praise of men, Matthew. 6.
our prayers are odious and Pharisaicall, Matthew. 6. Thanksgiving is an
excellent duty, but if with the Pharisie we give thanks rather to boast of
our gifts, then to show true thankfulness to the giver, Luke 18.
we shall not be approved of God. Giving of alms is a work acceptable unto
God, for it is a sacrifice wherewith he is well pleased, Heb. 13.16.
Heb. 13.16. but if they be not given in simplicity of heart, but in
hypocrisy, that we may be seen of men, it shall have the hypocrites reward,
Matthew. 6. In a word, Matthew. 6.
this truth and simplicity of heart is so necessary, that without it,
whatsoever we do it is not regarded; for God is a spirit, Ioh. 4 24.
and he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, Ioh. 4.24. According to
that, Josh. 24.14. Fear the Lord, Josh. 24.14.
and serve him in vprightnes and in truth. Which if we perform, our service
of God will be acceptable in his sight, though performed in great weakness, and
mingled with many imperfections: otherwise, though we offer thousands of
rams, and whole rivers of oil, that is, omit no outward cost and labor in
Gods worship, Mich. 6.7.8.
yet will it be abominable in his eyes, Mich. 6.7.8. Let us therefore with our
Savior pray unto God, Ioh. 17.17.
that we may be sanctified with his truth, that not only whatsoever we do
may be grounded on Gods truth, but that woe may do it in truth and vprightnes
of heart.

CHAP. XI. Of the breast plate of righteousness, and Gospel of peace.
He put on righteousness as an habergeon, Esa. 59.17.
and an helmet of salvation upon his head. The excellency of this breast plate
of righteousness.
And then shall not Satan's darts pearce us, so long as we are armed with a
good conscience, and a godly and innocent life. Yea as long as our breasts and
hearts are armed with righteousness, though our other members fall into sin,
our wounds shall not be mortal: for as the breast plate does defend the breast
and vital parts of a soldier, so the study and holy endeavor of a Christian
to live in righteousness and true sanctification, does so arm his mind, that
Satan cannot deadly wound the heart with any of his temptations. True it is
that the Saints do receive wounds and foyles, when as Satan has drawn them
to commit sin, but they are not wounded at the heart, because they do not
sin with full consent of will; for they allow not that which they do,
neither do they what they would, but what they hate, and they delight in the
law of God concerning the inner man, Romans 7.15.22.
when the flesh leads them captive to the law of sin. And hence it is that
Paul says he did not transgress Gods law, Romans 7.17. 1. Ioh. 3.9. and verse.
6.8.
but sin that dwelled in him, Romans 7.17. And the Apostle John affirms, that
they who are borne of God sin not, 1. Ioh. 3.9. and that they who are in
Christ sin not: and that whosoever sins is of the devil, verse. 6.8. Not
that Gods children are exempted from all sin, but because they sin not with
the full consent and swinge of their will; and when they do fall, their hearts
are defended with the breast plate of righteousness, that is, with an holy
endeavor and desire of serving God. David, a man according to Gods own heart,
may be a notable example hereof: for even after he was endued with the
knowledge of the truth, and had this godly endeavor of serving God, he
notwithstanding fell grievously many times, and was wounded often with Satan's
darts; but his wounds were not mortal, neither did they pearce the heart,
because he was armed with the breast plate of righteousness; for he kept Gods
law in his heart, and it was sweeter than honey unto his mouth, Psalm. 119.
he meditated therein, and sought after it continually, as appears Psalm. 119.
Would we therefore be preserved from the deadly wounds of Satan's darts of
temptation? then let us study and labor after true holiness, let us keep a
good conscience; and howsoever we fall often through infirmity, yet let the
heart always be armed with the breast plate of righteousness, that is, with an
earnest desire and holy endeavor of serving God; and so shall Satan never
mortally wound us.

That the lack of this armor is most pernicious.
if we once lay aside the breast plate of righteousness, not so much as
endeavoring to serve the Lord in holiness of life, but embrace sin with full
consent of will, we shall lay our breasts open and naked to all Satan's
thrusts, yea and as it were put swords in his hands wherewith he may wound and
murder us: for until we disarme our selves, and put weapons into the hands
of Satan by our sins, he cannot hurt us; as we may see in the example of
our first parents, who whilst they continued in their righteousness and
integrity, Satan could not offer them any violence by assault and force, and
therefore he allured them to entertain a treacherous parley, wherein having
enticed them to disarme themselves of this breast plate of righteousness, by
wilful transgressing Gods commandment, he inflicted on them deadly wounds,
pearcing them through to the very heart, and so like Ioab whilst he seemed
lovingly to embrace them, he did most treacherously stab them.

The consideration whereof should make us repel most carefully all Satan's
temptations, whereby he inticeth us to sin; but especially let us never be
allured to put off the breast plate of righteousness, and then though Satan
wound our souls with sin, yet his wounds will not be mortal so long as we
do not fall into sin with full consent of will, but through infirmity; in
the mean time loathing the sin which we commit, and delighting our selves
in the law of God, in respect of the inner man: for though we fall, yet the
Lord will raise us up by unfeigned repentance, so that though sin dwell in us,
yet shall it never reign in us.

CHAP. XII. Of the preparation of the Gospel of peace.
What the Gospel of peace is.
that we have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace;
where he alludeth to the custom of soldiers in former times, who going into
the field, strongly armed their legs and feet with legge-harnesse,
wargreaues or buskins, to preserve them from the injury of the weather, the
pearcing of briars, thorns, and such other things as might hurt them in their
way as they marched, and from the violence also of their enemies blows when
they were incountred; for all which uses the Gospel serves in our spiritual
warfare: for they who are armed with the true knowledge thereof, and are
assured of the merciful promises therein contained, they will walk and march
valiantly in the ways of godliness and Christianity, though they are full of
the briars and thorns of afflictions and persecution; preferring the rebuke of
Christ before the riches of Egypt, because they have an eye to the recompense
of reward, which they shall receive at the end of their journey. And this
makes them little to regard the foulenes and vnpleasantnes of the way; and
though Satan trouble them in their march, setting upon and assaulting them,
yet they easily resist the fury of his temptations, and go on forward in the
profession and practice of Christianity, if they be armed with the knowledge
of the Gospel of peace; for it is therefore called the Gospel of peace, Luke
10.5.
because it brings peace to our souls, not only as it is the embassage of
God, whereby we being reconciled unto God, Romans 10.15. Luke 1.7.9.
have peace with him, from the assurance whereof we have the peace of
conscience, but also because if we be armed therewith, we shall obtain a
final victory over our spiritual enemies, after which shall follow
everlasting peace, which shall not so much as be disturbed with the attempts of
any enemies.

of peace, unless we be always prepared to make confession and profession
thereof, though thereby we incur worldly shame, losses, afflictions and
persecution. And this the Apostle signifies, What it is to be prepared with
this Gospel.
by telling us that our feet must be shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace; that is, as those who are well shod are in readiness to go through
rough and unpleasant ways: so those that are endued with the knowledge of the
Gospel, must always be in readiness to make profession thereof in the midst
of affliction and persecution. For as with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10.10.
so with the mouth he must confess unto salvation, Romans 10.10. And this is
that which the Apostle Peter requires of us, 1. Pet. 3.15.
1. Epist. 3.15. That we do not only sanctify the Lord in our hearts, but
also that we be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks us a
reason of the hope that is in us.

But if we lay aside this armor, we shall be as unfit to travel in the
afflicted way which leads to Gods kingdom, as those soldiers who are
barefoote be unfit to march through ways which are full of briars and thorns;
neither shall we be ready to make confession and profession of our faith in
the time of persecution and trouble, but rather to slide back into a general
apostasy from all religion, unless we be confirmed and comforted with the
sweet promises of the Gospel, made to those who suffer affliction for Christ's
sake, namely, that if we confess him before men, Matthew. 10.32. Mark. 8.35.
he will confess us before his father in heaven, Matthew. 10.32. That whosoever
shall lose his life for Christ's sake and the Gospels, shall save it, Mark.
8.35. That whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, Matthew.
19.29.
or father or mother, or wife and children, or lands for his names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life, Matthew. 19.29.

CHAP. XIII. Of the shield of faith.
weak soever it be in it self, yet it does defend and protect us against all
the temptations of Satan; for he that puts on faith, does put on Jesus
Christ also, it being a property inseparable of faith, to apply unto us
Christ Jesus and all his benefits, that is, his merits and righteousness, and
everlasting life it self. And this will be not only a glorious garment to
cover our deformity out of Gods sight, to preserve us from the heat of Gods
wrath, and to obtain the everlasting blessing of our heavenly father, but also
it is armor of proof to defend us from the violent assaults of our spiritual
enemies. Let us therefore take unto us the shield of faith, that we may also
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.
as the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 13.14. for having him we shall want
nothing, which may either defend our selves or offend our enemies; the Lord
himself will be our shield and buckler, and therefore it will be impossible
for our foes to prevail against us.

What is meant by quenching Satan's fiery darts.
But let us consider further of the excellency and necessity of this shield of
faith, which appears by the virtue thereof, in repelling all the fiery darts
of Satan. The Apostle says, that thereby we may quench his fiery darts,
alluding to the custom of soldiers in ancient time, who maliciously poisoned
their darts, whereby the bodies of those who were wounded were so inflamed,
that they could hardly be cured, or eased of their raging and burning pain.
And such darts are all Satan's temptations, whereby we are wounded with sin;
for if they be not repelled and quenched with the shield of faith, they will
inflame our lusts to sin, and one sin will inflame our hearts to another,
till there be kindled in us a world of wickedness. And this we may see in the
example of David, who after that he gave himself to idleness and sloth, and
so was pierced with one of Satan's fiery darts, it presently inflamed his heart
to commit adultery, and having given place to that, he was provoked to
murder; so that if we admit one of these fiery darts, they will inflame us to
receive another, and so our burning wounds will torment our consciences, and
most hardly admit of any cure.

And therefore it behooves us to take unto us the shield of faith, whereby we
may quench these fiery darts. But why does the Apostle use this improper
speech, seeing the shield does not quench, but repel the darts that beat upon
it? I answer, partly to show the nature of our enemies temptations, namely,
that they are fiery, mortal, raging, and pernicious (as before I said) and
partly to set forth a double virtue of faith; for first thereby we repel and
beat back his temptations, and so resist him steadfastly in the faith, 1. Pet.
5.9.
as the Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 5.9. And secondly, if Satan's darts have
pierced and wounded us, faith also does cool the scorching heat of sin, by
applying unto us the precious baulme of Christ's blood, so that our wounds are
not mortal unto us, though mortal in themselves, if they were not cured by
this sovereign salve of sin, which being applied by faith, does ease the
burning torments of our evil consciences, and preserves us from all danger of
death. The first of these virtues is signified hereby, in that he calls faith
a shield, which repelleth Satan's temptations, as the shield does the darts
that are cast against it: the second by the word (quenching) namely, that as
water quenches the fire, so faith quenches the fiery darts of Satan's
temptations, as is aforesaid.

Why Satan is called the wicked one.
Lastly, we are to note that he calls Satan the wicked one, to show unto us
that he is the father and author of all wickedness and sin, both by sinning
himself, and provoking others to sin by his temptations. And therefore he is
called the wicked or evil one both here and Matthew. 6.13. But deliver us from
the evil one. Matthew. 6.13. and 13.38. Ioh. 8.44.
So Matthew. 13.38. The tares are the children of the wicked one, as also Ioh.
8.44.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the helmet of salvation.
THe fifth piece of our Christian armor is the helmet of salvation, which is so
called by a metonymie of the effect, because it brings salvation to them that
wear it, Esa. 59.17. Romans 8.24. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.
for we are saved by hope, as it is Romans 8.24. which we are to understand by
the helmet of salvation, as appears 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. where he exhorts us to
put on the hope of salvation for an helmet. Hope, the helmet of salvation.
As therefore soldiers when they go into the field put on their helmet, that
thereby they may defend their head, which is their chief part, from the cruel
blows of the enemy; so we being to fight the spiritual battle, must put on
hope both of victory, and the glorious crown belonging thereunto, and so
shall we never turn our backs when we are assaulted, seeing by the Lords
assistance we do assuredly hope for victory, and through his mercy and the
merits of Christ do expect after our combat is finished, the garland of
everlasting happiness, promised to all that overcome. For though Satan assault
us on the one side, by offering unto us the riches, honors and pleasures of
the world, that thereby he may entice us to sin, and so yield our selves his
captives, he shall not prevail against us, if we be armed with this helmet of
salvation: for as no man in his right wits would sell his certain interest
unto a goodly inheritance for a bright shining counter; so much less will any
man, who is not stark mad, sell his assured hope of the eternal kingdom of
glory, by yielding himself the slave of sin and Satan, to purchase for the
present the worlds counterfaite shining excellencies, which are in truth but
mutable, or at least momentanie vanities. And though he assault us on the other
side with afflictions, Act. 28.20.
crosses and persecutions as he did Paul, yet we will with him, for the hope
of Israel, be content to be bound in the chains of misery and affliction.
For the heauiest cross will seem tolerable, yea an easy yoke and a light
burden, 2 Cor. 4.17.
to those who do expect and hope for a far most excellent and an eternal
weight of glory; neither can the straight way and the narrow gate discourage
those, that in the end of their journey assuredly expect a palace of pleasure
and never fading felicity. But on the other side, if we do not put on this
helmet, we shall not dare to lift up our heads in the day of battle: for as
those who are encouraged with hope of victory and the spoil ensuing, do
fight valiantly; so those who are quite forsaken of hope, do forsake also the
field, and casting down their armor and weapons, do either run away, or
cowardly yield unto the enemy.

CHAP. XV. Of the sword of the spirit.
Of the sword of the spirit.
ANd so much for the defensive armor which we must put on; that which
follows is both defensive and offensive, fit to defend our selves, and repel
and foil the enemy. The first is the sword of the spirit, the word of God.
This the Apostle calls the sword of the spirit, because it is a spiritual
and not a carnal weapon, which the spirit of God himself has as it were
tempered, made, sharpened, and put into our hands, to repel our spiritual
enemies whenever they assault us. If therefore we would defend our selves and
drive back Satan, we must not only buckle unto us the defensive armor
before spoken of (for he that stands altogether upon defense, stands upon
no defense) but we must take unto us the sword of the spirit, wherewith we may
repel and deadly wound our spiritual enemies. Wherein we are to imitate the
example of our chief Captain Jesus Christ, who though he was able to have
confuted Satan by other arguments, or to have confounded him by the omnipotent
power of his deity, Matthew. 4.
yet as he suffered himself to be tempted in all things like unto us, so he
used also the same weapons, which he has appointed us to use in this
spiritual combat of temptations, to the end that we might be taught how to
handle them, having his example for our imitation, and also may conceive
assured hope of victory, considering that our Captain subdued Satan with the
selfsame weapons.

That the sword of the spirit is a most fit weapon to repel Satan's
temptations.
that we may defend our selves, and give him the foil, as being the most fit
weapon for this purpose: for if Satan seek to blind the eyes of our
understanding with ignorance, that thereby he may lead us as it were
hoodwinkt into sin, the word of God is a lantern to our feet, and a light
unto our paths to discover Satan's dark illusions and secret ambushments, and
to guide our feet in the way of peace. If he seek to deceive us with his
lies, and to seduce us into errors; the word of God is the touchstone of truth,
by which we discern the pure golden verity from the drossie conceits of
humane inventions; and the subtle delusions of Satan's probable falsehoods,
from the undoubted certainty of Gods infallible truth. If he transform
himself into an angel of light, Gods word does pull off his vizard, and
makes him appear in his own likeness: if he come upon us like a roaring lion
to devour us, it protecteth us from danger, and makes us strong enough to
withstand his violence. Seeing therefore this weapon is so excellent, let us
most highly esteem it, and manfully use it whenever Satan does assault us
and tempt us unto sin. How we are to use the sword of the spirit in the
conflict of temptations.
For example, when he enticing us to commit sin, does extenuate and mince it
as though it were but a May Game and a trick of youth which God regards not;
let us draw out the sword of the spirit, saying, it is written, that all they
are accursed who continue not in all that is written in the book of the law to
do it, Galat. 3 10. Romans 8.8.
Gal. 3.10. that they who live according to the flesh, cannot please God, Romans
8.8. that the burden of sin cannot be light, seeing it pressed out of Christ
himself a bloody sweat, etc.

On the other side, if he aggrauate the hainousnes of our sins, to the end he
may draw us into despair of Gods mercy; let us say, Ezec. 18.23.32
it is written, I will not the death of a sinner (says the Lord) but that he
repent and live, Ezech. 18.23.32. And, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15. Matthew. 9.13.
1. Tim. 1.15. And that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, Matthew. 9.13. Ioh. 3.16. If he tempt us to the love of the world,
and to the service of this unrighteous Mammon; let us answer him, Matthew. 6.24.
that it is impossible to serve two masters of such contrary disposition, as
it is written Matthew. 6.24. That if we love the world, 1. Ioh. 2.15. Iam. 4.4.
the love of the father abides not in us, 1. Ioh. 2.15. That the amity of the
world is enmity against God, Iam. 4.4.

Contrariwise, if renouncing the world, and endeavoring to serve the Lord in
vprightnes and in truth, he seek to draw us from our integrity, by
threatening afflictions and persecution; we are to strengthen our selves and
resist him with the sword of the spirit, remembering that they are blessed which
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Matthew. 5.10. 1. Tim. 3.12.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.10. That all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 1. Tim. 3.12. That whosoever loses
any thing for Christ's sake, Matthew. 19.29.
shall receive in recompense an hundredth fold more, and have everlasting life
to boot, Matthew. 19.29.

If he tempt us to the neglect of Gods word, we are to tell him, that all
Christ's sheep hear his voice and follow him, Ioh. 10.27. Ioh. 8.47.
Ioh. 10.27. That whosoever is of God hears Gods words, Ioh. 8.47. that they
who know God hear his ministers, whereas he that is not of God hears them
not, 1. Ioh. 4.6. And if he object that we cannot hear it without great
labor and cost, we are to remember, that whosoever is a wise Merchant fit for
the kingdom of God, will rather sell all he has to buy this precious pearl,
than be without it, Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46. Mat. 13.44.45.


On the other side, if he tempt us to content our selves with the bare hearing
thereof, neglecting obedience thereunto, we are to tell him that not the
hearers of the word, Romans 2.13.
but the doers thereof shall be justified, Romans 2.13. that they who are hearers
of the word and not doers also, do deceive themselves, Iam. 1.22.
if they think hereby to have any assurance of eternal life, Iam. 1.22. That
not every one who says Lord, Lord, (that is, Matthew. 7.21.
makes a goodly profession of religion) shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of the father who is in heaven. Matthew. 7.21.

So when he tempts us to pride, we are to say unto him, Satan I may not
yield unto thy temptation, for it is written; God resists the proud, but
gives his grace to the humble, 1. Pet. 5.5.
1. Pet. 5.5. If he tempt us to covetousness, we are to resist him, saying, it
is written, 1. Tim. 6.10.
that the desire of money is the root of all evil, 1. Tim. 6.10. If to
carking care, we are to tell him, that the Apostle exhorts us to cast all
our care on the Lord, for he cares for us, 1. Pet. 5.7.
1. Pet. 5.7. If to unthrifty mispending of Gods gifts, and careless
consuming of our estates, we are to tell him, that he that provides not for
his family, 1. Tim. 5.8.
is worse than an Infidel, 1. Tim. 5.8.

sword of the spirit, That it behooves us to be skillful in handling the sword
of the spirit.
and skilfully use the same in the fight; for it is not sufficient that we have
this sword lying by us, nor to be able to show the goodness thereof in
discourse, if in the mean time we never draw it out to fight the spiritual
combat, but let it rust in the scabberd; but we must always have it ready for
the combat, and (as it were) naked in our hands, that we may strike home, and
cut off all the temptations of Satan, and the lusts of our own flesh when
they do assault us. And to this end we must be skillful in the use thereof:
for though a man have an excellent weapon, yet if he know not how to use it, it
will little help him either to defend himself or offend his enemy: so if a
man have this two edged sword of Gods word, and have no skill to rule it, he
will strike flatlong and not cut, and sometime wound himself in stead of
hurting his enemy; yea so politic a warrior is Satan, against whom we
fight, that if we be not skillful in the use of this sword, he will turn the
edge and point thereof against our selves, and so in stead of defending us, it
will, like the sword of Goliath, be ready for the enemy to cut off our own
head. And therefore it behooves us to come into Gods school continually, that
there we may learn how to use and handle this sword of Gods word so cunningly,
that we may resist Satan in all his assaults, and give him no advantage in
the fight. Otherwise he will use it to our own overthrow; for if he durst
fight against our Savior Christ with his own weapon the word of God, whose
knowledge was exquisite and without measure, saying, It is written; how much
more busy will he be in using it against us, who have not attained unto the
least part of his skill?

The folly of those who neglect this spiritual weapon.
Whereby appears first the carnal retchlesnesse of many men, who, as though
there were no enemy to assault them, have not this weapon in their houses at
all, or if they have, yet they bestow more time in profane exercises, than in
study how to use the sword of the spirit for their own defense; or at least
trusting to their own skill as sufficient in it self, they seldom come to
the Lords school, where they might learn to use the weapon of Gods word for
their best advantage.

Secondly, hereby appears the wicked practice of the enemies of Gods truth,
who take from Gods people this sword of the spirit, which the Lord has given
unto all for their defense. Neither does the Apostle in this place exhort only
the Clergy to take this weapon, but all Christians whatsoever, who are
assaulted with their spiritual enemies: but they notwithstanding conspiring
with Satan to work the overthrow of Gods Church, deprive them of the use of
the sword of the spirit, the word of God, and so betray them into the power of
Satan, being able to make no resistance, when their chief weapon is taken
from them.

CHAP. XVI. Of Prayer.
Ephesians. 6.18. That prayer is the means of obtaining Gods assistance, and the
rest of the spiritual armor.
is fervent and effectual prayer, which the Apostle exhorts us to use, Ephesians.
6.18. And pray always with etc. The necessity and profit of which exercise is
exceeding great in this spiritual combat, because thereby we do obtain all
our strength to fight, and victory also over our enemies. For first we cannot
endure the least assault of Satan by our own strength, unless we be armed
with the power of Gods might, as before I have showed. And the Lords
assistance, whereby only we can overcome, is obtained by earnest and
effectual prayer, according to that Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble; Psalm. 50.15.
so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And our Savior
prescribes us this means to free our selves from temptation, or at least from
being overcome by them, by craving the Lords assistance, saying, Lead us not
into temptation, Matthew. 6.13.
but deliver us from evil, Matthew. 6.13. So he exhorts his disciples unto
prayer, least they should enter into temptation. Luke 22.40.
Luke 22.40, 46.

Secondly, we cannot obtain the spiritual armor (before described) by any
means of our own, but those graces of Gods spirit are his gifts, from whom
every good and perfect gift descends, Iam. 1.17.
Iam. 1.17. and therefore are to be begged at his hands by earnest and
effectual prayer, we having his gracious promise, Matthew. 7.7.
that if we ask we shall receive, Math. 7.7. And our Savior has assured us,
that whatsoever we ask the father in his name, Ioh. 16.23.
he will give it us, Ioh. 16.23. And to this his promise he adds his
commandment in the verse following, saying, Verse. 24. Luke 11.13.
Ask and you shall receive. Yea, if we do but truly desire the holy Ghost,
the Father will give him unto us, Luke 11.13. And he comes not alone, but
brings with him our spiritual armor, even all his graces fit for to arm us
in the spiritual combat, against all the assaults of Satan and his assistants.

The rest of the spiritual armor is not sufficient without prayer.
our truth being mixed with will worship and hypocrisy, the purity of our
conscience being stained with our corruption; our knowledge of the Gospel but
in part, and shadowed with the veil of ignorance; our faith mixed with
doubting, and weakened with incredulity; our hope shaken from our anker-hold,
when the promises of God are delaied; and whereas we also are unskillful to use
this spiritual armor for our best advantage; therefore it behooves us after
we have armed our selves at all points, not to trust altogether in our armor,
but to have our recourse unto our grand Captain Christ Jesus, acknowledging
our own weakness, and desiring his aid and assistance, that being armed
with his power, we may obtain a glorious victory over our spiritual enemies.
And as Moses joined with Iosuahs sword his own effectual prayer, which was of
far greater efficacy; for when he held up his hands in prayer, Israel
prevailed; but when he fainted, Amaleck had the upper hand: so we being to
fight against the spiritual Amalekites, are not wholly to trust in our
spiritual weapons, but we are to implore continually the Lords assistance by
hearty prayer, assuring our selves that if we lift up our hands and hearts
unto God, we shall in the end obtain a full victory; but if we faint, the
spiritual Amaleck will prevail against us. Whilst our minds lie groueling
on the earth, it is an easy matter for these spiritual wickednesses to
overcome us, seeing they fight against us from high places; but if we lift up
our hearts in prayer unto God, our minds and souls shall be as it were
transported into heaven, which is a tower of strength, into which our
spiritual enemies cannot approach. Whenever therefore we are assaulted by
Satan, let us lift up our souls into heaven by effectual prayer, and so we
shall be out of his reach.

Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. The properties required in prayer.
which also our Savior Christ enioyneth us, Luke 18.1. And Paul also 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. not that we must neglect all other exercises and do nothing but pray;
for there is a time to hear the word, to do the works of mercy and of our
callings; but his meaning is that we be always ready to pray upon all good
occasions: especially in the time of temptation this duty is required,
according to that Psalm. 50.15. Psalm. 50.15.
And therefore the Apostle says not, that we must pray (...), in every
particular time and season, but (...), in every fit time when just occasion and
opportunity is offered. Seeing therefore in the time of temptation we do
especially need the Lords help; therefore, that above al other is the opportune
and convenient time wherein we are to implore the Lords assistance. Where by
the way the stinted prayers of the popish rabble, which they restrain to set
hours is confuted, for the Apostle wills us always to be in readiness when
any fit occasion is offered.

The second thing required, is, that we pray with all manner of prayers and
supplication. The former word here used is (...), which signifies the earnest
desiring of any good thing: the other is (...), which is the deprecation of
some evil; so that whether we want any thing that is good, or would be
delivered from any thing which is evil, we must have recourse unto God by
prayer, that we may obtain the one and avoid the other; but more especially
when we feel the want or weakness of any part of the spiritual armor, the
graces of Gods spirit, we are to beg them at Gods hand, that so we may be
enabled to stand in the encounter; and when we apprehend the extreme malice,
joined with the great power and cunning policy of our spiritual enemies, we
are earnestly to pray that the Lord will not lead us into temptation; or if he
do, yet that he will not suffer us to fall therein and to be overthrown. And
these our prayers must not only be public in the Church, but also private in
our chambers; neither must we be always begging these benefits at Gods hand,
but having obtained them, we must be as ready to give him thanks, and to
ascribe the glory of all unto him, who is the author and bestower of all
virtue and grace which is in us; and so calling upon God with all manner of
prayer, he will be continually ready to assist us in our spiritual combat.

The third thing required, is, that we pray in or by the spirit, for the word
here used may signify both. First therefore we must pray in the spirit; to
which is required first that we pray with understanding; in which respect the
ignorant Papists offend, who pray in an unknown tongue; and the ignorant
Protestants also, who though they pray in their own language, yet know not the
sense and meaning of that they speak.

Secondly, that we pray with attentive minds, joining our hearts with our
tongues, and thoughts with words, to which is opposed the prayer of the lips
alone, when as we draw near unto God with our mouths, our hearts in the
mean time being far from him, Esa. 29.13.
as it is Esa. 29.13. Which kind of prayer is odious and abominable unto God:
for what more gross discord than when the tongue and heart disagree from one
another, which should be tuned in vnisone? And as the carcass being severed
from the soul is presently corrupt and stinketh; so the prayer of the lips
being severed from the prayer of the heart, which is the life and soul of it,
is but a dead carcass of prayer, and stinketh in Gods nostrels.

Thirdly, that we pray with a pure conscience and faith unfeigned, lifting up
pure hands to God, 1. Tim. 2.8.
without wrath or doubting, as it is 1. Tim. 2.8. to which is opposed prayer
proceeding from a polluted conscience, when as men live in their sins without
any true sorrow for those which are past, or any sincere purpose to forsake
them in the time to come; which prayers must needs proceed from an heart full
of incredulity, seeing they have no promise in the word whereupon they may
ground their faith: nay, contrariwise it is said, that God hears not sinners,
Ioh. 9.31. that is, Ioh. 9.31.
such as go on in their sins without repentance, having no purpose of heart
to leave and forsake them.

And thus you see what it is to pray in the spirit, which we cannot perform,
unless we pray through and by the spirit of God, which helps our
infirmities, and teaches us to pray as we ought, yea it self makes request
for us with sighs which cannot be expressed, Romans 8 26.. Sect. 4. Of
watchfulnes Matthew. 26.
as it is Romans 8.26.

The fourth thing required is watchfulnes; which duty is required jointly with
prayer in many places. Our Savior three times joins them together, saying,
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, Matthew. 26. And the Apostle
Peter 1. Epist 4.7. says, Now the end of all things is at hand: 1. Pet. 4.7.
Be ye therefore sober and watching unto prayer. As though he should say, your
enemy the devil as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour,
and therefore it behooves you at all times like valiant and careful
soldiers, who are still in danger to be assaulted by their enemies, to be
sober and watch, 1. Pet 5.8.
as it is 1. Pet. 5.8. but now more especially seeing the end of all things is
at hand, for Satan knowing that his time is but short, will redouble all his
forces to work our destruction, even as soldiers will most fiercely assault a
town, when as they cannot long lie at the siege, either by reason of winter
drawing on, or the approaching of new forces to relieve the town or raise the
siege. Seeing therefore Satan redoubleth his force and care in working our
destruction, let us redouble our care and watchfulnes in seeking to prevent his
force and malice. For if Satan watch continually that he may murder us, shall
not we be watchful in withstanding his assaults? He is continually in arms
to overthrow us, and shall not we watch night and day in our Christian armor,
that we may defeat his forces and obtain victory?

Now this our watchfulnes is partly of the body, and partly of the soul. The
bodily watching is the abstaining from natural sleep, to the end that we may
give our selves unto prayer; Psalm. 6.6. Psalm. 88.1.
when as with David we water our couch with tears, Psalm. 6.6. and call upon
God not only in the day, but in the night also, as it is Psalm. 88.1. And when
as even at midnight we rouse up our selves to give thanks unto God for his
mercy and benefits, Psalm. 119.62.
as it is Psalm. 119.62. The watchfulnes of the soul is when as we do not
sleep in our sins, being rocked in the cradle of carnal security, but
shake off our drowsines by unfeigned repentance, rising up to newnes of life.
And to this watchfulnes the Apostle exhorts us Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that
sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, etc. for we are
dead in our sins, till Christ by his spirit mortify them and revive us, Ephesians.
2.1.
raising us up to newnes of life, as it is Ephesians. 2.1. Though therefore we take
our rest and sleep in that measure which nature requires, 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
yet let us not sleep as do other, (to wit, in carnal security) but let us
watch and be sober, as it is 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. because in this respect it is time
that we should arise from sleep, for the dark night of ignorance is past; and
the bright sunshine day of the Gospel is come, Romans 13.12. etc.
let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor
of light: So that we walk honestly as in the day: not in gluttony and
drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying:
but putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, taking no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof, as it is Romans 13.12, 13, 14.

And this is the Christian watch which we are to join with prayer: but as I
would not have us put our whole confidence in the spiritual armor, so much
less in our own care and watchfulnes; for we must rely our selves upon God
only, desiring him to watch over us while we sleep; but yet with the Lords
assistance we must join our endeavor, and not drowsily and sleepely receive
his aid: and as the godly husbandman expects the fruits of the earth from
the blessing of God, and yet notwithstanding uses all pains, care and
diligence in plowing, harrowing and sowing his ground; so we are to seek
deliverance from the force and malice of our spiritual enemies of God alone,
but yet we are to join our good endeavor carefully and diligently, using all
the good means which are ordained of God for this purpose.

Of perseverance in prayer.
for it is not sufficient to pray earnestly and fervently for a spirt, but we
must continue therein, expecting the Lords leisure. And unto this we are
exhorted Romans 12.12. continuing in prayer. Romans 12.12.
So the Prophet David persuades to expect and wait for the Lord, Psalm. 27.14.
and to be strong in continuing constantly in our course, and then in the end
God will comfort our hearts, Psalm. 27.14. And the Apostle Paul wills us to
pray incessantly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
like importunate suitors who will have no nay, though they receive many
denials. To this duty our Savior encourages us by the parable of the
unrighteous Judge, who though he neither cared for man nor feared God, Luke
18.1.
yet was moved through importunity to do the poor widow justice; and
therefore our heavenly father will much more grant the importunate suites of
his elect, Why the Lord delaieth to grant the petitions of his children.
especially having bound himself thereunto by his most gracious promises. True
it is that the Lord does many times defer to grant the prayers of his
children, as though he heard or regarded them not; when as in truth he never
delayeth any of their lawful suites, unless it be to this end that he may
thereby either convey unto them greater benefits than they desire, as when he
gives spiritual graces in stead of earthly benefits; or else that thereby he
may move them to pray more fervently, and so exercise and increase their faith,
hope and patience; or that he may show these his graces to the praise of his
glory who has bestowed them, both to others and the parties themselves; or
that he may move us more thankfully to receive and highly to esteem his
benefits, after by long suite we have obtained them, which we would not so
greatly regard if he bestowed them at the first motion. A notable example
hereof we have in the Canaanitish woman, both for our comfort and imitation,
Matthew. 15. Matthew. 15.
To whose prayers our Savior Christ gave (as it seemed) no ear; and when he
did take notice of her suite he gives her a double repulse, first by telling
her that he was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and when
this would not move her to surcease her suite, he uses a more bitter denial,
telling her that it was not fit to take the childrens bread and to cast it to
whelps: but when she was not hereby discouraged, nor her faith extinguished,
but rather of a spark increased to a great flame, at the last she does not
only receive what she desired, but also was sent away with great commendation.
But wherefore did not our Savior grant her petition at the first hearing?
Surely not that he grudged her her suite, or was loath to entertain it, but to
the end that he might make her more earnestly implore his help, and manifest
to all the world her singular faith; and lastly, that she might be an example
to us for our imitation, both to encourage us in asking of God the supply of
our wants, and also to persevere in prayer, though at the first God seems not
to regard us, yea though we receive diverse repulses and many discouragements:
which if we perform we shall have a notable testimony of a true faith, when
as we can patiently abide the Lords leisure, though he do defer his help,
Esa. 28.16.
for he that believes, will not make haste, as it is Esa. 28.16. and in the
end we shall be sure to obtain our godly and honest desires, if not as we
would, yet as it shall be most for our good, and withal eternal blessedness.
For the Lord is the God of judgment; and blessed are all they that wait for
him, Esa. 30.18.
as it is Esa. 30.18.

When therefore we are assaulted by our spiritual enemies, and ready to faint
in the combat of temptations, let us call upon the Lord for his assistance,
that we may be freed from danger and delivered from them; and if the Lord do
seem to defer his help, and suffer us still to bear the brunt of the
battle, after we have many times implored his assistance, yet let us not be
discouraged, but constantly persevere in prayer, assuring our selves that the
Lord will either free us from the temptation, or else give us strength to endure
and overcome it: for he has promised that he will not suffer us to be tempted
above our power, but that he will give a good issue to the temptation that we
may be able to bear it, and he is faithful and true of his word: 1. Cor.
10.13.
as it is 1. Cor. 10.13. It may be that the Lord will not quite free us from the
skirmish of temptation, though we have often desired it of him, either because
he would further try our Christian valor, and exercise our faith, or
restrain us from sin, especially spiritual pride, to which we are too too
subject; as we may see in the example of Paul, who being buffeted by the
messenger of Satan, besought the Lord thrice that he might depart from him:
but the Lord answered, that his grace which he bestowed on him was sufficient,
and that his power was made manifest in the Apostles weakness, as appears 2.
Cor. 12.8, 9. 1. Cor. 12.8.9.
Now the cause why the Lord would not altogether release him, was, that he
might be humbled hereby, the prick of the flesh letting out the wind of vain
glory, which would have puffed him up, by reason of the multitude of
revelations which he had received. Let us not therefore send for the Lords
assistance (as it were) by post; and prescribe the Lord a time with the
Bethulians, wherein if we be not relieved we will faint and cowardly yield: for
that which the Prophet speaks from the Lord concerning the vision, may fitly
be spoken of the Lords aid and help; Though it tarry, watch; Hab. 2.3.
for it shall surely come and not stay, Habac. 2.3.

Prayer to be made for all the Saints.
that we do not only pray for our selves, but also for all the Saints. For
we are fellow members of the same body, we are fellow soldiers which fight
under the same Captain Jesus Christ, and consequently their victory is our
victory, and their foyles are our foyles. As therefore soldiers do not only
stand upon their several guards, but join their forces together, whereby it
comes to pass, that they who being scattered might easily be overcome,
having united their forces are irresistable; so we are not only to stand upon
our own defense, but to join in prayer with the whole Church militant, and
then shall not our spiritual enemies stand against us: for of the prayer of
one righteous man avails much, Iam. 5.16.
being fervent and effectual; of what efficacy and power are the prayers of
all the righteous joined together?

No armor appointed for the back.
And thus have I described the Christian armor, which every man is to put on
before he enter into the combat with our spiritual enemies: amongst all which
there is not any piece appointed for the back, to note unto us that we must
never retire, but manfully stand to it even in the face of our enemy. For if
we resist Satan, he will flee from us, Iam. 4.7.
Iam. 4.7. but if we give ground and betake our selves to flight, he will
pursue us swiftly and deadly wound us; for we have no armor on the back to
defend us from the violence of his blows, neither will the Lord protect such
faint-hearted cowards as run away from his standerd, not daring to trust and
rely upon his almighty power and never failing assistance, which he has
promised to all that fight his battles. Seeing therefore there is no safety
in flight, and assured victory to those that faint not but endure the brunt of
the skirmish unto the end, let us manfully stand upon our guard, neither
fleeing nor yielding to our spiritual enemies; for where can we be more safe,
than under the Lords standerd? where can we be more honorably employed, than
in fighting his battles? how can our state be more dangerous, than when we
flee and Satan pursues us? how can it be more desperate, than when we yield
our selves captive to Satan to be bound in the fetters of sin, until the
sentence of condemnation be pronounced on us in the general sessions at the day
of Christ's appearing?

CHAP. XVII. Of Satan's stratagems.
Satan works upon our own corrupt affections.
but he observes the quality and disposition of his enemies, and accordingly
he fitteth his temptations, so as they may be most forcible to prevail against
them. And to this end he observes to what sins we are most inclined, either
by nature, or by present occasion, and to those he inciteth us, thrusting us as
it were down the hill, where we are apt to run headlong of our own accord;
and seconding his assault with the aid of our corrupt flesh, which
intertaineth willingly his suggestions, and urges us violently to yield to his
temptations. So that Satan never strives against the stream, but uses the
tide of our affections to carry us swiftly into a sea of sin.

For example, if he find a man ambitiously affected, then he covers his
hook with the bait of honors: and thus he tempted Abimelech to murder all
his worthy brethren, Judge. 9.
that he might obtain the sovereignty: thus he tempted Ioab to stab
traitorously Abner and Amasa, that he might still be Captain General: thus
he tempted Absalon to vsurp the kingdom, 1. Sam. 14.
though it were by the utter destruction of his own father. And thus he
tempted our Savior Christ to worship him, by offering him all the kingdoms of
the world, thinking belike that he was inclined to ambition, seeing he
professed himself a great King, and had no worldly kingdom in his possession.
So in our days he tempts the ambitious subject to aspire, without just
title, to the Crown of their lawful Princes; and those who are Kings already
to affect a Monarchy, by usurping wrongfully their neighbor kingdoms: so he
tempts the Spirituality to come by Church-preferments, rather commended by
the gifts of the purse than of the mind; and the Laytie to buy great offices
at so high a rate that they cannot live of them, unless they sell justice by
taking bribes to betray the innocent, and their honesty also by using all
extorsion.

If he find that men are addicted to voluptuousnes, then he tempts them to
sin by offering carnal pleasures; and thus he tempted Noah to drunkenness,
David to adultery, Solomon to idolatry and all wickedness. And thus now he
tempts some to good fellowship, that is, to spend their whole time in
drunkenness, belly-cheare, and all riotous excess and Epicurisme; some to lust,
incontinencie, and all voluptuous pleasures of the flesh. Or if he cannot bring
them to such carnal grossnes, he will entice them to use lawful recreations
unlawfully, and immoderatly spending all their time in pleasure, which they
should bestow in the service of God, by employing themselves in the general
duties of Christianity, and in the special duties of their callings.

They that will be rich fall into temptations and snares, 1. Tim. 6.9.10 How
Satan works upon men's covetousness.
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction: for the desire of money is the root of all evil. With this bait
he allured Laban to deal churlishly and unjustly with Jacob, and his own
children; and to enrich himself by impouerishing them, for whose sake he
should have gathered his riches. He enticed Balaam to curse the people whom God
had blessed, by offering him money the wages of wickedness. He tempted Gehazi
to take the talent and change of raiment of Naaman, selling for this small
trifle Gods honor and his masters credit. He allured Achab to murder Naboth,
that he might purloyne his vineyard, and so purchase the juice of the grape
with the blood of his faithful subject. With this bait he enticed Judas to
betray his master, selling him for thirty pieces of silver, whose worth could
not be valued with many worlds. And hereby also he provoked Demetrius to
oppose himself to the preaching of the Gospel, Act. 19.25.
because he would not lose his gain in making silver shrines to the Idol,
Act. 19.25. Neither was this argument drawn from profit forcible only in
former times, but now also it does no less persuade to sin. For whom almost
does not Satan catch, or at least entangle in this golden net? Does he not
ensnare as well professors of religion, as professed worldlings, so that in
greedy seeking of gain it is not easy to discern the one from the other?
Does he not overcome all sorts and conditions of men, as well those who abound
in all things, as those that enjoy little, by proportionating his ^^^ers of
riches, according to their several estates; much to those that have much, and
little to those that possess little? For he comes to Princes, and promises
them huge sums of money, if they will lay intolerable taxations on their
s^cts, or rob the Church of her livings, that is, God himself of his right. He
comes to Magistrates and Judges, and offreth unto them great bribes, if they
will pervert justice, and so purteth out their eyes that they cannot see right
from wrong; for, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the just, as
it is Deuteronomy. 16.19. If he see one in office covetous, he promises great
revenues and stately houses, if he will deceive the Prince of their right,
and oppress the subject with grievous extortion: and the like offers he makes
to covetous gentlemen, if they will build their houses with the blood of their
tenants, and by grinding the faces of the poor, and by inhaunsing their rents,
and increasing their fines to such unreasonable rates, that the poor tenant
can scarce with the sweat of his face earne his bread.

Neither does he angle with this bait in the Court and country only, but he
thinks it fit for the city also: for he comes to the covetous Merchant,
and promises him that in such a country he shall have good traffic, if he
will dissemble his religion, that is, deny Christ before men: he offers to
the shopkeeper increase of wealth, if he will use false waights and measures,
and false lights, or else sell such wares as are neither profitable for the
Church nor Commonwealth; or adulterate and falsify his stuff by mixing bad
with good; or ask double the price, swearing that it cost him more than
afterward himself is contented to take: in a word, if in buying and selling
he will use fraud, lying, swearing and forswearing, he promises to make him a
rich man, though oftentimes he de^ceiueth him, for in stead of increasing in
wealth by these ungodly practices, oftentimes he becomes bankerupt, the Lord
laying his curse on those wicked means, without whose blessing the builder
builds and the labourer labors but in vain, as it is Psalm. 127. 1.2.
Psalm. 127.1.2.
So also he comes to the Artificer, and tells him that if he will be rich,
he must make sale ware: and what is that? such as is slight and altogether
unfit for use; as though that were most fit for sale which is slight and
altogether unprofitable. And so common nowadaies is this fault, that no greater
dispraise can be given, than to say it is sale ware, as though now nothing
which is good and substantial were fit to be sold. And with these and such
like snares does Satan entangle those that are covetous, and have set their
hearts upon the earthly Mammon; which I have the longer stood upon, because it
is a temptation most dangerous; neither does Satan by any means more easily
sack our souls, and spoil us of Gods graces, than when he ascends by
these golden ladders, or makes a breach in our hearts with these rich bullets.

How Satan tempts the vainglorious to sin.
then he inticeth them to sin, by offering them gorgeous attire far
unfitting their state and callings, and so causes them to commit a great
absurdity: for whereas our Savior Christ says, that the body is of more
worth than raiment, they make their raiment of more worth than their bodies, in
other men's judgment, and prefer gay apparel before the health of their
souls, in their own estimation; for that they may iet it out in rich attire,
they use unlawful means, either by iniuring and oppressing their inferiors,
or at least by keeping the poor from their right: (for their superfluity of
wealth was not given them to spend in such excess, but that they should like
the Lords Almners relieve the poor with their surplussage) and by both, they
wound their souls with sin, and without repentance plunge them into
everlasting death.

So also Satan takes advantage of our complexion and temperature; by tempting
the Sanguine to pleasure and lust; the Flegmaticke to idleness and sloth; the
Melancholicke to envy and malice; the Choleric man he provoke to quarrels
and braules, and inticeth him to take revenge by aggravating the injury, and
suggesting that it will be great disparagement to put up such a wrong. In a
word, Satan carefully observes to what sin we are most prone by nature,
custom or occasion; and to that he eggeth us forward unto which our own lusts
lead us, changing his temptations as we change our affection. And therefore
the Apostle James tells us, that whosoever is tempted, Iam. 1.14.
is drawn away by his own concupiscence, because Satan never assaulteth us,
but he is sure that the flesh will further him in his temptations.

he uses in tempting us to sin; Of the means to defeat Satan's former
policies.
which if we would withstand and defeat, we are as carefully to observe our
own nature and disposition, that we may find to what vices we are most prone,
and so with greater watchfulnes we may avoid them. For as when a city is
besieged, the inhabitants will most strongly man that place, which by nature is
most weak and assaultable, because they know that the enemy will give the
onset there where he is like to find the easiest entrance: so we being
besieged with our spiritual enemies, are most carefully to observe where our
souls are weakest to make resistance, and over that part we are to watch with
greatest diligence, assuring our selves that there Satan will plant all his
engines of battery, that having made a breach he may enter and surprise us.
Ierem. 17.9.
And because the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and none but God
know it, let us summon it often before the throne of Gods judgment, and
examine it by his law, that thereby we may see our secret corruptions, and
after labor to kill and mortify them.

If we find that we be ambitiously affected, we are to use all good means
that true humility may be wrought in our hearts, and whenever (honors
being offered) we are tickled with ambitious and aspiring thoughts, let us
suspect that under honor Satan has hid a hook to catch us. And therefore
before we accept it, we are to examine our selves whether we be fit for so
high a place, and whether we can attain thereto by honest and lawful means,
and whether the place it self be such, that therein we may glorify God,
benefit his Church, and keep a good conscience.

So if we find that we are addicted unto pleasures, we are with all care to
study and practice true mortification; and when any pleasures are offered us,
we are to look narrowly into them, that we may discern if Satan has not
laid under them a snare to entrap us, either by tempting us to pleasures which
are unlawful, or to the immoderate use of those which be lawful; and as we
love the salvation of our souls, let us avoid the bait when we see the snare.

In like manner if we find that we are prone to covetousness, let us carefully
labor to weane our selves from this vice, by considering that it is idolatry,
1. Tim. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. Matthew. 19.24.
and the root of all evil; that the rich (that is, such as set their hearts
upon riches) shall as hardly enter into Gods kingdom as a Camel through an
needels eyes; that riches are momentanie and mutable, and we mortal, Luke
12.20.
and therefore have no assurance of them for the space of one day. And when any
commodity is offered us, we are to look twice on it before we accept thereof,
examining whether we may compass it by honest and good means, and without
the hurt of our brethren, and then we may take it as sent from God; otherwise
we may assure our selves, that how pleasantly soever the bait looks, yet
Satan has hid under it a deadly hook, and therefore if we swallow the bait
the hook will choke us.

And thus also are we to behave our selves in respect of all other sins, to
which we find after due examination we are addicted, if we will be safe from
the devils malice and cunning fury, knowing that where we are most weak,
there he will give the most violent assaults.

CHAP. XVIII. How Satan fitteth his temptations to our state and conditions.
How Satan fitteth his temptations to our worldly estate.
If we be in prosperity, then he tempts us to those sins whereunto that
estate is most subject, namely to pride and forgetfulness of God, to contempt of
our poor brethren, to the love of the world, to coldness in religion, and
carnal security; for he will persuade us, how wickedly soever we live, that
we are highly in Gods favor, otherwise he would not bestow so great and
manifold benefits upon us, as pawnes and pledges of his love.

If we be in adversity, then he will labor to persuade us to use unlawful
means for the repairing of our estates, distrusting in Gods al-ruling
providence and never deceiving promises. If we be poor, he inticeth us to
steal, defraud and oppress our brethren, that so we may become rich by
others spoils. If we have lost any thing by thieves or other casualtie, he
tempts us to go to witches and wizards, that so we may hazard our souls,
which are of more value than the whole world, for the recovery of some earthly
trifle. If we suffer any great cross or affliction, he will persuade us that
God has forsaken and hates us, or else he would not so grievously afflict us;
and hereby he moves us to despair, murmuring and repining against God. Which
temptation he finds so forcible, that he confidently presumed that he could
thereby have caused Job to have blasphemed God to his face. Yea he thought it
a fit weapon to use against our Savior Christ; for, wanting ordinary means
to sustain his hunger, Satan tempts him to distrust Gods providence, and to
shift for himself, by turning stones into bread, Matthew. 4.. Sect. 2. How we
are to defeat Satan's former policy.
Matthew. 4.

Now if we would withstand Satan in this his cunning practice, we also are
carefully to observe our estates, and to arm our selves against those
temptations, to which that estate wherein we live is most subject. In the time
of prosperity we are continually to meditate, that whatsoever we have it is
the gift of God, bestowed on us not for our deserts, but of his free mercy and
goodness, that by the consideration hereof we may be stirred up to true
thankfulness, and as often as we look upon the gifts may think upon the
giver, and praise his name for his benefits, and employ them to his glory, and
the good of our brethren the poor members of Jesus Christ. Let us remember
that we are but stewards of these earthly treasures, and therefore must one
day be called to an account, and consequently the greater our receipts be, the
greater will be our reckoning; that these earthly things are momentanie and
mutable, and we also mortal, and therefore there is no reason that we should
be proud of them, or contemn our brethren who want them, seeing in an instant
they may abound, and we may be stripped of all we possess.

So if we be in adversity, we are to rely our selves on the Lords
providence, who has promised to all that depend upon him all things
necessary, so far forth as they tend to the salvation of our souls:
neither are we to believe Satan when he tells us that afflictions are signs
of Gods hatred, seeing there are innumerable examples of Gods dear children
grievously afflicted, and plain testimonies of Scriptures which prove the
contrary, as shall appear hereafter.

How Satan frames his temptations in respect of our spiritual estate.
If worldlings, then whether we be notoriously wicked, or civil honest men;
those that be notoriously wicked he plungeth headlong into a gulf of all
wickedness and outrageous rebellion against God, he tempts them to
Atheism, and to contempt of Gods worship and service, to swearing and
blaspheming, to the profaning of the Sabbath, and scorning of all religion,
to murders, adultery, drunkenness, theft, and all devilish practices, because
they are his slaves ready at his appointment to execute all those works of
darkness wherein he will employ them. For such men it is but lost labor to show
them how they may resist Satan, seeing they take their whole delight in
serving and obeying him; and therefore before they be taught how to resist him,
they must be persuaded to a desire of coming out of his thraldom, of whom
they are taken prisoners to do his will, as it is 2. Tim. 2.26. 2 Thessalonians. 2.26.


If they be civil honest men, he persuades them that it is sufficient if they
deal justly and uprightly with their neighbors both in their words and
actions; and for Gods service consisting in the duties of piety, which is
commanded in the first table, that it is enough if they have a good meaning,
though they be utterly ignorant of the principles of religion, and that it is
only required of preachers and those that be book-learned, to be able to
render an account of their faith; as for them God will have them excused, so
they lead an honest life amongst their neighbors, and be not tainted with
gross and outrageous sins.

How we may resist the former temptations.
if we would not be subdued by Satan, let us be most careful in withstanding
this dangerous assault: for there is not any one temptation wherewith Satan
prevails more, than by persuading men to content themselves with a civil
kind of honesty, which is destitute of religion and the true fear of God.
And to this end let us consider, that civil honesty severed from true piety
is but glorious iniquity: for when we have attained to as great a measure
thereof, as possibly we can in this age of corruption, we shall come short in
diverse duties of many of the Heathens, who have excelled in these moral and
civil virtues: and consequently when we are at the best we shall be but honest
Infidels and good natured worldlings, if we do not join thereunto the duties
of piety. And how goodly a show soever our works make in the eyes of men, yet
are they odious in Gods sight, if they be not done in knowledge, and grounded
on Gods word and commandment, but in ignorance and according to our own
inventions and the fond conceit of our blind understanding; if they proceed
not from the true love of God, which is the only fountain of all acceptable
obedience, but from the love of our selves and other carnal respects; if they
be not the fruits of a lively faith, but done in ignorance and infidelity;
for, what soever is not done in faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
as it is Romans 14.23. and therefore cannot please God, Heb. 11.6. By which we
are not to understand an historical faith, whereby we know and are assured
that those works we do are commanded in Gods word; but a true justifying
faith which does apply unto us Christ Jesus, and all Gods merciful promises
made in him. For, that our works may be acceptable before God, there is
required first that our persons be acceptable unto him, neither can any thing
we do please him, so long as we remain his enemies, in which state we are by
nature, till we are reconciled in Christ our Mediator, as appears Romans
5.10. Romans 5.10. Col. 1.20.
Now unless we have faith, we cannot apply unto us Christ nor his merits and
righteousness, by whom only we are reconciled unto God, and consequently we
remain Gods enemies, who can do nothing pleasing in his sight.

Secondly, the best of our works are imperfect, and mingled with many
corruptions, and therefore cannot abide the examination of Gods exact justice,
till their imperfections be covered by Christ's righteousness, and their
corruption washed away with his most precious blood; now Christ and his merits
cannot by any other means be applied unto us, but by the hand of a lively
faith.

Lastly, if all our works and honest dealing be not done in zeal of Gods
glory, and referred to this end that Gods name may be magnified, they are not
acceptable before God: for, the cause why he would have our light shine before
men, is, that he our heavenly father may be glorified, Matthew. 3.16.
as it is Matthew 5. 16. and the maine and wherefore we should have our
conversation honest amongst the Gentiles and unbelievers, is, that they which
speak evil of us, as of evil doers, may, by our good works which they shall
see, glorify God in the day of their visitation, 1. Pet. 2.12.
as it is 1. Pet. 2.12.

And therefore let not Satan deceive us, in persuading us to rest in civil
honesty; for if it be severed from true piety, from saving knowledge, from
sincere love of God, justifying faith, and a zeal of Gods glory, it will not
be acceptable in Gods sight; as proceeding from the love of our selves, and
other carnal respects, namely to obtain praise or profit thereby.

How Satan deals with professors of religion.
then he seeks to persuade them, that if they outwardly perform the duties
of piety, as the hearing of Gods word, the public and private calling upon
Gods name, the frequent receiving of the Sacraments; if they attain to the
knowledge and profession of religion, and can tip their tongues with
godliness; then they may live how they list amongst their brethren, neglecting
all the duties of the second table, so they outwardly observe the first; for
though they be barraine of good works, destitute of charity, filled with
pride, addicted to covetousness, oppression, and all deceitful dealing, yet
they shall be justified by their faith, and approved of God for their outward
profession sake. But let such men know that this is a notable stratagem of
Satan, to cause us to fall into his secret ambushments to our destruction,
That piety and honesty are inseparable.
which if they would prevent and avoid, let them consider that piety and
charitable honesty are two such twins as are borne, live, and dye both
together, that they are the life and soul of a Christian which cannot
possibly be severed; that it is as possible for the good tree to bring forth
bad fruit, for the fire to be without heat, and the Sun without light, as
it is for a lively faith to be void of good works, true profession to be
severed from holy practice, and justification before God from sanctification
and holiness of life before men; that whosoever braggeth of his love to God
and loves not his brethren is a liar, and there is no truth in him, 1. Ioh.
4.20.
1. Ioh. 4.20. that though they profess themselves the children of God, yet if
they do not the works of righteousness as well as the works of piety, and
love their brethren, they are in truth the children of the devil, 1. Ioh.
3.10. Romans 2.13.
as appears 1. Ioh. 3.10. that not the hearers of the word, but the doers
thereof are justified, Romans 2.13. that not every one who says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 7.21.
but they who do the will of the father which is in heaven, Matthew. 7.21. that
they deceive themselves who look to be saved by hearing the word, Iam. 1.22.
if they practice not that which they hear, Iam. 1.22. for in stead thereof
they shall plunge themselves into deeper condemnation: For the servant that
knows his masters will and does it not, Luke 12.47.
shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47. And it shall be more easy for
Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, Mat. 11.21.
who had not the Gospel preached amongst them, nor saw Christ's miracles, than
for Corazin and Bethsaida which enjoyed both, Matthew. 11.21. for there as he
gives great means of knowledge, there he expects great fruits in
practice, and as he will be honored in all, so especially in those that come
nigh unto him; as it is Leuit. 10.3. Lastly, Leu. 10.3.
that the sentence of salvation and damnation shall not be given according to
our words and profession, but according to our deeds and the holy practice of
the works of mercy and Christianity, which are the inseparable fruits and
undoubted signs of true faith. And therefore let not Satan delude us, Matthew.
25.
by persuading swading us that piety without honesty, profession without
practice, faith without works are sufficient for our salvation.

How Satan deals with sincere professors, and first with the weak Christian.
then he observes whether they be babes or strong men in Christ; if he find
them babes, then he seeks to abuse their simplicity, by drawing them either
into errors and heresies, or at least into blind zeal and superstition. If
he cannot so prevail, by reason that the bright beams of the Gospel shining
in the preaching of the word do discover his errors and lies, giving light to
those that sit in the darkness of ignorance, and in the shadow of death, whereby
their feet are guided into the way of peace, then he labors to ouerwhelme
them with the burden of their sins, and to plunge them into the bottomless
gulf of horror and despair, by aggravating the odiousnes of their rebellion,
and huge multitudes of their outrageous transgressions, by setting before them
the curse of the law, the vengeance of God due unto them, his infinite and
exact justice which must be satisfied, and the unspeakable and endless
torments prepared for the damned. But if he cannot aggrauate their sins, which
in truth they have committed, and make of them such an huge mountain as may
serve to ouerwhelme them, he adds unto them his own sins, by casting into
their minds outrageous blasphemies against God, and such horrible suggestions
of impiety, as it will make their hairs to stand on end when they do but
think of them, persuading them that they are their own thoughts, and therefore
horrible sins, whereas in truth they are but his suggestions, and therefore
if we do repel and reject them, they are not our sins but the sins of
the tempter: for as it is not our fault if a thief entice us to steal, so we
do not intertaine his motion, but show our detestation of his sin; so it is
not a sin to be tempted, if we presently do repel the suggestion, and do
not yield unto the temptation. And this may appear by our Savior Christ
himself, who though he were free from sin, yet he was tempted in all things
like unto us, and so not free from Satan's suggestions, for he was tempted to
diffidence, to tempting God, yea to the worshipping of the devil himself; but
resisting Satan's suggestions, he was not guilty of sin. Whose example if we
imitate, Satan's blasphemous temptations shall never be laid to our charge;
neither is it possible to be free from temptations, although it be possible by
Gods grace to resist them. But more of this hereafter.

How Satan inticeth the weak Christian to commit sins of ignorance.
then he takes advantage of their simplicity, by enticing them to commit
sins of ignorance. For example, he will tell them that it is lawful, nay
expedient to use their Christian liberty, when he tempts them to
licentiousness; and to the end he may more easily deceive them, he will set a
fair gloss upon foul sins, and seek to justify them by Gods word,
apparelling vices in the habit of those virtues which most resemble them. He
will tempt to covetousness, under show of frugalitie, telling them that they who
provide not for their family are worse than Infidels; and to prodigality,
under the pretense of liberality, alleging that they who sow plentifully
shall reap plentifully. He will allure them to tempt God, by neglecting those
means which he has granted them, under the color of affiance in God; and to
trust in the means, under the vizard of careful providence. He will tempt
them to propound this end of their good works, that they may be saved by them,
because God has promised to reward them; or to neglect good works, as
unnecessary to salvation, because faith alone justifies. Which temptations if
we would withstand, we must labor after true saving knowledge that we may
discern between virtue and vice, truth and error, that which God has
forbidden as unlawful, from that which he has commanded as lawful; to this
end using diligently all good means which tend to this purpose, as hearing,
reading, meditating, and conferring of Gods word, that so the clouds of
ignorance being dispelled with the light of knowledge, we may discover Satan's
delusions and deceits. Otherwise if he deprive us of knowledge, which is the
eye of the soul, he may easily seduce us out of the right way into the gulf
of perdition.

that he cannot take any advantage of their ignorance, How Satan deals with
the strong Christian.
nor overthrow their faith, then he labors to make them wound their
conscience, by committing sins of presumption against their knowledge, using
the violence of their affections, to abuse their reason and misleade their
judgment; the danger of which temptation David well discerning by his own
woeful experience, does earnestly entreat the Lord to preserve him from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13.
Psalm. 19.13. And thus has Satan prevailed with so many of Gods own
children, that he durst therewith assault our Savior Christ himself, by
offering him the whole world and the glory thereof, if he would fall down and
worship him; that his affections tickled with ambition, might move him to
commit this sin for the satisfying his desires. But if he cannot thus prevail,
2. Cor. 11.14.
he will transform himself into an angel of light, and tempt them to the doing
of a less good, that they may neglect a greater; or that which is in it self
lawful and commanded in his due time and place, he will tempt them to perform
it unseasonably, when as other duties in respect of present occasion are more
necessary; and so uses one virtue or duty to shoulder another, and thrust it
disorderly out of it own place and standing. For example, in the hearing of the
word he will cast into their minds meditations, in their own nature good and
acceptable to God in their due time and place, to the end he may distract
their minds and make them hear without profit: in the time of prayer he will
not stick to recall to their memories some profitable instructions which they
have heard at the sermon, to the end he may disturb them in that holy
exercise, and keep them from lifting up their hearts wholly unto God. Moreover,
in all his temptations he will allege scripture; but then either he depraueth
the place by adding or distracting, as when he alleges scripture to our
Savior Christ, Matthew. 4: 6. It is written he will give his angels charge over
thee, etc. and leaves out to keep thee in all thy ways, which is expressed
in the place he quoteth, Psalm. 90.11. because that made quite against him; or
if he recite them right, he will wrest the words unto another sense, than the
holy Ghost has written them, that so he may deceive us and lead us into
error.

CHAP. XIX. How Satan allureth us into sin by degrees, and draws us from
one extreme to another.
Satan laboreth to draw us into outrageous sins by degrees.
he will seek to draw us thereunto by degrees, beginning at the least, and so
bringing us from that to a greater, till at last we come to the highest step of
wickedness: whereby it comes to pass, that as those who walk to the top of
an high hill, whose ascent arises by little and little, come to the top
without wearines, before they well perceived that they did ascend; so they who
go forward in the ways of wickedness by degrees, do without any controulment
or check of conscience clime up to the highest top thereof, whence Satan
casts them down headlong into the pit of destruction. For example, if he see
a professor of religion which makes conscience of his ways, he does not
usually seek at first to draw him into heinous sins, unless the cords of
his temptations be exceeding strong; but first he allureth him to come into the
company of wicked men, by offering some pleasure or profit, or by occasion of
affinity and marriage, joining him if he can with such a yokefellow as will
draw him faster back than he can draw her forward in the course of godliness.
If he thus far prevail, then he tempts him to wink at their sins which in
conscience he condemns, that he may still enjoy his pleasure and profit, or
continue in their love and favor; then in the next place he moves him to
think them tolerable sins which they commit, and nothing so outrageous as
others fall into; and when he has made this progress, then he inticeth him to
taste of sin, which he so sweetneth with the sugared delights of this vain
world that he swalloweth it down without all loathsomeness, and never tastes
the bitterness thereof till the heat of Gods spirit do cause it work in his
conscience, so as he is never at rest till he have cast it up again by
unfeigned repentance. Otherwise if he be not prevented thus by Gods spirit,
Satan will by this means cause his conscience to swallow and to digest such
loathsome sins, which in former times he abhorred to see others commit. And
as those who from their infancy are accustomed to take poisons in small
quantities do enable their stomachs to digest more, till by long custom and
increasing the quantity by degrees, it becomes so familiar to their
stomachs, that instead of poisoning them they are nourished thereby, as
histories do record of some of the Indian Kings: so Satan inticeth us to
swallow down the poison of sin at the first in such small quantity, that
our consciences may not be sick thereof: but having well digested the least,
he increases the measure till by long custom he has made it so familiar to
our consciences, that those sins are even meat and drink unto us, which at
the first we loathed as deadly poisons.

Now if we would defeat this policy of Satan, we must continually watch
over our own hearts and pull them back when we see that they but incline
unto any sin; we must not lightly esteem of any sin, nor willingly give
entertainment to the least wicked thought, for though in it self it be not so
heinous, yet it will enlarge our consciences and make room for a greater, til
at last we keep open house, ready to receive all wickedness which offers it
self unto us; and as we are careful to avoid the sins themselves, so with
as much diligence we are to shun the occasions and means by which we might
be drawn, or enticed thereunto. But of this point more hereafter.

Satan's third policy in drawing men out of one extreme into another.
is to bring us from one extreme to another. For example, when we see the
vileness of prodigality, so as we will no longer be possessed of that vice,
then will Satan make it as odious as he can, and endeavor to bring us into
extreme hatred thereof, that so he may the more easily draw us into the
contrary vice of covetousness. If he cannot any longer keep us asleep in
sin, by rocking us in the cradell of carnal security, and singing unto us
the sweet tunes of Gods mercy and Christ's merits, the^ will he labor to
plunge us in despair, by setting before our eyes the heynousnesse of our
sins, and sounding in our ears the thundering threatenings of the law. If he
cannot any longer nuzzle us in superstition, and cause us to place all our
religion in ceremonies, and in restrayning our selves of the use of things
indifferent, he will draw us to the other extreme by moving us to think all
ceremonies unlawful, and to practice all licenciousnes under pretense of
christian liberty. If he can no longer persuade us to seek for justification
by the works of the law to the end we may not rely on Christ's merits and
righteousness, he will bring us into utter dislike of this doctrine, by showing
us the absurdities thereof, that he may draw us to the other extreme, namely to
neglect good works, as altogether unnecessary to salvation because faith
alone justifies. If he cannot hide out of our sight the shining graces of Gods
spirit by casting before our eyes the cloud of our sins and corruptions,
then he will cause us to look on them through the spectacles of self love and
affection to the end we may imagine them much greater than in truth they are,
and so be puffed up in pride, and too securely rest in those gifts we have, not
seeking for increase. If he cannot persuade us to diffidence and distrust, he
will move us to tempt God upon no necessary occasions: and thus he dealt with
our Savior Christ, for first he tempted him to distrust Gods providence, and
to provide for himself by turning stones into bread; but when he could not so
prevail, he moved him to make an unnecessary experiment of his providence and
care, by casting himself down headlong from the pinnacle of the temple,
whereas there were ordinary means whereby he might descend.

Now the end why Satan uses this policy is, more violently to cast us into
one extreme of sin, when with full swinge of will we do avoid the other: as
also to make us believe that the latter temptation is the motion of Gods
spirit, seeing it is clean contrary to the former suggestion of Satan,
whereas in truth they are but unlike children of the same father.

That we are to avoid the former temptation by keeping us in the golden mean.
we must keep us in the golden mean avoiding both extremes; and because we
are ignorant and unskillful in trauayling the straight path which leads to
Gods kingdom, and every hour ready to take the bywaies of error which lead
to destruction, let us use the word of God for our guide: and as the Israelites
trauayling toward the land of promise, were directed by the cloud and pillar
of fire, going forward when that went before them, and pitching their tents
where that stayed; so let us constantly and boldly travail in our christian
pilgrimage so long as we have the word of God for our direction, not staying
where it bids go, nor going when it stays. Let this be the touchstone to
discern the golden truth from the drossie extremes on either side; let it be
the line to lead us out of this laborinth of errors; let it be the star of
Bethlehem to conduct us in our tedious journey unto the place where our Savior
Christ is, not now lying in the arms of his mother, but sitting at the right
hand of his father in all glory power and majesty. And because we are
unskillful pilots in failing the dangerous sea of this tempestuous world,
readid to fall upon the rocks while we avoid the sands; lot Gods word be our
card, to direct us to the holy land: otherwise Satan will raise against us
such stormy tempests, and contrary blasts of temptations, that our souls
will suffer shipwreck upon the rocks of sin, and be drowned in a sea of
destruction.

CHAP. XX. Of three other stratagems which Satan uses.
How Satan moves us to propound bad ends to good actions.
When by the violence of his tentations he cannot altogether restrain us from
doing that which is good: then he will tempt us to do good actions to bad
ends. In giving of alms he will move men to propound this end that they may be
seen of men; in doing of good works, he will tempt them to forget Gods
glory, and to set before them as their maine end of all their good actions,
the meriting of heaven; and if men will needs appear virtuous and religious,
he will entice them to use outward virtues as a cloak to hide their inward
vices, and religion as a fair vizard to cover their foul impiety. And thus
he tempts men to use all outward shows of humility, to the end they may the
better disguise their hidden pride and ambition, as we may see in the example
of Absolon; and all complements of courtesy and love, as a mask to hide their
envy and malice. And thus he allureth men to profess religion, hear sermons,
and use glorious speeches, that they may (seeming religious and men of good
consciences) have their shoppes the better customed, and their words credited,
and so have the fitter opportunity of deceiving them who for their profession
repose trust in them.

How Satan moves us to use evil means for the effecting good ends.
and thus he tempted Saul to transgress Gods commandment in reserving the
fat of the cattle to the end he might sacrifice therewith unto the Lord; and
Isaac to say that Rebecca was his sister to save his life; and Peter to use
dissimulation that he might not offend the Jews. Galat. 2.
And thus he tempts men to tell officious and profitable lies for the
avoiding of greater evils; he moves servants to give their masters goods to
the poor without their priuitie or liking, and so to commit theft that they
may give alms; he tempts nonresidents to possess many livings that they may
keep good hospitality, and so starve the foul to feed the body; and
citizens to use all fraud and deceit that they may provide for their family.
Which policies of Satan are exceeding dangerous; for hardly can we escape
them both, namely doing good things to bad ends, or using of evil means for
the atchieuing of good purposes: but the more difficult the thing is, the
greater must be our care; the more secret and dangerous Satan's ambushments
are, the more diligent and watchfulnes must we use in avoiding them. In all our
actions therefore let us be careful to propound unto our selves good ends, and
use good means for the accomplishing of our honest and godly purposes; for if
we neglect the first, we shall bewray our hypocrisy and impiety, if the
latter we shall pollute a fair work with filthy tools, and show our
diffidence in God in not dairing to use those godly and honest means which he
has commanded and commended us, unless we boulster and prop them up by our
own foolish inventions, and wicked practices. And whenever we are moved to
propound evil ends of our good actions, or to use evil means for the
accomplishing of good ends, let us assure our selves, that they are not the
motions of Gods spirit, but the suggestions of Satan, at least so far forth
as we are tempted to the evil of the end or means; and therefore we are to
purge the wheat from the chafe, the pure gold from the dross, and to do the
works of God for those ends, and by those means, which he has appointed.

How Satan tempts us to be proud of our virtues.
is to take advantage of our virtues to plunge us headlong into vice; for
example when we have mortified our sins, and are plentiful in all good
works, he takes occasion thereby to puff us up with pride, and a
pharisaicall conceit that we are not as other men are; yea if we be so humble
that he cannot make us proud of any thing else, he will labor to make us
proud of our humility. Let us not therefore be retchlesse and secure, but have
an eye to our hearts, even in our good actions: and when we entertain any
excellent virtue, let us take heed least pride thrust in with it, seeing most
commonly it attends upon virtue, and takes up his standing where it lodges,
for we are not quite at liberty, and out of the danger of Satan's thraldom,
so long as pride like a iaylour attends on us.

CHAP. XXI. Of the manner of Satan's fight.
That Satan observes no complements of true valor.
but then most violently assaulteth us when we are least provided; if he cannot
prevail when we are waking, he will set upon us while we are sleeping; if he
cannot hurt us when we are ready in the field armed with the complete armor
of a Christian, the girdle of verity, the breast plate of righteousness, the
shield of faith, the sword of the spirit, etc. he will watch a time when he can
spy us unarmed, and then he will assail us; if he cannot overcome us in the
time of prosperity, when God has hedged us in with his blessings, Job. 1.10.
as it is Job. 1.10. then he will watch till we be cast down with some
adversity, and then he will lay load on us whilst we are under foot; and
whereas all our hope of victory is in the Lords assistance, he will persuade
us to yield unto him, for as much as the Lord is become our enemy.

Now if we would resist Satan, we must so prepare our selves that he do not
hurt us by this his dastardly fight. Seeing therefore he uses to set upon us
on all advantages, we are always to be so provided as that we give him no
advantage; being awake, we are always to stand upon our guard, ready armed
with the graces of Gods spirit; being to sleep, we are to desire the Lord to
watch over us, and to command his angels to pitch their tents about us, that
so we may be defended from Satan's fury; seeing he is ready to assault us
when he sees us disarmed, we are always to keep the coatearmour of a
Christian buckled unto us: lastly, seeing in the time of prosperity he is
ready to puff us up with pride, and in the time of adversity to plunge us
into despair, let us humble our selves when God exalts us, by thinking of our
unworthiness to receive the least of Gods mercies; and comfort our selves in the
time of our affliction, by remembering that it is the portion of all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, and that whosoever suffer with Christ, 2. Tim.
3.12. and 2.12.. Sect. 2. Satan assaulteth us when we are most secure.
shall also reign with him, 2. Tim. 3.12. and 2.12.

The second thing to be observed in his manner of fight, is, that he sets
upon us when we are most secure, and then sounds the alarm to battle,
when we most flatter our selves with hope of peace, and that not drowsily and
faintly, but with all celeritie and speed, whereby he overcomes oftentimes,
or at least foyleth us, before we can arm or prepare our selves to make any
resistance. And thus he assaulted our first parents in paradise, when they
securely promised unto themselves the continuance and increase of their
happiness; and David also after all his troubles when he was retchlesse and
idle, sleeping in the day, and after walking on his house top, letting his eyes
wander after pleasures.

If therefore we would withstand Satan, let us shake off all drowsy and
carnal security, and continually watch, standing on our guard to resist his
encounters whenever he sets upon us: and as in calm weather the careful
Mariner provides all things against a tempest, and the valiant soldier does
arm and furnish himself with all necessaries before the assault; so when
Satan seems to offer us a time of truce, let us therein prepare our selves
more strongly against the day of battle; for when this raging lion seems to
sleep as though he did not regard us, then if through retchlesnesse we give
him the least advantage, he will suddenly run upon us and devour us, if he
get us within his cruel paws.

Satan never weary in assaulting us. 1. Pet. 5.8. Job. 1.7.
is his indefatigable pains in tempting and assaulting us, for he never takes
rest, but still goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour;
and this is evident by his own confession, Job. 1.7. where he professes that
he had been compassing the earth to and fro, and walked from place to place. So
that he omitteth no pain nor labor in seeking our destruction. And though he
overcome us not at the first, but retire foiled, yet he will gather his forces
again and again, and incessantly set upon us. And therefore if we would
obtain victory, we must not think much of our labor, but use all pains,
diligence and watchfulnes in repelling his assaults. And seeing Satan is so
vigilant and painful in seeking our destruction, let us think no pains too
great in seeking our preservation; and considering that Satan after one, or
two, or twenty foyles is as ready to set upon us again as at the first, let
us never faint, but like valiant fouldiers always stand ready in the field to
endure his incounters. But alas, the practice of most is far otherwise, for
they watch and drudge night and day to attain unto riches and preferment, and
in the mean time little regard this dangerous foe, but to the end they may
attain unto their worldly desires, they entangle themselves in the snares
which he has laid to entrap them to their utter destruction.

That Satan often changes his temptations for his better advantage.
and taking as it were into his hand another weapon, when he perceives the
first wounds not. For example, he will tempt us to the contempt of Gods word;
if he cannot so prevail, he will entice us at least to neglect it; and if thus
he cannot hurt us, he will, if he can, choke the seed of Gods word with the
thornie cares of the world, and so make it unfruitful. He will move us to
think that Christ was no Savior; if he cannot persuade us to this, then he
will tell us he is not our Savior. Yea so shameless is this tempter, that he
will now tempt us to believe one lie of his coining, and presently after when
he sees we give no credit to that, he will tell us the clean contrary. For
example, he will sometimes tell us that we are such grievous sinners that
there is no way but damnation: and if we withstand this assault, he will soon
after persuade us to an ouerweening conceit of our own excellency, and to a
pharisaicall opinion that we are not as other men are. Sometimes he will move
us to doubt of our election, and if he cannot thus prevail, he will presently
persuade us to think our election so sure, that though we follow our own
lusts, and give our selves over to all outrageous wickedness, yet in the end
we shall be saved. In a word, this wicked Protheus will transform himself
into a thousand diverse shapes, and in a short space will vary many ways his
temptations, that if he cannot prevail by one means, he may overcome us by
another. And therefore it behooves us, if we will withstand him, to arm our
selves, not on one side alone, nor to be prepared against two or three
assaults of our spiritual enemy, but we must be ready to answer all
objections, and not so wholly incline to one side and to the defending one
part, as that in the mean time we leave the other naked to be wounded with
Satan's blows. And to the end we may the rather be encouraged to stand
constantly in our defense, we are to know that when Satan does so often shift
his temptations, and in a short distance of time does seek to bring us into
quite contrary vices, The often changing of Satan's temptations a probable sign
that he does not prevail.
it is a manifest sign that he does not yet prevail: for as no enemy is so
foolish as will after that he has made one sufficient breach for entry, or
forced one gate of the city, go from that to another, but rather enter where
the way is made; so Satan laying siege to our souls, would not seek to make
a new battrie with his temptations, if the former had made way for him to enter
and surprise us; he would not tempt us to pride and presumption, if he had
overcome our faith and plunged us into despair; he would never transform
himself into an angel of light, if he could have overcome us in his own
likeness; he would never tell us of Gods mercy, if he had already overwhelmed
us with the sight of our sins, and consideration of Gods justice; nor yet of
Gods justice, if he could keep us in carnal security, by setting before us
his mercy: but that way whereby he perceiues he any whit preuailes, he will
follow and continue earnest in the same pursuit, till he perceive he cannot
catch us. As therefore when the fit of the ague shifteth from time to time, it
is a good sign that our nature waxing strong does prevail against the
disease; so when Satan's temptations in a short time often change, and that
from one contrary to another, it is a sign that Gods spirit being strong in
us, does resist Satan and puts him to these shifts, whereas he would hold
on a constant course if he prevailed against us.

is, That Satan assaulteth us sometime himself, and sometime by his
instruments.
that sometimes he sets upon us immediately in his own person, and sometimes
mediatly using for his instruments the world and the flesh. Of the first we
have an example 1. Chr. 21.1. where it is said that Satan provoked David to
number Israel. So Ioh. 13.2. the Evangelist shows that the devil did put in
the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray Christ. And the Apostle Peter Act. 5.3.
tells Ananias that Satan had filled his heart with his suggestions that he
should lie unto the holy Ghost. And thus also he tempted our Savior Christ
immediately forty days together in the wilderness, Mat. 4. When he thus
fights against us in his own person, he gives the assault either in his own
likeness, or else transformeth himself into an angel of light. When he
incountreth us in his own likeness and like a devil indeed, then he does as
it were proclaim open wars, tempting us not only to those sins which,
having some appearance of good in them, our corrupt conscience does approve of,
or at least can without any great terror wink at, but also to all outrageous
wickedness and hellish impiety, which even a civil worldling would abhor to
think of; namely, to Atheism, Idolatry, contempt of all religion,
blasphemies against God, perjury, sacrilege, persecuting the known truth,
heresy, murder, adultery, and such like: all which at the first sight may
easily be discerned to be the suggestions of Satan, because this hellish
brood do resemble their wicked father in their very countenance and outward
appearance. And therefore Satan who subdueth more with the serpents wiles than
with the lions force, does seldom use this fight against any which have but
the civil restraining grace of God, unless he entice them thereunto by
degrees (as before I have showed) or except he find them exceeding ignorant,
to the end he may make them believe that his suggestions are their own
thoughts; but he practices these temptations, for the most part, against
those who have even sold themselves to work wickedness, having their hearts
hardened and consciences seared with their customable sinning.

persuasions, How Satan transformeth himself into an angel of light.
and making liberal offers of pleasure, profit or preferment, or else minsing
those sins to which he tempts us as though they were nothing, or masking
them under the vizard of virtue. Neither does he often move us to commit those
sins which nature (restrained by Gods common grace, or sanctified by his
spirit) does abhor and tremble to think of; unless it be either to vex Gods
children with such suggestions, rather than for any hope of ouercomming them;
or else that whilst their minds are wholly intent in withstanding his outward
violence, he may more cunningly entrap them in his secret ambushments, which
they regard not: but otherwise he usually tempts us to commit such sins, as
through our corruption we are prone unto, as not thinking them to be sins,
or but small, or rather never entering into any consideration of them at all; as
namely, carnal security, hardness of heart, infidelity, impenitencie,
neglect of Gods word, profaning of his Sabbaoths, covetousness, ambition,
pride, neglect of the general duties of Christianity and special duties of
our callings; all which are not much less heinous in the sight of the Lord
than the other gross outward sins, and much more dangerous unto us, as being
Satan's secret snares which he lays to entrap us at unawares; in which when
we are caught we are content to lie bound, because they do not so much pinch
and torment the conscience as the other outward sins, they being not seen,
or not regarded. As therefore those diseases which by disturbing the brain do
take away all sense of pain, are of all others most desperate, namely, the
dead paulsie, the falling sickness, and sleepie lethargy, and in other
diseases the patient is most dangerously sick when he has no feeling thereof;
so there is no sickness of the soul so desperate and dangerous, as those that
afflict not our consciences with any sense of pain, to wit, carnal security,
hardness of heart, and the rest above named.

That Satan is most to be feared when he most flattreth.
wherein like a Pirate he hangs out flags of truce, to signify peace and
friendship, till he have gotten us within his reach and command: and then he
grapleth with us, and ransacketh us of all Gods graces, and casts us over
board into the sea of destruction. And therefore it behooves us with no less
care to withstand Satan when he fawneth, than when he frowneth; when he
fights by ambushment, than when he assaulteth us by open violence; when he
offreth to stab us to the heart, than when he does but (as it were) prick a
vain, letting us blood to death without sense of pain; when he tempts us
to outrageous sins, than when he inticeth us to secret and hidden sins;
when he allureth us like a friend to commit sin, by offering pleasure, riches,
or honors, than when like an enemy a roaring lion, or cruel dragon he
raungeth about and rages against us; Nam cum delectabile proponit, molestum
supponit, and dum vngit pungit; He propounds things delightful to bring us
to grief and misery, he fawneth on us that he may bemire us, and kills
while he embraces us. Neither does man know his time, but as the fishes which
are taken in an evil net, Eccless. 9.12.
and as the birds which are caught in the snare, so are the children of men
snared in the evil time, when it falls upon them suddenly, as it is Eccles.
9.12. Nay, seeing this fight is far more dangerous, because he covers his
hook with an alluring bait; and those snares of sin more pernicious which
lie hidden, than those which lie in open view; Temptations unto secret sins
most dangerous.
seeing we are more easily tempted to those sins which are secret and
disguised in the habit of virtue, than unto those gross sins which have
their names as it were branded in their foreheads; seeing also we can more
hardly repent of them, both because they do not appear so horrible and
grievous unto us, as the other open and outward sins, and also because they
work in us no shame after we entertain and live in them, neither can any of
our christian brethren admonish or rebuke us for them, they being secret and
unknown: therefore is Satan made more audacious to tempt us, and we more bold
to admit of his temptation, and after we are fallen we lack means to raise
us up again by unfeigned repentance, for our selves do approve our sins,
and our brethren know them not: which Bernard well discerning, utters this
speech fit for this purpose: Extimesco magis occulta peccata quae clam committo
quam manifesta quae perpetro palam, clam enim si pecco nemo me redarguit. Vbi
autem reprehensio non metuenda est, ibi tentatori patet aditus liberrimus, and
peccatum cum voluptate admittitur. I am more afraid (says he) of my secret,
then of my open sins; for if I sin secretly there is no man to reprove me;
and where reprehension is not feared, there the tempter has most free access
and the sin is entertained with pleasing delight. In a word, seeing we are
more easily drawn into these sins; and after we are enthralled with them,
make no have to get out of our captivity: therefore let us be much more wary
and heedfull in discovering and avoiding these hidden snares and secret sins,
into which we do most commonly fall unwittingly, and being fallen, do most
willingly continue in them.

How Satan assaulteth us by his instruments the world and the flesh.
Satan assaulteth us sometimes by his deputies and instruments; especially he
employeth in these services, the world and the flesh. In the world he does not
only make choice of our enemies and profane irreligious men, which he
stirs up to afflict and persecute us, to the end we may be discouraged from
the profession and practice of true godliness; but also of our dear friends
and acquaintance and our near kindred: sometime our brother or sister, our
parents and children, yea sometimes a man's wife which lies in his boo some,
plays the part of the tempter. As we may see in the example of Job, who was
not so much vexed by all his outward afflictions, as by the temptation of his
wife, and three friends. The same is evident in the example of Eve, whom Satan
used as his instrument to entice Adam to the breach of Gods commandment: and
Iesabel who was the devils deputy, in provoking her husband to oppression and
horrible murder. Neither does he only use to these ends our carnal friends,
but also our spiritual kindred in Christ, who are of the same religion, and
make the same profession with us; and thus by the old Prophet, he enticed the
young Prophet to transgress Gods commandment. 1. King. 13.
1. King. 13. And thus he tempted our Savior Christ to neglect the work of
our redemption, using the Apostle Peter as his instrument; and therefore
because he supplied the devils place, our Savior calls him by his name
saying, Matthew. 16.23.
Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me, Matthew. 16.23. And thus
nowadaies he uses professors, yea preachers of the Gospel, as means to tempt
men to sin, both by their words and evil examples: which temptation is far
more dangerous and of greater force, then if all worldlings should combine
themselves together, and labor both by persuasion and example to seduce them;
for when they can say I am a professor as well as thou, 1. King. 13.18.
I am a servant of God who make conscience of my ways as well as thou, I am a
Prophet as well as thou, and therefore thou need not to make any doubt or
scruple in following my council or example; it is a most strong temptation to
entice us to sin: for like sheep we are most apt to follow after when any of
our own company lead us the way. And therefore if we would resist this
temptation, we must labor after true knowledge, that we may not depend upon
others for our direction, but upon the word of God alone, and not live by
example, but by precept; for the straightest rule that ever was of the most
holy man's life (our Savior Christ excepted) is often and in many places
crooked (for who is it that has not erred and gone astray?) and therefore if
we always follow their examples in all particulars, we shall err with them
besides all our own errors.

That Satan uses the help of our own flesh in tempting us to sin.
that we can hardly discern between Satan's suggestions and our own corrupt
motions and desires: for being a spirit, he does not appear in a corporal
shape and persuade us to sin with real words, which are conuayed to the
heart by the ear, but he comes to us after a spiritual manner, and
suggesteth secretly his temptations into the heart and mind directly and
immediately, so as we can seldom distinguish his motions from our own
thoughts. For as the spirit of God does so move us to all virtuous and holy
actions, as that in the mean time we would think his motions to be our own
godly cogitations, 2. Cor. 3.9.
but that we are sufficiently instructed out of Gods word, that we cannot of
our selves so much as think a good thought unless it proceed from God; so
much less can we discern between the suggestions of Satan and our own
fleshly thoughts, because they are both corrupt and alike wicked. By reason
whereof it comes to pass that Satan wants no opportunity of
circumuenting us, because we can put no difference between his temptations and
our own carnal desires: and therefore he having gotten (as it were) our own
watchword, we are ready to open the gates of our souls when he offers to
enter, and to yield to his temptations as soon as he assaulteth us; where as
no man almost is so outragiously desperate that would wittingly and willingly
entertain Satan's suggestions, whom he knows to be a common enemy to
mankind, continually seeking their destruction, though he should entice him
hereunto by offering much riches and great preferments. Yea hence it is that
after Satan has many times deceived and circumuented us, yet cannot we beware
of him, nor avoid his deceits. For whereas if a man do give us evil
counsel, or any way cousin us, yet after once or twice he come unto us, we can
take heed of him, and though he make fair shows of honesty and friendship,
we will notwithstanding be very jealous and suspicious least again he
ouerreach us; when Satan comes to us this day and tempts us to such gross
wickedness, that we cannot choose but discern them to be his suggestions, yet
this is no impediment to him but that he may come again to morrow, and deceive
us with some more subtle policy, because we cannot discern between his
suggestions and our own thoughts, and therefore do acknowledge no other
author of his temptations but our selves.

Hence also it is that he will not stick to tempt the most godly unto the
grossest impiety, and the most learned and sound in judgment, to entertain
the absurdest heresy or error. For if he prevail (which sometime he does as
we may see in the example of David whom he tempted to adultery and murder,
though he were a man according to Gods own heart; and of Peter whom, he
tempted to deny and forswear Christ, though he were a most worthy Apostle)
then he gets a great victory, and gives them a singular foil; but if he
be repulsed, yet this is no hinderance unto him, why he may not entrap them in
some more secret ambushment. Hence it is that though he begin his fight with
cunning policy, taking upon him the person of a friend, and transforming
himself into an Angel of light, yet this is no impediment but that he may
afterward again appear and violently assault us in his own likeness; as he
assaulted our Savior, first with subtle and secret temptations, like a friend
and welwiller; and when he could not so prevail, he does not stick to appear
like himself, tempting him to outrageous gross idolatry, saying, all this
will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. And contrariwise
though he begin his assault like a devil and professed enemy, this is no
hinderance but that he may end it like an Angel of light, and a flattering
treacherous friend. So when he has enticed us to one extreme and prevails
not, this is no impediment but that soon after he may allure us to the clean
contrary; because though we think the first motion to be his suggestion, yet
we may imagine the other to be our own thought, or (as I said) the motion of
Gods spirit, because it is quite contrary to the former.

How we may avoid danger, though we cannot discern Satan's temptations from
our own lusts.
how may we resist Satan, considering that we cannot discern his suggestions
from our own cogitations? I answer; we must be skilful in Gods word, and
thereby able to judge what is good and what is evil, to discern what is
virtue and what is vice, what God has commanded and what he has forbidden,
which be the motions of Gods spirit, and which the suggestions of Satan, and
the thoughts of our corrupt flesh; and then are we carefully to embrace that
which our conscience approoueth as good, being informed by Gods word, and to
avoid and reject those motions which we know to be evil, whether they do
proceed from Satan or from our selves; for it is not greatly material to
know who is the author of them, so we are assured that they are evil and
wicked; neither is it any dangerous error to ascribe Satan's suggestions to our
corrupt flesh; or to attribute the wicked thought of our own flesh unto
Satan: for though he be not the next and immediate cause, yet he is the first
and principal cause of all sin and wickedness. And hence it is that in the
Scriptures the same wicked motion and action is sometimes ascribed to man, and
sometimes to Satan indifferently as appears, Act. 5.3.5.
Act. 5.3.5 where first Peter affirms Satan to be the author of Ananias
sin, by filling his heart with his suggestions, whereby he was tempted to lie
unto the holy Ghost, and after he says that Ananias had conceived this lie in
his own heart.

How Satan's suggestions may be discerned from our own fleshly lusts.
and of our corrupt flesh, yet sometimes they may be distinguished by apparent
differences; as first when the temptations are so cunning and exceeding
subtle, that it is not possible they should be the thoughts of a seely
ignorant man, but the apparent suggestions of the old wily serpent.

Secondly, when as the suggestion is urged with great force and violence, and
leaves behind it a deep impression, which seems to bring a necessity of
doing that which is even contrary to natural reason, whereas the suggestions
of the flesh do rather lead and entice us then draw and enforce us unto sin.

Thirdly, the temptations of Satan move us oftentimes to such outrageous
wickedness, and hellish impiety, that even nature corrupted does condemn as
abominable, and even trembles with fear and horror, when they are first
suggested.

Fourthly, the flesh takes occasion of things present and subject to the
senses to entice us unto sin; but Satan's suggestions sometimes are far
fetched and so strange unto us, that before the instant they are suggested we
never thought or so much as dreamed of them.

Lastly, the things whereunto we are tempted by the flesh, are always
delightful and pleasing unto us; but satan tempts us also to those things
which are irksome and grievous: as namely to superstitious abstinence whereby
the body is almost starued; to punishing of our own bodies, as he tempted the
Baalitish priests, to cut and lance themselves before their idol; and the
supersttious papists to whip themselves before their images, and to take upon
them tedious and dangerous pilgrimages to idols and relics of Saints; and
the idolatrous heathen to burn in sacrifice their dear children. So also he
tempts some to despair of Gods mercy and so torment themselves with horror
and fear; yea sometimes to lay violent hands upon themselves, murdering and
taking away their own life, which by nature is so dear and precious unto
them. All which being contrary to our natural inclinations and the desires of
the flesh, manifestly appear to be the suggestions of Satan.

And these are the chief differences between the temptations of Satan and
the flesh; otherwise they are commonly so like one to the other that they can
hardly be discerned: and therefore let us not be so careful, curiously to
distinguish them, as to avoid or resist them; knowing that Satan is the
captain general, and the flesh and the lusts thereof Satan's chief aides and
assistants, which continually fight against the spirit and labor to plunge
both body and soul into everlasting destruction.

CHAP. XXII. Of the general means whereby we may be enabled to withstand our
spiritual enemies.
The circumstances to be considered in this spiritual conflict.
now we are to speak of the conflict it self; wherein (as I have showed) the
parties assaulting and oppugning are the devil and his assistants the world
and the flesh; the party defending and resisting is the christian soldier.
The cause of the fight is not for lands and dominions, nor for riches and mines
of gold; for these would Satan be content to give if he had them in his
possession, if we would renounce Gods service, and fall down and worship him;
but for the everlasting salvation of our souls which Satan laboreth by all
means possible to hinder, and to plunge us into endless destruction. The
weapons which the assailants use in this fight are not the sword and spear, or
any other carnal furniture, but spiritual temptations, whereby they seek to
entice, draw, and provoke man to sin, that consequently he may receive the
wages thereof everlasting death. The weapons which the Christian soldier uses
to defend himself and repel his enemies, is the spiritual armor before spoken
of, namely, the girdle of verity the breast plate of righteousness, the
knowledge and profession of the Gospel of peace, the shield of faith, the
helmet of salvation, the sword of the spirit, and fervent and effectual prayer.

Of two common affections to be considered of in this spiritual conflict.
there are first two common affections or general properties to be considered
of; the Christian soldiers manfull resistance, or else his fainting and
receiving the foil; for either he courageously stands upon his defense,
armed with the graces of Gods spirit, and puts Satan to flight by
withstanding his temptations; or else being surprised at unawares, whilst he is
disarmed of these spiritual weapons and Christian armor, he is soiled by his
spiritual enemies, yielding unto their temptations and falling into sin.

Of the first means to withstand our spiritual enemies, to wit, Gods
commandment.
That we may withstand our spiritual enemy valiantly in all his temptations,
and obtain a final victory, there are certain general means to be used;
which may serve as strong forts and bulworkes, unto which we may retire our
selves as often as we faint, and be ready to receive any disadvantage in the
fight. First, we are continually to have in memory the commandment of our
chief captain Christ Jesus, whereby he inciteth us to a continual fight
without fainting or yielding. So Ephesians. Ephesians. 6.10.11.
6.10.11. Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against all the assaults of
the devil. 1. Pet. 5.8.
And 1. Pet. 5.8. Your adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about
seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

The second means, hope of victory.
Secondly, let us be encouraged to withstand our spiritual enemies with assured
hope of victory; for we fight the Lords battles under the standerd of Jesus
Christ, whose power is omnipotent, and therefore able to defend us, and to
overthrow our enemies with a word of his mouth; who also is our head and we his
members, and therefore we may assure our selves that he has no less will than
power to succor us. As also let us always have in mind the crown of
victory promised to all that overcome, even a crown of glory and everlasting
happiness in Gods kingdom, Apoc. 2.7. and 3.5.12.21. And this will make us
resolve never to faint in the battle, Apoc. 2.7. and 3.5.12.21.
nor cowardly yield unto Satan's temptations, though he should entice us to
sin by offering us the whole world, because we would not thereby hazard the
loss of this eternal weight of glory.

The third means, to be always in readiness.
Thirdly, we are always to stand in readiness armed with the christian armor,
the graces of Gods spirit, and to use al good means that we may be more and
more strengthened and confirmed in them: but yet when we are at the strongest,
we are not to presume upon our own strength, but to rely our selves wholly upon
the Lords assistance, and when we are tempted and assaulted, we must
continually implore his help, that being armed with the power of his might, we
may withstand the temptation and obtain victory.

The fourth means, to take occasion of Satan's temptation unto sin of doing
the contrary virtue.
Fourthly, when we are assaulted by our spiritual enemies and tempted unto any
sin, we must not only abstain from committing thereof, but also take
occasion thereby of doing the contrary virtue. For example, when we are tempted
to unlawful pleasures, we must not only abstain from the^, but also we are
somewhat to abridge our selves of those that be lawful, and the more feriously
and painfully to follow the works of our lawful callings; when we are tempted
to covetousness, we must the more carnestly exercise the works of mercy and
christian liberality; when we are tempted to ambition, we must not only
refrain from vainglorie, but we must labor after true humility and
mortification, refusing not only unlawful honors, but those also which are
lawful, so often as we have just cause to fear that Satan will (taking occasion
of our corruption) hereby cause us to forget God; when we are tempted to
neglect the hearing of Gods word on the Lords Sabbath, we are the more
diligently to hear it, not only then, being bound hereunto by Gods
commandment, as being one of the chief means of sanctifying this day
consecrated to Gods service; but also on the week days, if the Lord give us
fit opportunity, when as we might lawfully be exercised in the duties of our
callings. In a word, when we are tempted to any vice, we are to take occasion
thereby of doing the contrary virtue; in the mean time carefully avoiding the
policy of Satan, before spoken of, whereby he labors to draw us from one
vice to his contrary extreme. And so like valiant soldiers we shall not
only avoid the danger and violence of Satan's strokes, but also we shall
give Satan the foil with his own weapon, yea and make him afraid to assault
us again with his temptations, least when he provoke us unto sin, we take
occasion thereby to serve God, and more constantly to embrace virtue.

The fifth means to withstand temptations when they are first suggested.
we are most carefully to withstand Satan's temptations when they are first
suggested; and to give him the repulse as soon as we perceive that he is but
beginning to make an entrance. For this gliding serpent if he can but thrust in
his head, will easily make room for his whole body: and therefore we must nip
and bruise him in the head, and use his temptations like the serpents brood,
which if men desire to kill, they do not tread upon their tails, for so they
would turn again and sting them, but upon their heads, and then they have no
power to hurt them. So we are not fondly to think that we can without hurt
vanquish Satan's temptations in the end when we have long entertained them:
for unless they be nipped in the head, and withstood in the beginning, they
will mortally poison us with the sting of sin. For as thieves coming to
break into a house, if they can but find room for the point of their wrench
to enter, will easily by turning and winding about the vice make the doors,
though very strong, fly open and give them entrance; so if this cunning thief
Satan can find any entrance for his first temptations, so as we can be
content to think upon them, and reuolue them in our minds with any liking,
he will easily burst open the gates of our souls, and entering further will
rob us of all Gods graces. Let us therefore if we would resist Satan, follow
the advice of the heathen Poet in a far different matter: Principijs obsta:
sero medicina paratur, Cum mala per longas conualuere moras. Or rather the
counsel of the Apostle given us in this selfsame respect, Ephesians. 4.27. Give no
place to the devil. Ephesians. 4.27.
And as wise citizens being besieged, do not let their enemies scale their
walls and enter the town, with a purpose then to repel and beat them back
again; but they withstand them as soon as they give the first assault, and
keep them, if they can, from approaching near their walls with sconces and
bulwarks: so we are not to suffer Satan our enemy and the troops of his
temptations to enter into our hearts, but to give them the repulse at their
first approaching, least it be too late afterward when they have surprised and
wounded us with sin. Blessed are they therefore who take this Babylonish
brood of Satan's temptations and dash them even whilst they are young against
the stones, Psalm. 137.9.
least waxing old and strong they furiously fight against us, and leading us
captive in the chains of sin, grievously afflict and vex us.

The sixth means is after one temptation is past to prepare: our selves for
another.
if we would not be surprised and foiled by Satan, we must after we have
resisted him in one temptation, be ready prepared to withstand another, and
after we have once or twice given Satan the repulse, we are not securely to
give our selves to rest, as though the war were at an end: but we must
continually expect his return with fresh supplies, and prepare our selves for
a new assault, using the time of Satan's intermission, as a breathing time to
recover strength against the next encounter. And as soldiers besieged after
they have sustained one assault, and given their enemies the repulse, do not
securely give themselves to idleness and sleep, but prepare all things ready
for the next conflict, mending the breaches, and repairing those places which
in the time of fight they found to be most weak; so when we have withstood
some of Satan's temptations, and given him the repulse, we are not to give our
selves to rest, sleeping in retchlesse security, as though our enemies were
quite overcome, but rather in the intermission of the spiritual combat, we are
to prepare our selves for the next assault, using all means to confirm our
selves, where we discerned in the time of fight that we were most weak, and
more strongly to arm our felues with the shield of faith and the sword of the
spirit, against those temptations which we found most forcible to prevail
against us. 1. Pet. 5.8.
For our enemy like a roaring lion continually raungeth about seeking whom he
may devour; his malice will never let him rest, but even then when he seems
to entertain a truce, he is most busy in plotting means whereby he may
work our final destruction: and therefore we are never more carefully to
stand upon our guard, than when this enemy seems to proclaim a peace, or
when he flees away as though he were vanquished; for when he talks of peace,
he makes himself ready for the battle, and this wicked Parthian does more
hurt in flying than in fighting. Here therefore the Christian soldier must
avoid two dangerous evils: the one, that he do not faint or yield in the
time of the fight; the other, that he do not after one victory wax insolent
and secure: but when he has once overcome, he is so to behave himself as
though he were presently again to be assaulted. For, Satan's temptations like
the waves of the sea do follow one in the neck of the other, and when one is
past, another is ready to ouerwhelme us, if like skillful Pilots we be not
ready as well to break the violence of that which follows, as of that which
went before. Neither must we look for any sound truce or firm peace, till we
have the everlasting peace in Gods kingdom; for as long as we continue in this
life our spiritual enemies will continually assault us: and therefore let us
never be secure, until by death we have obtained a final victory.

Reasons to persuade us to persevere in fighting this spiritual battle.
And to the end that we may the rather be persuaded to continual care and
Christian perseverance in this spiritual fight unto the end of our lives; let
us consider that Gods promises and the crown of victory are not promised to
those that enter into this spiritual fight, but unto those that continue
fighting, till they have obtained a full victory over their enemies. To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, Apoc. 2.7.10.11.17.
and 3.5.21.
Reu. 2.7. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of
life. Verse. 10. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death.
Verse. 11. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Manna that is hid,
etc. Verse. 17. He that overcomes shall be clothed in white array, and I will
not put out his name out of the book of life. cap. 3.5. To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame and
sit with my father in his throne. As it is verse. 21. So that it is not
sufficient that we enter the lists and sustain the first and second encounter,
if afterward we shamefully forsake the standard of Christ and cowardly run
away, or else traitorously yield unto sin and Satan: but if we would be made
partakers of Gods promises, we must overcome, that is, obtain a full victory
over the flesh, the world, and the devil. There is none triumphs for making
his enemies once or twice to retire, or for getting the better in some
skirmish; because they may gather their dispersed forces, and join with them
new supplies, and so giving a fresh assault, obtain victory: but those only
triumph who obtain a full victory; neither shall any triumph in the kingdom
of glory, who resist Satan in one temptation only or bridle one lust of the
flesh, but they who subdue them finally and wholly not once alone, but unto the
end of their lives; for as it falls out in worldly wars, oftentime the
enemy does retire back, and counterfeiteth a flight, to the end the other may
pursue him securely and disorderly with full assurance of victory; and then he
makes a stand and reuniting all his forces does overcome his retchlesse enemy:
so oftentimes Satan faineth himself to be put to flight, to the end we may
conceive an opinion of his great weakness, and our own invincible strength,
and so be brought to negligence and security; and then he knits together all
his force, and overthrows us when we are retchlesly secure fearing no danger.
Yea sometimes he is in truth foiled, but yet not so as that he will surcease
his fight; for if he cannot prevail one way, he will try another, so long as
our continuance in this earthly weak tabernacle gives him any hope of
ouercomming or foyling us: and therefore we are always to stand upon our
guarde, and to keep our standing continually, watching and preparing our
selves against the fresh assaults of our spiritual enemies. If Job had been
secure after he had resisted Satan's first temptation, in taking away his oxen,
asses and sheep, surely those which followed would have made him blaspheme God
as Satan imagined, but like a good soldier after that he had received one
blow, he did not cast away his shield of faith and patience, as though he had
no further need of it, but still held it up expecting more, till the combat
was ended; whose example we must imitate, if we would obtain victory, and
enjoy the crown of victory everlasting happiness in Gods kingdom. Otherwise
if we sleep in security after we have given Satan one overthrow, we shall be
sure to be assaulted and surprised before we be aware; for as one says, Joan.
Riu. Atthend. de luct. Christ.
Diabolus victus quoque vincit, even whilst the devil is vanquished, he
obtains victory; and therefore non victor magis quam victus est
extimescendus. Nam saepo se prostratum afflictumque simulat, vt acrius
insurgat; fugit vt in insidias pertrahat and incautos adoriatur; palam cedit vt
clam vincat: he is no more to be feared when he overcomes, than when he is
overcome; for oftentimes he faineth himself to be foiled that he may the more
fearcely renew the assault, he flies that he may draw us into his ambushments,
and assail us at unawares; he retireth openly that he may secretly overcome.

The seventh means not to believe Satan's suggestions. Ioh. 8.44.
if we would not be circumuented by Satan, we must not give any credit unto
him whether he lies or speaks true, whether he accuses or flattereth,
whether he indeauoreth to puff us up with pride and self conceit, or whether
he laboreth by aggravating our sins to plunge us into the gulf of hellish
despair; for he abode not in the truth because there is no truth in him. When
he speaks a lie he speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the father
thereof, as it is, Ioh. 8.44. And if at any time he speak the truth, it is to
the end he may be the better credited when he lies, Nam verum dicit vt fallat,
blanditur vt noceat, bona promittit vt malum tribuat, vitam pollicetur vt
perimat, he speaks the truth that he may deceive, he flattereth that he may
hurt us, he promises good things that he may give us evil, he promises life
that he may kill us. And therefore we are not to believe the truth it self,
because he speaks it, but because it is grounded on Gods word; nor to receive
it from his mouth as his assertion, but from the mouth of God, and his holy
Prophets and Apostles, guided and inspired with his spirit; for either he
speaks the truth to gain credit unto his lies, or propounds true promises
that he may sophistically gather out of them false conclusions. And hence it is
that our Savior Christ did reject his testimony though true, and enjoined him
silence when he confessed him to be the holy one of God, Mark. 1.24.25. Mark.
1.24.25
And the Apostle Paul would not suffer the divining maid to give them her
approbation though she spoke truth, Act. 16.17.18.
in confessing them the servants of the most high God, which did show unto us
the way of salvation. Act. 16.17.18. because Satan did it, either to this end,
that by his testimony and approbation he might cause them the rather to be
suspected and reputed imposters and deceivers, who did their miracles by
telling this truth, be the rather credited when he did belly and slander them.

The eight means, neither to despise Satan's temptations, nor too deeply to
apprehend them.
if we would withstand al Satan's temptations, we must avoid two extremes,
the one to despise them, the other too deeply to apprehend and too greatly to
fear them. For if we securely contemn Satan's temptations, we will never arm
and prepare our selves to make resistance, and so he will overcome us before we
be aware; if we take them too much to heart continually meditating upon their
strength and violence, and upon our own infirmity and weakness, they will
fill us with fear, and plunge us into despair; if we despise the temptation,
Satan will easily subdue us: for there is no enemy so weak and feeble which
will not prevail against those who securely contemn them, though exceeding
mighty; because they neglect all means of their preservation, and never stand
upon their guard for their defense; and therefore much more will Satan
prevail against us, if we regard not his temptations, he being strong and
mighty, and we feeble and weak. On the other side if we so fear his
temptations as that we despair of victory, Satan shall not need to fight
against us, for we will overcome our selves, fainting before the fight, and
casting away our weapons as soon as Satan does but muster his forces and
march against us. And therefore let us so much fear the temptations, as that
we do not securely contemn them; and not so much fear them as that we should
despair of victory: let us fear them so much as that thereby we be stirred
up with more care and diligence to resist and overcome them; but not so much as
that we should cowardly faint, distrusting Gods help: let us fear them in
respect of our weakness and their violence, but let us boldly strive against
them, trusting in Gods almighty power and merciful promises of his aid and
assistance, being hereby assured of certain victory.

The ninth means, to object Christ against all temptations. Matthew. 9.13. Esa.
53.5.
if we would withstand Satan, we must object our Savior Christ against al his
temptations: for if we apply him unto us by a lively faith, he will be our
sheeld and buckler to defend us from all Satan's blows. For example, if Satan
tell us that we are miserable sinners, and therefore in the state of damnation:
we are to answer that our Savior Christ came into the world to save sinners,
and that he was wounded for our transgressions and broken for our iniquities
etc. and with his stripes we are healed, and so he which knew no sin, 2. Cor.
5.21.
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. If
he say that we are subject to the curse of the law; Galat. 3.13.
we are to answer that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law when
he was made a curse for us. If he object that we are subject to Gods wrath, we
are to tell him that Christ did bear his fathers displeasure, that he might
make our peace: Col. 1.21.22.
and whereas we were strangers and enemies, because our minds were set on evil
works, he has now reconciled us in the body of his flesh through death. If he
tell us that we are his bondslaues, we are to answer, that we were so indeed
in time past, but our Savior christ has paid unto his father the price of
our redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and has set us free. If he affirm that we are unjust and therefore shall be
condemned before Gods judgment seat; we are to answer that Christ who was
innocent was condemned, that we who are guilty might be acquitted; that though
we are wicked in our selves, yet we are most just being clothed with his
righteousness; that he that came to save us shall come to judge us, and
therefore we need not doubt of mercy, if we plead his merits forsaking the
plea of our own righteousness and renouncing all self confidence. If he say
that we shall be held captive of death and never rise to take possession of our
heavenly inheritance, we are to answer that our Savior Christ has broken the
bonds of death and led captivity captive; that he is risen again, being the
first fruits of them that slept, Ioh. 14.2.
and is ascended into heaven, to prepare us a place there. If he object that
Christ and all his benefits do not appertain unto us, for every man shall
live by his own righteousness, Ezech. 18.
and the soul that sins shall die the death; we are to answer that by the
spirit of God and a lively faith, Christ is become our head and we his members,
so that he is ours and we his, and our sins he has taken upon him, and
bestowed on us his righteousness, he is become our husband and we his spouse,
and therefore as he has communicated himself unto us, so likewise al his
benefits, his merits, righteousness, sanctification, and everlasting happiness.

That to avoid Satan's importunity, we must leave to dispute with him and
send him to our advocate. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
but also our advocate to plead our cause and to answer all suites made
against us both by Gods justice and the handwriting of the law, and also by
Satan and all his adherents. as it is, 1. Ioh. 2.1. Seeing therefore our
Savior Christ who is the wisdom of his father has taken upon him the
defense of our cause in all our suites, let not us our selves be over busy in
disputing with this wrangling sophister, but send him for an answer to our
Savior Christ who has fully satisfied his fathers justice, in all, which it
had against us, and cancelled the handwriting of the law, whereby we were
obliged and bound, and therefore much more able is he to answer al accusations
which this cauelling accuser has against us. Neither are we to doubt but that
our Savior will be our advocate to plead our cause, especially considering
that it does principally concern himself, and his own glory and
sufficiency. For the questions and causes controuersall between us and
Satan, are not about our own worthiness, merits, righteousness, and
satissactions, all which we renounce and cast away from us as polluted cloutes,
in respect of being any causes of our justification and salvation: but
concerning Christ's righteousness, merit, and the sufficiency and efficacy of
his death and obedience, for the salvation of al repentant sinners which do
apply them unto themselves by a lively faith: and therefore we may assure our
selves he will defend his own cause against all Satan's objections and
imputations.

If we will avoid Satan's importunity, we must employ our selves in holy
exercises.
and will admit of no answer, we are as much as in us lies to banish his
temptations out of our minds, and not to think and meditate on them: and to
this end we are continually to exercise our selves in fervent prayer, desiring
the Lords gracious assistance whereby we may be enabled to withstand all the
assaults of our enemy, as also to hear read and meditate in Gods word, and
diligently to use holy conferences with our christian brethren, and painfully
to employ our selves in the works of our callings, that so we may have no
leisure to entertain Satan's temptations. For as a vessel which is already
full can receive no more, and whatsoever is powered thereinto spilleth upon the
ground: so when our minds are replenished with holy thoughts, and occupied in
godly and honest exercises, there is no room left for Satan's suggestions and
therefore as soon as they offer to enter, we presently reject them. Whereas on
the other side if we spend our times in idleness, and do not diligently
exercise our selves in the duties of christianity, and of our several
callings; then are our minds fit grounds to receive the seeds of Satan's
temptations, and to nourish them till they bring forth the fruits of sin:
and if Satan find us like empty houses clean swept and void of all holy
meditations and godly exercises, he will easily enter, and if himself be not
strong enough he will take unto him seven other spirits worse than himself,
Matthew. 12.45.
that so he may be more strong to keep possession. If therefore we would not
be overcome by Satan's temptations, let us beware of idleness; for when the
mind is empty of that which is good, it is most fit to receive that which is
evil.

But if Satan's temptations be at any time entertained into our minds, let us
most carefully take heed that we do not suffer them (as it were) to take up
their lodging, That we must not reuolue in our minds Satan's temptations, but
rather meditate on the contrary preservatives.
by reuoluing them in our thoughts, not to meditate too earnestly on them, but
rather on the preservatives which may strengthen us against their violence;
neither are we so seriously to think on Satan's objections, as that in the
mean time we forget how to answer them. For example, when he sets before
our eyes the haynousnesse of our sins, we are not to bend all our thoughts to
meditate and call to mind all our sins both new and old, both which we have
fallen into through infirmity, and which we have willingly committed, for so
the huge cloud of our sins being near our eyes, will hide from our sight
the shyning beams of Gods mercy and Christ's merit, though they are without
comparison greater: but as soon as we cast one eye upon our sins for our
humiliation, let us cast the other presently upon Christ Jesus who has paid
the price of our redemption, and suffered all the punishment which we by our
sins had deserved. For if when this fiery serpent Satan has stung us with
the sting of sin, we spend our time in looking upon the wound, and never
think upon the remedy, even the true brazen serpent Jesus Christ hanging on
the cross: the poison of sin will so inflame our consciences, that the wound
will prove mortal, which at the first might easily have been cured if we would
have applied thereunto the precious balm of our Saviors blood. So when Satan
sets before our eyes our own wickedness and infirmities, to the end we may
despair of victory, as being never able to withstand such strong temptations,
we are not to spend our time in thinking hereupon, but presently to call to
mind the almighty power of God who has promised us his assistance in this
spiritual fight. So when he obiecteth unto us the justice and wrath of God, in
punishning of sin, and the curse of the law and torments of hell prepared for
the damned; we are not over seriously to reuolue these things in our minds;
but presently to call to mind Gods infinite mercy and Christ's merits, whereby
Gods justice is fully satisfied, his wrath appeased, the curse of the law
cancelled, and we made of fire brands of hell heirs of heaven. And thus if as
soon as Satan inflicteth the wound we apply the cure, it will never be
mortal unto us; but if we let the poison of his temptations run in our
minds and never think of any remedy, though at the first it seemed but a
small scratch, it will so inflame our consciences with scorching heat that
they will afterward very hardly admit of any cure. When therefore Satan does
cast into our minds his temptations, let us repel them, and endeavor to
quench them whilst they be but small sparks: for our corrupt minds are like
unto tinder, and Satan's temptations like the fire, and therefore if in stead
of putting them out we blow upon them, though they be but as a small spark at
the first, within a while they will increase to an unquenchable flame which
will torment our consciences with scorching heat: neither is there any thing
but the blood of Christ, and the water of the spirit which will extinguish this
wildefire when once it has taken deep hold on us.

CHAP. XXIII. How the christian being foiled by Satan's temptations may be
raised again.


Now the means whereby being fallen he may rise again, is by unfeigned
repentance, when as he is heartily sorry for his sin, because thereby he has
displeased his loving and gracious father, and steadfastly purposes for the
time to come to leave and forsake those sins, into which by the malice of
Satan and his own infirmity he is fallen; and by a lively faith, when as he
does apply unto himself all the merciful promises made unto all repentant
sinners. For though faith in nature go before repentance, yet the act and
fruit of faith, whereby we are assured of Gods mercy in the free forgiveness of
our sins, always comes after.

A difference between the child of God and the wicked.
Where by the way we may note a difference between the state of Gods children
and the wicked: both fall into sin very often, both also commit heinous and
grievous sins; yea sometimes the child of God falls into more fearful and
horrible sins, than a mere worldling; but herein the chief difference
between them consists, that the child of God after his fall is vexed and
grieved, and laboreth to rise again by leaving and forsaking the sin which
is odious unto him; but the wicked man after his fall never soroweth nor
grieueth, but rather resolves to live still in his sin, and to commit it
again and again with greedines and delight when he has any occasion offered.

The complaint of the weak christian.
alas this is small comfort unto me which you speak, neither can I hereby have
any assurance that I am the child of God; for after I am fallen into sin,
such is the hardness of my heart that I cannot bewail nor be sorry for it; and
whereas every small worldly loss or cross makes me mourn, weep and wail,
when by my sin I have offended God, I cannot shed a tear nor show any true
sign of hearty sorrow; and such is mine untowardness and corruption that in
stead of forsaking my sin, I am ready to fall again upon the next occasion.
And therefore I cannot have any faith or full assurance of Gods promises made
in Christ, seeing they are all limited and restrained to those sinners which
repent and amend.

That the desire of Gods graces is accepted for the graces which we desire.
That therefore these mourning souls may receive some comfort, let them know
first, that if they have an earnest desire of repentance, faith, and the rest
of Gods graces; if they have a good purpose to leave and forsake their sins,
and to spend their lives in the service and worship of God: if they are
displeased with their corruptions, and according to the measure of grace given,
pray unto God, desiring the assistance of his holy spirit, whereby they may
more and more mortify the old man, and crucify the flesh, and the lusts
thereof: if they hate the sin they commit, and love the good which they
cannot do: if they can grieve because they are no more grieved for their
sins, and be displeased with themselves, because their sins do no more
displease them: then may they be assured that they are Gods children, who are
acceptable unto him in Jesus Christ. For he respects not so much our actions
as our affections; nor our works, as our desires and endeavors: so that he who
desires to be righteous is righteous; he that would repent, does repent; he
that strives to leave and forsake his sins, he rep^teth of him, as if he
had left and forsaken them; they that would never fall, nor be foiled by their
spiritual enemies, God esteems as his invincible soldiers, and valiant
worthies, who were never vanquished. For the Lord accepts the desire for the
deed; and if there be first a willing mind, 2. Cor. 8.12.
it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that a man
has not, as it is. 2. Cor. 8.12. So he is accounted blessed, not who has
attained unto perfect inherent righteousness indeed, Matthew. 5.6.
but he who hungreth after righteousness, Matthew. 5.6. that is, who has a
sense and feeling of his wants and imperfections, and withal an earnest desire
to have his wants supplied.

The conditions required unto that desire which is acceptable.
that every flickering and unconstant desire, proceeding from sudden passion,
and some extraordinary occasion, is pleasing unto God; for so every worldling
might imagine himself to be in the state of grace: but unto this desire I
speak of, there are diverse things required. As first, that this desire be
joined with an holy endeavor, and earnest striving and laboring in the use of
the means, whereby we may attain unto those graces which we do desire: for
it is not sufficient that we wish for faith, repentance, and other graces,
unless we endeavor to attain unto them, and to this end carefully use all
good means ordained of God for the obtaining our desires.

Secondly, this desire must not be sudden like a flash of lightening,
vanishing away as soon as it enters into us, but we must constantly persevere
in it, till it be satisfied.

Thirdly, it must not be a slight, and indifferent desire, as though we would
have these graces, if we could easily attain unto them, otherwise we do not
greatly care whether we have them or no: but it must be very earnest, at
least sometime, though not always: So as we may say with David: My soul
longs after thee, O Lord, as the thirsty land. Psalm. 63.1. And, As the Heart
brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O God: as it
is Psalm. 42.1.

Fourthly, this desire is true, and pleasing unto God, when as it proceeds
from a sense of our own want and penury, in regard whereof we are truly
humbled. And hereof it is compared to hungering and thirsting; in which two
things concur, first, a sense of want which afficteth us, and, a desire to
have it supplied.

Fifthly, it is not sufficient that we have a continual and earnest desire of
our salvation, unless we desire as earnestly the subordinate causes and
means tending thereunto; namely, vocation, justification, sanctification,
faith, repentance, and the rest of the graces of Gods spirit: for even Balaam
himself did wish that he might die the death of the righteous, but his desire
was not acceptable to God, because he wished not also to live their life: he
desired to die like them, that he might be saved; but he desired not to serve
the Lord in holiness and newness of life, whereby he might have been assured
of salvation.

If therefore we would have our desires acceptable to God, they must be joined
with an holy endeavor to obtain those spiritual graces which we do desire,
they must be constant, earnest, and proceed from a true sense and feeling of
our own want, and be referred as well to the means, as to the end, and then
the desire of grace is the grace it self; the desire of faith is faith; the
desire of repentance is repentance; not in it own nature, but in Gods
acceptance, who accepts the will for the deed.

The Christians perfection consists in desiring and laboring after
perfection.
when as we feel our imperfections, and labor earnestly after more
perfection: for, Christiani sumus potius affectu quam effectu: We are
Christians rather in our affections and desires, than in our works and
abilities: neither does the Lord bestow upon his children the full measure of
his spirit and the graces thereof in this life, but only the first fruits,
which are as it were but an handful of corn in respect of the whole field;
and the earnest to assure us of the rest, which is but as a penny in respect of
many thousands, which are confirmed unto us thereby, Romans 8.23.2. Cor. 1.22.
and 5.5.
as the Apostle speaks Romans 8.23.2. Cor. 1.22. and 5.5.

True it is indeed that God bestows his spirit and the graces thereof upon
some of his children in greater measure, and upon some in less, even as the
first fruits may be a greater or lesser handful, and the earnest is sometimes
a penny, and sometimes a shilling, sometimes more and sometimes less; but yet
the greatest measure which any receive, is but as an handful of the first
fruits, and an earnest penny in respect of the maine sum and full measure,
which the Lord has hereby assured us that he will bestow upon us in his
kingdom: and he that has received the least earnest, has as full and perfect
assurance of the whole bargain, which God has couenanted to make good unto
us, as he who has received the greatest, according to the nature of an
earnest, to which the measure of grace here received is compared.

But wherein does this measure of grace and chief perfection of a Christian
consist in this life? Surely, not in their works, for they are all imperfect,
and so full of corruptions that they are odious in Gods sight, being considered
in themselves, and examined by the rule of his exact justice; neither in their
inherent righteousness, and begun sanctification, for when they are at the
holiest they are polluted with the relics of original corruption, which
bring forth the fruits of actual transgressions, and make us unable to do
the good we would, in that manner and measure which we should, and therefore
those which are most righteous are not in this respect acceptable to God: but
herein the perfection of a christian consists, when as seeing his
imperfections, wants and sins, he is grieved and truly humbled with the sight
and sense of his own misery and wretchedness, and disclaiming and rejecting
his own righteousness and good works, does flee unto our Savior Christ,
hungring after his righteousness, and by a lively faith applying unto his
wounded soul his merit and obedience, does look for salvation in him alone;
and lastly, when as in obedience to his commandment, and in true thankfulness
for his infinite mercies he has an earnest desire to glorify his name, by a
godly and Christian life, striving and endeavoring continually to forsake his
sins, to mortify his corruption, and to attain unto more and more
perfection in righteousness and holiness. For, Maxima pars Christianismi est toto
pectore velle fieri Christianum; It is the greatest part of Christianity to
desire with the whole heart to become a Christian.

Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.11. Nehem. 1.12.
O Lord I beseech thee let thine ear now hearken to the prayer of thy servant,
and to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear thy name, the Lord will
hear us indeed and grant our requests. If with the Prophet David we have but
a respect to Gods commandments, with a care to fulfill them, we shall not be
confounded, Psalm. 119.6.
as it is Psalm. 119.6. If we but desire to obey Gods commandment, the Lord
will accomplish our desire, and quicken us in his righteousness, 40.
though we be dull, yea dead unto all goodness, as it is verse. 40. Romans 7.
If with the Apostle Paul we do the evil which we would not, and consent to
the law that it is good, delighting therein in the inner man; then though we
are with him led captive unto sin, yet it is not we that offend, but sin
that dwells in us, that is, our old man, our corrupt and unregenerate part,
That neither the name, nor actions of the flesh, can properly be ascribed to
the spiritual man.
which cannot fitly be called by our name, because it is mortified already in
some measure, and shall be fully abolished by the spirit of God; neither does
it live the same spiritual life with us, seeing it is not quickened by the
same spirit: and therefore as those who have diverse souls, which give unto
them life and motion, are themselves diverse and also called by diverse names; so
the new and old man living as it were by diverse souls, the one being quickened
with Gods spirit, the other by Satan (whereof it comes to pass, that the
more the one lives the other dies, the more strong the spirit is, the weaker
is the flesh; and the actions of both are quite contrary) therefore they may
fitly be called by diverse names: neither can the actions of the flesh be
ascribed to the spirit properly, seeing they are contrary the one to the
other. For as if a science of a crab tree, and another of a pepin tree being
grafted into the same stock do both bring forth their several fruits, the
one crabs, the other pepins, it may fitly be said this tree brings forth
either pepins or crabs, because they grow in the same stock; but yet it cannot
be truly said that the crab tree science brings forth pepins, or the pepin
science crabs: so because the flesh and the spirit are joined together in the
same body and soul, we may in this respect say that this man sins, or does
that which is good; but yet when we speak of the regenerate or carnal man
properly and severally, as we cannot truly say that the flesh does any good, so
neither can we truly affirm that the spirit and regenerate man does commit
that which is evil, but (as ye Apostle speaks) sin which dwells with him.
And though the flesh be the far greater part, yet does it not denominate and
give the name to the christian and his actions, because it is partly mortified,
partly in mortifying, and partly to be mortified, that is, deputed and
destinated to death and destruction; and also because it is the worse and more
unworthy part without compare, and consequently not to give the name: for as
wine mixed with water is called still wine, though the water exceed the wine in
quantity, because it is the more excellent substance; so the flesh being mixed
with the spirit, though it be in greater quantity, it does not give the name
to us and our actions, but the spirit, as being our most excellent and worthy
part; and of it we are called spiritual, regenerate and new men, though the
least part be spiritual, regenerate and renewed.

If therefore we are regenerate, and have in us the spirit of God, and the
graces thereof in the least measure, we may boldly say with Paul, that it is
no more we yt do offend God, but sin that dwells in us, neither shall we
receive punishment but the flesh, that is, our unregenerate and corrupt part,
which shall be mortified and fully abolished by the spirit of God; as for the
spiritual and regenerate part, it shall daily be more and more strengthened
and confirmed in the spiritual life, and the more punishments, afflictions and
torments the flesh has inflicted on it, the more shall the spiritual man grow
up in grace and goodness, till our corruption being by little and little
mortified, and in the end fully abolished by death, we shall be perfect men in
Christ, living a spiritual and everlasting life in all glory and happiness in
his kingdom. When therefore the Lord suffers Satan to afflict us in our
goods, bodies, and in our souls and consciences as he did Job, it is not
because he has forsaken us and given over his whole interest he has in us
to this wicked spirit, but, as the Apostle speaks in another matter, he
delivers us unto Satan (to be afflicted) for the destruction of the flesh,
1. Cor. 5.5.
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 5.5.

Though our spiritual growth be show, yet it is certain.
and the Lord may for a time let our corruptions bear great sway in us, to the
end he may hereby truly humble us with the sight of our infirmities, and take
away from us all selfe-confidence, presumption and cause of boasting, and cause
us wholly to rely upon his mercy and Christ's merits: but though it go on
slowly, yet it shall go surely, because it is not begun and continued by our
selves, for we cannot so much as think a good thought; but all our
sufficiency is of God, as it is 2. Cor. 3.5. 2. Cor. 3.5.
neither can we so much as will and desire that which is acceptable in Gods
sight, for it is he that works in us the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13.
even of his good pleasure, as it is Phil. 2.13. And therefore these holy
desires, which are the beginnings and first fruits of regeneration, being the
work of Gods spirit; he will finish and perfect that which he has begun, till
at last we be fully freed from our corruption, and endued with unspotted
holiness and sanctification. Phil. 1.6.
According to that Phil. 1.6. I am persuaded of this same thing, that he who
has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. For as with the Lord himself there is neither change nor shadow of
change, Iam. 1.17. Mal. 3.6. Romans 11.29.
Iam. 1.17. Mal. 3.6. so also are his gifts and calling without repentance: as
it is Romans 11.29.

If we earnestly desire perfection, the Lord will perfect us, and in the mean
time pardon our imperfections.
and to attain unto true sanctification, this desire is Gods work, which he
will finish and accomplish, according to that Psalm. 145 19. He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him. For if the Lord do even press upon us whilst
we do not desire his company; if he stand waiting and knocking at the door
of our hearts, calling and crying unto us that we will open and give him
entrance: when his holy spirit has inflamed us with true love of him, and
opened our hearts with an earnest desire to have him enter, will he now think
you go away and refuse to come in when we inuit him? Nay assuredly, for he
has promised the contrary, Revel. 3.20. Behold (says he) I stand at the
door and knock: if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in
unto him and sup with him, and he with me; that is, I will make him a rich
banquet of my heavenly graces, and give him to drink the water of life, of
which whosoever drinks shall never be more a thirst, but it shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life, as our Savior speaks Ioh.
4.14. So our Savior Christ calls such as thirst unto him, Ioh. 7.38. Reu.
21.6.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: And, I will give to him that
is a thirst of the well of the water of life freely. If therefore we have a
thirsting desire after Gods spirit and the graces thereof, we shall in Gods
good time be satisfied, and filled with the full measure of them. And in the
mean time though our infirmities be never so great and manifold, yet in Christ
God will be well pleased with us, when as our corruptions do displease our
selves, so that we earnestly desire to be freed from them, and to serve the
Lord in righteousness and holiness of life. For the Lord esteems more of our
will than of our deeds, and of our holy endeavor, than of our best works,
because this is the service and sacrifice of our hearts, wherewith above all
other things he is most delighted: and therefore, Da cordi Deo and sufficit,
Pro. 23.26.
Give thy heart to God and it suffices, Prou. 23.26.

For the Lord is our most gracious father, whose love far exceeds the love
even of tender mothers, Esa. 49.15. Esa. 49 15. and 66.13.
Look therefore what affection the tender father or mother bears and shows
toward their child: and such, nay infinite more will the Lord show toward us,
as himself professes Mal. 3.17. And I will spare them, Mal. 3.17.
as a man spares his own son that serves him. Now we know that if a child
endeavor to to his duty, and strive to do his best, though through want of
power or skill he is not able to do as he would, those things which his
father enjoined him; there is no loving father but will wink at his
imperfections, and accept his will; commending his obedience and dutiful
endeavor, though the work in it self deserve no commendations: how much more
therefore will our heavenly father, whose love is infinite and without all
compare, be well pleased with us in the midst of our infirmities, if we have a
desire and care to serve him?

The Lord is our shepherd, Psalm. 23.1. Ioh. 10.
and we his flock and the sheep of his pasture; as it is Psalm. 23.1. and Ioh.
10. Now if a sheep be entangled in the briars, so as he cannot follow the
shepherd, though he hear his voice calling unto him, yet if he struggle and
strive to come out to the uttermost of his power, and bleat for the shepherds
help, when he cannot help himself, hereby it appears that he is one of his
flock, which the good shepherd will not suffer to be lost; whereas indeed if
he want not power alone, but will also to be freed and to follow after, it is
clear that he belongs to another sheepfold: so if when we are entangled in
the briars of our corruptions, and so hindered with our imperfections, that we
cannot follow the great shepherd of our souls Jesus Christ in the path of
righteousness, which leads to the sheepfold of everlasting happiness, though
we hear his voice calling unto us; yet if with the silly sheep we struggle
and strive to be freed from the snares of sin, and when we cannot free our
selves by our power, do as it were bleate, and after our sheepish manner
implore the help of our careful shepherd; crying out with the Apostle Paul,
(that blessed sheep of Christ) Wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death, as it is Romans 7.24. then
will our loving shepherd Jesus Christ in his good time come and loose us, and
if with struggling in the briars of sin we are so disabled that we cannot go,
he will take us like the straied sheep upon his shoulders, and carry us by
the ways of righteousness into his sheepfold of everlasting happiness.
Neither can it possibly be that our heavenly shepherd, who of purpose came
into the world to seek us whilst we were lost, and spent three and thirty
years in following and finding us, who were wandering and straied sheep,
crying and calling unto us even till he became hoarce with loud cries, and
passing through the thornie ways of troubles and persecution, till he had shed
his precious blood, and finally laid down his life for our sakes; should now
turn away his eyes and stop his ears when his sheep desire to follow him,
and earnestly implore his help, finding their own weakness and inability to
come so swiftly to him as they should.

The Lord is our Savior and Redeemer, who has not spared his own precious
blood, but has given it to his father as the price of our redemption, that we
might be delivered out of the captivity of the devil, in which we were
detained, as it is 1. Tim. 2.6. 1. Tim. 2.6.
If therefore we have a sense of our captivity, and a desire to be set at
liberty, being weary of our misery, and unwilling to stay any longer in this
cruel bondage; our Savior Christ will redeem us, for to this end he came
into the world, Luke 4.18.
as appears Luke 4.18. And though like unto poor captives who (having long
time been clogged with heavy bolts, and galled with strong chains) have their
lims so benumbed and sore, that they cannot go after they are freed out of
prison; so we after we have long been detained in Satan's captivity, fettred
with chains of sin, and clogged with the heavy bolts of our corruptions, be
so galled and benumbed, that we cannot swiftly follow Christ our Redeemer in
the ways of righteousness unto his kingdom of glory, but halt and stumble
every step through our infirmity and weakness; yet if we have an earnest desire
of coming after him, then surely he that has given this inestimable price for
our redemption, will not now leave us in the hands of his and our enemies; but
will feed us with the food of his word and Sacraments, and strengthen and
support us with his holy spirit, inabling us with the graces thereof to follow
his steps, till having obtained full liberty we arrive at his kingdom of
everlasting glory.

That these are Christ's soldiers who have a desire of ouercomming their
spiritual enemies.
that I may fit the similitude to the spiritual conflict whereof we speak. If
we have an earnest desire of ouercomming our spiritual enemies, and
withstanding their temptations, whereby they labor to draw us to sin: we
may be assured we are Christ's soldiers, how weakly soever we fight when we
come to the encounter. For though a soldier through sickness be so infeebled
that he cannot weld his weapon against the enemy: yet if he march forward,
and show a courageous heart and earnest desire to overcome, it will hereby
plainly appear that he is faithful to his Captain, and therefore he shall
receive his pay, though at the first onset his lims should faint under him. And
so if through sin we have our spiritual man so weakened, that he is ready to
faint at the first encounter with our spiritual enemies, yet if we march under
Christ's standerd, and fight the battles of the Lord of hoasts, having an
earnest desire even above our strength to overcome our enemies, surely Christ
our grand Captain will acknowledge us for his soldiers, and will give us our
pay, even a crown of victory: and seeing his power is omnipotent and his love
incomprehensible, we may make sure account that if in the fight we receive a
foil, he will stand over us to defend us with the shield of his providence
and raise us up again; yea if we be taken prisoners and led away captive by
sin and Satan, he will rescue and deliver us. There is no discredit
accreweth to a soldier by receiving wounds, or by being by irresistable
violence taken prisoner; nay rather it argues his valor, and shows that the
invincible courage of his mind does far surpass the weak force of his
body; but rather hereby is a soldier disgraced, if either he dare not march
into the field, or being entered the battle does shamefully flee away, or
cowardly yield unto the enemy: so in this spiritual warfare it is no
dishonor to receive foiles and wounds of our spiritual enemies, for the most
valiant soldiers that ever fought the Lords battles, have sustained the
like: nay if in the fight they be taken prisoners, yet so they resist to the
uttermost of their power, and show an earnest desire to be out of the
captivity of sin and Satan, this is acceptable to their captain Christ,
and he will in pity and compassion restore them to liberty. But if rather
than they would endure the danger of the fight, they profess themselves
friends to sin and Satan; or if having professed themselves Christ's
soldiers, they at the first encounter of their spiritual enemies tempting
them to any sin, do forsake Christ's standerd shamefully, or cowardly yield
to sin and Satan, voluntarily living in their slavery without desire of
liberty: then either they show themselves notable cowards, worthy to be
cassered out of Gods camp: or traitorous rebels, who though outwardly they
made a profession that they were Christ's soldiers, yet in heart they desired
to serve Satan.



And that their manifold foyles and griesly wounds which they receive of sin
and Satan may not discourage them; let them consider that never any entered the
battle (our chief captain Christ excepted) but they have been subject to
the like. That Gods most valiant souldiars have received soyles.
Adam who was the strongest champion in his own strength that ever entered the
lists, was overthrown at the first encounter, and taken captive of sin: in
which bondage he should ever have remained, had not Christ redeemed him. Noah
was overcome with drunkenness; and Lot added thereunto incest. David a notable
soldier in fighting the Lords battles, was made a slave to his own lusts.
Peter a stout champion, ran away and forsook his master. In a word there
was never any that lived, who have not been foiled by Satan, and wounded with
sin. One perhaps receives more and deeper wounds, or is longer held captive
in the chains of sin than another; but none have escaped altogether. And
those who have received the most grievous hurts, so they have an earnest desire
to have those wounds healed which sin has made in their consciences, to the
end they may be enabled to renew the fight against their spiritual enemies;
may assure themselves that Christ the good Samaritane and their most careful
captain, will power the oil of his grace and mercy, and the precious balm
of his blood into their wounds, which will as easily cure them, though they be
many and greisly, as if they were but few, and (as it were) but small scratches.

That Satan prevails against us not by his absolute power, but by Gods
permission.
In the second place we are to consider that Satan foyleth us and causes us
to fall into sin, not at his pleasure nor by his own absolute power, but
because the Lord has said, thou shall thus prevail, for the further
manifestation of my glory: for therefore the Lord does leave his children
sometimes to themselves, so that being assaulted by Satan they fall into
sin, and bewray their infirmities and corruption; to the end he may show
hereby and declare the riches of his power, mercy, and goodness, which
otherwise would not so manifestly appear. And this the Apostle plainly
shows, 2. Cor. 12.8.9.
2. Cor. 12.8.9.10. where he says that he besought the Lord thrice that he
might be delivered from the prick in the flesh and the messenger of Satan,
which did buffet him: but the Lord returned him this answer, my grace is
sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through weakness; after
which answer received, the Apostle quieteth himself, notwithstanding his
infirmities, nay glories in them, rather than in his revelations, as he
professes saying, Very gladly therefore will I rejoice rather in mine
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me.

That the Lord suffers us to fall for the manifestation of of his own power,
mercy and goodness, and for our humiliation.
Though then our infirmities be great and our falls many, yet are we not to be
altogether discouraged thereby, seeing it is the will of God that we should
thus bewray our infirmities and corruptions, to the end his power mercy and
goodness, may be made the more manifest, and that both unto our selves, and
unto others. For such is our spiritual blindness and secret pride, that if we
should always alike withstand the temptations of Satan, without receiving any
foil, and never fall into any sin, we would be ready to think that we
stood by our own strength, and so ascribe the praise of victory to our
selves, thereby robbing God of the honor due unto him: and also for the time
to come, we would rely upon our selves rather than on the Lords assistance;
than the which nothing could be more dishonorable unto God, nor pernicious
unto our own souls. But when as in the spiritual combat of temptations, we
sometimes stand and sometimes fall, sometimes resist those assaults which are
strong and violent, and another time faint and yield in the lightest trials:
this makes it apparent that it is not our own power, which in it self is not
much unlike at all times; but the power of God, which sustaineth us sometimes,
that we may not be wholly discouraged; and sometimes withdraws it self, that
we may by receiving foyles learn to know our infirmities, and wholly to rely
our selves on the Lords assistance, returning all the praise of victory to the
Lord, who only has sustained us. As therefore our infirmities in respect of
our selves, should serve to abate our pride, and to work in us true
humiliation and utter despare in our own strength: so in respect that they
show unto us the Lords power supporting us, they should the rather encourage us
to fight the spiritual combat, with assured hope of victory, seeing it is
manifest that we stand not by our own power, which like a broken staff or
cracked weapon would fail us when we did most trust and rely upon it, but by
the almighty power of God, against which neither Satan nor the gates of hell
can any jot prevail. And in this regard we may well rejoice in our
infirmities with the Apostle Paul, because by reason of them it more manifestly
appears that the power of Christ dwells in us, which is able to defend us
from Satan's malice and violent rage, not only when we stand manfully in the
encounter, but also when we are foiled and put to the worst.

Gods power most clearly appears in our weakness.
the more is the praise of Gods glorious might manifested and magnified; for
when Satan, who is so malicious puissant and pollitike an enemy, has long
time assaulted a seely weak man or owman, and yet cannot wholly prevail, but
returns away foiled and overcome; it must needs be confessed that they are
assisted and strengthened by some superior power which far excels Satan
in strength and policy: whereas it seems no such wonder when as the strong
christian, who has obtained a great measure of knowledge, faith, and other
graces, gives Satan the repulse; neither are men so ready to ascribe the
praise of victory to the Lord, because his immediate power and helping hand
does not so manifestly appear; although in truth their victory also comes
wholly from him, for without his gifts and graces, they were as feeble and
unable to stand as the weakest; but yet the weaker and smaller the means are,
the more manifest is the Lords power and wisdom, who hereby does accomplish
things which are above the power of men and Angels. For example; the power and
goodness of God appears great, when as he provides for us food convenient,
and gives strength thereto to nourish and sustain us; and yet it is more
manifest, when as he so strentheneth us by virtue of one meal that we need no
more in forty days, as he did Elias; but then it shines as it were in his
full strength, when as he sustaineth us without any food at all, as he did
Moses and our Savior Christ. So it is made manifest when as he gives us
victory over our enemies, though there be some equality in the numbers, and
other preparations, Psalm. 144.1.
for it is he that teaches our hands to war and our fingers to fight: but it
is more evident when as our number is small, as when he delivered the
Israelites by Gedeon and his three hundred men, from an innumerable army; and
overcame the whole host of the Philistimes, by the weak means of Jonathan and
his armor-bearer: but then it is most clear and manifest, when as he
ourcommeth our enemies by his own immediate power, as he did the Egyptians in
the red sea, and the host of Senacherib at the siege of Jerusalem. And so when
he gives the strong christian who is full of grace, victory over Satan, his
power appears; for unless he were strengthened with his graces, he could not
stand: but when one who seems in his own eyes destitute of grace, and full
of sin and corruption (so, that he plainly sees that he is altogether
unable to withstand the least assault) is notwithstanding so supported by Gods
almighty hand, and immediate power, that he does not only stand in the
battle, but in the end obtains victory; hereby the power and goodness of
God most clearly appears to themselves and all the world. Seeing then our
sins and falls do show unto us our own infirmities and weakness, and these
do declare Gods irresistable power and might, which notwithstanding our
feebleness does uphold us: therefore let us so despair in our selves, as that
thereby we may be moved to rely wholly upon the Lord, having so much more hope
of victory, as the strength of God excels the strength of man; let us be so
humbled with a true sense, and sorrow for our own infirmities and corruption,
as that in the mean time we may receive more sound consolation and true joy,
because we stand not by our own strength, which every hour would fail us,
but by the power of Gods might: and therefore though Satan and all the power
of hell conspire and band themselves against us, yet shall they not prevail;
and though they foil us, yet shall they never finally overcome; for he that is
with us is stronger than all they who are against us; and the greater our
weakness is, the fitter occasion shall the Lord have of showing his omnipotent
power in giving us victory.

Horror, fear and despair, following our falls, argue our diffidence in God,
and selfe-confidence.
But if having bewrayed thine infirmities, and gotten a foil in the spiritual
conflict, thou presently be discouraged and despair of victory, surely it is
a manifest sign that thou did trust too little in Gods assistance, and too
much in thine own strength, which because it has failed, thou have cast away
all hope: and the greater thy horror and despair is which follows thy fall,
the greater was thy selfe-confidence, and the less thy affiance in God. For he
that altogether relieth upon the Lords assistance, and wholly distrusteth his
own strength, when he falls in the time of temptation, is not much
astonished with any great wonder, knowing that through his own infirmity and
weakness, he is most apt to fall when God leaves him to himself; neither is
he utterly discouraged and overwhelmed with despair, as though now there were
no means to stand in the spiritual combat, and to obtain victory; but
hating and with a peaceable and quiet sorrow mourning for his sin, because
thereby he has dishonored his God, and offended his divine majesty, he does
not abate his hope; but with less confidence in himself and more confidence
in God, he renewes the fight against his spiritual enemies, with undaunted
courage; knowing that the Lord in whom he trusts and wholly relieth will never
fail him. And therefore let us no more rest in our selves, if ever we would
enjoy the peace of conscience, or would have any assurance of the Lords
assistance; for he will be all in all, neither can he abide any sharing in the
glory of the victory: and therefore so long as we trust in our own strength,
and fight with our own forces, he will withdraw his help, till our often
falls and foyles have taught us to know our own infirmities and corruptions,
that so despairing wholly in our own strength, we may peaceably rest wholly upon
his almighty power, and promised assistance.

The last consolation, taken from the experience which we have had of the Lords
assistance.
let those who are truly humbled in regarded of those foyles which they
receive in the spiritual conflict, comfort themselves by the experience of
Gods love, care, and goodness, both in others and in themselves; for how many
have been cast down as well as they, and yet have in the end been raised up?
how many have sorrowed and mourned, that now rejoice and have received comfort?
how many have taken notable foyles and grievous falls in the spiritual
conflict, and yet in the end have obtained victory? In a word, who has
depended upon the Lord, and has been rejected? who has been truly humbled,
and has not been comforted? who has fought against their spiritual enemies,
and has not by the Lords assistance overcome? And is the Lords arm now
shortened, or are his mercies come to an end? has he forgotten to be gracious,
or has he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? Nay rather say it is
thine own infirmity, for the Lord is the same he was, without change or
shadow of change, and therefore as he has comforted and strengthened and given
victory unto others, so will he comfort and strengthen and give unto thee a
famous victory over thy spiritual enemies, if thou will depend upon him and
wait his leisure.

But if this will not comfort thee when thou hear of Gods mercy and
assistance in supporting others, yet at least let thine own experience
confirm thee in the assurance of Gods love and succor: for, have thou not
endured many assaults of thy spiritual enemies, and yet thou stand in the
encounter? but I pray thee by whose strength? surely not thine own, for thou
art weak and feeble, and thine enemies strong and mighty, and therefore able
to destroy thee every minute, if the Lord did not support thee by his almighty
power. Have thou not also received many foyles, and bewrayed notable
corruptions, and yet thou art not quite overthrown nor swallowed up by thy
sins? And who has preserved thee? surely not thy self; for if thou can
not stand against Satan whilst thou art fighting, much less could thou
rise up again when thou art cast down; but it is the spirit of the Lord who
has raised thee up by unfeigned repentance, and has renewed thy strength, so
that again thou art ready to withstand and resist Satan and his temptations.
Why therefore should thou fear least Satan will in the end overcome and
destroy thee? why should thou doubt of the Lords assistance in the time to
come, of which thou have had sufficient experience in times past? seeing
himself is unchangeable and his gifts without repentance, and therefore those
whom he has defended he will defend, those that he has once raised up, he
will ever raise up, and to whomsoever he has given grace to withstand their
spiritual enemies, to those he will continue and increase his grace, till in
the end they have a final victory, and the crown of victory, everlasting
glory.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK, ENTREATING OF SATAN'S special and particular temptations,
which he suggesteth against the several causes of our salvation; and of the
answers whereby they are to be refuted and repelled.
CHAP. I. Answers to those temptations of Satan, whereby he persuades
carnal men of Gods love.
That Satan's temptations impugn all the causes and means of our salvation.
namely his manfull withstanding Satan's encounters, and also his fainting and
falling into sin. Now we are to speak of the special temptations
themselves, and the means whereby we may be strengthened against them. Where
first we are to consider that Satan's temptations are not always one and the
same, neither impugn one or two points only of our faith and religion; but as
the causes and the means of our salvation are manifold, so also does he gather
manifold objections against every one of them, if they truly appertain unto
us, that so he may impugn and race our faith; or else does fill us with vain
presumption, persuading us that all the causes and means of salvation concur
together in us, when as in truth we are void and destitute of them all.

Let us therefore consider of the several causes of our salvation, and observe
what temptations Satan suggesteth in our minds against every one of them. The
first and principal cause of our salvation is Gods eternal love and immutable
goodwill, wherewith he has loved his creatures from before the foundations of
the world were laid; the which love and goodwill in himself did move him to
elect them to salvation, whom he so loved without any deserts in themselves:
for how could they deserve any thing at Gods has before they were? or what
good could the Lord foresee in them, but that which in his eternal counsel
he purposed to bestow and impart unto them?

Satan's temptation whereby he persuades carnal men, that they are beloved of
God.
First therefore we will speak of those temptations which concern the love of
God toward us, which are of two sorts; the first leading us to vain
presumption and carnal security; the other, to horror and desperation. For
if Satan see men living in carnal security, frozen in the dregs of their
sins, so as in truth there is no sign that they are beloved of God; he will
persuade them that they are highly in his favor and love, and therefore though
they run on in their wicked courses, yet they shall be saved. Do thou not
perceive (will he say) that God dearly loves thee? Why, consider that he
has made thee one of his chiefest creatures, whereas otherwise he would have
made thee a toade or serpent; he has also like a tender father preserved and
nourished thee from thy infancy, and which is more, he has sent his dearly
beloved son to die for thee, and he has made choice of thee amongst many
others to be a member of his Church, where thou inioyest the preaching of the
Gospel, and the use of the Sacraments, to the end thou may be assured of thy
salvation without all question or doubting. Never therefore take care nor
trouble thy self concerning thy salvation, use not such strictnes and
precisenes of life, but take thy pleasure, and follow those delights which the
Lord has bestowed upon thee as pledges of his love; for thou art not now a
slave but a son, and therefore may more freely follow thine own desire,
and use thy liberty: cast away all servile fear, which makes thee take such
pains in using all means whereby thou may be assured of salvation; for thou
art assured of the principal, namely of Gods love, and therefore thou need
not to doubt of the rest, nor to debar thy self of thy pleasures, spending
thy time in fear and care, to the end thou may get the assurance of that
which thou need not to call into question.

The answer to the former temptation.
And thus does the devil fill men with presumption, and lull them asleep in
carnal security to their utter destruction; and therefore it behooves us to
arm our selves against him, that we be not circumuented. And to this end let
us consider that Gods love goes not alone, neither is it idle in those whom he
loves: but as the first link of a chain draws all the rest of the chain
with it, so the love of God, which is the first cause of our salvation, is
accompanied with all the other causes which are subordinate thereunto; for whom
God loves, them he electeth; whom he electeth, those in his good time he
calls; whom he effectually calls, them he justifies; and whom he
justifies, those he sanctifies: if therefore we be not sanctified, we are
not justified; if we are not justified, we are not called; if we are not
called, we can have no assurance that we are elected, nor yet of Gods love and
favor; and consequently whosoever live in their blind ignorance, in their
infidelity, and wallow themselves in the filthy puddle of their sins,
without any true sorrow for those which are past, or any good purpose of heart
to forsake them in the time to come; they can have no assurance of Gods love,
but are rather justly to fear least they are in the number of those whom the
Lord has eternally rejected, if they continue in this their miserable and
desperate estate.

Temporal benefits no infallible signs of Gods love.
because of those general benefits, which like the rain and Sunshine are
bestowed both upon the good and bad; for what in this respect can they promise
more to themselves than Esau, and Saul? Were not they created men according to
Gods own likeness? were they not preseured and nourished by God, and that more
liberally than many Gods own children? For Esau had so much the he professed
to his brother Jacob that he had enough, and was attended upon by four hundred
men. And was not Saul a mighty King, who had all at command? Were not all
these in the Church of God, and outwardly enjoyed the word and Sacraments as
well as any other; and yet God himself says that he hated Esau, and had
rejected Saul. And therefore let us never brag of our assurance of Gods love,
because of these outward and common benefits which he indifferently bestows
both upon the elect and reprobate; but if we would be assured indeed of Gods
love, let us look into our selves, and consider if he have bestowed upon us
his spiritual graces, faith, hope, patience, love of him and our brethren,
true repentance for our sins, and holiness of life and the rest; and then by
the fruits of sanctification we may be assured that we are sanctified, and
consequently justified, called, elected, and eternally loved of God.

How Satan persuades weak christians that they are not belou^ of God.
but contrariwise when he assaulteth the weak Christian, he changes his
copy, and goes about to persuade him that he is not beloved of God, but
subject to his wrath and heavy displeasure. And this he inforceth by two sorts
of arguments: the one drawn from his manifold corruptions, whereby he is
unworthy of Gods love; the other from those grievous afflictions and crosses
which the Lord in this life inflicteth on him; both which he thus urges
against him. Can thou vild wretch conceive the least hope that thou art
beloved of God? Why, do but take a view of thy self, and thou shall see that
original corruption has ouerspread both thy body and soul like a filthy
leprosy; unto which thou have added actual transgressions more in number than
the hairs of thy head, or the stars of heaven; for daily, nay hourly thou
omittest some duty which thy God has commanded thee, and committest some
sin which he has forbidden. Can therefore the Lord, who abhors
wickedness, love the wicked? can thou obtain his favor, and yet do
nothing but displease him? He that loves God keeps his commandments; but
thou by transgressing them all, do show that thou love him not: and will
the Lord love them who hate and rebel against him? Can justice it self love
wickedness, and perfect holiness impure corruption? No verily; for in his word
he has threatened his wrath against all such notorious sinners, and he is no
less true in his threatenings than in his promises.

But if all this will not persuade thee that the Lord abhors thee, yet at
least be persuaded by thine own experienc. For, has not thy just God begun
already to make thee taste the cup of his wrath, of which hereafter thou
shall drink in full measure; has he not spoiled thee of thy goods, taken
away thy good name, made thee an abject amongst men, afflicted thee in body
with grievous and continual sickness, and filled thy soul full of horror and
despair? Is not thy conscience stung with sin, and has not the poison
thereof drunk up thy spirit? Do thou not plainly apprehend his wrath, and
is not thy soul as it were set upon the rack, so that there is not one part
of thee, either of body and soul which is not full of misery and
wretchedness. Do not therefore fondly flatter thy self with a vain opinion
of Gods love, but believe, if not my words, yet at least thine own senses; and
seeing thou have no hope of Gods love, if thou be wise love thy self,
follow thy pleasures, eat and drink and cheer up thine heart, and do not
vainly macerate and turmoyle thy self in laboring after impossibilities, and
in striving for the assurance of Gods love, of which, when thou have done what
thou can, yet shall thou never be assured.

How we may answer the former temptation.
whereby he labors to persuade us that we are out of the love and favor of
God; against which we must most carefully arm our selves, as being most odious
and injurious unto God, and most pernicious unto our own souls. It is most
injurious unto God, if we doubt of his love toward us, seeing he has given us
innumerable pledges and most certain testimonies thereof, and omitted nothing
which might do us good. He has created us after his own image, he has
continually preserved and sustained us, giving us our meat in due season, and
often time has succored and defended us before we craved his help; but which
is more, he has given his dearly beloved son to dye a bitter death, to
redeem us out of the hands of our spiritual enemies: and to the end we should
be made partakers of Christ and all his benefits, he has given us his word,
and made his covenant with us, that in Christ he will be our God, and we his
people, he our father, and we his children: And least yet there should be any
place left to doubting, he has added to his word, his sacraments, which like
seals may assure us of his love and favor. What injury therefore shall we
offer unto God, if notwithstanding all this we doubt of his good will, of which
he has assured us by so many pledges, testimonies and seals? We know that a
kind friend will take it most unkindly, if after he has heaped upon a man
innumerable benefits, and showed all testimonies of true love, he
notwithstanding doubt of his good will, and suspect his friendship: and so
surely the Lord will take it ill at our hands; and think himself much abused,
if after he has bestowed such infinite benefits, even his dearly beloved
son to dye for us, we now suspect his good will, and grow jealous of his
love; if we doubt of his love, who is love it self, as the Apostle speaks,
1. John 4.8.

That carnal men have no assurance of Gods love though they boast thereof.
the first is made by the worldling, the other by Satan. The worldly man will
say, that the Lord has made him also partaker of all these benefits, and
therefore there is no cause why he should doubt of his love; nor any reason why
he should be censured or condemned for his faith. I answer, that he is not
reprehended for his persuasion of Gods love, nor for his assurance of Gods
promises in Christ; but for his boasting of this faith, persuasion, and
assurance, whereas there is nothing in him in truth but a dead carcass of
faith, carnal security, and vain presumption. For true faith purifieth the
heart, Acts 15.9. and works by love, Gal. 5.6. it is plentiful in good
works, and provoke us to perform all good duties to God and our neighbors:
and it is impossible that we should be truly persuaded of Gods love, and not
love him again: it cannot be that we love God, if we show no care in
glorifying his name, by letting our lights shine before men, nor any desire to
perform obedience to his will. For as our Savior says, He that loves me
keeps my Commandments, and he that loves me not, keeps not my words, as
it is John 14.23, 24. If therefore we live in our sins without repentance, if
we make no conscience of our ways, and show no zeal in glorifying Gods name;
if our faith be destitute of the fruits of good works, then is our persuasion
but fond presumption; our assurance, carnal security; our faith dead, and
like a carcass which breaths not, as James speaks, chap. 2.26. We do not
then reprehend any for being persuaded of Gods love, gathering his assurance
out of Gods manifold mercies, and innumerable benefits bestowed on his Church:
nay, contrariwise we affirm that notwithstanding all our sins and
unworthiness, we are to be persuaded of Gods love in Christ, yea, and to
believe against belief, and to hope against hope, when as there is no ground
or reason of either in our selves: but this we maintain, that whosoever has
this assurance and faith, in the least measure begun in him, does truly love
God again, and earnestly labors after mortification and newness of life;
and whosoever is destitute of Gods love, and lives in his sins, without any
sorrow for those which are past, or purpose to leave them for the time to
come, he may well brag of his faith and assurance of Gods love, but in very
truth there is as yet nothing in him but carnal security and vain
presumption.

That every particular christian may assure himself of Gods love.
the tempter will object that the Lord has given all these testimonies and
pledges of his love unto his Church, and that it therefore may well be assured
thereof; but as for particular men, they notwithstanding may justly doubt of
his love, seeing they have no special reasons to persuade them that these
testimonies and pledges were given unto them. But I answer that this is a fond
of objection. For what is the Church, but the whole company of Gods saints?
What is it but a body consisting of many members, which are particular
christians? how therefore can the whole Church be persuaded of Gods love, if
all the several members doubt thereof? How can any thing belong to the whole,
which belongs not to the particular parts? as though a whole city could be
assured of the Princes favor, and yet all the particular men in the city
should think themselves in his displeasure. Saint Paul teaches us another
lesson in his own person, saying; Gal. 2.20.
Gal. 2.20. Who has loved me and given his life for me: he says not, who has
loved and given his life for the Church, but for himself. Neither does the
Apostle here speak this by revelation, whereby he might extraordinarily be
assured of Gods love: but he uses for his argument a reason common to all
Christians; namely, that God loved him, because he had given himself to death
for him: whosoever therefore believes with Paul that Christ dyed for him, may
be assured also with him of Gods love.

That doubting of Gods love, is injurious unto him.
we make him a liar, for he has professed his love, and given us many
testimonies thereof in his word, neither does he require any condition at our
hands but that we believe him. For his merciful promises do not exclude any
for their unworthiness, but for their unbelief: according to that, John 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, Ioh. 3.16.
but have everlasting life. Seeing then there is no other condition required
but faith, for the assurance of Gods love and everlasting life; surely most
desperately do we sin against our own souls, and most blasphemously
against God, if we will not believe his word confirmed by his seal, no not his
oath whereby he has ratified his covenant between him and us, but make him,
who is truth it self, a liar, a covenant breaker, yea, a perjured person. For
so the Apostle speaks, 1. John 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him
a liar, 1. Ioh. 5.10.
because he believed not the record, that God witnessed of his Son. Though
therefore we sin, yet let us not thus blaspheme; though we be grievous
sinners, and unworthy Gods love, yet let us not add this to all our other
sins and unworthiness, to distrust Gods truth in his gracious promises: for
if we put all our other sins into the one scole, and this alone into the
other, yet will it weigh down all the rest; neither are we damned for our
other sins, if we do not add unto them infidelity. For whereas the
precious baulme of our Saviors blood is a sovereign salve to cure all other
sores of sin; yet this it cannot help, because it does refuse the cure, and
as it were pulls off this precious plaster when it is laid on it.

Doubting of Gods love, pernicious unto our selves.
so also it is pernicious unto our own souls. For first, it tormenteth our
minds, and sets our consciences upon the rack, when as we have no other
assurance of Gods love, but only so far forth as we find our selves worthy
of it: for so often as we fall, and the sight of our sins comes before our
eyes, having no other ground of Gods love but our own deserts, we doubt and
stagger like a ship tossed with the billows of the sea, and in the end sink
into the gulf of despair, being over balanced and too heavily laden with the
unsupportable weight of our sins; whereas if we were thoroughly persuaded of
Gods free love and goodwill, grounded on his own good pleasure, and not on our
worthiness, if we did fall we would be grieved in deed even at the very
heart, because we had displeased our gracious God and loving Father; but yet
our sins would not make us despair or doubt of his love toward us, because
it has not it ground on our worthiness, but upon Gods own free mercy,
grace, and good will.

That we cannot love God, if we have no assurance of his love toward us.
Secondly, if we doubt and distrust of Gods love toward us, we shall never love
him from our hearts: for who loves him entirely, of whose love he is not
persuaded? or who can perform the duties of love to such an one as hates and
abhors him? Cos amoris amor, Love is the whetstone of love. And if this be
true amongst men, then much more between God and us: 1. Ioh. 4.19.
for we love him because he loved us first, as the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 4.19.
As therefore the cold stone can of it self cast forth no heat, till it be
first warmed by the Sun beams, and then it reflectsth again some of the
heat which it received: so no more can our cold hearts cast any beams of
hearty love toward God, till they be warmed with the apprehension of his love
toward us, and then they begin to return some sparks of love toward God,
after they are inflamed with the beams of his love clearly shining in them.
Unless therefore we be assured of Gods love we cannot love him, Romans 13.8.
and consequently cannot perform any duty of love in obedience to his will:
for as love is the fulfilling of the Law, as it is, Romans 13.8. so the want of
love is the transgressing of all the commandments: for all consist in the love
of God, which is the fountain of all true obedience; and in the love of our
neighbor, which as a spring issues from it. Nay, when we despair of Gods
love, then do we despair of our salvation, and therefore having no hope of
happiness in the life to come, we are ready to seek all the pleasures and
delights which this life will afford unto us, giving our selves over to the
satisfying of all the filthy lusts of the flesh, and spending our times in all
Epicurisme and fensuality.

The manifold evils which accompany, our doubting of Gods love, and the
benefits which follow our persuasion thereof.
our doubting and distrusting of Gods love does overthrow our patience in the
time of affliction, and causes us to murmr and repine against God,
blaspheming him to his face; it hinders all Christian resolution in suffering
any thing for the Name of Christ; for how should we suffer any thing patiently
for his sake of whose love we are not assured? It makes the day of death
horrible, when as we are not persuaded that we shall render up our souls into
the hands of a gracious father, but into the hands of a severe judge: whereas
on the other side, when we are thoroughly persuaded of Gods love, then may we
patiently, yea, joyfully suffer all afflictions, because we know that they are
but gentle trials, and fatherly chastisements, which our gracious God does
inflict on us for our everlasting good: when we are persecuted for our
profession of the Gospel, we will triumph with joy, because we are thought
worthy to suffer any misery for the Name of Christ, who has laid down his
life for our sake: Act. 5.14.
when the day of our departing approaches we rejoice, because we desire
nothing more than to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ, who so tenderly loves us. In a word, come prosperity,
come adversity, come affliction, come persecution, come fire, come sword, come
life, come death, nothing can come amiss, nothing can dismay or discourage us,
if we be once fully assured of Gods love in Christ, both because our love of
God, which by his love is wrought in us, will make the heauiest and most
tedious burden seem light and momentanie, which it shall please our heavenly
father to lay upon us: Romans 8.28.
and also because we know that all things (even miseries, afflictions,
persecutions, yea death it self) work together for the best unto them that
love God. As it is Romans 8.28.

CHAP. II. That our sins and unworthiness should not make us doubt of Gods
love.


Answer to Satan's temptations grounded upon our unworthiness.
First therefore whereas Satan obiecteth that we are miserable sinners,
unworthy altogether of Gods love, and most worthy of his wrath and heavy
displeasure; that God is infinitely just, and therefore cannot nor will not love
us being notoriously wicked: we are to answer, that indeed we are in our
selves unworthy the least dram of Gods love, by reason of our original
corruption, and actual transgression; and therefore if our assurance of Gods
favor, had no other foundation but our own deserts, we had great reason not
only to doubt, but also utterly to despair of Gods love toward us. But the
love of God is not grounded upon our worthiness which is nothing, Gods love not
grounded on our worthiness.
but upon his own good will and pleasure, which is infinite as himself is
infinite; and therefore though in our selves we are most miserable and wretched,
yet this is no reason why we should distrust or in the least degree doubt of
Gods love, seeing it arises not from any thing in us, but from himself who is
unchangeable.

The truth hereof manifestly appears by the scriptures, where it is said that
the Lord has loved us not for our excellency and worthiness, but of his free
grace and loving kindness. So Hos. 14.5. I will heal their rebellion; Hos.
14.5.
I will love them freely, etc. And the Apostle John tells us that herein Gods
love appears, in that when we loved not him, he so dearly loved us, 1. Ioh.
4.10.
that he sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins; 1. Ioh. 4.10.
And Paul says, that hereby God sets out his love toward us, seeing that
whilst we were yet sinners, Romans 5.8.10.
Christ died for us, and when we were enemies God reconciled us unto himself
by the death of his son. Romans 5.8.10. If therefore the Lord loved us when we
were enemies unto him and dead in our sins; how much more will he love us now
being reconciled in Christ, and in some measure purged from our corruption, and
quickened by his spirit to newness of life? If when we were most unworthy, he
freely showed such exceeding favor toward us: how much more having by his
spirit and the graces thereof made us more worthy, will he continue his love
unto us? If he has hitherto loved us not for any deserts of ours, but of his
free mercy, because he is love it self, as John calls him, 1. Ioh. 4.8. 1.
Pet. 5.10.
1. Ioh. 4.8. and the God of grace, as Peter makes him, 1. Pet. 5.10: why
should we doubt of Gods love in respect of our unworthiness, seeing his love
has not his ground upon our worthiness, but upon his own nature which is
immutable, and therefore whom he once loves, he loves them unto the end,
though in themselves they are miserable and wretched. Ioh. 13.1. Ioh. 13.1.


in the several causes thereof. Gods election not grounded on our works and
worthiness. Romans 11.5, 6.
As first he has elected us of his own free love and good will, and not for
any of our deserts; and therefore it is called the election not of virtue and
works but of grace. Romans 11.5. Nay it is flatly opposed to works in the verse
following. And if (says the Apostle) it be of grace it is no more of works, or
else were grace no more grace: but if it be of works it is no more grace, or else
were work no more work. So that our election is not grounded upon our
worthiness, but on Gods grace and goodwill: and therefore it cannot be
overthrown by our unworthiness, so we wholly rely upon Gods free mercy in
Christ.

Our worthiness is not the condition of Gods covenant.
Secondly the covenant between God and us, wherein he professes himself our
God, and takes us for his people and heirs of his promises, is not the
covenant of works, but the covenant of grace: in which he offers freely in
Christ, his grace and mercy to all who will receive it, by the hand of a lively
faith. And this the Lord himself expresses Ierem. 31.31. Behold the days
come says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel
(that is, my Church. Ierem. 31.31.
) 32. Not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers (that is,
the covenant of works) the which my covenant they break, etc. but this shall
be my covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days
says the Lord; I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. So the Apostle Paul
says, that the promise made to Abraham and his seed, was not given through
the law, but through the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.13.
Romans 4.13. and that it was therefore by faith that it might come by grace, and
the promise might be sure to all the seed. For if the covenant were of works
and not of faith, of deserts and not of grace, we should continually disanull
and make it of no effect.

Our redemption not caused by our worthiness. Ephesians. 1.7, 8.
as we are elected before all times, so were we in time redeemed freely, and
without respect of our own worthiness, of the mere mercy and love of God;
although our Savior Christ paid the full price of our redemption unto God his
father for us: and this appears, Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to his rich
grace. 8. Whereby he has been abundant toward us in all wisdom and
understanding. So that our redemption was not free unto our Savior Christ, for
it cost him the inestimable price of his most precious blood; but it was free
unto us, without any respect of our works and worthiness. For we were like
desperate debtors, deeply engaged unto God, and not able to pay the least
farthing; and therefore were cast into the prison of everlasting death, there
to be detained till we had discharged the whole debt: which being impossible
unto us, it pleased our Savior Christ of his mere pity and free goodwill to
become our surety, and to make full satisfaction to his father, even to the
least mite, that so we might be released and set free. We were all of us
miserable captives, held in the thraldom of sin, Satan and death, unable to
deserve in any measure to be set at liberty; for we were the children of
wrath, who were not sick only, but even dead in our sins, Ephesians. 2.1.5.
as it is Ephesians. 2.1.5 But our Savior Christ of his undeserved love did pay the
price of our redemption, and set us out of our captivity, quickening and
raising us up from sin to newness of life; as the Apostle sets it down
Ephesians. 2.3. And you were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Ephesians.
2.3.4
4. But God which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved
us, 5. Even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ,
by whose grace ye are saved, 6. And has raised us up together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. 7. That he might show in ages to come the exceeding
riches of his grace, through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. So that
there is no worthiness in our selves which the Lord respected, for we were all
alike the children of wrath, and dead in our sins; but only of his free
mercy and great love, he has redeemed us by Christ.

Our worthiness no cause of our calling.
as the Lord has freely redeemed us, so also he has freely called us to the
knowledge of the mystery of our redemption wrought by Jesus Christ, and chosen
us amongst all nations to be his Church and peculiar people, and that of his
mere grace and free goodwill, without any respect of our worthiness, as
appears 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us, 2. Tim. 1.9.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose of grace which was given us through Christ Jesus before the
world was. So Moses tells the children of Israel, that the Lord had called
and made choice of them above all other nations to be his Church and people,
not for any respect of themselves, or their own worthiness, but of his free
love and undeserved mercy, Deuteronomy. 7.7.8.
as it is Deuteronomy. 7.7.8. Psalm. 44.3.

Our works and worthiness no causes of our justification.
Fifthly, as the Lord has freely called us, so being called he has freely
justified us: not for any inherent righteousness in our selves, but of his
own grace and goodwill, through the righteousness and obedience of Jesus
Christ which he imputes unto us. And this is evident Romans 3.24. where it is
said, that we are justified freely by Gods grace, Romans 3.24.
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. And Tit. 3.7. where the
Apostle says, that we are justified by his grace. Tit. 3.7.
And least we should join with Gods grace our own works and worthiness, he
tells us that Abraham himself, though a most righteous and holy man in
respect of his sincerity and integrity of heart, was notwithstanding not
justified by his works, but Abraham believed God, Romans 4.3.5.
and that was imputed unto him for righteousness, Romans 4.3: and ver. 5. he
flatly excludes works from being any causes of our justification; To him
(says he) that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. So that we are freely justified of
Gods grace and goodwill, without any respect of our own works and worthiness,
as being any causes of our justification, although they are necessary and
inseparable fruits thereof. For the same death and bloodshed of Christ,
whereby we are freed from the guilt and punishment of sin and everlasting
death, does free us also from the death of sin to newness of life, and does
not only justify but also sanctify us, as the Apostle plainly shows, Tit.
2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
Tit. 2.14.
(that is, free us from the guilt and punishment of sin to which we were
subject) and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good
works.

Sixthly, our sanctification and inherent righteousness it self, what is it
else but the free gift of God, begun, increased, and finished by his gracious
spirit? That our sanctification is the free gift of God.
what are the graces in us but Gods free and undeserved gifts? what are our
best works but the fruits of his spirit working in us? for by nature we are
dead in our sins, and the children of wrath as well as the unbelieving
heathen or most profane worldling, Ephesians. 2.1.3.
Ephesians. 2.1.3. By nature we are not able so much as to think a good thought, or
to will that which is good, no more than those who remain in the state of
condemnation, as appears 2. Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. but it is our Savior
Christ, 2. Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. Ephesians. 3.25.26.
who so loved his Church, that he gave himself for it, that he might sanctify
it and cleanse it, by the washing of water through the word, etc. as it is Ephesians.
5.25.26. So that when we have attained to the highest measure of sanctification
that we can possibly attain unto, we must in all humility confess with
Paul, 1. Cor. 15.10.
that by the grace of God we are that we are, as it is 1. Cor. 15.10. Neither
must we attribute any thing in the work of our salvation, unto our
sanctification and good works, but ascribe all to the free grace and
undeserved love of God in Christ, whereby we are sanctified and stirred up to
new obedience, who were altogether polluted, yea dead in our sins; so that
our sanctification and worthiness is not the cause of Gods love and mercy
toward us, but his love and free goodwill is the cause of our sanctification,
and makes us, who were unworthy in our selves, worthy in Christ of his love
and favor. And therefore we must not measure Gods love by our worthiness and
abundance of grace as being a cause thereof; nor despair of his favor and
mercy, when we see our unworthiness and weakness in sanctifying graces; for
these are no causes of his love but effects, and consequently when we want
them altogether, though there be no cause of hope whilst we remain in this
state, yet we are not utterly to despair for the time to come, seeing the
Lord in his good time may begin his good work in us; and when it is begun, and
we have received the least measure of sanctification, even a desire and holy
endeavor to live in holiness and righteousness, we may be assured that it is
Gods work, which he having begun will finish and accomplish, Phil. 1.6.
according to that Phil. 1.6. In the mean time let us possess our souls with
patience, and with a quiet and peaceable mind labor after the increase of
grace, using all good means ordained of God for this purpose, submitting our
selves, in regard of the measure of grace which we do desire, to his good
will and pleasure, who will dispose of all so, as shall be most for his glory
and our good. And in any case let us beware that we do not so impatiently and
violently desire increase of more grace, as that in the mean time we forget to
be thankful to God for that we have, turning our songs of praise for Gods
great benefits, into murmuring and repining. Let us not be like unto rich
misers, who have their minds so intent upon the getting of that riches they
have not, as that they forget to enjoy and take comfort of that they have; let
us not resemble those unthankful men, who when they have received many
benefits, do still desire more, and when their desires are not presently
satisfied, ungratefully murmr against their benefactors, as though they had
received nothing: but let us make use of those graces which we have received,
to Gods glory and our comfort; let us desire more, yt we may more glorify him
with his own gifts; and though our desires be not presently satisfied, let us
not fall into impatiencie, but submit our selves unto his goodwill and
pleasure, and be truly thankful for that portion of grace, which it has
pleased him of his abundant mercy to bestow upon us.

Our own worthiness no cause of our salvation. Romans 6.23. Ephesians 2.8. Tit. 2.11.
our salvation it self depends not upon our own worthiness, but upon Gods
free mercy and undeserved love; for salvation is the free gift of God, and not
the wages of our own worthiness, as death is the wages of sin, as appears
Romans 6.23. And we are saved by grace through faith, and that not of our
selves; it is the gift of God, as it is Ephesians. 2.8. And the Apostle tells us,
Tit. 2.11. that the grace of God brings salvation, and teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this present world: so that our forsaking sin and
embracing holiness and righteousness is not the cause of our salvation, but
the grace of God, by which all these effects are also wrought in us. But most
plain is that of the Apostle 2. Tim. 1.9. where he excludes our own works
and worthiness, 2. Tim. 1.9.
to the end he might ascribe the whole work of our salvation to Gods grace and
goodwill. Who has saved us (says he) not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace. So Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of
righteousness which we had done, Tit. 3.5.
but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and
renewing of the holy Ghost.

Seeing therefore Gods love is not grounded upon our own worthiness, seeing
he electeth, redeemeth, calls, justifies, sanctifies, and finally saves us
of his mere mercy and free goodwill, without any respect of our own merits
or good works, let us not restrain the infinite love of God to our deserts,
nor measure his unmeasurable goodwill by the short ell of our own merits; but
as the Lord has freely loved us, so let us acknowledge his free and undeserved
love, and rely wholly thereupon, notwithstanding our unworthiness, seeing our
worthiness is no cause of his love, but it is his love which makes us, and
will surely make us worthy to be beloved, if we rest wholly upon him in Christ
by a true and lively faith. For, so much as we despair in respect of our own
unworthiness, so much would we ascribe to our own worthiness; and look how
much we attribute unto our selves in the work of our salvation, so much we
detract from Gods free mercy and Christ's merit: and therefore let us humbly
acknowledge our own unworthiness, and become nothing in our own eyes, that we
may wholly rely upon God, that he may be all in all. For well worthy are we
to thirst if we leave the fountain of living waters, and dig unto our selves
broken cesternes which will hold no water; Iere. 2.13.
well worthy are we to fall into the gulf of despair, if we forsake the
firm pillar of our salvation Gods mercy and Christ's merit, relying and
resting upon the broken staff of our own righteousness; well worthy are we
to be damned, if we envy the Lord the praise and glory of our salvation,
desiring rather to ascribe it unto our selves.

and save us in our selves, That being unworthy in our selves, we are loved,
elected, and saved in Christ.
but in our savior Christ, in whom being unworthy of our selves we are made
worthy; being unjust in our selves, we are made just, after we are adorned
with the rich robe of his righteousness; being in our selves the children of
wrath and firebrands of hell, we are made children of God and heirs of
heuaen. For he is made unto us of God, 1. Cor. 1.30.31
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, that he who rejoices
might rejoice in the Lord, as it is 1. Cor. 1.30.31. And therefore the Apostle
teaches us, that God has given his grace, not simply unto us, who were
altogether unworthy thereof, but in Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1.1.4. and that in
all things we are made rich in him, 1. Cor. 1.4. verse. 5. Romans 5.21.
as it is verse. 5. So he tells us, that grace does reign by righteousness
unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.21. And that he has
showed the exceeding riches of his grace, through his kindness toward us in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.7.
Ephesians. 2.7. And as God is gracious to us in Christ, so has he declared this his
love toward us in Christ only, as may appear in the several causes and
means of our salvation. For in him God has elected us to salvation, Ephesians. 1.5.
as appears Ephesians. 1.5. In him is made the covenant of grace, as being that
seed of Abraham in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed, Galat. 3.16.
Ephesians. 1.9.10. 2. Tim. 1.9. Romans 5.18.19. Esa. 53* 5. 1. Cor. 1.30. Col. 1.20.21.
Ephesians. 1 6. and 2.12.13. etc. Gal. 4.4.5. etc. Ephesians. 1.5. 1. Cor. 1.30. 1. Ioh.
5.11.
and to whom all the promises were made, as it is Gal. 3.16. In him are we
called and gathered together into one body, whereof he is the head, as it is
Ephesians. 1.9.10. 2. Tim. 1.9. In him are we justified, as appears Romans 5.18.19.
Esa. 53.5. 1. Cor. 1.30. In him we are reconciled unto God, Col. 1.20.21. Ephesians.
1.6. and 2.12.13.14. etc. In him we are adopted to be the sons of God, Gal.
4.4.5.6.7. Ephesians. 1.5. In him we are sanctified, 1. Cor. 1.30. In a word, in him
we are saved, as appears 1. Ioh. 5.11. God has given us eternal life, and
this life is in his son. Though therefore the Lord could not in his justice
bestow upon us these his benefits, because we were unworthy of the least of
them, and most worthy of al his judgments and punishments: yet in Christ we
have fully satisfied his justice, and performed perfect obedience, and therefore
even in his justice he could not but bestow these his mercies and graces upon
us, because in him we deserved his love, though in our selves we have deserved
eternal shame and confusion.

And therefore not trusting in our own worthiness, nor yet distrusting in
Gods mercy and free love in regard of our unworthiness, let us cast off all
self-conceit and opinion of our own righteousness, so that we may put on
the righteousness of Christ; and acknowledging our own weakness, yea our
nothing, let us nevertheless be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus,
2. Tim. 2.1.
as the Apostle exhorts 2. Tim. 2.1. In his name let us go boldly unto the
throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.
that we may receive mercy, and find help in time of need: for though in
our selves we are the children of wrath, yet are we reconciled and accepted of
God, as his beloved in his best beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.
as it is Ephesians. 1.6.

CHAP. III. That temporal afflictions are rather signs of Gods love, than of
his hatred.
Afflictions marks rather of our adoption than of our reprobation.
is taken from the manifold afflictions which are laid upon many of Gods
children, whilst they remain in this vale of misery. But it is easy to
answer this objection, if we be but a little co^uersant in the book of God;
for there we may learn that afflictions and crosses are rather signs of Gods
love than of his hatred; and marks rather of our election and adoption, than
of reprobation and eternal damnation. For the Lord has foreshewed us that his
children should mourn when the world shall rejoice; that they should be hated
and persecuted for his name sake; 2. Tim. 3.12.
that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution and
affliction, 2. Tim. 3.12. That they who will be conformable to him in glory,
must also be conformable unto him in his sufferings, Romans 8.29.
Romans 8.29. That this short and momentanie affliction, shall cause unto us a
far most excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.
2. Cor. 4.17. That if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him, 2.
Tim. 2.12.
2. Tim. 2.12. That whom the Lord loves he chasteneth: and scourges every son
that he receives, Heb. 12.6.8.
as it is Heb. 12.6. That those whom he does not thus correct, are bastards and
no sons, verse. 8. And to these we may add the examples of Gods children
from time to time, as of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, Job, the
Apostles, but especially our Savior Christ himself, who was hungry,
harbourlesse, despised, scoffed, reviled, buffeted, spit upon, crowned with
thorn, and lastly crucified; and yet even whilst he suffered al these
afflictions, he was the only begotten and best beloved son of his heavenly
father.

That afflictions, though in their own nature evil, turn to the good of Gods
children.
that afflictions are signs rather of Gods love, than of his hatred; and
marks of the children of God, rather than of the children of wrath. But here
the tempter will demand how this can be, considering that the Lord promises
to his children all good things; whereas afflictions are evils, and punishments
inflicted on the wicked. To this we may answer, that though in their own
nature they be evil, yet through the wisdom and gracious providence of our
God, they turn to the good of his children; and though to the wicked they are
plagues and punishments, yet to the godly they are but trials and fatherly
chastisements; for all their sins are punished in Christ, neither will it
stand with Gods justice to punish them again in the faithful: and therefore
there is no other end of them but the manifestation of Gods glory, and our
spiritual good and everlasting salvation. For as they are trials they serve to
show unto all the world, and especially to our selves, our faith, hope,
patience, obedience, constancy, and the rest of the graces of Gods spirit, to
the praise of his glory who has bestowed them, and to the comfort of our own
souls who have received them. And as they are chastisements they serve for
sharp eye-salues to clear our dim sight, so as we may see our sins, and
truly repent of them. They serve for sour sauces, to bring us out of love
with our sweet sins, and for fire and files, whereby we are purged and
scoured from the dross and rust of our corruptions. They are sharp pruning
knives, to lop and trim us, that we may bring forth plentiful fruits in
godliness. They are spurs to prick us forward in the Christian race, and
hedges to keep us from wandering out of the way. They are sharp salues to draw
out our secret corruptions, and bitter potions to cure our desperate diseases.
They are that wormwood, whereby the Lord weaneth us from the love of the world,
whose pleasing delights we would ever suck without weariness, if our mouths
were not distasted with some afflictions. They are rods, wherewith being
scourged, we are made more circumspect in our ways, and more careful to
perform obedience unto all the commandments of our heavenly Father. In a
word, they are the straight path which leads to everlasting happiness, and a
bridle to restrain us from running headlong in the broad way, which leads
to endless woe and misery. And therefore seeing our momentany afflictions do
serve for the manifesting of Gods glory, for the increasing of spiritual
graces, and the furthering of our eternal salvation, let not Satan persuade
us that we are out of Gods love and favor because of our afflictions, but
rather let us repute them as they are indeed signs of his gracious providence
and fatherly care which he has over us.

Satan's temptations grounded upon our spiritual afflictions.
for thereby the flesh is mortified and subdued, and the spiritual graces of
Gods spirit exercised and increased in us; but thy afflictions (will he say)
are far different, for thy soul is filled with horror and fear, thy
conscience is mortally stung with sin, and the weight thereof ouerwhelmeth
thee; thou see thy self subject to the curse of the law, and art already
tormented with the pains of hell; thy God who looks upon his children with
an amiable countenance, frowneth upon thee like a severe Judge, and thou
tastest of nothing but of his heavy wrath and displeasure; in a word, thou
have not one spark of true consolation wrought in thee by Gods spirit, with
which those that are Gods children are fully replenished, and whereby they are
encouraged patiently to abide all afflictions, but thy inward vexations are the
torments of an evil conscience, and the flashings of hell fire wherewith
hereafter thou shall eternally be burned.

To this temptation we must answer, that it cannot be denied but that the
afflictions of the mind are far more grievous than the afflictions of the
body; That our spiritual afflictions are no signs of Gods hatred.
and that the torments of conscience caused by the weight of sin, and the
apprehension of Gods fearful wrath, are as it were Gods three-stringed whip,
in respect of the gentle rod of outward afflictions; for a sorrowful mind
dries up the bones, Pro. 17.12. Pro. 18.14.
as it is Pro. 17.12. and the spirit of a man may sustain his other
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear, as the wise man speaks,
Prou. 18.14. Nevertheless, though these corrections are more sharp and
grievous, than the outward afflictions of the body, yet it cannot be denied
but that these also are the chastisements which our heavenly Father inflicteth
upon his children: sometimes for his own glory, and sometime for their trial
or chastisement, when more light correction will not reclaim them. For first
those places of scripture before quoted, are spoken generally of all
afflictions whatsoever, and therefore are not to be restrained to the outward
afflictions of the body, seeing they extend themselves also to the afflictions
of the mind; neither does our heavenly Father correct all alike, but some he
rebukes only by his word, and goes no further when as this reclaimeth them;
but if this will not prevail, he goes a step further, and chastizeth them
with gentle correction, as with outward crosses and afflictions; but if this
will not reform them, he takes his whippe into his hand, wherewith he
grievously scourges them, to the end they may more sensibly taste of his
displeasure, and amend that which is amiss; and this he does by making them
feel the weight of sin, Reu. 3.19. Heb. 12.6.
and appehend his wrath and heavy displeasure, which by their sins they have
justly incurred; and yet notwithstanding all this he still remains their
gracious Father, who seeks not their destruction but their reformation.
Neither need this dealing of our heavenly Father seem strange unto us, seeing
earthly parents take the same courses with their children whom they tenderly
love; for when they offen them, they first seek their amendment by words and
fatherly admonitions; and when this will do no good they proceed to blows,
and in a gentle manner do correct them; and if this prevail not with them,
then they use more sharp and severe chastizement; but if all this be to no
purpose, then will they disguise their fatherly affection under the vizard of
wrath and heavy displeasure; they banish out of their countenance all signs
of love, and assume terrible looks and bitter frowns; yea they will sometimes
thrust them out of doors, and reject them a while, leaving them to shift for
themselves, and to endure all misery. And whence proceeds all this? surely
not from hatred, but from love and tender care which they have over them for
their good. And this makes them use the bridle of correction, to restrain
them from running into all licentiousness; this causes them to pretend wrath
in the countenance, that they be not by their lewdness forced to entertain it
into their hearts; this moves them to reject them for a time, that they may
reclaim and retain them for ever. Neither does our heavenly Father, who is
infinite in love, deal otherwise with his disobedient children; he uses but
his word if his word will suffice; he goes no further then gentle
chastizement if that be enough; but if he sharply scourge us, yea if he look
upon us with a frowning countenance, and show nothing in outward appearance but
his wrath and heavy displeasure; if he seem to reject us for a time, and to
give us over to be tormented by Satan: yet undoubtedly all this proceeds
from his love and that fatherly care he has over us, for our everlasting good
and salvation; he seeks not our destruction, but amendment; he frowneth on
us for a time, that he may look graciously on us for ever; he seems to
reject us for a while, that like the prodigal son we may return again, and
be received into his everlasting love and favor.

That spiritual afflictions tend to our mortification.
the Lord sends afflictions to mortify in us the old man, the flesh and
unregenerate part: now the flesh is not only in our body, but also in our
soul and every part and faculty thereof, and therefore the Lord does not
afflict the body alone with outward calamities, but even the soul also with
grief of mind and horror of conscience, with the weight of sin and sense
of his wrath, to the end that our corruptions both in body and soul may be
mortified, the old man with the lusts thereof crucified, and in the end fully
abolished. Iere. 4.4.
And therefore does the Lord break our hard and stony hearts, therefore does
he plowe and tear them up like fallow ground, to the end that the seed of his
grace being sown in them may take root, fructify and bring forth a
plentiful harvest of godliness, to his glory and our comfort. It is not
therefore for want of love, that our heavenly father does thus bruise us and
even crush us in pieces; it is not because he will reject us and cast us of:
but when we are truly humbled, when our hard hearts are softened, and our
spirits broken and made contrite, then will he regard us and show his tender
love and merciful kindness unto us as he has graciously promised. Matthew.
12.20. The bruised reed will he not break, Matthew. 12.20. Psa. 51.17.
and smoking flax shall he not quench. So Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God
are a contrite spirit, a contrite and broken heart O God thou will not despise.
And the Prophet tells us that our Savior Christ was sent into the world to
preach glad tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, etc. to
comfort all that mourn, Esa. 61.1, 2, 3.
to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
gladness for the spirit of heaviness etc. as it is Esa. 61.1.2.3. Luke 4.18.

Gods dearest children subject to spiritual affliction.
that the afflictions of the mind, the apprehension of Gods wrath, the sting
of sin, and torments of conscience, are not any true and certain signs of
Gods hatred, hereby it plainly appears: in that the most dear children of
God have been subject to them, and that in great measure. For example, Job who
by Gods own testimony was the iustest man that lived on the earth, Job. 1.8.
Job. 1.8. notwithstanding was so grievously afflicted both in body and mind,
that he bursteth out into these grievous complaints, Job. 6.4. and 9.17, 18.
and 13.24.26. and 16.9. and 19.11.
Job. 6.4. The arrows of the almighty are in me, the venime whereof does
drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight against me. And chap. 9.
verse. 17. He destroys me with a tempest and wounds me without cause. 18. He
will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness. So, c.
13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face and take me for thine enemy? And v.
26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth. And c. 16.9. His wrath has torn me, and he hates me
and gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy has sharpened his eyes against
me. And. c. 19.11. He has kindled his wrath against me and counts me as
one of his enemies.

Look also upon the example of the Prophet David, who though he were a man
according to Gods own heart, yet was he made to drink a deep draught in this
cup of inward afflictions, and was vexed not only outwardly in his estate,
goods, and body, but also in his soul, with the sense of Gods wrath, with the
weight of sin, and the terrors and torments of conscience, which make him to
utter these and such like pitiful complaints in the book of the Psalms.
Psalm. 6.3. Psalm. 6.3.
My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou delay? And v. 6. I
fainted in my mourning: I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my couch
with my tears. So Psalm. 38.2. Psalm. 38.2.3.
Thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me. 3. There is
nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in
my bones because of my sin. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head,
and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. etc. And Psalm. 88.7.
Thine indignation lies upon me, Psalm. 88.7.14, 15, 16.
and thou have vexed me with all thy waves. And v. 14. Lord, why do thou
reject my soul, and hidest thy face from me? 15. I am afflicted and at the
point of death: from my youth I suffer thy terrors, doubting of my life. 16.
Thine indignations go over me, and thy fear has cut me off. So in the 77
Psalm he takes up this lamentable complaint. verse. 7. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor? 8. Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? 9. Has
God forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercies in
displeasure? 10. And I said, this is my death. Look also upon the Apostle
Paul, who though he were a chosen vessel, whom God had separated from his
mothers womb to carry his name before the Gentiles, and is is Act. 9.15. Act.
9.15. Gal. 1.15. 2. Cor. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Gallat. 1.15; yet was he afflicted grievously, not only outwardly in body,
as he professes 2. Corinthians. 6.4.5.6.7.8. etc. but also in mind; for the
messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12.7, 8.
and he had a long time a prick in the flesh, from which he could not be
freed, though he often begged this favor at Gods hand, as appears, 2. Cor.
12.7.8. And the burden of sin grievously afflicting his conscience, forced
him to cry out Romans 7.24, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of his death?

That Christ himself endured these spiritual afflictions. 1. Cor. 10.13. 1.
Pet. 5.9. Esa. 53.3.
that is manifest unto our comforts which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 10.13.
There has no temptation taken you but such as appertains to man; for the
same afflictions (which we suffer) are accomplished in our brethren which are
in the world, as it is, 1. Pet. 5.9. Yea the same and far greater were
endured by our head Jesus Christ himself, who received deep and grisly
wounds, in respect of those small scratches which we suffer, and drunk the
full cupe of Gods heavy displeasure, of which we only sip or taste; for he
was not only in his outward state dejected and reputed as an abject amongst
men, nor persecuted by his cruel enemies alone, even to the taking away of
his precious life, by a cruel and shameful death; but also inwardly in his
soul he sustained far more heavy crosses the^ that which he outwardly
carried on his shoulders, though the weight thereof caused him to faint for
wearines. for to say nothing of Satan's temptations and the power of hell which
was set against him, let us consider of that bitter agony which he sustained
in the garden, where the burden of Gods anger, for our sins was so heavy
upon him, that it pressed out of his blessed body a sweat of water and blood;
neither was he presently cased of this unsupportable weight, but he was feign
to bear it even unto his cross; neither was he comforted in mind when the
panges of death had taken hold of his body, but even then he was so vexed with
the sense of his fathers displeasure, that in bitterness of soul he cries
out my God, My God why have thou forsaken me: Not that he despaired utterly of
Gods love and assistance, or thought himself a reprobate and castaway, for he
calls him still his God: but the deity having for a time withdrawn it self,
to the end the humane nature might suffer that punishment which we had deserved
even unto death it self, which otherwise it could not have been subject unto,
he utters this speech truly according to his present sense and apprehension.
Now if we consider who it is that was thus grievously afflicted both in body
and mind, we shall find that it was not one hated of God, but his only
begotten and best beloved son, in whom he professes himself to be well
pleased. Matthew. 3.17. Matthew. 3.17.
Seeing therefore our Savior Christ who was the natural son and heir of
God, and so tenderly beloved of his heavenly father that in him he loves all
his children, did notwithstanding endure not only grievous afflictions of body,
but the intolerable burden of his fathers displeasure in his soul also. Why
should we imagine yt either our outward or inward afflictions are any signs or
arguments that God hates or has rejected us? especially considering that he
has predestined us to be made like to the image of his son, not only in
his glory, but also in his afflictions; so that first we must suffer with him,
and after reign with him, Romans 8.29. 2. Tim. 2.12. Objection. 1. Pet. 2.22.
as it is To. 8.29. 2. Tim. 2.12.

But it may be objected that our Savior Christ suffered all this not for any
sin that was in himself, for he did no sin, neither was their guile found
in his mouth. 1. Pet. 2.22. but he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
broken for our iniquities, as it is Esa. 53.5. Esa 53.5.
And therefore considering that the Lord did thus hate sin, even when his
dearly beloved son did take it upon him; how much more will he hate it in
us? Answer. 1. Pet. 3.18.
if he so severely punished his dear darling when he had taken the sins of
others upon him, how fearful punishments are prepared for the sinners
themselves? I answer, that indeed Christ who was just did suffer for us who
were unjust, as it is 1. Pet. 3.18. and that sin is so odious to Gods eyes
that rather then it should not be punished, he would punish it in his dearly
beloved son; the consideration whereof should make us also to hate and fly
from it as the greatest evil: but yet this should be so far of from
discouraging us, or from making us doubt of Gods love, that nothing in the
world does more assure us thereof, no consolation can be imagined more
comfortable, for what greater testimony of Gods love can be imagined, then
that when we were strangers yea enemies to God, Romans 5.10.
he should send his dear beloved son to die for us, to the end that by this
means his justice might be satisfied, his wrath appeased, and we being
received into grace and favor, might be made heirs of everlasting life? what
greater assurance can we have that our sins are forgiven us then that they are
already punished in Christ? it being against the justice of God to punish the
same sins twice? What stronger argument can be brought, to prove that we
shall never be subject to Gods wrath, nor be cast away in his heavy
displeasure; than that our Savior has borne his fathers anger, to the end he
might reconcile us unto him? and therefore though our Savior suffered these
outward and inward afflictions, not as he was the dearly beloved son of God
who was free from sin, but as he was our mediator, who had taken upon him our
sins, to the end he might satisfy his fathers justice; yet seeing he endured
these things in our stead, to the end we might be freed from them, hence
arises unto every true christian sound comfort, and certain assurance of Gods
love and goodness toward him.

. Sect. 7. A dangerous temptation grounded upon our not-profiting by
affliction.
But the tempter will further urge his objection after this manner: let it be
granted (will he say) that God does chastise sometime his children whom he
loves, both with outward and inward afflictions, and that they suffer even the
same miseries which thou indurest; yet seeing they are sometimes punishments
also which he inflicteth upon the wicked, hence thou can not gather that they
are fatherly chastisements and signs of his love to thee: nay contrariwise
thou may assure thy self, that they are fearful punishments and signs of
Gods hatred, which God in justice inflicteth on thee for thy sins, that
others may be warned by thine example. For if they were chastisements and
fatherly corrections, then would they indeed correct thee, that is, reform
and amend thee; for this is the end why God inflicteth them on his children,
and his end cannot be frustrate: but in thee there is no reformation wrought,
nor any increase of patience; whereas in the faithful, tribulation brings
forth patience, Romans 5.3.
as even by the Scriptures it is manifest. Nay contrariwise when the hand of
God is upon thee, thou bewraiest great impatiencie, and vtterest inconsiderate
speeches, which tend to Gods dishonor, give offense to the world and wound
thine own conscience. And therefore howsoever to other these are fatherly
chastizements, yet to thee they are severe punishments, which move thee rather
to despare, than assure thee of Gods love.

That it is no fit time to judge of our spiritual graces in the conslict of
temptations.
To this we answer, that it cannot be denied, but that Gods corrections do
correct and amend his children, and that afflictions serve to the increasing of
their patience, faith and other graces; but yet let us know that Satan plays
the false deceauer, when he moves us to look for the assurance of Gods love,
and for our amendment and increase of Gods grace, in the very time when the
hand of God is upon us, whilst the conflict lasts, and the temptation
grievously shakes and battereth us: as if he should come to a man who has
endured much and tedious sickness and should say unto him, thou did
imagine thy self awhile ago very beautiful and exceeding strong, but thou
wast much deceived, for if thou look in a glass thou shall presently
perceive that thou art lean, pale, and deformed, and if thou make trial of
thy strength, thou shall find that it is scarce sufficient to sustain the
weight of thine own body. Now who would not deride such fond reasoning? who
could not easily answer, that judgment is not to be taken of the beauty and
strength of the body in the time of sickness, but in the time of health? but
this is the very like case, and thus sottishly does Satan conclude, or rather
delude Gods children in the time of temptation; for he says thus unto them,
thou did persuade thy self that thou art the child of God, and in his
love and favor, that thou art endued with faith, patience, and other graces,
and daily increasest in them; but now thou art come to the trial it proves
far otherwise; for thy faith is turned into doubting or infidelity, and thy
patience to impatiencie, and therefore there is no likelyhoode that thou art
beloved of God, for then thou would profit by afflictions, and increase in
grace and strength, whereas thou bewrayest nothing but thy manifould
corruptions. But we are to know that we are not to judge of our grace and
strength, in the time of temptation, and of the spiritual conflict, when as
our souls are grievously sick with the sense of sin and apprehension of
Gods heavy displeasure incurred thereby, when as the fire of Gods spirit is
covered with the ashes of our corruptions, and the fruits and graces thereof
nipped with the could winter and boisterous blasts of temptations, but we are
to look into our selves when the fit is past and the conflict ended, and then
shall we find our patience by experience of Gods love confirmed, our faith
renewed, all other graces strengthened and increased: and then shall we
clear^^y discern the bright beams of Gods love and favor, shining upon us,
when the clouds of temptation are past away which did hide them from us.

That Gods dea^^ children in g^eiuous temptations show impatiencie, and utter
some^^^^ inconsiderate speeches.
But if in the time of trial and temptation we judge according to our present
sense and feeling, we must needs be deceived: for it cannot be denied but that
even the dear children of God who have received a great measure of grace, when
the hand of God is upon them do doubt of his love and favor, and when they
are grievously afflicted do bewray their corruption, and show their impatience
by uttering inconsiderate speeches; for while we continue in this life, we have
the relics of sin hanging on us, and we are partly flesh and partly spirit,
yea the flesh is the stronger part, and therefore it is no marvel if the
flesh being pinched in the time of temptation does complain, and being launced
deeply with the rasor of sharp afflictions does cry out for pain,
complaining of the Surgeon that he deals too rigorously with him. And if men
through bodily sickness have their judgments blinded, their understanding
dasled and misled, their memory overthrown, so that they can put no
difference between their friends and their enemies, but even rail upon those
whom in the time of their health they dearly loved, and think none so much
their enemy as their physician, rauing and inconsiderately speaking they know
not what; what wonder is it if the like effects follow the sickness of the
soul, when it is as it were set upon the rack, pressed with the burden of
sin, and tormented with the apprehension of Gods anger, considering that
these kind of afflictions are fair more grieous and without comparison more
intolerable, Pro. 28.14.
for a man may sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? as
it is Pro. 28.14. What marvel then is it if they take God for their enemy,
when they feel his sharp medicines, though in truth he be their loving
Physician, who by this means cures them of their diseases of sin and
corruption? what wonder is it if they utter rauing speeches when the sense of
pain presses them so sore? how is it possible but that they should doubt of
Gods gracious love and favor, when as they presently taste of nothing but his
rigor and justice?

Example to clear the former point. Iam. 5.11.
We must not therefore judge of our state while the cross is upon us, for so
should we condemn the generation of the just to be most wicked, then should we
imagine those who have excelled in patience to be most wayward and impatience.
Look upon Job who is renowned for patience, and you shall sinde that while the
hand of God was upon him, he bewrays the corruption of the flesh and shows
notable impatiencie, cussing the day of his nativity, and wishing that he had
never been borne, or else that he had presently after his birth been swallowed
up in the laws of death, Job. 3 and 6.8.9.10.
Job. 3. So chap. 6.8.9. he thus cries out like a man utterly desperate. O that
I might have my desire, and that God would grant me the thing that I lung for
9. That is, that God would destroy me: that he would let his hand go and cut
me off. 10. Then should I yet have some comfort, though I burn with sorrow,
let him not spare etc. Where Job seems to deal with God as a condemned
malefactor with a just and severe judge, who seeing the anger of the judge
incensed against him for his crime, has no hope that he can by entreaty and
persuasions move him to revoke his sentence of death, and therefore only
desires a mitigation of the tortures, and that he may quickly be dispatched
and rid out of his pain; nam misericordae genus est cito occidere, it is a
kind of mercy to be speedy in execution. So Job having no hope to be freed
from his miseries, desires only this favor at Gods hands, that he would not
(as it were) corment him piece meal, but make a quick dispatch of him by
laying on a greater weight of afflictions, till by their unsupportable burden
the breath were pressed out of his body. And chap. 10.18. Job. 10.18.
Wherefore have thou brought me out of the womb? Oh that I had perished, and
that none eye had seen me! 19. And that I were as I had not been, but brought
from the womb to the grave. Look upon the Prophet David who was a man
according to Gods own heart, endued with a steadfast faith and constant
patience; and you shall perceive that Gods love, and the graces of Gods spirit
in him, were so shadowed with the grieuousnesse of his present afflictions,
that he could not discern them. For he complains like a man utterly cast off
and rejected of God. Psalm. 88.14. Lord why do thou reject my soul, Psalm.
88.14.
and hidest thy face from me? 16. Thine indignation is gone over me, and thy
fear has cut me off. and 77.8.9.
The like complaint he takes up. Psalm. 77.8.9.10. Neither had the Prophet in
these times always the spirit of supplication and prayer, but sometime the
grieuousnesse of his pain did shut his mouth so as he could not confess his
sin, Psalm. 32.3.4.
nor humble himself before his God; though through the weight of affliction,
his bones were consumed, and he roared for grief all the day long, as
appears Psalm. 32.3.4. So Jeremy seeing the word of God contemned, Ierem.
20.14.15.18.
and himself who was Gods ambassador despised, could not bear it but bursteth
out into great impaciencie, cursing the day of his birth, and even the man that
brought news thereof to his father, because he was borne to see labor and
sorrow, and that his days should be consumed with shame. Ierem. 20.14, 15.18.
If therefore we judge of Job, David, and Jeremy, acording to their outward
behavior, and their own inward feeling in the time of afflictions, and in the
combat of temptations; we should think them void of faith, impatience, and
destitute of all assurance and hope of Gods love and favor: but the Scriptures
teach us otherwise, propounding them unto us as patterns of patience and true
godliness; and themselves also at other times do show their singular faith,
patience, and the rest of the graces of Gods spirit. Seeing then this is not
our case alone, but the state of Gods dearest children, let us not believe the
tempter telling us that we are not Gods children because we see not Gods graces
so plainly in the time of temptation and trial, but contrariwise bewray our
impatiencie and other corruptions: but let us be truly humbled in the sight of
our infirmities, laboring and striving to reform them; and judge of our state,
not as we find it in the time of the conflict, but as it was or is before or
after the combat is ended.

The objection out of Eccles. 9.1. answered.
and has stirred up his wicked instruments the enemies of Gods truth to
defend, that though we are not wholly to despair of Gods love, yet we must
doubt thereof: and to this purpose they allege that saying Eccles. 9.1. which
they read thus: I have handled all these things in my heart that I might
curiously understand: Just and wise men and their works are in the hand of
God; and notwithstanding, a man knows not whether he be worthy of love or
hatred, but all things are kept uncertain for the time to come etc. I answer,
that if Gods love or hatred did depend upon our own unworthiness, we might
well doubt; nay I will say more, we might justly despair of his grace and
goodwill, and certainly assure our selves that we were hated and abhorred of
God; for this, if any thing, we have deserved. But the truth is, that as
Satan tempting our Savior, and quoting scripture for his purpose, left out
that which made against him; so here by his instruments assaulting his members,
he adds to the scriptures that which makes for him: for neither in the
Hebrew, which is the original, nor in the Greek translation is there any one
word of our worthiness or unworthiness; but thus it is in the text as it is
truly translated in our Bibles; No man knows either love or hatred of all
that is before them: and whereas they read the words following thus; But all
things are kept uncertain for the time to come, they most grossly deprave the
text, which is thus to be read as we have it translated; All things come alike
to all, and the same condition is to the just and the wicked; and thus also
does Arias Montanus one of the most learned amongst themselves translate it.

Neither will their corrupt translation stand with the sense and truth of the
place: for, as he says, no man knows whether he be worthy of love, so also,
that no man knows whether he be worthy of hatred: but this is utterly false;
for so should we say that we could not know whether the Sodomites for their
filthiness, the Canaanites for their idolatry, Julian for his apostasy were
worthy to be hated of God; whereas the scriptures witness the clean
contrary, and even they themselves do confess, that they who desperately give
over themselves into all sin and wickedness, are not to doubt but that they
are worthy of Gods anger and heavy displeasure; why therefore on the other
side may not those who are truly converted unto God, and endued with a lively
faith which works by love, be assured of Gods love and favor, seeing he has
assured them hereof in his word? Nay in the same chapter verse. 7. their corrupt
exposition is overthrown; for there he bids us to eat our bread with joy,
and to drink our wine with a cheereful heart, for God now accepts our works.
Now, though God did indeed accept ourworkes, yet we could not be moved to joy
and cheerfulness of heart hereby, unless also we might be assured of his
acceptance.

But let us examine these words and show the true sense of them. The exposition
of Eccles. 9.1.
There are two expositions given, which may stand with the analogy of faith
and the circumstances of the text. For some understand these words not of Gods
love or hatred, but of man's love toward those things he desires, and of his
hatred toward those things he flies; and then this is the sense of the place;
A man knows not whether those things which he loves, as pleasures, honors
and riches, or those things which he hates, namely crosses and afflictions
shall happen unto him, because they are not disposed by his own power, but by
the providence of God who gives these outward things indifferently to all both
just and unjust. So that if the words are thus to be understood, there is no
show of reason in the Papists exposition.

Secondly, let it be granted that it is to be understood of Gods love toward
us, yet it will make nothing for their purpose: for then this is the plain
sense of the words; no man can know whether he be loved or hated of God by
these common outward things which happen alike to al, and in respect whereof
there is the same condition to the just and the wicked, and to the pure and
polluted, to those that worship God and those that worship him not: there is no
judgment that can be given, either of our selves or others in respect of our
outward state, for sometime the just are poor, the vniustrich, the wicked
advanced to honor, and the godly afflicted and persecuted. For example, Esau
enjoyed his delights and plenty of all things, Jacob like a poor pilgrim
went into a strange country, having no other riches but his clothes on his
back and his staff in his hand, and when he was come amongst his friends he
endured tedious labors, and many miseries; and so David was persecuted,
whilst Saul did sit on the throne; yea our Savior Christ himself was
arraigned at the bar and condemned, whilst Pilate and the chief Priests and
Pharisees sat in the seat of justice, ouerswaying all at their own
pleasures: and yet at the same time, Jacob was beloved, Esau hated; David
chosen of God, Saul rejected; our Savior Christ the dear son of his
heavenly father, and his enemies the instruments and limbs of Satan. So that
it is most true that Solomon speaks, namely, no man can have assurance of
Gods love and favor by these outward benefits bestowed both upon the godly and
wicked; neither by his adversities and afflictions can gather that the Lord
hates him: for these befall all indifferently, as it pleases God to punish
the reprobate, or to chastize his own children.

But though we can gather no sound argument from these outward things of Gods
love, yet it follows not that there is no other means to assure us hereof:
for by the same reason we may conclude that man is no better than brute
beasts, and that there is no immortality of the soul, Eccles. 3.19.
because it is said, Eccles. 3.19. that the condition of the children of men
and the condition of beasts is the same. But as the Wiseman speaks there of
their outward mortality alone, and not absolutely in all respects; and
therefore he says that they are alike to see to, that is, in outward
appearance, verse. 18. and explaineth himself in the words following; for
(says he) as one dies so dies the other: so he does not mean here simply
that there is no assurance of Gods love, but only in respect of these outward
things, and therefore he adds, that in these outward respects all things come
alike to all, and the same condition is to the just and the wicked.

Though then there is no assurance of Gods love to be gathered out of our
worldly estate, yet it cannot hence be concluded that therefore there is no
means whereby we may be assured hereof: for the Lord has given unto us his
word and merciful promises, he has given unto us his holy spirit crying in
our hearts Abba father, and witnessing to our spirits that we are the sons of
God, Romans 8.
Romans 8. He has manifested his love by giving us his only son, and
begetting in us by his word and spirit a lively faith, whereby we may apply
him and all his benefits unto us. Whosoever therefore believes truly in Jesus
Christ, he may be assured of Gods love and everlasting life, according to that
Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, Ioh.
3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

If therefore we believe in Jesus Christ, we need not to despair, no nor to
doubt of Gods love and favor toward us; notwithstanding our unworthiness,
nor yet in regard of the manifold afflictions which God inflicteth on us,
neither in respect of those manifold infirmities which we bewray whilst the
hand of God is upon us: but we may soundly and assuredly conclude with the
Apostle Paul, Romans 8.38. I am persuaded that neither death nor life, Romans 8.38.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, 39. Nor height nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And so much concerning the first cause of our salvation, namely Gods love and
goodwill, and also the temptations of Satan, whereby he labors to impugn
our assurance thereof: the second cause is Gods free election, which proceeds
from the other; for whom he loves, those he electeth unto everlasting life
and happiness, it being an inseparable fruit of love to seek the good and
felicity of the party beloved.

Election therefore is that part of Gods eternal and immutable decree, whereby
of his free love and undeserved grace he has preordained some in Christ unto
salvation, and to the use of the means tending thereunto, for the praise of
the glory of his grace.

CHAP. IIII. Of Gods election, the causes, subject, object, and properties
thereof.
IN this definition is set down first the efficient cause or author of our
election, namely God himself, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost; and
this appears Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy etc. And Ioh. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you, and ordained you that ye go and bring forth fruit, etc.

Secondly, the motive or impulsive cause of Gods election is expressed, namely,
Gods free love, mere goodwill and undeserved grace. And this also is manifest
Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give
you a kingdom. And Ephesians. 1.5. who has predestined us to be adopted through
Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

Here therefore are excluded all other causes, wherewith diverse have imagined
God was moved to elect us; as namely our own will, the foreseeing of our
works worthiness or faith, and the merits of our Savior Christ. And that
these were not the causes which moved the Lord to elect us, it may be proved
by manifest testimonies of scripture. First, our own will is expressly
excluded, Romans 9.16. It is not in him that wills or runs, but in God that
shows mercy. Secondly, not the foresight of our own works, for the Apostle
plainly affirms Romans 9.11.12. that before the children were borne, and when
they had neither done good or evil, that the purpose of God might remain
according to election, not by works, but by him that calls. 12. It was said
unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, 13. As it is written, I have loved
Jacob and hated Esau. And chap. 11.5.6. he says, that Gods election is of
grace, and if it be of grace it is no more of works, or else were grace no more
grace. Thirdly, not the foresight of any worthiness in us more than in others;
For there is no difference, for all have sinned and are deprived of the glory
of God: as it is Romans 3.23. And the Apostle affirms both of himself and
others, that they were all dead in their sins, and by nature the children of
wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.1.3. Fourthly, the Lord respected not our faith
as an impulsive cause moving him to elect us, but only as an effect of our
election; neither was the Lord merciful unto us in making choice of us to be
partakers of everlasting happiness, because we were faithful, but, that we
might be faithful, as Paul professes of himself 1. Cor. 7.25. And the holy
Ghost affirms, Act. 13.46. that as many of the Gentiles as were ordained unto
eternal life believed. Lastly, although the merit of Christ was the only
meritorious cause of our salvation, yet it was not the cause of Gods election,
for Gods election was from all eternity, and the cause of Christ's merits,
which were in time and the effects of Gods election, and therefore that which
came after could not be the cause of that which was from all eternity, neither
can the effect produce the cause, but the cause the effect. Moreover, we are
not said in the scriptures to be chosen for Christ, but in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
And the Apostle John affirms, that Gods eternal love was the cause which
moved the Lord to send his son to redeem us by his death, and not that his
death was the cause of his love, Ioh. 3.16. And so much concerning the
efficient cause of our election. The material cause thereof was the purpose or
counsel of God himself, whereby he determined to elect us.

The formal cause was the seuering and setting apart of certain men which
were to be saved,

The end of Gods election was twofold: the first and chief end was the glory
of God, set forth by manifesting his grace and mercy in the salvation of the
faithful. And this the Apostle plainly expresses Romans 9.23. namely, that the
end of Gods election is, that he might declare the riches of his glory in the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. And Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. he
says, that he has chosen us in Christ, and predestined us, to the praise of
the glory of his grace.

The second end which is inferior and subordinate to the other, is the
salvation of the elect, and this also is expressed by the Apostle Romans 9.23.
where he says, that the elect are prepared unto glory. And Act. 13.48. the
holy Ghost says, as many as were ordained to eternal life: thereby implying
that the salvation of the elect is the end of Gods election. And these are the
causes of Gods election. The effects which inseparably follow-hereupon, are
Christ the Mediator, and the whole work of his mediation and our redemption
wrought by him, our adoption, effectual calling, justification,
sanctification, and glorification; and these are the degrees and means of our
election, which are as well contained in Gods decree as our salvation it self.

The subject in which we are elected, is Christ Jesus our Mediator and head;
not in regard of his deity alone, for so he is the efficient cause; nor in
respect of his humanity alone, but as he is God and man. And we are therefore
elected in him, both because in our selves we were not capable of such glorious
dignity, as also because he alone is a fit Mediator in whom we should be
elected, seeing with our election there is an union and conjunction of us with
God who has elected us.

The object of Gods election are all those who are preordained unto everlasting
life, and whom the Lord will eternally save; which being considered in
themselves are a great number, but yet in respect of the number of the
reprobates but a small and little flock; for though many be called, yet few
are chosen, as Christ himself affirms, Matthew. 22.14.

The last thing, which also is expressed in the definition, are certain
properties attributed to Gods election; namely, that it is eternal, free and
immutable. That this decree is eternal, it appears Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen
us in him before the foundation of the world. So Romans 9.11.

Secondly, that it is free and of his mere grace, it is manifest Romans 9.18. He
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. So Ephesians. 1.11. In
whom we are chosen when we were predestinate, according to the purpose of him
which works all things after the counsel of his own will.

Lastly, that it is immutable and most firm and certain, it plainly appears
2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure; and has this seal, the
Lord knows who are his. Where we may observe, that this immutabilitie and
certainty of Gods decree, does not depend upon us or our perseverance, but
upon Gods good pleasure and foreknowledge, for it is a foundation in it self
firm and stable, and has not the seal of our worthiness or perseverance in
grace, but of Gods foreknowledge whereby he knows who are his.

CHAP. V. Satan's temptations concerning Gods election answered, and first
those wherewith he assaulteth carnal worldlings.
Satan's temptation whereby he persuades worldlings that all in the end shall
be saved, answered.
NOw concerning this decree of election and the assurance thereof, there are two
sorts of Satan's temptations: the first he suggesteth into the minds of carnal
worldlings, to nourish in them fond presumption and carnal security: the
other, into the minds of weak christians, whereby he moves them to doubt and
despair of their election to everlasting life. The worldly man he assaulteth
with two principal temptations: first, he persuades him that there is no
election at al or reprobation, but that all in the end shall be saved. Which
gross absurdity that he may make more plausible and probable, he sets
before them the infinite mercy of God, and the general promises and
consolations in the Gospel: Ezech. 13. and 18. 1. Tim. 2.4.
as, that he will not the death of a sinner, and that he will that all men
shall be saved, in both places cunningly dissembling that which follows; for
to the first place is added, but that he repent, and in the latter, that they
who shall be saved must also come to the knowledge of the truth.

But this temptation is so palpably absurd, that it becomes not Satan's
policy to use it to any, but those only whose hearts are hardened, their eyes
blinded, their consciences seared, and who having not believed and loved the
truth, are given over of God to believe strong delusions; and therefore I will
not spend much time in answering this temptation: only let such men as are
seduced with Satan's lies know thus much, that Gods mercy is a just mercy, as
his justice is a merciful justice; that God is infinite in both, and no less
glorified in the manifestation of the one than of the other. Let them know that
there are no promises of the Gospel so general, which are not limited with
the condition of faith, and the fruit thereof unfeigned repentance. Let them
know, that God who is not only merciful but also true, yea truth it self,
has in his word revealed his will, as well concerning the eternal death and
destruction of the wicked, as the salvation of the godly: he has said, Matthew.
22.14. and 7.13.
that many are called and few chosen; that the gate of heaven is so straight,
that there are few who find it; that he will say to the workers of iniquity,
Go your ways I know you not; 23.
that he will make a separation between the sheep and the goats, and as he
says to the one, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundations of the world, Mat. 25.34.41*
so he will say to the other, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the devil and his angels. Let them know that neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, not
thieves, nor covetous, 1. Cor. 6.9.10.
nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, nor any that live in the like
sins, without repentance, shall inherit the kingdom of God, for truth it
self has spoken it, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. but they shall have their part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Reu. 21.8.
which is the second death, as it is Revel. 21.8. And therefore let not Satan
bewitch them, by setting before their eyes Gods mercy; for as sure as God is
just and true of his word, so surely shall such as continue in their sins,
without repentance, be eternally condemned; neither is it any impeachment to
Gods mercy, if he exercise his justice in inflicting due punishment upon
obstinate and rebellious sinners, seeing it is sufficiently manifested in the
salvation of those who repent and believe.

Gods worship and service, Satan's temptation, grounded upon the
unchangeableness of Gods predestination.
and to what purpose should thou forsake thy pleasing sins, studying and
striving after mortification and newness of life, which is so bitter and
unpleasant unto thee? for Gods decree of predestination is sure and most
unchangeable as himself is without change, and therefore if thou art elected
of God thou may follow thy delights, go on in thy sins, live as thou
list, yet surely thou shall be saved, and he will give thee repentance, though
it be deferred to the last gasp. But if on the other side thou art a
reprobate, rejected of God in his eternal council, then take what pains thou will, make thy throat horce with praying, and thy bags empty with giving
alms, be never so diligent in Gods service, never so careful in mortifying
thy sins, yet all is in vain, for those whom he has reprobated shall be
condemned. And therefore much better were it to take thy pleasure and to follow
thine own desires whilst thou art in this life: for the punishments of the
life to come will be enough, though thou addest no torments of this life unto
them.

That the former temptation is both foolish and ridiculous false and impious.
And thus does Satan reason in the mind of a carnal man, partly to continue
and increase his security in the course of sin, and partly to discredit the
holy doctrine of Gods eternal predestination, as though it opened a door to
all licentiousness. But if we consider of this temptation aright, and sound it
to the bottom, we shall find first that it is most foolish and ridiculous,
secondly that it is most false and impious. That it is most foolish it will
easily appear, if we use the like manner of reasoning in worldly matters; for
it is all one as if a man should thus say: thy time is appointed, and the Lord
in his counsel has set down how long thou shall live; if therefore it be
ordained that thy time shall be short, use what means thou will of physic
and good diet, yet shall thou not prolong it one day; but if God has decreed
that thou shall live to old age, take what courses thou will, run into all
desperate dangers, use surfeiting and all disorder of diet, nay eat no meat
at all, and yet thou shall live till thou art an old man. Or as if he should
say; God has decreed already whether thou shall be rich or poor, and if he
has appointed thee to be poor, take never so much pains, follow thy calling
as diligently as thou will, abstain from all wastfulnesse and prodigality,
yet shall thou never get any wealth: but if thou art preordained to be rich,
sell all thou have and scatter it abroad in the streets, spend thy time in
gaming, drinking and whoring, never troubling thy head with care, nor thy hands
with work, yet shall thou be a welthie man. Now who would not laugh at such
absurd manner of reasoning if any should use it? because every man knows,
that as God has decreed the time of our life, so he has decreed also that we
should use the means, whereby our lives may be preserved so long as he has
ordained that we should live, namely avoiding of dangers, good diet, and
physic; and as he has decreed that a man should be rich, so he has decreed
also that he should use all good means of attaining unto riches, namely
providence and pains in getting, and care and frugalitie in keeping that he
has gotten; and whosoever use not the means, do make it manifest that they
were not ordained unto the end. Although indeed, because the Lord would show
his absolute and almighty power, he does not always tie himself unto means,
but sometimes crosses and makes them ineffectual to their ends, and sometime
he effects what he will, without or contrary to all means; and hence it is
that some quickly die who use all means to preserve health, and some become
poor who use al means of obtaining riches, whereas others being deprived of
the means attain unto long life and riches by the immediate blessing of God.
But ordinarily the means and end go together, and therefore it is fond
presumption to imagine or hope, without the use of the means, to attain unto
the end. And thus it is also in spiritual matters appertaining to everlasting
life; those whom God has elected, he has ordained also that they should
attain unto and use all good means tending thereunto, namely faith,
repentance, sanctification, and newness of life: and therefore it is as absurd
for any to imagine, that they shall be saved continuing in their ignorance,
infidelity, vnrepentancie, and filthy corruptions, as it is for a man to
think that he shall live to be old, and yet runs into all dangers,
forsakes physic yea and food also whereby his life should be sustained. For
the spiritual means of salvation are as well (nay much more) contained in
Gods decree, as the corporal means of preserving life: for it has been
heard-of, that some have lived in the midst of dangers, and in the absence
of meat, for a long time; but it was never heard that any have attained unto
everlasting life without faith, repentance, and sanctification: for even the
thief upon the cross believed in Christ, and showed the fruits of his faith
in acknowledging his own sin reproouing his fellow, in confessing our
Savior Christ even then when his Apostles denied and forsook him, in calling
upon his name and desiring by his means everlasting life.

Satan's temptation grounded upon the unchangeableness of Gods decree false
and impious.
so also it is false; for whereas he says that though we live in our sins
without repentance, yet we may be elected and therefore shall be saved; and
though we take never so great pains in Gods service, and most carefully
endeavor to spend our lives in holiness and righteousness, yet we may be
reprobates and therefore shall be condemned; this is utterly untrue: for,
whomsoever the Lord has ordained to everlasting life, those also he has
ordained to use the means whereby they may be saved, and consequently
whosoever carefully use these means may be assured of their salvation,
whosoever neglect and despise these means they manifestly declare that they
are not in the number of the elect, so long as they continue in their neglect
and contempt: for the end and the means tending to the end, are inseparably
joined in Gods decree; so that they who use the one shall obtain the other,
they who neglect and contemn the means shall never attain unto the end.

The end of Gods election two fold. Ephesians. 1.5.6.
Now the end of Gods election is two fould. The chief and principal is his
own glory, as appears Ephesians. 1.5.6. Who has predestinate us to be adopted
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will;
to the praise of the glory of his grace. And this end the Lord will not suffer
to be frustrate: for his glory shall shine in all his elect, and therefore we
also are most carefully to labor that we may further this end; for the more
that the praise of Gods mercy does shine in us, the better assurance we have
of our election. And seeing God is most glorified when as our lights shine
brightest before men in a godly and christian life, Mat. 6.16. 1. Pet. 2.21.
therefore let us be most careful to spend our time in holiness and
righteousness, that thereby we may glorify our heavenly father, and also make
our own election sure; Ephesians. 1.4.
for he has chosen us that we should be holy, and therefore if we be holy it
is a most certain sign that he has chosen us.

The second end of Gods election.
The second end of Gods election is the salvation of his elect; for the just
accomplishing whereof, he has preordained diverse subordinate causes or means,
which are the inseparable effects and fruits of his election; all which are so
linked one with another, as that the precedent means is the cause of that
which next in order follows, and Gods decree the cause of all. The effects of
Gods election, which are the subordinate causes or means of our salvation, are
principally three; Vocation, Justification, and Sanctification. By vocation we
are separated from the world, made members of the Church, and ingrafted in to
the body of Christ; and this is ordinarily done by the preaching of the word
being made effectual by the inward operation of Gods spirit, or extraordinarily
by some other means, or immdiately by the illumination of the holy Ghost. In
our justification we have the pardon and remission of all our sins by virtue
of Christ's merit, and are adorned with his righteousness imputed unto us: and
this is done, principally by God himself, and instrumentally by a lively
faith. Our sanctification consists in our dying to sin, and rising up to
newnes of life; which is begun, increased, and finished in us by Gods spirit.
Whosoever therefore are predestinate to salvation, they also are effectually
called, that is separate from the world* and ingrafted into the body of Christ;
and this they attain unto by diligent and attentive hearing of the word.
Whosoever are effectually called, are also justified; and therefore have
obtained a true and lively faith. Whosoever are justified are also sanctified,
that is, die unto their sins, and rise again to newnes of life, and
consequently whosoever are still mere worldlings and no true members of
Christ's body (as all those are who make no conscience of hearing Gods word
diligently, reverently, and attentively, nor of treasuring it up in their
hearts) they are not truly called; whosoever have not Christ's righteousness
and obedience imputed and applied unto them (which none have that are destitute
of a true and fruitful faith) are not justified; whosoever live in their
sins, without repentance, without any earnest desire and hearty endeavor of
serving the Lord in holiness and righteousness of life are not sanctified;
and whosoever are not called, justified and sanctified, shall never be saved;
for the end and the means tending thereunto are joined together in Gods
predestination. So that where the one is, there the other is; where the one
never is, there the other shall ever be wanting. And therefore as by our
sanctification, justification, and vocation, we may certainly conclude that we
are elected and shall be saved; so if we be without these, we may as certainly
infer that we are rejected, and shall be condemned if we live and die in
this state.

Seeing then this is Gods truth, let not Satan lull us in security with that
sophistical cavil; if we be elected we shall be saved live how we list; if
we be reprobates we shall be condemned, be we never so earnest in laboring
after godliness: for these principles may well stand together, it is
impossible that the elect should perish, and as impossible also that any who
believe not in Christ, and bring not forth the fruits of their faith in a
godly and Christian life should be saved; it cannot be that the reprobate
should attain unto everlasting happiness, and that any should not attain
thereunto, who desires and endeavors to serve and fear the Lord: because
predestination and salvation are so coupled together with the means that come
between them, that they cannot possibly be severed from one another, nor the
means from either of them, nor yet amongst themselves; even as the first
lincke of a chain is joined with the last by those which are between them,
and these which are in the middle one with another.

CHAP. VI. Satan's temptations whereby he moves the weak Christian to doubt
of his election, answered.
The causes which move Satan and his instruments to persuade the weak
Christian to doubt of his election.
but if he have to deal with a true Christian, who is indeed elected of God,
and shows the fruits of his election, by desiring and endeavoring to serve
the Lord in holiness and righteousness, then he persuades him to doubt of his
election, and to hang as it were wavering in the air, sometime lifted up with
hope, sometime dejected and cast down with fear, till at last he being weary
and tired with his doubtful thoughts, and having no where to rest himself, is
swallowed up of desperation: like unto a silly bird which flies over the
maine Ocean, and one while hops to attain unto the land, another while
fears seeing no place where to light, till at last being so weary that she
can fly no further, she falls down and is drowned in the sea. So these one
while hope, and soon after finding their own infirmities, and not seeing
where they may rest their wavering minds, doubt and fear, till at last through
weariness they sink down and are swallowed up in the gulf of desperation,
where they are drowned and destroyed, if it do not please the Lord to lift
them up again, and to show them the firm Rock Jesus Christ, whereupon they may
rest their weary minds and refresh their fainting souls; which he always
does perform to those that belong to his election; for it is impossible that
any of them should perish, though Satan and all the power of hell seek their
ruin and destruction.

But at this mark Satan aims though he never hitteth it, and though he
never finally prevail, yet to this doubting, and in the end despairing, he
labors to persuade the true Christian; neither does he content himself
with the forces of his own temptations, but he joins with him the world,
which is as ready as Satan himself to oppugn the certainty of our
election, and our own traiterous flesh which is easily moved to doubting and
despair, when as it sees nothing in it self whereupon it may rest. In the
world he makes his choice not of silly ignorant men, but of the most subtle
Sophisters and learned Doctors, the true successors of the Scribes and
Pharisees, even the whole rabble of the Popish clergy; who stand on Satan's
part stoutly fighting his battles, being persuaded and overcome by that
temptation which our Savior Christ withstood, All this will I give thee. For
to what end (I pray you) do these great Doctors so stiffly stand in the defense
of Satan's cause, persuading men might and maine to doubt of their election,
and consequently of their salvation? Surely that by emptying men's minds of all
true comfort, they may fill their own chests, and get the treasures of the
earth into their possessions. For when the weak conscience wauereth and
doubts of his election, and not finding any true consolation whereupon it may
rest, comes unto them for some comfort and better assurance; they behave
themselves like unto ungracious Surgeons, who intending to make a pray of their
patients, and to get their gains out of their pains and tortures, do one day
heal, and the next day hinder the cure, making the wound worse than it was
when they took it in hand, til at last they have so poisoned the sore that it
is past their cure, whereas they could easily have healed it, if they had not
regarded their profit more than their own credit, or their patients health: or
like unto deceitful Lawyers, who sometimes speak in their clients cause, and
sometimes betray it, going about in a tedious circuit, whereas the direct way
lies open before them, that so their clients cause being made more doubtful
and tedious, and themselves impatient of delays, are feign to double and
trebble their fees, and yet oftentimes to no purpose, because the more they
receive, the fitter they think them to be their perpetual Clients. So do
these Popish Surgeons and Romish counsailers deal with their Pacient and
Client; for showing his wounded conscience, and desiring some comfort at their
hands, they will not make any sovereign salve of the simples which they might
gather out of Gods word, whereby he might soon be healed, for then their cure,
and consequently their gains were at an end: but they hold him in suspense,
and increase his disease of doubting, applying thereunto poisons in stead of
salues, whereby at last his wound is made desperate. Thou can not (will they
say) attain unto any certain assurance of thine election, for that were fond
presumption; but thou art to hope well: and that thou may confirm thy hope,
thou must make vows and go on pilgrimage, to invoke and offer unto these
and these saints, thou must do these works of supererogation, build such a
Monastery, repair such a Church, give so much money to such a Cloister, buie
these Indulgences, whereby thou may receive pardon for thy sins; and for
more surety sake, thou shall at thy death bequeath so much money to the
Priests, for Masses, Trentals and Dirges, that if it happen thou go into
Purgatory, thou may speedely be delivered: but all this while they speak
not a word of Gods undeserved grace and free election, not a syllable of
Christ's death and satisfaction for our sins; no, this were too sovereign a
salve, and would too soon heal the wounded conscience, and so mar the
market of these mount-bankes, making their Vows, Pilgrimages, Masses, Dirges,
Indulgences, and other trumpery-ware not worth the cheapning.

The state of this question between the Christian and Satan with his
assistants.
whom he feeth with worldly riches to plead his cause. We hold that a man
truly converted, endued with a lively faith and sanctified, may ordinarily be
assured that he is the child of God, elected to salvation: but they affirm
that it is presumption for such to have any certain assurance hereof, unless
it be by extraordinary revelation; he may hope indeed that he is elected and
shall be saved, but this hope must he tempered with fear, and mixed with
doubting; and this doubting they call humility, which they do not account an
infirmity, but rather a virtue which does commend their faith, esteeming firm
assurance to be but heretical confidence and damnable presumption, and
pronouncing him accursed in their council of Trent, who affimeth that we are
to believe without doubting the remission of our own sin and everlasting
life in particular.

And because they cannot but confess, that doubting and believing, in
themselves are opposed one against another; they teach, that their faith is
assured of Gods mercy and Christ's merits, as in themselves infinite and
sufficient; but it doubts (in respect of our unworthiness and manifold
imperfections) to apply them particularly unto our selves: so that when we
look upon God and Christ, there is cause of firm assurance, but when we look
upon our selves, there is nothing but matter of doubting, there is in deed some
place left to their staggering hope, but none to assurance of faith: as though
our faith were grounded on our own worthiness, and not upon Gods free mercy
and Christ's merits; and as though resting upon these alone, it could not have
certain assurance of our election and salvation, notwithstanding our
unworthiness and corruptions. But let us arm our selves against this their
doctrine, which contains nothing else but principles whereupon satan may
ground his temptations, whereby he persuades us first to doubting, and
afterward to despairing of our election and salvation; for when the troubled
conscience has no other assurance of Gods love and his own election, but that
which is gathered from his own worthiness and works, he still doubts
whether yet he be worthy, or have fulfilled the measure of works required; and
then further examining himself to clear his doubt, and finding his best
works exceeding imperfect, and that his sins and corruptions are
innumerable, then is his conscience set upon the rack, and his soul plunged
into deep despair, having no other stay but the broken staff of his own
righteousness, which most deceives him when he most trusts to it.

The points to be considered of in this controversy.
and the subtle sophistry of these his Doctors, I will handle this point at
large, and will plainly prove, first, that the child of God being converted,
justified and sanctified, may be certainly assured of his particular election,
and that without any special revelation after an ordinary manner. Secondly, I
will show the means whereby we may attain unto this assurance; and the
infallible signs of our election. Lastly, I will answer such objections as
are made against it by satan and his adherents.

That we may be certainly assured of our election, proved by the testimonies of
the Scriptures.
Concerning the first, namely, that we may be certainly assured of our election
and salvation, it may be proved by testimonies of Scriptures, and also by
infallible reasons grounded upon them. For we must not think that we can have
this assurance, by ascending into heaven, and there searching into Gods secret
decree, but we must gather it out of Gods word, wherein the Lord has revealed
his will unto us: and in regard hereof, though Gods will in it self be secret,
so that we may ask who has known the will of the Lord? 1. Cor. 2.16.
yet seeing the Lord has revealed his hidden will in his word, we may say with
Paul, that we have known the mind of Christ. Now this knowledge of Gods will
concerning our election, is not to be gathered out of the law, as the Papists
would have it; for by reason of the condition annexed to the promise of
everlasting life (Do this and live) it leaves our consciences in perpetual
doubting, nay, rather in utter desperation, because we know that we are far
from the exact obedience thereof: but out of the gracious promises of the
Gospel, The covenant of grace made to assure us of our election.
freely made to every one who believes, without any condition of our own
works and worthiness. And therefore if we believe the promises of the
Gospel made in Christ, we may be assured of our election and salvation, though
in our selves we are miserable sinners, who have transgressed all Gods
commandments: for the covenant and promises of God made to Abraham and his
seed, was not through the law, but through the righteousness of faith, as it
is Rom 4.13. and therefore it is by faith, that it might come by grace, and the
promise might be sure, not in self only, and in respect of the sufficiency
of Gods mercy and Christ's merits, as the Papists dream; but to all the seed,
that is, to all that believe, and be the children of Abraham, who was the
father of the faithful both Jew and Gentill. For otherwise we should have no
better assurance of salvation by the Gospel than by the Law; for even the
promise of the Law was most sure in it self and on Gods part, yet not sure to
us who could not perform the condition: and therefore the Lord made a new
covenant, not of works but of grace, only on the condition of faith; that so
the promise might be sure, not only in it self and on Gods behalf, but also
unto us who are Abraham's seed, that is, true believers, as appears Romans
4.16. And this also notably appears Heb. 6.17.18. where the Apostle says,
Romans 4.16. Heb. 6.17.18.
that God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
stablenes of his counsel, bound himself by an oath, 18. That by two
immutable things wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have
strong consolation, which have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set
before us, 19. Which we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast.
In which words the Apostle plainly shows, that the Lord has added his oath
to his promise, not to the end that in it self it should be confirmed, or
needed any confirmation on Gods part (for his bare word is yea and Amen, so
infallible and sure, that though heaven and earth pass away and perish, yet
not one jot or title of his word shall fail till all things be fulfilled) but
to the end that we to whom the promises are made, Mat. 5.18.
might be assured of the stablenesse of his counsel, and thereby receive
strong consolation, and might rest our souls in the tempests of temptations
upon firm hope, as it were upon a steadfast and sure anchor. Now what
stabilitie, what strong consolation, what steadfastness of hope, if we are
still uncertain of our election, sometimes hoping, as when we look upon Gods
mercy and Christ's merits, and sometimes doubting, as when we look upon our
own sins and unworthiness? For what is this but to be shaken from our
anchor hold, and to be tossed up and down with the waves of doubting, till at
last we dash against the rocks of despair, and so make shipwreck of our
souls?

Particular testimonies proving this point.
that we might be assured of our election, and that the whole Gospel is
nothing else but Gods embassage, whereby he certifieth us of his free and
undeserved love in Jesus Christ: but let us further consider of some special
testimonies whereby this assurance is confirmed. Romans 5.1. it is said, Romans 5.1.
that being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. But what peace can we have, if we be not assured of our
election, but have our minds distracted and racked between faith and
doubting, hope and despair? Romans 8.38. the Apostle professes, Romans 8.38.
that he is persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, etc. nor any other creature should be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. It is true (will the tempter
say) that Paul had this assurance of his election and salvation, but it was by
some special revelation, and nor ordinarily; and therefore it follows not
hereof that every particular Christian can have this assurance. I answer, that
the Apostle groundeth not his faith on revelations in that place, but on a
foundation common to him with all true Christians, namely on the death of
Christ, verse. 32. Verse. 23.33.34.
on Gods free justification, ver. 33. and upon Christ's intercession, ver. 34.
and from hence he confirms his and our resolution, that nothing should
separate us from the love of Christ, verse. 35. from the love of God in him.
Whosoever therefore with Paul believes that Christ died for him, that God
freely justifies him through Christ's merits, and that our Savior fitteth at
the right hand of his Father to make intercession for him, he may be assured of
Gods love, and consequently of his election. Secondly, Paul speaks this not
of himself alone, but also of all the faithful, and therefore he uses the
plural number, I am persuaded that nothing shall be able to separate us. So
Ephesians. 3.12. the Apostle says, that we have through Christ boldness and
entrance with confidence by faith in him. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 4.16. and 10.22.
And Heb. 4.16. he exhorts us to go boldly unto the throne of grace, that
we may receive mercy etc. And chap. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true
heart in assurance of faith, etc. But I would feign know what entrance with
confidence, what boldness and assurance of faith, when we draw near unto God,
and present our selves before his throne of majesty, if we remain doubtful
of his love and our election? So Heb. 6.19. he says that our hope is a sure
and steadfast anchor of the soul; Heb. 6.19.
but what certainty or stedfastnes is there in it, if it waver and stagger
through doubtfulnes, so often as we look upon our sins and unworthiness?
The Apostle Peter also does tell us, that the trust which we have through Jesus
Christ must be perfect, 1. Pet. 1.13.
that is, entire and perpetual, till we enjoy the thing which we hope for, 1.
Pet. 1.13. And 2. Pet. 1.10, he exhorts us to use all diligence that we may
make our calling and election sure: which if we could not do, he should
persuade us to the undertaking of a needelesse labor. Nay he plainly assures
us, that if we do these things (to wit if we join virtue with our faith, and
with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance
patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness love) we shall never fall; because
these are effects and undoubted signs of our election. And the Apostle John
would not have it a matter doubtful, whether we are elected and shall be saved
or no; but certainly known and undoubtedly believed: and therefore he aims
principally at this mark, and propounds this as the chief end of his
epistle, namely to show how we might know ordinarily, and be fully assured that
we are beloved of God, 1. Ioh. 3.14.
elected, and shall be saved. So 1. Ioh. 3.14. We know that we are translated
from death to life because we love the brethren. And therefore in the latter
end of his epistle he says, that he had written it to this end, that we might
know that we have eternal life. chap. 5.13. and 5.13.
Seeing then the Scriptures do commend unto us a steadfast and assured faith,
whereby we particularly are assured and persuaded of our election and
salvation, notwithstanding our sins and unworthiness: therefore let not the
tempter persuade us to cast away this certain persuasion, and to waver in
doubting; but let us say with the Apostle Paul 2. Tim. 1.12, 2. Tim. 1.12.
Though I am unworthy yet I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that
he is able to keep that which I have committed to him.

An objection grounded upon the indefinitnesse of Gods promises answered.
that the promises of the Gospel are general and indefinit, and therefore no
man can gather out of them any certain assurance of his particular election. I
answer that this consequence is false: for out of a general and indefinit
proposition, we may truly and by the laws of reason gather and infer a
particular conclusion, though not contrariwise. For example, if I thus
conclude; all men are reasonable creatures: but I am a man; therefore I am a
reasonable creature: it is rightly and truly inferred. Though therefore the
promises of the Gospel be contained in general propositions, yet may every
faithful man as certainly conclude, that they belong unto him, as if they
were particularly applied unto him by name. Ioh. 3.16.
For when the Lord by his ambassadors makes this general proposition in the
preaching of the word; whosoever truly believe in Christ, they are all elected
unto everlasting life; the faithful hearer makes this assumption in his
mind, but I by the grace of God, and by the preaching of his word made
effectual by his spirit, have a true faith begotten in me, whereby I believe
in Christ my Savior; and therefore Gods promise of life and salvation
belongs unto me. And thus also does the conscience of man out of the general
curses of the law conclude that he is accursed; for when the law delivers
this proposition in general, Cursed is every one who abides not in all things
which are written in the book of the law to do them; Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
every particular man makes this assumption in his own conscience, but I have
not continued in all to do it, nay in stead of doing all, I have neglected
all, in sted of continuing in obedience, I have been continually disobedient,
in sted of doing the duties commanded, I have committed the sins forbidden,
and therefore by the sentence of the law I am accursed. So that though both the
threatenings of the law, and the promises of the Gospel be general and
indefinit, yet does every man's conscience truly informed by Gods word, gather
out of them most certain particular conclusions.

That we may be assured that we are the faithful, unto whom the promises of
the Gospel are made.
it is true indeed that every faithful man, may apply the general promises
of the Gospel unto himself, but all the question is whether thou can know
that thou have faith or no, seeing many who continue in their infidelity,
brag most of their faith. I answer that it cannot be denied but that many
are deceived, by contenting themselves with their carnal security, in stead
of a lively faith; but hence it follows not, that because many are deceived
with an opinion of faith, therefore those that believe indeed cannot be
assured that they have faith; no more then this follows, some men dream that
they are rich, and are not so indeed when they awake, therefore no man knows
whether he be rich or no; for what is their secure opinion, but an idle dream
of their own brains, which has no warrant out of Gods word? where as faith
certainly and evidently persuades, and like a candle does not only manifest
other things, but also it self appears by his own light. So that as a man
who sees and feels the fire and the heat thereof, does certainly know that
he sees and feels it, so he that believes in Christ does know that he
believes indeed: yea as much more certain is this knowledge, as the
knowledge of faith grounded upon Gods word which is infallible, is more
certain than the knowledge of the senses, which are often deceived.
Furthermore if we could not be assured that we have faith, then to what purpose
serves the admonition of the Apostle 2. Cor. 13.5. 2. Cor. 13.5.
Try your selves whether you are in the faith, examine your selves: know you
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates?
In which words the Apostle plainly implies, that we may know that we have a
true and lively faith, or else this trial and examination were vain: nay he
plainly says that we may know that Christ is in us, except we be reprobates,
and consequently that we have faith; for this only is the hand whereby we
apply Christ unto us and all his benefits. 1. Cor. 11.28.
So 1. Cor. 11.28. the Apostle wills us to examine our selves before we come
to the Lords table, that so we be not unworthy guests; in which examination
the chief thing which we are to respect, is whether we have a true faith; for
this is the mouth of the soul, whereby we feed upon the body and blood of our
Savior Christ; and therefore unless we can know whether we have faith when we
are truly endued therewith, this admonition of the Apostle were to no purpose;
neither can we have any assurance to our own souls, that we are worthy
guests of the Lords table, and consequently we rest doubtful whether we
receive the Sacrament to our spiritual good and salvation, or to our judgment
and condemnation. Thirdly, we are assured of this by Gods word that whatsoever
is not done of Romans 14.23.
faith is sin. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
And without faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6. If therefore we
cannot be assured that we have faith, we can have no assurance that our best
actions, our calling upon Gods name, our hearing of his word, and all other
duties of piety and justice, are any better than sins and odious in Gods
sight: whereof it must needs follow that these actions, how good so ever in
themselves, will be done of us in doubting, because we know not whether they be
done in faith; and being done doubtingly they become sins indeed, and
therefore displeasing in Gods sight. Lastly, if I can know whether I believe a
man upon his word, and whether I trust and rely my self upon his promise or
no; why may I not much more know whether I believe Gods gracious promises made
unto all repentant sinners, and amongst the rest unto my self, namely, that
for the obedience and merits of Christ, I shall have remission of my sins and
everlasting life? seeing this faith is not out of our selves, but a gift of God
wrought in us by his holy spirit, which is not idle in us, for it pu^ifieth the
heart, and works by love; it moves us to hate and fly from those sins we
have loved, and to embrace and love that holiness and righteousness of life
which heretofore has been loathsome unto us. As therefore the fire is known
by his heat, the sun by the light, the good tree by his fruits, so when our
cold hearts are inflamed with the love of God, and a fervent zeal of his
glory, when our blind understandings are enlightened with the knowledge of
God, and of the true religion, when we bring forth the fruits of our
profession in a godly and christian life, then may we certainly know that we
are endued with a true and lively faith.

A temptation grounded upon our assurance of faith, answered.
that he has no faith, seeing he does not certainly know that he has it, nor
discerns these signs and fruits of faith in himself. To this suggestion we
are to answer, that we do not say that the weak christian may be assured at
all times, that he has faith by his present sense; for first when we are newly
converted, and the seeds of faith are sown in our hearts, we do not
presently discern it; but as the corn which is cast into the ground, is for a
time covered and after springs up the blade, and then the ear; so faith
being sown in our hearts, which first like fallow grounds are plowed up, and
as it were harrowed and broken with the threatenings of the law, and
apprehension of Gods anger due unto our sins, does in the time of our
humiliation and contrition, lie covered so as we cannot discern it, till being
more and more watered with the water of the spirit, and the heavenly promises
of the Gospel, which in the preaching of the word, like sweet dewes and
pleasant showers distill upon it, it sends forth the blade, namely an holy
desire and earnest endeavor to serve God, and afterward the fruit, even a
plentiful harvest in godliness and righteousness of life.

And secondly, sometime after that faith is begun in us, and we have seen the
fruits thereof to our comfort, it is after hid from us again, as when either
we wound our conscience by committing some grievous sin against knowledge
wittingly and willingly, or when it pleases the Lord to exercise us in the
spiritual conflict of temptations; for then sometimes it comes to pass that
our faith for a time lies hid under the ashes of our corruptions; and the
cloud of our sins, and the apprehension of Gods anger, does so ouershadow
the eyes of our understanding that we cannot discern the beams of Gods love
and favor shining upon us; although when the conflict is ended, our faith
again flameth out in the love of God, and zeal of his glory, and the loving
countenance of the Lord shines graciously upon us when these clouds of
temptations are ouerpast. And therefore though we do not certainly know our
faith by the fruits thereof, either soon after our conversion, or in the time
of temptation, yet this must not discourage us, because these are no fit times
to judge thereof: only when we want this knowledge and full assurance, let us
use all good means ordained of God that we may attain thereunto if we never
had it; or recover and again renew it, if after we have once had it, we lose
the sense and feeling thereof, either by falling into heinous sins, or by the
violence of Satan's temptations.

CHAP. VII. That we may be assured of our election, proved by diverse arguments.
First, because the Gospel manifestly shows that we are elected.
that we may infallibly be assured of our election; now I will also prove the
same by strong arguments, drawn from the same fountain. First therefore we
may thus reason; Whatsoever is manifestly showed unto us in the Gospel, that we
are bound to believe, and of that we may be assured: but it is manifestly
declared in the Gospel, that we are elected unto everlasting life: and
therefore we are bound to believe it, and may be assured that we are elected.
The proposition or first part of this reason contains two branches: the first
is, that we are bound to believe whatsoever the Gospel reuealeth; the second,
that we may be assured of it; both which are evident truths. For that which
Christ commands, that we are bound to perform: but he commands us to
believe the Gospel, Mar. 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel. Mark. 1.15. 1.
Ioh. 3.23.
So this is his commandment that we believe etc. 1. Ioh. 3.23. The breach of
which commandment is punished with everlasting death. For he that will not
believe shall be damned, as it is Mar. Mar. 16.16.
16.16. And as we are bound to believe it, so we may also come to be assured
thereof; seeing the Gospel commands us nothing, which it does not also by
the inward and ordinary cooperation of Gods spirit enable us to perform. For
this difference is between the commandments of the Law and the commandments
of the Gospel: the Law shows us the duties which we should perform, but
ministers unto us no power whereby we may be enabled to perform them; but
the Gospel being assisted with the operation of Gods spirit, does command and
withal gives us ability to perform the commandment, for the words of the
Gospel are spirit and life, as our Savior speaks, Ioh. 6.63.
6.63. and with the preaching thereof the spirit inwardly works, quickening
and strengthening us to perform that which it enioyneth. The assumption or
second part of the reason is also clear, namely, that the Gospel manifests
unto us our election; for what else is the whole Gospel but a declaration of
Gods love, and of our election and redemption in and by Jesus Christ? what is
it else but the embassage whereby God reconcileth us unto himself? what else is
contained therein, but Gods merciful promises of life and salvation, made on
no other condition but on the condition of faith, which we need not fear to
perform, seeing it is commanded us of God? and therefore though we had no
other reason to believe, yet we should believe in obedience to Gods
commandment, seeing, he commands nothing which is not good in it self,
tending to his own glory and our salvation; and if we do believe, though our
unworthiness be never so great, yea though our faith be never so weak and
small, yet may we thereby be assured of our election and salvation; for this
is Gods will, Ioh. 6.40. and 3.36.
that whosoever believes in his son shall have everlasting life, as it is
Ioh. 6.40. So Ioh. 3.36. He that believes in the son has everlasting life.
But most notable is that place 1. Ioh. 1. Ioh. 5.10.
5.10. He that believes in the son of God, has the witness in himself:
that is, they need no other reasons to persuade them, that the testimony
which God has given of his son (namely, that whosoever believe in him shall
have everlasting life) is true; for they have full and sufficient assurance
hereof by their faith. Whosoever therefore can be assured that they believe in
Jesus Christ (as all may who bring forth the fruits of faith in sanctification
and holiness of life, or at least desire and endeavor to serve the Lord in the
duties of piety and righteousness) they may be assured, nay they are bound by
Gods express commandment, undoubtedly to believe they are elected and shall
be saved, because all the promises of the Gospel are made unto them without
any other condition.

Secondly, we are assured that we are redeemed, and consequently that we are
elected.
they are also undoubtedly to believe and may also be assured of their
election; but every Christian is bound by Gods express commandment to believe
that Jesus Christ is their Savior and Redeemer, as appears 1. Ioh. 3.23. and
therefore they are undoubtedly to believe and may be assured of their
election. The proposition is manifest, seeing all those and those only are
saved and redeemed by Christ, Romans 8.30. Matthew. 25.34. Act. 13.48.
who are elected to salvation in Gods eternal decree. The assumption is most
certain, for whereas God commands us to believe in Jesus Christ, he does not
only enjoin us to believe that he is a Savior of his Church in general, or
of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles alone, for this also the devils
believe as well as we; but we are to believe that he is our Savior and
Redeemer, and to apply all the promises of life and salvation made in him,
particularly unto our selves; for otherwise how should we have that assurance
of faith and that bold confidence when we approach unto the throne of grace,
Heb. 4.16. and 10.22.
which the Apostle requires of us, Heb. 4.16. and 10.22. if we cannot be
assured that he is our Savior and Redeemer, in whom God loves and has
elected us?

That our assurance should not be mixed with doubting.
as the Papists would bear us in hand, who make doubting not an infirmity,
but a commendable virtue of their faith: for faith and doubting though they are
often mixed in Gods children, yet in respect of their own natures they are
opposed in the scriptures one against the other. So it is said of Abraham, Romans
4.20.
that he doubted not of Gods promise through unbelief, but was strengthened in
the faith, Romans 4.20. where the Apostle shows, that doubting is a fruit of
unbelief and not a commendable virtue; nay, he opposes it to faith, saying,
that he doubted not of the promise, but was strengthened in the faith. So the
Apostle James chap. 1.5. says, If any man lack wisdom, Iam. 1.5.
let him ask in faith and waver not; where he opposes faith to wavering or
doubting. And our Savior Christ also makes this opposition, Matthew, 21.21.
saying, If ye have faith and doubt not. Matthew. 21.21.
So that though faith and doubting are not opposed in respect of the subject
wherein they are, for even the most dear children of God have their faith
often mixed with doubting, they being partly flesh and partly spirit; yet these
two in their own natures are opposed one against the other; and even in
respect of their subject they thus far disagree, that though they have their
subsistence in the same subject, yet not in the same part; that is, though they
be in the same man, yet not in the same part, for faith is in the regenerate
and spiritual part, doubting in the unregenerate or fleshly part.

Doubting a fruit of unbelief opposed unto faith.
Doubting then is no virtue of faith, but opposed thereunto as a fruit of
unbelief; it proceeds not from the spirit but from the flesh, and as a
fruit of the flesh it is condemned in Gods word, though the Papists highly
commend it. So Matthew. 14.31. our Savior reprehendeth Peter for his doubting; O
thou of little faith, Matthew. 14.31.
wherefore did thou doubt? And Luke 12.29. he tells us that we must not
stand in doubt, or (as the word (...) signifies) be not like unto meteors
which are carried about in the air with every wind. Luke 12.29.
And the Apostle James chap. Iam. 1.7.
1.7. compares him that wauereth or doubts, to a wave of the sea tossed of the
wind and carried away. And Paul is so far from commending doubting for a
virtue, that he does not only condemn it as a sin in it self, but also as
a cause which makes our actions which are indifferent or good in themselves to
become sins. So the eating of this or that meat is a thing indifferent and
lawful if it be recciued with prayer and thanksgiving, but yet the Apostle
tells us Romans 14.23. that he who doubts is condemned if he eat; Romans 14.23.
and he renders this reason, because he eats not of faith, and whatsoever is
not of faith is sin. So that by this he shows, that he who doubts,
eats not of faith; and that whatsoever is not done of faith is sin. Seeing
therefore doubting is opposed unto faith, and is in it self not only a sin,
but also a cause of sin; let us not intertaine it though it bring letters
commendatorie from the Pope and all his shauelings; but labor to banish it out
of our hearts, and strive after faith and full assurance of our election and
salvation in Christ Jesus; and though we find our great unworthiness of the
least of Gods mercies, and cannot see any reason in our selves why we should
believe that we are elected and shall be saved, yet let us hope against hope,
and believe against belief, for it is not a thing left to our choice but
enjoined us by God, as the chief and maine duty required in the Gospel: and
therefore laying aside all reasoning and disputing, let us resolve to believe
in obedience to Gods commandment; and then though we are never so full of
corruptions, Act. 15.9.
yet will this faith purify us; though we are most backward in perfourming
any good work, yet will it be fruitful in us, Galat. 5 6.
and will work by love; though we be most unworthy, it will make us more
worthy, by applying unto us the righteousness of Christ and the merits of his
death and bloodshed, which will not only free us from the guilt and punishment
of sin, but will also purge us from the vices and corruptions themselves.

Thirdly, faith is a certain and particular persuasion, and not a doubtful
opinion or general notion.
by an argument drawn from the nature of faith: which is not a doubtful
opinion, but a certain persuasion; not a general notion, but a particular
assurance, whereby we do apply and appropriate unto our selves those things
which we do believe. Whosoever therefore has true faith, he does certainly
believe and is particularly assured of his election, justification and
salvation. That faith is a certain persuasion, it may appear first by those
properties and names which are given unto it in the word. Heb. 11.1. faith is
said to be (...), that is, Heb. 11.1.
a subsistence or present being of things hoped for; so that hope waits for
them in time to come, but faith enjoys them as being present, namely in
respect of the certain assurance and particular application of the promises
unto ourselves: and therefore the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 5.13.
that hereby we may know (not that we shall have, but) that we have eternal
life, 1. Ioh. Heb. 11.1.
5.13. not in possession but in assurance of faith. It is called (...) in the
same place, which word is quite contrary to doubting, as signifying a manifest
demonstration which does not only show a thing probably, but also does convince
with strong arguments, and make that truth clear and manifest, which was
otherwise obscure and secret, and therefore in the text it is called a
demonstration of things not seen. So there is ascribed unto it fullness of
persuasion, Heb. Heb. 10.22.
10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, (...), in full assurance of faith:
and also boldness with confident trust, Ephesians. Ephesians. 3.12.
3.12. by whom we have boldness and entrance with confidence (not by
extraordinary revelations, but) by faith in Christ: which full assurance,
boldness and confidence we could not have, if we were not assured of Gods
love and our election, but remained doubtful whether we were beloved of God
and elected or no.

To these names and properties of faith, we may add some plain testimonies of
Scriptures, which clearly show that faith is not a doubtful hope, but a
certain persuasion. 1. John 3.14. 1. Ioh. 3.14.
The Apostle says, that we know that we are translated from death to life
(not by revelation but) because we love the brethren; he does not say that we
know that we shall be, but that we are translated from death to life, to note
the certainty of this knowledge and persuasion. Romans 3.2. the Apostle says,
Romans 5.2.
that by Christ we have access through faith unto Gods grace, wherein we stand
and rejoice under hope, or, as the word signifies, glory and triumph with joy:
so that we do not waver and stagger, but stand firmly through faith, we do
not fear and timorously hope, but even glory and triumph in our rejoicing:
saying with the Apostle, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? Romans 8.33, 34.35, 38.
it is God that justifies. 34. Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead:
yea, or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request also for us. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ,
etc. So, that though our sins be manifold, our unworthiness great, and our
faith weak; yet if it be true, it may also be certain in the assurance of
Gods love and our election: because it is not grounded on our worthiness, but
upon Gods free justifying and accepting of us, as righteous in Christ, Heb.
6.18.
and upon Christ's death, resurrection, and intercession for us unto God his
father; which is a most sure foundation that cannot fail. In deed if our
faith and the anchor of our hope, did pitch, rest, and fasten it self, upon
the light and hollow sands of our own merits and worthiness; the surging
waves and boisterous blasts of Satan's temptations, would disanchor and toss
us too and fro, till at length we should make shipwreck of our faith, against
the rocks of despair: but seeing we take hold and rest upon the firm and
sure anchor-hold Christ Jesus his merits and righteousness; well may the
tempests of Satan's temptations shake us, but they shall never remove us from
our firm hold and certain assurance which we have in Christ; because we
apprehend him, nay rather, are apprehended or taken hold of by him, as the
Apostle speaks, Phil. 3.12. Phil. 3.12.
And no man (no not the whole power of hell) is able to pluck us out of his
hands, as our Savior speaks, John 10.28. For though they be mighty to
destroy, yet Christ is almighty to save, Ioh 10.28. Esa. 63.1.
as it is Esa. 63.1. and therefore let us not suffer our souls to be racked
between hope and fear; 1. Pet. 1.13.
but let us trust perfectly on the grace that is brought unto us by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle exhorts, 1. Pet. 1.13.

The certainty of faith proved by the examples of believers.
that we may be most certain of this certainty of faith, we will add to these
testimonies, some examples of believers mentioned in Gods word. And first let
us consider the faith of Abraham: which was not wavering and doubtful, but
most certain and assured; for above hope he believed under hope, and he was
not weak in faith, neither did he doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory unto God, being fully
assured that he which had promised was able to perform it; and therefore it
was imputed unto him for righteousness; as the Apostle sets it down, Romans
4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Now, Abraham was not only a bare believer, but the
father of the faithful; neither was his faith propounded unto us as a wonder
to admire at, but as an example for all his sons to imitate. And therefore it
is said, verse. 23. That this is not written for him only that his faith was
imputed to him for righteousness. 24. But also for us to whom it shall be
imputed for righteousness, which believe in him, who has raised up Jesus our
Lord from the dead. But it may be objected, that Abraham is not said here to
believe thus certainly his own election or salvation, but that he should have
a son, and become a father of many nations: I answer, though this were the
next and immediate object of his faith, yet this was not the chief and
principal; but the promise of blessedness and happiness, which was made to
him and all the nations of the earth, in his seed Christ. For Abraham could
not be justified by believing that he should have a son, but by believing in
the Messiah which should come out of his loins, by whose righteousness and
obedience he should be saved. And therefore the Apostle Gal. 3.16. does
appropriate that promise made unto Abraham, Gal. 3.16. Genesis 22.18.
Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, unto
the promised seed Jesus Christ.

Look also upon the prophet David, and you shall see, that though his faith
was often shaken with doubting, yet in it self it remained certain: like a
tree shaken with the winds, which is not overthrown, but takes more firm
and deep root: Psalm. 23.4.
Psalm. 23.4 Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me. So Psalm. 27.1. Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Neither had he only this
assurance in himself, but shows that it is also the state of all the
faithful, Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion,
Psalm. 125.1.
which cannot be removed, but remains for ever. So Job in the midst of his
afflictions shows his certain assurance and faith, saying, Job. 13.15. Job.
13.15. and 19.25, 26.
Lo, though he slay me yet will I trust in him: And chap. 19.25. I am sure
that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth. 26. And
though after this skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my
flesh, etc. And Paul speaking not only of his own assurance of Gods love, and
everlasting life, but of all the faithful, says, that he is persuaded that
nothing in the world should be able to separate us from Gods love in Christ,
Romans 8.38.
Romans 8.38.

That faith particularly persuades us of our election.
Now I will also prove that it particularly persuades us of our own election
and life everlasting. For first; such a faith is begot now in our hearts, by
the Preaching of the word, as was begot in the hearts of men, by our Savior
Christ himself; for as there is but one God, so there is but one true and
justifying faith, Ephesians. 4.5: Ephesians. 4.5.
but by that faith they were particularly persuaded of the remission of their
sins, and consequently of their justification and salvation, as appears
Luke. 7.42.50. where our Savior says thus to the woman: Luk.7.48.50.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. So
Matthew. 9.2. he says to the sick of the Paulsie, Be of good comfort, Matthew.
9.2.
thy sins are forgiven thee. And therefore the faith which is now begot in us
by the Preaching of the word, does also particularly persuade us of the
remission of our sins and eternal salvation. For as our Savior Christ by
his own absolute authority, did remit the sins of those that did believe;
so he has left this authority to his ministers (not absolutely by their own
power to remit sins, which the man of sin does challenge unto himself, but)
to declare and pronounce their sins forgiven who truly believe in the son
of God, and repent them of their sins: the which their sentence is ratified
in Heaven, according to that Matthew. 16.19. Matthew. 16.19.
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind in earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
in earth shall be loosed in Heaven; which authority is not given to Peter
alone and his successors, as the Papists dream; but as Peter answered, not
only for himself, but also in the behalf of all the rest, so he receives
this power both for himself and for all the Apostles; yea, for all Gods true
Ministers, the undoubted successors of the Apostles, as our Savior expounds
himself, John 20.23. where he gives this authority to all the Apostles;
saying, Whose sins so ever ye remit, they are remitted unto them, Ioh. 20.23.
and whose sins so ever ye retain, they are retained. So that, the
Ministers of Gods word, by the Preaching thereof, may assure men particularly
of the remission of their sins: for when he makes this general proposition,
whosoever believes and repents him of his sins shall have them remitted,
and be made an heir of everlasting life; and the particular hearer does
truly assume that he believes and repents, the Minister has authority
given him of God to make this conclusion: therefore be thou assured that thy
sins are forgiven thee in Christ, and that thou art an undoubted heir of
everlasting life.

Secondly, as the Lord does offer unto us his gracious promises of life and
salvation, so do we receive them by faith; but the Lord does not only
generally in the word offer these his gracious promises to all that will
receive them, but also particularly in the right use of the Sacraments to every
faithful receiver: for in the Sacraments we must consider a relation and
correspondencie between the outward signs and things signified: as therefore
the Minister does offer and give, and I receive and eat the outward signs of
bread and wine; so am I as certainly to believe that God does offer and give,
and that I do receive and feed upon Christ Jesus and all his benefits, with
the hand and mouth of faith, unto the nourishing of my particular soul to
everlasting life, as my body is nourished with these outward elements of bread
and wine.

Lastly, the Apostle says, that through faith we have entrance unto God with
boldness and confidence, Ephesians. 3.12.
and therefore by faith the believer is particularly persuaded of the remission
of his sins and of his reconciliation with God: for with what boldness or
confidence can the poor sinner come before God, who is terrified with the
threatenings of the Law, with the temptations of Satan, and with the
confideration of his own unworthiness and selfe-guiltinesse; if he be not
particularly assured that his curse is borne by Christ, that he is forgiven
the whole debt of his sins, and reconciled unto God? What assured comfort can
he receive, if he believe that God has elected Peter and Paul and all his
Church, if he be not also assured that he is in this number? If a whole City
should rebel and commit high treason against a Prince, and the Prince should
send out a proclamation, declaring that upon some conditions he would receive
them to mercy; with what boldness or confidence can any in this city come
before him, if he be not assured that he has performed these conditions? But
this is our case, we have rebelled against God, and he has proclaimed in his
Gospel the pardon of our sins, so we lay hold upon Christ by a true and
lively faith, and repent us of our sins: If therefore we could not be assured
that we have a lively faith and true repentance, and consequently that Gods
merciful promises belong particularly unto us; with what boldness or
confidence can we come before him? But the Apostle faith, that by faith we have
this boldness and confidence, and therefore it follows that we may be
assured that we have faith and repentance, and thereby may certainly be
persuaded of Gods love and our particular election.

The fourth argument, drawn from the doctrine and use of the Sacraments.
it may be proved by an argument drawn from the doctrine and use of the
Sacraments; for the Lord has added to the covenant of grace, his Sacraments as
seals, not to confirm Gods promises in themselves, which are so undoubtedly
true that they need no confirmation, but to strengthen our faith in this full
assurance that they belong particularly unto us. For whereas in the word the
promises of grace and salvation are generally propounded to all believers; in
the use of the Sacraments, they are particularly applied to every worthy
receiver; to the end that all doubting being removed, they may certainly be
assured that all the promises of the Gospel do belong particularly unto
themselves. Now if the Lord would have us doubt of our election and salvation,
and if this doubting were a virtue of faith, as the Papists teach, then surely
there were no use of the Sacraments; for the word is sufficient to beget that
general faith which is mixed with doubting, and the Sacraments which do
further assure us and apply unto us Gods promises, would be rather hurtful
than profitable, because they take away doubting, which is a virtue of their
faith. But we are otherwise instructed by Gods truth, namely, that the Lord
would not have us doubt of his promises: and therefore he has not only
written his covenant, but also has confirmed it by his seal, and has thereby
particularly applied it to the use and benefit of every one who receives it by
the hand of a lively faith, that there may be no place left to doubting. And
hence it is that the Sacrament of Circumcision is called the seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.
Romans 4.11. because thereby as by a seal Abraham was confirmed in the truth
of Gods promises, and assured that the righteousness of faith, that is, the
righteousness of Christ, who was the promised seed, did belong unto him. And
answerable to this Sacrament is Baptism, wherein Christ and all the gracious
promises of life and salvation made in him, are particularly applied to the
party baptized; and therefore the Apostle says, that all that are baptized
into Christ have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27.
Gal. 3.27. where the Apostle compares Christ to a garment, which by the hand
of faith is put on by every particular believer. So in the administration of
the Lords Supper, the bread and wine is particularly delivered unto all the
communicants, to signify unto them, that every one who stretches forth the
hand of faith does receive Christ and all his benefits, whereby his soul is
nourished unto everlasting life. Whosoever therefore has faith, he may be
assured that he receives Christ; and whosoever receives Christ, he may be
assured of his election and salvation; for to as many as receive him, to them
he gives power to be the sons of God: and who are those? Ioh. 1.12.
even those that believe in his name, as it is Ioh. 1.12. And whosoever eats
his flesh and drinks his blood has eternal life, Ioh. 6.54.47.
as our Savior says Ioh. 6.54. Now if we would know how we feed upon him,
it is by the mouth of faith, as he expounds himself verse. 47.

The fifth argument taken from prayer. 1. Ioh. 5.14.15.
whatsoever we are bound to pray for; that we may be assured of, 0198 0153 nay
we ought steadfastly to believe that we shall receive it: and this is evident 1.
Ioh. 5.14. This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will he hears us. 15. And if we know that he hears
us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we have
desired of him. And the Apostle James would have us to ask in faith without
wavering, Iam. 1.5. Mat. 6.12.
that is, not doubting to receive that we ask. But we are taught to pray for
the remission of our sins: and therefore we are certainly to believe that our
sins are remitted, and consequently that we are justified, called, elected,
and shall be saved; for whom he did predestinate, them also he called, Romans
8.30.
and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also
he glorified, as it is Romans 8.30.

The sixth argument taken from the confession of our says.
whatsoever we profess in the Articles of our faith, that we should believe,
and of that we may and ought particularly to be assured: but every man
professes that he believes the remission of sins and life everlasting, that
is, that the Lord does not only forgive sin, and grants unto some the
fruition of everlasting life, for this the devils believe as well as we, but
also that he does particularly forgive me my sins, and that he will make me
an heir of eternal happiness: for this is the nature of faith, to assure us
certainly and particularly of that which we believe, as we have showed; and
therefore we ought particularly to be assured of the remission of our sins,
and that we shall attain unto everlasting life, and consequently that we are
elected, seeing none enjoy it but Gods chosen. But it may be objected, that if
every one be bound to believe as an article of his faith that his sins are
forgiven, and that he is an heir of everlasting life, then some are bound to
believe that which is false, for those who live and die in their sins without
repentance, shall never obtain either the one or the other. I answer, that
we are not bound to believe, being destitute of a true and a lively faith, for
this were rather fondly to presume, than surely to be persuaded of the
promises of the Gospel, but we are first bound to have a true lively and
justifying faith, and so to believe and apply unto our selves the promises of
the Gospel; but those that live in their sins without repentance, they are
altogether destitute of true faith, which wheresoever it is purifieth the
heart, and works by love, moving the believer to endeavor and strive to
mortify his corruptions, and to rise from the death of sin to newness of
life: and therefore well may they securely presume, but it is impossible that
they should truly believe, because they are utterly destitute of a lively
faith, and where the cause is not the effect cannot follow: and consequently
for their infidelity they are subject to eternal plagues and punishments,
because they do not that which they are bound to perform. Neither must we
think that every kind of faith, or rather every fond persuasion of faith is
enjoined us, but such a faith as is grounded upon Gods word; but the word of
God does teach us, that whosoever live in the flesh cannot please God, and if
we live after the flesh we shall dye, Romans 8.8.13. Romans 8.8.13. 1. Cor. 6.9.
That the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.9. That
the workers of iniquity shall be rejected of Christ, Matthew. 7.23. And that no
unclean thing, Mat. 7.23. Revel. 21.27.
nor whatsoever works abomination and lies shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, Revel. 21.27. And therefore those who live in the flesh, those who are
workers of iniquity, unrighteous and unclean, in which rank are all those
who live in their sins without repentance, fulfilling the lusts of the flesh,
and falling continually into sin with pleasure and delight, are not bound
simply and absolutely to believe, so long as they resolve to continue in this
state, for so should they be bound to believe that which is false and repugnant
to Gods word; but they are bound to have a true faith, which being wrought in
their hearts will move them to forsake their sins by unfeigned repentance, to
hunger after righteousness, to endeavor to serve the Lord in holiness and
newness of life, and so to believe in Christ as their Savior and Redeemer,
which fruits if our faith bring not forth, we cannot be assured that we have
true faith, or do truly believe. For though in nature faith be before
repentance, yet in our sense and feeling it always follows it: neither does
faith ever soundly and truly persuade us of Gods love, till we have sorrowed
for our sins, and at least in purpose of heart have forsaken them. So that
whosoever lives still in his sins with pleasure and delight, and yet believes
that he is elected to salvation, and that he is in Gods favor, and shall
continuing in this state be made an heir of eternal life, he is not endued
with true faith, but with fond presumption and carnal security, which makes
him to believe that which is false and repugnant to Gods word. Though then all
men, even carnal worldlings and reprobates are bound to believe, and because
they do not, are subject to condemnation, as committing a great and fearful
sin; as appears Ioh. 3.18. and 16.8.9. where our Savior says, that the
holy Ghost should reprove the world of sin, Ioh. 3.18. and 16.8.9.
because they believe not in him: yet they are not bound to believe continuing
in their worldliness, and resolving to go on in their sins, for such a
faith were but fond presumption; but they are bound so to believe as that their
faith may be grounded upon Gods word, which it can never possibly be if it be
severed from true repentance, and for want of this faith they are condemned.

CHAP. VIII. The last argument grounded upon the testimony of Gods spirit.
Ephesians. 1.5.
and therefore the faithful are to believe, and ought undoubtedly to be
assured that they are the sons of God elected to everlasting life. The
prosition is manifest; for, what more certain truth can be imagined, than that
which the spirit of God witnesses unto our spirits, and confirms unto us,
seeing all the properties required in a true witness, do concur in him in
the highest degree, namely knowledge, truth, and faithfulness? for knowledge,
he is infinite and knows all things, even the eternal council, and decree of
God concerning our election, as appears 1. Cor. 2.10. 1. Cor. 2.10.12.
The spirit searches all things even the deep things of God; and this spirit
do we receive that we may know the things that are given to us of God. As it
is verse. 12. What fitter witness therefore can be imagined in this respect
than Gods spirit, who wholly and only knows all his secret counsels? In
respect of truth he is most true, yea truth it self, and in regard hereof
he is called the spirit of truth which leads us into all truth. Ioh. 16.13.
Ioh. 16.13.
And therefore as in respect of his knowledge he cannot be deceived, so in
respect of his truth he cannot deceive. In respect of faithfulness he is most
faithful and just in all his ways Psalm. 145.17. 1. Cor. 1.9. especially in
his word; Psalm. 145.17.
for his testimony is sure as it is, Psalm. 19.7. and therefore he cannot lie,
1. Cor. 1.9. Psalm. 19.7.
neither will he conceal the truth for any respect of persons; and
consequently whatsoever this al-knowing true and faithful witness testifies,
we are undoubtedly to believe as being most sure and certain. If an Angel
sent from heaven should assure us from God that we are elected, even the
Papists themselves could not deny, but that we might be assured thereof by such
a revelation without any manner of doubting: but the testimony of Gods spirit
witnessing to our spirits that we are the sons of God, is so much more
certain and without exception than the testimony of Angels, as the spirit of
God better knows the counsels of God than Angels, as it excels them in
truth and faith, as the testimony which is imprinted in the heart is more
firm then that which is spoken in the ear, which may easily be forgotten. And
therefore if by their doctrine we might be assured of our election by the
extraordinary revelation of an Angel; then much more certainly may we be
assured hereof by the ordinary testimony of Gods spirit which he witnesses
in the hearts and consciences of the faithful.

That Gods spirit testifies that we are the sons of God.
let us prove the assumption; which contains two branches, first that the
spirit of God testifies to our spirits, that we are the sons of God; and
secondly does fully assure us of this testimony that it is most undoubted
true; both which are manifest by Gods word. First that Gods spirit gives this
testimony in the hearts of the faithful, Romans 8.15.16.
it is evident Romans 8.15.16. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear again; but ye have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry abba
father: the same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. Gal. 4.6.
So Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son
into your hearts which cries abba father. Which places do so evidently prove
this point, that there needs no more reasons or allegations; for first he
excludes the spirit of bondage, which like the Papists faith causes us to
fear and doubt of our election and salvation; and then he tells us that
we have received the spirit of adoption which bears witness unto our spirit
that we are the children of God.

in us shadowed with imperfections and our faith mixed with doubting, because we
are saved as yet but by hope, as it is Romans 8.24. And we walk by faith and not
by sight, as it is 2. Cor. 5.7. and this our faith is continually shaken with
manifold temptations, therefore least we should doubt of Gods love and our
election adoption and salvation, the Lord has given us his spirit to seal,
and further to confirm this assurance in our hearts; and that it might be an
earnest and a sure pledge unto us, whereby he might secure us concerning the
covenant which he has made with us. The truth hereof appears in many places
of the Scripture. 2. Cor. 1.22. 2. Cor. 1.22.
Who has sealed us and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. So
Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also ye have trusted, Ephesians. 1.13.
after that ye heard the word of truth, even the Gospel of our salvation,
wherein also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of
promise. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
the possession purchased unto the praise of his glory. And Ephesians. 4.30. Ephesians.
4.30.
The Apostle exhorts us not to grieve the holy spirit of God, by whom we are
sealed unto the day of our redemption. And 2. Cor. 5.5. 2. Cor. 5.5.
he says that God has given unto us the earnest of his spirit.

Which words do minister unto every faithful man no small consolation, if
they be rightly waied; for first we use to seal those things which we would
have most certain and out of all controversy; as when a man has made a
promise or covenant with another, for his better security he does commit it to
writing, and least yet there should any scruple or doubt rest in his mind, he
does confirm it by adding his seal, to put the matter out of all question; so
the Lord has added to the written covenant of his word, whereby he has
assured us of our election adoption and salvation, the outward seal of the
sacraments, and the inward seal of his spirit, whereby he has ratified it,
not in it self, but in our hearts, that so all cause of doubting being taken
away, we might certainly be assured of his promises, that they belong unto us
not after a general manner as the Papists teach, but particularly even as this
assurance is particularly sealed by Gods spirit in the heart of every true
believer, Romans 4.11. Romans 4.11.
The end therefore why we are sealed to salvation by Gods spirit, is not that
we should doubt thereof, but that it might be out of all question fully
ratified and confirmed unto us: for this is signified by this metaphor here
used of sealing, as may appear not only by the ordinary custom amongst us,
but also by the use thereof in former times. So when Ahashuerosh would have
letters written in the Kings name, which no man might revoke, he commands
that they should be sealed with the Kings ring. Hest. 8.8. Ioh. 6.27.
Hest. 8.8. And Ioh. 6.27. it is said that God the father had sealed our
Savior Christ, that is, confirmed him in his office of mediation, by giving
evident testimonies and manifest signs that the people might not doubt of his
calling and anointing. Matthew. 3. 17. and 17.5. and Ioh. 1.32.

So, whereas the holy Ghost in the faithful is called the earnest of our
inheritance, this ministers unto every true believer no small consolation, nor
doubtful assurance of their salvation; for we know that an earnest is given
amongst men to ratify and bind a bargain, so as they cannot go from their
agreement after earnest is given and received. The word arrhabo which is here
translated earnest, has also other significations which minister unto. Gods
faithful, the same assurance and the like true comfort. Genesis 38.17.18
Genes. 38.17.18. this word is used to signify a pledge or pawn, than the
which there can be no better assurance of performing promise: and 2. King.
14.14. 2. King. 14.14.
it signifies a hostage given in wars which is given for assurance to
confirm covenants agreed upon. Whereas therefore Gods spirit in the faithful
is called arrhabo, which signifies an earnest pawn and hostage: we are hereby
assured that the Lord will perform his covenant between us and him; that he
will not miss a day in the performing of his promise; that howsoever we were
enemies, yet now being reconciled by the death of his son, he has given us
an hostage to assure us of eternal peace, even his holy spirit. And therefore
let not Satan nor all his assistants cause us to doubt of Gods covenant,
wherein he has assured us of our election, adoption, and salvation; seeing he
has sealed this covenant with his spirit, and has given unto us this earnest
and pawn, to assure us that he will perform his promise and bargain.

That we may discern Gods spirit by the effects thereof.
that we cannot know and discern whether we have the spirit of God, unless it
should bring forth in us some extraordinary effects: and though it should be
granted that we were endued therewith, yet we cannot discern the testimony
thereof from our own thoughts, unless it be by some special revelation. To
the first I answer, that though many lulled asleep with carnal security,
do vainly dream that they have Gods spirit, and so are deluded with their
own fantasies; yet this hinders not, but that he who has the spirit of God
indeed, may certainly be assured that it dwells in him; for it seals in
us the assurance of Gods covenant, 2. Cor. 1.22.
and who can receive this seal and not feel the impression? it is an earnest,
and who receiving an earnest cannot know whether he has received it? for
otherwise how can it assure us of our bargain, if of it self we have no
assurance? it is a pawn of Gods love and our salvation, and who having a pawn
in his custody cannot know that he possesses it? it is a heavenly light which
does illuminate our understandings, Ephesians. 1.17.18.
which were blind and ignorant in the knowledge of Gods truth, and who cannot
discern between blindness and sight, light and darkness? it is a water
which purges us from our corruption, Esa. 44.3. Ezech. 16.9.
and who that is thus washed and cleansed, can doubt that this water has
touched him? Matthew. 3.11. Act. 2.3.
it is a sire which inflameth our cold frosen hearts with a zeal of Gods
glory, and love of our brethren, and how can fire which is carried in our
breasts be hidden from us? 1. Ioh. 2.20.27
it is a precious oil which mollifieth our hard stony hearts, and makes them
flexible and pliable able to Gods will, which before were so stiff and
obdurate that they would rather have broken then bowed to obedience; it
suppleth also our stiff joints and makes them active and nimble in the works
of holiness, and righteousness, and who finding those strange alterations in
himself, may not be assured that he is anointed with this oil? it is the
Lords champion fighting in us against the flesh, Gal. 5.17.
and subduing the lusts thereof, and who feeling this intestine war in his
own bowels can doubt that the combatants have their residence in him? in a
word it is only this spirit which restrained us from the evil, which
naturally we love, and provoke us to embrace that good, which through
natural corruption we loath and abhor: if therefore sin grow unpleasant
unto us, and virtue and true godliness delightful, we may be assured that
this is the work of Gods spirit dwelling in us. Would we then be assured that
we are endued with the spirit of God? why then let us consider if our eyes
blinded with ignorance are enlightened in any good measure, with the knowledge
of Gods truth; if our souls polluted with the filth of sin, are purged in
some sort from our corruptions; if our cold hearts are inflamed with the zeal
of Gods glory and the love of our brethren; if our hearts more hard than
adamant, and more inflexible than steel, are softened and made obsequious to
Gods will; and if the other members of our body, which were benumbed and as it
were taken with a dead paulsie, be made nimble and active in the works of
holiness and righteousness; if we feel a fight and combat between the
flesh and the spirit, the one striving to lead us captive unto sin, the
other resisting and drawing us out of this captivity; if the sins which
heretofore we have loved, be now loathsome unto us, and the virtues* which we
have abhorred be delightful and pleasant; and then we may assure our selves
that it is the light of Gods spirit which has shined upon us, it is this
heavenly water which has washed us, it is this divine fire which has inflamed
us, it is this precious oil that has mollified and foftned us, it is this
champion of the Lord of hosts which makes war against our traiterous flesh,
and subdueth the lusts thereof; in a word it can be nothing but Gods spirit,
which makes us hate that sin which naturally we so dearly love, and to love
virtue and godliness which by nature is loathsome and bitter unto us.

elected adopted and shall be saved, How we may discern the testimony of Gods
spirit from our own presumption. 2. Cor. 3.6. 1. Cor. 3.5.
from our own fantasies caused through carnal security and vain
presumption. And to this end we are to know, that the preaching of the Gospel
is the ministry of the spirit, whereby we are sealed and confirmed in the
assurance of our salvation, as appears 2. Cor. 3.6. And hence it is that the
preachers of the Gospel are called the ministers by whom the people believe,
1. Cor. 3.5. And the words of the Gospel are called by our Savior Christ
spirit and life, because it is the ministry of the spirit which quickneth us,
as it is Ioh. 6.63. And Gal. 3.2. Ioh. 6.63. Gal. 3.2.
the Apostle says that we have received the spirit by the hearing of faith,
that is, the doctrine of faith preached in the ministry of the Gospel. If
therefore the testimony of salvation in the minds of the faithful, be
conceived by the preaching of the Gospel applied unto them by faith, then is
it most certainly the testimony of Gods spirit; for the inward testimony of
Gods spirit is not different from the outward testimony of the word: but if
this persuasion be not grounded upon Gods word, as theirs is not who persuade
themselves that they are elected, adopted, and shall be saved, notwithstanding
that they live in their sins without repentance, making no conscience of
their ways, nor indeauoring to serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness
of life; then is it not the testimony of Gods spirit, but a presumptuous
fantasy, and a secure and carnal imagination: for the testimony of Gods
spirit in the conscience, is the same with the testimony of the word, and
therefore it does not bear witness nor give any assurance that they are
saved, which Gods word pronounces to be in the state of damnation. When
therefore this testimony is given in a faithful man and, agreeable to Gods
word; it is the testimony of the spirit which seals us in the full assurance
of that we believe: according to that Ephesians. 1.13. where the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 1.13.
that after the faithful had received the word of truth, even the Gospel of
their salvation, and believed therein, they were sealed with the holy spirit of
promise. But those who make no conscience of hearing the Gospel preached, and
when they hear it, do not believe it, nor apply it to themselves by a true
and lively faith, nor bring forth any fruits thereof in a holy and Christian
life, they have neither faith nor Gods spirit: and therefore if they have any
persuasion of their election and salvation, it is not the testimony of Gods
spirit, but their own fantasy, and a vain opinion arising from carnal
security and presumption.

Another means to discern the testimony of the spirit.
the testimony of Gods spirit may hereby be known: first, in that it
thoroughly persuades the faithful of their election and salvation; secondly,
by the manner of persuading them; thirdly, by the effects of this testimony
and persuasion. For the first, the spirit of God does not only give this bare
testimony that we are elected, adopted, and shall be saved: but also does
fully persuade us hereof, as being a thing most certain and without question.
So 1. Cor. 2.12. the Apostle says that we have received the spirit of God, 1.
Cor. 2.12.
that we might know the things that are given to us of God. And Ephesians. 1. 17,
18. Gods spirit is called the spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1.17.18.
which does inlighten the eyes of our understanding, that we might know what
the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is
in the Saints; and what is the exceeding greatness of his power, particularly
toward us that believe, according to the working of his mighty power. So the
Apostle John says, 1. Ioh. 3.24.
hereby we know that Christ abides in us, even by the spirit which he has
given us, 1. Ioh. 3.24. So that we may be assured that we have Gods spirit,
and thereby be thoroughly persuaded that Christ dwells in us, and consequently
that we are elected and shall be saved. And chap. 4.13. Hereby know we that
we dwell in him and he in us, and 4.13.
because he has given us of his spirit. And the Apostle Paul by the spirit of
God was so steadfastly assured of Gods love, that he professes that he was
firmly persuaded that nothing could separate him from it, Romans 8.38, 39.
Romans 8.38, 39. So that the spirit of God thoroughly persuades the faithful
that they are elected and shall be saved; whereas the wicked who are destitute
of Gods spirit, may well have a fond opinion and a foolish conceit, that they
are highly in Gods love and elected to salvation, through carnal security and
vain presumption; but they are never thoroughly persuaded hereof: for when any
affliction of body or mind is inflicted on them, their vain persuasion
vanishes away, and nothing remains but doubting, which in the end brings
them to utter desperation.

But here the tempter will take occasion to discourage the weak Christian, and
to persuade him that he has not Gods spirit, seeing he does not feel in
himself this firm persuasion of Gods love and his election and salvation. The
persuasion of the spirit not always discerned in our sense and feeling.
To which we are to answer, that Gods spirit does thoroughly persuade, although
not at all times, neither in our present sense and feeling; for immediately
after our conversion when we are newly regenerate, and like newborn babes in
Christ, the motions of the spirit are but weak in us, and we are not skillful
in understanding this heavenly language of the spirit, wherewith we have been
altogether unacquainted; but the spirit waxing stronger in us, and we growing
to a ripe age in Christ, does cry in our hearts, Abba father, and testifies
to our spirits that we are the sons of God; which we then being better
acquainted with this heavenly speech, do well understand, and are thoroughly
persuaded thereby. And secondly, when the poor Christian who has received a
great measure of the spirit is exercised in the spiritual conflict, the
hideous noise of Satan's temptations which like Cannon-shot sound in his ears,
and the tumultuous outcries of his own passions do so disturb and wholly
possess him, that he can not hear the voice of the spirit persuading him that
he is the child of God; till the skirmish be past and the noise of
temptations ceased, and then again as in former times he hears to his
comfort the spirit of God persuading him of Gods love, and hereby he is again
assured thereof. So that we are not to judge of the having of Gods spirit in
the time of our Christian infancy and spiritual nonage, nor yet according to
our present sense in the time of temptation, but when we are come to perfect
age, and when the conflict of temptations is ceased.

Secondly, the testimony of Gods spirit persuading us of his love and our
election, is known by the manner whereby it persuades us: namely, it
persuades us hereof with arguments grounded upon Gods word, and drawn not
from any worthiness in our selves, but from Gods free grace and vnderserued
mercy, and from the righteousness and merits of Christ; whereas Satan and
our own flesh never use such reasons, but either move us to a bare and vain
opinion which has no ground at all but self-love, which makes men easily
believe that which they desire; or else with some arguments drawn from some
outward common benefits, bestowed indifferently upon the good and bad; or
lastly from a pharisaicall conceit and false opinion of our own worthiness
and deserts.

The 3. means to discern the spirit, namely by the fruits thereof.
the testimony of Gods spirit is known and discerned by the effects thereof;
for after that it has effectually persuaded us, that we are elected and the
dear children of God, we are moved thereby to trust wholly in God, and to
love him as our gracious father: from which love proceeds a zeal of his
glory, and a true hatred of sin, because thereby our heavenly father is
dishonored and displeased with us; and a true love and hearty endeavor of
embracing holiness and righteousness, because thereby our gracious father is
glorified and well pleased with us. If therefore these effects and fruits
follow this persuasion of Gods love and our election, we may be assured that
it is the spirit of God which does persuade us; but if we have no such trust
and affiance, no such love of God, no zeal of his glory, no hatred of sin,
no love nor desire of embracing righteousness, but remain as carnal,
worldly, and profane as ever we were, then let us brag as much as we will
of our persuasion of Gods love and our election, yet it is most certain that
this persuasion is not wrought in us by Gods spirit, but that it is a vain
conceit and fond opinion which proceeds from self-love, carnal security,
and fond presumption, which in the end vanishing away will leave us in despair.

CHAP. IX. Of the means whereby we may be assured of our election.
The first means the testimony of the holy Ghost.
and in some measure sanctified, may ordinarily attain unto the assurance of
their election: Now I will show the means and signs whereby we may be thus
assured. The first and principal means which assures us of our election, is
the inward testimony of Gods spirit which cries in our hearts Abba father,
Romans 8.15, 16.
and witnesses unto our spirits that we are the children of God, as it is Romans
8.15, 16. Which testimony it does not give by extraordinary revelation, but
by a secret application of the promises of the Gospel unto us, and by an
inward cooperation whereby it makes the outward ministry of the word
effectual for the begetting of faith in us, whereby as with an hand we do
appropriate the general promises of the word unto our own selves. And when
the Ministers use reasons to persuade us of Gods love in Christ, the holy ghost
opens our deaf cares, and inlighteneth our blind understandings, and
powerfully inclines our wills, so that we may attentively hear, truly
understand, and be fully assured of that truth which is delivered, not only in
respect of the whole Church, but also in respect of our selves particularly, so
as we can say, I believe that these promises of God are true, and that they
belong to all the faithful, and consequently unto me who do believe and am
assured of them, seeing they are promised on no other condition.

Diverse differences between the testimony of the spirit and presumptuous
security.
But the tempter will object, that many through carnal presumption do persuade
themselves, that all the promises of the Gospel do belong unto them, and
therefore we may easily be deceived, not being able to discern between the
testimony of the spirit and presumptuous security. I answer, that those who
are endued with Gods spirit, may easily discern the testimony of the spirit
from the carnal language of presumption, as is evident by that which before I
have delivered, and also may more plainly appear by manifest differences, if
the one be compared with the other. For presumption is a fruit of original
corruption which accompanies us from our mothers womb, till it be beaten
down with Gods sanctifying spirit; but the testimony of the spirit is a thing
supernatural, which no man ever feels before his conversion unto God, when
as by the preaching of the word he is humbled under the burden of sin,
sorrowing and grieuing for his sins past, and detesting them from his heart,
and purposing to leave and forsake them in the time to come. If therefore we
have had always this testimony in our minds that we are in Gods favor and
elected, and never felt our conversion, nor discerned any fruits thereof; then
does this testimony proceed from carnal presumption and not from Gods
spirit. Secondly, those who have the testimony of the spirit, make conscience
of the diligent and careful use of the outward means of salvation, as the
hearing and reading of the word, the receiving of the Sacraments, and other
holy duties of Gods service, because they know that the inward testimony of
the spirit is not ordinarily severed from the outward testimony of the word;
and the assurance of Gods love and our election is not wrought immediately in us
by revelation of the spirit, but by the preaing of the word and use of the
Sacraments, made effectual by the inward cooperation of the holy Ghost. But
presumption as it arises not from the use of these means made thus
effectual, but from carnal security, so is it not confirmed thereby: for the
less that the presumptuous man hears the word and perfourmeth the duties of
piety and Gods service, the more confidently does he boast of his faith and
full assurance, and therefore he makes no conscience of using these means
ordained of God; nay contrariwise he will not stick to affirm, that the
hearing of the word too often is the cause that troubles men's minds and
afflicts their consciences, moving them to doubt of Gods mercy, which
before they never called into question: and why is this, but because hereby men
are rouzed out of their sleep of security, and have their confident
presumption beaten down. If then we are careful to use all holy means
ordained of God to assure us of our salvation; that assurance and testimony
which follows is the testimony of Gods spirit: otherwise it is nothing else
but fond presumption. Thirdly, presumption is most confident, and never
doubts nor makes any question of his election and salvation who thus
presumes; but this testimony of the spirit is much assaulted with doubting,
and oftentimes thereby so exceedingly weakened that we cannot hear the voice
thereof: as we may see in the example of Job, David, the father of the
possessed child, the two Disciples who iourneyed to Emaus, and in all Gods
children who have not yet attained unto fullness of persuasion, unto which none
can come but by degrees. And therefore if we can brag with secure
worldlings, and say with the proud Pharisie, I never was troubled I thank God
with any doubting of mine election and salvation, as many are; but always have
had a strong belief that I am in Gods love and shall undoubtedly be saved: we
may assure our selves that this is the voice of presumption, and not the
testimony of Gods spirit. Fourthly, presumption is joined with worldliness
and profaneness, but the testimony of Gods spirit is never severed from
sanctification, or at least from an earnest desire and holy endeavor of
serving the Lord in holiness and righteousness: for (as I said) the
testimony of the spirit in the conscience is never contrary to the testimony
of the spirit in the word, neither does it bear witness that those are in
Gods love and elected to salvation, which the Scriptures witness to be in
Gods displeasure and in the state of condemnation, namely, all unrepentant
sinners continuing in their vnrepentancie: and therefore if the assurance which
we have of our election and salvation be not joined with a desire to leave our
sins, and with an earnest endeavor of serving God in the duties of holiness
and righteousness, then it does not proceed from the testimony of Gods spirit,
but from carnal security and fond presumption. Lastly, presumption no longer
persuades men of Gods love and favor, than they enjoy the outward benefits of
this life; but when the Lord lays upon them any grievous affliction, either
outwardly in body and state, or inwardly in mind; then this persuasion
vanishes, and nothing remains but doubting, which commonly ends in utter
despair: but the testimony of the spirit is constant and permanent; and
howsoever we cannot by reason of the grieuousnesse of afflictions, and the
violent noise of our own passions hear the voice thereof at some times, yet
afterward again it cries alowd in our hearts Abba father, and witnesses
unto our spirits that we are the sons of God: So that the chief means
whereby we are assured of our election is the spirit of God. But seeing we
have it not naturally in our selves, how may we attain unto it? Surely we are
to have our recourse unto the Father of lights by earnest prayer, Iam. 1.17.
Matthew. 7.7. Luke 11.13.
from whom descends every good and perfect gift, having our faith grounded
upon Gods gracious promise, namely, that if we ask we shall receive, and more
especially, that he will give his holy spirit to them that ask it, as it is
Luke 11.13.

The second means, the hearing of the word.
is the hearing of the word, wherein the Lord manifests his grace and
goodwill to all believing and repentant sinners, and whereby also he ordinarily
begets this faith and repentance in all his children. For howsoever Paul may
plant and Apollos may water, but God alone gives the increase; yet Gods
blessing ordinarily accompanies his own ordinance, making it effectual by
the inward operation of his spirit for those ends for which he has ordained
it. And though the word may long sound in our ears before it pearce the heart,
or beget any saving grace in us, unless the Lord open our hearts and make the
seed of his word fruitful: yet those who make conscience of hearing the word,
with diligence reverence and attention, and pray for the assistance of Gods
spirit, whereby it may become profitable to their salvation, may constantly
expect the blessing of God upon his own ordinance, which they carefully use in
obedience to his will; whereas those who neglect and contemn Gods word have no
such assurance, because it is the means and instrument which is ordained of
God for this purpose, without which the spirit of God does not ordinarily beget
faith or any saving grace in us. Though therefore we do not after long hearing
of the word, feel this assurance of Gods love and our election, yet let us not
give it over but expect Gods blessing upon it, and wait his leisure assuring
our selves that in the end, he will make this his own ordinance effectual
for those ends, for which he has ordained it.

The third means, the use of the Sacraments.
is the frequent and religious use of the Sacrament of the Lords supper,
whereby our faith is more and more confirmed the in truth of Gods promises. For
the Lord to the preaching of his word which is the covenant of grace, has
added these seals that we might be the more thoroughly assured of his love and
favor; and therefore if we conscionably frequent this holy Sacrament, the Lord
will bless also this his own ordinance. Moreover they who worthily receive
these holy mysteries, do receive Christ Jesus, and have the union and
communion which is between him and them, more and more strengthened and
confirmed, for he that eats his flesh and drinks his blood, dwells in
Christ, and Christ in him, Ioh. 6.56.
As it is Ioh. 6.56. Now there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ
Jesus Rom 8.1; Romans 8.1.
and therefore they need not doubt of their election and salvation.

The fourth means, the effects of our election. Zanch. de Attrib. l. 5. c. 2.
are the effects of Gods predestination, which are the undoubted signs
thereof; for the effects argue the cause, as the cause the effects, and that
not only in natural things, but also in those which are supernatural and
spiritual: and therefore as certainly as we know that there is fire because
it casts forth heat, and the son by his casting forth of bright rays
whereby the world is lightened, and that a tree is good by the good fruits which
it brings forth, so also may we as certainly be assured that we are elected
of God, when we find in our selves the effects and undoubted signs of our
election.

Neither are these effects bare signs only of our election, but also manifest
seals which by their plain impression, do evidently assure us thereof: so
that though we do not directly and immediately know Gods election,
predestination, and eternal decree of our salvation in God himself, electing
predestinating, and decreeing that we shall be saved, yet we may plainly see
apparent seals and impressions hereof in our selves, lively resembling that
which is secret in Gods hidden council; and as we not seeing the seal which
makes the impression, do easily discern the form, fashion, and quantity
thereof by the print which it has made; so we not seeing Gods secret decree
of predestination, may notwithstanding attain to the euedent knowledge
thereof, by that impression which it makes in us.

This also may further be illustrated by a familiar similitude; namely, as the
sun shining upon us with his bright beams, does imprint as it were in our
eyes the image of his light, whereby we see the sun and the light thereof
(the beams of the sun which are cast upon us, being reflected back again
to the sun it self;) so the foreknowledge of God whereby he has decreed
that we shall be saved before all eternity, is secret in it self, so that we
cannot see not understand it directly, but yet whilst God does acknowledge us
for his elect, he does express the image and form of this his foreknowledge
in those whom he has elected, whereby we do also acknowledge him our gracious
God who has elected us; and so it comes to pass that by the true knowledge
of God, which is communicated unto us, whereby we acknowledge him for our God
and father, we also know his foreknowledge, whereby he knows and
acknowledges us for his sons and children. For first God knows us, and
then by the light of this knowledge communicated unto us, he inlightneth our
hearts with the true knowledge of himself, as the sun first inlightneth our
eyes, and by this light we see the sun it self. And this our Savior Christ
intimates, Ioh. 10.14. where first he says he knows his sheep, Ioh. 10.14.
and then he adds that he is also known of them. As though he should say,
whilst I know and acknowledge them for my sheep, hereby I bring to pass that
they in like manner by the participatio^ of this my light and knowledge, do
acknowledge me for their true pastor. If therefore we know and acknowledge God,
for our gracious God and loving father in Christ, it is a most certain sign,
that he also by his foreknowledge, does know and acknowledge us for his people
and children. But if we remain in our ignorance, without the knowledge of God,
and his son Christ, we can gather no assurance unto our selves of our
election; for if the foreknowledge of God had shined upon us, the beams
thereof would have illuminated our hearts, so as we should by their light have
known God also.

Gods love cause of our love.
The like may be said of Gods eternal love, wherewith he has loved us in
Christ; for God loving us, has imprinted the image of his love in our hearts,
whereby we love him again: and when this heavenly heat of Gods love has
descended on us, and warmeth our cold hearts, frozen in the dregs of sin,
then do we reflect some of those beams of Gods love toward him again. And
this the Apostle John plainly shows 1. Ioh. 4.19. where he says that we
love God because he loved us first; 1. Ioh. 4.19.
that is, by that eternal love wherewith God loved us in Christ, there is
imprinted in our hearts the love of God. Verse. 7.
And hence it is that he says verse. 7. that love comes from God: because we
can neither love God, nor our neighbors aright, till his love toward us
having shined upon us, has inflamed our hearts. So the Apostle Paul says, Rom
5.5. that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5.8.
by the holy Ghost which is given unto us, whereby love toward God is begotten
in us. If therefore the love of God be in our hearts, we may be assured that it
is but an impression which is made in us, by the seal of his love toward us,
but a little spark kindled by this heavenly flame, and a small model or
little counterfaite resembling the infinite love of God, wherewith from all
eternity he has loved us in Christ. Thus also Gods eternal election, whereby
before all worlds he has chosen us in Christ, does make an impression, and
seals in our hearts the form or image thereof, whereby we make choice of the
true God Jehovah, amongst all the Gods of the nations to be our only God, whom
we will serve and worship. And therefore if we have made this election, and
dedicated our selves wholly to Gods worship and service alone, it is a most
certain sign of our election, whereby God has chosen us: fot our choosing of
God is an effect of his choosing of us, and an impression or print wherewith by
his election he has sealed us.

not only as signs signify, The first effect of our election is our savior
Christ, by whom we are assured that we are elected.
but also as seals confirm unto us the assurance thereof: but let us further
consider the special effects of our election, whereby we may be assured that we
are chosen of God. The first effect, is our Savior Christ himself, set apart
of God to be the mediator to reconcile all Gods elect unto him, dwelling in us
by his spirit; who may justly be called the first effect of Gods election,
because all the other, namely our vocation, justification, sanctification, and
salvation, are by him and through him alone. Whosoever therefore are assured
that Christ dwells in them and they in him, they have a most undoubted sign
of their election: and whosoever have not Christ dwelling in them by his
spirit, can have no assurance that they are chosen, as the Apostle plainly
shows 2. Cor. 13.5. know you not (says he) that Jesus Christ is in you
except you be reprobates? 2. Cor. 13.5.
but how shall we know whether Christ dwells thus in us and we in him? the
Apostle tells us Romans 8.1. Romans 8.1.
that those who are in Christ Jesus walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit, that is, those who do not willingly submit themselves to be ruled and
led by the lusts of the flesh, but labor and strive to resist and subdue them,
studying and indeauoring to live a spiritual life, in holiness and
righteousness. For in whomsoever Christ dwells by his spirit, those he
regenerateth and raises from the death of sin, to newness of life; and his
blood is effectual, not only to purge them from the guilt of sin, but also
to cleanse them in some measure from the corruptions themselves.

The second effect of our election, is our effectual calling.
is our effectual calling; whereby we are separated from the world, and
ingrafted into Christ, and made lively members of his body: and this is done
ordinarily by the diligent and attentive hearing of the word, joined with the
inward operation of Gods spirit. If therefore we have heard Gods word preached,
diligently and attentively; if thereby we have attained unto the knowledge of
the work of our redemption wrought by Jesus Christ, and are delighted
therewith; if by this means we have our hearts somewhat weaned from the
world, and fixed upon our Savior and heavenly things; and thinking it
sufficient to have spent the rest of our lives past in the lusts of the
Gentiles, 1. Pet. 4.2.3.
do live hence forward after the will of God: then are we truly and
effectually called, for those are Christ's sheep that hear his voice and
follow him Ioh. 10.4. Those are ingrafted into his body, who bring forth the
fruits of godliness: Ioh. 10.4.
for as the branch can bring forth no fruit except it abide in the vine, so
neither can we bring forth any fruits of piety and righteousness except we
abide in Christ; and therefore if we do bring forth these fruits, it
manifestly appears that we are in Christ, and consequently truly called and
elected, for without him we could do nothing, Ioh. 15.4.5.
as it is Ioh. 15.4.5.

The third effect is our justification.
is our justification, consisting in the remission of our sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness: and to this is required a true and lively
faith, which assures us of the remission of our sins, and applies unto us
Christ's righteousness. If therefore we believe that our sins are forgiven,
if we do by faith apply unto us Christ and his righteousness, we may be
assured that we are justified, and consequently elected: now this persuasion
and lively faith, is discerned by the fruits thereof; for it purifieth our
hearts, and works by love; and it works in us an hatred of sin, and love
of righteousness, which is our sanctification.

The fourth effect is our sanctification, which is the touchstone of all the
rest.
is the true touchstone of all the rest: whereby we may certainly know
whether we be effectually called, that is, separated from the world, and
ingrafted as lively members into the body of Christ; and whether we be truly
justified, that is, purged from the guilt and punishment of our sins by
Christ's blood, and adorned with his righteousness imputed unto us. For if we
be separated from the world, then do we not set our minds upon worldly
things, but have our conversation in heaven from whence we look for a savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ; Phil. 3.20.
if we are ingrafted into the body of Christ who is the true vine, then do we
bring forth the sweet grapes of holiness and righteousness in our lives and
conuersations, as it is Ioh. 15.5; Ioh. 15.5.
if we have by a true faith the assurance of the remission of our sins, then
will we love God who has forgiven us so great a debt, and labor to express
our love by glorifying his name, in causing our light to shine before men; and
if the blood of Christ be effectual unto us for the purging away of the guilt
and punishment of sin, then will it also in some measure purge away the
corruptions themselves. For we are grasted with him into the similitude of his
death and resurrection, Romans 6.56.
and our old man is crucified with him and the body of sin destroyed, that
from henceforth we should not serve sin, as it is Romans 6.5.6. And as our
sanctification is the only undoubted sign of our vocation and justification;
so also of our election; for the Lord has chosen us that we should be holy,
Ephesians. 1.4. And therefore if we be holy we have a manifest effect and
inseparable fruit of our election, Ephesians. 1.4.
if we be not holy nor make conscience of serving the Lord in the duties of
piety and christianity, we have no assurance that we are elected: for though
the foundation of God remains sure on Gods part being sealed and confirmed in
his eternal counsel, yet it is not sealed in our hearts until we depart from
iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19.
as it is, 2. Tim. 2.19.

Though then there be no place unto our sanctification in Gods decree, as being
any cause thereof; and therefore when the question is asked why we are elected,
we must answer not for any deserts or holiness in our selves, but because of
Gods good pleasure and undeserved grace; and when it is demanded in whom we
are elected, we must reply in Christ Jesus only: yet there is chief place
unto our sanctification in the assurance of our election, so that when the
question is asked who are elected, answer is to be made, those only who are
also sanctified in Gods good time by his gracious spirit; Heb. 12.14.
for without this holiness no man shall ever see God, as it is, Heb. 12.14.

Wherein our sanctification consists.
and a true hatred of sin; from whence proceeds an earnest desire, and
hearty endeavor of forsaking that which is evil, and of cleaving unto that
which is good: and for the better effecting hereof, a careful study of
mortifying the flesh and the lusts thereof, and painful diligence in using
all good means whereby the spirit may be strengthened, and the gifts and
graces thereof increased, that so we may not be so prone to fall into that
sin which we hate, nor so backward in embracing and following that
righteousness and holiness which we love. And this is the sanctification
which is an inseparable fruit and effect of Gods election in all his children,
That those who will be assured of their election must begin their assurance at
their sanctification.
which though it be the last in nature and next unto salvation it self, for
first God electeth, and those whom he has elected, in his good time he
calls, and whom he calls those he justifies, and lastly, whom he
justifies those he sanctifies and saves; yet when we are to gather assurance
of our election, we are not to observe this order, but to begin where the Lord
ends, and so ascend from the lowest degree till we come to the highest. For
as it is a foolish thing for a man, to think that he can leap to the top of an
high ladder at the first step, and therefore every one begins with the
lowest, and so ascends step by step till he come to the highest: so it is a
foolish thing for a man to imagine, that he can leap into heaven, and there
search the unsearchable councels of God, and so know whether he is elected or
no; but we must begin at the lowest step, namely our sanctification which being
attained unto, we may ascend a step higher in our assurance, namely that we are
justified, and so to the next, that we are effectually called, and lastly to
the highest that we are elected. Otherwise if we curiously diue into the
bottomless secrets of Gods councels, we shall be drowned and overwhelmed; if
we approach unto this vnapproachable light, the eye of our understanding will
be dazzled, yea stark blinded; if we presume to understand beyond sobriety, we
shall by the just judgment of God be infatuated, and thrust our selves into an
endless laborinth, out of which we shall never find way, wanting the line of
Gods word to guide us. And therefore if we would have any true assurance of our
election, we must examine our selves whether we be sanctified; and if we find
in our selves sanctification by the fruits thereof, we may undoubtedly
conclude that we are justified, called, elected, and shall be saved. If we
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, we may be assured that we are
in Christ Jesus, and therefore there is no condemnation belonging unto us, Romans
8.1.
Romans 8.1. If we bring forth the fruits of righteousness and holiness, we
may be assured that we are good trees of Gods own planting, Matthew. 7.17.
Matthew. 7.17. If we be fruitful branches we may assuredly know, that we are
ingrafted into the true vine Jesus Christ, Ioh. 15.4.5.
Ioh. 15.4.5.

argument can be imagined to make us flee sin, The use of the former doctrine.
and labor after mortification and newness of life; what keener knife can be
used to cut insunder the cords of vanity, wherein naturally we are fettered
and entangled; what sharper spur to prick us forward in the course of
godliness; than to know and consider that by our sanctification and holiness
of life, we are certainly assured that God has elected us, to be heirs of
the unspeakable joys of his kingdom, and that by our wickedness and
profanesse we have no less certain assurance that we shall have our portion
for ever in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone? for if we live
holily like true christians on earth, we shall live happily like glorious
Angels in heaven; but if here we lie forzen in the dregs of our sins, without
any sense of sorrow for those which are past, or any desire and purpose of
heart to forsake them in the time to come, we shall be thrust from the Lord
amongst the workers of iniquity, and the wrath of God shall pursue, overtake
and consume us. What sin therefore can be so pleasant to our taste, which
this consideration will not make more bitter than wormwood? what duty of
holiness and righteousness so displeasant and grievous, which this will not
make sweet and delightful?

Diverse kinds of counter sait holiness which give no assurance of our election.
in sted of true sanctification, we are to know that this assurance of
salvation, does not proceed from every kind of holiness, but from that which
is true and unfeigned: for there is an holiness of the tongue, severed from the
holiness of the heart, in show but not in deed, in profession but not in
practice; there is an holiness in performing outward duties of Gods service,
severed from righteousness toward our brethere^; there is an holiness in leaving
some or ye most sins, without any desire or purpose to forsake some one or two
sins by which we receive greatest pleasure or profit; there is an holiness in
tything mint and cummin, which neglects the weighty things of the law, and
which makes clean the outside of the platter and cup, leaving the inside full
of rapine and excess; and outwardly makes a glorious golden show, when as
within there is nothing but putrefaction and rottennes: there is an holiness
which consists in the pharisaicall censuring of poor publicanes, and in
extolling our own virtues. The first kind is of those whom the prophet
reproves Esa. 29.13. Esa. 29.13.
who drew near unto God with their lips when as their hearts were far from
him: and of those whom the Apostle brandeth 2. Tim. 3.5. 2. Tim. 3.5.
who make a show of godliness, but in their lives deny the power thereof: in
which rank many professors also in these days may fitly march. The second
kind is of those who are content to serve God in the outward duties of his
worship, because they find them good cheap, yea often gainefull; but cannot
away with righteousness, because that is sometimes painful and sometimes
requires cost. And these men in stead of making godliness their gain, make a
gain of godliness. The third kind is Herod's holiness, who heard John gladly
and did many things, yet could not abide to leave his incest: and such
holiness is in some now adays, who will be content to leave all gross
outward sins, so they may continue in their covetousness or voluptuousness.
The fourth is the holiness of those pharisees which are most zealouse in
ceremonies and their own traditions, but key cold in those duties which most
concern Gods glory and their neighbors good. The last kind was the
holiness of the ancient pharisees, and is the holiness of our new brownists,
who place the most of their religion in censuring and condemning the
corruptions of the Church, and misdemeanors of private men, not looking into
their own sins of hellish pride, bitterness, envy, and want of charity.

The fruits and properties of true sanctification.
but it is that true sanctification indeed, which begins not in the mouth
but in the heart, and sanctifies our will and affections, making us to love
and to embrace to our uttermost power virtue and godliness, and to abhor and
flee from sin and iniquity: and from the heart it proceeds to the tongue
and hands, making the word of God and all holy conferences honey in the mouth,
and inciting us to the practice of that which we profess. It always approves
golden piety to be pure, and without mixture of the dross of hipocrifie, by
the touch stone of righteousness; it is as careful in approving the heart and
secret actions unto God, as the outward actions unto men; it causes us to hate
as well one sin as another, and that sin most of all into which we are most
prone by nature to fall, though it bring never so much pleasure and profit; it
embraces afflicted godliness when it is attended with loss poverty and
shame, as well as when it is waited upon with gain, pleasure, and the praise
of men; it is very charitable in censuring the faults of others, but most
severe and strict in judging and condemning the sins which our selves have
committed. And therefore if our sanctification have these properties, we may
most certainly be assured thereby that we are elected and shall be saved; but
if these be wanting, it is but a counterfeit holiness which affoordeth no such
assurance.

The miserable estate of those who have not so much as a show of godliness.
Now if this be true, what hope can they have who have not so much as a show of
godliness? how desperate is their state, who even in outward appearance show
nothing but wickedness and profaneness? If the fig tree which bears fair
green leaves be accursed, what curses, what miscrie and wretchedness are they
to bear and suffer, who have not so much as leaves, that is, an outward
profession of godliness? If Herod be a damned wretch in hell, who heard John
the Baptist willingly, and did many things according to his doctrine, because
he nourished one sin in his bosom; what fearful condemnation are they to
expect, who contemn and neglect Gods word, not thinking it worth the hearing,
and cannot find in their hearts to submit themselves to the obedience of any
part thereof, neither will be brought to forsake any one sin wherewith they are
delighted, till it leave them? And yet such is the blind ignorance, carnal
security, and vain presumption of such men, that they will not stick to
brag that they are sure of Gods love, and that they are elected to salvation,
though there be no show of reason whereupon they may probably ground their
foolish persuasion. But the truth is, that whilst they continue in this
damnable estate, consolation it self can not give unto them any true comfort,
for without sanctification there is no hope of election or salvation: and
seeing the Lord has elected us that we should be holy, Ephesians. 4.14.
therefore without holiness there is no assurance that we are elected: seeing
he has sworn that all those whom he has redeemed and saved, out of the hands
of their spiritual enemies hell, death and the devil, Luke 1.74 75.
shall worship him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life;
what hope of redemption and salvation can they conceive, who live in impiety
and unrighteousness, seeing by Gods oath they are excluded from both, whilst
they continue in this state?

CHAP. X. Of the signs and infallible notes of our election.
The first sign, an earnest desire after the means of our salvation.
now let us consider of some special signs which are infallible notes of
those that are elected. The first sign is an earnest desire after the means
of our salvation, and a conscionable endeavor in using them after we enjoy
them. For the end and the means are never separated in Gods decree, and
therefore those that carefully use the means may be assured that they shall
attain unto the end. For example, the hearing of Gods word is the chief
means of our conversion, being made effectual by the inward operation of Gods
spirit; and as thereby we are begotten unto God, so also it is that bread of
life, wherewith our souls are nourished and strengthened in all spiritual
graces. So that whomsoever God has elected, those he has decreed to call
ordinarily by these means; and by the same also to furnish with his graces
being called. Whosoever therefore labor to purchase this precious pearl,
whosoever hunger after this heavenly Manna, and are content to enjoy it not
only when it is good cheap, but also when it is very chargeable, whosoever
enjoying it do attentively and diligently hear it and receive it with delight,
they use the means of their salvation, and therefore may be assured that they
are elected, for the means and the end go together. And that this is a note of
Gods child, it appears Ioh. 10.3, 4. where our Savior says that his sheep
hear his voice. Ioh. 10.3.4.
And Matthew. 13.45. he compares the true member of the kingdom of grace to a
Merchant, Matthew. 13.45.
who rather then he would want the precious pearl of Gods word, sells all he
has to buy it. Those therefore who make this precious account of Gods word,
and carefully diligently and attentively hear it when they enjoy it, may to
their comfort assure themselves that they have an undoubted sign of their
election. And on the other side, those who had rather be without it than enjoy
it, those who will bestow no cost to obtain it, nor forgo any pleasure or
commodity that they may hear it, nor when they do hear it are affected with
any delight, but are glutted with loathing satietic, hearing no part of the
sermon with any pleasure but the conclusion only; they can have no assurance
of their election, because they neglect the means of their salvation, which are
joined with the end in Gods eternal decree. The like also may be said of
other means, as the receiving of the Sacraments, meditating in Gods word, the
works of holiness and righteousness, and the rest.

The second sign, the spirit of supplication.
is the spirit of supplication, when as they can power forth their souls in
fervent and effectual prayer unto the Lord, confessing their sins, and
imploring his grace and mercy: for this is a notable fruit of Gods spirit
working in us, which we cannot by any natural means attain unto; for of our
selves we know not what to pray as we ought, Romans 8.26.
but the spirit helps our infirmities, and makes request for us with sighs
which cannot be expressed, as it is Romans 8.26. Prayer therefore is a most
inseparable fruit and undoubted sign of Gods spirit, and Gods spirit
certainly assures us of our election and adoption, for it bears witness
with our spirits that we are the sons of God, Verse. 16.
as it is verse. 16. So Romans 10.13. it is said, Romans 10.13.
that whosoever call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But this prayer
must proceed from faith; for, as it follows, How shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? and must be performed in spirit and truth, and
not with deceitful lips; for it is to no purpose to draw near unto God with
our mouths, Esa. 29.13.
if our hearts be far from him, Esa. 29.13.

The third sign is, when we are weaned from the love of the world, and mind
heavenly things.
is, when as their hearts are somewhat weaned from the world, and seated in
heaven minding the things that are above; and when their tongues being set a
work by the heart, do gladly entertain godly and religious conferences; for
there as the treasure is, there will the heart be also, and with whatsoever the
heart is affected, the tongue is delighted. Now that these holy meditations
and religious discourses are signs of the child of God, hereby it plainly
appears; in that they cannot possibly proceed from our corrupt nature, to
which they are irksome and tedious, but from the spirit of God dwelling in us,
and guiding and directing us in our thoughts and words; and whosoever are thus
led with the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, as it is Romans 8.14.
Romans 8.14.
He that is right heir to a royal kingdom and not yet possessed thereof, is
never weary of thinking on it, nor glutted with such discourses as tend to the
extolling the riches and glory which there attend him, or show the means
whereby he may be assured to come into speedy and peaceable possession of his
right: and so those who are elected by God, and adopted to be the heirs of
his everlasting kingdom of glory, are never satisfied in meditating and
speaking of the riches and joys of this heavenly inheritance, or of the means
whereby they may be assured undoubtedly to obtain it; whereas those who have
no such interest nor hopes, think and talk of these things with loathsome
weariness, as being matters not concerning them; and therefore when such
thoughts come into their minds, they vanish as suddenly as a flash of
lightning, and when they are present at any spiritual discourses the time
seems long, and they sit upon thorns until they be ended; and they remain
dumb as though they were tongue-tyed, unless they take occasion to interrupt
such holy conferences, and to divert them to some worldly affairs.

The fourth sign, is the sight of sin: and sorrow for it.
is, when he sees his sins and imperfections, and truly repents of them,
that is, bewaileth those which are past, and endeavors to forsake them in the
time to come. For naturally we are blind, and yet do not perceive our
blindness, we are most sinful and miserable, and yet do not see our sins and
misery, but with the proud Pharisie and iusticiarie Papist we think our
selves righteous, and with the Church of the Laodiceans we imagine that we are
rich and have need of nothing, not knowing that we are wretched, miserable,
Revel. 3.17.
pour-blind, and naked, until it please the Lord to annoint our eyes with the
eye-salue of his spirit, whereby we are enabled to discern the pure gold of
Christ's merits, which only makes rich, from the dross of our own works, and
the white raiment of Christ's obedience from the polluted rags of our own
righteousness. And though we see our sins, yet naturally we are not sorry
for them, nay we delight our selves with their remembrance; or if we sustain
any grief, it is not for the sin, but for the punishment which either we
feel presently inflicted, or fear as being hereafter threatened, until it
please the Lord to adopt us for his sons, and to give us the spirit of
adoption, which moves us to grieve and sorrow for our sins, not so much for
fear of punishment, as for son-like affection, because by our sins we have
dishonored and displeased our gracious and loving father: and because we
cannot wholly mortify them so long as we continue in this life, we lamentably
cry out with Paul, Wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body
of death? And because we know that we shall be never freed from it altogether so
long as we live, we wish earnestly with the Apostle that we may be speedily
dissolved, being contented to part with our lives, because we can no otherwise
part with our sins. Whosoever therefore has this sorrow for sin; he may
be assured of his election and salvation: for, 2. Cor. 7.10.
as it is 2. Cor. 7.10. this godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation not
to be repented of, whereas worldly sorrow causes death; and all the promises
of life and eternal happiness, are made only to such repentant sinners, and
to them only they appertain. And as Gods children are grieved for their
sins past, so do they hate and detest them, as in all others so especially
in themselves, which hatred causes them to flee from them, and avoid all
occasions which might cause them to fall into the like wickedness, striving and
endeavoring to mortify their lusts and evil concupiscences, and to lead
their lives in holiness and righteousness, because herewith their heavenly
father is well pleased. Whereas the wicked man, if he be not restrained with
a servile fear of Gods judgments, or of temporary punishments, goes on in
his sins with pleasure and delight, adding drunkenness unto thirst, and
drawing iniquity unto him with the cords of vanity. Whosoever therefore have
this son-like care, and holy endeavor of forsaking their sins, and betaking
themselves to serve the Lord in the duties of holiness and righteousness,
they may be assured that they are elected and adopted to be the sons of God;
but those who have no such purpose can never have this assurance; for if they
were the sons of God, they would be affected like loving children to such a
gracious father.

The fifth signo, is an hungring desire after Christ's righteousness. Ioh. 7.37.
Revel. 21.6.
is, when as feeling his own misery and wretchedness, he earnestly desires
and even as it were hungreth and thirsts after Christ's righteousness,
looking for life and salvation in him alone; for such as these our Savior
Christ calls unto him: Ioh. 7.37. If any man thirst let him come unto me and
drink; and to such he promises everlasting happiness. Revel. 21.6. I will
give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely, of which
whosoever drinks shall never be more a thirst, Ioh. 4.
but it shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life. And
to this we may add also, an high and incomparable estimation of Christ and his
righteousness, after that we are assured of them, whereby we prise and value
them so much above all worldly things, that with Paul we esteem them all but
dross and dung in respect of gaining Christ, Phil. 3.8.
Phil. 3.8. and are content not only with the Merchant to sell all we have
that we may buy these precious pearls, but also to suffer tribulation,
anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, yea death it self,
Romans 8.35.
rather than we would be separated from the love of Christ, as the Apostle
speaks Romans 8.35.

The sixth sign, is the inward fight between the flesh and the spirit.
is the inward combat which they feel, between the flesh and the spirit,
whereby on the one side they are drawn unto sin, and on the other side
incited unto holy obedience; now delighted in the law of God, and yet soon
after led captive unto sin; one while rowing against the tide of their
carnal affections, and another while carried violently down the stream, by
reason of their weakness, and the strength of their inbred corruption. For
naturally we go al one way, without any stop, opposition or resistance, even
the broad way which leads to hell and destruction: naturally we serve sin,
and willingly subject our selves to live in the bondage of our spiritual
enemies, until the Lord do with his holy spirit renew our will, and sanctify
our affections, working in us an earnest desire to come out of this miserable
captivity, that we may attain unto the glorious liberty of the sons of God:
which renewing and sanctification, because it is done but in part, therefore is
it opposed by the contrary corruption which we have by nature, so that what
the spirit loves the flesh hates, what the spirit imbraceth the flesh
abhors, what the spirit would have us do, the flesh hinders and inforceth
us to leave undone, with whatsoever the spirit is delighted, with that the
flesh is vexed and displeased; and this spiritual fight is in all Gods
children as appears Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17. which should be so far from
discouraging us, Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.
that nothing more can assure us of our election; for naturally we are all
flesh, wholly submitting our selves to be ruled by Satan, neither is there any
fight or opposition in us, for Satan's kingdom is not divided against it
self, and whilst the strong man wholly keeps the house, all that he
possesses is in peace, until our Savior Christ, by the operation of his
spirit, thrusts him out of his possession, and seeks to rule in us by the
scepter of his word; and then the devil rages and strives to keep his hold,
and the flesh stormeth, desiring still to serve his old master. When therefore
we feel this inward fight within our selves, we may be assured that Christ is
come to dwell in our hearts by his holy spirit, and consequently, that we are
the children of God, and heirs of everlasting life, for as many as receive
him, to them he gives power to be the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12.
even to them that believe in his name, as it is John 1.12.

The seventh sign, is new obedience. 1. Ioh. 2.5.
when as he applies his heart to the keeping of Gods commanmaundements,
desiring and indeauouring to serve the Lord in holiness and newness of life;
for if any man keeps Gods word, in him is the love of God perfect in deed,
and hereby we know that we are in him, as it is 1. John 2.5. And whosoever
abides in him sins not, whosoever sins has not seen him, neither has
known him, chap. 3. v. 6.10
as it is chap. 3. ver. 6. So verse. 10. In this are the children of God known
and the children of the devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of
God, etc. So that our new obedience is a sign of the child of God, and the
neglect thereof a mark of the child of darkness. But we are not to
understand this of that exact obedience which is required in the Law; for
thereby none living can have any assurance of their election and salvation, but
rather of reprobation and damnation; but it is to be understood of an
evangelical obedience, which consists in an holy desire and earnest
endeavor of keeping all Gods commandments; with which the children of God are
so wholly possessed, that after their true conversion it is impossible that they
should fall into any known sin, with full consent of will and with their
whole hearts. And this is the obedience which the Gospel requires, and of
which the Apostle speaks, and thus we never sin but keep all Gods
commandments, namely, in respect of our desire and earnest endeavor. This is
that righteousness which is accepted, as though it were perfect before God,
who spares us as a man spares his son whom he tenderly loves, Mal. 3.17.
as he professes Mal. 3.17. and therefore measures our obedience not
according to our actions, but according to our offections, and accepts of the
will for the deed, as before I have showed.

The properties of true obedience: first, that it must be total and entire.
we are to know that this evangelical obedience has these properties; first,
it must be total, and that both in respect of the subject and of the object;
that is, we must not share our selves between God and the world, giving one
the tongue, the other the heart; one our outward actions, and the other our
inward affections; but we must perform our obedience with our whole hearts,
yea with the whole man body soul and spirit: for though we be regenerated
and sanctified but in part, yet is there no part of the whole man unregenerate
and unsanctified, howsoever the flesh and the corruption of nature be spread
likewise and mixed therewith throughout the whole body and soul. And therefore
though all our obedience savor of the flesh, and is mingled with manifold
imperfections, yet it does proceed from the whole man body and soul, because
regeneration from which it proceeds is not of any part alone, but of the
whole man. So also it must be total in respect of the object; for it is not
sufficient that with Herod we observe many things, if we nourish willingly any
one sin taking therein pleasure and delight, but we must desire and endeavor
to forsake all our sins, and to perform obedience unto all Gods
commandments; for if we nourish one sin in our hearts, it will open a door
to let in more when we are tempted unto them; as we may see in the example of
Herod and Judas, the one harboring incest, the other covetousness; if we
neglect willingly, obedience to one precept of Gods law, it will so harden our
hearts and sear our consciences, that soon after we shall neglect all. If
therefore we would have our obedience acceptable unto God, we must with the
Prophet David Psalm. 119.6. have respect unto all Gods commandments; Psalm.
119.6. Iam. 2.10. The second property, that it must be perpetual and constant.
for, he that fails in one, is guilty of all, as it is Iam. 2.10.

Secondly, this obedience must be perpetual, continuing in a constant course
from the time of our conversion to the end of our lives; for we are not to
judge of our selves or others, by one or two or many actions whether they be
good or evil, but by the whole tenor and course of our lives, so that he who
in this respect is holy and righteous, he is so accepted before God,
notwithstanding his many falls and great infirmities; he that in the course of
his life is wicked and profane, is so esteemed of God, although he seem to
himself and others religious by fits, and perfourmeth many excellent duties
and good works. It is therefore not sufficient that we begin in the spirit,
Galat. 3.3.
if we end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3. It is not sufficient to profess and
practice godliness in our youth, if we break off in our age; it is not
enough that we enter into the Christian race and run well in the beginning,
if we stand still in the midst, or before we come to the goal; Matthew. 24.13
Luke 9.62.
for he only that endures to the end shall be saved, as it is Matthew. 24.13. As
for him that lays his hand on the plough and looks back, he is not fit
for Gods kingdom, as our Savior affirms Luke 9.62.

The third property, that it must be grounded on Gods word, and referred to
his glory.
Lastly, our obedience must be grounded upon Gods word, and therefore performed
because the Lord has enjoined such duties unto us; it must proceed from faith,
which first purifieth the heart, and then works by love; it must not be done
for any worldly respect; but of a conscionable care of perfourming our duties,
and in a fervent zeal of Gods glory, which is magnified when as our lights
shine before men; which zeal will make us go forward in our course of
godliness, through evil report, 2. Cor. 6.8.
and good report, honor and dishonor. And if our obedience spring from these
fountains, and be referred to this end that God thereby may be glorified;
then will we make no less conscience of secret, than of open sins; then will
we be no less ready to serve God in the duties of piety and righteousness
when there is no witness of our actions, than if all the world should look
upon us; then will we be as fearful to offend God in the breach of any of his
commandments in our secret chambers in the dark night, as in the Church or
market place at noone day.

The eight sign, is the love of our brethren, because God has commanded us.
is the love of our brethren in obedience to Gods commandment; when as a man
loves entirely a Christian, because he is a Christian, and ingrafted into the
same body of Christ whereof he is a member: for as it is impossible that one
member of the body should not love, cherish, and defend another, because they
are quickened by the same soul and governed by the same head; so it is not
possible but that one true Christian should love, cherish, and defend another,
because they are quickened by the same spirit, and ruled by the same head Jesus
Christ. And this is made a mark of Gods child by the Apostle John, 1. Ioh.
3.14. 1. Ioh. 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren: as the want of this love is a sure note of the child of wrath, for
as it follows in the same verse, he that loves not his brother abides in
death.

Now the undoubted signs of love and christian charity are two; giving to
those that want, The signs of true love. 1. Cor. 13.4
and forgiving those that offend: for it is a property of true love to be
bountiful, 1. Cor. 13.4. as to all, so especially to those that are of the
household of faith, as it is Gal. 6.10; and on the other side, Gal. 6.10.
He that has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his compassion from him, he is destitute of the love of God, 1. Ioh. 3.17.
and consequently of the love of his brethren, which is but a stream issuing
from this fountain, 1. Ioh. 3.17. And this Christian liberality as it is a
sign of true love, so also of our election and salvation; for our Savior
Christ has showed us, that according to these fruits of charity, and actions
of Christian liberality, he will pronounce the sentence of everlasting joy
and happiness at the day of judgment, Matthew. 25.34, 35, etc.
Matthew. 25.34, 35, 36. and on the other side, that he will pronounce the
sentence of condemnation against the neglectors of these duties of Christian
charity, verse. 41, 42, 43.

The second sign of true love is forgiving, when as we are ready for Gods
sake and in obedience to his commandment to remit and pardon those injuries
which are offered us; for, love is not provoked to anger, 1. Cor. 13.5.7
and therefore much less to revenge; it suffers all things, it indureth all
things, as it is 1. Cor. 13.5, 7. Nay, it does not only not render evil for
evil, but it overcomes evil with goodness, Romans 12.19.21.
leaving revenge unto God, and to his deputies and vicegerents the Magistrates,
as we may see in the example of our Savior Christ, and the blessed Martyr
Steven, who prayed for their persecutors; whose example we are to imitate, as
the Apostle exhorts Romans 12.14. Bless them that persecute you; Romans 12.14.
bless I say and curse not. And so shall we have a certain sign of true
love, and an undoubted note of Gods spirit dwelling in us, of the remission of
our sins, and consequently of our election and salvation. For naturally we
are Wolves, Leopards, Lions, yea Cockatrices who kill with their looks, Esa.
11.6.8.
as the Prophet speaks Esa. 11.6, 8. and like bruit and savage beasts willing
to offer all injuries, but impatient of suffering any: and therefore when our
savage cruelty is turned into charity, and we become as meek and
harmless, as the lamb, calfe, or little child, it is a manifest sign that
our stout courages are abated and beaten down with the rod of Christ's mouth,
that we are borne anew and quickened by his spirit, and that now we are
seated in the mountain of his holiness, and shall be heirs of his kingdom
of glory. So also hereby we are assured of the remission of our sins, when
we find our selves ready and willing to forgive our neighbors; for our
Savior Christ has promised, Matthew. 6.14.
that if we do forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly father will also
forgive us, Matthew. 6.14. and consequently we may assuredly gather, that we
are justified, called, elected, and shall be glorified.

The ninth sign, is the love of Gods ministers.
is, the love of Gods true Ministers and ambassadors, not only because they
are Christians, but also because they are sent of God to execute these holy
functions, for the gathering together of Gods elect. And this our Savior
Christ declares, Matthew. 10.41.
Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have
a Prophets reward; that is, everlasting joy and unspeakable happiness in Gods
kingdom; for, they that turn many unto righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. And because none should pretend
that by reason of their poverty they cannot show their love to Gods Ministers,
therefore the Lord encourages even the poorest, to show their goodwill and
affection unto them, Matthew. 10.43. saying, Matthew. 10.43.
Whosoever shall give to any of these little ones to drink, a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you he shall not lose
his reward, namely in Gods kingdom. Moreover, those that love Gods
ambassadors, do prove unto themselves and show unto the world, that they
have received good by their embassage, even reconciliation with God, peace of
conscience and assurance of salvation, which makes them to think no worldly
benefit sufficient to requite these spiritual graces, which by their means
and ministry they have received: and therefore with the Galatians they could
be content, if it were possible to do them good hereby, Gal. 4.15.
to pull out their own eyes and to give them unto them, seeing by their means
the blind eyes of their understandings, are enlightened with the knowledge of
God and Christ their Savior. And because they have received from them to their
comfort, the glad tidings of peace and good things; therefore their feet, that
is, their approaching and coming unto them, seem beautiful and delightful,
as the Apostle speaks Romans 10.15. Romans 10.15.
If an ambassador were sent from a mighty Prince, who was our enemy in time
past, and able at his pleasure to destroy us and our country, to the end he
might conclude a peace; and not only so, but to offer us the free use of all the
riches and commodities of his kingdom; who would not receive him with joy, and
give him royal entertainment, if they were persuaded of the truth of his
embassage? But we by our sins had made the glorious King of heaven and earth
our enemy, who is able every minute to destroy us with the breath of his
nostrels; and it has pleased the Lord to send his ambassadors, not only to
offer peace, but also to beseech us that we would be reconciled unto him, as
the Apostle speaks 2. Cor. 5.20; 2. Cor. 5.20.
and upon this reconciliation, he assures us of the riches of his kingdom:
who therefore receiving and believing this embassage, will not love the
Ambassadors that bring these blessed tidings unto them? Who can be assured of
such inestimable benefits, and yet show no token of thankfulness toward them,
who are the means whereby they are derived unto them.

The great contempt of Gods ministry, a sign that few prosit by their
ministry.
Where by the way we may note, how few the number is in these days, who receive
the Lords embassage to their spiritual comfort; how few they are to whom it is
effectual for the begetting in them the graces of Gods spirit; how few hereby
come to the true assurance of the remission of their sins and everlasting
happiness: seeing the number is so exceeding small who love and respect the
Lords ambassadors in regard of their embassage. Nay rather the most, even for
their ministry sake do contemn those, whom otherwise in respect of their
learning, wisdom, and other excellent gifts of body and mind, they would
respect and highly esteem if they were not of the ministry. So that their
honorable calling, which above al things should commend them, does above all
things make them base and contemptible: and no marvel, seeing the most are
flesh and not spirit, the children of Mammon and not the children of God: and
therefore, savoring only the things of the flesh and not perceauing the things
of the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.14.
they seem foolishness unto them, and the preachers of them fools, and men
of shallow conceits. But let such know, that God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, 1. Cor. 1.27.28
and weak things to confound mighty things; and vile things of the world, and
things that are despised has God chosen, and things that are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence, as it is
1. Cor. 1.27.28. Let them know that this their contempt, or at least small
regard of Gods ambassadors, is a most manifest sign that they never received
good by their embassage: for had they received from them spiritual things,
they would never grudge to bestow upon them their worldly things, which in the
true christians estimation are not to be compared with them; and much less
would they against their own conscience defraud them of their own right,
which by the laws of God and man is due unto them, whereby it comes to pass
that whereas all men being industrious and frugall, may live plentifully even
of their meanest trades, only the Lord ambassadors, though never so painful
in their callings, live in want and misery.

will speak of, The tenth sign an earnest desire of Christ's coming to
judgment. Revel. 22.20. Matthew. 6.10.
is their earnest desire that our Savior Christ should come to judgment:
whence proceeds that patheticall prayer, Come Lord Jesus come quickly,
Revel. 22.20; and that prayer which our Savior has taught all the faithful
to pray daily, let thy kingdom come, Matthew. 6.10. Now that this is a note of
those that are elected to salvation, it appears plainly 2. Tim 4.8. Where
the Apostle says that a crown of righteousness is laid up for all those
that love his appearing. 2. Tim. 4.8. Romans 8.23.
And Romans 8.23, he tells us, that those who have the first fruits of the
spirit, do even sigh in themselves, waiting for the adoption even the
redemption of their body, when as their corruption shall put on incorruption,
and the mortal body immortality, as he speaks 1. Cor. 15.53. 1. Cor. 15.53.
So our Savior Christ has told us, that his faithful children should at his
coming, look up and lift up their heads, Luke 21.28.
because their redemption draws near, Luke 21.28; and on the otherside that
the kingdom of the earth shall mourn, and that the profane worldlings and
reprobates shall say to the mountains and rocks, Matthew. 24.30. Revel. 6.16.
fall on us and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the lamb; Revel. 6.16. So that by these places it is
manifest, that if we love the appearing of the Lord Jesus, and desire his
coming to judgment; we are the children of God endued with his spirit, which
assures us of our salvation. For naturally we abhor to think of this
fearful day, and tremble with fear when mention is made of the appearing of
our judge, because by our sins we have deserved everlasting damnation: but
when the spirit of God by the ministry of the word, has begot faith in us,
whereby we apply unto our selves Christ Jesus, and all his merits, by whom we
are reconciled unto God and made friends who before were enemies, and sons of
God and heirs of everlasting happiness who before were the children of wrath
and firebrands of hell, then do we earnestly desire the company of our
heavenly father; when we are assured that our judge shall be our Savior, then
can we go boldly to his judgment seat without fear of condemnation; when
we are assured that we are the beloved spouse of Christ, then we long for
nothing more then for the coming of our bridegroom; when we are certainly
persuaded that by Gods spirit we are ingrafted into the body of Christ, and
are become lively members of his body; then do we heartily wish with the
Apostle to be dissolved, that we may be with Christ our head in his kingdom of
glory, where together with him we shall receive, and be fully satisfied with
such incomparable joys, 1. Cor. 2.9.
as neither eye has seen nor ear heard nor the heart of man conceived.

CHAP. XI. The objections alleged against the assurance of our election,
answered.
Answers unto testimonies alleged.
now I will answer such objections as are brought against this doctrine by the
enemies of Gods truth. And these are of two sorts, first testimonies of Gods
word, and secondly reasons. The testimonies of scriptures are diverse: 1. Cor.
10.12. Pro. 28.14. Romans 11.20.
first they object such places as these; 1. Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks
he stands, take heed least he fall. Pro. 28.14. Blessed is the man that
fears always, Romans 11.20. Be not high minded but fear. Phil. 2.12. Make an
end of your salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12. 1 Pet. 1.17.
1. Pet. 1.17. Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear: to all which and
many other such like places, we may answer generally, that the holy Ghost
would not hereby take away our certainty of faith, but carnal security; he
would not deprive us of the assurance of the remission of our sins and our
election, but rather by these admonitions as with a bridle he curbeth in our
unruly affections, and restrains us from running into all licentiousness
under this pretense that we are assured of our election; he would not have us
doubt of Gods grace, but he would not have us too much trust and rely on those
graces which we have received; and therefore he puts us in mind of our
own weakness and infirmity, not to the end we should doubt of our election,
and despair or fear our perseverance, but to the end that distrusting our
own strength we may wholly rely upon the power love and promises of God, and
thereby gather so much more certain assurance of our election and
perseverance, as the power of God is above the power of man; lastly he gives
us not these admonitions to bring us into doubting, but would hereby stir up
our faith unto the exercise of holiness and righteousness, that it may not
through idleness faint and wax stiff and benumbed, and unable to perform
these holy actions, whereby this assurance and certainty of our election,
would be infeebled and not so sensibly discerned: and therefore these and such
like speeches tend not to this end that we should doubt of our election, but
rather that we should be preserved from doubting; to which, carnal security,
self confidence, negligence in the duties of holiness and righteousness, and
continuance in sin would in the end bring us; all which the spirit of God by
these admonitions and exhortations preuenteth.

Secondly, I answer that these. and such like admonitions, are not directed
only to the faithful, who may and ought to be assured of their election, but
in general to the whole Church, wherein there are many hypocrites who content
themselves with a bare show of godliness, and many worldly men who please
themselves with carnal security, and a carcass of faith, which never so much
as breaths, and muchlesse performs any actions of holiness and
righteousness: and therefore as it was necessary that the faithful should be
more and more confirmed with the promises of the Gospel, so was it requisite
that hypocrites and secure worldlings should be rouzed out of their security,
with these and such like admonitions and comminations.

Admonitions and comminations profitable for Gods children.
but even for the dear children of God: who because they are partly flesh and
partly spirit, therefore as they have need that the spiritual man should be
comforted and their faith confirmed against diffidence and doubting, with the
sweet promises of the Gospel; so had they need to have their unruly flesh
curbed in, and restrained from falling into retchlesse security, by these
admonitions and comminations. And because by reason of this division which is
in our selves, we are ready as it were to mutiny, one part of our forces
being ready to march cheerfully to the land of promise, the other to forsake
the way, sometimes on the one side being ready to turn back again, as
utterly despairing of attaining to the end of our journey, when we consider the
sons of Anakim our spiritual enemies, in respect of whose stature and
strength we are but as grasshoppers, and the mighty oppositions which are made
against our weak force; and sometimes to go on in a way which God has not
appointed, presuming upon our own strength and abilities. Therefore that we
may keep the straight way without declining on either hand, God does as it
were hedge us in on both sides, to restrain us from wandering; on the one side
with sweet promises, that we may not despair, but rely our selves on his
strength and assistance; on the otherside with sweet admonitions and fearful
comminations, that we may not trust too much unto our own power, nor presume
upon our own abilities: and by the means of the one, he does as it were
prick us forward in our journey, keeping us from once thinking of standing
still, or returning again into Egypt; and by the other as with an hand he
does uphold us, when we are weary and ready to faint, having an eye to the
crown of glory, and the garland of happiness, which is prepared for us at
the end of our course, and race of christianity. And as a skillful pilot, when
his ship is in a tempestuous and strait sea, in danger to run on the rocks
or to sink in the sands, does cast our ancor on both sides, or most caresully
look unto the stern to keep it in an even course; so we sailing in the
tempestuous sea of this miserable world, are in danger on the one side to dash
upon the rocks of presumptuous security, and on the otherside to sink in the
sands and to plunge into the gulf of desperation: and therefore the Lord does
stay us from both, as it were with two strong cables; the first is legal
comminations and strict admonitions, to keep us from carnal security and
hypocritical presumption, the other is sweet promises whereby he keeps us
from falling into doubting and desperation; neither does one of these hinder
another, but both stay us from falling into these extremes.

True true meaning of the several places objected.
but partly to take away the presumption and security of hypocrites and
carnal worldlings, and partly to bridle and restrain the flesh from running
headlong into sin, and from growing insolent over the spirit even in Gods
children, whereby in deed their assurance of salvation would be abated and
languish. The truth whereof appears if we examine the several places. For
first, whereas the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.12. says, Let him that thinks he
stands, 1. Cor. 10.12.
take heed least he fall; he does not move those that are faithful, to doubt
of their perseverance, but those that want true faith, not to deceive
themselves with vain presumption, and with an opinion of faith in stead of
true faith in deed: and therefore he says not simply, let him that stands,
but let him that thinks he stands, that is, he that does not stand in deed
but in his own found opinion. Neither can it necessarily be proved, that this
falling is to be understood of final falling away from God; but rather as the
coherence of the text shows, of falling into those sins which the
Israelites fell into: and though it were, yet is it but an admonition to take
away carnal security, not given to make us doubt of our standing, but to
preserve us from falling.

Secondly, whereas the wise man says, Pro. 28.14, Pron. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears allwaies: he does not understand thereby a
doubtful fear of our election, but a fear to sin, and a conscionable care
of avoiding those things which are displeasing in Gods sight; which fear is
opposed to carnal security and hardness of heart, as appears in the same
place where this is added, 'But he that hardneth his heart shall fall into
evil: as though he should say, that man is blessed which fears the Lord,
for this will work in him a conscionable care of avoiding sin, which is
odious in the eyes of God, and of embracing holiness and righteousness, which
being acceptable unto God, he will reward with eternal blessedness; but he
that hardneth his heart and continues in carnal security, runs headlong
into the evil of sin, and consequently the evil of punishment, even
everlasting condemnation.

Thirdly, whereas the Apostle, Romans 11.20, Romans 11.20.
exhorts, us not to be high minded but fear; he does not mean that we
should doubt of our election and salvation, but does hereby beat down our
spiritual pride, and opinion of our own righteousness and holiness, whereby
we are ready to insult over the Jews, as though we were chosen and preferred
before them, for some excellency or worthiness in our selves, and so derogate
from the free grace and goodness of God, whereby he has chosen us without any
respect of our deserts. And that this is the meaning of these words, appears
in the eighteenth verse, where he wills the Gentiles not to boast themselves
against the Jews who were the natural branches. Neither does the Apostle
write this to the faithful only, but to the whole Church of the Gentiles, in
which were many hypocrites and carnal men, who contenting themselves with a
bare name of Christians, would insult over the Jews, whom God had cast off
from being his Church and people; whom he warns, not to be puffed up in pride,
as though in this respect their state were most secure and out of all danger;
for as (says he) they were cast off for their infidelity, even when they were
natural branches, so shall you much more be rejected, who being wild branches
were grafted in their places (that is, called to be the members of the visible
Church) if you continue in the like infidelity, contenting your selves with
vame confidence and fond presumption, in stead of a lively faith.

Phil. 2.12.
whereas the Apostle, Phil. 2.12. does exhort us to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling; he does not hereby take away from us assurance of our
election and salvation, but carnal security and self confidence; that so
despairing of our own strength, as being unable of our selves to think a good
thought, or to will that which is good, we may in all humility rest and rely
our selves, wholly upon the Lord. And that this is his meaning, appears by the
reason which he adioyneth in the verse following: for says he, it is God
which works in you both the will and the deed. As though he should say,
there is no reason why you should be secure, as though you were able to stand
by your own strength; there is no cause why you should be lifted up with fond
presumption, or be carried away with self confidence, for of your selves, you
are not able so much as to will that which is good, or to perform it though
you should will it, unless it please the Lord of his own good pleasure and
free will to work both in you, and therefore respecting your own infirmities
and imperfections, you should be so far from carnal security or self
confidence, that contrariwise you should continually fear, least through your
corruption you should be overtaken of sin, and so displease the Lord which is
your sovereign King and gracious Father. So that the Apostle does not here
exhort us to doubt of our election and salvation, but to a godly fear that we
do not fall into sin: he would not have us to doubt of Gods grace and free
promises, but of our own strength, by which we are altogether unable to stand
if he leave us to our selves: he would not have us fear least we should be
rejected and damned, after we are truly converted unto God, but least we fall
into sin, and neglect that duty which we owe to our heavenly father.

Fear and distruct in our own weakness, and assurance of our election, may
well stand together.
These two therefore may well stand together: for the more we distrust our own
weakness, the more firmly we rest upon the power and assistance of God, and
the more we rely upon him, the more sure we are of standing unto the end: the
surer we are of Gods love and favor, the more we love him again; and the more
we love him, the more fearful we are to displease him: the more we see our
pronenesse to sin, the more we fear least we should fall into it; and the
more we suspect our selves, the more earnestly we implore the assistance of
Gods spirit, whereby we are enabled to withstand temptations. And therefore
David joins these together, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice
in trembling; Psalm. 2.11.
noting thereby that Gods children fear, yea, even tremble in regard of their
own infirmities and corruptions, and yet at the same time they rejoice and are
filled with consolation, in respect of that full assurance which they have of
Gods love and favor, and their election and salvation. And as he joins them
in precept, so also in his own practice, Psalm. 5.7.
Psalm. 5.7. I will (says he) come into thine house in the multitude of thy
mercy; and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple: so that at the
same time, when as he was encouraged by the consideration of Gods great mercy,
to go boldly and with a lively faith unto the throne of grace; he was also
touched with a godly fear in regard of his unworthiness and imperfections;
not that he doubted least he should not be accepted of God, but least in
worshipping of God he should bewray his corruption, and not do it in that
manner and measure which God requires.

John says, Objection. 1. Ioh. 4.18. Answer.
1. Epist. 4.18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear,
etc. I answer, that there is a twofold fear mentioned in the scriptures; the
first is a servile fear proceeding from incredulity, whereby men fear God as
a scuere judge, who is ready to inflict on them those just punishments which by
their sins they have deserved, which fear is expelled when as we are assured
of Gods love and love him again. The other is a sonne-like fear, which is a
fruit of faith, whereby we do not fear God as an enemy or an angry judge,
but as a gracious Father, whose displeasure we would by no means incur; not
that we fear his wrath and vengeance, as though it were ready to fall upon us,
but because we would not thus abuse his mercy and goodness toward us, nor do
any thing which might cause him to look upon us with a frowning countenance:
or if we do fear Gods judgments, it is as they are inflicted on another
subject, and not as being ready to fall upon us: for this difference is
between the fear of the wicked and Gods children, they like malefactors which
are led out to punishment, are filled with horror and fear when they think of
the torments which they are to endure, but yet did never fear to commit such
crimes as descrued the punishments, and though they should escape, yet this
would be no warning for the time to come; but Gods children seeing the
judgments which are exercised upon the wicked, do fear, not least they
should be inflicted upon them presently, but least they should so offend and
deserve the like punishments, first avoiding sin, that they may not receive
the wages thereof. And this sonne-like fear is commended unto us in the
scriptures, as being a part of the honor and service which we owe unto God, as
appears Mal. 1.6. Mal. 1.6.
A son honors his father, and a servant his master, if I be a father
where is mine honor, if I be a master where is my fear says the Lord?
Psalm. 34.9. and 112.1.
So Psalm. 34.9. Fear the Lord ye his saints, for nothing wants to them
that fear him. And Psalm 112.1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and
delights greatly in his commandments. In which places we are not to
understand a servile and slavish fear, but an ingenuous and sonne-like fear,
which draws us back from falling into sin, and incites us to perform all
good duties of holiness and righteousness to God and our brethren, because we
would not incur the displeasure of our heavenly father, but do those things
which are acceptable in his sight.

Lastly, whereas the Apostle Peter 1. epist. 1.17. exhorts us to pass the
time of our dwelling here in fear, 1. Pet. 1.17.
he does not understand such a fear as makes us to doubt of our election and
salvation, but such an one as provoke us to obey Gods commandments, and
restrains us from wallowing and defiling our selves in sin: for with this
fear in the verse following he joins certain knowledge of our redemption,
and consequently of our election and salvation, knowing (says he) that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold from your vain
conversation, etc. but with the precious blood of Christ. So that this fear
does not take away the certain knowledge of our election and redemption, but
this knowledge causes us to fear least we fall into sin after we are
assured of this great benefit of our redemption, and thereby displease our
gracious God, and defile our souls after they are purged with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ.

Other places objected answered. Job. 9.21.
as that Job. 9.21. Though I were perfect, yet I know not my soul; therefore I
abhor my life. To which I answer, that Jobs scope and drift in this place is
to show, that even the most just and holy man cannot stand before Gods
judgment seat in his own righteousness and holiness, which is polluted and
imperfect, and that therefore it behooves every one to despair in himself
and his legal righteousness, as not being able to justify him in Gods sight,
in respect of whose purity even the very heavens are unclean, that so he may
wholly rely upon Gods mercy and Christ's merits; and this appears verse. 2.3. I
know verily (says he) that it is so (that is, Job. 9.2.
that God is just and all men are sinners, who are righteously punished for
their demerits, as Bildad had reasoned in the former chapter) and therefore how
should man compared unto God be justified? 3. Verse 3.
If he would dispute with him, he could not answer him one thing of a
thousand. And verse. 20. If I would justify my self, Verse 20.
mine own mouth should condemn me; if I would be perfect, he shall judge me
wicked. 21. And though I were innocent or perfect, (that is, though I seemed
just in mine own eyes, and knew nothing by my self) yet I know not mine own
soul, nor what secret corruptions may lurk in it, and therefore I will not
hereby look to be justified, nay in this respect I abhor my life, and cast
mine own righteousness from me as a polluted cloute. By which manner of
reasoning he confuteth Bildads objection, who affirmed that Job and his sons
were punished of God for their sins and that justly, and therefore they were
not so just and innocent as they had seemed: to this Job answers, that it is
true indeed he could not justify himself in respect of his own
righteousness, if he compared himself with Gods exact justice, but must
needs condemn himself for a wretched sinner; yet hence it followed not that
therefore God thus afflicted him, seeing this was the state not of him only but
of all men whatsoever: and therefore this could not be the only cause of his
extraordinary afflictions. So that this place makes nothing against the
assurance of our salvation, which is grounded upon Gods free mercy and Christ's
merits; but against that presumption which relieth it self in whole or in
part, upon our own legal righteousness.

Paul which they object, 1. Cor. 4.3, 4. 1. Cor. 4.3 4.
I judge not mine own self, for I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord. For answering whereof,
we are to know, that there were diverse in the Church of Corinth, who censured
Paul's ministry and disgraced his gifts; a against which detractations he
bends his speech and makes an apology for himself, saying, that he would
not take upon him to judge himself, concerning the excellency and worth of
his ministry and gifts, but would leave the judgment and approbation thereof
unto God, whose ambassador he was; and though he knew nothing which might be
objected against him in regard of his ministry, yet hereby he would not
look to be justified in Gods presence: So that if this be the sense of the
words, as appears by the coherence and the drift of the place, it makes
nothing for popish doubting. But let it be granted that Paul speaks not of
his ministry, but of his righteousness and obedience to the law, yet this
makes nothing against the certainty of our election; for the Apostle speaking
of his own righteousness and innocence, does disclaim it from being any
cause of his justification: neither does he say that in regard thereof he
doubts, as the Papists would expound him, but he affirms directly that he
is not thereby justified, and renders this as a reason, that it is God who
judges him: and therefore though he were unblameable before men, yea though he
knew nothing by himself; yet he could not hereby be justified before the just
judgment seat of God, who requires such perfection and exact obedience as can
be found in no man living; for he that but once breaks but one commandment,
Iam. 2.10.
is guilty of all, as it is Iam. 2.10. And therefore it behooued the Apostle
and al others, not to seek for justification in themselves and their own
righteousness, but in the righteousness and obedience of Christ, which we
may boldly present before Gods exact judgment seat, and there be accepted as
righteous. And of this justification the Apostle speaks, not doubtfully or
timorously, but boldly and certainly, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we
have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Romans 5.1.2.
By whom also we have access through faith unto his grace wherein we stand,
and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. So Romans 8.33. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies. 34. Romans
8.33.
Who shall condemn? it is Christ who is dead, yea rather which is risen
again, etc.

Joel 2.14. Amos 5.15.
they object these places to move us to doubt of our election and salvation.
Joel 2.14. Who knows if he will return and repent; and Amos 5.15. It may be
that the Lord God of hoasts will be merciful unto the remnant of Joseph. And
Ion. 3.9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, Jonas 3.9.
and turn away from his fearce wrath that we perish not? To which I answer,
that the Prophets in these places do not speak of the election or eternal
salvation of those that truly repent, but of their delivery from outward
afflictions, and temporary calamities threatened against them for their sins:
which sometimes the Lord does inflict on his children after their true
repentance, either for their chastizement, that they may thereby hate sin for
the time to come, when they feel the smart of it; or else for their trial: and
sometimes also the Lord after he has threatened them against the wicked, does
notwithstanding hold back his hand, and as it were put up his sword of justice
again into the scabberd, which he had drawn out to punish their sins, upon
on their outward humiliation and fained repentance, that he may show hereby
how highly he esteems the true repentance of his children, as appears in
the example of the Nineuits and of Ahab, 1. King. 21.29.
1. King. 21.29. And therefore seeing the Lord keeps no certain course in
these temporary chastizements, but sometimes inflicteth them upon the
repentant whom he dearly loves, and sometime spares the wicked when they
but outwardly humble themselves before him; therefore the Prophets speak
doubtfully and exhort to repentance, referring the event to Gods wise and
gracious providence. And thus doubtfully does David speak in this respect 2.
Sam. 12.22. 2. Sam. 12.22. and 16.12.
Who can tell (said he) whether God will have mercy on me that the child may
live? and chap. 16.12. It may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction; and
yet though he were doubtful whether he should be freed from these temporal
crosses, he was notwithstanding certainly persuaded of his election and
salvation; Psalm. 16.11.
as he professes Psalm. 16.11. So that these places speaking of temporary
chastizements, make nothing against the certainty of our election.

Act. 8.22.
is that which they allege to the same purpose, Act. 8.22. where Peter
exhorts Simon Magus to repent of his wickedness, and to pray unto God, that
if peradventure the wicked thought of his heart might be forgiven him. To which
I answer, first, that the original word (...), which is translated, if
peradventure, and in our Bibles, if it be possible, sometimes also signifies,
that truly, and in this sense it makes nothing for doubting. Secondly, though
we understand it as a speech of doubting, yet it makes not for their purpose;
for it is not to be referred unto God, as though it were doubtful whether he
would forgive the sins of the Magician, if he did truly repent and call upon
him; for he has certainly assured us by his gracious promise, that whosoever
truly repents him of his wicked ways, Ezech. 33.11.
he will receive him to mercy, Ezech. 33.11. But it is to be referred to Simon
Magus, of whose repentance and lively faith Peter might well doubt, least
either they would be none at all, or else fained and hypocritical, seeing his
heart was not right in the sight of God, but in the gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity. Lastly, though it should be a doubtful speech and be
referred also to God, yet it makes nothing against the certainty of faith;
for the Apostle seeing him in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity,
thought it not fit to raise him up suddenly, by applying unto him the sweet
promises of the Gospel, nor to cast those precious pearls before such a
filthy swine, unless first he preserved them as it were in the casket of a
doubtsull and perplexed speech, from being trampled under his bemired feet,
till he had washed them in the tears of unfeigned repentance. Moreover, he
thus doubtfully speaks to give him a more clear insight of the heinousness
of his sin, as though it might be well doubted of, whether the Lord would
forgive it or no, that so his mind hereby being least perplexed, might by the
consideration of his horrible sin be beaten down and truly humbled; and
because those things which are hardly obtained are more earnestly sought,
therefore Peter intimates unto him by this doubtful speech, that it was no
easy matter to obtain forgiveness for such outrageous wickedness, that he
might hereby work in the Magician more earnest and hearty repentance, and
incite him to call upon the Lord for mercy with more vehemency and feruencie
of spirit. It is not therefore the Apostles meaning to overthrow the certainty
of faith, or to call into question Gods mercy, whether he will extend it or
no to heinous offenders who truly repent of their sins and believe, for this
were contrary to the whole course of the Gospel; but he uses this doubtful
speech to this desperate sinner, that he might not make the sovereign salve of
Gods gracious promises base and contemptible, by applying it to the festred
sores of a filthy dog, which were never cleansed with the sharp corrasiues
of the law; and also for the good of this malicious sinner, for he does not
absolutely assure him of mercy and forgiveness, that he might be stirred up
with more earnestness and care to seek it; for the easiness of obtaining
makes the suitor careless and negligent in seeking and suing; neither does
he absolutely exclude him from all hope of grace, least he should never
labor after it, but desperately run on in his wickedness; for when hope is cut
off, the desire also faints, and therefore he uses a perplexed and wise
tempered speech, which on the one side might preserve him from secure
presumption, and on the other side from falling into hellish desperatio^.

Eccles. 5.5.
they object that saying Eccles. 5.5. which they thus read: De propitiato
peccato noli esse sine metu, neque adijcias peccatum super peccatum. That is,
be not without fear concerning sins forgiven, neither add sin unto sin.
To which, first I answer, that this book is not canonical scripture, and
therefore not to be alleged for the determining of questions in controversy,
nor for the confirming of doctrines of faith. Secondly, I answer that they
have corruptly translated the original text, for he wills us not to fear
concerning our sins forgiven, but concerning the forgiveness of them before
they are remitted, least we should securely add sin unto sin, because
forgiveness is promised whenever we repent, and so abuse the mercy and
long suffering of God to our just condemnation. So that he forbids not to
believe certainly, that our sins are remitted when God has pardoned them,
but he forbids us to run on in sin securely, presuming upon forgiveness,
as plainly appears by the original text and the whole drift and scope of the
place. For in the verse going before he uses this speech: Say not I have
sinned, and what evil has happened unto me, for the Lord is long suffering,
but yet he will not dismiss or acquit thee; and in this verse he bids us
not to be without fear concerning the forgiveness of sin, adding sin unto
sin, that is, we must not go on in sin presuming upon forgiveness: and
verse. 6. Do not say that his mercy is great, he will forgive my manifold
sins: 7. For mercy and wrath are swift with him; but upon sinners his
indignation shall rest. 8. Do not defer to turn unto the Lord, neither put
it off from day to day; for suddenly the wrath of the Lord shall break forth,
and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the time
of vengeance. In all which words he does not take away the assurance of the
forgiveness of our sins after we have truly repented of them, but carnal
security and vain presumption, whereby men defer their repentance upon hope
of mercy and forgiveness whenever they repent. Lastly, though this place were
to be understood concerning sins forgiven, yet the scope thereof is not to
hinder our assurance of forgiveness when we have truly repented, but only that
we do not after we have obtained remission of our sins, take occasion
thereby of falling into sin again, and so abuse the mercy and goodness of
God, using it as an argument to move us to go on in sin, because the Lord
upon our repentance is always ready to receive us to mercy.

CHAP. XII. The reasons alleged against the assurance ofour salvation,
answered.
That it is not arrogancy or presumption to be assured of our salvation.
which are alleged against the certainty of faith: now let us consider their
reasons. First, they object that it is proud arrogancy and heretical
presumption for a miserable sinner, without all doubting to assure himself
that he is elected and shall be saved. To which I answer, that if with the
pharisaicall papists and proud iusticiaries, we did build our assurance upon
our own merits and worthiness, it were indeed intolerable arragancie and
proud presumption, not only certainly to believe, but even to doubt whether
we are elected and shall be saved (for where as doubting is there is some hope
also) whereas the scriptures peremptorily conclude, that they who look for
righteousness and salvation by the law, are under the curse, Gal. 3.10; Galat.
3.10. Romans 3.20.
and that by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight,
Romans 3.20; and that we are justified not by our deserts, in whole or in part,
but freely by Gods grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, as it
is, verse. 24. But seeing we wholly disclaim our own righteousness, and humbly
acknowledging our own misery and wretchedness, do wholly rely our selves
upon the gracious promises of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus, seeing we
become nothing in our selves in the work of our salvation that God may be all
in all, seeing we cast away all glory from our selves, that we may wholly
glory in the Lord according to that Ierem. 9.24. Let him that glories, Ier.
9.24.
glory in this that he understands and knows me: This is not proud
arrogancy nor heretical presumption, but christian humility which gives all
glory unto God, leaving nothing to our selves but the comfort which is wrought
in our hearts, by the assurance we have of Gods promises. Nay the more
undoubtedly we trust in Gods promises, the greater is our humility; for the
more wretched we are in our own eyes, the more we see our imperfections, yea
our nothing in Gods sight; and hereby we are moved to go out of our selves, to
seek for salvation only in Gods free grace and Christ's merits, and to rest in
them with full assurance, as being in themselves all sufficient without our
works and worthiness. On the otherside the more we doubt of our salvation, in
respect of our unworthiness, the more is our pride and arrogancy; for we
would not doubt in regard of our unworthiness, unless we looked for
salvation by our worthiness, and therefore we come so far short in faith and
hope, as we find our selves short in merits; and whence can this proceed but
from arrogancy and pride, which makes men to look for salvation in
themselves, and to doubt of Gods mercy and Christ's merits, unless they find
that they have deserved them by their own works and worthiness? Let us
therefore abhor this proud humility of the papists which makes them doubt
of Gods merciful promises, and consequently of his truth; 1. Ioh. 5.10.
for as it is 1. Ioh. 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him a liar;
and also of the sufficiency and value of that inestimable price which Christ
Jesus has given for our redemption, as though it were imperfect in it self,
unless it be eitched and patched up with our own merits and worthiness: and
though we are most abject, wretched, and in a desperate case in respect of our
selves, yet let us have assured trust and confident boldness, yea a
triumphant boasting and glorying in respect of our Savior Christ, as the
Apostle speaks Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2. Notable is the saying of Austine to
this purpose, Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2. Sermon. 28. deuerbis domini. Omnia tibi
peccata tua dimissa sunt.
Ideo praesume non de operatione tua sed de christi gratia, presume therefore
(says he) not of thine own working but of Christ's grace, for ye are saved by
grace says the Apostle; therefore here is no arrogancy but faith, to show
what thou have received; it is not pride but devotion. So in another place, In
Psalm. 88.
Hoc dixit deus, hoc promisit, si parum est hoc, iurauit. The Lord has said
this, he has promised it, and if this be not enough he has sworn it. Because
therefore the promise is sure and confirmed, not according to our merits but
according to his mercy, let no man profess that with fear, of which he
cannot doubt.

Doubting proceeds from pride and arrogancy.
But they further urge, that humble doubting is better than presumptuous
assurance; I answer, first that their doubting is full of pride, which makes
them look for salvation in their own worthiness, rather than in Gods free
mercy and Christ's merits: secondly that our faith and certain assurance is
full of humility; for we freely confess our own unworthiness, and dare not
offer before the seat of Gods justice any righteousness that is in us, as
desiring in whole or in part to be justified thereby; nay rather we pray with
the Prophet Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall none that lives be justified; Psalm. 143.2.
and though we know nothing by our selves yet do we plain^ly affirm with the
Apostle, that we are not hereby justified. 1. Cor. 4.4.
1. Cor. 4.4. But this humility does not abate our faith and certain
assurance, nay rather it does confirm and increase it, for it makes us to go
out of our selves, as finding no hope of salvation whereupon we may rest, and
moves us to seek for salvation in Christ, who is such a sure ancorhold that
whosoever pitch the ancor of their hope on him, shall find it sure and
steadfast, and whosoever build their faith on this foundation and corner stone,
the power of hell shall never prevail against them.

Our unworthiness no cause why we should doubt of our election.
or to be elected, and therefore we cannot be assured thereof. I answer, this
were true if Gods election depended upon our worthiness and deserts; but
seeing the Lord respects not any thing in us, but elected us freely of his
undeserved grace and mere goodwill; our unworthiness in our selves may well
stand with the assurance of our election: for those who are most unworthy
need not to doubt of Gods love and their election and salvation, so that they
wholly rely upon Gods mercy and Christ's merits by a true and lively faith;
forasmuch as they are not grounded upon their worthiness, and therefore cannot
be overthrown by their unworthiness. Notable is the saying of Austine to this
purpose. Tria (inquit) sunt quae sic roborant and confirmant cor meum, vt nulla
me penuriae meritorum etc. There are three things (says he) which so
strengthen and confirm my heart, that no want of merits, no consideration of
mine own vileness, no estimation of the heavenly blessedness, can deiect me
from the height of my hope: upon them my soul is surely settled. Will thou know
what they are? I consider three things upon which my hope wholly relieth, to
wit, the love of adoption, Aug. Manual. cap. 23.
the truth of the promise, the ability of performance. Let now my foolish
cogitation murmur as much as it will, saying, but who art thou, or how great is
that glory; or with what merits do thou hope to obtain it? And I will
boldly answer, I know whom I have believed, and I am assured, because God has
adopted me in great love, because he is true in his promise, because he is
powerful in performance, for he may do what he will.

Weakness of faith and certainty may well stand together.
they object that our faith is weak and feeble, and by reason thereof the
faithful (a^peareth by continual experience) are assaulted with doubting, and
grievously shaken with Satan's temptations, so as there can be no such
certainty of faith as we speak of. To which I answer, that weakness of
faith is not opposed as contrary to certainty, but to strongnesse and full
persuasion, and therefore weakness and certainty may well stand together.
Neither do we imagine such a certainty of faith which is never shaken with
doubting, nor assaulted with temptations; nay rather we teach that those whom
God indueth with most faith, he most exercises in the conflict of temptations,
like a wise captain who sets that soldier which is best armed and
strongest, to bear the brunt in the forefront of the battle: and the devil
is most ready to assault those who most resist him, and most violently to
strike where he sees the shield of faith held up to defend; and therefore our
Savior has taught all his faithful children to pray, lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. But withal we affirm that though this
weak faith be assaulted with Satan's temptations, yet is it never overcome;
though it be opposed with doubting yet it never falls from assurance and
certain persuasion; though it be sometimes shadowed, and the shining light
thereof dimmed, yea though it be for a time hid and covered, yet in it own
nature it remains firm and steadfast; like the sun which always shines,
though oftentimes by reason of the interposition of the clouds or the earth,
we cannot discern the beams thereof; or like unto the fire which being hid
under the ashes does retain his natural heat, although we feel it not: So
our faith retains in it self his certainty and assurance as it were his
light and heat, when as it is shadowed with the clouds of doubting, and
covered under the ashes of Satan's temptations.

A weak faith does as truly assure us of our election as a stronger.
But it may be demanded how a weak faith assaulted with Satan's temptations
can continue certain, seeing the strongest 0 faith can do no more but
certainly persuade? I answer, that our certainty respects not our faith it
self but the object thereof, namely Gods mercy and Christ's merits: and
therefore seeing a weak faith does as well apply unto us the mercies of God
and merits of Christ as a stronger, therefore also it certainly persuades us
as well and truly, though not so strongly and fully of our election and
salvation, as a stronger does. So that when we have the least spark of faith,
it does illuminate our minds, so as we can truly discern the loving
countenance of the Lord shining upon us though somewhat dimly, and as it were a
far of; even as he that is pore-blind does as certainly see the sun, as he
who is most sharp sighted, though not so clearly; and as he who is in a dark
dungeon does discern the light as surely at a little hole, though he be
compassed about with black darkness, as he who is in the open fields; so
when we are as it were pore-blind, and compassed about with the dark miste* of
ignorance, yet by the dim sight of faith we certainly discern Gods love and
favor shining upon us, though the more we increase in knowledge and faith, the
more clearly we perceive it, till at last having attained unto fullness of
faith, we see him near at hand and as it were face to face.

True it is that our faith which is in it self weak and feeble, and compassed
about with the darkness of ignorance, is mixed and turmoyled with much fear
and doubting, by reason of our natural inclination unto diffidence and
incredulity, the manifold temptations of Satan, and the burden of our sins
lying heavy upon our consciences: which makes Gods dear children to groan
and complain, yea sometime to murmur and repine against God himself, as
though he were their enemy, because he suffers them thus to be vexed; but
still it rises after it has received a foil, and gathers new strength
against all new assaults, until in the end it obtains full victory, so as
all the faithful may say with the Apostle 2. Cor. 4.8. We are afflicted on
every side, 2. Cor. 4.8.9.
yet are we not in distress; in poverty but not overcome of poverty. 9. We
are persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but we perish not. For though their
faith be weak, and their temptations vehement and violent, yet this bruised
reed is not broken, this smoking flax is not quenched; for as the reed in a
boisterous tempest is blown down even to the ground, but when the tempest is
past rises up again to his former estate; so though the boisterous blasts of
Satan's temptations beat us down even to earth, yet by faith we rise again
when the storm is ouerblowne.

How our faith though assalted with doubting may be certain.
it may be demanded how the faith of Gods children can be said to be
certain, seeing it is continually assaulted and often foiled with doubting,
which is opposed to the certainty of faith. To which we may easily answer, if
we know and remember that every christian is divided into two parts, the flesh
and the spirit, which continually fight and strive the one against the other;
and as they themselves are thus opposed, so are their qualities and fruits,
for in the spirit is faith, love, hope, zeal, joy in the holy Ghost, and such
other sanctifying graces; in the flesh is doubting, and infidelity, hatred of
God, presumption and desperation, coldness, dullness, yea deadness in
religion, fear, horror, and such like corruptions, so as we may say with the
Apostle, I know that in my flesh, that is, in my unregenerate part dwells no
good thing, Romans 7.18.
Romans 7.18. Now as there is a continual war between the flesh and the
spirit, so also between their qualities and fruits; for faith is continually
assaulted with doubting and infidelity, love of God with the hatred of God,
hope with presumption and desperation, zeal with coldness and dulnes in
religion, the joy in the holy Ghost with horror and fear of Gods anger, the
curse of the law and condemnation; and sometimes the one sometimes the other
has the upper hand, both in the mean time retaining their nature and
properties, although (as we say) remissis gradibus, not exercising them in that
measure and degree, as they do when they have victory and give the other the
foil. For example, when in some grievous affliction, the hatred of God does
assault the love of God in our hearts, and does so foil and wound it, that we
can scarce discern that it breaths or retains life, yet notwithstanding
the love of God even at that instant is not turned into hatred, nor receives
any properties thereof, but still retains his own nature and properties,
which again clearly appear and show themselves when the conflict is ended.
The like may be said of our hope, zeal, joy in the holy Ghost, and other
graces, when they are most foiled by the corruption of the flesh which fight
against them, so as they cannot possibly exercise their own actions and
functions, yet do they not receive any carnal properties, nor loose any of
their own, but retain still their own nature, which again manifests it
self when the assault is ended. Even as fire covered over with ashes retains
still his own nature of light and heat, though then by reason of the ashes
the light be not seen, nor the heat felt; but when the ashes are removed and
new matter added unto it, then it shines and burns and heateth as much as it
did before: so when the graces of Gods spirit are covered (as it were) under
the ashes of our corruption, they are not discerned by their properties and
effects; but when the corruptions are removed by virtue of Gods spirit, and
the graces nourished with hearing of the word, prayer, holy conferences, and
such like spiritual exercises, as it were with new matter added unto them,
then do they again shine in their brightness, and exercise their wonted
strength in all good duties to God and our neighbor.

Faith assalted with doubting, retains his own nature and properties.
so also with faith, which is often assaulted with doubting and infidelity,
and sometimes also so foiled that we can hardly discern any breath or life in
it; but yet even then it retains it own nature and properties, and does not
receive the nature and properties of doubting; but as the tree which is shaken
with boisterous blasts of wind and is not overthrown, does in the midst of
the tempest live and suck nourishment out of the earth, and still retains his
own nature and properties; so when our faith is shaken with the boisterous
blasts of Satan's temptations, and with our own natural doubting and
infidelity, yet it still lives and sucketh nourishment out of Gods gracious
promises, and still it retains his own property of certain persuasion,
though then it do not exercise it in action, so manisestly as before and after
the conflict of temptations, and as the shaking of the tree is not of the
nature thereof, for of it self it stands firm and steadie, but by outward
accident, namely the wind blowing upon it: so is not uncertain wavering and
unconstant doubting of the nature of faith, for of it self it is firm and
certain; but it comes by outward accident from the boisterous blasts of
infidelity, and the temptations of Satan which (as it were) violently blow
upon it, which being past, it remains like the tree firm and constant. And
as the graces of Gods spirit, and the flesh and the corruptions thereof do
still retain in themselves their own nature and properties, so also do they
most commonly show themselves in their diverse fruits and effects, and that
oftentimes in the conflict and time of temptation, so that the regenerate man
may at the same time feel in himself contrary affections and actions; for
the spirit acknowledging Gods goodness mercy and truth in his promises, is
replenished with joy, being in hope to enjoy them, on the otherside the flesh
feeling present misery, and the sharpnes of afflictions, sorroweth and
grieueth. The spirit apprehending and applying unto it the sweet promises of
the Gospel, does quietly rest upon them; the flesh seeing it own corruption,
and the huge weight of sin that presses it down, fears and doubts: the
spirit being assured of everlasting happiness, triumphs with joy, desiring
nothing more than to be dissolved and to be with Christ; the flesh finding it
self guilty of sin, and in this respect subject to the anger of God and
condemnation, fears and trembles to think upon death: The spirit conceiueth
of God as of a merciful father in Christ, and in all necessities flies unto
him by hearty prayer; the flesh conceiueth of him as of an angry and severe
judge, and therefore flies from him, desiring rather to seek for help any
where else than of the Lord: so that the christian by reason hereof, at the
same time finds in himself opposition between action and action, affection
and affection. For at the same instant, while the flesh, having in it the
conscience of sin and sense of guiltiness, does murmur repine and complain
upon God, as an enemy which is ready to destroy us; the spirit does fly unto
God by a lively faith, and commits it self to his providence, will and
protection, expecting salvation from him only; which it could never do, if it
were not assured that we were in his love and favor. And in this the christian
may not unfitly be compared to a child, who having been sharply corrected by
his father, does avoid his presence as though he were his enemy; but if at
the same time some sudden danger affright him, before al other he runs to
his father for safeguard and protection: so when our heavenly father has
sharply corrected us, either with some outward or inward afflictions, we flee
from his presence as though he were our enemy; but when an imminent danger
ouertaketh us, and we be in peril to be supplanted with satan and his
assistants, who are our enemies in deed, then the sonne-like affection which is
wrought in our hearts by Gods spirit, does move us to run unto him before all
other, desiring and craving his aid and assistance.

And thus it appears, that though the flesh and the spirit be mixed together,
yet they retain their own natures, properties and effects; and though faith
which is a grace of the spirit, be mingled with doubting, yet this doubting is
not of the nature of faith, which in it self is certain and assured, nay, it
is not an infirmity of faith, as lamenesse is an infirmity of the joints, and
dimnesse of the sight, for it is not any way incident to the nature thereof:
and therefore much less is it a commendable virtue of faith, as the Papists
teach, but it is a fruit of unbelief, which is in the part unregenerate, and
is opposed unto faith, as appears Romans 4.20. and consequently, Romans 4.20.
though faith be assaulted with doubting, yet in it own nature it may and does
remain certain and assured.

That it is no presumption to labor for the assurance of our election. 1. Cor.
2.16.
they object that it is rash presumption, and proud boldness for any man to
search into the mystery of Gods secret counsels, or to take upon him
peremptorily to determine that he is one whom God has elected. For who has
known the mind of the Lord? as it is 1. Cor. 2.16. I answer that it is true
indeed, whosoever prieth into Gods hidden counsels and secret decree of
predestination, is proud and presumptious, and shall in the end receive the
punishment of both, being given over of God to fall into many errors, and in
the end utter desperation: and therefore it is very dangerous, yea, pernicious
to our souls, if we labor after the assurance of our election by using these
means, and judge of Gods decree, according to the conceit of our own reason
and doubtful speculations. But yet though the will of God be in it self
secret and not to be searched into; this must not hinder us from looking into
his will revealed, though we can gather no certainty of our election by
searching into his secret decree, yet this is no impediment why we may not
gather it out of his word, where he has revealed his decree and the execution
thereof: though we can have no assurance by our own speculations, yet we may
attain unto it by the testimony of Gods spirit, Romans 8.16.
which witnesses to our spirits that we are the sons of God, which also
searches all things, even the deep things of God, and is given unto us that
we also might know the things which God has given us, 1. Cor. 2.10.12
as the Apostle teaches us, 1. Cor. 2.10.12. and therefore it is no pride or
presumption to be certain and assured of that which the Lord has revealed in
his word, to this end that we might be certainly assured thereof. But it may
be demanded how this certainty can be gathered out of the Scriptures. I
answer, that if we would attain unto it, we must not seek it in the law,
where the promises of life and salvation are made upon the condition of our own
works and worthiness, which condition we can never perform, and therefore can
never be assured of the promise: But out of the Gospel, which does not only
show that some are predestined to life, and some rejected, neither does it
only speak of our election, as it was ordained in Gods secret decree in it
self, or revealed in his word, but also it sets out unto us the execution
of the decree, with the causes, means, signs and effects of our election, and
how it is accomplished for the bringing us to those joys to which God has
chosen us. First therefore it shows the decree of God concerning our
election. Secondly, Gods decree concerning our redemption by the death and
obedience of Christ our mediator. Thirdly, the decree of God concerning the
calling of his Church by the ministry of the word, that they may be ingrafted
into the body of Christ, and so participate with him in all his benefits to
their salvation. Fourthly, the decree concerning the sending of his spirit into
the hearts of his chosen, by the inward operation whereof the word is made
effectual for the begetting of faith and repentance. Fifthly and lastly, his
decree concerning the justifying and saving of those who repent truly of their
sins, and apprehending and applying unto themselves by a lively faith, Christ
and his merits and obedience, do approach unto the throne of grace to receive
mercy and forgiveness. And all these are so linked together that they can
never possibly be severed, so that he who is assured of one, may be assured of
all; whosoever is certain that he has faith and repentance, may be certain
also of his election, though he never presumptuously search into Gods secret
counsel.

Fifthly,. Sect. 7. That the Lord particularly assures us of our election.
they object that there is no certainty of faith, which is not grounded upon
Gods word: but there is no place of Gods word which assures us of our
particular election and salvation: and therefore we can have no certainty of
faith concerning our particular election and salvation. I answer; though the
Lord give us no particular promise in his word, yet he gives us that which is
equally effectual, and of like force; namely his general promise without any
limitation, exception or condition, but the condition of faith and repentance,
with a commandment to apply the same. And because naturally we are unable in
our selves to perform this, therefore he has ordained the ministry of the
word, and the use of the sacraments, which he makes effectual by the inward
operation of his spirit, for the begetting and confirming of our faith, and
stirring us up to repentance; which being wrought in us, we may as certainly
be persuaded that the general promises belong unto us, as if they were made
unto us particularly and by name.

. Sect. 8. That our assurance of election depends not upon the sufficiency of
our faith and repentance.
Sixthly, they object that we cannot be assured of the sufficiency of our faith
and repentance, and therefore we can have no certain assurance of our election
and salvation. I answer; this reason were good if our election and salvation
depended upon the worthiness or measure of our faith and repentance; but seeing
that they depend not thereupon, but upon Gods free mercy, and the worthiness
and sufficiency of Christ's merits and obedience, therefore though our faith be
never so weak, and our repentance but in small measure, yet so they be true
and unfeigned, not dissembled and hypocritical, we may certainly be assured of
our election and salvation, for a weak faith does apply Christ and all his
benefits unto us as well as a strong, though not in so strong and perfect a
manner, as shall appear hereafter. But yet we must not content our selves with
a small and weak measure, but labor to grow up from faith to faith, till we
become perfect men in Christ.

Seventhly,. Sect. 9. The sight of our imperfections no cause why we should
doubt of our election.
they object that though there were no cause of doubting, so long as we look
upon Gods mercy and truth in his promises, and Christ's obedience and merits,
yet at least there is cause of doubting when we look upon our selves, and
find our great indisposition to perform the condition of faith and
repentance, which God requires of all who shall be partakers of his promises,
and our manifold imperfections and great unworthiness of the least of Gods
mercies. And thus these iugglers play fast and loose, making their faith like
unto the ignis fatuus, or going fire, which interchangeably sometimes shines
clearly, and sometimes vanishes and leaves behind it nothing but black
darkness. But let us constantly oppose our selves against such inconstancy,
and in no wise admit of such mutable variety in our faith, which makes it more
changeable than the Moon, which one while shines with full bringhtnesse, and
in small distance of time cannot be discerned; and to this end let us know,
first, that though in our selves we be not worthy of the least of Gods
mercies, yet our unworthiness makes us not incapable of the greatest, for all
Gods benefits are his free gifts, which he promises and bestows without any
respect of our worthiness or deserts, of his mere grace and undeserved love:
and therefore as when we are most worthy in our own conceit, there is no reason
why we should presume the more; so when we find our selves unworthy, there
is no cause why we should hope the less, or be more weakly assured of Gods
promises; for as they are not made upon the condition of our worthiness, so
they are not disanulled and made void by our unworthiness, otherwise no man
living could have assurance of them, seeing all men living are unworthy of
them. But the Lord has made al his promises unto us in Christ, who was sent to
be our Mediator, to the end that we who were altogether unworthy in our
selves, might be made worthy in him of all Gods mercies and benefits. And
therefore whosoever lay hold upon Christ, with a true though a weak faith, and
bring forth the fruits thereof in repentance, they may certainly be assured
of their election and salvation, notwithstanding their unworthiness. Secondly,
we are to know that our faith does not respect our selves in our selves,
neither are we the object thereof, but Christ and his merits and obedience;
whom our faith does not behold standing aloof of (as the Papists dream) but
as he is united unto us, and become our head and we his members; so as now we
cannot look upon our selves but we must look upon Christ, because he is in us
and we in him. And therefore when we consider the greatness of our sins we
despair not, because now we look upon them as they are translated from us and
laid upon Christ, who has fully satisfied his fathers justice by his alone and
all-sufficient sacrifice upon the cross; when we consider our imperfections we
doubt not of Gods promises, because they are covered with his perfect
righteousness; when we consider our unworthiness we are not discouraged,
seeing by communicating of Christ's worthiness we are made worthy; when we
consider that in our selves we are subject to the curse of the law, the anger
of God and eternal condemnation, we are nevertheless assured of everlasting
life and salvation, because we are united to Christ our head, who has taken
away our curse and nailed it to his cross, borne his fathers displeasure to
reconcile us unto him, and was condemned and suffered death to free us from
death and condemnation, and to make us heirs of life and salvation. So that
now we behold the huge debt of our sins, as it is discharged and cancelled
with his merits and full satisfaction; we behold our imperfections, but as
perfected by his perfections; we look upon our unworthiness, but as it is
ennobled with his worthiness; when we set before us the curse of the law, the
anger of God and sentence of condemnation, we consider them as taken away and
swallowed up of Christ's death and full obedience; because now we are united
unto Christ, and he is become ours that we might become his; he has taken
upon him our sins and unworthiness, that he might make us partakers of his
righteousness and worthiness. And therefore that which God has wisely joined
together let not our faith fondly separate; for if it be unlawful in carnal
marriages, then much more in the spiritual marriage between Christ and his
Church. But let us look upon our selves, not in our selves, but as we are
united unto Christ, and then our selfe-worthinesse of hell and destruction will
not abate our assurance of life and salvation.

Eighthly,. Sect. 10. Heretics and worldlings boasting of faith, no cause why
those should doubt who truly believe.
they object that every heretic, epicure and worldling, continuing in their
sins and wickedness, may feign unto themselves such a persuasion of the
certainty of election: but this is nothing to the purpose; for the question is
not of epicures and worldlings, who have no faith or a dead faith, but of true
believers, who bring forth the fruits of their faith, at least in an holy
desire and endeavor of serving the Lord in holiness and righteousness. For
they that cannot be assured that they have faith, cannot have any certainty of
their election; but none can have any assurance of faith, unless they bring
forth the fruits of their faith in dying to sin and rising again to
newness of life, for faith purifieth the heart and works by love: and
therefore such as live in their sins without repentance having no faith, can
have no certainty of their election, though they may delude themselves with a
fond persuasion which has no other ground but carnal security and fond
presumption: but hence it follows not, that because a dead faith affoordeth
no true certainty, therefore a lively faith does it not; because a profane
epicure or carnal worldling, deceives himself with a vain opinion, therefore
those that are truly converted, mortified unto sin and raised up to newness
of life, can have no certainty of their election and salvation. For what
similitude is there between light and darkness, righteousness and
unrighteousness, the children of God and the children of Belial, the repentant
and unrepentant, faith and no faith?

Lastly,. Sect. 11. That this doctrine opens no way to security and
presumption.
they object that if we teach this doctrine of the certainty of election, men
will abuse it to nourish in them carnal security and presumption. To which I
answer, that wicked men abuse the whole doctrine of the Gospel to their
destruction; for when they are taught that God is most gracious and merciful,
that Christ has died for us, and given himself as a sufficient price to
redeem us out of the power of sin, Satan, death and damnation, and makes
intercession for us to God his father; that the Lord is slow to wrath and ready
to forgive, they take occasion hereby of continuing in their sins, and
deferring their repentance, till God take them away and consume them in his
heavy displeasure: but hence it follows not that the Gospel must not be
taught, because carnal men abuse it to their just condemnation; for though to
these it be the savor of death unto death, yet to those who are saved it is
the savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.16. 1. Cor. 1.18.
as it is 2. Cor. 2.16. Though it be foolishnes to those that perish, yet it is
the power of God to those whom God has ordained to salvation, and God is no
less glorified in the one by showing his mercy, than in the other by showing
his justice. Though worldly men abuse it to carnal security, yet the godly
are the more incited thereby to serve the Lord in holiness and newness of
life: for like loving children, the more they are assured of the love of their
heavenly father, and secured of his mercy and bountiful benefits, the more
they love him again, the more they love him the more zealous they are of his
glory, and the greater their zeal is, the greater is their care in making the
light of their godly and Christian lives to shine before men, that their
heavenly father may be glorified. So that it is not the fault of this precious
seed, but the barrenness of the ground which makes it fruitless, or else for
good wheat sends tares cockle and darnell; it is not any defect or ill
disposition in this sweet smelling flower, but the venomous nature of these
spiders which turn honey into poison: and therefore the seed must be cast upon
the earth, though there be stones with the good ground which will never bring
forth fruit; the flowers of sweet consolation must not be pulled up by the
roots and cast away. For though the spider gathers poison, yet the
profitable Be will gather honey out of them. Secondly, when we teach the
certainty of election, we do not teach that men must gather it out of Gods
secret counsel, but from their own sanctification, by which they may be
assured that they are justified, called and elected: and therefore whosoever
are not sanctified but continue in their sins without repentance, can have no
assurance by our doctrine that they are elected or shall be saved; nay
contrariwise, we teach out of Gods word, that whosoever line in the flesh shall
die, Romans 8.13. that they which perform the lusts thereof shall never inherit
the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19.20, 21. that none who continue in their
unrighteousness and uncleanness shall enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, 1.
Cor. 6.9.10. Reu. 21.27; but shall have their portion in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone; as it is verse. 8. Now what stronger bridle to curb in
our unruly flesh when it is ready to run into sin, than to be assured that
if we live in sin and fulfill our carnal lusts, we are in the state of
condemnation? what sharper spur to prick us forward when we are ready to
faint, or slack our pace in the Christian race of holiness and
righteousness, than to consider that our sanctification and newness of life,
is the only means whereby we may come to the assurance of our election and
salvation?

CHAP. XIII. Of our Redemption.


Redemption what it is.
This our redemption is an effect of Gods election, whereby our Savior Christ
(being set apart of his father for this purpose) has freed and delivered all
Gods elect out of the captivity of their spiritual enemies, sin death and
the devil; by offering himself for the price of their redemption, and a
sufficient sacrifice for sin, for the appeasing of his fathers displeasure
and satisfying of his justice; to the end that being delivered, they may serve
him in holiness and righteousness all the days of this life, and afterward
may inherit the kingdom of glory, and the crown of eternal happiness which
is purchased for them.

The definition explaned.
First I say, that it is an effect of Gods election; for whom he had chosen to
everlasting life in Christ, those by Christ he has saved and redeemed, and
those only as we shall see afterward.

Secondly, I show who is our Savior and Redeemer, namely Christ Jesus, who
only saves us from our sins, as it is Matthew. 1.21; Neither is there
salvation in any other, as it is Act. 4.12. Matthew. 1.21. Act. 4.12.
For as there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator between God and
man, which is the man Jesus Christ, as it is 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Tim. 2.5.
And by him alone we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins, and that without any respect of our worthiness, but according to
his rich grace, Ephesians. 1.7. Ephesians. 1.7. Luke 1.68.
And though we do not exclude God the Father, from the work of our redemption,
for he is the author and first cause, who has so loved us that he sent his
son to save and redeem us; nor the holy Ghost who applies unto us the
merits and efficacy of Christ's death, making them effectual for our
salvation; yet if we speak properly, our Savior Christ only can be called
our Redeemer, and that in these respects; first, because he alone was ordained
and deputed to perfect the work of our redemption; secondly, because he only
was God and man, both which were necessarily required in our Mediator and
Redeemer, that he might have full right and ability to redeem us; thirdly,
because he alone gave himself to be the price of our redemption; and lastly,
because in him only there is perfect redemption as being our head, who not
only has salvation in himself, but also deriueth it to all the members of his
body.

Thirdly, I set down the captivity it self out of which we were redeemed;
namely, not the captivity of Egypt or Babylon, nor out of the slavery of the
Turk, Spaniard, or any other earthly Tyrant, whose thraldom might well be
bitter but not long, because our lives are short; and grievous to the body,
but extends not to the soul: but Christ has delivered us out of the bondage
of sin, Satan, hell and death, in which we should have been enthralled and
fearfully tormented for ever and ever, not in body alone but in soul also.

1. Pet. 1.18. How Christ is said to have bought us with a price.
I show the price which he has given for our redemption, namely, not silver
and gold, or any corruptible thing, but himself; even his body to be crucified
and his blood to be shed, that so his fathers justice being satisfied and his
wrath appeased, we might be set free out of the thraldom of our spiritual
enemies. But it may be demanded, how it can truly be said that Christ has
redeemed us by paying the price of our redemption, seeing the scriptures
testify that by his power he has forcibly delivered us out of the hands of
our spiritual enemies. So Heb. 2.14. it is said, that Christ destroyed him who
had the power of death, that is the devil. And Col. 2.15. the Apostle shows,
that he has spoiled principalities and powers, and has led them openly and
triumphed over them. And Luke 11.22. he is compared to a valiant champion who
has thrust the strong man Satan out of his possession: by which it may
appear, that our Savior has not redeemed us by giving a price after a legal
manner, but by force, and as it were by conquest. I answer, that Christ has
both paid the price of our redemption, and also has delivered us forcibly by
his power; for he paid the price unto God to whom he offered the sacrifice of
himself, that it might be a full satisfaction for sin, and a sufficient
price to redeem us out of the captivity of our spiritual enemies, and to
purchase the favor of God, and our heavenly inheritance in his kingdom: and
therefore in respect of God the Father, to whom our Savior offered himself,
he is said to have redeemed us by giving a ransom for us. But when Gods
justice was fully satisfied, Christ dealt not with our spiritual enemies by
entreaty (much less offered he this price of our redemption to Satan; for if
no sacrifice might lawfully be offered unto any save God alone, much more
unlawful was it that this sacrifice of Christ's body, should be offered unto
the devil) but by his almighty power he overcame the power of darkness,
vanquished Satan, subdued death, and broke open the prison of the grave, and
so by strong hand set all Gods elect at liberty. For after that the debt of
our sins was discharged, our ransom paid, and the handwriting of ordinances
cancelled and nailed unto the cross, these our spiritual enemies had no just
interest unto us, nor any thing to allege why they should longer hold us in
their captivity; but yet the strong man who had taken possession would not
willingly lose it, unless he were overcome with a greater strength: and
therefore our Savior Christ having bought us of his father, and so become our
true owner, buckled with our spiritual enemies, overcame these principalities
and powers, triumphed gloriously over them, and freed us out of their
tyrannical jurisdiction.

But it may be objected that we were captives unto Satan, and therefore the
price of redemption was to be paid unto him, and not unto God the father who
held us not in his captivity. I answer that though Satan held us in his
captivity, yet not in his own right, for we had not sinned against him to
whom we were not bound to perform obedience, nor were indebted unto him; but
we had sinned against God, whose servants we were by right of creation, and
had infinitely run into his debt, which we were altogether unable to pay; and
therefore like a just judge he condemned us to the perpetual prison of death,
and committed us to the custody of Satan, as unto a iaylor, to be kept in his
bondage, till we had satiffied for our sins and discharged our debt: which
being impossible to us, our Savior Christ having assumed our nature and become
our surety and mediator, paid that we owed, and suffered that which we had
descrued, and so fully satisfying his fathers justice, has purchased our
redemption; so as now Satan had no more anthoritie to retain us in his
captivity, then the iaylor has of holding him in prison who by the judge is
released, or the executioner of hanging him whom the judge has acquitted or
pardoned. And therefore tyrannically exercising still his jurisdiction, our
Savior by strong hand overcame him and all the power of hell, that so he might
set us at liberty whom his fathers just sentence had acquitted and his mercy
pardoned.

The last thing to be considered is the end of our redemption, namely that we
should no longer serve sin and Satan, out of whose bondage we are released;
but become the servants of Christ, who has redeemed us, serving him in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our lives; that so glorifying him here on
earth, he may glorify us in heaven, and make us partakers of those everlasting
joys, which by his death and bloodshed he has purchased for us.

CHAP. XIIII. Satan's temptations concerning our redemption, wherewith he
moves the worldling to presumption, answered.
The temptation.
now let us consider of those temptations of Satan which he suggesteth into
the minds of men, whereby he laboreth to deprive them of this great benefit,
and to keep them still in his captivity, or to pull them back again when they
are escaped. And these are of two sorts, the first leading to security and
presumption, the other to doubting and desperation. For if he have to deal
with worldly men; who were never truly converted unto God, he laboreth to
persuade them that they are redeemed by Christ, and therefore though they live
in their sins, yet they shall be saved, for Christ came into the world to
save sinners: but when he assaulteth the true christian, who is indeed the
redeemed of the Lord; then he moves him to doubt and despair, either of the
sufficiency or of the efficacy, of the work of our redemption wrought by
Jesus Christ.

That he may continue the worldly man in his carnal security, and fond
presumption, he uses two principal reasons; the first, that the redemption
wrought by Christ is universal, and effectual for the salvation of all the
world; out of which he frames this temptation. Christ has shed his precious
blood, and suffered death for all the world; and has redeemed all mankind
which were lost in Adam, out of the bondage of Satan death and hell; why
therefore should thou be so strict in flying sin, with which thou art so
much delighted? why do thou strive against the stream of thy corruptions?
and wherefore should thou take any great pains in the works of holiness and
righteousness, which are so bitter and unpleasant to thy taste and appetite? for
Christ came into the world to save all men, and not those only who are so
strict in their ways; he came to redeem the whole world, and gave himself as
a sufficient ransom for all men: and therefore doubtless he will not lose his
labor, nor spill his blood in vain; he will not willingly let any perish, whom
he has purchased at so high a rate, and redeemed with so dear a price: he is
also so powrefull that nothing shall be able to pull them out of his hand, Ioh.
10.28.
as himself affirms, Ioh. 10.28; and so wise that he would not shed his
blood, for those whom he would not save. And who can imagine that God who is
most just, will impute those sins unto thee for which Christ has suffered,
inflict death on thee for whom Christ died, and require that debt again which
is already discharged? Or who can imagine that God, who is immutable, should
show such inconstancy as to send his son into the world, to suffer death for
the redemption of those whom he now will not save; for if he would who could
resist his will or withstand his power? And therefore if he has redeemed all,
surely he will save all, and consequently thee amongst the rest, though thou
live as thou list and follow the lusts of thine own heart: for thy sins and
unbelief cannot make his purpose void, nor annihilate the work of thy
redemption; nay the more thy sins abound, the more his grace will abound also.

The answer to the former temptation.
that universal redemption which is the ground and foundation thereof, is an
idle dream of man's brain, which cannot be justified by the word of God which
is the touchstone of al truth; neither has our Savior Christ redeemed any
other, than those whom he effectually calls unto the saving knowledge of
their redemption, indueth with true faith and unfeigned repentance, justifies,
sanctifies, and lastly saves, if we respect the purpose of God, and the will
of our blessed Savior; although indeed the price he gave for our redemption,
was of sufficient value for the sins of all the world, if it were applied by
a lively faith.

But because this doctrine has many enemies, Testimonies of Scripture alleged
against universal redemption.
it is not sufficient to propound it unless I prove it: and therefore I will
show first by testimonies of scriptures, and after by strong reasons, that our
Savior Christ has died for, and by his death redeemed, those only whom he
indueth with true faith and unfeigned repentance, and not for all the world as
they imagine. Matthew. 20.28. it is said, that he came into the world to give his
life a ransom for many. Matthew. 20.2 and 26.28.
and 26.28. that his blood was shed for many for the remission of sins. And
Esa. 53.11. that Christ should justify many by bearing their iniquities. So
that he has not given his life a ransom and shed his blood, and by bearing
their iniquities justified all, but many, that is, part of all. Luke 2.34.
Simeon says, Luke 2.34.
that Christ was appointed by Gods decree, for the fall and rising again of
many, that is for the fall of many reprobates, and the rising again of many
who are elected, and therefore not for the redemption of all. So Christ says
that he lays down his life for his sheep, Ioh. 10.15. and therefore not for
wolves and goats, Ioh. 10.15. and 15.14.
for his friends, Ioh. 15.14. and therefore not for his wicked enemies; for us,
that is, for the company of the faithful believers, Romans 8.32.33. and
therefore not for the sinagogue of Satan and wicked unbelievers. Romans 8.32.33.
Matthew. 1.21.
So Matthew. 1.21. he is said to be the Savior of his people, and not of aliants
and strangers; and to have given himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5.25.
Ephesians. 5.25, and not for those who have no fellowship in the communion of
saints; that he should die for the nation, that is as John says for all Gods
children Jews and Gentiles, Ioh. 11.52. Romans 3.22.25.26.
Ioh. 11.52. and therefore not for the wicked, and the children of Satan. So
that Apostle Romans 3.22. says that the righteousness of God (that is, the
righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed unto us by God, or the righteousness of
Christ God and man) is manifested upon all and unto all that believe; and verse.
23. that God has set forth Christ to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, and verse 26. That he is the iustifier of him, which is of the faith of
Jesus. Where the imputation of Christ's righteousness, reconciliation with God,
and justification, is restrained to the believers only. And to the same
purpose is that of the Apostle, Heb. 5.9.
Heb. 5.9. where Christ is said to be the author of eternal salvation unto all
that obey him, and therefore not unto them who continue in their rebellion not
observing his will, nor submitting themselves to be ruled by the scepter of
his word.

And as by these places it is apparent, that Christ and his benefits are
restrained to the faithful, so also in other places the unbelievers and such
as continue in their wickedness, are flatly excluded from the participation of
them. Ioh. 3.18. He that believes in him shall not be condemned, Ioh. 3.18.
but he that believes not is condemned already. verse. 36.
And verse. 36. He that believes in the son has everlasting life, and he
that obeys not the son shall not see life, Romans 2.9.
but the wrath of God abides on him. So Romans 8.9. If any man have not the
spirit of Christ, the same is not his; and consequently it follows that if he
be not Christ's, then Christ and his benefits belong not unto him. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
And the Apostle 1. Ioh. 3.8. plainly affirms that he who commits sin
(that is, he who lives in sin without repentance) is of the devil, and that
he who is borne of God (that is, regenerate by his spirit) sins not, that
is, lives not in his sins, neither commits them with full consent of will.
And Paul wills Timothy to instruct his hearers, 2. Tim. 2.26.
that they might come to amendment out of the snare of the devil; whereby it
is manifest that those in whom sin raineth, are not of Christ but of Satan,
and that notwithstanding Christ's death they are still in the snare of the
devil til they come to amendment of life; because the blood of Christ is not
effectual to free any out of their spiritual bondage, till it be applied unto
them by a lively faith.

Reasons to prove that redemption is not universal.
that the redemption wrought by Christ belongs only to the faithful; which
also by virtue of Christ's death and bloodshed, have their sins and
corruptions in some measure mortified; and not unto the wicked, who live and
die in their sins without repentance. Now I will also confirm this truth by
strong reasons. First, those who were never known of Christ (that, is
acknowledged for his) were never redeemed by his precious bloodshed; neither is
it probable that the father would give his well-beloved son, and that the son
would give himself for the redemption of those, whom in his eternal council
he had decreed to reject, or (as all confess) whom he foresaw should perish:
but our Savior will profess to the workers of iniquity that he never knew
them, Matthew. 7.23.
Matthew. 7.23: and therefore he never gave himself for their redemption.

Secondly, for whomseouer Christ has offered a sacrifice unto his father, for
them also he makes intercession and is become their advocate; neither is it
probable that Christ would die for those for whom he will not entreat, and
that he would offer the sacrifice of his body for those for whom he would not
offer the sacrifice of his lips. Besides it was the office of the same high
priest to offer sacrifice and to pray for the people, and consequently of our
Savior Christ, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
as appears 1. Ioh. 2.1.2. where he is said as well to be our advocate, as
the propiciatory sacrifice for our sins: and the Apostle Paul Romans 8.35.
says, Romans 8.35.
that as Christ died for us, so he makes intercession for us; but our Savior
Christ flatly excludes, from all participation of the fruit of his
intercession, all those who are of the world, that is, Ioh. 17.9.
all mere worldlings. Ioh. 17.9. I pray not for the world but for them which
thou have given me; and the Apostle says, that as he perfectly saves, Heb.
7.25.
so also he makes intercession for those who come unto God by him, that is,
true believers only: and therefore for them alone he has offered himself, a
sacrifice unto his father.

Thirdly, Christ has died for those alone in whom he has attained unto the
end of his death; for whatsoever attaineth not his end is done in vain, which
argues want of wisdom, or power, in the agent and efficient, neither of
which without blasphemy can be ascribed unto Christ, who is in both infinite:
but the end of Christ's death (that is, the eternal salvation of those for whom
he died) is attained unto only in the elect and faithful; Mark. 16.16. Ioh.
3.36.
for as it is Mark. 16.16. He that shall believe, shall be saved; but he that
will not believe, shall be damned. And Ioh. 3.36. He that believes in the
son has everlasting life, and he that obeys not the son shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him: And therefore, Christ has died for
those alone, who believe and bring forth the fruits of their faith in
obedience, and not for the unbelievers and disobedient.

Forthly, if all were redeemed by the death of Christ, then should they also be
saved: for what should hinder them from salvation, who are redeemed, seeing
they have received the pardon and remission of their sins, as appears
Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.
even the remission of our sins. Col. 1.14. And consequently whosoever are
redeemed are justified, and also heirs of eternal blessedness; for blessed are
those whose iniquity is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.
and whose sin is covered, as it is Psalm. 32.1. Seeing also Christ who has
redeemed us, is stronger than Satan and all the power of hell, and therefore
al their spiritual enemies conjoined together, cannot pluck those whom he has
redeemed out of his hand violently and against his will, neither can we with
any probable show of reason imagine that he would willingly lose those whom he
has redeemed with the inestimable price of himself, neither will it stand
with the justice of God to impute the sins of any to their condemnation, for
which Christ has fully satisfied, nor to exact that debt again which he has
paid: and therefore if Christ had died for all, God in his justice could not
choose but save all: and Christ might well say to his father, to what purpose
have I died if thou destroyest those whom I have saved? what profit is in my
blood, if thou condemnest those whom I have redeemed?

Lastly, if he died and by his death redeemed all; then also he died for and
redeemed the Pagans, Turks, Atheists and Epicures, who were out of the Church
and covenant of grace; and so justification, redemption and salvation should be
out of the Church, and be extended to those whom God never received into his
covenant; which is quite contrary to the whole course of the scriptures, where
it is said, that all who are saved are also added unto the Church, Act. 2.47.
and that Christ has given himself only for his Church, Act. 2.47. Ephesians. 5.25.
Ephesians. 5.25. Yea if Christ died for all, and by his death redeemed them, then it
must necessarily follow that he had redeemed even those damned souls who were
in hell before his coming, which is most absurd to be imagined; for if they
were redeemed, how did they again fall into condemnation, seeing they being
once become Christ's can never perish, neither is any able to pull them out of
his hands, as it is Ioh. 10.28.

In what sense Christ is said to have died for all men. 1. Tim. 2.6. Heb. 2.9.
1. Ioh. 2, 2.
that in the scriptures Christ is said to have died and to have given himself
a ransom for all men. 1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men.
And Heb. 2.9. he is said to have tasted death for all men; and 1. Ioh. 2.2. he
is said to be a reconciliation for the sins of the whole world. To which I
answer; first, that these speeches are not to be understood of all and
singular men, but of all the faithful which are gathered out of the whole
world; for the drift of the Apostles is to show that our Savior Christ died
not only for the believing Jews, but for the Gentiles also, of what country,
nation or condition soever they were. And so these general speeches are
expounded Ioh. 11.52. where our Savior Christ is said to have died, not only
for the Jewish nation, Ioh. 11.52.
but that also he might gather together in one, the children of God which were
scattered. So also he is said Reu. 5.9, Revel. 5.9.
to have redeemed us (that is all the faithful) unto God by his blood, out of
every Satan's temptations grounded upon the doctrine of etc. kindred, tongue,
people and nation: and Galat. 3.26. that all are the sons of God by faith in
Christ Jesus; and verse. 28. Gal. 3.26.28.
That there is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond, nor free, male nor female, but
all are one in Christ Jesus. So that these places are not to be understood of
all and singular men, but of al believers, of what nation or condition soever
they be. For all the promises and benefits promised in the Gospel, which is the
covenant of grace, are to be restrained to the condition of the covenant, be
they never so general and universal; and this condition is sometimes
expressed and sometimes understood, but never excluded. So Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Romans
3.22. it is said, Romans 3.22.
that the righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ, is given to all that
believe. So Gal. 3.22. Gal. 3.22.
The scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of
Jesus Christ should, be given to them that believe. Act. 10.43.
As also Act. 10.43.

Secondly I answer, that Christ in some sense may be truly said to have died
for all the world, namely in respect of the sufficiency of his death, though
not in respect of the efficacy; for by his death he paid a sufficient price
for the sins of all the world, and a full ransom for all mankind, if all
would or could apply his merits and obedience unto themselves by a lively
faith; but in respect of Gods counsel, Christ's will, and the event, his death
was not effectual for the redemption of all, but the faithful only. Even as a
sovereign salve, may have sufficient virtue in it self to cure innumerable
wounds and sores, but yet it is effectual for the healing of those only to
which it is applied; so the precious baulme of Christ's blood, is of sufficient
virtue to heal the wounds of all sinners whatsoever, but notwithstanding it is
effectual to those only, to whom it is applied by a true and lively faith.

The former objection urged and answered. Mar. 1.5.
that he died for all without exception. I answer, that it is an usual thing
in Gods word, to put this word (all) for many, or for all those which are of
one kind. So it is said Mar. 1.5. that all the country of Judea and they of
Jerusalem, went out unto John the Baptist and were baptized of him; that is,
not every man without exception, but great multitudes. So it is said Mat. 4.23.
that our Savior Christ healed every disease and sickness amongst the people,
that is, many that were diseased, Matthew. 4.23.
or diseases of all kinds. And Act. 10.38. it is said, Act. 10.38.
that Christ healed all that were oppressed by the devil, that is, very many,
for otherwise great numbers oppressed of the devil never came into our
Saviors presence. Thus also it is said ver. 12. that there was in the sheet
which Peter saw in his vision ((...)) all fourefooted beasts, that is, beasts
of all kinds. And thus sometimes, by all, we are to understand all the elect and
them only, and sometimes all the reprobate and them alone. In the first sense
are these places to be understood. Ioh. 12.32. our Savior says, that after
he is crucified he will draw all men unto him, that is, Ioh. 12.32.
all the faithful and elect, for they only are converted unto God and drawn
unto Christ. So it is said Esa. 54.13. that al shall be taught of God. And
Iere. 31.34. Esa. 54.13. Iere. 31.34. Joel. 2.28.
that all shall know him from the least to the greatest. And Joel 2.28. the
Lord says, that in the latter times he will power out his spirit upon all
flesh; which places cannot be understood of the reprobates and wicked, but of
all Gods elect and faithful. Sometimes also we are hereby to understand all
the reprobate and wicked. So Phil. 2.21. the Apostle says, that all seek
their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's, that is, Phil. 2.21.
all worldlings and wicked men. And Ioh. 3.32. the Baptist says, that no man
has received Christ's testimony, that is, Ioh. 3.32.
none of the wicked and reprobate, for all the faithful and elect receive it
and believe. By all which places it is evident that this word (all) sometime
signifies many, and sometime all of one kind; and therefore in those places
where it is said that Christ has died for all men, we may understand it of
many, as it is expounded Matthew. 26.28. or of all the faithful, Matthew. 26.28.
as in many places it is restrained.

Secondly, it is objected that Christ died even for the wicked and damned; for
it is said that some shall deny the Lord who has bought them, 2. Pet. 2.1.
chap. 1.2.9.
2. Pet. 2.1. that some who are purged afterward become blind and forgetful,
2. Pet. 1.9. that he may be destroyed for whom Christ died, Romans 14.15. Romans
14.15. Heb. 10.29.
that they who are sanctified may count the blood of the Testament an unholy
thing and tread it under their feet, Heb. 10.29. To which I answer, that
these and such like places are to be understood of men, not as they are in
truth and in Gods sight, but as they are in outward show, profession, and in
the estimation of men, who according to the rule of charity judge the best,
when they see not evident reason to the contrary; or it may be understood of
hypocrites as they are in their own opinion, or according to their vain
boasting; and so those that are in show, or in their own opinion redeemed by
Christ's death, may be reprobates and condemned, but not any who are redeemed
in truth. Secondly, those hypocrites that are in the outward visible Church are
said to be redeemed, in respect that they are numbered for a time amongst the
faithful, till they bewray their hypocrisy, and depart from the communion and
fellowship which they have outwardly with the Saints, though they are not in
truth redeemed, unless they be of the Church and members of Christ's body.

as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, That al are not
redeemed by Christ, who perished in Adam. 1. Cor. 15.22.
as the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 15.22. but all died in Adam, and therefore all
are made alive in Christ. I answer, that the Apostle here understands all
the faithful, of whose resurrection he here disputes; and it is as much as if
he had said, as all the faithful died in Adam, so al shall be made alive in
Christ: or though it be understood of all, that they died in Adam, yet it
proves not that all are redeemed by Christ, for then the sense is thus much;
as Adam derived death unto all his, by natural propagation, so Christ has
derived life to all his by grace: and this appears in the verse following,
where he says, that first Christ rose, and afterward they that are of Christ
shall rise at his coming: now they only are Christ's who are led by his
spirit, and therefore they who have not their part in the first resurrection,
whereby being sanctified they rise again, from the death of sin to newness
of life, shall not have their part of the second resurrection, whereby they
rise to inherit those joys which Christ has purchased for them.

But it may be further urged, that if all do not live in Christ who died in
Adam, Adams sin shall be of more force than Christ's death and satisfaction,
and Adam shall be more strong to destroy than Christ to save. I answer, that
their power and strength is not to be measured by the number of those who are
destroyed and saved; but according to the manner whereby they were destroyed
and saved, or according to the virtue and force required to saving and
destroying; for it is far more easy to hurt many than to help a few, to kill a
multitude than to restore one to life; for even brute beasts can kill and
destroy, but neither man, angel, nor other creature can give life save God
alone; and so it was no hard matter for Adam to plunge al mankind into the
gulf of perdition, but to save and deliver us out of this wretched estate,
neither he nor any other could perform save Christ alone: and therefore
though our Savior had freed and restored to life but only one, and Adam by his
sin destroyed all, yet Christ's death was stronger and of more virtue in
saving, than Adams sin in destroying. Secondly I answer, that Christ's death
is as sufficient for the redemption of all the world, as Adams sin for their
condemnation, in respect of the infinite value and price thereof; if, as Adams
sin was derived unto all by natural propagation, so Christ's death and merits
were applied unto them by faith; for there is no want of virtue in this
precious salve to heal, but the cause why it heals not, is because it is
rejected and cast away through incredulity. Thirdly, Christ's death is of far
more virtue and force than Adams sin, in that it brings unto us far
better things than we lost in Adam; for we lost by Adam but earthly benefits,
but we have derived unto us by Christ heavenly glory and everlasting
happiness; Adam cast us out of the possession of the earthly paradize, but
Christ gives us possession of the heavenly Jerusalem; Adam made us of the
servants of God the bondslaues of Satan, but Christ made us of the bondslaues
of Satan, the sons of God and heirs of his kingdom.

CHAP. XV. That all who are redeemed are also sanctified.
Satan's temptation to persuade men to all licentiousness.
whereby he moves carnal men securely to continue in their sins, because
Christ has redeemed and will save the wicked as well as the godly, by proving
that Christ has redeemed the faithful only.

The second temptation which he uses to the same purpose, he thus frames;
Christ has redeemed all, at least who believe in him, be their sins never so
many and grievous: and therefore thou may continue in thy sins with
pleasure and delight, and satisfy the lusts of thine own flesh; only believe
and thou shall be saved, for Christ requires no other condition. Neither is
there any other end of Christ's coming, but that he should by his suffering take
away thy sins; and therefore why should thou vex and torment thy self,
in embracing bitter mortification and newness of life, and in shunning thy
sweet and pleasing sins, seeing Christ redeemeth the greatest sinners as
well as the least?

true faith, and consequently the work of our redemption wrought by Christ,
does not appertain unto them.

That whom Christ redeemeth those he sanctifies.
whomsoever Christ redeemeth with his blood, those he sanctifies with his
spirit; and in whomsoever his death is effectual for the taking away of the
guilt and punishment of sin, in them it is effectual for the mortifying of
their corruptions and the sin it self; for, being the members of Christ,
Romans 6.5.6.
we are grafted with him into the similitude of his death and resurrection, and
our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin, as it is Romans 6.5.6. And as our
Savior Christ is our wisdom, righteousness and redemption, so he is our
sanctification also, 1. Cor. 1.30.
as it is 1. Cor. 1.30. So that whomsoever he redeemeth and justifies, those
also he sanctifies, as it may further appear by many and evident testimonies.
Tit. 2.14. he is said to have given himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself zealous of good works.
Luke 1.74.75. the Lord binds it with an oath, Luke 1.74.75.
that whomsoever he redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies,
they shall worship him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their
life. 1. Pet. 2.24. the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 2.24.
that our Savior bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin should live in righteousness. Romans 6.18.
And Paul shows Romans 6.18. that as soon as we are freed from the bondage of
sin, we are made the sernants of righteousness. So Heb. 9.14. it is said,
Heb. 9.14.
that the blood of Christ does purge our consciences from dead works, that we
may serve the living God; neither are we only justified, but also sanctified
by the offering of the body of Christ once made, Heb. 10.10.14*
as it is chap. 10. ver. 10.14. and as he is appointed of God to be a prince
and Savior to give remission of sins, so also to give repentance, as
appears Act. 5.31. So the Apostle says, Act. 5.31.
that Christ gave himself for his Church, not that it might continue still in
pollution and the filthiness of sin, Ephesians. 5.25.26.
but that he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing of water through
the word, Ephesians. 5.25.26. If therefore we walk in the light as he is in the
light, then his blood purges us from all our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
If we are sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, then we may draw
near with a true heart in assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22.
Heb. 10.22. But if we continue in our sins without repentance, and commit
them with delight and greediness, then let us brag as much as we will that we
are redeemed by Christ, yet we are still in the bondage of the devil; 1. Ioh.
3.8.
for Christ appeared not only to free us out of his captivity, but also that
he might loose the works of the devil, as appears 1. Ioh. 3.8. He has
redeemed us out of the thraldom of Satan, that we might become his own
servants, whom he will rule and govern by his word and spirit; and therefore if
we have not this spirit to lead us, Romans 8.9.
we are none of his, as it is Romans 8.9. if we will not submit our selves to the
scepter of his word, we are none of his subjects, but continue still the
servants of sin and Satan. Seeing then it is manifest by Gods word, that
whosoever are redeemed are also sanctified, and whomsoever Christ has washed
with his blood, from the guilt and punishment of sin, he does also purge and
cleanse them by virtue of the same blood, from the sins and corruptions
themselves; and seeing he has redeemed us out of the hands of our spiritual
enemies, to the end we should become his servants, worshipping him in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life: let us never be persuaded by
Satan's temptations, foolishly to imagine that we may the more securely live
in our sins, because Christ Jesus has paid a sufficient price of our
redemption: for, first, what horrible ingratitude is this unto God, to take
occasion by this inestimable benefit the more to offend him? what a blasphemous
imagination is this against Jesus Christ, to think that he came into the
world, to be a bolster whereupon we may more securely sleep in sin; and that
he shed his precious blood to purchase liberty for us, that we may live in all
wickedness; that he reconciled us unto his father by his death that we might
the more freely offend him; that he has redeemed us out of the bondage of
Satan, that we may more diligently serve him; that he has with his blood
washed us from the filth of sin, that we may more securely wallow in this
stinking puddle again? for, what were this but to make Christ another
Sisiphus, who as soon as he has ended his labor is new to begin again? what is
it but every day to crucify the Lord of life afresh, and to tread his precious
blood under our feet as an unholy thing? what is it but to contemn and basely
to esteem of, the inestimable price of our redemption, if we will not stick
to sell again our souls unto sin, for every beastly pleasure and base
commodity, which Christ has purchased at so high a rate? Secondly as hereby
we shall show horrible ingratitude against God and our Savior Christ, so also
shall we be most injurious to our own souls, seeing we can never attain unto
any true assurance of our redemption, till we find our selves freed in some
measure from the power of sin, and sanctified by Gods spirit, for the Lord who
is truth it self has said it, and if this be not enough he has solemnly
sworn it, yt all those who^ he has redeemed out of the hands of their
spiritual enemies, shall worship and serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of their life; and therefore as well may God speak, nay swear an
untruth, as those may be redeemed who live in their sins, destitute of all
holiness toward God, and righteousness toward their neighbor.

A twofold end of our redemption, Gods glory and our happiness.
we are to consider that the Lord has redeemed us to a twofold end: the first
and principal is his own glory, the second which is subordinate unto the
other, is our salvation and everlasting happiness: both which concur in all
those, to whom the redemption of Christ is made effectual. Now God is not
glorified by redeeming such as continue in their rebellion toward him, and
will not by any means leave the service of sin and Satan, but rather in
showing his justice and power, in punishing their sins which they commit with
greedines: but he is glorified when he mercifully delivers repentant
sinners, out of the bondage of sin and Satan, who are weary of their
captivity, and desire nothing more then freedom, that they may in the rest of
their lives serve him their redeemer in the duties of holiness and righteousness.
And therefore they who live in their sins without repentance, continuing
still traitors to God and servants of Satan, can have no assurance of their
redemption; for the Lord has therefore bought us, 1. Cor. 6.20.
with a price that we should glorify him both in our bodies and souls: and
therefore those who in sted of letting their lights of holiness and righteousness
shine clearly before men, yt their heavenly father may be glorified, do
nothing else but dishonor him by their sins and wicked conversation, show
plainly that the redemption wrought by Christ does not as yet appertain unto
them.

Three degrees of our redemption which always concur.
we are to know that the work of our redemption wrought by Christ, consists
of three parts or degrees; for first Christ redeemed us by paying the price of
our redemption, and thus he is said in the Scriptures to have redeemed us with
his blood. Secondly, he redeemeth us when as he applies this benefit of our
redemption unto us in particular, and does thereby free and deliver us from the
devil sin and death, so as we are no longer in their bondage subject to their
power and government, although we be continually assaulted and often foiled by
them; thirdly, he redeemeth us when as he perfectly freeth us, not only from
the power and government, but also from the assaults and molestations of all
our spiritual enemies, and gives us eternal peace in his kingdom. The first
was wrought immediately by himself, when as he paid a sufficient price for our
redemption, and thereby fully satisfied his fathers justice; the second he
works by his own spirit, whereby he does dispell out of our minds and hearts
the dark mists of ignorance and infidelity, and by the glorious light thereof
does illuminate our understandings, with the beams of true knowledge and a
lively faith, so that we know acknowledge and believe that Christ is our
savior and redeemer, and are assured that he has freed us from the bondage of
our spiritual enemies: after which assurance he begets in us an earnest
desire, of being more and more freed from them actually, and an holy endeavor
of withstanding all their assaults and temptations, whereby they labor again
to bring us into their captivity, and withal enableth us with some measure of
strength, to withstand and overcome them; and renews and confirms this
strength received, when in the conflict of temptation we are weakened, and have
received the foil, that we may rise up again and afresh maintain the fight.
Lastly, our Savior Christ redeemeth us, when as he perfectly freeth and
delivers us from our spiritual enemies at his second coming, when as we
shall not only not be overcome nor foiled of them, but also not so much as
once assaulted. And of this redemption our Savior speaks Luke 21.28. Luke
21.28.
When (says he) these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up
your heads; for your redemption draws near. And these are the three degrees
of our redemption, which always follow one another, for, for whomsoever Christ
has given himself as the price of their redemption, to those also he gives
his holy spirit, which does illuminate the eyes of their understanding blinded
with ignorance, and sanctifies their will and affections, working in them a
desire and holy endeavor of serving the Lord in holiness and righteousness, and
of withstanding the temptations of the flesh, the world and the devil. And
whomsoever he thus redeemeth out of the power and government of their
spiritual enemies, those he will perfectly redeem and deliver from all their
malicious attempts, and give them the eternal peace of his kingdom. But those
who have not their part in the second degree, that is, those who continue in
their blind ignorance, and in the natural pollution of their will and
affections, willingly subiecting themselves to the service of sin and Satan,
and stubbornly withdrawing their stiff necks out of the yoke of holy
obedience unto Gods commandments; they can never have any assurance that
Christ has redeemed them by paying the price of his blood, nor will deliver
them at his second coming out of the bondage of Satan, in which they have
lived all their life time, with pleasure and delight; for, whomsoever he
ransometh with the price of his blood, those he freeth out of the government of
their spiritual enemies, sin, death, and the devil; and therefore they that
still live in sin, as our Savior says Ioh. 8.34, Ioh. 8.34. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
Romans 6.16.
yea the servants of Satan also, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Ioh. 3.8. For
their servants we are to whom we obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness, as it is Romans 6.16: and those who still remain in
the service and slavery of sin and satan, have no part in the first
redemption, wrought by the shedding of his blood, nor shall have any part in
the last redemption, at his second coming to judgment.

That Christ has redeemed the whole man.
we are to know that Christ has redeemed the whole man, body, and soul, and
has freed and delivered every part and faculty of them, out of the bondage of
our spiritual enemies, that all and every of them may perform service unto
God. For example, our understandings were captiued in the dark prison of
ignorance and blindness, and appears Ephesians. 4.17.18: but our Savior Christ
redeemed us, Ephesians. 4.17.18.
and has dispelled these mists of darkness with the preaching of the Gospel,
which like a glorious sunshine has appeared unto us, and by the operation of
his holy spirit, he has caused the scales of ignorance to fall from the eyes
of our understanding, so that we can see the mystery of our redemption, and
work of our salvation wrought by him, Luke 1.77.78.
as it is Luke 1.77.78.79. Our wills which were so inthralled that we could not
so much as desire any thing pleasing and acceptable unto God, Phil. 2.13.
has our Savior redeemed and freed out of this spiritual bondage, and by the
good motions of his holy spirit does so rule and incline them, that to will is
present with us, and we are delighted in the law of God concerning the
innerman; as the Apostle speaks of himself Romans 7.18.22. Romans 7.18.22.
And though the law of our members and corruptions of the flesh, do rebel
against the law of our mind, leading us captive to the law of sin, yet do
we abhor this sin, and earnestly desire to be freed from it, and to serve
the Lord in holiness and righteousness, indeauoring and striving to mortify the
flesh and the corruptions thereof, and to rise again to newnes of life. Our
affections also were wholly corrupted and disordered, so that we hated God, and
loved the world, feared man, and not the Lord, trusted upon the inferior
means, never regarding the fountain of all goodness; in a word we were given
over to our own hearts lusts, Romans 1.24.26.
and unto vile affections, as it is Romans 1.24.26: but by the redemption wrought
by Christ becoming his, and being quickened and strengthened by his holy
spirit, we have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof,
Gal. 5.24.
as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.24. Lastly, the members of our body were
servants to uncleanness and iniquity, to commit iniquity, Romans 6.19. Romans 6.19.
our eyes full of adultery, our tongues forges of lies, our feet swift to
shed blood: but our Savior Christ redeeming us has delivered our bodies also
from the thraldom of sin and Satan, so as though sin dwell, yet it shall
no longer reign in our mortal bodies, Romans 6.12.
that we should obey the lusts thereof, as appears Romans 6.12. In a word, both
body and soul were in miserable captivity to our spiritual enemies: but our
Savior has bought us with a price, 1. Cor. 6.20.
to the end we may glorify God in our bodies and in our spirits, for they are
Gods, as it is 1. Cor 6.20. And has redeemed us not with corruptible things,
as silver and gold, from our vain couersation, 1. Pet. 1.18.19.
but with his own most precious blood, as Peter teaches us 1. Pet. 1.18.19.

If therefore we are redeemed by Christ, then our blind understandings are
enlightened by the preaching of the Gospel, and we freed from our former
ignorance: our wills which were rebellious are inclined to obedience, so as we
earnestly desire to leave our sins, and to serve the Lord in the duties of
sanctification, and have an endeavor of mortifying our sins, and rising again
to newnes of life; our affections also are purged from their corruptions, so
that we love, fear, trust in, hope, and expect all good from him, who is the
fountain of all goodness; our bodies which were given as servants unto sin,
are now become the servants of righteousness unto holiness; Romans 6.29. verse. 22.
In a word both in body and soul we are freed from sin, and made servants
unto God. But if our understandings are still blind and ignorant, our wills
backward to embrace any goodness, and most prone unto all evil, our affections
as corrupt as ever they were, and our bodies the ready instruments to act all
sin and wickedness, then have we as yet no fruit of the redemption wrought by
Christ, for it is not a titularie but a powerful redemption, which indeed and
truth delivers us, even in this life, from our spiritual enemies: so that
though they may assault, and grievously vex us, yet they shall never govern
and reign over us; and therefore whosoever feel not the redemption wrought by
Christ, powerful in this life to free them in some measure, from the rule and
jurisdiction of sin, Satan, the world and the flesh, shall never find it
fruitful and effectual to free and deliver them, from condemnation hell and
destruction in the life to come.

CHAP. XVI. Of those temptations which Satan uses against the faithful
concerning their redemption.
That it is not repugnant to Gods justice to punish Christ for us.
now we are to consider of those which he uses to move men to doubting and
desperation. First therefore he obiecteth that it is a thing unreasonable, and
utterly repugnant to Gods justice, that Christ who was innocent should be
punished for us who are guilty, that we should deserve the blame, and he
suffers the stripes, that the righteous should be condemned, and the wicked
acquitted, that we who like barrabas were cruel murderers and wicked sinners
should be let lose, and the immaculate lamb of God in whom there was no fault
should be delivered up to be crucified; for what were this but to make the just
God like unjust Pilate? what were this but to deny his own word, having said
that the righteous should live in his righteousness, Ezech. 18.20.
and the sinner die in his iniquity? To which I answer, first, that it would
not indeed have stood with Gods justice, to have punished Christ as he was
innocent and righteous, nor to have acquitted and absolved us who were
unrighteous and wicked; but he punished Christ in respect that he had taken
upon him the sins of all the faithful, and absolueth us as we are freed from
our sins, and clothed with his righteousness and obedience. He punished Christ,
not as he was most just and free from sin, but as he was our surety who had
taken upon him to discharge our debt, and to satiffie for our sins; and thus
the creditor may justly require his debt of the surety though in respect of
himself he owed him nothing, and thus he may, nay ought to release the
principal, when the surety has allreadie discharged the debt. Secondly I
answer that it had bin injustice in God, if he had forced our Savior Christ,
who was just and innocent, to undergo the punishments which were due unto us,
who were malefactors and offenders; for this were to condemn the righteous,
and to justify the wicked: but our Savior Christ of his own free accord, did
voluntarily offer himself to stand in our place, and to discharge that debt
which we owed, and to make satissaction to his father, by suffering that
punishment which we had deserved. Ioh. 10.18.
And this apeareth, Ioh. 10.18. where our Savior says, that no man took his
life from him, but that he laid it down of himself. And the Apostle tells
us that he humbled himself, Phil. 2.8.
and became obedient unto death, Phil. 2.8. In which respect, his death is
called a sacrifice or free oblation, which he voluntarily offered unto his
father, Heb. 9.14: Heb. 9.14.
and therefore the Lord might justly take that which Christ freely gave, nay it
had been cruelty and injustice if he should have refused, the payment of such
a sufficient surety, when he voluntarily offered it for our discharge,
choosing rather still to have kept us in prison, bound in the chains of
everlasting death. Lastly, there might have been some show of rigor and
injustice, if Christ the innocent had been overwhelmed, in suffering the
punishments which were due unto us, who were the offenders; but being not only
man which suffered but God also, and therefore of infinite power and majesty,
he was able to pay our great debt, and yet is never the poorer; to suffer death
and overcome it by suffering: and by yielding a while to the malice of our
spiritual enemies, he finally vanquished and gloriously triumphed over them
all; and therefore it was not injustice in God to suffer our Savior Christ, to
undergo that which he was sure to overcome; but unspeakable mercy toward us,
in sending his son to pay that debt which we could never have discharged, and
to suffer punishments for a time, which otherwise we should have endured for
ever.

By this then it appears, that God might justly receive the price of our
redemption, which Christ freely offered. But seeing by the laws of redemption
there is required, not only that the redeemer pay a price or ransom, but also
that he have right to that which he does redeem, it may be demanded what
right our Savior had over us, that he should pay this price for us. I
answer, that as our Savior Christ consists of two natures, so also he had a
twofold right unto us; for as he was God, he had the right of propriety, and
was our true owner; he was our Lord and therefore had right to redeem his own
servants; he was our King, and therefore had right to redeem us who were his
subjects; yea he was our creator, and therefore he had more right then any Lord
or King to redeem us who were his creaturs; as he was a man he was our
kinseman, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone; yea he was our brother, as
it is Heb. 2.11.12. and Ioh. 20.17; Heb. 2.11 12. Ioh. 20.17. Leuit. 25.25.
and therefore had also the right of propinquitie, which was required by the
law of redemption. Leuit. 25.25.

That Christ has offered a sufficient price for our redemption.
Satan may object that the death of Christ is not a sufficient price for our
redemption; for how could the death of one, be a sufficient satisfaction for
the sin of all the faithful, seeing every one by their innumerable sins, had
deserved innumerable deaths? and how could the temporary and short punishment
which Christ endured, Act. 20.28.
free us all that believe from the everlasting punishments of hell fire, seeing
the justice of God requires that there should be some proportion, between the
punishment which we deserved, and the satisfaction which Christ made and
offered? I answer, that Christ who suffered for us, was not man only but God
also; in which respect it is said, that God purchased his Church with his
blood; not that God has blood, but because he that shed his blood, was not
only man but also God; and therefore his short sufferings were of more worth,
virtue and value, than the everlasting sufferings of all the world; for they
should ever have suffered, but could thereby never have satisfied, because our
sins deserved infinite punishments, in that we had by them offended the infinite
justice and majesty of God; which because finit creatures could not bear, Gods
justice required that they should be infinite in time and everlasting, seeing
they could not be infinite in measure; but the sufferings of Christ, though
short in time, yet were they infinite in value, worth and merit, because he was
not man alone, but God also, and therefore at once he put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26.
and by his one oblation he took away the sins of many, as it is Heb. 9.26, 28.
As therefore: Adams sin, which in it self was finit, as proceeding from a
finit creature, notwithstanding deserved infinite punishment, because God whom
by his sin he offended was infinite; so contrariwise Christ's sufferings were but
of short continuance in respect of time, but yet of infinite merit and worth,
because he that suffered was not man alone, but also God, and therefore
infinite.

That Christ's death and merits belong to every particular believer.
the tempter will object that Christ's death and merits, though they be in
themselves a sufficient price for our redemption, yet they do not belong unto
us, neither will be effectual for our salvation. Let it be granted (will he
say) that the death and merits of Christ are sufficient for the salvation of
all: yet what comfort can thou receive hereby, seeing thou can have no
assurance that they belong unto thee, or will be effectual for thy redemption?
for either he has redeemed all or but some only; if all, then some who are
redeemed may perish notwithstanding, seeing the scriptures show that the
greater part of the world are the children of destruction, and it is not
unlikely but that thou art in the greatest number. But if he have redeemed some
only, how can thou conclude that thou art one of these whom he has redeemed,
seeing out of mere particular propositions thou can not infer any sound
consequence? For example, if thou do thus conclude, some men are redeemed by
Christ, but I am a man, therefore I am redeemed: thou might as well reason
thus, some men are kings, but I am a man, therefore I am a king. To this we
must answer, that though Christ has only redeemed some, yet we may after a
more sound manner conclude that we are in this number, not using the help of
satan's absurd fallacions; but inferring our conclusion out of general
propositions grounded upon Gods word after this manner; whosoever believe in
Christ, those he has redeemed and will save; for this is the voice and promise
of Christ in the Gospel: but I (may every faithful man say) do truly
believe in Christ: and therefore I am redeemed and shall eternally be saved.

Satan's temptations against the particular application of Christ's merits,
answered. Ephesians. 5.25.27.
that Christ only saves and redeemeth his own body which is his Church, and
that this his Church is glorious without spot or wrinkle, holy and unblameable,
as it is Ephesians. 5.25.27. and therefore (will he say) what hope of redemption or
salvation can thou have, who art defiled not only with original corruption,
but also with innumerable actual transgressions? To this we must answer that
the Apostle says not, that the Church which Christ redeemeth and saves, is
now already without spot or wrinkle; but yt he has by giving himself for it,
redeemed it, that hereby he might wash and cleanse it from all spots, and might
make it holy and without blame; either by his merits and righteousness imputed
unto it which is done in this life; or by freeing it altogether from
corruptions and the filthy spots of sin, wherewith naturally it is defiled,
which is begun in this life, but shall not be perfected until the life to
come.

Secondly, he obiecteth, Our falling into sin, no reason to prove that we are
not redeemed. Col. 1.14.
that if Christ had redeemed us out of the thraldom of sin, then we should
not still be overcome thereby, nor so often, will we nill we, transgres Gods
commandments. To which we are to answer, that our Savior Christ has
delivered us from our sins, first in regard that for his merits and
satisfaction sake, the Lord has pardoned and remitted them, so as they shall
never be imputed unto us, nor arise up in judgment to our condemnation,
neither in this world nor the world to come: secondly, he does deliver us from
our sins, whilst he does give unto us his holy spirit, whereby our sins
are in some measure mortified, and the strength of them abated, so that they do
not reign and rule in us as in former times, although we cannot wholly expel
them from dwelling in us, according to that Romans 6.12, Romans 6.12.
Sin shall not reign in your mortal body that you should obey it in the
lusts thereof. And though we cannot utterly subdue this Cananitish brood of our
corruptions, but that still whilst we continue in this life, they are as
thorns in our sides, always vexing and grieuing us: yet by the help of Gods
spirit assisting us, we weaken their force, abate their courage, and make them
become tributaries; and if at any time they rebel, we curb them in, and give
them the overthrow; yea, though sometimes they gain ground, and give us the
foil, yet we rise again by unfeigned repentance, and recover our selves,
being assisted with the fresh supply of Gods spirit, till at last by death we
obtain a final victory.

That our obedience to the Law, proves not that we are not redeemed. Gal.
3.13.
he obiecteth that we are still under the law, and tied to the obedience
thereof, and therefore Christ has not freed us from it: I answer, that though
Christ has not freed us from the obedience of the law, yet he has freed us
from the curse and malediction, as it is Gal. 3.13. so as though we do not
perform it in that exact manner and measure which God requires, yet our
transgression shall not be imputed unto us; for he has perfectly fulfilled the
law for us, that his righteousness might become our righteousness, and he
has suffered death, that by his blood he might wash away our sins. Romans 8.3.4.
And thus when the law was impossible to be performed, by reason of the weakness
and corruptions of our flesh, the Lord sent his Son in the similitude of
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness
of the law might be fulfilled in us, as it is Romans 8.3, 4. Moreover, we are
not now tied to perform obedience to the law, to the end that thereby we may
be justified, nor yet shall we for the imperfections of this our obedience be
in danger of condemnation, but now only it is a means before our conversion
to bring us to Christ, by showing unto us our sins and insufficiency in our
selves, and after our conversion it serves for a rule or square, according to
which we are to frame our lives in holiness and righteousness, that so we may
show our thankfulness unto our heavenly father for his inestimable benefits, by
glorifying his name in a godly life. And because this also is bitter and
unpleasant to flesh and blood, therefore the Lord has also granted and given
unto us his holy spirit, which mortifieth our corruptions, whereby we are made
less prone unto sin; and quickneth us in the inner man, inabling us to
perform obedience in some measure to the law of God, with alacrity and
cheerefulnes, so that now his commandments are not grievous unto us, 1. John
5.3.
as the Apostle speaks, 1. Ioh. 5.3, but his yoke which so much galled us
while we were rebellious, and like untamed oxen, is now become easy, and his
burden which heretofore was so heavy and irksome, is now become light, Matthew.
11.30.
as our Savior tells us, Matthew. 11.30.

That God is not angry with the faithful, though he seems to frown upon
them.
the tempter may object to the weak conscience which labors under the
burden of sin, that our Savior Christ has not redeemed us from the anger
of God due for sin, seeing we still see his frowning countenance, and apprehend
the scorching heat of his wrath inflamed against us: but let all know, that if
they truly believe in Christ, and only rely themselves upon this their
mediator, if their sins past grieve them, and they purpose for the time to
come, to labor that they may forsake them; then they are reconciled unto God by
Christ, and in him he is become their loving and gracious father, Col. 1.20.21.
as the Apostle tells us, Col. 1.20.21. Let not such therefore be
discouraged, if God seem to frown upon them for a time, for he will not
frown for ever, nor always retain his anger, as the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 103.9. Nay, Psalm. 103.9.
in truth he is not angry with us at all as a Judge to punish, but as a Father
to correct and amend us: and if we will speak properly, he always loves and
delights in us; for as he is well pleased with Christ our head, so is he
always well pleased with us in him, as being members of his body:
notwithstanding as a tender Father when his Son offends, makes semblance
as though his wrath were kindled, to the end that he may be careful in the
time to come, to avoid the like fault, and to amend; so the Lord who is our
gracious Father, seems oftentimes to be grievously displeased with his
children when they have sinned against him, hiding from them his amiable loving
countenance, and showing nothing but signs of wrath, not that he has in
truth cast them out of his love and favor; for he never falls out with those
whom Christ has reconciled unto him, neither can he cease to love the members
of Christ, nor Christ's members cease to be his members after they are once
ingrafted into his body by his holy spirit and a lively faith: only like a
wise father he frowneth upon them and seems angry, to make them in the time
to come forsake their sins, whereby they have incurred his displeasure.

That though Satan tempt us, yet we may be assured that we are redeemed. Heb.
2.14.
seeing he does often assault and overcome us with his temptations, and leads
us captive fast bound in the fetters of sin. To which we must answer, that
our Savior Christ by his death has destroyed him that had the power of death,
that is the devil; that he might deliver all them which for fear of death
were all their life time subject to bondage, as the Apostle shows Heb.
2.14.15. That God has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his dear son, Col. 1.13.
as it is Col. 1.13. That our redeemer Jesus Christ has spoiled the
principalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has
triumphed over them upon his cross, Col. 2.15.
and that not only for himself, but for all his members, Col. 2.15. That he
has now broken the Serpents head, so that well may he hiss against us, but
yet he cannot sting us. And whereas heretofore he was the prince of the
world, Ioh. 12.31.
who did rule and govern us at his pleasure and according to his will, now he
is cast out by the prince of princes, as it is Ioh. 12.31. and our Savior
Christ has established his kingdom in us, ruling and governing us with the
scepter of his word and holy spirit. Whereas he was the strong man who quietly
kept his possession in us, Luke 11.21.
Luke 11.21; our Savior Christ who is stronger than he, has spoiled him of
his armor wherein he trusted, and has thrust him out of his possession.
Whereas he was a cruel tyrant who held us fast bound in his captivity, our
Savior Christ has redeemed us out of his thraldom, so as now he cannot hurt
us though he never cease to assault us; and though he goes about like a
roaring lion seeking whom he 1. Pet. 5.9.
may devour, yet now we are enabled by Gods spirit to resist him steadfastly in
the faith, and so armed with the coat armor of Gods spiritual graces, that
though he may with the violence of his assaults foil us, yet shall he never
be able to overcome us. That God turns Satan's temptations to the good of his
children.
God does indeed suffer this wicked enemy to make war against even his
dearest children, and that sometimes after a strange and extraordinary manner,
not that he will give them over again unto his thraldom, out of which he has
purchased them with so dear a price, but partly to drive them hereby to fly
unto him by earnest and effectual prayer, imploring his aid against Satan's
cruelty, and that having received it they may ascribe the whole glory of the
victory to him alone, by whose strength they have overcome; and partly to show
unto them their own weakness, that they may not rely nor rest upon it.
Sometimes he suffers them to be thus assaulted, that his power may be
magnified in their weakness; and sometimes that the graces which he has
bestowed upon them, may shine gloriously to all the world. Sometimes for the
confirmation of others who shall hereafter be tried with the like temptations,
when they have in their brethren often experience of Gods love power and
fatherly assistance; and sometimes the more to strengthen themselves in his
spiritual graces, and to confirm them more fully in the assurance of his love
and their salvation. For as a city which has once bin besieged and not
sacked, will ever after be more strong to hold out if it be assaulted by the
like danger, because the citizens will carefully fortify their walls and
increase their bulwarks; and as he who has been once robbed by thieves, will
ever after ride better provided to make resistance, that he do not again
fall into their hands; so those who are besieged and assaulted by their
spiritual enemies, will ever after more carefully arm themselves against them
with the graces of Gods spirit, that they may not be overcome nor foiled by
them. We know that whilst men quietly enjoy their possessions and inheritance
they rest secure, keeping their writings in a box without ever looking on them
from year to year, but when their title and right is called into question, and
some man labors to thrust them out of their possession, then they peruse their
writings and deeds with all diligence; and, not satisfied with their own
judgment they resort to skillful Lawyers, craving their counsel how they may
maintain their right, and answer the plea which their adversary makes
against them; whereby oftentimes it comes to pass that they make their title
not only much more strong in it self, but also more clear and evident unto
al others, so that afterward none dare once adventure to trouble them again,
or call their right into question: so whilst we never doubt of our heavenly
inheritance we rest secure, and let the book of God which is our best deed and
evidence, lie under our cupbords till it mould for want of use; but when satan
by his temptations does call our title into question, and pleades that we have
no right to Gods kingdom, then do we most carefully and diligently peruse the
book of God, then do we go unto Gods Ministers, desiring their counsel how
we may answer Satan's plea and clear our title, then do we most carefully
use all good means to increase our knowledge, that thereby we may thoroughly
infourme our selves of our right, and confirm our assurance against all cauils
and objections. And hereby it comes to pass, that those who before had very
weak titles to their heavenly inheritance, whilst they remained retchlesse and
secure, and but slender assurance ever to enjoy it; now, by their care, pains
and diligence, have so confirmed it unto themselves, and so cleared it to all the world, that Satan dare never after call it into question, unless he do
it (like many contentious men in these dates) rather that he may trouble and
vex them with a tedious suite, than for any hope of prevailing in the end. And
thus you see that Christ has redeemed all the faithful out of Satan's
thraldom, notwithstanding that he still assaulteth them with his temptations;
neither does he hereby overcome them and again inthrall them in his
captivity, but rather by Gods blessing they serve to strengthen them in the
spiritual graces of Gods spirit, and to confirm them in the full assurance of
their salvation.

That though we die, yet we are redeemed from death. Genesis 3.19. Heb. 9.27.
To which we may answer, that Gods just sentence once denounced could not be
revoked, Genesis 3.19, Dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return; and
therefore the Apostle says Heb. 9.27, It is appointed unto all men that they
shall once die. But as Ahashuorus, Hest. 8.
though he could not revoke the sentence of death against the Jews after it
was once pronounced, because it was a decree of the Medes and Persians which
might not be altered; yet at Hesters suite sent out another decree, whereby he
armed and strengthened the Jews against their enemies, to the end they might
resist, overcome, and destroy them: so the Lord having pronounced the sentence
of death against all the sons of Adam, could not revoke his decree and
sentence, as being far more unchangeable than the decree of the Medes and
Persians, yet at the suite of our Savior Christ he made another decree,
whereby we might be armed against our enemy death, and overcome him. So that
now though we die, yet are we not subject unto death, neither shall we be held
under the dominion thereof; though we are not wholly exempted from death, yet
now the nature thereof is quite altered; for heretofore it was unconquerable, but
now easily overcome; heretofore it was a curse for sin, but now turned into
an exceeding blessing, as deriuing unto us many benefits: for first it freeth
us from all our afflictions, with which in this life we are so much molested;
it delivers us from the irksome company of profane wicked men, who grieve
the very souls of the righteous, and make them to cry out with David; Woe is
me that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar; Psalm. 120.5.
it wholly freeth us from sin, and purges away those corruptions which in
this life cleave so fast unto us; so that though heretofore there was great
amity between sin and death, for sin was the only cause which enlarged
deaths dominions, and made all the world to become his tributaries, yet now they
are at odds, and death now is the means, to free us out of sins thraldom and
utterly to destroy it. And thus has the Viper sin, bred a young one which
eats out it own belly; for sin brought forth death, and death destroyed
sin: had it not bin for sin, death had never entered into the world, and
were it not for death, sin would never go out of the world. Moreover, by
death we obtain a full and perfect victory over the flesh, the world, and
the devil; for whereas in this life we are in a continual fight, and sometimes
Ameleck, sometime Israel has the upper hand: death puts an end to this
battle, and gives us full victory over the flesh, the world, and the
devil; so as they shall never afterward not only not prevail, but not so
much as assault or trouble us: and thus does every Christian, with David cut
off Goliahs head with his own sword; for death was the weapon which Satan used
to destroy us, and with this weapon we give Satan a final overthrow. Lastly,
death which heretofore was the high way to hell and destruction, is now become
the ready entrance into Gods kingdom, and like a foul gate whereby we enter
into a fair palace; heretofore it was a fiery serpent which by stinging killed
and destroyed us, but, now our Savior has pulled out the sting, it is become
so harmless that we may safely put it into our bosoms, without receiving any
hurt: and in this respect it may not unfitly be compared to the brazen Serpent,
which looked like other Serpents, but in steed of wounding it presently cured,
in steed of killing it preserved life; so though death retain his former
shape, so that we are afraid and ready to flee from it, yet it is but in
outward appearance; for in steed of an ever dying life, it gives us possession
of a never dying life and endless happiness. Heretofore it was the devils
sergeant to arrest and carry us without bail, into the perpetual prison of
utter darkness, but now it is the Lords gentleman-usher to conduct and place
us in the kingdom of heaven. Heretofore it was like the devils cart wherein we
were carried to execution, now it is like Elias fiery chariot whereby we mount
up into heaven. And this Paul shows 2. Cor. 5.1. We know (says he) that if
the earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, 2. Cor. 5.1.
we have a building given us of God, a house not made with hands, but eternal
in the heavens. Why therefore should we fear, nay why should we not desire
death, seeing now it is unto us advantage? Phil. 1.23.
as it is Phil. 1.23. why should we not desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, verse. 21.
seeing that is best of all? as it is verse. 21. for now we may say, not that we
die, but that we depart and go to our father, Ioh. 8.21.
as our Savior speaks Ioh. 8.21.

But yet we must take heed that we do not imagine, that death in it own
nature works and procures for us these great benefits; for in it self this
temporary death is but a step to everlasting death, and as it were a fearful
prologue to a more fearful tragedy: but our Savior Christ it is alone who
has gathered wholesome honey out of this pernicious poison, and by mingling the
flesh of this venomous serpent with his own most precious blood, he has made
thereof a wholesome Triacle.

That those who are once redeemed cannot again be brought into bondage.
notwithstanding Satan's temptations and objections, that Christ has perfectly
redeemed us, out of the hands of all our spiritual enemies; now in the last
place Satan suggesteth, that though Christ has once redeemed us, yet we may
come into their bondage again, and then there is no hope of a second
redemption. But we are to know that our Redeemer is God omnipotent, whose
power all the power of hell cannot withstand; and therefore nothing is able to
pluck us out of his hand, Ioh. 10.28.
as himself speaks Ioh. 10.28; neither are we to think, that he will easily
and willingly lose them, which he so entirely loves that he spared not his
precious blood, but freely gave it as a price of their redemption. And
therefore, as he is able, Heb. 7.25.
perfectly to save all those who come unto God by him; because he ever lives
to make intercession for them, as it is Heb. 7.25. so we need not doubt of his
will, seeing he has redeemed us with so d^^re a price: for if he would not
lose us when we were his enemies, much less will he suffer us to perish when
we are become his subjects, yea his spouse, nay members of his own body: and
therefore we may assure our selves that if our Savior, our spouse and head
has once redeemed us, then he has also obtained eternal redemption for us,
Heb. 9.12.
as the Apostle affirms Heb. 9.12. So that though the devil rage like a
roaring lion, and the flesh betray us and harbor whole legions of unlawful
lusts which fight against our souls, and the world sometime frown, and
sometime faune, and all of them by all means labor to destroy us; yet our
omnipotent redeemer, our loving and careful spouse and head, will not suffer us
to be lost whom he has so dearly bought, but will give us the possession and
fruition of that heavenly inheritance, and those unspeakable joys which he
with his own most precious blood has purchased for us.

CHAP. XVII. Of our Vocation.


What our calling is.
In speaking hereof, I will show first what this calling is, and afterward
answer Satan's temptations, whereby he laboreth to make it frustrate and
unprofitable unto us. For the first, our vocation or calling is an effect of
Gods election, whereby our Savior Christ, God and man, does by his kingly
authority call and inuit us whilst we live here, unto the participation and
embracing of the inestimable benefit of our redemption, that thereby we may
attain unto everlasting life.

And thus are we called sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, when it seems
good unto the Lord: as appears in the parable of the householder, who hired
laborers into his vineyard, some at the dawning of the day, others at the
third, sixth, and ninth hour, Matthew. 20.
others at the eleventh hour, not long before the sun setting, as it is
Matthew. 20.

A twofold calling, general and effectual.
Moreover, this our calling, is either commune and general, or else special and
effectual. The general calling, is whereby all indifferently, good and bad,
elect and reprobate, are outwardly invited by the ministry of the Gospel, to
embrace the benefit of our redemption wrought by Christ: which outward calling
is ineffectual to the wicked and reprobates, because being invited to the
supper of the King they refuse to come, that is, they either altogether neglect
the hearing of the heavenly embassage of the Gospel, or else contemn those
inestimable benefits which are therein offered, preferring before them the
honors, riches, and pleasures of this life; whereby it comes to pass, that
the word of God finds no place in their hearts, but vanishes away, leaving
nothing behind it but the savor of death, to their more deep condemnation.

What our effectual calling is.
that which is proper to Gods elect, when as with the outward ministry of the
word, wherein grace and salvation is offered to all believers, our Savior
Christ joins the inward operation of his holy spirit; which opens our deaf
ears, inlighteneth our blind understandings, and softneth and sanctifies our
hard and corrupt hearts, so as we attentively hear, truly understand, and by
a lively faith apply, the doctrine of grace and salvation which is preached
unto us; whereby also we are separated from the world, given to Christ and he
to us, whereupon follows that near union, whereby we being ingrafted into
his body, mistically do become his members, and he our head.

Effectual calling proper to the elect.
That this effectual calling is proper to those that are elected and shall be
saved, it appears by the parable of the supper, where many, outwardly invited
to the great supper of the king, refuse to come, Matthew. 22.3.8.
and therefore are excluded from the marriage, Mat. 22.3.8. And Romans 8* 30, the
Apostle says that whom he did predestinate, them also he called, and these
also he justifies. Rom 8.30.
So Act. 13.48. it is said that as many as were ordained to everlasting life,
believed at the preaching of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.48.
and therefore these only were effectually called. Ioh. 6.45.
And Ioh. 6 45. our Savior says, that every one who has heard and has
learned of the father, comes unto him. So that, outward hearing is not
sufficient to bring us to Christ, unless the father also inwardly instruct us
with his holy spirit, opening our deaf ears, inlightening our blind
understandings, inclining our wills, and sanctifying our affections, that we
may attentively hear, truly understand, and heartily embrace the Gospel
preached unto us. And this appears in the example of Lydia, Act. 16.14.
Act. 16.14. whose heart the Lord is said to have opened, that she might attend
unto the things which Paul spoke, and be converted: by which speech the holy
Ghost implies thus much, that her heart was (as it were) close shut, and fast
locked up, so as he could not receive the word preached, till the Lord had
opened it by the inward operation of his holy spirit. Which matter need not
seem strange unto us, seeing it is continually confirmed by our own
experience: for how comes it to pass that many amongst us, hear the word
preached from day to day and year to year, and yet are never the nearer, but
still remain as ignorant in their minds, as perverse in their wills, as
corrupt in their affections, as profane in their lives as ever they were? On
the other side how happens it that some attentively hear Gods word, treasure
it up in their memories, and thereby have their minds enlightened with the
knowledge of God, their wills inclined to holiness and righteousness, their
affections sanctified, their lives reformed? surely because the Lord does join
in these, the inward operation of his spirit with the outward ministry of his
word, making it effectual for their true conversion; whereas he leaves the
other to their own corrupt affections and hardness of heart.

And thus it appears that the elect only are effectually called: as for the
wicked and reprobate, though they hear the outward preaching of the word, by
which they are invited unto Christ; yet they stubbornly refuse to come unto
him, and reject all the gracious promises of the Gospel, to their eternal
perdition; because the Lord leaves them to their own lusts and corruption,
not opening their hard hearts, nor inclining their perverse wills nor
sanctifying their corrupt affections.

Of the parts of effectual calling, and first of our separation from the world.
the parts of our effectual calling; the first is our separation from the
world, of which in former time we were citizens and true members, that from
henceforth we should be of Gods household and family: for naturally we are
mere worldlings, dead in our sins, and to every good work reprobate, living
without God and serving Satan, the world and the corrupt lusts of our flesh,
until it please the Lord to make choice of us among many other, calling and
separating us from this corrupt mass of mankind, that he may make us subjects,
first of his kingdom of grace, and afterward of his kingdom of glory. Of
this our Savior speaks Ioh. 15.19. Ioh. 15.19.
If you were of the world, the world would love his own; but because you are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. And the Apostle says that after our calling and conversion, Ephesians.
2.19.
we are no more strangers and forreners, but citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God. Now the Lord makes this choice of us before others, not
for any respect of worthiness or excellency in us more then in them, but of his
mere mercy, undeserved grace, That the Lord calls us, not for any respect
of our own worthiness.
and free good will; neither does he therefore intertaine us into his Church
and family, because we are already, or because he knows we will be
hereafter holy and righteous; but having freely called us without any our
deserts, he does also of his own undeserved love give us his holy spirit,
whereby we are purged from our corruptions, sanctified and raised up from the
death of sin to newnes of life; so that our holiness is not a cause of our
calling, but Gods election and calling is a cause of our holiness. And this
appears both by testimonies of Scripture and examples. For the first, the
Lord professes, Esa. 65.1.
Esa. 65.1. that he offered himself to those that asked not after him, and was
found of them that sought him not etc. The Apostle Ephesians. 2.1. affirms that
even those who are the Church and people of God, were before their calling and
conversion, not sick only, but even dead in their sins, in which they walk
according to the course of the world; Ephesians. 2.1.3.12.
that they were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, as it is
verse. 3. and that they were without Christ, aliants from the commonwealth of
Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, and had no hope, and were
without God in the world, as it is verse. 12. So 1. Cor. 6.11. he says, that
those who were now sanctified and justified, were in time past fornicators, 1.
Cor. 6.11.
idolators, adulterers, wantons, buggerers etc. The Apostle Peter like wise
writing to the Church of Christ, says both of himself and them also, that
they had spent the time past before their conversion, after the lust of the
gentiles, walking in wantonness, gluttony, and in abominable idolatries, 1.
Pet. 4.3.
1. Pet. 4.3. And the Prophet Esaias says, that we all were wandering sheep,
Esa. 53.6.
until the Lord gathered us into his sheepefold. So that it was so far of,
that we should deserve nay grace or mercy at Gods hand, that in his justice he
might rather have consumed us as his enemies, than called us to be his Church
and people.

This also is plain in the examples specified in the book of God: for, what
excellency or worthiness was in Abraham who before his calling was an idolater?
or in Rahab who had spent her time in lust and filthiness? or in Manasses who
was a cruel idolater, a murderer, a sorcerer? or in Matthew who was a
publicane? or in Paul who was a bloody persecutor? or in the thief, who had
spent his life in all outrage and wickedness? what excellency or desert was in
any of us, who have not so much as a thought, or inclination to any good thing,
or any power to perform it? and therefore we must conclude with the Apostle,
that we are called with an holy calling, not according to our works, 2. Tim.
1.9.
but according to his own purpose of grace, etc. 2. Tim. 1.9.

Of the second part of our effectual calling, to wit, our reciprocal donation.
truly and effectually to al his elect, to be their head, redcemer, and
Savior; and also whereby he gives his elect unto Christ to become his
members, that so they may be saved and redeemed by him: whereupon all Gods
elect may truly say, that this Christ Jesus, God and man, is mine head, my
Savior and redeemer; and all his merits obedience and benefits, purchased by
both, are become mine by this right, as being a member of his body; and our
Savior also, may as truly say of Gods elect, that they are his whom he has
right to redeem and save, because he is their head and they his members. Of
this mutual donation and gift, the Scriptures speak evidently; Esa. 9.6. Ioh.
3.16.
and first that Christ is given unto us; Esa. 9.6. Unto us a child is borne,
and unto us a son is given. Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Romans 8.32. Secondly, Romans 8.32. Ioh. 17.6.
that we are given unto Christ, it is manifest, Ioh. 17.6. I have declared thy
name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world, thine they were and
thou gave them me, etc. So. Ioh. 10.29. My father which gave them me is
greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers hand. By
which places it plainly appears, that Christ is given unto us by God his
father, and we unto Christ. But in what manner is this mutual donation made?
surely not grosely and corporally; but spiritually and after a celestial
manner: for the means whereby it is brought to pass on Gods parr, is his
divine and holy spitit, and on our part a true and lively faith.

Of the third part viz. our union with Christ.
which follows upon the donation before spoken of, whereby Christ Jesus and
they are mistically coupled together into one body, he becoming their head
and they becoming his members. Of this the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 4.15.16.
where he exhorts the faithful, to grow up into him which is the head, that
is Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.
by whom all the body being coupled together by every joint etc. receives
increase. And chap. 5.30. We are members of his body, and 5.30.
of his flesh, and of his bones. And of this our Savior Christ speaks in the
parable of the vine Ioh. 15.1. where he co^pareth himself to the stock and
root, and all the faithful to the branches; Ioh. 15.1.
and the Apostle expresses it by a metaphorical speech taken from a building,
comparing Christ to the foundation, and the Church to the rest of the building,
Ephesians. 2.20.21.22. Now we must not conceive of this union, that it is either
natural, Ephesians. 2.20.21.
as the three persons in Trinity are united in the same divine nature, or
personal as the body and soul being united make one man, or corporal as the
parts of a building are coupled one with another: but this conjunction and
union is made by the spirit of God, which dwelling in the manhood of christ
above measure, filling it with the graces thereof, is from it derived unto all
the faithful and true members of Christ's body, filling them with the like
graces in measure; and on our part by a true and lively faith, whereby we do
apply unto us Christ Jesus and all his benefits. And this appears Ephesians. 2.22.
where the Apostle says that we are the habitation of God by the spirit. Ephesians.
2.22. 1. Ioh. 4.13.
And 1. Ioh 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he
has given us of his spirit. So that by the spirit of God dwelling in us, we
are made one with Christ and Christ with us. Now the manner whereby this union
is made is this; the faithful man, body and soul, is united unto whole Christ
God and man; but first and immediately to the humane nature, and mediatly
thereby to the divine nature, both which are most necessary; for life and
salvation is wrought for us by virtue and power of the Deity, but it is
derived and communicated unto us by the humane nature of Christ. According to
that Ioh. 6.54. Ioh. 6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And this is the
union which is between Christ our head and us his members, by virtue whereof
we have sure interest and just title, both to Christ and all his benefits, his
obedience death and merits, by which we are justified, sanctified and saved.

And so much concerning the parts of our effectual calling; the means whereby
the Lord thus calls us, Of the means of our effectual calling.
are first on Gods part the preaching of the word, which is made effectual by
the inward operation of his spirit; first to mollify our hard hearts, and
truly to humble us, by setting before us our sins and corruptions, and this
is done by the preaching of the law: and after we see our inabilitie and
insufficiency of working our own salvation, we are thereby brought out of our
selves, to seek for salvation in Christ Jesus, applying him and his merits
unto us by a true and a lively faith, and this is done by the preaching of the
Gospel.

The means on our part is the saving hearing of the word, whereby our hard
hearts are mollified, and we truly humbled, and brought out of our selves to
seek for salvation in Christ, whereby also true faith is begot in us,
wherewith we apply, Christ unto us, and rely upon him alone for our
salvation.

And thus have I showed what our vocation is, and the means thereof. Now let us
consider of those temptations, which Satan suggesteth into men's minds in
respect of their vocation, to the end he may hinder them from the
participation and fruition of Christ and his benefits, whereunto in the
preaching of the word they are called and invited. And these are of two sorts,
first those wherewith he assaulteth them who are not called: secondly, those
wherewith he assaulteth them who are truly called and converted.

CHAP. XVIII. Satan's temptations whereby he seeks to make our calling
ineffectual, answered.
Of the necessity of our effectual calling.
and first he labors to persuade them, to neglect this their calling as a
thing not necessary, and to contemn the ministry of the word, which is the
means whereby we are effectually called.

But we are to withstand these temptations: and to this end we are first to
know, that before our effectual calling we are not true members of the
Church, though we may outwardly thrust our selves into this society; for what
else is the Church but that company or congregation which is truly called and
selected out of the world? and from hence it has it name, for it is called
Ecclesia (...), from the calling thereof: unless therefore we be called we are
not members of the Church, and if we be out of the Church there is no
salvation; for our Savior gave himself for his Church alone, and he is the
Savior of his own body, Ephesians. 5.23.25. Act. 2.47.
as it is Ephesians. 5.23.25. and he adds daily unto the Church such as shall be
saved, as it is Act. 2.47.

Moreover, unless we be truly called we shall never be truly justified, and
without justification there is no glorification: Romans 8.30.
for this is the golden chain of our salvation, as appears Romans 8.30.

Lastly, we can never come unto Christ, nor communicate with him in any of his
benefits, nor receive any sanctifying and saving grace of Gods spirit, till by
the grace of God we are made partakers of this holy calling; for naturally
we are mere worldlings, destitute of all grace and goodness, and so we
remain till by this holy calling we are separated from the world, and
ingrafted into the body of Christ, by whose spirit we are quickened who were
dead in our sins, and have sanctifying graces begotten nourished and
increased in us.

Seeing therefore this our effectual calling is so necessary, let not Satan
persuade us to neglect it, neither let us when the Lord inuiteth us to this
royal feast pretend excuses, one that he must go see his farm, Matthew. 22.
Luke 14.
another that he must go try his oxen, a third that he must go about his
merchandise, and a fourth that he is hindered by a carnal marriage: for if we
will not come when the Lord inuiteth us, like unworthy guests we shall be shut
out of the doors, and not suffered to be partakers of this banquet of eternal
blessedness. Psalm. 95.7.8.
Whilst today we hear his voice let us not harden our hearts, for he has
not promised that he will call again to morrow, whilst now he stands at the
door and knocks and calls for entrance, let us hearing his voice open the
door of our hearts, that he may come in and sup with us and we with him;
Revel. 3.20.
for if unkindly we deny him entertainment, we can have no assurance that he
will return again to such churlish and ungrateful hoasts. In a word, seeing
the Lord passing by many other in the world makes choice of us, calling and
inuiting us to the participation and fruition of eternal blessedness and
happiness, let no worldly business, though it seem as necessary as the
burying of our dear father, Matthew. 8.21.
hinder us from harkening, and obeying this heavenly call; let no transitory
trifle stay us from coming to God, when he offreth to make us good assurance
of his royal kingdom: for though many things be convenient, yet one thing is
necessary, and thrice happy are they which make choice of the better part.

Satan's temptations whereby he moves us to neglect the means of our
effectual calling.
But it is impossible that ever we should be truly called, unless we carefully
use the means when the Lord offreth them unto us, and attentively listen unto
the Lords voice when he inuiteth us to come unto him: and therefore Satan
labors, not so much to persuade us that our vocation is in a thing
unnecessary unto salvation, seeing this is manifestly repugnant to plain
testimonies of scriptures, as to move us to neglect the means whereby we are
called, namely the ministry of Gods word: partly working upon our inbred
corruption, which not conceiving the things of God condemns them of
foolishnes, and not being delighted with those things which it understands
not, they seem irksome and tedious; and partly enticing us with the
commodities and pleasures of the world, which are more pleasant to carnal men
than their meat and drink, he causes us to spend that time in our earthly
businesses or vain delights, which we should bestow in the hearing of Gods
word, whereby we should be effectually called, that is, separated from the
world, and ingrafted as lively members into the body of Christ Jesus.

Motives to persuade to the diligent hearing of Gods word. The first motive.
Let us therefore strongly arm our selves against this temption, as being most
pernicious unto our own souls: and to this end let us briefly consider of
some reasons, whereby we may be stirred up diligently to frequent Gods holy
assemblies, to be made partakers of this heavenly embassage. First therefore
were are to know, that the ministry of the word is Gods own ordinance, which
he has instituted and ordained for the gathering together of the Saints, and
building the body of his Church, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
as appears Ephesians. 4.11.12. Neither does he use ordinarily any other means
(especially where this is to be had) for the true conversion of his children,
and for the working of the sanctifying graces of his spirit in them. And
therefore though he could by extraordinary means, have sufficiently instructed
the Eunuch in the ways of salvation, yet he would not, but rather uses his
own ordinance, and sends Philip to preach unto him, Act. 8. Though he could
have illuminated the eyes and understanding of Paul, Act. 8. Act. 9.6.17.
by the immediate work of his spirit, yet he chose rather to send him to
Ananias, Act. 9.6.17. Though he could by the ministry of his Angel, have
sufficiently infourmed Cornelius in things necessary to salvation, yet he
would not offer so great disparagement to his own ordinance, Act. 10.5.6.
and therefore he causes him to send for the Apostle Peter, Act. 10.5.6. And
therefore if we would have any assurance, of our effectual calling and true
conversion unto God, let us with all care all diligence hear the word of God
preached unto us.

The second motive.
Secondly, let us consider that it is even God himself, who speaks by the
mouths of his Ambassadors, and that they come not in their own names but in
Christ's stead, to entreat us that we would be reconciled unto God, 2. Cor.
5.20.
as it is 2. Cor. 5.20; that though they be but earthen vessels, yet they
bring from the world, and is yet hid to those that perish, 2. Cor. 4.7.
2. Cor. 4.7. And hence it is that the Prophets, being to pronounce their
prophecies, still begin with, The word of the Lord, and, Thus says the Lord;
and God himself sending Jeremy to preach, says, that he had put his words
into his mouth, Iere. 1.9. Iere. 1.9.
Whosoever therefore refuse to hear the word of God preached, refuse to hear
the Lord himself, as our Savior plainly affirms Luke 10.16. He that hears
you hears me, Luke 10.16.
and he that despises you despises me; and what hope can they have of coming
unto God, who cannot endure to hear his voice calling them unto him?

The third motive. 2. Cor. 5.18.
the titles which are given unto the word in the Scriptures, may serve as
strong arguments to move us carefully to hear the same: for it is called the
ministry of reconciliation, whereby we are reconciled unto God, 2. Cor. 5.18.
and therefore without it, there being no other ordinary means of
reconciliation, we remain still Gods enemies. It is called the Gospel of
peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
Ephesians. 6.15. without which we have neither peace with God, nor the peace of
conscience; It is called the word of grace, Act. 14.3, and 18.32, because it is
the means whereby the Lord deriueth unto us his grace and mercy, Act. 14.3.
and all the spiritual graces of his sanctifying spirit; Phil. 2.16. Act.
13.26.
It is called the word of life, Phil. 2.16. and the word of salvation, Act.
13.26. because it is the means whereby we are saved out of the hands of
spiritual enemies, and are certainly assured of everlasting life and
happiness; Matthew. 13.44.
It is called the kingdom of God, Matthew. 13.44. because thereby we are
brought, first into the kingdom of grace, and afterward into the kingdom of
glory; It is that heavenly seed whereby we are begotten unto God, in which
respect the ministers thereof are called spiritual fathers, 1. Cor. 4.15.
1. Cor. 4.15. and therefore without it we can never be regenerated and borne
unto God; It is the food of our souls, even milk for babes, 1. Cor. 3.2.
Heb. 5.12.
and strong meat for men of ripe years, 1. Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.12. whereby we
are nourished unto everlasting life: and therefore let us not refuse this
heavenly food like waiward children when our heavenly father offreth it unto
us, for so our souls being hunger-starued, nothing can follow but eternal
death and destruction; It is the physic of our souls, whereby being sick in
sin they are cured and restored: for as Christ is our heavenly physician, so
is his word the potion which he gives to purge us from our corruptions, and
the preservative which confirms us in health, and preserves us from the
leprous infection of sin, yea this physic is so sovereign, that though with
Lazarus were have lien dead in our graves four days, that is, continued long
in our natural corruptions, yet this physic being applied will raise us up
to newness of life; and therefore those who neglect this divine physic, are
subject to all infection of sin, and being infected can never attain to
their health again. It is the square and rule of our lives, from which we must
not decline neither on the right hand nor on the left, Deuteronomy. 5.32.
Deuteronomy. 5.32. and therefore without it our works must needs be crooked in Gods
sight. It is a lantern to our feet, Psalm. 119.105.
and a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119.105, whereby we are guided in the ways
of holiness and righteousness which lead us to everlasting happiness, which
being taken away we shall walk in darkness, and be every step ready to fall
into sin and eternal destruction. It is the sword of the spirit, wherewith we
defend our selves and offend our spiritual enemies, Ephesians. 6.17.
Ephesians. 6.17; which being neglected, or not skilfully used, we shall lie open to
all thrusts and blows, and be easily overcome. In a word, it is profitable for
all uses, as being the only ordinary means ordained to convey unto us all
good, and to preserve us from all evil: and therefore great folly it is for
any man to contemn it, or to prefer before it vain pleasures, or trifling
commodities, which also are momentanie and uncertain.

The fourth motive.
the manifold benefits which by the word of God are derived unto us, may serve
as a strong argument to stir us up to the diligent and careful hearing
thereof; for first thereby we become true members of the Church, out of which
there is no salvation, and being ingrafted into the body of Christ, are made
partakers of all his benefits. And this appears Ephesians. 4.11.12, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
where the Apostle shows that the end of the ministry is for the gathering
together of the saints, and for the edification of the body of Christ. A
notable example whereof we have Act. 2.41. where, Act. 2.41.
by one sermon three thousand souls were added to the Church. Secondly, hereby
we are regenerated and begotten unto God, and therefore in this respect Paul
professes himself, the father of the Corinthians 1. Cor. 4.15. 1. Cor. 4.15.
and without this regeneration and new birth, none shall ever enter into the
kingdom of God, as our Savior shows us, Ioh. 3.5. Thirdly, Ioh. 3.5.
unless the blind eyes of our understandings be illuminated, we shall fall
into a laborinth of errors, and never find the hard way which leads to Gods
kingdom; but the word of God is that heavenly light, which shines unto us who
sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, guiding our feet into the way of
peace, as it is Luke 1.79. and in this respect, Luke 1.79. Matthew. 5.14. Act.
13.47.
Gods ministers ars called the light of the world, Math. 5.14. Act. 13.47.
because, as lights, they guide and direct men in the ways of salvation, and
reveal unto them the great light, even the Sun of righteousness, Christ
Jesus. Fourthly, through faith we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. Neither is it
possible, Ephesians. 2.8.
that without says we should ever attain unto salvation, for this is the
condition of all the promises of the Gospel, without which we cannot have any
assurance of them, Ioh. 1.12. and 3.16.18. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
Ioh. 1.12. and 3.16.18. Moreover, whatsoever is not done of faith is sin,
Romans 14.23. And without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. But
the preaching of the word is the ordinary means of begetting faith in us, as
appears Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
and hearing by the word of God. And therefore whosoever contemn or neglect
the hearing of Gods word, they refuse the means of faith; and being without
faith, all they do is sin, and cannot please God, neither can they ever have
any assurance of Gods promises, or their own salvation. Lastly, by the hearing
of Gods word we are saved, and therefore Gods ministers in this respect are
called Sauers of the people, 1. Tim. 4.16. Take heed unto thy self and unto
learning; 1. Tim. 4.16.
continue therein, for in so doing thou shall both save thy self and them that
hear thee; because they are the ministers of God, whom he uses as means, and
instruments in working the salvation of the elect: and therefore seeing by the
preaching of the word, we are made members of the body of Christ, regenerated
and enlightened; seeing thereby we attain unto faith, and everlasting salvation,
let us as we love our own souls, diligently hear the word, and not suffer
our selves to be hindered from frequenting the holy assemblies of Gods saints,
with every vain pleasure and base commodity.

Satan's temptations, whereby he vvithdraweth men from the diligent hearing of
Gods word, answered.
that though the word preached be thus necessary and profitable at sometimes
when we are at leisure, yet this should be no reason to move us to neglect our
business, or abandon our pleasures; for when once by the hearing thereof we are
converted, enlightened with the knowledge of Gods true religion, and endued with
faith, it is sufficient if we but seldom hear it; for what in substance can
we learn, which we have not already learned, or what can the preacher teach
us, which we do not know as well as he? Against which temptation, which is so
common and pernicious, it behooves every christian most carefully to arm
himself; and to this end let us know, first that this neglect of Gods word is
a manifest sign that such are not as yet truly converted, nor endued with any
measure of saving knowledge and true faith; Ioh. 8.47. and 10.27.
for whosoever are of God hear his word, Ioh. 8.47; and all Christ sheep
hear his voice and follow him, as it is Ioh. 10.3.4.27. Whosoever have
attained unto knowledge, faith, and the rest of the graces of Gods sanctifying
spirit, they will be so ravished with the excellency of them, that it is not
possible for them to content themselves with a small measure, but still they
will labor to grow from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, from one
grace to another, till they become perfect men in Christ. And as those who have
but once tasted of some delicious meat, are not satisfied therewith, but
again and again feed upon it if easily they may come by it, because their
taste is exceedingly delighted therewith; so if ever we did but truly taste of
this heavenly Manna, and spiritual food of our souls, the word of God, we
would not rest so contented, but when opportunity is offered, we would often
feed upon it, until our souls were fully satisfied, and nourished unto
perfect strength; 1. Cor. 12.13.
and forasmuch as so long as we continue here, our knowledge is but in part and
our faith weak, and Gods graces but in small measure, therefore we would
continually feed on this heavenly nourishment, to the end of our lives, that
thereby our knowledge may be increased, our faith strengthened, and all other
graces confirmed and multiplied in us. But if on the otherside we loath this
heavenly Manna, it is a manifest sign, we never tasted thereof in truth, or
that our souls are exceeding sick in sin, which makes them that they
cannot relish this dainty and delicious food, and that we have not
knowledge, faith, or any grace begotten in us, neither that our selves are
begotten unto God. For as the child being begotten and conceived, does
presently draw nourishment from the mother; and the bigger it waxes, the more
it desires till it come unto perfect age and strength: so as soon as the
graces of Gods spirit are begotten in us by the preaching of the word, they
draw nourishment from their spiritual mother, the Church; and the stronger they
wax in grace, the more earnestly they desire a greater pittance till they
become perfect men in Christ. And therefore where there is no desire of this
food, there is no regeneration nor new birth.

Gods word, the food of our souls, often to be received.
Moreover the word of God is the food of our souls, whereby we are nourished,
and the graces of Gods spirit confirmed and increased in us; and therefore it
is not sufficient to eat of this food once or twice, but continually, even as
often as the Lord calls us to this spiritual banquet. For as the body will
wax faint, and quickly perish, unless that which wastes away be continually
supplied by nourishment: so will the soul languish and wax faint in
spiritual graces, unless it be often nourished with this heavenly Manna. Let
not therefore Satan persuade us, that seldom hearing of Gods word is
sufficient, whereas this banquet is often provided; for though in the time of
scarcity by the extraordinary blessing of God, we may go with Elias forty
days in the strength of one meal, yet if we feed no oftener when the Lord
grants unto us plentiful provision of the spiritual food, our souls will
be hungerstarued. Neither let our often receiving of this heavenly nourishment,
cause us with the unthankful Israelits to loath it, or like wayward children,
or impacient sick patients, spit it out of our mouths again; for if our
appetites be thus cloyed through a surfeit of satietie, surely we are to fear,
least the Lord who is a cunning physician, will prescribe us a long fast, till
we have recovered our stomachs, as he threatens Amos 8.11. I will send a
famine in the land, Amos. 8.11.
not a famine of bread nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the word of the
Lord. And then we shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the
East shall we run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord and shall not
find it.

That we should often hear, though we had sufficient knowledge.
though it should be granted that we had attained unto such a measure of
knowledge, that we should need no more, yet are there many reasons why we
should continually hear Gods word with as great diligence as ever we did; for
the end of our hearing is not only to know, but also to practice; not only to
inform our judgments, but also to reform our affections; not only to beget
the graces of Gods spirit in us, but also to nourish and increase them; not
only to teach us what we should do, but also to stir us up to the doing
thereof; and the word of God is not only a light for our feet to show us the
way, but also a prick in our sides to make us go in the way, and a bridle in
our mouths to keep us from wandering; it is not only profitable to teach,
but to improve, to correct and instruct in righteousness. That the man of God
may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works, 2. Tim. 3.16.
as it is, 2. Tim. 3.16. it is not only profitable for doctrine, but for
edification, exhortation and consolation, as appears, 1. Cor. 14.3. And
therefore it is not sufficient to come once or twice to the assemblies of Gods
saints, 1. Cor. 14.3.
but we must above all things desire with the prophet David, that we may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of our life, Psalm. 27.4.
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple, Psalm. 27.4. For
though our knowledge be never so great, yet so long as we have any sin
hanging on, or any grace imperfect in us, we had need to be continual hearers
of Gods word, for the suppressing of the one and perfecting of the other.

CHAP. XIX. Satan's temptation, whereby he persuades men that the Scriptures
are not Gods word, answered.
The temptation.
to the end he may move them to neglect the hearing of Gods word, or though
they do hear it, to reject it through unbelief, he thus frames. What folly
is it to take such pains in hearing the scripture, and what madness is it so
steadfastly to believe it, seeing thou know not whether it be Gods word, or
the subtle devise of man's brain, to keep the people in awe, and to restrain
them from such secret faults, as other humane laws ratified and confirmed with
temporal and outward punishments and rewards cannot keep them from; because
the laws of princes cannot (no more than the lawgiuers themselves) either fore
see, prevent or punish any faults and offenses, which are not open and
manifest? why should thou thereby be moved to forsake thy delightful
sins, and to embrace unpleasant godliness, to abandon thy pleasures, and to
undertake an austere and strict course of life, seeing thou know not whether
the scriptures be true or false, the word of the everlasting God or the
invention of mortal man.

The answer: that all religion depends upon the authority of the
Scriptures.
Against which temptation it behooves every man most carefully to arm himself,
as undermining the very foundation of all true religion; for take away the
authority of the scriptures and you shall open a wide door to all carnal
worldlines, beastly epicurisme, and devilish atheism; they being the only
true rule of virtue, whereby we are directed to choose the good and refuse the
evil; the scepter of God whereby he rules all the subjects of his kingdom,
which being rejected we give over our selves to be ruled by the devil, and the
lusts of our own flesh; the light of our eyes without which we are blind and
walk in darkness; the food of our souls which being taken away, they
languish in all spiritual graces, and fall into miserable death and
destruction; and the sword of the spirit whereby we defend our selves, and
beat back our spiritual enemies, which being plucked out of our hand, we are
easily vanquished and led captive unto all sin and wickedness.

Reasons to prove that the scripture was indicted by Gods spirit. 1. The
antiquity of the scriptures.
And that we may be the better provided against this temptation, let us propound
some reasons whereby gainesayers may be convinced, and Gods children persuaded
of the truth and authority of the scripture. The first argument to prove the
scriptures to be written by the motion and revelation of Gods spirit, is the
antiquity thereof; for whatsoever religion is most ancient, that proceeds
from God: but the religion contained in the scriptures, is of all other most
ancient: and therefore God was the author thereof. The first part of this
reason is clear and manifest; for seeing man was created for Gods glory, to
the end he should worship and serve him, and could not perform acceptable
worship and service unto God, unless he revealed his will unto him; therefore,
that man might attain unto the end of his creation, it was necessary that the
Lord should from the beginning reveal unto him his true religion, whereby he
might know how to worship and serve him, according to his will. And
consequently, the first and most ancient religion is the true religion, which
proceeded from God; and all other are false and counterfeit, which are
disagreeing and repugnant hereunto, seeing Gods will is one and the same,
constant and immutable. The second part of this reason, namely that the
religion delivered in the scriptures is of all others most ancient, is of
undoubted truth; for it is within a few days as ancient as the world it
self, taking it beginning from man's creation, and so continuing in a constant
and unchangeable course unto this day. Now all other religions are but new and
vpstart in comparison hereof, taking their beginnings diverse thousand years
since the creation; yea even the Gods themselves which they worship (which
intruth were men like themselves) had their beginning for the most part, long
since the time of Abraham, as their own histories manifestly declare. Neither
did any other religion of the heathen continue one and the same; for that which
one received another rejected, that which one confirmed another changed, and
time has worn them all out, leaving scarce any small remnants or relics of
them. And therefore all other religions, saving that which is delivered in the
scriptures, are false and counterfeit; and this only the truth of God.

2. Reasons taken from the purity and perfection of the Scriptures.
Secondly, the purity and perfection of the scriptures, do evidently show that
they are the word of God, indicted by his holy spirit; for they manifest unto us
the only true God, and propound him alone unto us, to be worshipped,
expressing also the manner and means of his service, from which we must not
decline on the right hand, or on the left: but all other religions teach us
either to worship many Gods, which is a thing absurd in reason, and contrary
to the light of nature, as diverse of the wisest philosophers well discerned; or
to worship the true God not according to his revealed will, but according to
their false imaginations, and erroneous superstitions. Now, nature, reason, and
experience it self teach us, that there is no wise King but will set down
rules and laws, according to which he will be served and obeyed, and not leave
it to every ones fantasy and vain imagination; and shall we think God less
wise then man, that he should not have a perfect law for the government of his
people, but suffer every man to follow his own blind conceit and ignorant
superstition?

3. Reasons taken from the sincerity of the writers of the Scriptures.
Thirdly, the sincerity and vprightnes of the writers of the holy scriptures,
is a manifest argument that they were guided and directed by Gods spirit; for
they deliver nothing in their own name, but in the name of the Lord, not
arrogating any praise unto themselves, but ascribing all glory unto God;
neither did they in their preachings or writings seek themselves, or aim at
any worldly benefit; nay rather they were content to be contemptible, subject
to scoffs and taunts, yea to offer themselves to death, and deprivation of all
worldly felicity, for the truth of God which they had delivered. And whereas
diverse of them might have lived in all pomp, if they would have followed the
times, winked at the sins of rulers, and suppressed the word of the Lord,
which they had received of him; they chose rather to suffer persecution, yea
death it self, then they would keep back any of the counsel of God, as
appears in the example of Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Michaeas, Zacharias,
A^nos, and many others of the Prophets, and Apostles. Neither do they in their
writings abstain only from seeking their own glory and praise, but also set
down those things which might tend to their discredit, to the end God might be
glorified in their infirmities, the truth confessed and preserved, and the
Church of God benefited, when by seeing the weakness of the most strong, they
are kept from presuming on their own strength, and from desparing in Gods
mercy. And thus Moses concealeth not the fall of our grand parents, the
drunkenness of Noah, the incest of Lot, the lie of Isaac, the whoredom of
Judas; nay which more nearly concerned him, he plainly reuealeth the horrible
and bloody sin of his grandfather Leuy, Genesis 49.5.6.
and Simeon, in murdering the Sichemites, and the curse of their father Jacob
pronounced against them for this their outrage, Genes. 49.5.6. which could not
in humane reason but be dishonorable to his stock and progeny, and offensive
to all who were of that tribe: furthermore he displayeth the corruptions,
imperfections, and often rebellions of that people whose salvation he
preferred before his own soul; he spares not to set down the Idolatry of
his own brothur Aaron, nor the sin of his sister Miriam in murmuring against
him, nor of Aarons sons in offering with strange fire. Nay he leaves the
remembrance of his own sin of impatiencie and unbelief, for which he was
debarred from entering into the land of promise, unto all posterities, as a
perpetual note of his own weakness and infirmity. Neither sought he at al
his own glory, and the advancement of his posterity, but the glory of God and
the good of the church, as may hereby appear in that when the government was
established in his hand, he does not make his own sons his successors, but
Joshua his servant, because God had so appointed it. The like may be said of
Jeremy, who has in his prophecy left record of his murmuring and
impatiencie, Ierem. 20.
Iere. 20; Of Jonas who has set down his own rebellion, punishment, and
repining against God; Of the apostle Paul who has not spared to call himself
a cruel persecuter and chief of al sinners. Now we know that naturally, we
desire to conceal the faults of our friends and kindred, and we count him an
evil bird that defiles his own nest; naturally we seek our own praise and
the advancement of our children, and can brook nothing less than that our
faults should be diuulged and become table talk: and therefore this detection
of their own and their friends falls and faults could not proceed from
nature, or any worldly policy, but from the direction of Gods spirit which
ouerruled their affections, and took away all partiality.

The fourth reason, taken from the concent of the diverse writers of the
Scriptures.
Fourthly, the wonderful concent which is amongst the diverse writers of the
Scriptures, does evidently show that they were guided and directed, by one and
the same spirit of God: for whereas it is truly said of other men, Quot homines
tot sententiae, Look how many men there be, and so many minds there be;
whereof it comes to pass that every writer almost varieth from another,
gainsaying and confuting that which another has delivered, that so out of the
ashes of their credit and reputation they may build a monument of their own
fame: the quite contrary is to be observed in the writers of the scriptures,
who successively writing one after another the space of diverse thousand years,
do notwithstanding consent together in the same truth, the later ratifying and
confirming that which the former had delivered without any alteration,
opposition or emulation, as though they were diverse hands set on work by the
same soul, which could not possibly come to pass unless they were ouerruled
by Gods spirit.

The sift reason, taken from the wonderful preservation of the Scriptures
against all oppositions.
Fifthly, the mighty oppositions which have been made by the devil and his
wicked impes against this doctrine of the scriptures, and yet al in vain, do
evidently show that they are Gods word and truth, the patronage and protection
whereof he has himself undertaken, above al humane reason and power. For has
not the devil in former times, and does he not still at this day oppose
himself against the word of. God? and do not his cursed instruments, ungodly
men, the more they exceed in wickedness the more bend their whole power
maliciously to oppugn this truth, persecuting the children of God, for this
cause only that they are professors and practizers of Gods true religion? And
whence proceeds this malicious opposition but from this, that the scriptures
are the word of God? and therefore as they hate and oppose themselves against
God himself, so also against his word; and because they know that by this
light their works of darkness are discovered, therefore they labor to put it
clean out, that their wickedness may not be descried; because it is pure and
holy they cannot endure it, they themselves being corrupt and wicked; because
it is the rule of justice which shows the crookednes of their ways, they
would, if they were able, burn it or cut it in pieces; because it is the word
by which they are condemned, therefore they loathe as much to hear it, as the
prisoner does abhor to hear the sentence of the just Judge. And hence
proceeds their opposition and oppugning of the holy scriptures with all
their force and might; but all in vain, for the more the devil and wicked men
rage against the word of God, the more by the almighty power of God supporting
it, the glory thereof appears and spreads it self over the face of the
earth; the more they labor to keep it down, the more it florisheth. And as
they who go about to stop the current of a mighty river, do but make it to
swell the higher and ouerflow all the country, whereas before it was contained
within the compass of his own banks: so when Satan and his wicked impes, do
seek to stay this heavenly stream which flows from Gods Sanctuary, and
labor might and maine to hinder the passage and propagation of Gods truth; the
more it spreads it self, maugre their malice, and ouerfloweth the whole
earth. And whence can the defeating and frustrating of this powerful violence
proceed, but from a greater power, even the power of God? for though all men
should combine themselves together, they were unable to resist Satan's rage, or
protect the word of God from utter ruin: only the Lord whose power is
omnipotent could thus uphold it, and make it prevail against all the power of
hell.

And as the Lord by preserving and defending the scriptures, from the beginning
unto this day, does evidently show that they are his own word and revealed will:
so also by punishing, even in this life, with utter ruin and destruction, al
those who have most violently and maliciously opposed themselves against it,
and persecuted the Saints of God for the profession hereof; as may appear
notably in the examples of Antiochus Epiphanes, Herod, Nero, Domitian,
Dioclesian, Julian the apostata and many others; who by their shameful and
horrible deaths testified and proved the scriptures to be the truth of God,
which they had oppugned and persecuted the whole course of their wicked lives.

The sixth reason taken from miracles.
which Satan himself cannot so much as imitate; as by giving the blind their
sight, raising the dead to life, turning back the course of the Sun in the
firmament, dividing the sea in two parts, and such like; which miracles were
wrought by the almighty power of God, to this end that the faithful might be
confirmed in the assurance of Gods truth, and the wicked convinced. But against
this, Satan will be ready to suggest, that there were never any such miracles
as are recorded in the scriptures. To which I answer, that these miracles were
not done in a corner, or in hugger mugger, but in the presence of great
multitudes; otherwise the Prophets and Apostles who were but mean and simple
men, should have labored in vain to have persuaded men, to have embraced
their doctrine and religion (especially being so contrary to humane wisdom,
and our natural disposition and affections) if they had only themselves
reported, or brought some few witnesses of their miracles wrought, and not
publikly showed them to all the people. Moreover, seeing this doctrine has had
so many enemies from the beginning, it is not probable but that they would have
exclamed, and written against the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, as
soon as they were published, for writing such things as were never done: but
amongst all those who have opposed themselves against the scriptures, there is
no man so impudent as to deny that such miracles were done, of which so many
were eyewitnesses: nay contrariwise the Heathen themselves, who neither knew
God nor his true religion, have made mention of them in their writings; and the
Jews who to this day withstand the work of redemption wrought by Christ, do
notwithstanding confess that such miracles were wrought by Christ and his
Apostles; neither in truth are they able to gainsay them, seeing they have
received this truth by tradition from their fathers: and therefore they are
driven to confess, that Christ was a great Prophet, though not the promised
Messiah.

who have sealed this truth with their dearest blood, The seventh reason, taken
from the testimony of Martyrs.
is a notable argument to assure us that it is indeed the word of God: for it
is not likely that so many would so constantly and cheerfully have suffered for
their profession, the most exquisite torments that wit and malice could invent,
if the spirit of God had not certainly assured them that it was the truth of
God, and if it had not supported them in suffering these torments above all
humane power and strength. And whereas it may be objected, that wicked men
have suffered also for their sects, opinions and heresies, we are to know that
there is great difference between them; first, because the number has been few
who have suffered for their several sects and heresies, but the Martyrs almost
innumerable who have suffered for the same truth; secondly, the same
cheerfulness, constancy and rejoicing in their sufferings has not bin in
them who have suffered for their errors, which has always been observed in
Gods Saints. And lastly, these heretics have always been confuted and
convinced of their errors and heresies before their sufferings, whereas Gods
Saints directed by his holy spirit, have stopped the mouths of their
adversaries with the wisdom of Gods word, which Satan himself cannot resist,
and through violent rage being vnconuicted have been led to the slaughter.

CHAP. XX. Other reasons to prove that the Scriptures were indicted by Gods
spirit, taken from the Scriptures themselves.
The eight reason, taken from the argument which they handle.
is the argument which they handle, and the end whereunto they tend. For the
subject whereof they entreat are the great works of the everliving God, how
he exercises his mercy toward his children in sustaining, defending, and
saving them from all their enemies, and his justice toward the wicked in
turning their counsels to foolishnes, in overthrowing their designs and
purposes, curbing in their rage and violence, and in punishing and destroying
them. Now if you consider and peruse all other writings in the world besides,
you shall find no such matter contained in them; for some labor in polishing
humane Arts; some set out large histories of the actions, counsels, success,
policies, enterprises and perturbations of men like themselves: so that at the
first sight we may know that they are indicted by the spirit of man, seeing
they are wholly spent in humane affairs, never intermedling with any
spiritual matter appertaining unto God. Moreover, the scriptures attribute the
governing and wise disposing of all things to Gods al-ruling providence, that
he may have the whole praise of his own works; as when they speak of some
famous victory, they do ascribe it neither to the wisdom of the Captain,
nor to the valor of the common soldier, but unto the Lord of hoasts alone;
neither do they make poems in the praise of Moses, Joshua, David, Ezechias, or
any other of the Kings and Leaders, but in the praise of the Lord, who by his
own strong arm has given his children victory over their enemies. Now
whence can this proceed but from the spirit of God inditing them, who contrary
to the nature of man which desires rather all praise himself, does move him
to refuse all glory attributed to himself, that all the praise may be
ascribed unto God? So when they speak of any benefit received by the Church,
they do not attribute it to worldly friends, their good fortune, or their own
industry and labor, but to the blessing of God proceeding of his mere mercy
and goodness toward them. And contrariwise, when they set down the
destruction of the wicked, they do not ascribe it to any want of their own
care and providence, nor to the malice or power of their enemies, nor to blind
chance, or other outward accident, but to the hand of God exercising his
judgments upon them, and punishing them for their sins. Now if you peruse
all other writings, you shall find that they aim at nothing less than Gods
glory; for some write to show their eloquence, others to extol their wits and
deep learning, others to advance the praise of mortal men above the clouds,
some for one end, and some for another, all aiming at their own praise,
pleasure or profit, never so much as once respecting Gods glory in their least
thought; and hence it is that setting down any victory they ascribe it to the
weakness or want of wit, providence or courage of the adverse part, or to the
fortitude of the Captains, the resolutenesse of the soldiers, the advantages
of the place, Sun, wind, and such like circumstances, in the mean time
excluding ye God of battles, as though he had no stroke in this business. So
likewise when they speak of any other affairs or accidents which fall out in
the government of the world, they ascribe all to outward circumstances,
inferior means and subordinate causes, as though God had given over the
government of the earth, and had committed the ruling of the stern to blind
fortune. Now whence can this exceeding difference proceed, that they should
altogether aim at the glory of God, and these wholly at the praise, pleasure,
and profit of man? that they should always ascribe the government and
disposing of all things to the wise providence of God, and these to outward
accidents, natural causes and inferior means? Surely because they were
indicted by the spirit of God, and therefore themselves are divine, sauouring
wholly of the author of them: and these by the spirit of man, and therefore al
contained in them is merely humane carnal and natural.

The ninth reason, taken from the style of the Scriptures.
The ninth reason may be taken from the style and manner of penning the
Scriptures, in which they much differ from all other writings whatsoever: for
whereas men in their writings affect the praise of flowing eloquence and
loftiness of phrase, the holy Ghost in penning the Scriptures has used great
simplicity and wonderful plainness, applying himself to the capacity of
the most unlearned: in which low and humble manner of speech, he does
notwithstanding set forth the deep wisdom of God, and the profound
mysteries of religion, the bottom whereof the most wise and learned in the
world can not search into: and under the veil of simple and plain speech,
there shines such divine wisdom and glorious majesty, that all the humane
writings in the world, though never so adorned with the flowers of eloquence,
and sharp conceits of wit and learning, cannot so deeply pearce the heart of
man, nor so forcibly work upon his affections, nor so powerfully incline his
will either to the embracing of that which is good, or avoiding of that which
is evil, as the word of God: and whence can this proceed but from the virtue,
power and wisdom of the spirit of God who is the author of them?

Moreover, we may observe in the style of the Scriptures, a maiesticall
authority above all other witings, which only beseems the glorious King and
sovereign commander of heaven and earth: for they speak in the same manner,
and inioyne the like obedience, to prince and people, rich and poor, learned
and unlearned, without any difference or respect of person; not using any
arguments, reasons, or persuasions, but absolutely commanding that duty which
is to be done, and forbidding that sin which should be left undone, and that
under the promise of everlasting life and blessedness, and the pain not of
the gallows, rack, or wheel, but of eternal death and damnation; and whom
beseems it to promise everlasting life, or to threaten euelrasting death, but
him only who is himself eternal and everlasting? and who has this absolute
authority of commanding all without any difference, but he who is Lord,
Creator and governor of the prince as well as the people? Lastly, this word of
God does not only extend it self to the outward actions and conversation,
requiring only the external obedience which is in fact and outward behavior,
which is the uttermost that humane laws respect, because the lawgiuers can see
no further; but the law of God requires especially the obedience of the heart,
and forbids not only consent to any evil, but even concupiscence and lust?
now who can make laws for the heart and conscience, or though he should be so
fond to make them, who could either reward the obedient, or punish the
disobedient, but God alone who searches the heart and reins? The style
therefore of the scriptures being peculiar unto themselves, showing majesty in
lowliness and meanness, an ouerruling power in persuading, without rendering
reason or bringing any argument besides absolute authority, and an universal
jurisdiction over all without difference or respect, and that as well in regard
of the secret thoughts as the outward actions, does manifestly show that they
are not the invention of man, but the word of God indicted by his holy spirit.

Why the Scriptures were penned in a simple lowly and plain style.
that if the Lord who is infinite in wisdom were the author of the
Scriptures, they would have excelled all humane writings in conceit of wit, and
excellency of phrase and style, as far as God excels man, whereas we see
that they are penned after a most simple plain and unpolished manner. To which
I answer, that it does not become a Prince to play the Orator when he sets
out an edict, nor to use Rhetorical figures and alluring persuasions when he
has to deal with his subjects, but rather peremptory commandments and
plain phrases, full of gravity and authority without all affectation; and
how much less should the chief commander of King and subject, use such a
style as sauoured any whit of humane eloquence, seeing, it better beseems his
majesty plainly to command, than to persuade, or allure with enticing
speeches? Secondly, the Scriptures were penned by the holy Ghost, not only for
the wise and learned, but also for the simple and ignorant: and therefore
howsoever the Lord in the profunditie of his wisdom, could have written in
such a lofty style as would have filled even the most learned with admiration,
yet he uses a simple easy style fit for the capacity of all, because it was
for the use of all, and necessary to salvation to be understood of all sorts
and conditions. As therefore he frames himself to our shallow capacity in
the penning of the Scriptures, and speaks not according to his unsearchable
wisdom, but after the manner of men, or else no man, no not the most wise and
learned could understand him: so he thought it fit to speak as well to the
capacity of the simple as the wise, because the knowledge of his word was no
less necessary to salvation to these than to the other; and in his mercy and
goodness he vouchsafed as well milk to the babe, as strong meat to those
who were come to more ripe years in knowledge and spiritual wisdom. At
which the wise and learned have no reason to be offended, seeing the salvation
of one is as dear to God as of another, and they may with greater facility
understand the Scriptures being plain and easy, which could not be understood
of the simple, if they were penned in a lofty eloquent phrase. And yet if they
examine the Scriptures in the balance of a true judgment, they may find food
therein contained fit for their own pallat and taste; for under this humility
they shall discern more majesty, under this simplicity more deep wisdom,
under this unpolished plainness more powerful persuasions to work upon and
incline the affections, than in all humane writings whatsoever. Thirdly, humane
eloquence and witty sharp conceits, are not only unfitting the grave
majesty of our heavenly King, but also needless in respect of the Scriptures
themselves; for what are they but Gods truth, and what is more agreeable and
beseeming truth, than plainness and simplicity? For what needs beauty the
help of painting, or a precious Diamond much art to polish it, seeing they are
glorious in their own nature? And what needs the truth of God, which in it
self shines clearly like the Sun in his chiefest brightness, the goodly
ornaments of humane eloquence which would but darken the beams thereof? Or
what needs that which is heavenly and divine, any help from that which is
earthly and carnal to commend it to man's judgment? No, no, the flowers of
Rhetoric and help of witty Sophistry, is more fit for Tullies orations,
whereby often times a good cause is made bad, and a bad one good, right wrong,
and wrong right, than for Gods divine truth, which like the Sun shines most
gloriously when it is bare and naked. Lastly, it is to be observed that the
Lord in his wisdom does manifest his power in weakness, his majesty in
baseness; and his wisdom in foolishnes, to the end that weakness baseness, and
folly, may serve as foiles to make his power, majesty, and wisdom appear to
us more glorious, though in truth in themselves they are infinite, and nothing
can be added to their excellency. But because we lie groueling on the earth,
and are ready to ascribe al to the inferior means, and nothing unto God:
therefore the Lord chooses weak and simple means, that his own power and
wisdom may be in them more manifest. For example, if the Lord had penned the
Scriptures in such an eloquent style as would have ravished the readers with
delight, we would like fools have stood admiring at the curious work of the
casket, and never opened it to look upon the precious jewel therein contained;
and have bin so much affected with the words, that in the mean time we would
have neglected the matter; but when this treasure is brought unto us but in an
earthen vessel, when this beautiful feature is clothed in mean attire, and
the divine wisdom of God set forth in an humble and simple style, we leave
shadows and behold the substance, neither do we rest in the outward letter,
but search after the inward truth. So also if the Lord had in the penning of
the Scriptures used enticing eloquence, or affected humane learning, men would
have been ready to have said, that by the force thereof so many were drawn or
enticed, to embrace religion and to spend their lives in Gods service; but when
as in outward show there is nothing but unpolished plainness and simple
rudeness, by which nevertheless the hearers understanding is more
enlightened, his will more powerfully inclined, his affections more strongly
ruled, than by all the eloquent persuasions which wit and learning can invent,
they are driven to confess that the wisdom of God is hidden under this
simplicity, his power under this outward weakness, and that the Scriptures have
their virtue and force, not from the enticing speech of man's wisdom and
excellency of words, but from the power and plain evidence of Gods spirit,
who was the author and inditer of them.

The tenth reason, taken from the Contents of the Scriptures, which in many
things are above the reach of humane reason.
to prove that the Scriptures are not the invention of man, but the word of God
indicted by his spirit, is, that many things contained therein are above the
reach of humane understanding, and so deep that man's wisdom and reason
cannot conceive them nor search them to the bottom. For example, though all
men know by the light of nature that there is a God, seeing this truth is
written in large characters in the fair volume of the creatures, so as none
can behold them but he must needs know and acknowledge it; yet that this God
being one in nature should be distinguished into three persons, the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, without any division of substance or confusion of
persons, man's reason cannot conceive, though the Lord has revealed it, and
much less could invent it seeing now it cannot comprehend it. So, that the
world and the creatures therein contained were created, the light of nature
sufficiently teaches us, seeing they have an end and therefore had a
beginning, a time of corruption and therefore a time of generation also, and as
is the nature of every several part, so is the nature of the whole universal;
seeing also one effect brings us to his cause, and that cause to a superior
cause, and that to another until we come to the highest and supreme cause
which is God, who having his being of himself gives being to all things: but
that all this goodly order should be brought out of confusion, this light out
of darkness, that al these excellent creatures should be created of nothing, by
the alone word of their omnipotent Creator, it passes the conceit of humane
reason, and therefore his invention also. So, that we are wretched and full of
misery, not only our reason but even our senses can teach us; but how we
should be freed out of this misery and attain unto everlasting happiness, is
a thing above the reach of man's wisdom. And that we are unable to perform
those duties we ought, and leave those sins undone which we should omit, and
by both offend God, the law of nature written in our hearts, and the checks and
fears which every one feel in their own consciences do sufficiently teach
us: but the means whereby we should be reconciled unto God whom we have
offended, as they are set down in his word, namely, that the second person in
Trinity should take upon him man's nature and be borne of a pure virgin, that
in this nature he should for us perform perfect obedience to Gods law, and
suffer affliction, misery, yea death it self to reconcile us to his Father
and procure his love, to free us from everlasting death and damnation, and to
purchase for us everlasting life and happiness, and that his obedience and
merits should become ours, by reason of that union whereby he becomes our
head and we his members, which union is made principally by his spirit, and
instrumentally by faith, do all seem strange, yea absurd to humane reason;
and therefore the Apostle says, that the natural man perceives not the things
which are of the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned; as it is 1. Cor. 2.14. And if he cannot know and
conceive them when in the preaching of the Gospel they are revealed unto him;
how much less could he invent them having never heard of them? or who can
imagine that in policy he would have devised such a religion to keep the world
in awe and obedience, as to every worldly man seems foolish and absurd, yea
contrary to his nature? For what can be more against the hair, than to deny
our selves and to take up our cross and follow Christ? than to reject our own
works and worthiness, and to seek for justification in Christ's death and
obedience alone? than to imagine that manifold afflictions and great misery,
is the high way that leads to glory and endless felicity? and that
pleasures, honors, and riches, make us unfit to enter into Gods kingdom? And
therefore seeing the doctrine of the Scriptures are not only above the reach
of humane reason, but also flat contrary to natural wisdom, it plainly
proves that they are not the invention of mortal man (for then the effect
would be like the cause) but the word of the everliving God, which sauoureth
of his hidden and spiritual wisdom.

The eleventh reason, taken from the prophecies of holy Scriptures.
to prove that the Scriptures were indicted not by man but by Gods spirit, are
the prophecies therein contained, which were fulfilled in their due time; as
that there should be enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
Serpent, and that the promised seed Christ Jesus should vanquish the devil;
that the posterity of Cham should be accursed; that Abraham should have a
son by his wife Sarah, when they were both old, and she past the time of
childbearing; that his posterity should be bond men in Egypt four hundred
years, foretold before he had Isaac of whom they came; that Iudaes posterity
who was but the fourth son, should have sovereignty and dominion over the
rest; that the scepter should not be taken from him till the Messiah should
come; that the tribe of Ephraim should excel the tribe of Manasses; that he
who should ree difie Jericho after it was destroyed, Josh. 6.26.
should be punished with the death of his sons, as appears Josh. 6.26,
which was five hundred years after fulfilled in Hiel the Bethelite, 1. King.
16.34.
as it is 1. King. 16.34; that Josias by name should destroy idolatry and the
idolaters, and restore the true religion, 1. King. 13.1.2. 2. King. 22. and 23.
foretold almost 300 years before he was borne, 1. King. 13.1, 2. 2. King. 22.
and 23; that the people of Israel should be led captive into Babylon, and be
set free by Cyrus by name, Esa. 44.26.27.28.
prophesied of above an hundred years before Cyrus was borne, Esa. 44.26, 27,
28. And to these we may add the prophecies of Jeremy, concerning the taking of
Jerusalem and their captivity into Babylon, and the time of seventy years
limited for their abiding there; the prophecies of Daniel concerning the four
Monarchies, which are so clear and perspicuous as if he had seen them in his
time; the prophecy of Christ concerning the destruction of Jerusalem; the
prophecies contained in the Revelation of S. John, many of which we see
fulfilled in our time, especially that concerning the Antichrist of Rome, his
manner of coming, his increasing, his works, seat and place of residence;
and which are so manifestly and plainly described, as if the Apostle had
written an history and not a prophecy. Which plainly proves that the
Scriptures were not devised by man, but penned by the inspiration of Gods
spirit, who by his provident wise dome foreseeth all things, and by his wise
providence rules all things.

That the Scriptures were penned by the holy men of God which are in them
mentioned, and not forged in their names by some politician.
that we are not able to prove that these prophecies were written by any such
Prophets and holy men as are mentioned in the Scriptures, so long before the
things contained in them were done, and that for ought we know they might be
forged and foysted in by some cunning fellow after the things were come to
pass. The like objections also he makes against the rest of the Scriptures,
as that either there was not any such Moses, or if he were, that he was but
some cunning fellow who writ of miracles and wonders never done, to gain
credit to his law which he had published; or if he wrote nothing but truth in
his time, yet we know not whether these books which go under his name are
perfect as he left them, or depraved and corrupted, having many things altered,
added, and detracted, according to the pleasure of those who have had the
keeping of them. And so also he obiecteth against the other parts of holy
Scriptures. To this I answer, that as it were great absurdity to call in
question the writings of Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch and other Heathen men whether
they were penned by any such men or no, because the next age received them from
the authors themselves, and delivered them to the next ensuing, and so by
tradition from hand to hand they are come unto us; so it is no less absurdity
to call into question whether the scriptures were written by the Prophets and
Apostles who lived in their several times, seeing the Church has received
them from time to time, and delivered them to their successors to this day.
Moreover, the law published by Moses was not in secret or in a corner before
some few witnesses, but in the presence of six hundred thousand men, besides
women and children, and the strange miracles and works of God full of wonder,
which he wrought for the better confirmation of his law given, were done and
performed in the presence of many thousands, who made relation of them to
their posterity, and they to theirs to this day. Neither was it easy to be
corrupted, altered or changed, seeing the lawgiuer did straightly charge all men
that they should not add, detract, or alter any thing upon pain of present
death in this world, and everlasting death in the life to come; who therefore
would incur the danger of such fearful punishment for the satisfying of his
fruitless fantasy? Moreover, this book of the law was safely kept in the
Tabernacle, and after in the Temple in the Arc which was placed in the holy of
holiest, and diverse authentical copies written out of it for every one of the
twelve tribes, which were every Sabbath day read and expounded in their
Sinagogues; yea so familiar were these writings with the Jews, that they were
written in their houses, and upon their garments, so as it was not possible for
any man to falsify them but it would presently be espied. Yea (will the
tempter say) but though they could not be depraved or corrupted, yet they might
at first be invented by some more subtle than the rest, and so thrust upon
men under the authority of God himself, as being the writings of his Prophets
and Apostles. To which I answer, that there is no probability of truth in
this objection; for I would feign know in what age this man should write. In
the time of Moses? how then could he write the history of the Judges who
succeeded him? In the time of the Judges? how then could he write the history
of the Kings? What then? could he write these things in the time of the Kings,
and so feign a relation of such things as went before? why then it is
necessary that he should have lived in the time of the last Kings, or else he
could not have penned their history also: but before this time, there were
many copies abroad of the Scriptures in diverse nations, by reason that the
Jews were scattered abroad through their captivity, where they as constantly
professed their religion as in their own country. Besides, if these writings
had been fained, in what age could they come to light but men diligently
inquiring into them, as being matters importing no less than their eternal
salvation or condemnation, would have found them counterfeit? For if they had
been penned in the same age wherein the things were done, who would have
believed them, if they did not assuredly know that they contained nothing but
certain truth? If in an after age, who would have straight subscribed unto
them, unless they had by tradition from their ancestors bin assured that such
things were done in former times? Furthermore, it is not probable but that the
Jews would have made mention of such an author if they had known him; or if
they had by some accident found them written in this form, it is not likely
that they would have been so simple as to have built their faith so firmly
upon them, that they would rather choose to suffer all torments than be brought
to deny any one part of them.

Antiochus, That the books of holy Scripture perished not in the time of
Antiochus.
the books of the Scriptures were by his tyranny and extreme cruelty wholly
abolished, and these which we have, afterward invented by the Jews to grace
their religion. To which I answer, that this objection is so sotrishly
foolish, that it sauoureth not of common sense, much less of any force of
reason, for seeing now there were extant almost innumerable copies of the
Scriptures, what means could be invented by with and rage utterly to suppress
them, especially seeing the Jews made far more precious account of them than
of their lives, so that for the profession of this truth they were content to
suffer even in this tyrants time cruel deaths? Besides, if they had been all
destroyed and abolished in his time, how came it to pass that presently after
his death they were again (as it were) pulled out of the ashes and revived? Or
how could others be put in their place, seeing innumerable men lived before and
after his persecution, who had the sight and perusing of the same books before
they were suppressed, and afterward again when they came to light? Lastly,
though it should be granted that all the books of holy Scriptures had bin
utterly defaced in all the dominions of Antiochus, yet this were nothing for the
tempters purpose: for the Jews were now scattered far and wide, and had their
Sinagogues and schools in sundry nations where he had no authority; and
therefore though he had destroyed all the copies of the Scriptures in all places
of his kingdom, yet there were many in other places where he bare no sway.
Neither were they now in the Hebrew tongue alone, but also translated into the
Greek by the 70 Interpreters, at the request of Ptolomey Philadelphus, and the
translation carefully kept in his Library long before the time of this
Antiochus. By all which it is more then manifest, that the Scriptures are the
same which were penned by the Prophets and holy men of God, inspired with his
divine spirit, confirmed with so many and wonderful miracles, and sealed with
the blood of innumerable Martyrs.

To this which has been said, I might add the testimony of heathen writers,
who in their several times have in their writings made mention of the most
principal things which are contained in the story of the Bible: but as we need
not the help of a candle to see the sun, which more sufficiently shows it
self by his own light: so this glorious light of Gods truth is in it self so
clear and manifest, that it needs not the testimony of Infidels to confirm
it, unless it be to those who far exceed them in infidelity. And that
noble learned and religious Gentleman, Philip Mornay in his books of the
Trunesse of Christian Religion, has eased me of this labor, from whose never
wasting candle I have borrowed the chiefest part of my light in the handling of
this question.

CHAP. XXI. That the testimony of Gods spirit, does only persuade us, that the
Scriptures are the word of God.
ANd these are the arguments whereby all gainesaiers may be convinced, who deny
the Scriptures to be the word of God, and his infallible truth; but though
they are sufficient for the conviction of all opposers, and for stopping the
mouths of all Atheists, Epicures and mere naturals; yet notwithstanding, not
any of these, nor al these are in themselves sufficient, to beget faith in the
heart of any, or to persuade him with full assurance, to believe that the
Scriptures are the word of God, unless there be adjoined unto the^ the
testimony of Gods spirit, which does not only convince, but also thoroughly
persuade us of this truth; and this alone in it self is all-sufficient, though
we never heard any other of the former reasons, for the working of faith in us,
and a full persuasion of this truth.

That all other arguments are without this insufficient.
hereby it is more then manifest, in that not many wise, nor many learned in
the world do believe the Scriptures, which is the cause why they do not
submit themselves to the obedience thereof; whereas if faith might be wrought
in men by force of arguments or natural reason, Matthew. 11.25.
they who best conceive them would most easily be persuaded by them: but
contrariwise, we see that these things are hid from the wise and prudent, and
are revealed unto babes, not by means of natural reason, but by the testimony
of Gods spirit. For naturally we are all blind in spiritual things, neither
can the natural man discern the things of the spirit of God, neither can he
know them, 1. Cor. 2.14.
because they are spiritually discerned, as it is 1. Cor. 2.14. and therefore,
though the Scriptures be the glorious light of Gods truth, shining as bright as
the sun in the firmament, to those whose eyes are enlightened with Gods
spirit; yet to those who continue in their natural blindness, and were never
anointed with the precious eye-salue of Gods spirit, this glorious light
appears not, no more than the sunshine to those who want their sight, and
hence it is that they grope at noone days. And as the poor woman, of whom
Seneca speaks, being suddenly in the night stricken with blindness,
desired the next day to vndraw the curtains and open the windoes that she
might see, whereas the cause of her not seeing was not want of light, but want
of eyes: So these men who are stricken with natural blindness, complain that
they cannot see the glorious light of Gods truth shining in his word, and
therefore desire to have it cleared by taking away the clouds of objections
which seem to shadow it, and by adding unto it the light of humane reason; but
the truth is, the fault is not in this glorious light, which always shines,
but in their blindness who cannot discern it; and yet such is the pride,
self love, and vain opinion, which every one has of his own gifts, that
they will sooner imagine that the sun wants light, than they eyes to look
upon it.

Other arguments convince, but not persuade.
so that they have nothing to object, and perhaps they may be brought to have
a good opinion of the Scriptures, and to a doubtful conceit that they are the
word of God in deed; they may with the two Disciples which travailed to Emaus,
when they hear the Scriptures interpreted, have their hearts burn and throb
within the^, imagining that which they hear, to be more than the word of
mortal man; and as the blind man in the Gospel, when his eyes were a little
illuminated by our Savior, discerned men, not as men, but as moving trees, so
they may in some confused manner know and acknowledge the Scriptures to be the
word of God; but before Christ has fully opened their eyes, and by the
precious eye-salue of his spirit has dispelled their natural blindness, they
will never certainly be persuaded nor assuredly believe, that the Scriptures
are not the word of man, but the infallible truth of God. For it is not in man's
power to beget faith in any, neither is it grounded upon any natural reasons or
persuasions, but it is the supernatural gift of Gods spirit, who illuminates
our understanding, and inclines our will, so that we see, and steadfastly
believe that truth which it delivers, as appears Ephesians. 2.8. 2. These.
1.11. Ephesians. 2.8. 2. These. 1.11.


And when we have this testimony of Gods spirit in our hearts, it will
certainly persuade us of this truth, Gods spirit fully persuades us of this
truth. 1. Cor. 2.15.
though we had no other reason: as appears by testimonies of Scripture, and
by our own experience. For the first it is said, 1. Cor. 2.15. That the
spiritual man, that is, he who is endued with Gods spirit, judges all things,
and yet himself is judged of no man. So 1. John 2.27. But the annoynting which
ye received of him, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
dwells in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the
anointing teaches you all things, and verse 20. Verse. 20.
But ye have an ointment him that is holy, and ye have known all things. Where
by he understands the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.10.12.
which searches all things, even the deep things of God, which spirit is
given unto us that we might know the things which are given unto us of God: as
it is 1. Cor. 2.10.12. So our Savior promises to send a comforter unto us,
Ioh. 16 7.13.
as it is John 16.7.13. And in deed who is more fit then the spirit of God to
confirm us in the assurance of that truth, which he himself has indicted and
inspired? or who can better judge of the things of God then the spirit of God?
who can better inform us in this truth then he who is the spirit of truth?
And therefore if we have the testimony of Gods spirit in us, we shall need no
other witness, nor any reasons invented by man's wit, to confirm us in this
truth, that the Scriptures are the word of the everliving God.

Gods spirit persuades us of this truth by our own feeling and experience.
For whosoever are endued with Gods spirit, do also by their own experience
sensibly feel by the effects and operation of the scriptures in themselves,
that they are not the word or invention of mortal man, but the word of the
almighty and most wise God: for when they perceive that the eyes of their
understanding are illuminated, which before were blind and full of darkness;
that their will is inclined to the obedience of Gods commandments, which
before was stubborn and rebellious; that their heart is become soft and
tender, so as like the heart of Josias it melts at the preaching of the law,
which before was obdurate and more hard then the Adamant; that their conscience
which was dead and seared, is now ready to check and control them when they
commit any sin, and to allow and approve all good actions; that their
affections are cast in a new mould, so that whereas heretofore they loved
nothing but the world and worldly things, now their love is fixed on the Lord
and those things that are above; and whereas nothing was more odious in former
times then virtue and godliness, nothing more pleasing then finne and the
delights thereof, now contrariwise, nothing is more loathsome then sin,
nothing more sweet and delightful, then obedience to Gods commandments; and
when they further consider, that this great alteration is made in them only by
the hearing of Gods word preached, they need no further persuasions, nor other
instructor to teach them, that the scriptures were penned by the divine
operation of Gods spirit, seeing the word of mortal man could never make such
a change in them, nor any thing else but the word of the everliving God; which
at the first was alone sufficient for their creation and generation, and now
only of power sufficient for their regeneration, and new birth. Ioh. 9.
As therefore the blind man reasoned with the Pharisees, John. 9, not with any
far fetched reason, but from his own experience, to prove that our Savior
was not a notorious sinner, as the Pharisees accused him, but some great
Prophet sent from God; saying, doubtless this is a marvelous thing that ye know
not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes; and, if this man were not
of God he could have done nothing: so may we reason with those who affirm that
it cannot be known whence the scriptures came, from God or man; using this
argument taken from our own experience, saying, doubtless this is a marvelous
thing that ye do not know whence the scriptures are, seeing they have opened
mine eyes which were blind from my birth, inclined my will to obedience which
before was rebellious, softened my heart and sanctified and quite changed mine
affections, so that I now love that good which before I hated, and hate that
evil which before I loved; and am delighted with those holy exercises which
heretofore did most displease me; and am displeased with those vain pleasures
and filthy sins, which in times past did most delight me; and therefore if
it were not of God it could have done no such thing, if it were not inspied and
indicted by his holy spirit, and made effectual by the virtue and power
thereof, it could never have wrought in me such strange alterations.

CHAP. XXII. Satan's temptations suggested against the translations of holy
Scriptures answered.
That the Scriptures are truly translated.
that so they may never be effectually called. Now thirdly, if he cannot
persuade men that the Scriptures are not the word of God, that so he may take
away all the authority thereof, then he will take exceptions against the
translation; suggesting into their minds, that though the Scriptures be the
word of God as they were penned in their own proper languages, by men inspired
by his spirit, yet for ought they know being unlearned, the Scriptures may be
corruptly translated, altered from their first original, and things added and
detracted at the translators pleasure. To this I answer, that not only
professors of religion, but also Pagans, Infidels, Epicures and Atheists, who
are even the very limbs of the devil, have been skillful and learned in these
languages; and therefore if the translations were not near the original; who
could stop their mouths from inueighing against such falsehood? Who could
restrain them from declaiming against such corruption, seeing they so hate and
abhor this truth, as that they wish the utter extirpation thereof, and with
extreme malice oppose themselves against it, persecuting and murdering to
their uttermost power, whosoever embrace and profess it? Moreover, we know
that the Jews who more maliciously malign Christians and christianity than
the Turks and Pagans, do notwithstanding agree with us in the translation of
the old Testament, and can take no exception against the new. Thirdly, there
has been ever since Christ's coming many sectaries and heretics, who for the
maintenance of their opinions have but sought to corrupt some few places of the
Scriptures, but still God has raised up some godly learned in the original
tongues, who have confuted them and cleared the text; how therefore in such
division and vehement discord should such a thing be concealed. How should any
corrupt the whole Scriptures, or any principal places; seeing there is such
controversies from time to time about every letter and syllable? Lastly, this
truth of the Scriptures has been sealed and confirmed with the blood of many
Martyrs, who have been excellently learned in the original tongues: and who
can imagine that they would have been so foolish, as to have given their lives
for the maintaining that truth which is contained in the Scriptures as we have
them translated, if they thought them corrupted and falsified in the
translation?

Of the difference of translations.
and therefore some of them must needs be false, and who would ground his
faith upon any, until he know which is the best and truest? I answer, that
though there be diverse translations, and one better than another; yet even that
which is most corrupt and imperfect is sufficient to instruct us in the
knowledge of God, and in the principles of Christian religion; neither is there
amongst them all, many errors which concern the articles of our faith, or come
near the substance of doctrine which we are bound to believe, for all the
translatours have labored to conform their translations according to the
analogy of faith; and though they have not in all places delivered the proper
sense, yet they have endeauored to come as near it as they can, and where they
have failed, it is rather in circumstances than in substance, in the proper and
special truth, than in the common and general; and though in one place they
do not so clear the truth as they should, yet they do it in many other. And
therefore let not Satan persuade us to neglect the Scriptures, because there
are wants and imperfections in the translations; for if we study and meditate
even in the meanest, and conform and frame our lives according to that truth
which we learn out of them, we shall attain unto everlasting life and
happiness. Men do not use to neglect their business, because by reason of
some cloud the sun does not shine upon them in his full brightness; for
that light which they enjoy is sufficient, though not so gloriously bright as
when it shines in his full cleerenesse: so we must not neglect the conforming
of our selves to the Scriptures, because we cannot see them shine in their own
glorious brightness, as they were penned by the inspiration of the holy Ghost
in the original language (for as well may a painter express in his table with
artificial colors the glory of the Sun, as any man living can express that
perfect beauty and divine glory which shines in the natural phrase of holy
Scriptures in a translation) but rather we are to enjoy the benefit of this
glorious shining Sun of Gods word, though the brightness be as it were
vayled and somewhat shadowed with the cloud of another language; for
notwithstanding, through it they shine and afford us such light, as may be
sufficient to guide and direct us in the ways of holiness and righteousness,
which will bring us in the end to eternal glory and endless felicity.

CHAP. XXIII. Satan's temptations taken from the evil lives of the Ministers,
answered.
That Satan by disgracing the ministers seeks to disgrace their ministry
also.
to the end he may make men neglect to hear and read them. But if this will
not prevail, then he leaves to disgrace the word it self, and seeks by
discrediting the Ministers thereof, to make them to contemn their Ministry;
and to this end he uses all his skill to draw them into some gross and
scandalous sin, and to neglect that doctrine themselves which they teach unto
others, showing in their lives and conuersations, neither zeal of Gods glory,
nor desire of their neighbors good; and when he has attained unto his purpose
in some, he thinks it a sufficient ground for the slander of all, and a
notable foundation whereupon he may build a most pernicious temptation. Art
thou so foolish (will he say) as to think all Gospel which the ministers
teach, that all truth comes from their mouths, and that there is not a more
easy way of attaining to everlasting life, then that which they show unto
thee? why, do but look upon themselves and thoushalt find their lives far
dissonant from their words, that whilst they exhort thee to stricktnes, they
take their liberty, whilst they dissuade thee from taking thy pleasure,
affecting honors, setting thy heart upon riches, themselves in the mean time
are as voluptuous, ambitious, and covetous as any other; and whilst they
endeavor to make sin to appear unto thee as black as hell, themselves
embrace it with pleasure and delight as though it were the joy of heaven. Who
therefore can imagine that they think as they speak, or that they are
persuaded that heaven gate is so straight, and the way so troublesome and hard
to find, as they go about to persuade thee, seeing themselves take the least
pains in walking in this way which they prescribe unto others? Or if it be the
truth which they teach, then surely they are not worth the hearing who in their
lives deny this truth which in their words they profess; for what hope can
thou have that it will be powerful to work grace in thee, seeing it has no
power to work it in themselves? or that they can persuade thee to that
holiness, to which themselves are not persuaded?

The answer to the former temptation.
that so being weakened and hungerstarued for want of this heavenly Manna, he
may vanquish them at the first onset, and lead them captive unto all sin;
and being still hudwinckt with the thick veil of ignorance, he may lead them
the direct way to hell and utter destruction: and therefore it behooves every
one to arm themselves, that so they may beat back the violence of this
temptation. First therefore, Ministers subject to all human imperfection.
whereas he says that the ministers speak not as they think, because they do
not as the speak; we are to know for the answering of this temptation, that
ministers are subject to the same corruptions and infirmities which are
incident unto other men, and though they are called in the scriptures Angels in
respect that they are Gods messengers to bring and publish the glad tidings of
the Gospel, yet are they not Angels in respect of their purity and
perfection: but as they are flesh and blood, subject to all humane frailty; as
they are borne in sin and defiled with original corruption, so are they as
prone as others to fall into al actual transgressions, if the Lord restrain
them not. Neither must we imagine that learning and knowledge do indue men
with sanctification and the saving graces of Gods spirit, for then we might
attain unto them by our study, labor and industry; whereas the Scriptures
teach us that they are Gods free gifts which he bestows on whom he will;
then it would follow that he who is endued with most knowledge and learning,
should also have most grace and sanctification, whereas our own experience
teaches us, that many of the greatest Doctors of the world spend their lives
in all voluptuous pleasures and licentiousness. What then? do these men teach
one thing and believe another. Surely it may be the case of many, for faith
comes not by variety of knowledge, neither is it tied to learning; but it is
the free gift of God bestowed as well, yea and as often also, upon the simple
fisherman as upon the learned Pharisie; and therefore though they have such
great learning and knowledge, that they are able to instruct others and defend
the truth against all opposers, yet may they be as hard hearted and full of
infidelity, as the most ignorant and sottish in the world. Shall then their
hardness of heart and infidelity move us to call the truth of God which they
deliver into question, as though it were a matter doubtful whether it is the
word of God or no? God forbid. Nay, let God be true and every man a liar. For
their own consciences are convinced of this truth though not persuaded, and
the Lord has given them eyes to see it, though not hearts to believe it; to
the end that the praise of our salvation may wholly be ascribed to his own free
grace, who calls and justifies, sanctifies and saves whom he will, and not
unto humane learning or knowledge, which may be attained unto by man's industry
and labor.

It may be also that these who teach one thing and practice the clean
contrary,. Sect. 3. That not learning, but Gods spirit freeth us from our
natural corruptions.
do notwithstanding believe, that is, know and give their assent to that which
they deliver; but this general faith is incident as well to the devils
themselves as unto men, and therefore those who have it may nevertheless be as
worldly, carnal, and profane as ever they were; for before we attain unto a
true justifying faith, and be sanctified by Gods spirit, our knowledge and
learning will not free us from our corruption of nature, wherein we are
conceived borne and bred; and therefore though we see the truth, yea know and
acknowledge it to be the word of God, which shall one day either justify or
condemn us, yet if the Lord do not join with this knowledge the inward
operation of his spirit, making it effecttuall for our sanctification, and for
the purging of us from our corruptions, we are as ready to fall into all
sin, being enticed and carried away with the riches, honors and pleasures of
the world, as if we were still most sottishly ignorant. A notable example
hereof we have in Solomon, who though he had received such a measure of
wisdom and divine knowledge, That neglect of duty does not always argue
incredulity.
as never mere man attained unto the like, yea though he were a penman of an
excellent portion of holy Scriptures, yet the Lord leaving him to the
corruption of his own heart, he fell most grievously into all abominable
wickedness: and yet who will dare to say, that Solomon did not write as he
thought, and not rather that he was carried away through the violence of his
corruptions, to commit that sin which his conscience condemned, and to
neglect obedience to Gods undoubted truth? So David who was endued with notable
knowledge and no less grace, fell notwithstanding most fearfully into
adultery and murder; but shall we therefore think that he was not persuaded
that these were horrible sins, or that when he commended mercy, innocence
and chastity, he spoke not as he thought? And Peter likewise denied and
forswore his master, whom before he had acknowledged to be the son of God;
but shall we hence conclude that Peter dissembled when he made that notable
confession, because when he came to the trial he utterly disclaimed it? Nay
rather we may certainly be persuaded, that David was carried away with his lust
and concupiscence, and Peter overcome with fear and frailty, and both drawn,
through their corruption, to commit those sins which their consciences
condemened. But leaving such far fetched instances, let every man, yea even he
who has attained unto the greatest measure of faith and sanctification, enter
into a strict and due consideration with himself, and examine his own
conscience before Gods tribunal seat; and then let him tell me whether he
perform obedience to all that truth which he knows and believes, or
whether he may not justly complain, that our corruption takes occasion by the
knowledge of Gods commandment, to work in us all manner of concupiscence; that
he does those things which he allows not, nay which he hates and abhors;
that though he do not only know the law of God, but also is delighted
therewith in the inner man, yet that there is another law in his members which
rebelleth atainst the law of his mind, Romans 7.8.15.23.
and leads him captive unto the law of sin, as it is Romans 7.8.15.23. And if
this be the case of Solomon, David, Peter, and of all Gods children, who have
attained to the greatest measure of knowledge and sanctification; let not
Satan persuade us that we may safely neglect the ministry of the word,
because the ministers thereof seem not persuaded that the doctrine which they
deliver is true, in that they do not practice it in their own lives: for many
knowing and believing that truth which they deliver, are notwithstanding
destitute of the sanctifying graces of Gods spirit, and therefore wholly carried
away into all licentious wickedness; and many also who are sanctified, being
not wholly purged from their natural corruptions, are ready to show their
frailty and infirmties to all the world, though they know, acknowledge,
believe, and from their hearts embrace, that truth which they teach and
profess.

But if Satan cannot thus prevail, nor cause us to doubt of Gods truth,.
Sect. 4. The second temptation taken from the evil lives of Ministers,
answered.
because the ministers live not according to that doctrine which they teach;
then he will persuade them at least to refuse to hear such whose lives are
scandalous, as being unworthy to take the word into their mouths, and unable
to convert or amend others, seeing the word is not powerful which they deliver
for the converting and refourming of their own lives. Which temptation of
satan is most dangerous and pernicious unto many: for what greater
discouragement can there be to a sick patient, than to take physic of such a
Physician who can not cure himself of the same disease? Or who will willingly
eat of that food, which he who gives it unto him so loatheth and abhors,
that he will not so much as taste of it? Or who takes delight in hearing him
discourse of mercy, chastity, and liberality, whom he knows wholly
possessed of cruelty, lust, and covetousness? And therefore it were to be
wished that Gods ministers should be Physicians to themselves, before they take
upon them the cure of others; that they should not stand like Images by the
high way sides, directing others in their iourneys, themselves never moving
foot, but that they should like guides go before them, and instruct them not
only by their word, but also move them to receive their instruction by their
example. But yet let us take heed, that Satan do not take occasion upon the
neglect of their duty to make us neglect ours; and that he do not rob us of
the inestimable treasure of Gods word, and deprive us of this heavenly Manna
and food of our souls, whereby all the graces of Gods spirit are begotten,
That the Ministers wickedness or unworthiness should not make us neglect
hearing.
nourished and increased in us, because the minister who offreth it unto us
does not feed upon it himself. And to this end we are to know that the
ministry of the word is Gods ordinance, which depends not upon the
worthiness of him who delivers it, neither is it made void and ineffectual
by his unworthiness; but it has it virtue force and power from the blessing
of God, and from the inward operation of his spirit, who applies it to the
hearts and consciences of men, and thereby illuminates their understandings,
begets faith in them and all sanctifying and saving graces. And hence it is,
that the minister himself, finds not the word which he delivers, effectual
for the begetting of faith or any grace in him, which notwithstanding is
powerful in many of the hearers for these purposes, because the Lord
vouchsafes not the assistance and inward cooperation of his holy spirit with
the outward ministry of the word unto him, which notwithstanding he
mercifully grants unto others. Seeing then the ministry of the word is Gods
own ordinance, which he makes effectual to whom he will by the inward
operation of his holy spirit, by whomsoever it is delivered; and seeing those
ministers which are most holy and virtuous cannot at their pleasure infuse
grace into their hearers; for Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God
gives the increase; 1. Cor. 3.5.
so that neither the one nor the other are any thing in themselves without Gods
blessing; seeing also those who are loose and vicious, if they truly preach the
truth it self, cannot by their badnesse hinder Gods ordinance, but that
coming from their mouths it will be effectual for the conversion of men unto
God, and the eternal salvation of those that believe; for though unto himself
it be but a dead letter, yet the spirit of God may give life unto it in those
who receive it; and though he preaches for glory or gain, or for envy and
strife, yet we must with the Apostle rejoice that Christ is preached any manner
of way, Phil. 1.15.18.
and reap the fruit thereof to our eternal comfort. Lastly, seeing the
wisdom of God thinks it good to send ambassadors of both sorts, sanctified
and unsanctified, and oftentimes makes the word in the mouth fo a faithful
and godly minister the savor of death unto death, and the same word in the
mouth of one who is void of grace and sanctification the savor of life unto
life, to the end that we should not depend upon man, but wholly rest and rely
our selves upon Gods own ordinance, giving and ascribing unto him the whole
glory and praise of our conversion and salvation; let not Satan persuade us to
think the worse of the pure word of God, because of his corruption who
delivers it: for what were this but to refuse a comfortable embassage from a
gracious prince, because we dislike the qualities of the ambassadors? what
were this but to scorn to receive a kind letter from a loving father, because
the carrier does displease us? what is this but to refuse a rich treasure,
because it is brought unto us in an earthen vessel which is frail and
brittle? what is it but like proud beggars to refuse the bountiful alms of a
merciful prince, because it is delivered unto us by an Amner which is covetous
and hard hearted? Yea what is it but to cross our Savior Christ's express
commandment, who commanded all to hear even the Scribes and Pharisees who
sat in Moses chair, Matthew. 23.
and to do after their words though not after their works? In a word, what is
it else than to pin Gods ordinance upon man's sleeue, and to make the preaching
of the Gospel, Romans 1.16.
which is the power of God to salvation unto every one who believes, to depend
upon the weak strength of frail flesh, either to be made effectual by his
worthiness, or to be made vain and unprofitable by his unworthiness?

CHAP. XXIIII. Satan's temptations taken from sundry opinions, sects, and
religions, answered.
ANd thus Satan may be answered,. Sect. 1. Satan's temptations persuading us
to profess no religion.
when he takes occasion of discrediting the Gospel and hindering the course
thereof, by obiecting the wickedness and worldly profaneness, or the
infirmities and frail weakness of the Ministers thereof. But if he cannot
thus prevail, he leaves their lives and comes to their doctrine. Do thou
not see (will he say) that there are innumerable sects and contrary factions
amongst those who profess Christianity? some Papists, some Protestants, some
Arians, some Anabaptists, some Pelagians, some Libertines, some Familists, some
Donatists, and many other who all cite and allege Scriptures for the defending
of their contrary opinions, and confidently affirm yt they only have the
truth amongst them? how therefore can thou know which is truth and which is
falsehood; who interpret the scriptures aright, and who wrest and misconster
them? or if thou were disposed to be religious, what religion will thou
profess in this great confusion? to what Church will thou adioyne thy self
seeing one is contrary to another, and thou know not which is in the truth?
If thou be wise therefore keep thy self quiet and let all alone, harken
not to any of them, or if thou do, believe them not over hastily, be of that
religion which will best stand with thine advantage; or if thou will needs
serve God, follow thine own conscience, have a good intention in that thou
do, and it is enough; but profess not one religion more than another, till
thou see those who are learned agree amongst themselves, for until then thou
can have no assurance that thou professest the truth. For the answering of
which temptation we are to know, that the scriptures have foretold unto us
that there should be sects, divisions, 1. Cor. 11.19. 1. Tim. 4.1. 2. Pet. 2.1.
heresies and false teachers, even unto the end of the world; as appears 1.
Cor. 11.19. 1. Tim. 4.1. 2. Pet. 2.1. And the experience of al times both under
the law, and under the Gospel, may sufficiently teach us that wheresoever the
truth of God is published and preached, there it is opposed by innumerable
sectaries and heretics, which by the malice and subtlety of Satan, are
stirred up to impugn and discredit the true religion: and therefore if Satan
can still keep us blindfoulded in ignorance, and restrain us from the
confession and profession of our faith, till there be a general unity and
agreement in the true religion, without all opposition or gainesaying, then he
has attained his desire; for so shall we never join our selves in the
communion of the saints, nor be true members of the Church, professing and
practizing the religion of Jesus Christ, seeing the devil will not cease to
stir up his wicked instruments, false Prophets, secraties and heretics, to the
end they may oppugn and contradict the truth when it is sincerely preached,
and make it frutelesse in the hearts of unbelievers; seeing also our Savior
has taught us that his Church is but a little flock, which is assaulted and
grievously vexed, not only with Lions, Tigers and open enemies, but also with
Foxes, and Wolves in sheep clothing, and secret enemies who under the show
and profession of religion, seek to undermine and bring it to ruin. And the
Apostle also has forewarned us that there must be heresies among us, 1. Cor.
11.19.
that they who are approved might be known. 1. Cor. 11.19. Though therefore
there be many sects, and heresies, many false religions, and but one truth,
this must not make us to neglect all, till there be an universal agreement,
for as well may be reconcile light and darkness, the children of God with the
children of the devil, grace and natural corruption, truth and error, as the
true religion with those which are false, or the professors of the one with the
professors of the other.

Those who have important businesses abroad, do not stay at home and refuse to
travail because some go out of the way; but therefore they are more careful
to inform themselves of every turning in their journey, because they would not
err with others: those that have a desire to live, do not refuse all meat
because some surfeit and die, by eating that which is unwholesome; but rather
hereby they are made more wary in making good choice of such diet as is fit
for the preservation of their health: those also who are sick, do not neglect
all physic, because there are many cousening Imposters and unlearned
Emperickes who kill in sted of curing; but this makes the^ with more
circumspection to find out a skilful and learned physician. Let us therefore
follow the like practice in these spiritual things: and seeing there is but
one direct way which leads unto heaven, and many bywaies which lead to
destruction, let not this keep us from trauayling this heavenly journey, but
rather move us with more diligence to inquire the right and perfect way: seeing
also there are many which offer us poison in sted of the wholesome food and
physic of our souls, let us learn with more care to make choice and to put
a difference between the one and the other.

But there it will be demanded how those who are simple and ignorant can judge
which is the true religion,. Sect. 2. How the unlearned may discern the true
religion from that which is false.
and which is the false, who teaches the truth and who falsehood? to which I
answer, that every one must labor to inform himself of the truth, by
studying and meditating in Gods word: this must be his light to guide him, his
counsaylor to inform him, his touchstone whereby he may discern the stubble
and straw of men's inventions, from the pure gold of Gods true religion. Neither
are we to receive all doctrines hand over head, but as the Apostle exhorts
us, we must try the spirits whether they be of God or no: and with the men of
Berea, we must search the scriptures, I. Ioh. 4.1. Act. 17.
to see if those things be so as they are delivered, and accordingly either
receive them if they are consonant with Gods word, or reject them if they be
dissonant thereunto. Yea (will some say) this were a direct course if those
only who have the truth on their side had scripture to allege, but seeing
every heretic is as ready to quote scripture, for the upholding and defending
of his heresy, as the professors of Gods truth for the maintenance thereof;
all the question is, whose interpretation is to be received as good, and whose
to be rejected as false and erroneous? To this I answer, that though there be
some places in the scripture hard and somewhat doubtful, and therefore the more
easy to be wrested unto a wrong sense, yet are there others clear end
evident, for the confuting of all sects, heresies, and errors whatsoever: and
therefore we must expound those places which are dark and ambiguous, by those
which are perspicuous and manifest. For exmaple, if we would know whether
Popery be the true religion or no, we must examine the doctrines thereof by
Gods word, not making choice of those places which seem any way hard and
doubtful, but of those which are clear and manifest; and so we shall find
that their doctrines are as contrary to Gods truth, as light to darkness. For
whereas they teach that we are able to fulfill the law, and to merit heaven,
the scriptures affirm the clean contrary, I am. 3.2. and 2.10.
namely that in many things we sin all, I am. 3.2. and whosoever shall keep
the whole law yet fails in one point is guilty of all, I am. 2.10. that
there is no man who sins not, 1. King. 8.46.
1. King. 8.46. that in Gods sight none that lives can be justified, Psalm.
143.2. Luke 17 10.
Psalm, 143.2. that when we have done all those things that are commanded us,
we are unprofitable servants, and have done but our duty, and therefore merit
nothing. Luke 17.10. So whereas they teach that we must pray to Saints and
Angels, because they make intercession for us, the Apostle flatly excludes all
other from this office, but Christ alone. 1. Tim. 2.5.
1. Tim. 2.5. there is one mediator between God and man. Where as they teach
that marriage is unlawful for some men at all times, and some meats unlawful
for all men at some times, the holy Ghost tells us plainly that this is
erroneous and a doctrine of devils; 1. Tim. 4.1.3.4.
and that every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it
be received with thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4.1.3.4. And that marriage is honorable
for all men and the bed undefiled. Heb. 13.4.
Heb. 13.4. that to avoid fornication every man must have his wife, and every
woman her own husband. 1. Cor. 7.2. and that better it is to marry then to
burn. v. 9. 1. Cor. 7.2.
Whereas they teach that our Savior Christ is carnally and corporally present
in the sacrament, the scriptures teach us the contrary, namely that he is
ascended into heaven, and therefore not upon the earth. Matthew. 28.6. Matthew.
28.6.
That when he was taken into heaven he was taken from us, Act. 1.11.
Act. 1.11. That the heavens must contain him until the time that all things
be restored, Acts 3.21.
Act. 3.21. Whereas they teach that we must make and worship images, both are
expressly forbidden in the second commandment, and in many other places of
scripture. Whereas they teach that the scriptures should be kept from the
common people, in an unknown language; the Apostle plainly affirms that he
had rather in the Church speak five words with his understanding, that he
might also instruct other, 1. Cor. 14.19.
than ten thousand words in a strange tongue; and flatly inioyneth that the
Prophets should keep silence in the Church, rather than speak strange
lauguages, where there is no interpreter, 1. Cor. 14.19.27.28. Whereas they
hold that the cup in the administration of the Lords supper, is to be withheld
from the common people, and given only to the Priests, the quite contrary is
to be observed in the institution, whereas our Savior says, Drink ye all of
it, because it is his blood of the new testament that is shed for many, for the
remission of sins: plainly thereby inferring, that this sign and sacrament
of his blood belongs to as many as were redeemed by it, Matthew, 26.28.
Matthew. 26.28. And whereas they say that here the disciples were only, and
that to them alone this speech was directed, the Apostle plainly takes away
this cavil: for setting down the words of institution for the use of the
whole Church of Corinth, he wills every one indefinitly to examine himself
and so to eat of this bread and drink of this cup. 1. Cor. 11.28.
1. Corinthians. 11.28. And thus if we study and meditate in Gods word, we shall
find most clear and manifest places for the confirmation of the truth, and
confutation of all sects errors and heresies. But what if this means be taken
away from us, of reading and studying the scriptures, either because they are
only to be had in an unknown language, as in the time of popery, or because
we cannot read and have no body to teach us? What if both reading and studying
them, we find many doubts and difficulties, and diverse places which seem to
favor diverse and opposite opinions and religions? how the must we quit our
selves out of this laberinth of ambiguitie and doubtfulnesse, seeing it is
prejudicial to appeal to the judgment of either faction? I answer, that in
these days the means of knowledge are not so scant, but yt they may enjoy
them that labor for them; for either they may obtain the use of the
Scriptures in their own language where they dwell, or else in some other place
by removing their habitation; and though they cannot read, yet it is no hard
matter to learn, to those who will use pains and diligence, or at least to
get the help of others to supply their want and defect in this behalf. But
let it be granted that we were abandoned of all these means, or that using
them, there were some doubt remaining of which we cannot be resolved; are we
therefore destitute of help, and forsaken of all means, whereby we might
attain unto the knowledge of the truth? No surely. For, if when allother
means fail us, we have our recourse unto God by earnest and effectual prayer,
instantly craving his holy spirit to guide and direct us, we have a merciful
promise that he will hear our request and grant unto us his holy spirit, as
it is Luke 11.13. Luke 11.13.
and that thereby he will illuminate the blind eyes of our understanding,
inlighten our minds with the knowledge of the truth, and take away from us all
prejudice of opinion and forestalled judgment, so as we shall discern truth
from falsehood, and Gods true religion, from errors and lies, sects and
heresies. John 16.13.
For this spirit of truth will lead us into al truth, as it is Ioh. 16.13. He
searches al things, 1. Cor. 2.10.12.
even the deep things of God; and to this end we receive him, that we may
know the things which are given unto us of God, as it is 1. Cor. 2.10.12: He
is that precious eye-salue, wherewith being anointed we see, Revel. 3.18.
who before were blind, Revel. 3.18. And if once we have received this
annoynting, we need not that any man should teach us, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
for this annoynting teaches us all things, as it is 1. Ioh. 2.27. Though
therefore we were abandoned of all other means, yet let not Satan persuade us
to neglect all religion, because we cannot discern the true religion from that
which is false: for if we earnestly and sincerely labor after the knowledge of
the truth, and with good Cornelius continually implore the assstance and
direction of Gods spirit, we shall be sure to obtain our desire, for the
Lord has promised it, and he will undoubtedly be as good as his word.

CHAP. XXV. Satan's temptations taken from our unworthiness and unfitness to
hear, answered.
That our sins and unworthiness should not hinder us from hearing Gods word.
which he draws from the Ministers, to discredit the Gospel, and to diswade
men from ye hearing thereof; but if he cannot thus prevail, he will leave the
Ministers, and come to the parties themselves, suggesting into their minds that
they are unworthy, in respect of the innumerable number of their sins, to be
hearers of the Gospel, which is so pure and excellent; and that their
corruptions are so great, their understandings so blind, their memories so
slippery, their wills so perverse, their heart and affections so wicked and
profane, that it is to be feared in regard of this their unfitness to hear,
that the word of God, which in it self is the savor of life unto life, will
become unto them the savor of death to their more deep condemnation. For the
answering of which temptation, we are to know, first, that our sins and
unworthiness should be so far from hindering us from the hearing of Gods
words, that they should rather serve as forcible arguments to move us more
attentively and diligently to hear it: because it is the means ordained of
God to pull us out of our sins, to purge us from our corruptions, to work in
us true sanctification, and to make us of the sons of wrath the children of
God. Moreover, though we want faith and all other sanctifying graces, yet we
are to hear the word of God: for therefore the Lord has ordained the
ministry of the word, not only to increase grace where it is begun, but also
to beget and begin it where it is wanting; so that we must not only hear
because we are fit, but also that we may be made fit, who before were unfit.
Neither are we to imagine that faith and other graces go before hearing, but
follow after as fruits and effects thereof; Romans 10.14.17.
as the Apostle plainly shows, Romans 10.14. But how shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And verse 17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. If then there be no
faith without hearing, nor no grace without faith, it must needs follow, that
before we hear, we are destitute of faith and all saving grace, and that by
hearing they are wrought in us, God preventing us with his grace, and calling
us unto himself, not only when we had no deserts to merit his mercy, but also
not so much as any grace to desire it. And hence it is that the Apostle says,
2. Tim. 1.9. That God has called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, 2. Tim. 1.9.
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given unto us through
Christ Jesus before the world was. The truth hereof may appear in all the
examples of Gods saints, who before their calling were so far from deserving
any grace at Gods hand, that rather they deserved confusion and utter
destruction. For example, what worthiness was in Abraham before his conversion
who lived in gross idolatry? what worthiness in Rahab ye harlot? in Manasses a
cruel tirant, a wicked sorcerer, an horrible idolater? what worthiness in Marie
Magdalene possessed by seven devils? or in Matthew and Zacheus the Publicanes?
or in Paul who persecuted the Church of God? In a word, what worthiness is in
any of Gods saints, before the Lord by the preaching of his word, made
effectual by the inward operation of his spirit, has called and converted,
and pulled them out of their sins and corruptions in which they wallowed, and
endued them with some measure of his sanctifying and saving graces?

That our unfitness to hear, should not make us neglect hearing.
whereas he obiecteth our unfitness to hear, because our ears are dull, our
eyes blind, our hearts hard, and our wills, affections, and all the powers and
faculties of our bodies and souls wholly corrupted and disordered, this must
not move us to neglect the hearing of Gods word, but to become hearers thereof
with more care and diligence: for it is the two-edged sword of the spirit,
which will pearce and make way for it self to enter, and will build a lodging
for it self to dwell in; it is not only a light to guide those that see, but
a precious eye-salue to give sight unto those who were borne blind; it is not
only the heavenly deaw which makes Gods graces to spring in us, but also that
divine seed which gives them being and rooting in our hearts; it is not only
the food of our souls to preserve and increase that strength which we
already have, but also that immortal seed by which we are first begotten
unto God and borne again, who before were dead in our sins, and that
excellent physic of our souls by which they are purged from their
corruptions and restored unto health, which before were deadly sick in sin;
it makes us first to will that which is good, and then further to desire it;
it gives us life who before were dead in our sins, and then preserues this
life; it begets and begins faith and sanctification and all other graces in us,
and being begotten and begun it strengthens and increases them: and
therefore let not Satan dissuade us from the hearing of Gods word, because of
our sins, unworthiness and unfitness; for as it is a notable means
ordained of God for the increasing of grace where it already is, so is it no
less effectual for the begetting of grace where it never was. There is no
wise man that will neglect his trade and live idely because he is poor, but
rather this will move him to be more painful therein, as being the means
whereby he may become rich; neither do men refuse all nourishment, because
they have empty and hungry stomachs, but do more earnestly desire meat
that they may be filled and satisfied; yea even those whose stomachs are weak
do not altogether refuse their food, but eat something to sharpen their
appetite, and so by little and little in using their stomachs they get
stomachs: let us follow the like practice, and when we ^^rceiue our
beggerlinesse in Gods graces, let us more earnestly ^^bour after this heavenly
treasure and precious pearl, that we may be made rich; when we feel our
emptines of all virtue a^^ goodness, let us more eagerly hunger after this
spiritual M^^na that we may be filled and satisfied; when we find our
appetite weak and our stomachs indisposed to eat of this heavenly food, let
us a little force our selves against the appetite, or (...) all good means to
quicken and sharpen it, and so we shall find that the oftener we eat, the
oftener we shall desire, the more we hear the word of God, the more we shall
desire to hear, and the greater benefit we shall receive by it. Whereas
neglect of hearing will make us every day more unfit to hear, even as long
abstinence does quite spoil the stomach.

CHAP. XXVI. How we must arm our selves against Satan's temptations, whereby
he labors to make the word of God fruitless.
That Satan tempts us to careless negligence in hearing.
but if we break these snares and cannot be withheld from frequenting Gods
holy assemblies; then he will labor by all means to make the word of God
which we hear, fruitless and ineffectual for our conversion and salvation;
and to this end he will labor to work in us a negligent carelessness in
hearkening to those things which are delivered; and this is usually accompanied
with dullness of spirit, drowsinesse and sleepiness: or if we set our selves
to hear the word, with any care and conscience to profit thereby, then he will
seek to distract our minds with wandering thoughts, either by offering and
suggesting to our consideration and memory the world and the vanities thereof,
as our affairs and business and those pleasures wherewith we are most
delighted; or if this will not prevail, by casting into our minds things in
their own nature good and religious, if they were thought upon in time
convenient, to the end that we may be distracted, and be made unfit to hear
the word with profit.

That to resist Satan we must prepare our selves before we hear.
Which temptations we are to withstand as being most dangerous and pernicious:
and to this purpose there is something required at our hands to be performed
before our coming to Gods assemblies, and something afterward. Before we
come to the hearing of the word, there is required due preparation, whereby our
minds are made fit vessels to receive the spiritual treasure and food of our
souls. For if we come into the congregation of the faithful, without any
premeditation, reverence, or regard of the action which we are to take in hand;
if we present our selves rashly and unadvisedly, as if we went to a play, or to
dispatch some worldly business: we shall hardly keep our minds from negligent
wandering and worldly distractions, which will make the word of God fruitless
and unprofitable.

Wherein this preparation consists. Eccl. 4.17.
to which duty the wise man exhorts us; Eccl. 4.17. Take heed to thy feet
when thou entrest into the house of God, that is, be careful to purge thine
affections which are the feet of thy soul. And this was typically signified
by the outward washing of the Israelites before the promulgation of the law,
Exodus 19.10.
Exodus 19.10. where by the washing of their clothes and bodies, the purging of
the secret corruptions of the heart was signified and represented. Which duty
is necessarily to be performed, of al those who will hear the word with
profit: for as the most pure liquor is defiled and made unprofitable for use,
if it be put into a polluted and stinking vessel; so the pure liquor of Gods
word is defiled and made fruitless, unto al those who receive it into an heart
polluted with unclean affections: As therefore Moses was enjoined by God to
put off his shoes from his feet, before he might tread on that ground made
holy by Gods presence, or receive the Lords embassage to his people; so he
requires of us that we put off the shoes, that is, the corruption of our
affections, before we tread upon the holy ground of his Church, there to hear
the glad tidings of the Gospel, concerning our everlasting delivery out of
the bondage of our spiritual enemies. What these affections are the Apostle
James partly shows, Iam. 1.19. namely wrath, Iam. 1.19. 1. Pet. 2.1.
filthiness, malitiousnesse, to which Peter adds dissimulation and
hypocrisy, envy and evil speaking, 1. Pet. 2.1. And to these also we may
add all other like unto them.

We must banish all forestalled opinions of the minister
we must banish out of our minds all prejudice, forestalled opinions, and
sinister conceits, of the minister of Gods word whom we are to hear; whereby
men are either carried away with a vain admiration of his gifts, and in the
mean time make no conscience of feeding upon that food which is offered; like
unto them who in steed of drinking of the wine, stand wondering at the curious
workmanship of the cup; or else with a preiudicate opinion of his insufficiency
in gifts, or imperfections of life, whereby they are so forestalled that they
think nothing which he can deliver will be worth the hearing.

We must expel all worldly cogitations.
Thirdly, we must expel out of our cogitations, the remembrance of all worldly
busineses, pleasures and delights, least they distract our minds in the
hearing of the word, and so choking this heavenly seed make it fruitless;
for as the vessel which is already full, will receive no more, and whatsoever
is powered into it, spilleth upon the ground: so the mind that is full of
worldly meditations, is not fit to receive the word of God, but as soon as it
offers to enter, it is kept back and so perishes; for God and Mammon, the
holy word of God and the cares and vanities of the world, can never dwell at the
same time together, but as soon as one enters it expels the other. As
therefore men purposing to write a sermon, do make clean their writing
tables, by blotting out yt which was written in them before, for otherwise
there would be such a mixture and confusion, that nothing would be legible; so
when we purpose to carry away a sermon fair written in the tables of our
memories, we must first blot out all worldly affairs and businesses, otherwise
there will be nothing but confusion, and we shall not be able to recall any
thing to our remembrance.

We must examine our sins and wants.
before the hearing of the word we must search and examine our hearts both
concerning our sins and corruptions, as also concerning our wants and
imperfections; for the first we must consider to what sins we are most
addicted, and with what temptations we are most easily subdued, to the end we
may bring our sins to be slaughtered and mortified with the sword of Gods
spirit, being otherwise unable to overcome them our selves; and that we may
also thereby so strongly arm all parts, both of our bodies and fowls, so as
they shall not in time to come, bring us again under their dominion. And as
citizens being besieged with their enemies, do learn by their assaulting
which part of the city is most weak, and so with more care and labor
fortify it, with men and munition, trenches and bulworkes; so when we who are
continually besieged by our spiritual enemies, do learn by their assaulting
of us where we are weakest, and the enemy most like to enter, then we must go
into Gods armorie and provide sufficient weapons and munition, whereby we may
be enabled to hold out and make resistance. So also we are to consider of our
wants and imperfections, that so we may be stirred up with an earnest desire,
to have them supplied, and hereby may be moved with more care to apply unto our
selves such food as shall be most fit to supply these our wants, and amend our
imperfections; for as men who hunger earnestly desire to be satissied with
wholesome food, neither will they willingly without any difference eat of all
meats, especially if they have weak stomachs, but of that which is most fit
and best agrees with them; so those who find their spiritual wants earnestly
desire to be satisfied, and to have their defects supplied: and for as much as
all food contained in Gods word, is not fit for this purpose, nor agreeable to
their stomachs, to the end that Gods graces may be nourished in them,
therefore they will wisely make choice of that which best agrees to their
present state, and apply it unto themselves accordingly. For example, he who
finds his heart hard and secure, must feed upon the threatenings of the law,
to the end he may be humbled, and his heart molified, and resolved into tears
of unfeigned repentance; he that is of a broken heart and contrite spirit, must
feed upon the sweet and gracious promises of the Gospel; he that is
ignorant, must hunger after milk, and desire to be instructed in the
principles of religion; he that has a good measure of knowledge, may desire
stronger meat, that is, attend unto the more deep points of divinity; in a
word, every man is to examine his particular state, and to search out his
greatest wants, that so coming to hear the word, he may more diligently apply
such doctrines, instructions, and exhortations as shall be most fit for his
use and benefit; for that which is food to one is poison to another, and that
salve which is fit to heal one sore, does make another to fester and ranckell,
and one part of the word of God being applied to men of diverse estates, does
work diverse effects, one it feeds, another it poysoneth, one it heals
another it wounds, to one it is the savor of life unto life, and to another
it is the savor of death unto death: and therefore before we come to the
hearing thereof, we are to examine our states that we may apply and make
profitable use to our selves of that which is most fit to nourish and
strengthen us in Gods graces.

Lastly and most especially we are to use earnest and hearty prayer unto the
Lord that he may open our blind eyes, We are to use earnest prayer Ps. 119.18.
so as we may see the wonderful things of his law, that he will take away our
stony hearts, and give us fleshly hearts in which his word may more easily be
imprinted; that he will with the cyle of his grace bow our stubborn wills,
and make them flexible and inclinable to perform obedience to his will,
revealed in his word, that he will sanctify our affections and purge them from
their natural corruptions, that he will distill the heavenly dew of his holy
spirit into our minds and barraigne hearts, that so the seed of his word
being watered there by may yield a plentiful harvest in grace and godliness.

Of the duties which we must perform in hearing it, to set our selves in Gods
presence.
there are also other duties to be performed to the end that Satan may not
distract our minds and so make the word which we hear fruitless: first we
are to set our selves in the presence of God who looks upon us, and beholds
all our behavior in this action, according to the example of good Cornelius.
Act. 10.33. Here (says he) we are all present before God to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God. And if we thus do we shall not carelessly and
negligently hear the word of the Lord, but with fear and trembling as in his
presence, before whom the earth trembles, and the foundations of the
mountains move and shake as it is Psalm. 18.7.

Secondly, we are to hear the word preached not as the word of a mortal man,
but as it is in truth the word of the everliving God, 2. We must hear it as
the word of God.
according to the example of the Thessalonians. 1. These. 2.13. when (says the
Apostle) ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not
as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God. For the minister is
not his own spokesman but the ambassador of the Lord, it is not his own
message which he brings, but the Lords embassage, and hence it is that the
Prophets and Apostles prefixe before their writings; these and such like
speeches, The word of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, thus says the Lord;
so also the Apostle professes in his own name, and in the behalf of all Gods
true ministers, that they are the Lords ambassadors who in Christ's stead
beseech their hearers that they will be reconciled unto God. 2. Cor. 5.20. We
must not therefore look upon the man but on God who sends him, nor on the
earthen vessel, but on the heavenly treasure which it brings, nor on the
simpleness of the casket, but on the precious pearl which is contained in it,
nor upon the meanness of the ambassador, but upon the glorious royalty of the
prince who sent him: and on his embassage which is the glad tidings of the
gospel, the word of salvation and life; which is able to save our souls and
then his feet will seem beautiful and none shall be better welcome, then
shall we not contemn or neglect their ministry but receive joyfully,
reverently, and attentively the word preached by them, remembering what our
Savior Christ has said, Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he
that despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that
sent me.

3. We must stir up our selves with meditation of the benefit of hearing.
as that it is the lively seed whereby we are begotten unto God, the food of
our souls whereby we are nourished unto everlasting life, that spiritual
physic whereby we are purged from our corruptions, that light which guides us
in the ways of holiness and righteousness, in a word that it is the chief
means to work in us all Gods graces in this life, and to assure us of
everlasting happiness in the life to come. And if these and such like
meditations come to our remembrance, they will serve to stir us up from our
drowsy dullness and to hear Gods word with alacrity and cheerfulness,
fastening our eyes on Gods ministers according to the example of Christ's
hearers. Luke 4.20. and even hanging upon them (like the child on the mothers
breast) to suck our souls nourishment, as the people hanged on our Savior.
Luke 19.48.

Fourthly we must hear the word as if we were neuermore to hear it, for who
can tell whither he shall live till the next sabbath? or though he do, yet
how knows he whether he shall have his senses, understanding, and memory,
seeing he will not use them to Gods glory and his own good? or though he
have, yet may the word of God be taken from him and such a famine be of this
heavenly food that he may wander from sea to sea, Am. 8.11.
and from North to East seeking it and shall not find it, and therefore whilst
the Lord speaks unto us, today let us harken and not harden our hearts, for
he has not promised us to morrow that we shall hear it, whilst we enjoy this
heavenly light let us look upon it and be directed by it to do the works of
holiness, for it may be it will shortly set and never rise again unto us, and
then what will follow but eternal darkness?

Lastly let us be stirred up to attention by the consideration of Gods
judgments which he inflicteth on the contemners and neglectours of his word
which he may justly every minute pour upon us whilst our minds are a wandringe
not regarding that which he says unto us, he may suddenly strike us with
frenzy and madness, or with death it self, and then how fearful and
lamentable were our state if such a judgment should sease upon us. Acts 20.
Let us remember what happened to drowsy Eutichus, and consider with our selves
that that which befalls unto one may happen unto another.

How we are to behave our selves after we have heard the word.
but when we have gone thus far we must not here rest, for if our enemy
satan can no hinder the seed of Gods word from falling into our hearts then
he will labor to steal it away as soon as it is sowed that it may never
take root nor bring forth any fruit, as appears by lamentable experience;
for how many are there who receive the word of God with their approbation, and
are somewhat affected with that which is spoken and yet soon after it
vanishes away; and nothing remains but their old corruptions? and whenc does
this proceed but from the malice of Satan who when he finds the seed of the
word not thoroughly entered into the ground of the heart and therein covered like
a rauinous bird deuoureth it, or if it have a little rooting, yet he choaketh
it with the thornie cares of the world so as it never springs up no not so
much as into a blade of profession, or if it be so far grown up, yet he
indeauoureth to keep it from ever thriuing further, by causing the hot sun
of persecution to arise and with the heat thereof to make it wither, and
perish, though for a time it have made a flourishing show; as our Savior
Christ has taught us in the parable of the Sower. Mat, 13. And therefore it
behooves every one of us to take no less pains after the hearing of the word
to keep it from devouring and to preserve and nourish it, that it may take deep
root and bring forth much fruit, then we did in the time of preparation, and
in the time when we received it; for as the careful husbandman takes great
pains in stirring up his fallow grounds; and preparing it for the seed, as
also in the seed time in sowing it in the ground thus prepared, and yet all
this were to no purpose if he did not afterward harrowe it and cover it in
the ground; so though we take great pains in breaking up and preparing the
fallowe grounds of our hearts, and also in receiving the seed of Gods word yet
if we be not as careful after all this to cover and hide this seed in the
furrows of our hearts that it may take deep rooting it will never bring
forth any fruit of true godliness. Now the means to preserve and nourish
this heavenly seed of Gods word is first serious mediation; whereby we call to
mind that which we have heard, in which it it is very requisite that we
examine the doctrines which were delivered according to the touchstone of Gods
word, and turn over the bible to those proofs which we remember alleged as
most principal for the confirmation of the doctrines which were delivered: a
notable example whereof we have in the noble men of Berea. Acts. 17.10.11. Who
though with great readiness they received that doctrine which Paul had
delivered yet when they came home they searched the scriptures to see if those
things which they hard were consonant and agreeable with them or no.

Secondly, we must use holy and Christian conference one with another, about
those matters which we have heard, for hereby it will come to pass that what
one did not observe or has forgotten, the other remembers and repents, and
so likewise the other helps out in another point where his neighbourfaileth,
till at last they recall all the material points to their remembrance, even as
many meeting together at a feast do every one cast in his shot til the
reckoning be made, so many joining their heads together for the recalling of a
sermon to mind, one repeateth a little and another as much more, till at last
all be repeated. And secondly, this benefit redoundeth hereof that all which
every one remembers by this repetition is more surely imprinted in his memory
and is not afterward easily forgotten.

Lastly, the best and surest way to imprint things in our memory never after
to be blotted out, is upon all occasions to practice it in our lives and
conversation, for as we only truly know that in christianity that which we
practice, so likewise that is only well remembered which is well practiced.

CHAP. XXVII. Satan's tentations whereby he persuades men to delay their
repentance answered.
The tentation alluring to defer repentance.
ANd so much concerning the subtle tentations of Satan, whereby he labors
to make the word of God fruitless and ineffectual for our conversion,
wherewith if he cannot prevail being repelled by the means before spoken of,
and if men by their hearing of the word have learned thus much knowledge that
their conversion and turning to God is necessary to salvation; then he will in
the next place labor to persuade them to defer their repentance for a time,
till they have better opportunity and are more fit for this purpose. Let it be
granted (will he say) that it is necessary that thou should repent and
turn unto God, yet thou may defer thy repentance until thine old age, or
at least till the time of sickness, for then thou will be more fit to
perform this duty, then in the flowrishing prime of thy youth, when as the
exercises of religion are so tedious and unpleasant, and the pleasures of the
world so sweet and delightful; neither need thou to fear any in
conuenience which will come hereby, for God is so gracious that whenever thou
returnest unto him he will receive thee to mercy, for he has promised in his
word, that whenever a sinner repents him of his sins he will blot all his
wickedness out of his remembrance: And therefore thou may enjoy both the
pleasures of this life and the life to come, thou may repent time enough
hereafter and live a strict and religious life, when the heat of youth is past
and old age draws on, which is far more fit for these exercises: for what
folly is it so to dote upon the heavenly joys to come, as that thou should
deprive thy self of those worldly pleasures which are present seeing thou
may enjoy both?

This tentation most dangerous.
Against which tentation it behooves every man most carefully to arm himself
as being in it self most dangerous and pernicious to great multitudes, as may
appear by too too lamentable experience; for when as Satan can no longer
hudwinke their eyes with the veil of ignorance but that they plainly see, that
it concerns their eternal salvation to harken unto the Lord calling them to
repentance, then not withstanding thus far he prevails with them that they
are content to delay their conversion and turning unto God, either until the
time of sickness, or till their old age. And therefore it shall not be amiss
to set down briefly some weighty arguments, whereby every Christian may be
moved to speedy repentance, and not to defer their conversion from day to
day, Motives to persuade us to hastenour repentance.
but to turn unto the Lord when he first calls them.

us speedily to turn unto him, that we may do him service all the days of
our life, to which end he has created and redeemed us and does continual
preserve us. Psalm. 95.7.8. To day if you shall hear his voice harden not your
hearts, so as he charge us not to resist his calling no not till to morrow,
for if today we will not harken unto him, he has not promised to call us
again unless it be to judgment. So Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy creator in
the days of thy youth whiles the evil days come not, nor the years approach,
wherein thou shall say I have no pleasure in them, that is their old age, as
afterward he expounds himself. And Esa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord whilst he
may be found, call ye upon him whilst he is near. Matthew. 3.2. Repent; for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Act. 3.19. And our savior Christ does
inioyne us, first to seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof.
Matthew. 6.33. If therefore we will not wittingly and wilfully break Gods
commandment, let us offer unto him the service of our youth as well as the
service of our old age, for he requires this as well as the other, nay before
the other, and this was signified under the types of the old law, where the
Lord requires that they should offer unto him the principal of the flock,
and such beasts as were whole and sound young and without blemish. So Leuit.
3.1. the Lord requires that the sacrifice which they offered should be without
blemish, and 22.20. Ye shall not offer any thing that has a blemish for that
shall not be acceptable for you. And Deuteronomy. 15.21. if there be any blemish
therein as if it be lame or blind, or have any evil fault thou shall not offer
it unto the Lord thy God. And for transgressing this law the Lord reprehendeth
the people by his Prophet. Mal. 1.8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice is
it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick is it not evil? offer it now
to thy Prince; will he be content with thee or accept thy person says the Lord
of hoastes. And verse. 14. Cursed be the deceiuer which has in his flock a
male and voweth, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. Now did the Lord
regard the beasts, and has he made so many laws that he might have the best
of them? surely this is not Gods main end, but he would thereby teach us to
offer and dedicate unto his service even our best things as the prime of our
youth and our flourishing age, for was the Lord greatly offended when as men
reserved the best of the flock to themselves and offered the old, blind and
lame unto him; and will he be well pleased that we should dedicate our youth
and the strength of body and soul unto Satan, and our own lusts and reserve
for him only our old decrepit lame and withered age, when as our bodies are
full of diseases and our minds of infirmities? will any Prince accept of us if
we spend the whole time of our youth and strength in the service of his
enemies, and when we are sick, old, lame and blind, offer him our service, and
will the Prince of Princes think he be well pleased if he be thus used? if
Satan and the world have all the pure wine will he be contented with the lees
and dregs, if they have the ripe fruit, will God have that which is rotten and
putrified. If they have our health will he have our sickness? surely it is not
likely; for the Lord who has created us redeemed us and does preserve us, does
look to be served with our youth health and strength which he has bestowed on
us.

a. Motive taken from the momentany shortness of man's life.
The second argument to move us to hasten our repentance and turning unto God
is taken from the momentanie shortness and the mutable uncertainty of our
lives; in respect of the shortness of our lives they are compared to a
pilgrimage, to the flower and grass of the field, to the wind, a cloud, smoke,
vapor, to a dream, a tale told, a spanne shadow, and the passage of the
weauers shuttle, yea it is called vanity it self. And therefore seeing our
lives are so short surely they are al to little though they were wholly spent in
Gods service; but seeing we have spent a great part of this short time even
our whole life before our conversion after the lusts of the gentiles, let us
think that enough yea far too much to be so ill bestowed, and from hence for
ward let us live (as much time as remains in the flesh) not after the lusts
of men but after the will of God, as the apostle admonishes us. 1. Pet. 4.2.3.
But though our life were short yet if this short time were certain there were
some more show of reason why we should defer our conversion; but as it is short
so is it most uncertain, for we have not assurance that we shall live one
hour, we are tenants at will in these earthly tabernacles, neither do we
know how soon our great landlord will turn us out of them; we are the Lords
stewards here on earth and we know not how soon our Lord and master will call
us to a reckoninge and therefore it behooves us to have our accounts always
perfect and the books of our consciences made up in readiness. We are
uncertain when death will arrest us and carry us to judgment and therefore we
should be prepared for it all times; when we go to bed we are so to lay us
down as though we were never to rise til we rise to receive our last sentence,
when we rise up in the morning we are so to spend that day as though it were
the last of our lives, for how many have gone well to bed who have been dead
before the morning? how many have risen (as they thought in perfect health) and
yet have been attached by death before the evening? and therefore it behooves
every one who has any regard of the eternal salvation of his soul to turn
speedily unto God, and while today they hear his voice not to harden their
hearts. Men usually delaie matters of least weight and in the first place
dispatch business of greatest importance, and therefore unless we think the
preserving of our bodies and souls from the eternal torments of hell fire and
the assurance of everlasting happiness and blessedness in Gods kingdom to be
matters of less importance, then the obtaining of some vain pleasures,
unconstant honors or base commodities, let us turn unto the Lord betimes by
unfeigned repentance and according to our saviors advise. Matthew. 6.33. Let us
first seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and then worldly
necessaries shall be cast unto us as a vantage in this maine bargain. If our
houses were on fire we would seek first to preserve those things which are
most dear and precious unto us good household stuff before lumber, Jewels
before stuff, and children before Jewels, but our lives are daily in a
consumption et dum crescimus vita, decrescit, whilst we grow and increase, our
lives decrease, and therefore in the first place let us seek to preserve our
soul, which is, our chief Jewel and not suffer it to perish through
impenitencie, whilst we gain some earthly vanities. But most lamentable is the
practice of most who live as though they were never to die, or as though they
had taken of God a long lease of their lives which is to expire at a certain
appointed time; and this makes them defer their repentance and to put the
evil day far from the^, til at last death attacheth them and carrieith them to
judgment; and this appears by the scripturs and continual experience. Job
speaking of earnal secure men says, that they take the tabret and harp and
rejoice in the sound of the organs, they spend their days in wealth and
suddenly they go down to the grave. Job 21.12.13. So Eccl. 9.12. man does not
know his time but as the fishes which are taken in an evil net and as the
birds that are caught in the snare, so are the children of men snared in the
evil time when it falls upon them suddenly. when the evil servant shall say
in his heart my master does defer his coming and shall begin to smite his
fellows and to eat and drink and to be drunken; that servants master will
come in a day when he looks not for him and in an hour that he is not aware
of, and will cut him off and give him his portion with the unbelievers. as our
savior has taught us. Luke 12.45.46. And we know what happened to the rich man
who said unto his soul, soul thou have much goods laid up for many years,
live at ease, eat drink and take thy pastime, even the same night God said
unto him, O fool this night will they fetch thy soul from thee, and then
whose shall those things be which thou have provided. Luke 12.19.20.

That many purposing to repent in old age are cut of in the mean time by Gods
judgment.
and have been prevented and cut of by Gods judgment? do we not see that
many have been taken away with sudden and violent deaths, many deprived of
the use of their senses, memory, and understanding, in the time of their
sickness and have so dyed mad, frantic, and sensles, many who come to their
old age and yet are further from repentance then in the time of their youth.
And this comes to pass by the just judgment of God for what can be more
righteous then that the Lord should contemn them at the hour of death who
have contemned him their whole life? that they should loose their memory and
understanding in the time of sickness, who have continually abused them to the
dishonor of God in the time of their health; that they should dye impenitent
who have lived in impenitencie, that they should forget God when they are
ready to go out of the world, who would never remember him whilst they were
in the world; that God should withdraw his grace when they are sick, which
being often offered they despised when they were in health. And this the Lord
threatens Pro. 1.24. Because I have called and ye have refused, I have
stretched out mine hand and none would regard. v. 25. but ye have despised all
my counsel and would none of my correction. v. 26. I will also laugh at your
destruction and mock when your fear comes. v. 27. when your fear comes
like sudden desolation, and your destruction shall come like a whirlewind,
etc. and v. 28. then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they
shall seek me early but they shall not find me. v. 29. because they hated
knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord. So Zachar. 7.11.12.13. the
prophet says, that because the people refused to harken, pulled back their
shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear, but made their
hearts as an Adamant stone least they should hear the words of the lord, sent
in his spirit by the ministry of the former prophets, therefore came a great
wrath from the Lord of hosts, whereof it came to pass that as he cried and
they would not hear, so they cried and the Lord would not hear their cry.
And therefore when the Lord calls, let us answer Lord I come, let us not
delay our conversion from day to day, but seek the Lord whilst he may be
found, and call upon him whilst he is near, let the wicked (now) forsake his
ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations and return unto the Lord, and
he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive,
as it is. Esaias 55.6.7. But if we contemn the ministry of his word, and when
God calls to refuse answer, if we harden our hearts against the means of
our conversion, and quench the good motions of his spirit when he puts them
into our minds, surely it will come to pass, that as we neglect the Lord, so
he will neglect us; and though he call us today yet he will not call again to
morrow, but will let us die in our sins without repentance. Let us remember
the fearful example of Esau who contemning his blessing and birthright,
afterward when he would have inherited the blessing was rejected, for he found
no place to repentance though he sought it with tears, as it is, Hebr.
12.16.17. And of the 5. foolish virgins who neglecting the opportune time of
providing oil for their lamps, afterward went to buy when it was too late,
Matthew. 25.
for the bridegroom passed by and they were shut out of doors. Call to mind the
fearful example of Pharaoh, who still hardening his heart against Gods word
sent unto him and confirmed by many miracles and wonders, at last was destroyed
with his whole army. So Herod having hard John Baptist willingly, and
performed obedience to some things which he had learned, yet because he did
not turn to the Lord with his whole heart nor repented of his incest, was
never after called again but left of God to his own hardness of heart; the
like may be said of Pilate, Agrippa, Foelix, Judas, Demas Julian the Apostata,
who having not harkened to the Lords call, but quenched the good motions of his
spirit, afterward were given over of God to a reprobate sense to their
everlasting ruin and destruction. So likewise when as the Lord gave the false
prophetess Iesabel a time to repent, Apoc. 2.21.22.
and she repented not, he threatens his heavy judgments against her; in a
word this is manifest in the examples of carnal secure men in these days, who
having abused Gods mercy and long suffering, and deferred their conversion from
day to day, at last they are taken away in Gods heavy displeasure, and as they
lived like beasts so commonly they die like beasts: and therefore as we love
the salvation of our souls let us harken when the Lord calls, and not harden
our hearts against the good motions of his spirit, for if we be like these men
in our wicked practice there is no hope we should be unlike them in fearful
punishments.

The 3. motive because repentance is Gods gift.
is the gift of God from whom every good and perfect gift descends, as it is,
Iam. 1.17. And therefore we are to accept of this gift when he offers it unto
us; for God does not promise his gifts and graces, with condition that we may
receive them when we list, but when he offers them, Psalm. 95.7. To day if ye
will hear his voice harden not your hearts, he does not give us respite till
to morrow: now God calls and inuiteth us to to come unto him, now he knocks
at the door of our hearts, desiring to enter that he may dwell in us by his holy
spirit, and if we refuse to let him enter, how know we whether he will ever
knock again? if he do not; what gainest thou, but the pleasures of sin for
a season, and in the end eternal death? and what loosest thou, no less a
thing then everlasting life and an eternal weight of glory in Gods kingdom?
well, yet Christ knocks at the door of our hearts, and if we will open he
will be our guest and suppe with us, bringing his cheer with him, Apoc. 3.20.
even an heavenly banquet of all his spiritual graces, but if we rudely shut
the doors against him, what hope can we have that he will come again when he
finds such rude and uncivil entertainment? and then what will follow but
that either we shall never seek after him, and then our case will be most
miserable, Cant. 5.
or with his spouse in the Canticles we shall long seek him but not find him
without great difficulty, yea perhaps we may seek him as Esau sought his
blessing with tears and never find him?

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the fourth motive taken from difficulty of repenting, caused
by delays.
That the longer we defer repentance, the more hardly we shall repent.
THe fourth motive to persuade us to speedy repentance and turning unto God, is
that the longer we defer it the harder we shall find it, for the difficulty
thereof will be much increased by delay, 1. Because sin will grow customable.
and our selves also who are unfit today will be more unfit to morrow, the
reasons hereof are many, first because by continual sinning we get a custom
and habit of sinning, and if a custom which is but affected be hardly left,
what shall we say of a custom which is confirmed by nature or what is nature
strengthened by custom? who knows not that the drunkard is more easily
reclaimed from his drunkenness when he first falls to this vice then when he
has long lived in it, that the swearer the longer he uses and inureth his
tongue to swearing, the more hardly can he forbear it, and the covetous man
as he increases in years increases also in covetousness, and the like may
be said of all other vices. Neither need this seem strange unto us seeing it
is a thing apparent in reason and in experience; for the longer the disease
has possessed the body the more hardly it is cured, and therefore that
counsel is good, Venienti occurrite morbo, prevent the disease before it has
seized on thee or presently after it has taken place remove it. The longer the
sore is neglected the more it festreth and the greater difficulty there is to
heal it, the longer the tree grows the deeper root it takes and the more
hard it is to pull it up; the enemy is more easily kept from scaling the
walls, then beaten back when he is entered into the midst of the city; and
so it is with sins and vices, facilius repelluntur quam expelluntur, they are
more easily kept from entrance then beaten out: as therefore you would condemn
him of extreme folly who would not regard his sickness till it had
overthrown nature and then think to cure it, or who would neglect to apply
any salve to a greisly wound till it were festred and then think the better to
heal it; or that should assay to pull up a young plant and being unable should
defer it till it were grown to a great tree, thinking then more easily to
pluck it up by the roots, or that would let the enemy quietly enter into the
city with a purpose then to expel him with more facility and less loss; so
alike nay much more foolish is he, who finding it now a hard matter to turn
unto God and to forsake his sins deferreth it for many years together; till
the corruptition of nature have received double strength by long custo^e
imagining that then he can very easily attain unto his purpose, let us
therefore break of our sins by unfeigned repentance, and take heed of
confirming our natural corruptions by long custom, August.
for as one says Dum consuetudini non resistitur fit necessitas, whilst
custom is not broken it becomes necessity, and as another, Basil.
Sicut non potest aliquis dediscere maternam linguam, sic vix longam peccati
consuetudinem, as a man cannot easily forget his mother tongue, so neither can
he leave customable sin. So it is said Job 20.11. that the wicked man's bones
are full of the sins of his youth and that they shall lie down with him in
the dust; whereby it is implied that as diseases after they are entered into the
marrow and bones are incurable in so much as they go with me^ to their graves;
so sins and vices which are the sicknesses of the soul having seized and
taken fast hold of a man by long and continual custom from his youth; will
most hardly leave him in his age but will hang fast on till the day of his
death. And hence it is that the Lord by his Prophet does note it to be a thing
impossible in respect of human power to leave those sins which are
customablely committed. Ier. 1323. Can the black more change his skin; or the
leopard his spotts? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do
evil. and therefore if ever we mean to leave our sins and to turn unto God
it is best to begin before the corruptions of nature be confirmed by custom.

2. Because Satan will more hardly be cast out of his possession when he has
long held it.
which possession the longer he holds the more hardly will he be cast out;
for as those who have a long time quietly inioyed their houses and lands though
their title be but weak yet are more hardly dispossessed then if at their
first entrance their right had been called into question, both because long
custom has in it the nature of a law, and the parties themselves will be
more earnest in using all means to retain their possessions which they have
long held, time having worn out al doubting of their right: so satan is more
hardly thrust out of his possession when he has long kept it, because his long
houlding of us in his thraldom makes him imagine that he has right to hold
us still, and he is most earnest in using all his strength and policy; to
hold that which he has already gotten and long kept in his possession. We
know that when a soldier in fight has taken another captive, at first he
uses al means to break from him as having better opportunity when they are
still in the field, then he can hope for after when he is carried away and
clapped up in prison: and as he has less means, so also he has less desire
to escape; after that by continuance of time his captivity is made more
familiar unto him; and we commonly see that a bird as soon as she is taken,
fluttereth and strives to get away, but after she has been a while in the
cage she is content to stay there still though the door be open; and so it is
in our spiritual thraldom, at the first we have best means to escape and
most desire also, for after we are inured to satan's captivity we are
content to remain his bondslaues still. And if we desire to escape he would
more disdain that we should strive and oppose our selves against him, after
he has long time had us at command, and ruled us at his beck, then when at
the first we fell into this cruel slavery.

3. By continuance the strength of sin increases.
and the more hardly it is subdued, for it is the nature of sin as soon as
it is entertained to make way and room for more and those worse then it self
as we may see in the example of David, for when he was overcome of idleness,
it made way for adultery, and adultery for murder. So Herod entertained
incest; and that opened a door in his heart to let in murder, and both these
made open way for all hellish impiety; so Judas retayninge still his
covetousness was moved thereby to betray his master; and this sin brought
him first to desperation, and then to hang himself; yea the Apostle Peter
after that he joined himself in company with the wicked servants of the more
wicked high Priest; at first was moved hereby to deny his master, Matthew. 26.
and when he had gone thus far, then he denies him again with an oath,
and when he had thus far proceeded in the course of sin, he makes no
conscience of redoubling his oaths, cursing himself if he knew the man; so
that the longer we let sin have dominion in us, the more it will increase it
self in strength and number, till our hearts be full of sin and
wickedness. As therefore those citizens were to be accounted most foolish,
who when they saw an hundred enemies entered into the city, should defer the
beating of them out or killing of them, till they had opened the gate to let in
ten thousand more better armed and more strongly provided, thinking then to
have better opportunity, and more ability to give them the repulse, so alike
foolish are those who finding it hard and defficult to subdue some few sins,
to which they are now given, do defer it till the time to come, when as they
are increased in huge multituds imagining then to do it with more ease. Sin,
it is the poison of the soul, as therefore poisons being drunk are presently
to be cast up again, otherwise they disperse themselves in the veins and so
going to the heart cause death; so this poison of sin if it be long kept in
us, it will disperse it self over the whole body and soul, and seasing upon
the heart, will plung us into everlasting death and destruction. Sin it is an
heavy burden and upon whomsoever it lies it will press them down unto
hell; as therefore the way to ease a man of his burden is not to add more
unto it but to cast it of, so the way to ease us of the heavy burden of
sin, is not to increase the weight by adding still more and more unto it but
by casting it of speedily, for when by this continual addition our sins are
grown to an unsupportable wayght, they will sooner press us down then we
shall cast them of.

Fourthly, the longer we live in sin the more unpleasant will virtue and
godliness be unto us; and the more we are delighted in the fulfilling the
lusts of the flesh, the more bitter it will be to mortify them, and to embrace
any strict course of sanctification, seeing these are contrary the one to the
other; he that has long continued in darkness cannot endure the light of the
sun; he that never tasted any thing but sweet and pleasant meats, cannot
abide to feed upon those which are sour and bitter; he that was borne and
bred in hot countries, is not able to brook those which are cold; and so
those who have accustomed themselves to sin will hardly be ever brought to
embrace virtue and godliness, these being as contrary one to another, as
light and darkness, sweet and sower, hot and cold, especially considering
that sin is as delightful to the taste of a natural man, as drink when he is
extremely thirsty, or meat when he is ready to pine for hunger.

5. Because the longer we delay the more we are disabled.
the longer we live in our sins and defer our conversion unto God, the more
are our understandings darkened, our wills perverted, our affections more
corrupted, our hearts hardened, and our consciences seared, and all the powers
and faculties of our bodies and souls are more and more disabled; for as the
longer that sickness has continued, the more it weakneth the body and makes
it unfit for any work or actio^, so the longer sin which is the sickness of
the soul has seized on us, the more unable we are to shake it off, and the
weaker it makes us to perform any good actions. When men at first fall into
unusual sins, their consciences check them, and they fear least the Lord
will pour upon them his heavy judgments, but when they have committed the
same sins again and again, and yet are not punished, then like thieves who
having escaped after one robbery committed, are ready to commit another, so
they having not tasted of Gods judgments threatened, think that they shall
never be inflicted on them, and therefore are ready to sin again; until by
long custom in sinning their hearts are hardened and their consciences seared
as it were with a hot iron, so as no^e without any check or remorse, yea with
all pleasure and delight they cannot commit those sins, which in former times
they would have trembled, to have entertained into their secrets thoughts.

6. Because the means grew vnessectuall by delays.
the longer we defer our repentance the more ineffectual will the means be
of our conversion; for the word of God, will either soften our hearts like
wax, or harden them like clay, either it will be the savor of life unto life,
or the savor of death to our deeper condemnation, as is 2 Cor. 2.16. If it
once go out of Gods mouth it shall not return unto him void, but it shall
accomplish that which he will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto he
sends it, (whether it be for the conversion or hardening of those who hear
it) as it is Esa. 55.11. we know if a salve be applied unto a wound either it
heals it, or else the sore ouerco^ming the virtue thereof does more fester and
ranckle, and so this spiritual salve, being applied unto our souls wounded
with sin, does either cure them, or else becoming ineffectual they wax
worse and worse. When men sleep and are suddenly wakened with some strange
and unusual sound, they presently start up and are amassed, but after a long
time they have been acquainted with the noise they can sleep securely and not
be much disquieted; so when men sleeping in carnal security are awaked with
the threatenings of the law preached unto them, which like Canon shot thu^dreth
in their ears, they are at first somewhat rouzed up and begin to look about
them, but giving themselves to sleep again in their sins, after they have
been many times awakened, at last this fearful sound nothing moves nor
disquietts them neither will any thing waken them out of this spiritual
lethargy, but the voice of the Archangell commanding them to arise and to come
unto judgment.

7. Because old age is more unfit for repentance then youth.
it will then be more hard and difficult then in the time of youth, because
old men are more indocible and unfit to learn, then they were in their
youthful days, and therefore whosoever mean to attain unto learning, or to
knowledge of any science, trade or occupation they do not defer it to their
old days, but give themselves unto it in the time of their youth, when as
their wits are most fresh, and their capacity most quick to receive
instruction. Seeing then there is much knowledge necessarily required to the
making of a true Christian (for without knowledge we can have no faith, and
without faith there is no salvation) therefore for the attaining hereunto it is
very needful that we begin betimes and set our selves to learn Gods true
religion in the time of our youth, when as we are most fit for this purpose.
And this counsel the wise man gives us Prou. 22.6. Teach a child in the trade
of his way and when he is old he shall not depart from it. Secondly, as old men
are more unfit to learn, so also they are more forgetful to remember that
which is taught them, and therefore if they do not set their whole minds upon
Gods word, and continually call to mind that which has been delivered unto
them in the preaching thereof, meditating therein with the prophet David day
and night, all they have learned, will easily slip out of their weak and
decayed memories. Which thing is most hard for them to perform by reason of
manifold distractions, which that age is subject unto, as the infirmities of
the body, sickness, aches, and innumerable griefs, and also the manifold
troubles and cares of mind, not only in respect of their own state, but also
in the behalf of their children, young nephews and near friends, whose welfare
is as dear unto the^ as their own: now if a single man has cares inow to
distract him from Gods service, how many are their distractions whose cares are
doubled and redoubled: and therefore if we would make choice of the fittest
time for our conversion we must not defer it till our old age, but turn unto
God in our youth, when as our wits are most fit to receive, and our memories
to retain instruction.

8. Because the hour of death is the most unfit time for repentance.
or till we lie on our death bed, we shall find it more difficult in that our
enemy satan who always goes about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour
us, does then redouble his malicious diligence in working our destruction when
as he sees the time draw near wherein he must attain his purpose, or else
for ever fail of his desire, what, therefore will now our malicious powerful
and most subtle enemy leave unattempted? what violence will he not now
offer? what policy will he not assay to draw us from God, to his kingdom of
darkness? we know that when enemies beseidging a city do hear that their
seidge is shortly to be raised by the approaching of mighty succors; or within
a while will become vain and bootelesse, by reason that the city well be
more strongly manned and better victualed, how they will bend all their
ordinance against the wall to make a breach, how furiously they will give the
assault, and how desperately they will fight that they may not be disapointed
of their hope and loose all their former labor; and shall we think that
satan who has long beseidged us, desiring nothing more then to sack our
souls, and to spoil them of al Gods graces and to lead them captive to hell
and destruction, will use less politic fury in assaulting us with all his
engines of battrie when he sees the time approach when as now or never he is
to accomplish his desire? But let us consider moreover how able we are to
endure his assaults if we do not prepare our selves before the time of
sickness, arming our selves with the whole armor of God; surely we are naked
and lie open to all his violence, being destitute of the girdle of verity; the
knowledge of Gods truth, neither armed with the brestplate of righteousness,
nor having our feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, whereby
we might be enabled chearefully to march in the afflicted way which is full
of the thorns and briars of tribulation and afflictions, wherein we must
travail if we will go to Gods kingdom; neither yet having the shield of
faith whereby we might quench the fiery darts of the wicked one, nor the
helmet of salvation, nor yet any skill to use the sword of the spirit, the word
of God: either for the defending of our souls; or the offending of our enemy.
And whereas we may hope that God will at that time supply all our wantes and
give unto us all his spiritual armor whereby we may be defended and satan
repulsed, we are to know that God uses not to give his heavenly and
spiritual graces at the hour of death to those, who have contemned them al
their life, or if he do bestow them upon any it is ordinarily by means
which he has ordained for this purpose, as the hearing of the word, hearty
prayer, holy conferences, and such like spiritual excercises: now let it be
granted that we may have at such times of our mortal sicknesses, Gods
ministers and all other outward helps to further us, in performing of these
duties (which yet notwithstanding no man can promise to himself) yet how
unfit is any man in this case for the effectual doing of these holy exercises,
when as his body is full of pain, and his mind full of anguishe, partly
fearing Gods judgments and eternal damnation, partly being grieved with the
loss of all his delights, and because he is to part with his friends,
partly being troubled and distracted with disposing of his worldly estate and
setting all things in order; and when to all these encumbrances there is added
satan's dangerous temptations, who then most violently assaulteth, and most
subtilely undermines us that he may work our final destruction? And
therefore seeing our conversion in the time of our sickness is so hard and
difficult, (I had almost said desperate,) let us whilst the Lord gives us the
outward means of our conversion, and withal the use of our senses,
understandings, and memories, (all which when we are grieuoussy sick, are
always exceedingly weakened, and sometime quite overthrown) let us (I say)
unfeignedly turn unto the Lord by unfeigned repentance in the time of our
health, and strength, and not by our delays, hazard and desperately endanger
the eternal salvation of our souls for the inioying of the transitory trifles
and vain delights of this miserable world.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the fifth Motive which is that our delay will bring more
sorrow or utter destruction.
More sorrow follows sin then joy acco^panieth it.
is that by our delay either we prepare more matter for our own sorrow and
grief, or else treasure up for our selves a more fearful measure of wrath
against the day of wrath; for if the best happen that we can hope for, or
imagine, it is that we truly repent us of our sins without which, there is
no forgiveness, and what is this repentance, but an hearty sorrow, and bitter
grief, for our sins past, and an earnest desire and endeavor of forsaking
them in time to come? and therefore seeing whatsoever pleasure we have taken
in sinninge we must after loose it in sorrowing for sin, seeing our laughing
must end in weeping, and our honey be turned into gall, and wormewoode, let us
break off our sins betimes, by unfeigned repentance, and not heap up matter
of more grief, let not our minds so much dote to taste of the honey which
sin brings in the mouth, as that we forgette the poison which it carries
in the tail; let us not be so eager in drinking of this poison of sin,
though it be sweet and pleasant to the taste, remembering that it is deadly in
opperation if it be not (as it were) cast up again by unfeigned repentance;
let not our gluttonous appetites cause us to surfeit on the pleasures of sin,
seeing the present delight will not countervaile the future pain, when as
being sick in sin, and tormented in conscience, we shall vomit that with
grief, which we have eaten with pleasure, finding more bitterness in the
casting up, then sweetness when we swallowed it down. But this is the best
which can befall us, for if we do not thus heartily sorrow for our sins, but
still live in them with pleasure and delight, then do we nothing else but
heap up judgment, and punishments, which shall one day be powered upon us in
full measure, and fill up the vialls of Gods wrath, till being filled up to the
brimme, he will power them out upon our one heads. And this the Apostle
plainly shows. Romans 2.5. But thou (says he) after thine hardness and
heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of
wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God. 6. Who will reward
every man according to his works. etc. And this is all the treasure which
sinners, by deferring their repentance heap up unto themselves for the last
days; as James speaks. Iame. 5.3. The longer therefore we defer our
repentance the more we increase the bills of accoumpts, of which we shall
never be able to give a reckoning, at the great, and general audit, the more
we heap up our sins, the more we heap up Gods wrath; and increase the
measure of our condemnation, and hellish torments every day, (as it were)
pyling up wood, in which we shall eternally be burned.

The sixth motive our dangerous estate before conversion.
is the consideration of the dangerousnesse of our estate before our
conversion; for we are dead in our sins, the children of wrath and enemies
unto God, who every minute lie open to his judgments and punishments. And this
the Lord implies in his speech to Cain, Genesis 4.7. If thou do not well
(says he) sin lies at the door, that is the punishment due to thy sin,
like a cruel wild beast still watches and waits for thee, so as thou can
nor stir any way but it is ready to sease upon and destroy thee. Now in what
a fearful state are those who every minute live in this danger, of which if
they be surprised what can remain unto them but everlasting death and
destruction; For as the tree falls so shall it lie, as it is Eccl. 11.3. that
is; as the day of death leaves us, so shall the day of judgment find us, and
therefore if we be taken away in our impaenitencie whilst we are dead in our
sins, children of wrath, and enemies unto God, such shall we be presented
before the tribunal seat of judgment in the presence of the great judge of
heaven and earth. The seventh motive taken from the benefits which accompany
our conversion.


and taste of that liquor which was put into it whilst it was new and
unseasoned, so they will longest retain virtue and goodness who have it
planted in them in their youth, according to that Pro. 22.6, teach a child in
the trade of his way, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Secondly
if we turn to God betimes the exercises of religion, and works of
sanctification, will be far more pleasant and easy then if we defer them
till our old age, for often use will bring us to a custom, and long custom
will work in us an habit of virtue, which will be easy and familiar, if
children from their youth be brought up in trades and occupations which are
exceeding hard and difficult, they do attain to the skill and practice of them
with exceeding dexterity and quickness, but if the learning of them be
deferred till old age they ca^ never attain unto them, or at least perform
them slowly and with great difficulty, and so if from our childhood we,
accustom our selves to the learning and practice of the works of holiness
and righteousness, they will grow exceeding easy and pleasant, whereas being
deferred they will be difficult and tedious. If the ox whilst he is young be
accustomed to the yoke he draws in it quietly and with no great pain, but
if he run long in the pasture unbroken and untamed, when he is brought to the
yoke he strugleth and strives, and therewith gaulling his neck draws with
exceeding pain and irksomenesse; and so if in our youth we accustom ourselves
to bear the yoke of obedience, it will be easy and pleasant, but if we use
delays we shall grow stubborn and stifnecked like untamed oxen, and the
bearing of Christ's yoke through our impaciencie, and the rebellion of our
nature will gaul and vex us. Thirdly, the sooner we turn unto God, the more
joy, peace and comfort shall we have in the whole course of our lives, for what
joy may be compared with the joy in the holy Ghost, Pro. 15.15.
what peace is like the peace with God; and the peace of conscience, when as we
are sure that we are now friends, who before we were enemies and children of
God and heirs of his everlasting kingdom of glory, who in time past were
children of wrath and fire brands of hell? what comfort in the world can be
imagined like unto the consolation of Gods spirit, which is able to make all
afflictions light; and even death it self sweet and pleasant unto us, but this
joy, peace, and comfort do all company our true conversion unto God, and
therefore who would defer it for one day, seeing it brings such inestimable
benefits and such surpassing pleasures as none sufficiently understand them,
but they who feel and enjoy them. Whereas on the other side if we defer our
conversion, in the mean while we are continually subject to the checkes and
terrors of an evil conscience, in fear of Gods judgments and eternal
damnation: and though in outward show we may be exceeding merry and
pleasant, yet our mirth is full of sorrow, and our joy of bitterness, and of such
laughter we may say, thou art mad, and of this joy what is that which thou
do? as the Wise man speaks, Eccle. 2.2. for it is but Sardonicus risus
laughter from the teeth outward, which is straight controuled with some inward
pange or check of conscience. Fourthly, the sooner we turn unto the Lord;
the longer time we shall spend in his service, which in truth is perfect
liberty, now what can be more delightful unto any Christian heart, then to
serve our creator from the days of our youth, and to show our thankfulness
to God our redeemer for all the inestimable benefits which he has bestowed
upon us, by causing our lights to shine before men, and by glorifying his name
in our godly and Christian lives? what can be more pleasing to a thankful mind
then to take all occasions of expressing thankfulfulnesse to him unto whom we
are so much bounden? Lastly, as by our speedy conversion unto God we live in
sweet comfort and joyful peace, so also we securely expect death and give it
entertainment when it comes with cheerful countenance, for being converted
unto God we are at peace with him and in his love and favor, we are assured
that the curse of the law is nailed to Christ's cross, that he was condemned
that we might be justified and put to death that we might live eternally, that
he is gone before us into heaven to prepare us a place there, and now sits
at the right hand of his father to give us joyful entertainment when we come
unto him, that he has taken away the sting of death which is sin, and has
made a sovereign medicine against this poison with his precious blood, and
therefore being converted unto God we need not to fear death, nay rather we
may wish with the Apostle to be speedily dissolved that we may be with Christ
seeing that is best of all. As it is Phil. 1.23. neither need we to fear the
destruction of this earthly tabernacle, seeing we are assured that we have a
building given us of God, a house not made with hands but eternal in the
heavens. as it is 2. Cor. 5.1. Moreover we shall not need to fear either
sudden death; or an evil death, for it cannot be sudden to them who are
always prepared, Nee potest male mori qui been vixit, August.
neither can he die ill who has lived well. On the other side those who
defer their repentance and turning unto God, when death approaches are filled
with horror and fear when as they see that they are still subject to the
curse of the law and every minute in danger of Gods fearful judgments; when
as the weight of sin presses them, Satan and their own conscience accuses
them, death waits on them to bring them to everlasting death, hell, and
destruction. And therefore seeing so many benefits accompany our speedy
conversion both in life and death, and so many evils follow our delays: let us
not be moved by Satan's tentations, the sweetness of sin, nor with the
alluring vanities of this deceitful world to defer our repentance from day
to day, but let us now harken whilst God, yet calls us, and take the good
and acceptable time when he offers it unto us.

The 8. motive because repentance deferred to old age is not so excellent or
acceptable.
is that our turning unto God being deferred to our old age, or till the time
we lie sick on our deathbeddes, is not so excellent in it one nature, nor so
acceptable unto God, as if it were performed in the time of our youth; for what
great matter is it if we leave our sins, when they, are ready to leave us,
to renounce the world with the riches honors, and pleasures thereof, when
they are ready to abandon us; to embrace mortification, when as our bodies are
mortified with sickness, and brought to the gates of death; to give to the
pore when we can keep our goods no longer, to forgive our enemies, when as we
can not offer them any further wrong, or violence, to commend our wives, and
children, into the hands of God, when as we our selves can no longer defend and
provide for them? to cease to swear and blaspheme Gods name, when as soon
after we shall cease to speak? moreover how can we think that this will be
acceptable unto God when as we do not come unto him before all the world
forsakes us, nor crave his help till we are abandoned of all other succor,
nor offer to come into his service before we are ready to go out of the
world, and that rather for fear of punishment; and hope of reward, then for
any love we bear to our Lord and master. But let it be granted (as in truth
it cannot be denied) that whenever we truly repent us of our sins and
turn unto God he will receive us to mercy, should we take occasion hereof to
defer our conversion and to continue in our sins? should his love and mercy
toward us move us to rebellion, and impiety, toward him, and because he
is gracious and long suffering shall we therefore the more offend him, and as it
were whet the edge of his wrath against us? be it far from us. Nay rather if
God be gracious and merciful, let us be ashamed to offend so gracious and
merciful a God, and though we should be so hard hearted as not to fear his
justice, and fearful judgments, yet even in common humanity let us blush
for shame to offend him in consideration of his infinite love, and mercy. If
we had a friend who by reason of the love he bears us, would hardly be
displeased, or moved to anger against us, would we make this use of his love
and patience, still to provoke him with new injuries? Nay if their be any good
nature and civility in us, would not his love toward us, move us to love
him again, and would not this love work in us a care and fear not to
displease him? yes assuredly. O let not then the Lords love, patience, and
long suffering, who is our friend of frindes, make us to take occasion of
offending, and displeasing him, but rather let the consideration thereof be a
forcible and strong motive to move us to repentance.

Lastly though the Lord be so gracious, Romans 2.4.. Sect. 5. The last motive
because repentance in time of sickness is often unsound.
and merciful, that he is ready to receive us into his love, and favor
whenever we unfeignedly repent, and truly turn unto him; yet forasmuch as
he extends his mercy to those only, who are truly penitent; and seeing the
repentance of the most is fained, and hypocritical, which then only begins
when death or some extreme danger approaches, this should be a strong
motive to persuade us to repent, and turn unto the Lord, when we are in our
perfect health, strength, and prosperity that so we may have assurance that
our conversion is sincere and unfeigned, and not forced or dissembled. We know
that Pharaoh himself when he was vexed with Gods fearful plagues, Exodus
9.27. and 10.16.17.
could say I have sinned, and promise amendment, And Saul, when God threatened
to cut him off, and to take the kingdom from him, could acknowledge his
wickedness, and pretend a desire to worship the Lord. And Jeroboam could show
more contrition for the loss of his hand, Sam. 15.14.25.
then he ever showed for the loss of his soul. And wicked Achab when he heard
heavy judgments denounced against him, could outwardly humble himself, 1.
King. 13.6 and 21.27.
put on sackeloth, fast and go demurely. And who may not observe in his own
experience, how many there are who in the time of their sickness, make godly
shows of repentance, promising goulden mountains and vowing if they recover,
that they will lead a new life, forsaking their sins, and indeuouring to
serve the Lord in the duties of holiness, and righteousness, and yet the
same men being restored to their heath, with the dog return to their vomit,
and with the sow to wallowe again in the filthy puddle of sin, becoming
as prophaine, wicked, irreligious, and negligent in all duties of
christianity, as ever they were; which is a most undoubted sign, that there
repentance was but feigned, and dissembled, and that they were moved thereunto
not for any love of God, or hatred of sin, but for fear of Gods judgments,
and eternal condemnation, and therefore as soon as the cause of their fear is
a little removed, their repentance also cease. Moreover we know that true
repentance is the gift of God, and that we have it not at our own beck and
call, but when he offers and vouchsaueth it unto us, and therefore it is no
marvel if they who have scorned this gracious gift all the whole course of
their lives, should be denied it at the time of death, and left so to the
hardness of their hearts, that though with Esau they seek repentance with
tears, yet they shall never find it. And though with the five foolish virgins
they desire to buy oil for their lamps, yet the time of grace being past they
shall be shut out of doors and excluded from the marriage. Neither does the
Lord ordmarily beget faith, Ephesians 4.11.12.
repentance and other sanctifying graces in any man, but by the use of the
means which he has ordained for this purpose; now the means ordained of God
are not sickness or the infirmities of old age, but the ministry of his
word, made effectual by the inward operation of his spirit for our conversion
and sanctification; and therefore if the Lord has oftentimes granted us this
means, and they have not been effectual for our conversion if he have often
called us in the preaching of the word and we have refused to come, what hope
can we have that we should turn unto God, John 6.44.
without this means in the time of sickness, who by the continual hearing
of the word have not been converted in the time of our health, seeing not any
come unto Christ but whom the father draws, and the means whereby he draws
us unto him, is not sickness or the approaching of death ordinarily, but the
ministry of his word; for when the sheep hear Christ's voice and thereby
know him to be the true shepherd. then (and not before) they follow him as
it is John. 10.27. So that though we were sick and certainly assured we
should die to morrow, yet for all this, we are never the nearer our
conversion, faith, and repentance then we were before; as appears in the
example of the Epicures. 1. Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink (say they) for
to morrow we shall die a man would think they should rather have said, let us
fast and pray for to morrow we shall die; but this plainly shows that we are
never the nearer our conversion unto God, and true repentance though we are
certain that death approaches; it is only the work of Gods spirit, which
ordinarily works not by the means of sickness or fear of death, but by the
ministry of the word which is Gods own ordinance, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
instituted of God for the gathering together of the Saints, and for the
edification of the body of Christ. And therefore whilst the Lord calls us in
the preaching of the word, let us harken unto his voice, and turn unto him by
unfeigned repentance, for if Gods own ordinance is not effectual for our
conversion, assuredly there is no hope that ever we will be converted by
sickness or any other extraordinary means whatsoever. It is an admirable
miracle wrought by the infinite wisdom and almighty power of God, that a
poor sinner should be converted unto him by the preaching of the word, for
hereby we who were dead in sin, are raised up to newness of life, we who
were borne blind, are endued with sight, our hearts more hard then the Adamant
are made flexible, and soft as wax to receive any impression, which the Lord
wilimprint in them, and we are moved to deny our selves, and to cast away our
own righteousness, and to rest and rely upon Christ Jesus alone for our
justification and salvation, which is quite contrary to our natural
disposition: but it were a miracle of miracles that all these things should be
wrought in us by sickness, which the Lord has not ordained for this purpose,
when as the means appointed by God himself the ministry of his word, which
is Gods own ordinance could never work them in us. It may be indeed that
Gods hand lying heavy upon us in the time of sickness, and fearing worse
judgments in the life to come, we may be moved hereby to make a goodly show,
and to vow great reformation if we might be restored to our health: It may be
that with Pharaoh we may make a fained confession of our sins, and promise to
amend if this judgment may be removed, or that we may with Achab outwardly
humble our selves before God, to the end we may escape those fearful
punishments which are threatened in his word; but it is a thousand to one if we
then truly repent who have lived our whole time in impenitency, or then turn
unto God if we were not before that time effectually called and converted; for
as we live so we commonly die, neither is it likely that having led our lives
like wicked Balaam we should die the death of the righteous, that having
always hitherto been thorns and thistles we should now bring forth sweet
figs and pleasant grapes when we are ready to be cut down and to be cast
into the fire, that having all our life sowed the seeds of wickedness we
should at our death reap the fruit of godliness; And therefore (as the
Apostle exhorts) let us not be deceived: God is not mocked; for whatsoever a
man sows that shall he also reap; for he that sows to his flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting. as it is Gal. 6.7.8. Let us now turn unto God
while he calls us and grants us the means of our conversion the
ministry of his word; now is the acceptable time, now is the day of our
salvation; and if we will now turn unto God and truly repent whilst we might
continue in our sins, we may be assured our repentance is true and unfeigned,
and not pressed out of us with sense of present pain, nor forced with fear of
future punishment, and that turning to God we shall be received to grace and
mercy, seeing we then offer to serve him, when we might have served Satan,
the world and our own corrupt flesh.

CHAP. XXX. Two letts which hinder worldlings from speedy repentance removed.
The first let, is the misaplying of Gods mercy and gracious promisee.
all which the worldly secure man wardeth and bears of with a double fence,
so as they can never beat him down with true humility nor pearce his heart
with unfeigned sorrow for sin; the one is by alleging Gods mercy manifestly
declared unto us in the sweet promises of the Gospel; the other by obiecting
the example of the converted thief, who though he had spent his whole life in
sin and wickedness, yet at the last hour was received to mercy.

For the first, Ezech. 13.32. and 33.11. Math. 9.13. Math. 11.28.
has not the Lord (will they say) protested in his word that he desires not
the death of a sinner, but that he turn from his way and live? has not our
Savior told us that he came not to call the righteous; but sinners to
repentance? and does he not inuit such unto him as labor under the heavy
burden of sin promising that he will ease them? And has not the Apostle
Paul taught us, 1. Tim. 2.4.
that Gods will is that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of
his truth. Seeing therefore God is so merciful why should we doubt of our
salvation? Why should we fear to defer our repentance and follow our
pleasures and delights for a time, seeing the Lord will receive us to mercy
whenever we turn unto him?

The first let removed.
I answer first, that though all this were certain, true, and not to be
doubted of, yet it is a most unthankful part and horrible ingratitude against
our gracious God and loving father to take occasion of his mercy the more to
offend him, as before I have showed. Secondly I answer, that as God has
showed his mercy in the gracious promises of the Gospel, so also he has as
plainly declared his justice in the severe threatenings of the law, and he is
as true in the one as in the other: And therefore all the question is who shall
taste of his mercy, and who of his justice, seeing that is promised to some, and
this threatened against others; or rather in truth it is without all question,
for the Lord has plainly showed in his word that he will extend his mercy to
all repentant sinners and to them only, and that he will declare his justice
in pouring out his just judgments upon the wicked who live in their sins,
and especially upon those who take occasion of Gods mercy to continue in their
vnrepentancie, despising the riches of his bountifulnes, his patience and long
suffering; for hereby they heap unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath
and the declaration of the just judgment of God, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
2.4.5. Though then there be never so many sweet promises in the gospel, yet
they who continue in their sins without repentance can reap no true comfort
by them, because they are not made to them but to repentant sinners; and on the
other side though there be never so many terrible threatenings denounced in the
law, yet the paenitent sinner need not to fear them, seeing they are threatened
only against those who continue in their impaenitencie; though God be of
infinite mercy let not the wicked man who lives in his sins presume, seeing
it is sufficiently declared in pardoning the sins of repentant sinners.
Neither let him who is truly paenitent despair because God is of infinite
justice, seeing it is sufficiently manifested in punishing the sins of those
who continue in their vnrepentancie; let not him who is turned unto God from
his wicked ways fear Gods justice, for it is fully satisfied in Christ and
therefore it shall never attach him, neither let him who continues in his
sins without repentance hope in Gods mercy for it does not belong unto him,
nor yet in the sweet promises of the Gospel which though they be never so
general, yet are they always to be restrained to the condition of the
covenant of grace, faith, and repentance. And this is manifest in the places
before alleged which worldly men so much abuse to nourish in them carnal
security; for whereas the Lord says Ezech. 33.11. That he will not the death
of a sinner, he adds in the next words, but that he turn from his way and
live, so that the Lord speaks not of all sinners but of those who turn unto
him from their wicked ways. So our savior Christ says Math. 9.13, that he
came not to call the righteous, that is those who are just and righteous in
their own conceits, but sinners to repentance, so that whosoever are called
unto Christ that in him they may have salvation are called also to repentance.
And Math. 11.28. our savior does not call all sinners unto him without
difference, but those only who are weary and heavy laden, that is who find
their sins irksome and grievous unto them, and desire nothing more then to be
freed of this unsupportable burden. And the Apostle Paul likewise 1. Tim.
2.4. does not say simply that God would have all men to besaued, but that he
would also (...) have them come to the knowledge of the truth, that is to the
knowing, acknowledging, and believing of the principles of Christian religion
concerning God, themselves, and the work of redemption wrought by Christ. Let
therefore no carnal secure man take occasion to presume upon Gods mercy in
regard of the sweet and gracious promises of the Gospel, for unless they
turn unto God from their evil ways and truly repent them of their sins,
unless they are weary and heavy laden, desiring nothing more then to be
eased of their heavy burden; unless they come out of their blind ignorance
and attain to the knowledge of the truth, the gracious promises of the Gospel
do not appertain unto them.

The 2. let is presumption upon the example of the converted thief.
and therefore we can make thereof no general rule, especialy seeing to this
one we may oppose many thousands of those who having deferred their repentance
to the last hour, have been taken away in their sins and impaenitencie. It
is true indeed that if with this thief we truelyturne unto the Lord by
unfeigned repentance, and show our faith by the like lively fruits he will
pardon our sins and receive us to mercy according to his gracious promises,
but this faith and repentance are not in our own power, but the free gifts of
God which he very seldom bestows on those at the hour of death who have
neglected and contemned them their whole lives: sometimes indeed he calls
and conuerteth some at the last hour to show the infinite riches of his mercy,
but most commonly he leaves those who have deferred their repentance to die in
their impaenitencie that they may be examples of his justice. And to this
purpose Austine speaks well; there is (says he) mention made in the
Scriptures of one whom the Lord received to mercy that none might despair,
and but of one that none might presume. It is the manner of princes to send
their gracious pardon sometimes to those who are led out to execution, but if
any will wilfully offend in hope hereof, or having offended will defer to sue
for his pardon to the last hour, surely he is well worthy to be hanged, both
for his offense; and also for his presumption, so the Lord mercifully pardons
some few when death is ready to cease upon them, and to transport them into the
eternal torments of hell fire, to show the riches of his grace, but if any
shall take occasion hereby the more to offend against his majesty, or having
offended deferreth to sue for pardon by pouring out the tears of unfeigned
repentance until his last hour, he is undoubtedly unworthy of any grace and
mercy, and in all likelihood he shall be delivered up to suffer eternal
torments. Moreover as this act of mercy in receiving this thief to grace was
very extraordinary, so was it reserved as being most fit for the time of
Christ's passion; for as great Princes at the time of their coronation pardon
such notorious offenses, the like whereof they will hardly ever after remit, to
the end that their clemency and mercy may appear to all, so our Savior
Christ the glorious king of heaven and earth, being ready to lay down the
form of a servant and to take upon him the crown of endless glory and
majesty, gave his gracious pardon to this grievous offender, that his infinite
mercy and goodness might be manifested unto al men, that so they might break
of their sins by unfeigned repentance, and by a lively faith come unto him,
looking and expecting for life and salvation only in this their savior and
redeemer; and as cunning Surgeons having made a sovereign salve, do upon the
next occasion make experiment thereof by curing some griesly and desperate
wound, that so they may commend it to all who shall have need to use it, so the
Lord having made a precious plaster and sovereign salve to cure all souls;
who being wounded with sin, will apply it unto them by a lively faith,
presently took occasion of curing there with this poor thief grievously
wounded with sin, that all others in his state, seeing the virtue thereof,
might more earnestly desire it and more carefully seek after, and apply it to
their wounded souls. And therefore seeing the occasion of this cure was
altogether extraordinary, the action is not like to be ordinary, the occasion
being removed, and the mercy of God and virtue of Christ's death and bloodshed
being sufficiently manifested to all the world. Thirdly, we are to know that the
estate of these men, is far unlike and much more desperate then the state of
the converted thief; for he was in all likelihood never before this time
called, and presently he harkeneth unto the voice of Christ, and willingly
intertaineth the good motions of his spirit, but these men being often called,
have refused to come, and have quenched the good motions of Gods spirit; he
persisted in his sin ignorantly, having not heard the doctrine of the Gospel,
whereby he might be invited to come unto Christ by a lively faith, and might
turn unto God by unfeigned repentance, these have often heard these glad
tidings, and have neglected and contemned them; he continued in his sins
through ignorance, neither did he ungratefully resolve to serve the devil his
whole life, reserving the time of his old age and sickness for the service of
God, only for his own advantage, but these men having bin often instructed in
the law of God, and ways of godliness, notwithstanding wittingly and will
fully persist in their sins, presuming upon repentance and hope of mercy at
the last hour, intending then to turn unto God, not for any love they bear
him, but for fear of hell torments and eternal damnation, lastly his
repentance was most unfeigned and exceeding earnest, and his faith brightly
shined presently after his conversion in singular fruits thereof. For he made a
notable confession of his savior and redeemer, even when all his disciples for
fear forsook him. He justifies Christ when all men condemned him, and even
his Apostles doubted of him. He prays fervently unto him, when the multitude
mocked and reviled him, he humbly confesses his own sins, and lovingly
admonishes his fellow of his wickedness, desiring earnestly that as they had
bin fellows, and copartners in sin, so they might be partakers in pardon,
and in the benefitte of redemption wrought by Christ. Whereas most commonly
their repentance is forced and dissembled for fear of punishment, rather then
for hatred of sin, or love of God: as they usually make it manifest if they
recover of their sickness. And therefore seeing there is such great
dissimilitude; and difference in their purposes, lives, and courses, it is not
probable that they will ever be like in their conversion, death, and salvation.

CHAP. XXXI. Satan's tentations moving men to rest in a counterfeit repentance,
answered.
That the promises of the gospel are made only to those who repentseriously.
with which, if he cannot prevail both because we see the necessity of
repentance unto salvation, and also plainly perceive by the former reasons that
delays are most dangerous, then he will labor in the next place to persuade
us to content our selves with a small measure of repentance, or rather in truth
with a cou^terfait worke-repentance, which is only in outward show and never
pearceth the heart; making us believe that if when we see our sins, having
our consciences convinced out of Gods word we do in some general terms
confess that we are all sinners, and desire God after a formal manner to have
mercy upon us, if we can sometime strain from us a broken sighe and be
content to leave some of our least pleasing sins, our repentance will be very
acceptable to God, and sufficient for our salvation.

And with this tentation Satan deludeth, and destroys, innumerable men in
these our days, and therefore it behooves every man, to prepare himself for
this encounter. And to this end we are to know that the mercy of God, and
merits of Christ, dot^ not belong unto those who thus slubber over their
repentance; neither does Christ Jesus call unto him such as slightly sorrow for
their sins, and think the burden of them light, and easy to be borne, but
such as labor, and are heavy laden. as appears Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me
all ye who are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. In which words
our savior Christ plainly shows whom he calls to the participation of
the work of redemption wrought by him, and what measure of repentance he
requires of them; for the first word (...) signifies such as labor until
they be weary, and the other word (...) signifies such as are heavy laden
with a burden unsupportable and therefore, being grievously pressed therewith,
they desire nothing more, then to be case of it, for (...) from which this
word is derived properly signifies the burden of a ship, and is taken
metaphorically for any thing which is very troublesome and grievous. So that by
joining these two together our savior evidently declares whom he calls,
and inuiteth unto him. Namely those only who known, acknowledge, and feel,
that their sins are an intolerable heavy burden, and being exceedingly
vexed with them, most earnestly desire to be eased, and released of them, and
to this purpose flee unto Christ by a true and lively faith finding themselves
destitute of all means whereby they may otherwise be eased and relieved.

What things are required in those who truly repent.
and a true and feeling knowledge of our miserable, and wretched estate, in
which we are, by reason of them, and the punishment due unto them. Secondly we
must be weary in bearing this heavy burden, as being most irksome and
grievous unto us. Thirdly we must have an earnest desire to be eased and freed
from it. Lastly we must come unto Christ by a true and lively faith, to the
end that he may ease and release us.

1. Knowledge and sight of their sins.
For the first We must come to the knowledge of our sins, before we can
truly repent of them, for we cannot sorrow for them, until we see them;
neither is it sufficient that we see, and know, that we are grievous and
hanious sinners, unless we also feel the weight of this intolerable burden,
pressing us down, and vexing, and grieuing us even to the very heart; for
wicked and profane men may see their sins, (for what can hide them from
their eyes being so innumerable in multitude, and so grievous and heinous in
respect of their quantity, and quallitie, but yet they feel not their weight,
neither are troubled with them; nay it is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly,
as it is Prou. 10.23. and the abominable filthy sinner drinks iniquity
like water, as it is Job. 15.16. and there are some so delighted with
ungodliness, and all lewd profaneness that they even draw unto them iniquity
with the cords of vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes, as the prophet
speaks Esa. 5.18. and though they be laden with their sins as it were with
an intolerable burden, yet they feel them not, neither are they any thing
vexed with their weight, and though the iniquity of sinners be so heavy that
the earth cannot bear it but reeleth too and fro like a drunken man, and is
removed like a tent, as it is Esaias 24.20. though it make all the creatures
groan and travail in pain together, as the Apostle shows Romans 8.22. yea
though it even wearieth God himself in suffering and bearing with it, as it is
Esa. 43.24. yet do they walk bolt upright, and with stretched out necks,
never so much as stooping under this unsupportable burden, till at last it
grow so heavy, that it ouerwhelmeth them, and presses them down to the
bottom of hell.

The reason here of is because they are wholly plunged yea drowned and dead in
their sins, and therefore as those who being diued to the bottom of some
deep water, do not feel the weight of that which is above them, whereas if
they were pulled out of the waters; they would be overwhelmed with the burden
of one tun, so those who are deeply plu^ged into the gulf of sin and
wickedness, do not feel the weight of this intolerable burden, but if once
they come out of their sins by unfeigned repentance, the weight of some few of
them would press them down unto the gates of hell, if they be not supported
and freed from this burden by our savior Jesus Christ.

But such as these, are not called by our savior, neither will he ease them,
though their burden be never so intolerable; but he inuiteth those only who
are heavy laden, and finding their burden irksome are weary of it and
desire to be eased; he harkeneth only unto those who from their hearts cry out
with David. psalm. 38.4. mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as a weighty
burden they are to heavy for me. 6. I am bowed and crooked very sore, I go
mourning all the day. He respects only those who are of a broken heart and
contrite spirit, Psalm. 51.17. Esaias 66.2.
for these only perform the condition of the covenant and consequently to
them alone the promises contained in the covenant do appertain.

That he who feels not his sins has neither faith nor repentance.
neither of which does he perform who does not see nor feel the burden of
his sins; for we will never rest upon Christ for our salvation, unless we
see that we have no means of our own to escape condemnation, we will never
seek unto Christ to be our redeemer unless we perceive that we are the
bondslaues of sin and Satan, we will never labor to obtain the riches of
his righteousness, unless we discern our own nakedness and beggerie, we
will never come unto Christ to be washed and purged from the pollution of our
sins and corruptions with his blood, unless we see our natural filthiness,
we will never desire to be eased of the heavy burden of our sins, unless
we feel the weight of them, we will never entreat Christ to be our Physician,
unless we find that our souls are sick in sin; we will never go unto him
who is the author of life, unless we see that we are dead in our sins, in a
word we will never entreat Gods mercy, until we feel our own misery.

If therefore without this sense of sin we will never come unto Christ, then
consequently without it we shall never be eased, for he^^^^th those only from
condemnation who rely themselves wholly upon him for their salvation, he came
to be their redeemer alone who feel their miserable captivity, and earnestly
desire to be released, he will not enrich any but those who perceive their own
beggary, and crave relief, he will not wash any with his precious blood; but
those who see their pollution and filthiness, and come unto him entreating him
to purge and cleanse them, he will not ease any but those who finding their
sins to be a heavy burden, are weary and come unto him to be freed from
them; he came into the world to be a physician, not to those who feel no
infirmity, but to those who are sick and diseased; he came to give life to
those alone who are dead in their sins and trespasses; neither will the Lord
show mercy unto any, but unto those alone who perceive their estate to be most
wretched and miserable.

For who can imagine that the Lord who is most infinite in wisdom, should
unadvisedly bestow his benefits upon such, as finding no want of them, do not
desire them; when they are without them, nor esteem them though they had them,
and consequently will never be truly thankful for that which they neither
want, desire, nor esteem; who can in reason conceive that he will offer
himself to be a Savior, to such as do not think themselves lost and
condemned, or to be their redeemer who will not acknowledge that they are in
captivity, or that he will bestow the riches of his righteousness upon such
proud beggars, as find no need thereof, being righteous enough themselves in
their own conceits, that he will vainly spend his precious blood in washing
of those who think themselves clean already, and need no such purging, that
he will in compassion ease those of the burden of their sins who were never
troubled with bearing of them; that he will offer them any physic who will
not acknowledge themselves sick; or to give life to those who will not
confess that they are dead in sin; and who can imagine that the Lord will
ever show to those his mercy, who will never show to the Lord their wretched
misery.

Whosoever therefore have not a true sense and feeling of the heavy burden of
their sins; they will never come unto Christ, neither can they ever have any
assurance that he will ease the^, and consequently they are destiture of a true
faith which is the chief condition of the covenant of grace; but as they want
faith, so also they can never attain unto true repentance. For so long as they
have not the sense of their sins they are not grieved with them, neither do
they desire to leave and forsake them, and as those who bearing a burden and
are not vexed with the weight, they are not weary of bearing it, nor desirous
to leave it; so those who being loaded with the unsupportable burden of their
sins and have no sense of the weight they are not grieved with weariness nor
desirous to be freed from it, and consequently they are destitute of true
repentance which is nothing else but an hearty grief and a true sorrow for our
sins past and an earnest desire and endeavor to leave and forsake them in the
time to come.

The former point proved by particular testimonies.
they are destitute of true faith and repentance, and therefore the promises of
the gospel being made, only to the faithful and repentant sinners, do not
appertain unto them. Which may more evidently appear if we consider some of
the particulars; Esaias 61.1. It is said that our savior Christ was sent to
preach glad tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to preach
liberty to the captives, and to them that are bound, the opening of the
prison. 2. To comfort all that mourn, and to give unto them beauty for ashes,
the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness. Math. 9.13. our savior says that he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, and the apostle witnesses of him, that
he came into the world to save sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15. If therefore we be not
poor in spirit and broken hearted, if we be not miserable captives, heavy
mourners, and wretched sinners, our savior Christ was not sent to preach the
glad tidings of the gospel unto us, he will not give us liberty nor afford
us any comfort, he came not to call us neither will he save us. So our
Savior professes, Math. 18.11. that he came to save that which was lost, and
to fetch home the wandering sheep. If therefore we be not lost in our selves
we shall never be found of Christ, if we do not confess with the Prophet
Esaias, that we have gone astray like wa^dring sheep, Esaias 53.6.
he will never seek us, nor carry us on his blessed shoulders to the sheepfould
of eternal happiness. In a word as without the sense of sin, we can never
attain unto faith and repentance, so without faith and repentance, we can
never have any assurance of any of the promises of the Gospel.

The means whereby we may attain so a true sight of our lives. 2. King.
22.19. Act. 2.37.
that with good Josias our hearts melt within us, and even resolve themselves
into the tears of unfeigned repentance; that we even rent our heart with true
compunction, as the Prophet exhorts. Joel. 2.13. and that with the Jews we
have our hearts pricked within us, when we come to the sight of our sins, and
all this not so much in regard of the punishment we have deserved, as that by
our sins we have displeased our good God and gracious father, and have
caused our savior Christ who is the Lord of life, to be put to a shameful and
painful death. Zach. 12.10


And that we may attain unto this sense and feeling of our sins, 1. Means
prayers.
there are diverse means to be used effectual for this purpose; as first we
are to have our recourse unto God by earnest and fervent prayer, desiring and
entreating that he will anoint the blind eyes of our understandings, Revel.
3.17.18.
with the precious eye salve of his holy spirit, that we may see our own
wretchedness, misery, poverty, blindness and nakedness, and that he will
soften our hard hearts, with the oil of his grace, and so beat these stony
rocks, that out of the^ may flow plentiful streams of unfeigned repentance.

Secondly, 2. Meditating in the law.
we are oftentimes to set the law as a glass before us that so we may see our
deformities, and to examine our lives thereby as it were by a rule or square,
that so we may know both how often we have erred and transgressed it in the
time past, and how unable we are to perform it for the time to come in that
exact manner which God requires. For as the deformities and spots in the face
though they be great and many, cannot be descerned of those who have them,
unless they look themselves in a glass, and though every one else does
plainly see the^, yet the party himself does least of all perceive them: so
though our spiritual deformities and filthy spots of sin, appear most ugly
and odious in the eyes of God and men, so that every one seems to point at
them, yet we our selves will never discern them, unless we set the looking
glass of the law before us.

Thirdly, 3. Meditating of the justice and truth of God. Job 4.18. and 15.15.
Esa. 64.6.
we are often and earnestly to meditate upon the justice and truth of God, in
whose presence the heavens are not clean, and the Angels themselves are unable
to abide the rigor of his justice, and how much more is man abominable and
filthy, who drinks iniquity like water. In whose sight out best
righteousness is like a polluted cloth, and how much more filthy then are our
sins and wickedness, moreover as he is most just so as he cannot let sin
go unpunished, so also he is most true, yea truth it self, neither can any
of those threatenings fall to the ground unexecuted, which he has denounced
against those who live in their sins, and therefore there is no means to
escape his fearful judgments, unless we turn from our sins and meet the
Lord by unfeigned repentance.

Fourthly, let us continually remember that we must once appear before Gods
tribunal seat of judgment, 4. Meditation of the last judgment.
there to render an account not only of our words and works but even of our
secret thoughts, when as the Lord himself who searches the hearts and reigns
shall be our judge who will not acquit the guilty, nor respect the person of man,
neither will he be satisfied with fair pretenses and smooth excuses, nor
corrupted with brides and gifts. 1. Cor. 11.
And therefore let us judge our selves that we may not be judged of the Lord,
and in bitterness of soul and remorse of conscience let us condemn our
selves to be miserable sinners, that the Lord may acquit us and make us taste
of his mercy.

5. Remembrance of those punishments due to the wicked.
Lastly, let us seriously meditate on those fearful punishments, which are
prepared for those who live and die in their sins; for they shall for ever be
separated from the presence of God, the joys of heaven, and the sweet
company of the Saints and Angels, and be cast into eternal darkness, where
they shall for ever and ever be tormented in flames unquenchable, all which
horrible punishments are due unto all, Gal. 3.10.
who continue not in all which is written in the book of the law to do them,
and therefore how shall we escape who in stead of continuing in obedience to
all Gods commandments, have continualy broken them aland done the clean
contrary, if we do not in the sense of the heavy burden of our sins, humble
our selves before God by unfeigned repentance, and come unto Christ by a true
and lively faith, that we may be eased of this intolerable weight, and
adorned with his righteousness and obedience.

The 2. thing required is that our sins be irksome and grievous unto us.
namely the sight and sense of their sins. But it is not sufficient that we
feel our sins like a heavy burden, pressing us down if we be conte^tto
bear it still, but it must seem irksom and grievous unto us, and make us
exceeding weary of bearing it, we must with the Apostle Peter think it
sufficient that we have spent the time past of our lives, after the lust of the
Gentiles in abominable sins, and for the time to come we are to live after
the will of God, dedicating our selves wholly to his worship and service.
Otherwise, though we have never so exquisite a sight and sense of our sins, yet
if they seem unto us a sweet burden which we are content still to bear
without any great weariness, nay with pleasure and delight, if we be like
the rich miser who though his back should be almost broken with the weight of
his own gold, yet would not think it any trouble, nay would esteem it for
his chief felicity because his burden pleases him, so if we feeling that our
sins are an huge and massy burden, are nevertheless not troubled nor weary
of bearing them, but rather take our chief delight in being so loded; because
the burden is exceeding sweet and delightful to us, we may assure our selves
that we are not in the number of those whom Christ calls, for he inuiteth
them only unto him? who being heavy laden with the weight of their sins are
weary of their burden, and sorrow and grieve, that they cannot shake it of,
nor be freed from it. Crying out with the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death.

The 3. thing is an earnest desire to be freed from our sins.
whereby we may know those whom Christ calls, is that being vexed with the
heavy burden of sin, they earnestly desire to be eased and released of it;
for as those who are ouerpressed with a heavy burden, desire above all things
to be freed from it, so those who feel the weight of sin pressing them down
and are weary and tired in bearing of it, they most earnestly desire to be
eased of this intolerable burden, and will never be at rest till their
desire be accomplished.

This desire resembled to hunger and thirst.
This desire in the Scriptures is resembled to hunger and thirst; in which these
two things concur, first a sense of our want, and secondly an appetite or
earnest desire to be satisfied, and to have our want supplied; and so in these
spiritual things, first we feel the want of Gods graces and Christ's
righteousness, and then we earnestly desire that we may be filled and
satisfied with them. So that to hunger and thirst after the grace of God, and
the righteousness of Christ, and to be weary and heavy laden are much alike,
and both are blessed of the Lord; for as those who hunger, and thirst after
righteousness, are blessed because they shall be satisfied, as it is, Matthew.
5.6. So they are blessed who are weary and heavy laden, with the burden of
their sins, for such Christ calls unto him, and has promised to ease them,
that is, to give unto them the remission of their sins, and to release them
of this burden, by taking it upon his own shoulders. And as our Savior
calls and inuiteth unto him such as are weary and heavy laden. Matthew.
11.28. So in diverse other places, he inuiteth and calls those, who hunger and
thirst after his righteousness So Esa. 55.1. To every one that thirsts come
ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver come buie, and eat, come I say
buy wine, and milk, without money. and John 7.37. Jesus cried saying; If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Apoc. 21.6. I will give to him
who is a thirst, Apoc. 21.6. and 22.17.
of the well of the water of life freely. and 22.17. Let him that is a thirst
come, and let whosoever will, take of the well of the water of life freely. a
notable example of this thirsting we have in David. Psalm. 63.1. O God thou art
my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee. and 42.1. as the
heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee O God. 2.
my soul thirsts for God, even for the living God. and Psalm. 143.6. my soul
thirsts after thee, as the thirsty land. Which thirst whosoever feels, he
may boldly assure himself, that he is in the number of those whom Christ
calls, and that will satisfy him.

Whosoever therefore hungreth and thirsts after the grace of God, and
righteousness of Christ, whosoever is weary and heavy laden, that is, who so
has a true sense, and feeling of his sins, and is vexed, and grieved, with
the burden thereof, and withal, his heart desires to to be eased of his
load, though he think himself in a most miserable estate, yet if he come
unto Christ, and with blind Bartemaeus cry out O son of David have mercy on
me, I may fitly say unto him, as it was say do unto this blind man: Be of
good comfort, for Christ calls thee.

The last thing required is that we come unto Christ.
for to whom should we come for ease, but unto Christ himself, seeing their
is neither saint nor Angel, that can ease us, for the weight of one sin
would press them down into hell; whereas our Savior Christ is able to bear
the burden of our sins, nay he has already borne them, that we might be
delivered from them. As it is, 1. Pet. 2.24. neither it is likely, that either
saint or Angel, would so willingly help us as our Savior Christ Jesus, who so
tenderly loved us that he came into the world, to lay down his own most
precious life as a price for our redemption; and though they were willing, yet
they have not the like ability unto him, who has all power in heaven, and
earth committed unto him, Mat. 11.27.
for working the work of our redemption. And therefore, seeing he wants
neither love, nor power, let us go unto him, and him only. Otherwise we shall
commit a double folly, that is, we shall leave Christ, who is the fountain of
living water, and dig unto our selves broken cisternes, which will hold no
water. Iere. 2.13.
For there is not salvation in any other, neither is their among men any other
name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved. as it is, Acts 4.12. He is
the way which leads unto everlasting happiness, he is the truth, to instruct
us in all the counsels of God, he is the life to revive us, who were dead in
our sins, yea the life of everlasting life, and the perfection of our
heavenly happiness. John 14.6. He has taken upon him our infirmities, and
borne our pains, he was wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our
iniquities, the pain of our punishment was laid upon him, and with his stripes
we are healed. Esa. 53.4.5.6. To whom therefore should we go in our
sickness, but to this our heavenly physician? whose help should we seek
for the curing of our wounds, but the help of this our blessed surgeon who
will easily cure them all, with the precious balm of his blood? whether should
we return after our long wandering, but unto the shepherd of our souls? to
whom should we seek to be preserved from death, and damnation, but to him,
who is the Lord of life, and salvation? and therefore leaving all other means
of our own diuising, let us repair unto him, and him alone, for he calls
and inuiteth us, promising that he will ease us.

But how should we come unto Christ, and what is meant hereby? surely we are
not to understand a corporal or local coming unto him, for he is in heaven,
and we are upon the earth, but our coming is spiritual not of the body but
of the soul.

This coming to Christ twofold.
the coming of repentance, is perfectly to God the father, the coming of
faith, is to Christ Jesus, both which are mentioned, Act. 20.21. witnessing
repentance toward God, and faith toward Jesus Christ. For repentance is
nothing, but a turning from our sins, and a returning to God, and faith
causes us to go out of our selves, unto Christ, seeking salvation in him
alone.

So that our coming to Christ, is to believe in him, for thus Christ himself
expounds it, John 6.35. He that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me, shall never thirst. So chap. 7.37.38. If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me as says the
scriptures, out of his belly shall flow rivers of the water of life. This then
does Christ only require of all penitent sinners, who are weary, and heavy
laden, with the burden of their sins, that they believe in him, that is,
that by a lively faith, they do apply unto themselves Christ Jesus, and all
his benefits, and assure themselves that whatsoever he has done in the work
of mediation, and redemption, he did it for their sakes; namely, that he left
the boosome of his father, and taking upon him our flesh, became the son of
man, that he might make us the sons of God, and heirs of his everlasting
kingdom, that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, to sanctify our
conception, that he here suffered hunger, cold, weariness, and other miseries
of this life, that he might make us partakers of all happiness in the life to
come, that he performed perfect obedience to the law, that he might deck and
adorn us with the rich robe of his righteousness, that notwithstanding, he
was most just and innocent, yet he was condemned to death, before an earthly
judge, that we who were wicked, and unjust, might be acquitted, and absolved,
before the judgment seat of God, that he died upon the cross, to preserve us
from everlasting death of hell, that he endured his fathers anger, that we
might be reconciled unto him, that he bore the curse of the law, that he
might cansell the handwriting of ordinances which made, against us, that he
rose again and ascended into heaven, that he might be the first fruits of
them that slept, and by his entrance into heaven, might make way for us also,
that he sits at the right hand of God, to make intercession for us, and to
protect and defend us against all our enemies, that he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead, to the end he may give unto us, perfect
redemption, and crown us with everlasting glory; And if we thus believe in
Christ, and apply him with all his benifites unto us, we may assure our selves
that he will ease us of the heavy burden of our sins, cloth us, with the
glorious array of his righteousness, and give unto us the eternal possession of
those everlasting ioies, which by his death and bloodshed he has dearly
purchased for us.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Satan tentations which he uses against those which are
called, to bring them to despair.
How Satan te^pteth these which are called to despair.
wherewith he assaulteth them who are not yet effectually called, to the end
that he may keep them from turning unto God by unfeigned repentance, and
coming unto Christ by a true and lively faith: now we are to speak of those
tentations which he uses against those who are called. And first, when as he
perceives that he can no longer blind them with ignorance, nor keep them
still in carnal worldinesse and presumptuous security, when as he sees that
they are resolved no longer to defer their repentance and coming unto Christ
by a true faith, neither can be persuaded to content themselves, with such
faith and repentance as are false and counterfeit; then, and not before he
appears in his own likeness, and shows himself a devil indeed; for then
he accuses them of their manifold and outrageous sins, where in they have long
continued, then he tells them of their sins past and present corruptions,
whereby they are ready to fall into the like again, then he reuealeth unto
them their sins of ignorance, and calls to their remembrance those sins
which they have committed against their knowledge and conscience, then will he
aggrauate their sins which in themselves are but too too heinous, and set
before them the justice of God, the fearful threatenings and terrible curse of
the law, the wrath of God and the intolerable and eternal torments of hell
fire, which by their sins they have justly deserved; all which terrblie
sights being in one view represented to their already timorous thoughts, he
takes occasion of them al, to move them to distrust of Gods mercies and
Christ's merits, and so to plunge them into utter desperation. Would thou
now vile wretch (will he say) turn unto God hoping to be received to grace
and mercy? why assure thy self it is too late, for are not thy sins in number
numberless, and in their quality and nature most heinous and outrageous; and
have thou not continued in this thy rebellion against God a long time, refusing
to come unto him though he has often called, and carelessy neglecting all the
means of thy salvation, when thy God has graciously offered them unto thee?
Now therefore the acceptable time and day of salvation is past never again to
be recalled, and though with Esau thou seek repentance with tears yet shall
thou never find it. Moreover to the consideration of thy horrible rebellion
add the remembrance of Gods justice, which can in no wise suffer sin to go
unpunished, the terrible curse of the law denounced by God who is truth it
self, against those who continue not in all that is written in the book of
the law to do it, the fearful torments of hell prepared for sinners amongst
which number thou art one of the chief; and therefore do not flatter thy
self with hope of mercy, but rather expect those fearful judgments and
endless torments which are due unto thee for thy rebellious wickedness: and
thus does Satan labor to bring the poor Christian to deep desperation, and
to fill his conscience with horror and fear, which if he can accomplish he
rests not there, but like a cruel coward who can never be at quiet till he
see the death of his enemy, so our malicious enemy is never satisfied till he
see our death and utter destruction. And therefore when he has grievously vexed
the Christians consciences with fearful horror, and tormented him even with
the flashings of hell fire, in the next place he will persuade him to seek
some ease of his present torments by imbruing his hands in his own blood, and
putting himself to some violent death: which is nothing else but (as the
Proverb is) to leap out of the frying pan into the fire, and in seeking to
ease his terrors of conscience to plunge himself into the torments of hell.

That if we will withstand the former tentation, we must not rest on our own
righteousness.
they must not rest in themselves, desiring in whole or in part to be justified
by their legal righteousness, neither must they measure out unto themselves
Gods mercies according to their own merits and worthiness, they must not
look only upon Gods justice, and upon that exact obedience which the law
requires of them, nor yet upon those fearful punishments which by their
sins they have justly deserved, for then Satan will easily attain unto his
purpose, and speedily bring them to desperation and utter destruction. But they
must go out of themselves and rejecting their own righteousness, as
altogether imperfect and insufficient they are to rest and rely themselves
upon the alone righteousness and obedience of Christ Jesus, as being in it
self all sufficient both for our justification and salvation. And as they have
one eye on Gods justice to keep them from secure presumption, so they must
have the other firmly fixed on his infinite mercy to preserve them from falling
into desperation, as they have one eye on the law to humble them, and to bring
them out of themselves to Christ, so they must have the other eye on the sweet
and comfortable promises of the Gospel to comfort and raise them up. Finally
as on the one side they behold the curse of the law, and the eternal torments
prepared for the wicked: so on the other side they must steadfastly look upon
the righteousness, death, and obedience of Christ, and also upon those
everlasting joys which by his precious bloodshed he has purchased for them.
And if thus being truly humbled and brought to unfeigned repentance they go
out of themselves and reject their own righteousness, resting and relying
upon the alone righteousness of Christ for their justification and salvation,
they may most certainly assure themselves that they have in Christ satisfied
Gods justice, and are by his death reconciled unto him, that they are freed
from the curse of the law, and from the wrath of God, that their scarlet sins
are made as white as wool, and all their imperfections perfected by Christ's
righteousness and obedience, that they are acquitted from the sentence of
condemnation, and delivered from the fearful torments of hell.

Reasons to persuade the weak Christian of the forgiveness of his sins.
and are continually vexed and moved to desperation, by Satan's most subtiland
violent tentations, are not so easily persuaded that their sins are forgiven
them, and they reconciled unto God in Christ; therefore I will set down some
arguments, whereby all those who truly repent, (that is sorrow for their sins
past, and desire, and endeavor to forsake them in the time to come) and
withal going out of themselves, do earnestly hunger after Christ and his
righteousness, and rest and rely upon him for their salvation, may have full
assurance that their sins are forgiven them, and that they are in Christ
reconciled unto God, and received into his love and favor.

The first argument drawn from Gods mercy.
The first argument, to assure all of the pardon and forgiveness of their
sins, who will come unto him, may be drawn from his mercy, which is one of
his properties and attributes, so often attributed unto him in the scriptures.
Exodus 34.6.7. God thus describes himself: The Lord, the Lord, strong,
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth. 2
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin.
Out of which place that famous and godly learned man H. Zanchius has observed
matter fit for our purpose, Zanch. de Attrib. l. 2. cap. 1. q. 2.
and therefore it shall not be amiss to set down his own words: For besides
(says he) that the essence of God is only one, and that eternal most simple
most perfect, living, immortal, invisible, incorruptible, infinite,
omnipotent, most wise; he is also wholly most good in whom nothing is wanting; a
lover of men, most meek, most gentle, slow to anger, most ready to forgive
injuries, most patient, most true, most righteous, most just, most faithful in
performing his promises, finally he is nothing else then the sovereign
goodness, and the chief clemency as he has described, and lively deciphered
himself. Exodus 34. and elsewhere. And therefore we must note, although anger
be attributed unto God, yet notwithstanding it is in God nothing else but the
chief goodness and justice, whereby he abhors evil and according to his
just judgment does at length punish it, if it be not amended by his long
suffering and patience. This herehence manifestly appears, because speaking
of revenge or taking punishment which is an effect of anger, he does not say
that he does presently inflict punishment, or that he is so ready to inflict
it as to show mercy, but he says that he is slow to anger. Sign fying by
this manner of speech, that he is of his own nature always most ready, to show
mercy, to grant pardon, to be beneficial; but not so ready to take
punishment, but is forced here unto as of himself, unwilling through our
impenitencie. Hereunto also appertains that ancient form of prayer; O Lord
whose property is always to have mercy and forgive. Esa. 28.21. 2. Sam. 5. 1.
Chro. 14. Ios. 10.
Herehence also we read in Esai. chapter 28.21. The Lord shall stand as in mount
Perazim, he shall be angry as in the valley Gibeon. That he may do his work,
his strange work, that he may effect his act, his strange act. (that is, he
shall inflict the like punishments in his just anger upon his rebellious
people, which he exercised upon his wicked enemies the Philistines in mount
Perazim, when as he ouerthrewe them, by his servant David, and upon the
Amorites in the valley of Gibeon when as he smote them with stones from
heaven.) Where the Prophet makes a twofold kind of Gods works, his proper and
strange works. The proper work of God is to show mercy, and to spare or
forgive; his strange work is to be angry and to punish. And therefore whereas
he calls that the proper work of God, and this his strange work; he
plainly teaches that mercy, goodness and long suffering are according to the
nature of the deity, but that to be angry is diverse from Gods nature, Yea
which is more he makes it not his work, that is to say, he is angry that
afterward he may bring his work to pass, that is, that he may have mercy
and preserve; for whilst (says the Apostle) we are judged of the Lord, we
are chastened that we should not be comdemned with the world. 1. Cor. 11.32.
And what do these things teach us, but that the nature of God is nothing else
then goodness, 1. Cor. 11.32.
mercy, love especially of men, patience, benignity, and most far and remote
from all unjust severity, cruelty, tyranny, and pride. The which may minister
unto every penitent sinner most sweet consolation; for when they see that God
is angry by reason of their sins, and that he does grievously afflict them, and
even bring them as it were to the gates of hell, this must not make the to cast
of al hope and to fall into utter desperatio^; but they must remember, that
these are not the Lords proper works but strange unto him, which he does to
this end, that he may bring to pass his own proper works which are agreeable
to his nature, that is, that he may again show unto us the glorious beams of
his loving countenance in more full brightness, and bring us from death to
life; from affliction to joy, from the gates of hell to the kingdom of heaven.
According to that 1. Sam. 2.6. the Lord kills, and makes alive, he brings
down unto hell, and brings up again. As therefore when we see carpenters
pulling down a ruinous building our minds do not rest there, because we know
that this they do is not their proper work, but we go further in our
cogitation thinking of a new house which they will build in the place of the
old, for as much as we know that it is not their proper work to race down
but to build, or to race down that they may build; so when we see the Lord
angry and inflicting corrections let us not rest here, but with the like
foresight of mind, let us consider that he does these his strange and improper
works, that afterward he may do those which are proper and natural, that is
that he afflicts that he may bring the more true comfort, that he brings us
to the gates of hell, to the end he may raise us up to be partakers of the
joys of heaven. But let us consider of some more testimonies of Gods infinite
mercies. As the Prophet David likewise says Psalm. 103.8. that the Lord is
full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness. and Psalm.
86.5 Thou Lord art good and merciful, and of great kindness unto all them
that call upon thee. So the prophet Joel 2.13. testifies of the Lord, that
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness. And the
apostle says that he is rich in mercy. Ephesians. 2.4. and 2. Cor. 1.3. He calls
him, the father of mercies, and God of all comfort.

That God is delighted in exercising his mercy.
therefore it is also of his essence, and being, for there is not in Gods most
perfect nature, any qualities or accidents, but whatsoever is in God, is God,
so that God is mercy it self, and consequently, to show and exercise his
mercy, is to show and exercise his own nature. Now we know that natural
actions are not troublesome, norirksome, neither is the sun troubled with
giving light, nor the fire with giving heat, nor the tree with yielding
fruit, nor the beast with nourishing his young, nor man with receiving
nourishment, and sleep, because it is their nature to be excercised in these
actions, and therefore seeing mercy is of Gods essence, it is not painful
and troublesome to exercise it toward all repentant sinners, be their
sins never so many, and hanious, no more, then it is troublesome to exercise
his justice, in punishing of those who are obstinate and rebellious, nay it is
not only not troublesome and painful, but also pleasant and delightful for
God to show mercy unto all those who truly turn unto him, and contrariwise
it should be troublesome and irksome, (if I may so speak,) for God not to
show and exercise his nature, and mercy, toward repentant sinners; for as
the eye is delighed with seeing, and to be restrained there from is grievous
unto it, as the care is delighed with hearing, and is much molested if it be
stoped, and as every part, and faculty of the body, and soul, are delighted
in excercising their several actions, and functions, and are much vexed, and
cumbred, if by any means they should be hindered; so is the Lord delighted,
and well pleased, in showing, and excercising his own nature, and attributes,
as his power, and providence, in governing the world, his justice, in punishing
wicked, obstinate, and rebellious sinners, and his mercy in pardoning, and
remitting the sins of those, who are of an humble spirit and broken heart,
and are weary of this intolerable burden, desiring nothing more, then to be
eased and freed from it. And not to thus exercise his nature, and attributes,
would rather (that I may speak after the manner of men) be unto the Lord
tedious and troublesome.

Of this pleasure and delight, which the Lord takes in pardoning repentant
sinners, the Prophet Micha speaks, chap. 7.10.18. who (says he) is a God
like unto thee; that takes away iniquity, and passes by transgression of the
remnant of his heritage: he retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy
pleases him. So the prophet David Psalm. 147.11. says that the Lord is
delighted in them that fear him and attend upon his mercy; even as though he
rejoiced much, to have an occasion offered, of excercising his mercy and
goodness toward those, who earnestly desiring it, wait upon him, that they
may be made partakers of of it. For the object of Gods mercy, about which it
is exercised, is man's misery, and the action thereof, is to pity, and help
him, out of his wretched and miserable estate; and therefore, if there were no
misery, and wretchedness, and no sin to be forgiven, there would be wanting
that external object, about which Gods mercy should be exercised and manifested
to all the world. And hence it is, that the Lord willingly permitted the fall
of our first parents, to the end that he might make a way for the
manifestation of his mercy, in pardoning repentant sinners, and his justice in
punishing the contemners of his grace. And as the apostle says, Romans 11.32.
God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all, that is
to say, on all the elect, both Jews, and Gentiles.

Seeing therefore God delights himself in excercising and manifesting his
mercy, to the praise of the glory of his grace, by pardo^ing and forgiving
repentant sinners, let not any who are grievously laden, and groan for wearines
under the heavy burden of their sins, fear to come unto the Lord, and to
implore his mercy for the forgiveness of their sins, though never so grievous
and manifould, neither let them doubt, least God will reject their suite, and
refuse to receive them, into his grace, and favor, because of their great
rebellions and unworthiness. For although there were not (as in truth there is
not) any thing to be respected in us, saving that we are the creatures of
God, and work of his hands, yet the Lord will have compassion upon us, even
for his own sake because he is exceedingly delighted in showing mercy to all
those who turn unto him. And this the Lord himself professes Esa. 43.25. I
even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. And therefore the prophet Daniel calling upon the Lord
for mercy, in the behalf of himself and the people, disclaimeth their own
righteousness, and all respect of their own merits and worthiness; saying,
we do not present our supplications before thee for our own righteousness,
but for thy great tender mercies: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider
and do it; defer not for thine own sake. Dan. 9.18.19.

That the grieuousnesse of sin cannot debar the repentant sinner of Gods
mercy.
that God indeed is merciful, but yet he will never extend his mercy toward
such heinous offenders, whose sins are in number numberless, and in quality
and nature most grievous and outrageous. For answering of which tentation, we
are to know that though our sins be never so innumerable and heinous, yet
this should not discourage us from coming to God by unfeigned repentance, with
assured hope of forgiveness, for though our sins be great, his mercies are
infinite, and consequently though it were imagined that all the sins which
were ever committed in the world were joined together, yet in comparison of
Gods mercy they are without all comparison less then a mote in the Sun to
all the world. Neither is God like unto man, whose bounty and mercy are limited
in some straight bounds which they will not pass, and therefore they are soon
weary both in giving to those who want, and forgiving those that offend, but
his bounty is endless and his mercies infinite, and therefore he can and will
as easily forgive us the debt of ten thousand millions of pounds as one penny,
and as soon pardon the sins of a wicked Manasses as of a righteous Abraham,
if we come unto him by unfeigned repentance, and earnestly desire and implore
his grace and mercy. And this our Savior Christ shows in the parable of the
poor Publica^e, whose heinous sins the Lord presently forgave upon his true
conversion. Luke 7.41.
And in the parable of the two debtors, where the lender our bountiful God as
easily forgave the 500. pence as the fifty, that is innumerable great sins,
as well as few and less. And the Apostle Paul teaches us, that where sin
has abounded, there grace has much more abounded. Romans 5.20.

That we must not so aggrauate our sins that we derogate from Gods mercy.
Seeing therefore Gods mercy is infinite and without al limits, let not us
restrain it, neither let us so aggrauate our sins as that in the mean time
we derogate from Gods mercy. If a Prince should send his general pardon unto
a number of offenders, without any exception or limitation, and one amongst the
rest should say this pardon does not appertain unto me, because I am so great
an offender, and therefore I will still stand in doubt of my Princes mercy, and
suspect his word, who would not accuse such an one both of folly in refusing
his pardon, and of ungratefulness and diffidence in distrusting his gracious
Prince, calling his great mercy and truth in his promise into question? Who
would not think this offense greater then all the rest, but the Lord who is
infinite in mercy, has sent his general pardon to all repentant and believing
sinners without all exception; why therefore should we make question of his
mercy, because of our hamous sins, why should we unto our others sins add
this which is more heinous then all the rest, indoubting and distrusting his
word and promise, and in extenuating his infinite and endless mercies. For if
we think our debt so great that God will never forgive it, what do we else
but detract from Gods rich bounty and liberality, if we suppose our sins may
not be for given because of their greatness, what do we else but imagine that
they surpass Gods infinite mercy, which is a most horrible blasphemy once to
conceive.

That Gods mercy is over all his works.
and he graciously feeds the Ravens and young Lions, which in their brutish
manner implore his help; and shall he not extend his mercies to reasonable
creatures that seek after them? Psalm. 36.6. and 104.21.27 and 147.9. and 145.9.
Yea the Lord is good to all and his mercies are over all his works, as it is
Psalm. 145.9. and will not the Lord be gracious to man, who is his most
excellent workmanship created according to his own image, if he sue unto him
for grace and desire to be partaker of his mercy? His goodness stretches it
self unto his obstinate enemies, for he causes his rain to fall and his
Sun to shine both upon the evil and the good, on the just and unjust. Matthew.
5.45. And shall it be restrained from his repentant servants? he multiplieth
his mercies in temporal benefits upon the wicked and reprobate, and shall it
be scanted toward his elect, he is very gracious to malicious rebels, and will
he deny grace to humble suers for mercy and repentant sinners. He showed his
goodness and long suffering unto wicked Achab upon his fained and
hypocritical humiliation, and will he not extend it toward those who being
truly penitent unfeignedly turn unto him? Yes assuredly, for though he be
good to all even senseless creatures, brute beasts, and rebellious sinners,
yet he is in especial manner good to those who are of the household of faith.

That even man is merciful toward the penitent and therefore much more God
who is infinite in mercy.
let us look upon them in some small resemblance and little counterfaite, if
we cannot comprehend them in their own infinite nature, yet let us view them
in a small model. Even man himself who has but a spark of this mighty
flame, and a small drop of this bottomless Ocean spares his son when he
offends, pardons his servant when he desires forgiveness, yea is
oftentimes reconciled to his enemy who has many ways wronged him, when he
sueth for reconciliation, and confesses his faults, shall therefore man who
has received a little spark from this ever burning flame of Gods goodness, a
small drop of this endless and bottomless Ocean, and but a little model of
this infinite greatness, whose greatest mercy compared with Gods, is but
sauadge and barbarous cruelty; shall he I say be ready to spare his Son,
forgive his servant, and be reconciled unto his enemy, and shall not God
spare, forgive, and be reconciled unto those who turn from their sins by
unfeigned repentance, and earnestly sue for grace; shall we see, and
acknowledge, the mercies of man, and shall we doubt of the mercies of God
which is the plentiful fountain, from which like a pirling stream they flow;
shall we confess, that a drop of water is moist, and affirm that the ocean
is dry, shall we be sharpsighted in seeing the light of a small spark, and
be stark blind, in behoulding the glorious beams of the sun. Nay let us
know, acknowledge, and assure our selves, that as much as the whole globe of
the earth, exceeds in quantity the least mote in the sun, as much as the
whole ocean exceeds the smallest drop of water, yea, as much as the infinite
creator, exceeds the finite creature, between which, there can be imagined
no degrees of comparison, so much does the mercy, and bounty of God, exceed
the bounty and mercy of mortal man. And therefore if upon repentance for our
fault and earnest desire of reconciliation, we hope of mercy and wounted
kindness, from our frinde or neighbor, let us not make any question, nor once
doubt of the Lords love and favor toward us, though our sins be never so
grievous, so we truly repent and unfeignedly turn unto him.

though there be no doubt of Gods mercy, That doubting of Gods mercie^ in
respect of our unworthiness argues pride
but that it is in it self most infinite, yet I doubt, least I shall never be
partaker thereof because of my manifold inperfections, and great unworthiness.
To which I answer, that this distrusting of Gods mercies, in respect of our
unworthiness, proceeds not from true humility, but from our natural pride,
for if we had denied our selves, and were nothing in our own eyes, if we had
wholly removed our own righteousness, and did wholly, and only, rest on our
savior Jesus Christ for our salvation, we would never hope the more in regard
of our own worthiness, nor yet doubt in respect of our unworthiness. But it
is our secret and inbred pride of heart, which makes us to doubt of Gods mercy,
unless we bring him a bride and deserve it at his hands, and to desire to
make the Lord beholding unto us rather then we would be any whit beholding
unto him. Which is nothing else but to disgrace Gods mercies, that we may grace
our own merits; and by laboring that we may be so^ething in our selus, we will
not allow that God should be al in all and have the whole praise of our
salvation. But we are to root out of our hearts this spiritual pride, and to
plant therein true humility, and then we may assure our selves though our
sins be great, yet the mercies of God are far greater, though we be most
beggarly in merits, yet we shall be made rich by Christ Jesus
righteousness; for the poorer we are in desert, the richer Gods mercy will
appear in accepting us to his grace and favor; and where sin has abounded,
there grace will abound much more.

Seeing therefore Gods mercies are infinite, and are not any whit restrained by
our unworthiness, let us seek unto the Lord by unfeigned repentance, and
assure our selves of his love and favor in Jesus Christ; Let the wicked
forsake his ways and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the
Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he is very ready to
forgive, as the Prophet exhoreth us. Esaias 55.7.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the second Argument grounded upon Gods justice.
That Gods justice will not punish those sins in us which are already
punished in Christ
who unfeignedly repent and rely wholly upon Jesus Christ for their salvation,
by a lively faith may be drawn from Gods justice, for their sins are fully
and sufficiently punished in Christ Jesus, and therefore it will not stand with
the justice of God, to punish them again in any of those who have applied unto
them the merits and sufferings of Christ by a lively faith; and as the Lord
cannot in justice let sin go unpunished, and therefore has punished the sins
of all men either in Christ Jesus, or will thoroughly punish them in the parties
themselves, so the same justice will not admit that the same sins should be
twice punished, once in our Savior; and again in the faithful. Now that our
savior Christ has sufficiently suffered for all the sins of the faithful;
it is evident by many places of the Scriptures. Esaias 53.4. Surely he has
borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows. 5. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisment of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. 2 Cor. 5.21. he has made
him to be sin for us which knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. So the apostle He. 9.26. says that our savior
Christ has appeared once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And
Pet. 1. epistle 2.24. says that his own self bare our sins in his body on
the tree, that we being delivered from sin should live in righteousness.
Seeing then our sins were laid upon Christ and severely punished in him, God
in his justice will not inflict any more punishmens upon the faithful but
will pardon and forgive them, which pardon and forgiveness is a work of his
justice as well as of his mercy, and therefore it is said, Romans 3.25. that God
has set forth our Savior Christ to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins that are
passed through the patience of God. 26. to show at this time his
righteousness that he might be just, and a iustifier of him who is of the
faith of Jesus, So it is said 1. John 1.9. that If we acknowledge our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. So that Gods righteousness is declared in the forgiveness of
sins, and he shows his justice in justifying those who are of the faith of
Jesus, and in pardoning all their offenses. And therefore if we will believe
in our Savior Christ and bring forth the fruits of our faith in unfeigned
repentance, we need not seruilely to fear Gods justice, nay we may be
assured that because he is just, he will in Christ pardon and forgive our
sins, and never inflict any punishment, which by them in our selves we have
justly deserved.

That our sins are debts and therefore not to be twice paid.
we are to consider that our sins in the scriptures are called debtes; for
the Lord in our creation lent unto us the rich talents of his graces, to be
employed for the setting forth of his glory, all which we wastfully misspent
and brought our selves into such extreme beggerie, that we were altogether
unable to pay to God the least part of that which we owed, nor to render
accoumpt unto our Lord and master how in any good fort we had bestowed his
rich treasures; and therefore in his justice he sent his sergeant death to
arest us, and to cast us in the prison of utter darkness, there to remain in
the custody of satan our most malicious iaylor, till we had fully discharged
our debt and made full satisfaction to his justice; which when we were
altogether unable to perform, it pleased our savior Christ in his infinite
love toward us, to become our suerty, and to take upon him the answering of
our debt, which he fully discharged in as exact a manner and measure as the
justice of God required, for whereas we are bound to perform perfect
obedience to the law, he performed it for us; where as we for our
disobedience were subject to the sentence of condemnation, the curse of the
law, and death of body and soul, he was condemned for us, and bore the curse
of the law, and dyed in our stead an ignominious death, whereas we deserved
the anger of God, and to be kept prisoners in the grave under the dominion of
death, he endured his fathers wrathful displeasure, and himself was for a
time held captive of death in the grave, that so he might reconcile us to his
father and set us at liberty. In a word whatsoever we owed Christ discharged,
whatsoever we deserved he suffered, if not in the self same punishments,
(for he could not suffer the eternal torments of hell) yet in proportion, the
dignity of his person giving value unto his temporary punishments, and making
them of more value and worth then if all the world should have suffered the
eternal torments of hell. Seeing therefore our Savior Christ has fully
discharged our debt and made full satisfaction to his fathers justice, God
cannot in equity exact of us a second payment, no more then the creditours may
justly require that his debt should be twice paid, once of the suerty, and
again of the principal. Neither now has Gods justice any thing to show
against us, for the law which was the hand writing of ordinances which made
against us, and as it were a bond whereby we were obliged and bound to God the
father either to perform obedience, or to undergo the penalty; even
everlasting death and condemnation, is now cancelled taken away; and fastened
to the cross of Christ, as the Apostle affirms. Col. 2.14. So that now the
Lord cannot in his justice put us in suite nor recover any debt of us, seeing
our savior Christ our good and all sufficient suerty has undertaken the
matter in our behalf discharged our debt to the utmost farthing, cancelled the
handwriting or bond in which we were obliged, and by the law acquitted us of
all paimentes which Gods justice by virtue of the law might require of us. and
therefore if we turn unto God by unfeigned repentance, and lay hold upon our
savior Christ and his merits by a lively faith, we have our quietus est and
general acquittance, which God himself has pronounced from heaven in the
presence of many witnesses, saying, This is may well-beloved son in whom I am
well pleased, that is in whom I am delighted, and restfully satisfied, and well
contented. Mat. 3.17.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the third Argument grounded upon Gods truth.
Of Gods truth in his promises.
whereby all those who repent and believe may be assured of the pardon and
remission of their sins, is grounded upon Gods truth; for the Lord is most
true yea truth it self, and all his promises in Christ are yea, and amen. 2.
Cor. 1.20. Apoc. 1.7.
he is a faithful and true witness. and whatsoever he has spoken shall be
accomplished; so that though the heavens decay and wax old like a garment,
though the sun loose his light, and the moon be turned into blood, though
the earth tremble and quake, and the foundations of the mountains be moved
and shake, yea though heaven and earth and all things therein contained perish
and pass away, Matthew. 5.1^.
yet shall not one jot or title of his word fall to the ground unaccomplished.
And therefore whatsoever the Lord has promised in his word that he will most
undoubtedly perform, for he is Iehoua, who having his essence and being in and
from himself alone, gives being unto all things else, especially to his word
and promises. But he has promised to all believers and repentant sinners,
that he will in Christ Jesus pardon al their sins, and will receive them into
his grace and favor, and therefore if we believe and rest upon our Savior
Christ alone for our salvation, truly repenting us of all our sins, we may
assure our selves that though our sins be never so many and grievous, yet the
Lord will receive us to mercy, and pardon and forgive them.

That Gods regal style assures us of mercy and forgiveness.
may have some ground whereupon to rest, when it is ready to faint, and some
spiritual weapons whereby it may defend it self, and beat back the violence
of Satan's tentations, I will make choice of some amongst many of the
comfortable promises of the gospel, made unto all repentant sinners. First
therefore let us consider, that when the Lord like a mighty monarch would set
out his own style as it were in fair text letters, to be read of all his
subjects, he thus proclaymeth it, Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord, strong,
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth.
7. Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sinners. where we may observe that the greatest part of his style consists of
his mercy, gratiousnes, long suffering, goodness and readiness to forgive the
iniquities of repentant sinners; as therefore we cannot offer a greater
disgrace to a mighty prince, then to deny or call into question any part of
his tytles or regal style, so we cannot more dishonor the prince of princes,
and sovereign king of heaven and earth, then by doubting of or denying any of
these his titles which in his own style he has attributed unto himself,
seeing then he professes and proclaymeth himself to be a gracious, merciful
long suffering God, who is always ready to forgive repentant sinners when
they implore his mercy, let us not offer God that disgrace to rob him of any
part of his glorious titles, nor deprive our souls of that true comfort which
the Lord by them in his infinite goodness has granted unto us.

That Gods ^ouenant assures us of the remission of our sins.
which the Lord professes that he will make with his church and people, namely
that he will forgive their iniquity and remember their sins no more. Ier.
31.34. the counterpaine of which covenant we have Heb. 10.16.17. and therefore
if we on our part perform the condition of this covenant between God and us,
that is, if we truly and unfeignedly repent us of our sins, and a rest and
rely on Jesus Christ for our salvation by a lively faith, we may be assured
that God on his part will not go one jot from his word, nor break the
covenant which he has made with us. For he has not only made this his
covenant with us by word of mouth, but he has also committed it to writing,
and not contenting himself herewith that there might be no place left to
doubting, he has confirmed and ratified his hand writing by adding thereunto
his seals which are the Sacraments; as first the seal of Baptism, whereby he
assures us that being outwardly received into the body of the Church, and
inwardly ingrafted into the body of Christ, we have all our sins and filthy
corruptions washed away with his precious blood, as the outward filth of the
body is washed and purged by the washing of water. The virtue of which
spiritual washing is not limited and restrained to the time past or present,
as though it washed away only our original corruption, as some have foolishly
imagined, but extends it self to the whole course of our lives; So that if
falling into many and grievous sins we unfeignedly repent us of them, and
apply Christ Jesus and his merits unto us by a true and lively faith, we may
be assured of the pardon and forgiveness of them all, for this was promised
sealed, and confirmed unto us in our Baptism. Secondly, the Lord has further
confirmed this his covenant by the Sacrament of his Supper, for he has
therefore instituted and ordained it, that thereby we should be put in mind of
our savior Christ's death and sufferings, to the end that we may gather more
and more assurance, that our Savior gave his blessed body to be crucified and
shed his most precious blood, that he might take away the curse of the law,
and nail it unto his cross, free us from his fathers anger by bearing it
himself, and by his death deliver us from everlasting death, and by his
bloodshed wash away all our sins and corruptions. And hence it is that the
Apostle calls the wine in the Lords supper, the new Testament in Christ's
blood, 1. Cor. 11.25.
because thereby the new Testament is sealed and confirmed unto us. And
therefore whenever we receive the Sacrament of the Lords supper, the Lord
does thereby certainly assure us that our sins in Christ are pardoned and
forgiven, and that he has received us into his love and favor, yea the Lord
has not only ratified and confirmed his covenant with us, concerning the
remission of our sins with his own hand writing and seals annexed, but also
by his oath; For God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
the stablenesse of his counsel, bound himself by an oath: that by two
immutable things wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have
strong consolation; as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.17.18. And therefore
unless we would conceive of God that he is untrue of his word, a covenant
breaker, yea a perjured person (which were most horrible blasphemy once to
imagine) we may undoubtedly assure our selves that he will pardon and forgive
us all our sins, be they in number never so innumerable nor so heinous in
their nature and quality, if we will turn unto him by unfeigned repentanee,
and lay hold upon Christ Jesus our savior, by a true and lively faith.

Of particular promises whereby we may be assured of the remission of our
sins.
contained in the covenant of grace, that so we may gather unto our selves more
full consolation and firm assurance of the pardon and forgiveness of our
sins. The Prophet David who had in himself often experience of Gods mercy
tells us, Psalm. 32.10. that whosoever trusts in the Lords mercy shall
compass him. The Prophet Esaias exhorts the wicked to forsake his ways, and
the unrighteous his own imaginations, and to return unto the Lord, assuring
them that he will have mercy upon them, for he is very ready to forgive. Esaias.
55.7. The Lord himself also does make this gracious promise Ezech. 18.21. But
(says he) if the wicked will return from all his sins which he has
committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right,
he shall surely live and not dye. 22. All his transgressions that he has
committed shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his righteousness that he
has done he shall live. 23. Have I any desire that the wicked should dye says
the Lord God? or shall he not live if he return from his ways? verse. 32. For
I desire not the death of him that dies says the Lord God; cause therefore
one another to return and live ye, and cap. 33. ver. 11. As I live says the
Lord I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live. So Mal. 3.17. the Lord professes that he will spare his people
and children, as a man spares his own Son that serves him. Now we know
that a loving father is ready to forgive, and to receive into his grace and
favor his repentant Son, though he has very often offended him: and so
surely the Lord who is infinitely rich in mercy, will much more forgive his
children when they turn unto him; nay he is not only ready to receive them
into his grace and favor, but it fills him (as I may say) with exceeding joy
and delight, when his repentant children forsake their sins and evil ways,
and turn unto him by unfeigned repentance, as it appears most evidently in
the parable of the prodigal Son, of the strayed sheep, and the lost groat.
Moreover our Savior Christ had his name Jesus given him of God by the minister
of an Angel, because he saves his people from their sins: as appears
Math. 1.21. and he therefore came into the world, not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance. As it is Matt. 9.13. and he inuiteth and calls unto
him all those who are weary and heavy laden with the burden of their sins,
promising that he will ease them. Matt 11.28. yea so certain it is that they
shall have remission of their sins and everlasting happiness who truly repent
and believe, that our savior Christ says they have it already as though they
were in present possession. John 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation but has passed from death to life. So chap.
6.47. and chap. 11.26. whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die.
The apostle Peter also plainly affirms that God would have no man to perish,
but would have all men to come to repentance. Seeing therefore the Lord has
made so many gracious promises in the Gospel to all repentant and believing
sinners, let us unfeignedly turn unto the Lord, and apply Christ and his
meritts unto us by a true and lively faith, and then we may assure our selves
that he will pardon and forgive us al our sins, and receive us graciously
into his love and favor.

That al Gods promises are made indefinitely to all that believe.
Satan will be ready to object to the afflicted conscience, that these promises
were made to the prophets, apostles and holy men of God, but not to such
heinous and rebellious sinners who have most justly deserved that God should
pour out upon them the violls of his wrath, and those fearful punishments
threatened in the law, because of the innumerable number of their sins and the
outragiousnesse of their wickedness; and therefore such have nothing to do
with the sweet promises of the Gospel, but are to apply unto themselves the
terrible threatenings denounced in the law against such grievous sinners.

For the answering of which tentation, we are to know that the Lords promises
made in the Gospel, are general, indefinite and universal, excluding none,
who turn from their sins by unfeigned repentance, and believe in Christ
Jesus, resting on him alone for their salvation. Neither is there any
limitation or exception of this or that sin, for be they never so greiuous
and manifold, yet if we perform the condition of faith and repentance, the
Lord will make good his promises unto us.

For the first, namely that the promises of the gospel are indefinite, and
generally made to al who repent and believe it, shall manifestly appear if we
consider the particulars. Esa. 55.1. the Lord calls all unto him indefinitly,
saying, to every one who thirsts come to the waters, and ye that have no
silver come, buy and eat; Come I say buy wine and milk with out silver and
without money; so that though we have no worthiness and righteousness of our
own, yet if we thirst after the mercy of God and righteousness of Christ, and
come unto God by unfeigned repentance, and unto our savior by a lively faith,
our thirst shall be satisfiyed and all our wantes supplied. So Ezech. 33.11.
the Lord solemnly swears that he will not the death of a sinner, but that
they turn from their wicked ways and live; where he speaks not of this or
that sinner, but of all without exception who turn unto him. Our savior
Christ likewise makes this indefinite promise Mark 16.16. that whosoever shall
believe and be baptized shall be saved. and John 3.14. he says, that as Moses
lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lift up 15.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. So
that as al who were stunge of the fyrie serpent were healed if they looked upon
the brazen serpent, neither was their any exception or distinction between
those who were deeply, or but a little pearsed with the sting, for if they were
stu^g they died, if they used not the remedy ordained of God, though their
wound were but small and shallow, but if they looked up to the brazen serpent
according to God ordinance, they were cured though their wound were never so
deadly and desperate, so those who look not upon Christ Jesus hanging on the
cross with the eye of faith, are sure to fall into everlasting death and
damnation, be their sins never so few, and on the other side, they who lay
hold upon Christ and believe in him, are sure to be saved though their sins
be never so many and grievous. So in the 16. verse it is said, that God so
loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. and ve. 36. He
that believes in the son has everlasting life. etc. So that here is no
exception of sins, for the promises are made indefinitely to all that
believe. In like manner our Savior has promised John 6.37. That whosoever come
unto him he will not cast them away. and ve. 40. he assures us that it is the
will of his father who sent him, that every man who believes in him should
have everlasting life. And the Apostle Peter Acts 10.43. says that unto our
Savior Christ give all the prophets witness, that through his name all that
believe in him shall have remission of sins. And the Apostle John likewise
says, 1. Ioh. 2.1. that if any man sin we have an advocate with the father
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not
for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world, that is for
whosoever repent and believe of every kingdom, country, and nation. So that
by all these places it is clear and evident that none are excluded from being
partakers of Gods merciful promises, but those who exclude themselves through
their infidelity and vnrepentancie.

the benefit of Gods mercy and Christ's merits so we repent and believe, That
our sins cannot debar us of Gods mercy, so we repent and believe.
as may appear also by plain testimony, Esaias. 1.18. the Lord thus speaks
to the Jews whom he had described to be rebellious and most outragiously
wicked. Come now (says the Lord) and let us reason together, though your
sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow: though they were red as
scarlet, they shall be as wool. The Apostle Paul likewise witnesses. Tit. 2.14.
that our savior Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity; And the Apostle John says, that the blood of Christ cleanses us
from all sin, and if we acknowledge our sins he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, 1. Ioh. 17.9.
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. So that here is no mention made
of any sins which are excepted, or which exclude us from Gods mercy and
Christ's merits, so that we repent and believe; neither are the promises of the
Gospel limited or restrained in respect of the number or greeuousnesse of our
sins, so we perform the condition of faith and repentance, for whosoever is
heartily sorry for his sins past, and purposes for the time to come to leave
and forsake them, whosoever does believe Gods promises and rests upon Christ
Jesus alone, for his salvation by a true and lively faith, he may be certainly
assured, that the Lord has pardoned and forgiven all his sins, and received
him into his grace and favor, though his sins be never so many and heinous;
and on the other side whosoever continues in his vnrepentancie and
infidelity, shall be condemned though his other sins be never so few and
small; neither will all our other sins debar us of Gods mercy, unless they
be joined with vnrepentancie and unbelief, for observe the condition of the
promises, faith and repentance, and all the promises of the Gospel belong unto
thee though thou were the greatest sinner that ever lived. For whereas it may
be objected that the sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, we are to
know it is not so much in regard of the heinousness of the sin, as that
because it is always severed and disioyned from faith and repentance, God
denying these his graces to those who upon desperate malice have made a
general Apostasy, and have persecuted the known truth. So that if it were
possible for them to repent and believe, it were possible also that they should
be saved.

Seeing therefore the promises of the Gospel are general excluding none, let
not any man who is laden with the burden of his sins, exclude himself
through his want of repentance and infidelity, for though their other sins
are grievous, yet this is more heinous and damnable then all the rest. For
whereas the Lord says, that he will extend his mercy unto all who come unto
him; if we reply, no he will not exte^d it unto me because I am a grievous
sinner, what do we else but contradict the Lord, and give truth it self the
lie; not giving credit to his word and promises. And therefore let us take heed
that we do not so aggrauate our sins as that in the mean time we extenuate
and derogate from Gods infallible truth.

CHAP. XXXV. Of other arguments drawn from the persons in the Trinity.
Reasons drawn from the first person, God the father.
whereby we may be assured of the remission of our sins; there may also other
arguments be drawn from every person of the Trinity. First God the father
has created us of nothing, even according to his own image, and when we had
defaced this his image in us, and made our selves slaves to Satan, he so
tenderly loved us his poor miserable creatures, that he spared not his dearly
beloved and only begotten Son, but sent him into the world to take our
nature upon him, that therein he might suffer all misery and affliction, and
lastly the cursed and bitter death of the cross, that so he might satisfy his
justice for our sins and perfect the work of our redemption. And this the
Evangelist witnesses, John 3.16. Al which love the Lord showed unto us even
for his own names sake, when we neither deserved it nor yet desired it, for we
were bondslaues unto Satan, and well contented to live in his bondage, we
were children of wrath and dead in our sins, yea we were enemies unto God
and all goodness. And therefore if our merciful God so loved us whilst we
were in love with our sins, at league with his enemy Satan, and at enmity
with him, that he sent his dearly beloved and only begotten Son to dye for
us, that by his death and bloodshed he might redeem and save us out of this
miserable estate, how much more will he now receive us to mercy and pardon, and
forgive our sins if we seek and sue for grace? if he loved us so dearly
when we hated him, and sought al means of reconciliation when we were
professed enemies against him, how much more will he receive us into his
favor, when as we earnestly desire to be reconciled? If he so loved us that he
sent his Son to die for our sins, how much more will he remit those sins
for which he has satisfied, when as with hearty sorrow we do bewail them,
and earnestly desire to be freed from them? if he has given his Son to
mankind to this end, that he should save and redeem repentant sinners, why
should any doubt of their redemption and salvation if they turn unto him by
unfeigned repentance, and lay hold on Christ by a lively faith? and if he have
given us his chief Jewel, hiw only begotten and best beloved Son and that
when we were his enemies, what will he deny us when in Christ we are
reconciled unto him and become his friends? And thus the Apostle reasons,
Romans 5.8. God (says he) sets out his love toward us seeing that whilst we
were yet sinners Christ died for us. 9. much more then being now justified by
his blood we shall be saved from wrath through him. 10. For if we were enemies we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life.

Reasons drawn from the 2. person God the son
for first he is our Savior and redeemer, 1. Because he came into the world
to save sinners.
who therefore came into the world that he might save and redeem us out of
the captivity of our spiritual enemies, sin, death, and the devil, and
that he might satisfy his fathers justice, obtain the remission of our
sins, and reconcile us unto him. Though then our sins be many and grievous,
this should not hinder us from coming to Christ by a true faith, and firm
assurance, that in him we shall have the remission of our sins, and be
received into Gods love and favor, nay rather this should be a forceible
argument to move us, to seek his help, when we find our selves in a
desperate case, destitute of all means whereby we may attain unto salvation,
seeing our Savior Christ came into the world to save such as were lost in
themselves, and inthralled in the miserable bondage of sin and Satan. And
this is evident by the scriptures, Matthew. 9.13. our Savior professes that he
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. and Luke 19.10. The
son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. 1. Tim. 1.15.
This is a true saying and by all means worthy to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners. the apostle also affirms that
our Savior Christ has quickened us who were dead in our sins and trespasses.
Ephesians. 2.1.5. And our savior Christ Matthew. 11.28. does not only call unto him
small sinners, but those who are heavy lade^ with an intolerable weight or sin,
promising that he will ease them.

Seeing therefore he came into the world to save and redeem grievous and
heinous sinners, and to give life unto those who were even stark dead in their
sins, seeing also he calls and inuiteth such unto him as are heavily laden
with an intolerable weight of wickedness, and promises to ease them; let us
not excuse our selves from coming because our sins are heinous and grievous,
but therefore let us the rather go unto Christ because we had need of his
help. If a man being loded with a weighty burden, should refuse the help of
a friend, both able and willing to ease him because his burden is very heavy,
who would not laugh at such ridiculous folly, for therefore he should more
earnestly desire, and more thankfully accept of his friends offered courtesy,
because himself is tired, pressed down, and altogether unable to bear this
intolerable weight: but such and greater folly do they commit, who being
pinched and oppressed with the heavy burden of their sins, do through
their infidelity refuse the healpe of Christ, offering himself to release and
ease them under this pretense, because their burden is over heavy; for
because to them it is intolerable, therefore they should rather go unto
Christ and ernestly desire to be eased and released, seeing he is not only
able, for his power is omnipotent, but also most willing, for he has most
graciously promised and freely offered his help.

That the price which Christ has paid for our redemption far exceeds all
our sins.
Moreover we need not to doubt of the sufficiency of the price which our
Savior has paid for our redemption, for it is of infinite value and of more
virtue and power to justify and save, then all the sins of the world to
condemn and destroy; so that though we were the greatest sinners that ever
lived, yea though the weight of all sin which ever in the world has been
committed did lie upon us, yet the meritts of Christ and the price which he
paid for our redemption do far exceed them, and if we come unto him by a
lively faith resting upon him alone for our salvation, he will surely ease us
of this intolerable burden. And therefore though the grieuousnesse of our
sins should increase our repentance, yet they should not diminish our faith
and assurance of pardon and forgiveness, for though our debt were never so
great, our suerty Christ Jesus has paid it to the uttermost farthing, though
our sins are never so many and grievous our Savior has borne them all upon
the cross in his own body and fully satisfying Gods justice for the^, 1.
Pet. 2.24.
has freed and delivered us from this heavy burden. Though we were never so
deeply inthraled in the bondage of our spiritual enemies, yet our almighty
redeemer has freed us out of captivity and has paid a sufficient price for
our ransom; and though we had no right or interest in the kingdom of heaven,
yet our savior has dearly purchased it for us by his precious death and
bloodshed, and therefore seeing in Christ we have fully satisfied Gods justice,
and fully merited the pardon of our sins, seeing in him we have not only
paid our debt, but also given a sufficient price for the purchasing of
eternal happiness, we need not to make any doubt of the pardon of our sins,
and of possessing of our heavenly inheritance, for the Lord cannot in justice
hold that from us which of right appertains unto us; nay we may assure our
selves that though he could yet he would not; for who can imagine that the Lord
who of his bountious liberallitie gives unto us more then we can deserve or
desire, will keep from us that which of right appertains to us? that he for
his own names sake without any respect of our works or worthiness freely
multiplieth his benefits upon us, should with hold our rightful inheritance
in his heavenly kingdom from us, which our savior Christ has purchased for
us by his precious death and bloodshed? and therefore seeing we have undoubted
right to the pardon of our sins because Christ Jesus has satisfied for them,
and just title to our heavenly inheritance which our Savior has purchased for
us with so dear and all-sufficient a price, let us in the name of Christ go
bouldly unto the throne of grace, desiring a general acquittance of that debt
which is already paid, nay let us not fear to approach the throne of Gods
severe justice, and to claim our heavenly inheritance which Christ has so
dearly purchased.

That Christ's power, mercy, and merits is more manifested by forgining
grievous sinners.
and so full of all power virtue and perfection, that our sins should not
discourage us from coming unto him, for the more miserable wretched and sinful
we are, the more fit subjects we are, whereupon he may exercise and show the
infinite riches of bounty, mercy, virtue and all sufficiency. If we were but a
little soyled with sin, it were not so great a matter to make us clean but
when we are most filthily defiled, and our polution is ingrayned in us as it
were with a scarlet die; when our unclean corruption sticks as fast to our
souls, as the Ethiopian blackness to their skins, then is the virtue of the
excellent lauer of Christ's blood sufficiently manifested, when as he purges us
and makes us clean, washing away all our filthy corruptions, and making our
scarlet sins as white as snow. Our savior Christ is our spiritual physitio^
who can as easily cure desperate diseases eue^ the remediles consumptio^, the
dead apoplexy and the filthy leprosy of the soul, as some small malady, or
little faintnes? neither is he only able but also as willing to undertake such
desperate cures as the least infirmities, because his skill will be the more
manifest and his praise the more extolled, for the more desperate the disease
is, the more it argues his cunning who helps it, and the more co^mendations
he shall receive who effects such a cure. And therefore though our diseases
are most dangerous and desperate, yet let us resort to this our heavenly
physitio^, for the more desperate the cure is, the more fit occasion shall he
have of showing his never failing skill, and of advancing his immortal praise.
He is our heavenly surgeon, even the good Samaritane which powers the
sovereign oil of his grace, and the precious baulme of his blood into our
wounded souls, and therefore the more greisly our wounds are, the more praise
and glory he gets in curing them, the more is the virtue of the sovereign
salve of his blood manifested to all the world by healing of them.

Though therefore our souls are most filthy and polluted, yet if we come to
Christ he will surely wash and purge us, for to this purpose he suffered his
precious water and blood to issue out of his side, that thereby as with a
living and clear stream issuing from a most pure fountain, he might cleanse
us from al our sins, and wash away all our filthy corruptions, though we are
most desperately sick, let us come unto our spiritual physician, for he can
cure the most remediless diseases as perfectly and as speedily, as the most
small infirmity and faint weakness: though our souls are wounded even to the
death, with the deep pearcing and deadly impoysoning sting of sin, yet let
us seek help of this our heavenly surgeon, who with the precious baulme of
his blood, can as easily heal the most dangerous wounds, as small scratches or
little cutts. Neither is he more able then willing, for hereby his virtue and
power, his love and bounty, is the more manifested to his endless and
immortal praise.

That those who doubt of the remission of their sins derogate from the vert^^
of Christ's merits.
But if we think our souls so filthy that he cannot purge them, what do we
else but derogate from the virtue of his blood, if we will not go to this
heavenly Physician to crave his help, because our sickness is grievous and
dangerous, what do we else but call his skill into question? If we will not
show our wounds because they are griesly, what do we else but notably detract
from the cunning of this our spiritual surgeon, and doubt of the virtue and
efficacy of the precious baulme of his blood: Whereas on the other side if we
see our polluted filthiness, and yet go unto Christ that we may be washed and
cleansed, we acknowledge the virtue and excellency of the spiritual lauer of
his blood? if we plainly discern that our sickness is desperate and yet go
to our souls Physician not doubting of recovery, we thereby extol our
Physicians skill, if our wounds be in themselves griesly and incurable, and
yet we resort to our heavenly Surgeon to be healed of them, we cannot more
commend his all sufficient cunning. And therefore seeing it is in these our
extremities to our Savior Christ most honorable and acceptable, and to our
selves most profitable and full of comfort, if we come unto Christ not doubting
of his help, let us not pretend excuses either because we are unfit, unworthy,
or in a desperate state, for by thus aggravating our own remediless misery we
extenuate and call into question Gods mercy and Christ's al-sufficiency, we
spoil him of his honor, glory, and our own souls of all joy and
consolation.

That the offices of Christ give us assurance of the remission of our sins.
And first in that he is our Prophet.
for first he is our prophet who has revealed unto us all the will and
counsel of his father, he has declared unto us the mystery of our
redemption and the means of our salvation, how we may attain unto the
remission of our sins, and how we may come out of that miserable and
wretched estate, in which we are by nature, and attain unto eternal
happiness, he it is who by the bright beams of his word does illuminate our
understandings, and by the operation of his holy spirit does cause the seals
of ignorance to fall from our eyes, Giving knowledge of salvation to his people
by remission of sins. He is that glorious and bright shining day star,
which from an high has visited us, to give light unto them who sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of
peace. If therefore we will walk in the way which he shows us, and use those
means which he reuealeth unto us in his Gospel, namely turn unto God by
unfeigned repentance, and believe in him by a lively faith, we shall not need
to fear our sins though never so grievous and manifold, for this our
heavenly Prophet has truly revealed unto us a plain way how we may come out
of our sins and be reconciled unto God, how we may be adorned with the
glorious robe of his righteousness and be made partakers of all his merits;
how we may become of the children of wrath and firebrands of hell, the children
of God, and heirs of heaven. And therefore let us walk in this way and assure
our selves that we shall come to the journey end of our desires, for truth it
self is our guide so that we need not to doubt of the way.

Reasons drawn from Christ's priesthood.
who has offered up unto his father an all-sufficient sacrifice and full
satisfaction for our sins, whereby Gods justice is fully satisfied and his
wrath appeased, who also sitting at the right hand of his father, continually
makes intercession for us. The sacrifice which this our high priest offered
was himself, as the apostle testifies Heb. 9.26. even his body to be
crucified, and his blood to be shed for the putting away of our sins? the
which oblation was offered on the altar of his diety which sanctified the
sacrifice, and gave unto it such sufficie^cy and value, that it was a perfect
price and full satisfaction for the sins of all the faithful, as the apostle
witnesses. 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. Seeing therefore this our
high priest has given himself for us, even his body to be crucified, and his
blood to be shed to this end, that it might be a propitiatory sacrifice and
full satisfaction for our sins, and seeing he was once offered to take away
the sins of many, as the Apostle speaks Heb. 9 28. we need not doubt of
the remission of our sins if we come unto him by a lively faith, for to this
end he has shed his blood, that he thereby might offer unto God a full
satisfaction for our sins and purge away all our wickedness, and therefore
if he should not attain unto his end, that is if he should not satisfy Gods
justice and appease his wrath, by purging and taking away all our sins, his
precious blood should be shed in vain.

Reasons drawn from Christer intercession.
who continually sits at the right hand of his father making intercession
for us, by showing and pleading his own meritts righteousness and obedience
whereby he pacifieth his fathers displeasure, and works us into his love and
favor. And this the apostle witnesses. Romans 8.34. It is Christ which is dead
yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request for us. So also Heb. 9.24. it is said that our high priest Jesus
Christ is entered into heaven, to appear in the sight of God for us. and the
Apostle John says. 1. Ioh. 2.1. If any man sin we have an advocate with the
father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation for our sins.
neither need we to doubt of his effectual dealing for us, for if he loved us
so dearly that he spared not to give his precious life for us, there is no
question but he will be exceeding earnest in making request for us, neither will
he be sparing in words who has not spared his dearest blood. And therefore
seeing our high priest does continually make intercession for us, we need not
to doubt but that he will obtain his suite, and procure the pardon of our
sins, and his fathers love and favor. Especially considering that he
entreats nothing which he has not deserved and by his death purchased for
us, and consequently when like an advocate he pleads his full payment of our
debt, and alleges his all sufficient meritts and sufferings, God cannot in
his justice but grant his most lawful request; considering also that he
makes his suite not to a stranger or some common friend who will either
prevent his suite with a strange and stern countenance, or deny it with some
vain excuse, but unto his most gracious and dearly loving father who
willingly harkeneth unto, and redily grants all his requests. And this our
Savior himself testifies Ioh. 11.41. father (says he I thank thee because
thou have heard me. 42. But I know thou hear me always etc. And therefore
considering Christ's merit in deserving, and Gods mercy in granting, Christ's
importunity in asking, and his fathers facility in yielding; seeing he that
entreats for us loved us so entirely that he dyed for us, and will
undoubtedly be most earnest in soliciting our suite, and he who is entreated
so heartily affects us that he spared not to give unto us his only begotten
and dearly beloved son, that by his death he might purchase for us
everlasting life, let us shake of all doubting and go bouldly unto the throne
of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
as the Apostle exhorts us Heb. 4.16. For our good high priest is able
perfectly to save them who come unto God by him, Reasons drawn from Christ's
kingly office. Mat. 11.25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. as it is Heb. 7.25.

for (now) the father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the
son. as himself testifies Ioh. 5.22. and even when he was upon the earth he
excercised this authority, as appears Matthew. 9.2. whereas he says to the
sick of the palsy. Son be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven thee. For
which being challenged he defends his regal privileges, affirming ver. 6.
that the son of man has authority even on earth to forgive sins. Now what
can be more comfortable unto any soul wounded with sin then the
consideration of this undoubted truth. For seeing our Savior who so tenderly
loved us, that he spared not to give his own most precious blood for the
price of our redemption has all-sufficient power in his own hands to save
and deliver us out of the hands of all our enemies, who can imagine that he
will suffer us to be lost whom he has so dearly bought? seeing he gave his
life to purchase for us the remission of our sins, who can doubt that having
thus dearly purchased it he will not bestow it and so suffer his blood to be
spilt in vain, seeing he was content for our sakes to endure all misery,
mockings, reuilings, whipping, crucifying death it self, and the anger of his
father more bitter then death, to this end that by all these his sufferings, he
might procure the remission of our sins and everlasting life, and that when
we were rebellious traitors who did flee away from him; who can make any
question, but that now he will bestow these inestimable benefits which he has
of purpose bought for us, they being in his own power and custody, if like
humble servants and penitent children we turn unto him and implore his grace?
if a malefactor had a dear friend who loved him so entirely, that he would
not spare to give his whole substance to procure his pardon, would this
miserable offendour fear death or condemnation, if he were assured that now
his pardon were in his friends hand, and that the matter were by his Prince
referred to him, as unto a supreme judge absolutely to determine what he
will? But our Savior has not given goods or gold, or any corruptible thing,
but even his own most precious body to be crucified, and his blood to be shed,
that by this inestimable price he might purchase our pardon of God our
sovereign king, now he has the law in his own hands, and is appointed of God
for our supreme Judge to acquit us at his own pleasure, who therefore can
make any doubt of grace and pardon, seeing his judge is his Savior who has
loved him so dearly, that to this end he has shed his precious blood, that he
might procure for him the remission of his sins and everlasting happiness,
and therefore if he would not stick to buy it at so high a rate, how much more
having bought it only for this purpose will he now bestow it if we seek unto
him, and earnestly desire to be partakers of his grace and mercy.

Reasons drawn from Christ's promises, confirmed by experience.
Moreover as this our most gracious king and loving Savior has sufficient
power to pardon all our sins, and in respect of his inestimable love, is most
certainly willing to blot out all our wickedness, if we repent and come unto
him, so also he has bound himself hereunto by most free and faithful
promises. Matthew. 11.78. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heany laden,
and I will ease you. John 3.36. He that believes in the Son has
everlasting life. And Ioh 6.37. He has assuredly promised, that whosoever
comes unto him he will not cast away. These and many such like gracious
promises he has made, of the performance whereof we need not to doubt,
especially considering that he gave continual experience in his practice here
on earth, of his love, goodness, mercy and truth, for who ever came unto him
with any lawful suite and received a repulse? who ever entreated his help, and
was aba^doned? who ever asked any thing of him which was profitable for him to
receive and did not obtain his suite? whatsoever sick came unto him received
their health, whatsoever lame desired his help received their lims, whatsoever
blind resorted unto him received their sight, whatsoever sinner implored the
forgiveness of his sins received full remission and pardon. Yea so gracious
merciful and loving was this our king and redeemer, that he prevented his
poor miserable subjects with his grace, and sought all occasions of extending
his love and mercy toward them, giving unto them more then they desired; the
sick of the paulsie coming unto him not only was cured of his disease, but
also received the remission of his sins. Matthew. 9. Zacheus desired but to see
his face, and he offers unto him his company and therewith eternal
salvation. Luke 19. The woman of Samaria requested but elementall water, and
he offers unto her the water of life. Ioh. 4. The people followed him to be
sed by miracle with corporal food, and Christ offers unto them the bread of
life. Ioh. 6. John 9.
The poor blind man desired that he might be by Christ restored to his bodily
sight, and Christ also illuminates the eyes of his soul, so that as with his
bodily eyes he discerned him to be a man so by the eye of faith he knew him to
be his redeemer and Savior. By all which it clearly appears that there was
never any more ready to ask then Christ to give, nay such was his goodness
and love, that he was always more ready to grant then they to entreat, and to
grant more then they ever desired. Now we must not think that our Savior is
altered in nature, or that (as it is usual amongst men) honors have changed
manners, for he is God immutable in goodness, and without change or shadow of
change, as it is Iam. 1.17. and therefore we may assure our selves if we
turn from our sins by true repentance, and come unto him by a lively faith,
we shall be received to grace and mercy, and receive the pardon of our sins be
they never so heinous and innumerable.

Reasons drawn from our Communion with Christ.
Lastly, the union and communion which is between Christ and all the faithful,
may give unto them full assurance of the pardon and remission of all their
sins; for first they are coupled unto him in spiritual matrimony, and he
becomes the Bridegroom, they the spouse, he the husband, they the wife, now
we know that in law there will no action of debt lie against the wife whilst
the husband lives, because she is under covert barn, and therefore her
husband who has taken upon him to maintain and defend her, must answer and
follow all her suites, and his goods are liable for the paying of her debts.
And thus it is also between Christ the husband and the Church his spouse being
married unto her, he has taken her under his charge and protection, and has
undertaken to answer all suites and to satisfy all her debts, nay he has
discharged them already, and therefore we need not to fear any action which
Satan, the Law or Gods justice may lay against us, for our husband Jesus
Christ has taken upon him to follow all our suites, and to satisfy all our
debts, so that if either the Law, Gods justice, or our enemy Satan do
co^mence any suits against us, we are not now to take upon us the answering of
them in our own persons, but we are to send them to our husband Jesus Christ,
who has taken our causes in hand and will give unto them a sufficient answer.

The faithful Christ's members.
Secondly the faithful are united unto Christ in a more near union, for he is
there head and they his members, as appears Ephe. 5 23.30. he is the true
vine and we the branches, as himself speaks John 15 1. he is the fruitful
Olive tree, we the sciences which are grafted into him. as it is Romans 11. he is
the foundation, we the building, as the apostle affirms Ephe. 2.20.21. by
reason of which near union, it comes to pass that those things which
appertain unto Christ belong unto us, and ours unto him, for as the head
deriueth sense and motion unto the members; and as the Olive tree and vine do
communicate their virtue, farnesse, and sap unto their branches and sciences,
by which they live and bring forth fruit, and as the foundation does sustain
and uphold all the building; so does our Savior Christ our head, root, and
foundation communicate unto us his members and branches, the virtue of his
merits and the iuce and sap of his precious blood, whereby we are quickened and
revived who were dead in trespasses, our sins washed away and purged and we
made fruitful in all righteousness and holiness, as in that his imputed
righteousness whereby we are justified before God, and that inhaerent
righteousness begun in us by his holy spirit, whereby we are justified
before men. And as he has bestowed and communicated unto us his
righteousness, death and obedience, so has he taken upon him from us al our
sins original and actual, of commission and omission, and in his own person
has suffered all that punishment, which we by them had deserved, so as now he
having taken upon him our sins, and endued us with his righteousness, merit,
and obedience, we need not to fear the exact rigor of Gods justice, for by
him and in him we are without sin, pure and undefiled, and perfectly
righteous in Gods sight. Neither shall we need to fear the violence of all our
spiritual enemies, for our head Jesus Christ is God almighty, and therefore
none shall be able to pluck us out of his hands against his will, and we are as
dear unto him as the members of his body, and therefore look how loath any
careful head would be to have any of the members pulled from it by force and
violence, so loath and unwilling will our Savior and head be, to have any of
his members plucked from him. And therefore seeing he wants neither will nor
power to defend us, we need not fear the raging malice and cunning violence
of any of our spiritual enemies, sin, the Devil, the world and the flesh,
for our head is all-sufficient, and also most willing to save and defend us,
from all their force and malice.

Reasons drawn from the 3. person the holy spirit.
And so much concerning the reasons drawn from the second person, whereby every
repenting and believing sinner may be assured of the pardon and remission of
all his sins. Now we are to speak of those which may be drawn from the
third person the holy spirit. First therefore we are to know that though our
sins be manifold, and our corruptions exceeding filthy, yet this holy spirit
will sanctify and purge us from all our pollution; so that though in times
past we were most heinous sinners, idolaters, adulterers, thieves, drunkards,
raylers, extortioners, yet now we are washed, now we are sanctified now we
are instified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. As
the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 6.11. he is that heavenly fire which consumes
and purges us from all the dross of our corruptions, he is that divine water
which washes away all our filthy pollution, it is he who does regenerate and
beget us a new who were dead in our sins, and whosoever are thus regenerated
shall be heirs of the kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, we may hereby be assured of the remission of our sins, in that the
spirit of God joins with us in our suite and together with us, makes request
unto God in our behalf, and whereas we are ignorant and know not how to pray
as we ought, the spirit it self helps our infirmities and makes request for
us with sighs which cannot be expressed. But God who scarcheth the hearts,
knows what is the meaning of the spirit: for he makes request for the Saints
according to the will of God. As the Apostle speaks. Romans 8.26.27. who
therefore can doubt of obtaining his suite, even the remission of his sins
and reconciliation with God, seeing his suite is framed and indicted by Gods
spirit, and consequently is most wise, just, and as the Apostle says according
to the will of God? yea it is solicited and followed with great earnestness
by the same spirit; and therefore our suite being wise, just, and framed by the
spirit according to the will of God, and by the same spirit in most earnest
manner, solicited and furthered, there is no question but we shall obtain it.

CHAP. XXXVI. Other reasons to persuade the weak Christian of the remission of
his sins.
1. That we are to believe the remission of our sins, because it is an
article of our Creed.
to assure us of the remission of our sins; to which we may ad diverse others.
First, the believing of the remission of our sins in an article of our
Creed, which we do daily confess and profess, which is not left unto our
choice to believe or not to believe, but as we confess it with the mouth, so
we are bound to believe it with the heart, if we would be reckoned in the
number of Christians. Why then should we doubt of that which we are bound to
perform; and if we do not we grievously sin through infidelity, which is
more dangerous and damnable then all our other sins whatsoever? And therefore
though there were no other reason to move us, though our heinous and manifold
sins should make it seem unto us never so incredible, yet let us set aside
all impediments and break through the violence of all objections, and believe
in obedience to Gods commandments, and because it is our duty, the
performance whereof is very acceptable unto God, and the neglect whereof is a
sin most dangerous and damnable. Which that we may perform, let us
carefully observe the condition of the covenant of grace, that is, let us rest
and rely upon Christ Jesus alone for our salvation by a lively faith, and turn
unto God by unfeigned repentance, and then there is no place left to doubting of
that which in duty we are bound to believe.

2. The testimony of Gods faithful ministers. Matthew. 16.
for the keys of the kingdom of heaven are committed unto them, and they have
power given them of God here on earth to bind and loose; not as though they
could by their own authority and in their own name give pardon of sins to
whom they list (as the papists teach and practice, for this is proper and
peculiar unto God alone, as even the Pharisees well knew whereof it was, that
seeing our Savior Christ take upon him to forgive sins whom they imagined to
be a mere man, they affirmed that he blasphemed. For who (say they can
forgive sin but God only) but they have authority given them of God upon
due examination and trial of their faith by the fruits thereof unfeigned
repentance, certainly to declare and pronounce unto them that their sins are
forgiven. Whosoever therefore have this testimony of Gods faithful ministers
who are well acquainted with their estates given unto the^, they may assure
themselves that it is undoubtedly true and most certain; for who is it that
dare oppose himself and contradict the testimony of Gods spirit in the mouth
of so many his faithful ambassadors? who dare be so presumptuous as to take
upon him the discerning of his state better then the ministers of God, who
being appointed of God to this function are endued with a great measure of his
spirit, whereby they are enabled to discern and judge of men's estates better
then they themselves? for he that is spiritual discerns all things, and is
made acquainted with the mind of Christ, as the Apostle speaks 1. Cor
2.15.16. And therefore if diverse of Gods faithful ministers with one consent
pronounce unto any paenitent sinner the remission of their sins, and assure
them after the examination of their estate that they are in the love and favor
of God, it should be unto them ten thousand times more forcible an argument to
persuade the^ and to confirm their faith in the assurance of Gods love, then
the contrary testimony of Satan or their timorous unbelieving flesh to move
them to doubting thereof, if our bodies be sick we committ our selves to the
skill and care of the physician, and good reason, because we know he is
better able to discern of our estate then we our selves, and believing his
judgment to be good we suffer him to apply such remedies as he thinks
most fit; why then should we not committ the discerning of our estate to the
physician of the soul no less careful, and in this respect much more skilful?
for the others rules in some patients may fail him, but the grounds whereupon
the spiritual physician builds, are most infallible being the undoubted
truth of God. Why should we not rather believe their often approved judgment
then our own timorous fantasies, or Satan's testimony who is our malicious
enemy?

The 3. Reason drawn from the contrary testimony of Satan.
For when there is any suggestion cast into our minds which is repugnant to the
word of God and the testimony of Gods spirit in the hearts of the faithful,
we may assure our selves that it is the speech of Satan or of our corrupt
flesh the messenger of Satan both which come to one end; but those motives
and suggestions, that God will not receive us to mercy, that our sins are
unpardonable, that we are reprobates and castawayes, that now it is too late
to turn unto God, proceed not from Gods spirit, for they are quite contrary
to that which the scriptures teach us, namely that the mercies of God are
infinite, and he always ready to receive us to grace when we turn unto him;
that if we will earnestly repent and in the mediation of Christ sue for mercy,
he will make our scarlet sins as white as snow, that it is never to late to
turn unto God, for if we repent he has promised to remit our sins, and to
receive us into his favor. Neither are we to imagine that the testimony of
Gods spirit in our consciences is contrary to the testimony of the same
spirit in the holy scriptures, and therefore seeing these suggestions are
flatly repugnant to the word of God and testimony of the spirit, we are to
assure our selves that they are the temptations of Satan, either immediately
suggested by himself or mediately by his messenger our corrupt flesh.

Seeing then these suggestions come from Satan who is our malicious enemy,
Ioh. 8.44. Satan either lies or else speaks the truth to deceive.
and a liar from the beginning yea the father of lies we are not to believe
the^, nay rather we may gather certain assurance that the contrary is true;
for the speaks only lies, or if at any time he speak the truth it is to
this end that he may deceive us. For example he tells the secure carnal
may that he is in the state of grace, and highly in Gods favor, but unto the
humbled sinner he says, that he is a reprobate and shall most certainly be
damned; unto the worldly secure man he says that God is most merciful, then
the which nothing can be more true, but does not speak this in his
conscience, because he would have him to taste thereof but to lull him a sleep
with this sweet siren song to his eternal perdition. On the other side when
he has to deal with the bruised heart and contrite spirit, he tells him
of nothing but of Gods exact justice, to the end that he may plunge him into
utter desperation: In a word whatsoever he speaks in the conscience of man,
it is either false in it self or if true in them yet false in hypocrisy, if
true in the general, yet false in the particular application. As what can be
more true then that God is just? and what more false then that he will
exercise his justice in punishing repentant and humbled sinners? what can be
more true then that God is most merciful? and what more false then that he will
show this his mercy is saving those who live and die in their sins without
repentance? and yet it is most usual with Satan to affirm both the one and
the other, lying in both because he does misapply them. And therefore seeing
Satan does never speak the truth or else does falsely apply it in respect of
our estate, let us acquaint our selves with his false language; and so by
hearing his lies we may be the better assured of the truth; for example, when
he tells us that our sins are unpardonable, that it is now too late to
turn unto the Lord, that we are reprobates and damned wretches, we knowing
that our malicious enemy by his lies does continually seek our destruction,
are contrariwise to assure our selves that Gods mercy and Christ's merits
far exceed our sins, that now is the acceptable time and day of salvation,
if we will turn unto God and hearing his voice not harden our hearts, that
we are in the state of salvation, the vessels of mercy, and beloved children
of God.

The last argument taken from the experience of Gods mercy in pardoning others.
and first of whole cities and nations.
may gather unto themselves assurance of the forgiveness of them, by the
consideration of Gods mercy extended unto other repentant sinners; for there
was never any from the beginning of the world to this day, were their sins
never so heinous or innumerable who have not been received to mercy, and
pardoned of our gracious God whenever they did unfeignedly turn unto him. And
this may appear whether we consider whole cities or nations, or else
particular men. Of the first we have a notable example in the Israelites which
lived in the time of the judges, who though they did many times negligently
forget the great mercies and inestimable benefits of God showed to their
forefathers, of which also themselves had been partakers, though they forsook
the Lord not once or twice but very often, even then when he most bound them
unto him with multiplying upon them the benefitts of peace and plenty, and
though they let the raines loose unto all wickedness, yea (which was most
abominable and odious in the sight of God,) though they worshipped and served
Baal and Asteroth and other idols of the cursed nations, for which horrible
idolatry God had cast out the nations before them; yet whenever they turned
unto the Lord he pardoned their sins, receiving them into his former love
and favor, and delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies.

So likewise in the time of the prophet Esaias, The example of the Israelits in
the time of the prophet Esaias. Esaias 1.5. to the 16.
to what a notorious height of wickedness were the same people grown as the
Lord by his prophet does decipher and describe them in the first chapter of
that prophecy. In the 2. ver. he calls heaven and earth to witness their
horrible rebellion, in the 3. verse he shows that their unthankfulness for
all his mercies, far exceeded the ingratitude of brute beasts, in the 4. verse
he exclaymeth out against them calling them a sinfullnation, a people laden
with iniquity, a seed of the wicked corrupt children who had for saken the
Lord, and provoked the holy one of Israel to anger. In the 5. and 6. verses he
shows their hardness of heart and obstinacy in their rebellion which was so
great that though the Lord sent afflictions and chastize mentes upon them, yet
they were no whit reformed but waxed worse and worse, and that this was not the
case of some few but of all the whole body of the people, for the whole head was
sick and the whole heart was heaute. and that from the soul of the foot to
the crown of the head there was nothing sound therein, but wounds, and
swellings, and sores full of corruption, the cure whereof they utterly
neglected. In the 10. verse he matcheth the sins of both prince and people,
with those crying sins and outrageous wickedness of Sodom and Gomorah which
brought down from heaven fire and brimstone to consume them. In the 11.12.13.
and 14. verses he complains of their filthy hypocrisy in Gods outward
worship joined with the utter neglect of true godliness and his spiritual
service, which caused the Lord to detest al their sacrifices, sabbothes, and
new moons. So that their could not be imagined greater wickedness in any
people, respecting those notable means which the Lord continually granted
unto them above all other nations for their own conversion; and therefore who
would not have thought their state to be most desperate, who would not have
looked daily that the Lord should have consumed them with fire and brimstone,
or have caused the earth to have swallowed them up alive as it did Corah and
his assotiats? but behold the infinite mercies of our gracious God, even when
they wallowed in this filthy sink of all impiety the Lord calls them to
repentance, and when as they had forsaken him and fled from him, desiring
nothing less then to make or meddle with him, the Lord calls unto them, and
he in whose power it was every minute utterly to destroy them, first of all
desires a parley, he who might well abhor to vouchsafe them his presence,
earnestly desires conference with them, saying. ver. 18. Come now and let us
reason together says the Lord; though your sins were as crimson, they shall
be made as white as snow; though they were red like searlet, they shall be as
wool.

The example of the Israelites in the time of our savior Christ
In like manner in the time of our savior Christ the same Jews most wickedly
rebelled against the Lord; for when the Lord in his rich mercy sent the
promised Messiah, to deliver them out of the hands of their enemies, they
would not receive him, nay they continually afflicted and persecuted him, they
mocked and reviled him, they haled him before the judgment seat, and caused
him to be condemned who came to justify and acquit them; they buffeted and
whipped him, and preferred a wicked murderer before him, who preferred their
salvation before his own life, lastly in most ignominious sort they crucified
and killed him. After all which outrageous wickedness offered against the Lord
of life, they continued in their hardness of heart and impaenitencie, never
acknowledging their fault not desiring pardon, nay rather as they had
persecuted the head our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, so when they could offer
no more wrong unto him in his own person, they were ready to satisfy and
glutt their malicious rage in persecuting his poor members. Now what more
hellish impiety was ever committed? what more outrageous sin was ever heard
of; who would ever have imagined that there was any hope of pardon for such
rebellious bloody wretches? but O the infinite and bottomless depth of Gods
mercy, whilst their wickedness was fresh in memory, and their hands still
imbrewed in the guiltless blood of this innocent Lamb: when as they continued
in their course, and ran headlong forward in their wickedness without any sense
of sin or desire of pardon; the Lord sent his apostles unto them to bring them
to repentance, and to assure them that their sins were pardoned. Act. 2.38.
Seeing therefore these obtained the remission of their sins, who needs to
doubt of pardon who earnestly desires it? for did the Lord gratioussy offer
forgiveness to such rebellious wretches, and will he not grant it to less
offenders if they desire it? did he offer them mercy before they sought it, and
will he deny mercy unto any who earnestly seek and sue for it? Does he seek
to draw men to repentance and to turn unto him; and will he not receive them
when they do repent? was he so exceeding merciful in times past, and shall we
now think his arm shortened or his mercy abated? Nay assuredly he is immutable
ever like himself one and the same most gracious, most merciful, and full of
all goodness and compassion, toward all them that come unto him. And
therefore if we turn from our sins by unfeigned repentance, we may assure
our selves though they be never so many and grievous they shall be pardoned, and
we received into Gods love and favor.

Particular examples of Gods mercy.
we may ad the examples of particular sinners, who have been received to mercy
and obtained pardon, though their sins have been many and grievous, as
Matthew, Zacheus, Leui, who were sinful Publicans that got their livings by
pilling and polling, oppression and extortion, men so notoriously wicked, that
Publicans and sinners are joined together, as though they were sinners by
profession, and therefore as Synonima or diverse words of one signification they
interpret one another. And yet such was the riches of Gods mercy, that even
these professed sinners were converted, and received remission of all their
outrageous wickedness. The like may be said of Mary Magdalene who though she
had been a woman of lewd behavior and loose life, though she were possessed
of many devils, and commonly noted for an infamous and notorious sinner, yet
upon her true repentance obtained the remission of her sins: and whilst she
washed the feet of our savior Christ with her tears, he purged and cleansed
her body and soul from the filthy leprosy of sin with his own most
precious blood, whilst she wiped them with the hairs of her head, he
beautified and adorned her with the rich robe of his righteousness. Yea she
was received into an high degree of favor with our savior Christ, so as she
had in some things the pre-eminence before his chief Apostels, for after
Christ's rising again he first vouchsafed her his presence, and used her as
his messenger to certify the rest of his resurrection. So likewise the Apostle
Paul before his calling was not only no lover but a bitter and fierce
persecuter of the truth, and of all the professors thereof, imprisoning,
stoning, and cruelly murdering the Saints of God; but behold and admire the
wonderful mercy of God, even whilst his imbrued hands, were yet red with the
blood of Gods faithful children, and whilst his heart was so full of burning
rage, that he breathed out still threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, it pleased God wonderfully to convert him, to assure him
of the remission of all these his horrible sins, and to make him of a bloody
persecuter, a most excellent preacher of his Gospel, and of a ravenous
devouring wolf, a most vigilant and painful shepherd. To these we might
add the example of the thief, who though he had spent his whole life wickedly
and profanely, yet was converted at the hour of death and receiving the
pardon of his sins, was presently assured of everlasting happiness. But I
shall not need to heap up many particulars, only I can not pass that notable
example of Manasses one of the most outrageous sinners and prophanest wretch
that ever lived, as the holy Ghost has described him in the 21. 2. Kings 21.
chap. of the 2. book of the Kings. For there he affirms of him that he was
a most horrible idolater, a most malicious enemy and cruel persecuter of Gods
truth, a defiler of Gods holy temple, a sacrificer of his own children unto
idols, that is devils, a notable witch, and wicked sorcerer, a bloody murderer
of exceeding many the dear Saints and true Prophets of the Lord, one who did
not run headlong alone into all hellish impiety, but also ledd the people
under his government out of the way to do more wickedly then did the Heathen
people whom the Lord distroied before the children of Israel, and in a word
wrought more abominations and outrageous wickedness then the cursed Amorites
and Cananites, of whom notwithstanding the land surfetted and spued them out
for their crying sins. And yet this Manasses, this wretch, more like a devil
incarnate then a Saint of God, repenting him of his sins from the bottom of
his heart, was received (I cannot speak it without rauishing wonder of Gods
bottomless and never sufficiently admired mercy) was received I say, to grace,
and obtained the pardon of all his horrible sins and most abominable
wickedness. Now all these examples are written for our learning, and are
recorded by the holy Ghost, to the end that we may continually laud and praise
the Lord for his endless and infinite mercies, and gather unto our selves
assurance, that though our sins were as grievous and heinous as any of theirs
before named, yet if with them we turn from our sins by unfeigned
repentance, and go unto Christ by a lively faith, we shall also with them
receive the pardon of our sins, and be entertained into Gods love and favor.

That unrepentant sinners have nothing to do with the former consolation.
upon which as upon immovable firm grounds, the afflictted conscience may lay
the foundation of sound comfort; now if any abuse the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and gather out of this heavenly doctrine this devilish use, that because Gods
mercies abound therefore they will abound in their sins without repentance,
and still more and more provoke the wrath of the Lord against them, to these I
answer with the Apostle that their damnation is just, in that they abuse Gods
mercy, as an occasion to sin, which should serve as a forcible argument to
lead them to repentance, neither let such flatter themselves with vain hope of
Gods mercy, for despising the riches of his bou^tifulnesse, patience, and long
suffering, and continuing in their hardness of heart and vnrepentancy, they
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God. As the apostle plainly speaks Romans
2.4.5. Neither let the^ foolishly boulster up themselves in their sins, by
putting under their elbowes, the sweet soft pillowes of Gods merciful
promises, for as there is none so special which do exclude the most heinous
sinner that repents and believes, so is there none so general which do
extend themselves to those who continue in their vnrepentancie and unbelief;
and therefore though there be no sin so grievous, which being repented of and
forsaken will condemn us if we rest and rely upon our Savior Christ for our
salvation by a lively faith; so there is no sin so small and venial which
will not plunge us into the bottom of hell, if we live therein without
repentance and do not desire to leave and sorsake it. And therefore so long as
we live in our sins, and do not seriously turn unto the Lord by unfeigned
repentance, let us not in vain arrogate and misapply unto our selves the mercy
of God, the merits of Christ, and the sweet promises of the Gospel, for unto
such appertain the fearful threatenings of the law as being still the
children of wrath, dead in their sins, and subject to Gods heavy wrath and
displeasure.

CHAP. XXXVII. How we may know whether we be effectually called or no.
How Satan persuades the weak Christian, that he is not called.
of all which consolations Satan earnestly indeuoureth to spoil the afflicted
soul, by suggesting into his mind diverse subtle and dangerous tentations. As
first, that all these gracious promises and sweet consolations of the gospel
do only belong unto those who are called* neither to all in this number, for
many are called but few are chosen, but unto those alone whose calling is
effectual, that is to say, who are separated from the world, given unto Christ
and Christ unto them, and who are ingrafted into him, and become lively members
of his body: but thou, will he say to the humbled sinner art not thus
effectually called, and therefore do not flatter thy self with the hope of
Gods promises, for though in themselves they are most certain, yet they belong
not unto thee, but unto those alone whose calling is effectual.

How we may withstand the former tentations.
Against which tentation if we would strengthen our selves, we must examine our
calling whether it be effectual or no; and that both by considering the means
whereby all are effectually called, and also the parts of effectual calling,
making application of both unto our own particular. For the first, we may
thus reason against our spiritual enemy, whosoever can find the means of
effectual calling, power fully working in himself, and converting him unto
God he is effectually called, but I have and do find these means thus working
in me, and therefore I do not flatter my self with vain hope, but am
certainly assured that I am effectually called and converted.

Of the means of our effectual calling.
are first the saving and fruitful hearing of Gods word, by the ministry
whereof the Lord calls and inuiteth us to come unto him by unfeigned
repentance, and to our savior Christ by a lively faith even when we are dead
in our sins, without any desire to will or ability to perform any thing
that is good, Ezech. 16.6.
whilst we are the bondslaues of Satan and mecre worldlings, Ephesians.
2.1.3.12.13.
not desiring nor once thinking upon the means of our salvation. And this is
done first by the preaching of the law, by which is revealed unto us our
innumerable heinous sins, and the fearful punishments due unto them: as
that we by our continual transgression are subject to the Romans 7.7.
curse of the law, unable to perform obedience unto any of the commandments
or to make satisfaction to Gods justice for the least of our sins, and so
consequently that we are obnoxious to Gods wrath, subject to those horrible
torments provided for the wicked, and therefore in respect of our selves, our
own righteousness, satisfaction, or any other means of our own whatsoever
in a most damnable and desperate estate. Secondly, after the Law has thus
showed unto us our sins and the punishments due unto them, the Lord by the
ministry of the gospel does reveal unto us a plain way by which we may come
out of this miserable estate, and attain unto everlasting salvation, namely by
believing and ayplying unto our selves Christ Jesus and all his benefits.
Thirdly with this outward ministry of the word the Lord joins the inwarrd
cooperation of his holy spirit, whereby he opens our deaf ears, and makes
us attentively to hear, Psalm. 40.6. John 6.44. Act. 16.14. 1. Ioh. 2.20.27.
and as with a precious eyesalue illightens the blind eyes of our
understandings, enabling us to conceive and understand those things which are
delivered unto us, both out of the law, and out of the Gospel.

The 2. means of our effectual calling.
The second means of our effectual calling is the softening of our hard
hearts, when as the Lord takes away our stony hearts, and gives us hearts
of flesh, as he promises Ezec. 11.19. And breaks up these fallow grounds
fit in themselves to bring forth no fruit but weeds and thistles, that so
they may be prepared to receive the seed of his word, and be made fruitful
in all grace. And thus our stubborn and rebellious hearts are softened when as
we particularly apply unto our selves the doctrine of the law, whereby first we
come to the knowing and acknowledging of our finnes, original and actual.
Secondly our hearts are pricked, and our consciences wounded by apprehending
and applying to our guilty souls the curse of the law, the anger of God, and
those fearful punishments prepared for the wicked. Thirdly seeing this our
misery, and finding no means of our own how we may come out of this wretched
estate, we are brought to despair of our own strength, righteousness and
satisfaction,, finding them of no virtue for our justification. By all which,
being thoroughly humbled and cast down in our selves, the Lord by the
preaching of the gospel does reveal unto us a way how we may escape out of
this miserable estate, by applying unto our selves Christ Jesus, and all his
meritts and obedience by a true and lively faith; after which the humbled
sinner seeing his own wants and misery by the law, and perceiving that our
savior Christ is so rich in meritts, that he can cansily supply all his
defects, and so gracious and powerful that he can and will free him out of
his wretchedness, he does plainly discern that he stands exceedingly in
need of Christ Jesus and his righteousness. After which sense of his own
wantes there is begott in him an carnest and hungring desire to be made
partaker of Jesus Christ his righteousness, meritts, obedience, and of all
those inestimable benefitts which are purchased by them. And lastly he is
moved to appeal from the sentence of the law, to the throne of grace,
pleading not his own righteousness or satisfaction, but Christ's meritts and
obedience.

The third and last means of our effectual calling is a true and lively
faith, The 3. means
whereby we apprehend Christ Jesus and all his benefitts given and applied unto
us by Gods spirit, resting upon him alone for our justification and salvation..

That all (...) find the former means powerful in them are effectually called.
And these are the means of our effectual calling, which whosoever has found
powerful working in themselves for their conversion after the manner before
spoken of, they may most certainly assure themselves that they are effectually
called, and are already partakers of Jesus Christ and all his benefits. If
therefore the Lord whilst we did lie frozen in the dregs of our sins,
without all desire of grace or means to escape our sins, without all desire
of grace or means to escape out of our misery, has vouchsafed unto us the
mystery of his holy word, if by the law he has revealed our sins unto us
and the punishments due unto them, and if by the gospel he has showed us
the way how we may come out of this misery; if by the inward cooperation of
his holy spirit he has opened our deaf cares, and with this precious eyesalue
has anointed the blind eyes of our understandings so that we have
attentively heard, and in some measure understood those principles of our
christian religion, which have in the mystery of the word been delivered
unto us; if our hearts have been softened and pierced, and our consciences
wounded with the sight and sense of our sins; if disparing in our own
strength, righteousness and all other means of our own, we have gone out of
our selves, and rested and relied upon Christ Jesus alone for our justification
and salvation, then are we without all doubt effectually called and are in the
number of Gods church and people to whom the promises of grace do appertain.

That we may know that we are effectually called by considering the several
parts thereof.
Secondly we may come to the knowledge of our effectual calling, by considering
the several parts thereof. The first is our selection and separation out of
the corrupt mass of mankind, whereby it comes to pass that though we be in
the world, yet we are not of the world, and therefore we neither love it, nor
the world us; and this our Savior shows, Ioh. 15.19. If (says he) he were
of the world the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
1. Ioh. 2.15.
and the apostle John affirms, that if any man love the world the love of
the father is not in him. 1. Ioh. 2.15. and the apostle James tells us that
the amity of the world is enmity with God, Iam. 4.4.
and therefore whosoever will be a friend of the world makes himself the
enemy of God. If therefore our love and affections be weaned in some good
measure from the world, and fixed on spiritual and heavenly things, if we
cease to be citizens of the world, Phil. 3.29.
and begin to have our conversation in in heaven from whence we look for a
savior even the Lord Jesus Christ; and if the world begin to hate and
scorn us, then may we be assured that we are severed from the world, and
entertained into Gods church and family.

Satan's tentation answered whereby he persuades the christian that he loves
the world and the world him.
But here the tempter will object, that by this it plainly appears that we
are not yet effectually called nor separated from the world, because we still
love the world affecting and desiring the vain pleasures, honors, and riches
thereof, yea and also love those who are mere worldlings, and on the other
side the world also loves us, giving us good countenance and performing other
duties unto us. For the answering of which suggestion we must distinguish
between our selves and our selves; for whilst we continue in this life we
are partly flesh and partly spirit, and as there is great enmity between the
spirit and the world, so is there great amity between the world and the
flesh. So far forth therefore as we are still carnal and corrupt fleth the
world loves us, but as much as is spiritual and regenerate so much the world
hates and abhors. Moreover we may generally be considered as men, or more
specially as we are Christian men; in the first respect, the world that is
wicked worldlings may love us for some natural parts or mere moral virtues,
or else in common humanity as members of the same civil or politic body: but
as we are Christians who have given our names unto God and diuoted our selves
to his worship and service, the world hates us and our profession, religion,
and all the fruits and exercises of sanctification and holiness, so that
though in other natural, worldly, and more civil respects it loves us, yet
in regard of our regeneration and the fruits thereof it cannot endure us, and
our company and conversation is exceeding tedious, irksome and unpleasant. So
on the other side whereas Satan obiecteth that we love the world that is
carnal worldly men, we may answer that even as we are regenerate, it is
lawful to love them in the same respects which they love us, namely as they
are men and the excellent creatures of God, as they are endued with excellent
natural gifts or moral virtues, as they are of the same civil body or
kindred, or as they have been used of God as his instruments for the bostowing
of any his benefits upon us: in which respects loving them, we may
notwithstanding with a true zeal hate and abhor their vices, their carnal
worldliness, profane irreligion, and wicked conversation. Neither will
religion make us to lay aside all humanity and transform us into some
brutish, or rather devilish Timon who was a hater of men. For even our savior
Christ himself who was wholly exe^pted from sin, notwithstanding loved the
worldly young man for some good things he saw in him though he were not
religious, yea though he were so carnal that he preferred his vain and
uncertain riches before the salvation of his soul, as appears Mark.
10.21.22. So also he used all humanity and civil conversation even amongst
the Publicans and sinners, that he might have the better opportunity of
converting all those who belonged to Gods election. And therefore we need not
fear to follow Christ's example so it be with the same holy affection. For we
also must endeavor to gain those unto Christ who are without, and by our holy
conversation give them occasion of glorifying God in the day of their
visitation as the apostle exhorts us, 1. Pet. 2.12. which we can never do by
hatred, rough severity, and sinicall inhumanitie, but with loving courtesy,
upright behavior, gentle admonitions and charitable reprehensions. But if
through our corruption we give satan occasion further to object, that under
these pretenses we set our hearts too much upon the world loving worldings more
then those who are of the household of faith and more delighting in their vain
conversation for outward respects then in the company of the faithful if not
always yet oftentimes, we are to answer that though these be sins in us,
and notable signs of our great corruption, yet are they no strong arguments
that we are not yet effectually called, or truly severed from the world, for
as much as we are not wholly separated from the world, but only so much of us as
is spiritual and regenerate; so that it is no marvel if the the flesh and
unregenerate part still love the world, bebecause it is still worldly; but if
in the inner man we hate this love, and strive to bridle yea to mortify it,
if we are truly sorry and displeased with our selves for this as for other sins
and labor to refourme it, we may be assured that the spirit of God is in us,
which has severed us from the world, and joined us to the body of Jesus Christ.

worldly things, honors, riches and pleasures; How far forth we may love
worldly things.
we may love them as they are the blessings of God, and desire them so far
forth as they are temporal benefitts, and furtherances or at least no
hindrances in the works of holiness and righteousness, we may so love them
as that in the mean time our love be subordinate to the love of God, our
brethren and spiritual things. But if our love pass these limitts it is
corrupt and carnal, yet no undoubted argument to prove that we are not
effectually called, if we are displeased with it and labor against it, though
oftentimes we are overcome therewith through the violence of our carnal
affections and the corruptions of the flesh, yet if we hate this sin in the
inner man, if we entertain through violence, and not with affection and
delight, if it dwell in us but do not reign in us, if but sometimes it get
the upper hand and do not continually ouerrule us, it is no more we that do
it but sin that dwells in us, that is the old man and corrupt flesh, which
whilst we live in this life will bear some sway in us.

That the world loves them not who^ Satan hates.
Lastly when as Satan assaulteth the poor christian with his tentations,
persuading him that he is not yet called nor separated from the wicked world,
because it loves him, he may well suspect his argument of falsehood, for Satan
does not hate those whom the world loves; but by his continual assaulting of
the weak christian, and his daily laboring to bring him through the violence
of his tentations to utter destruction, it manifestly appears that Satan
like a mortal enemy deadly hates him; and therefore it is not likely that he
is beloved of the world though it may for a time fawn upon him, that by
pretending love and friendshipp it may work him the greater mischief.

Of the second part of our effectual calling.
whereby he has given Christ Jesus unto us to be our savior and redeemer, and
us unto Christ to be saved and redeemed, by which also we may prove that we
are effectually called. For this gift is mutual and reciprocal, and therefore
the one does clearly prove the other, so that if we can have any assurance
that Christ is given unto us, then may we also be assured that we are given
unto Christ, and contrariwise if we have any assurance that we are given unto
Christ, then may we be also assured that Christ is given unto us, and
consequently that we are effectually called for this mutual donation is one
part thereof. Now we may be assured that Christ is given unto us if we
believe in him resting upon him alone for our justification and salvation, as
appears Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world that he has given his only
begotten son that as many as believe in him should not perish but have
everlasting life, and so also we may be assured that we are given unto Christ,
if we hear his voice and follow him, as himself speaks Ioh. 10.27. and
submitt our selves to be led and governed by his spirit, for as many as are
led by the spirit of God they are the sons of God, and whosoever are sons
are heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. as it is Romans 8.14.16.

How those that are given to Christ, keep his word.
But here Satan will object that those who are given unto Christ have kept his
word, as himself also affirms Ioh. 17.6. How therefore will he say, can
thou be assured that thou art one of those who are given unto him, seeing thou
keep it not but continually transgressest his commandments? To which we
must answer that the word of Christ is his gospel, wherein he promises
everlasting life to all that believe in him, and bring forth the fruits of
their faith in unfeigned repentance. as it appears Ioh. 5.38. where he thus
speaks to the unbelieving Jews: And his word (says he) have ye not abiding
in you: for whom he has sent, him ye believe not; whereby it is manifest if
Christ's reasoning be of sound consequence, that those have his word abiding in
them who believe in him, whom God has sent even our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. So that we keep the word of our Savior when we believe in him,
resting and relying upon him alone for our salvation, and truly repent us of
our sins, sorrowing and grieuing that by them we have offended and displeased
our loving God and merciful father, hating our sins because they are sins,
purposing and laboring to forsake them, and indeuouring according to the
measure of strength and grace received, to serve the Lord in holiness and
newness of life. And therefore if we can find in our selves this faith and
this repentance, we may undoubtedly be assured notwithstanding our manifould
falls and great corruptions that we have kept the word of Christ, and
therefore are given unto him of the father; and consequently that we are
effectually called and shall be eternally glorified. For it is the will of the
father that whosoever believes in his son Jesus Christ should have
everlasting life, as our Savior testifies Ioh. 6.40. As for our corruptions
they shall be washed away with the blood of Christ, and our imperfections
shall be covered with the rich robe of his perfect righteousness, so that in
him we shall appear perfect before Gods judgment seat, and there be
accepted as just and righteous.

Of the third part of our effectual calling.
whereby he becomes our head and we his members, of which whosoever can be
assured, they need not to make any queston of their effectual calling; but all
those who are endued with faith are united unto Christ, for it is a property
thereof to apply unto our selves Christ and all his benefitts, it is the hand
of the soul whereby we lay hold upon Christ, it is the mouth of the soul
whereby we spiritually feed upon him, and he that eats his flesh, and drinks
his blood dwells in Christ and Christ in him, as himself speaks, Ioh.
6.56. So also whosoever are endued with Gods spirit and have submitted
themselves to be led and governed thereby, they are ingrafted in the body of
Christ, for the spirit is the blood of this union, and therefore if we can
discern the spirit of God in us by any of the fruits thereof, Gal. 5.22.
we may be assured that we are the members of Christ, and consequently
effectually called. Lastly we may be assured that we are ingrafted in the
body of Christ by our work of salvation, either appertaining to Gods service
or christian righteousness toward our neighbor, for it is impossible that
we should bring forth any ripe grapes of godliness if we were notingrafted
in the true vine Jesus Christ, as himself affirms, Ioh. 15.4. Abide in me
and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in
the vine. no more can ye except ye abide in me: 5. I am the vine, ye are the
branches, he that abides in me and I in him the same brings forth much
fruits for without me ye can do nothing. And therefore if we make
conscience of our ways, and exercise our selves in some measure, in those good
works which the Lord has commanded in obedience to his will, and to this
end that his name may be glorified, we may assure our selves that we are
ingrafted into the true vine Christ Jesus, for of our selves we are altogether
unfruitful and could do nothing.

That we may be united unto Christ though we always bring forth small fruits
and sometime no fruits.
for we thereby make it manifest that we are not ingrafted into Christ, because
our fruits of holiness and righteousness are commonly exceeding small, and
sometimes none at al, whereas the lively branches of this vine are exceeding
fruitful, and abundant in good works. To which we are to answer, that all
the branches of the vine do not bring forth fruits in like abundance, but some
more and some less, and yet notwithstanding this does not prove that these are
not true branches as well as the other although they receive less sap and
lively juice from the root and stock, and so also it is in this mystical
vine; if the branches be not altogether barren and fruitless, though their
fruits be not in so great abundance, yet if it be right and of the same
nature with the other, they may assure themselves that they also are lively
branches of the true vine Jesus Christ; neither is the quantity and number of
our fruits so much in this regard to be respected; for if according to the
quantity of sap and goodiuice which we receive from our root we bring forth
fruit, that is, if according to that measure of grace and gifts of Gods holy
spirit, which our savior Christ has bestowed upon us, we spend our lives in
Gods service which himself has commanded to the end that we may glorify his
holy name, we may assure our selves that we are true branches of this vine,
which our Savior will purge and prune that we may bring forth more fruits,
as he has promised. Ioh. 15.2. moreover whereas Satan obiecteth, that we are
not branches of this vine, because at some times we can show no fruits; we
are to answer that as the earthly vine has not always grapes, no not so much
as leaves upon it, and yet notwithstanding it lives, receiving nourishment
from the root, and brings forth fruit in due time and season, so that the
branches of this mystical vine are some time without the fruits of good
works, yea, have not so much to be seen upon them as the fair green leaves
of an outward profession, as it is most usual when as they are thoroughly
nypped with the could winter of tentations, and have all their beauty blasted
and blown away with the boisterous blasts of satan's fierce incounters; and
yet at the same time they receive the sapp, juice, and virtue of Gods spirit
from their root Jesus Christ, by which they seeming dead do live and receive
nourishment; until at Gods good pleasure the comfortable beams of his love
and favor do shine upon them, with which their frozen hearts being thoroughly
warmed, do again bring forth not only the leaves of profession, but also the
ripe fruits of godliness and righteousness, and therefore though presently in
such cases we have no fruits to show yet let not Satan persuade us that we
are not true branches of this vine? for if we can call to mind, that ever in
former times we have brought forth any right and kindly fruits of
sanctification and true godliness, we are true branches of the vine Christ
which he will lop and prune and again make fruitful; for out of him we could
never have brought forth such fruits, and those who are once ingrafted into
him can never possibly be plucked away by Satan, the world, or all the powers
of hell, Ioh. 15.4. Ioh. 10.28.
though (as I said) they may for a time be nipped and shrewdly weather beaten.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Satan's tentations obiecting to the weak christian
vnrepentancie and hardness of heart answered.
How Satan persuades the weak christan that he has no repentance.
whereby he labors to rob and deprive the poor humbled sinner of all the
hope and comfort which he might reap in applying unto himself the gracious
promises and sweet comforts contained in the gospel, by persuading him that
he is not effectually called. Wherewith if he cannot prevail he descends
from the general to the particulars, and having as it were a far off
discharged his shot of dangerous temptations without inflicting desired hurt
and destruction, he approaches nearer, and fights against the poor christian
with handie blows, that thereby he may beat him down into deep
desperation. Let it be granted will be say that thou are called, yet it
follows not hereof that thou art elected and shall be saved; for Christ
Jesus himself has said that many are called but few are chosen and why
may not thou be in the greater number; neither is the calling thou speak
of sufficient to make a christian, unless it be accompanied with unfeigned
repentance and a lively faith. And the promises of the gospel wherein thou
vainly hopest are not made unto all those who are called, but unto those who
are endued with a true justifying faith, which is always joined with the
fruit thereof, unfeigned repentance. But if thou examine thy self aright, thou
shall find that both these are wanting in thee, for to begin first with
repentance which is most sensible and to be discerned with greatest ease if
thou search thine heart without any affectionate partiality or vain conceit,
thou shall find that thou are altogether destitute thereof. For is not thy
heart so obstinately hard, and so stubbernely rebellious, that thou can not
bewail thy sins with any unfeigned sorrow, nor scarce with much strayning
force one tear, whereas for any worldly loss, or temporary affliction which
indeed touches thee with true grief, thou can without any difficulty weep
more bitterly then the apostle Peter, and shed as many tears as Marie
Magdalene. Besides whereas those who repent turn from their sins with a
trueand unreconcilable hatred of them, and spend the rest of their life that
remains in the service of God, whereas they have their hard stony hearts
mollified and turned into hearts of flesh, which are flexible unto holy
obedience and full of alacrity and cheerfulness in performing service to
God, thou through thy hardness and heart that cannot repent live still in
thy sins, and spendest a great part of thy time in vanity and worldly
delights, thy heart as hard as the adama^t is ready sooner to break then to
bow to Gods will, and when thou forcest thy self hereunto, thou can not but
discern the blindness of thy understanding in spiritual things, which is so
sharp and eagle sighted in matters concerning the world, thy spirits so dull
and blockish, and thine affections so glutted and tired in performing service
unto God which are so full of life, and alacrity in following worldly vanities.
And therefore it is impossible that thou should have any true repentance,
for how can repentance and hardness of heart, a heart of flesh and an heart of
stone be atonce in thee.

For the answering that former tentation 2. extremes to be avoided.
it behooves us to be very careful that we do not run into two dangerous
extremes; the one whereof is securely to flatter our selves with an opinion of
our good estate when as in turth it is most dangerous and damnable, the other
that we do not too much suffer our selves to be dejected and cast down,
though we have not as yet attained to so great perfection as our heart
desires. Two sorts of hardness of heart. 1. that which is insensible.
And to this purpose we are to know that hardness of heart is of two sorts,
the first is of them who being most hard hearted, notwithstanding do not feel
nor perceive it; the other of those who feeling their hardness of heart are
grieved therewith, and desire to have it mollified, softened, and even resolved
into tears of unfeigned repentance. The first sort is damnable or at least most
dangerous, for it lulleth us asleep in carnal security, it takes away all
sense of sin, and consequently all sorrow whereby we should bewail it; it
scareth and brawneth the conscience, covering it as it were on all sides with a
thick hard skin, which will never or most hardly be pierced, either by Gods
justice and threatenings to cause us to fear least we incur his wrathful
displeasure, or by his mercies and gracious promises to move us to love him,
and to bring forth the fruits of our love in acceptable obediencd, it repelleth
all the good motions of Gods spirit and fills the soul with such drowsy
dulnes and blockish deadness, that it is altogether unfit to perform any
service unto God, and most apoto entertain any of Satan's tentations. And this
insensible hardness of heart which is the spiritual lethurgie of the soul is
of two kinds; The insensible hardness of heart is of two sorts. The first
joined with obstinacy.
the first is joined with wilful obstinacy and affected rebellion, whereby
men advisedly and contemptuously withstand the outward ministry of the word,
and the inward motions of Gods spirit, with all other means which might move
and muite them to serious repentance; an example whereof we have in Pharaoh
who hardened his heart against the Lord, opposing himself against his
embassage delivered unto him by Moysos, and confirmed by so many miracles, and
also obstimately and with an high hand of rebellion checked, and quenchen the
good motions of Gods spirit, whereby he was sometimes moved to confess his
sin, and to acknowledge the Lord righteous. As also in Saul who against his
conscience persecuted David because the Lord loved and had made choice of him
to succeed in his place, and howsoever sometimes by occasion of some notable
fruit of David's innocence he was moved to condemn himself and to justify
him, yet presently he hardened his heart again and raged against him with
wonted malice. And thus likewise were those Israelites hardened and frozen
stiff in the dregs of their sins, Esaias 28.15.
of whom the Prophet Esaias speaks Esaias. 28.15 Ye have said (says he) we
have made a couenam with death and with hell we are at agreement: though
ascourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at us: for we have
made falsehood our refuge and under vanity are we hid. And those also of whom
the Prophet Zachary complains Zach. 7.11. who (obstinately) refused to
harken, Zach. 7.11
and pulled away the shoulder and stopped their ears that they should not
hear, yea, and made their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear
the law and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the
ministry of the Prophets. And so also many of the Scribes and Pharisees
hardened their hearts against our Savior Christ obstinately contemning the
gracious and powerful words, which proceeded out of his mouth, and quenched
the good motions of Gods spirit, occasioned by his wonderful miracles and
admirable works which none could perform, but he who was the very true and
only begotten son of God. Now we are to know that this hardness of heart is
most damnable, and whosoever are possessed therewith they can never escape Gods
fearful judgments and everlasting condemnation in the life to come.

Of that hard nesse of heart which proceeds from careless retchlesnesse.
The other kind of inse^sible hardness of heart proceeds from careless
retchlesnesse and carnal worldliness, when as men having their understandings
blinded do not perceive their filthy corruptions, profane wickedness, and
extreme misery, nor feel the burden of their sins though they be grown to
an intolerable weight, but flatter themselves with a vain opinion of their
good estate in themselves, without any other help, as though they needed not
the means appointed of God for their conversion which others use. And
therefore they neglect the ministry of the word, as knowing and practizing
enough already, or if they hear it they remove far from them the threatenings
of the law denounced against impaenitent sinners as not appertaining to them,
and check all the good motions of Gods spirit which are commonly joined with
the public ministry of the word, and the private admonitions of godly men,
or with the example of Gods judgment on others, or with the sense of their
own afflictions; and so return to their old profaneness and lie wallowing in
the dregs of their sins without any remorse or hatred of evil, or any true
love of that which is good. Until at length their hearts are so hardened and
their consciences so scared with customable sinning, and by often repelling and
beating back the means of their conversion the outward ministry of the word,
and the inward motions of Gods spirit, that they proceed from careless
senselessness, and negligent security, to wilful profaneness and obstinate
rebellion. And this hardness of heart is most commonly incident unto worldings
and is nothing else but carnal security, whereby they rest contented with
their miserable and wretched estate, neither loving that which is good, nor
hating that which is evil, nor using any means to better themselves, because
they either think they are good enough or at least never enter into
consideration of their estate, nor come to the sense and feeling of their evil
corruptions, in which they are wholly plunged and overwhelmed. Yea sometimes and
in some measure this befalls the dear children of God through their
careless negligence, and want of the due examination of themselves (as may
appear in the example of David, who many months together lived in his sin
of adultery and murder, without any serious and sound repentance, till it
pleased the Lord to rouse him out of this spiritual lethurgie by the
ministry of the Prophet Nathan) but yet the Lord does not finally leave them,
but by the preaching of the word, godly admonitions and reprehensions, and also
with the inward motions and secret operation of his holy spirit he pulls
them out of this wretched estate, giving unto them a sight or feeling of their
sins, and mollifying their hard hearts, working in them an hatred and
detestation of their sins, and an earnest desire to be unburdened of them.
But howsoever this may befall the children of God, yet this can be no
encouragement unto any to continue still in this wretched case, for howsoever
they may be indeed the children of God, yet assuredly they can never have any
true assurance in their consciences that they are his children and in his
favor, till their hearts be mollified and resolved, into the tears of unfeigned
repentance at least in some measure. And therefore let every one beware of
carnal security and of hardening their hearts through careless negligence, and
by committing sins against their knowledge and conscience, let them beware of
resisting the ministry of the word, and of quenching the good motions of Gods
spirit, for though the conscience at the first be most tender and the heart so
soft, that every sin will prick and pearce it, and every gentle admonition
will make it relent, yet in continuance of time through customable sinning, and
resisting the means of our conversion and salvation, the conscience is so
seared that it becomes senseless though it be oppressed and surcharged with
a heavy mass of outrageous wickedness, and the heart grows to such
Adamantiue hardness, that the thundering Canon threatenings of the law, and of
Gods fearful and imminent judgments cannot batter or bruise it, nor make any
breach whereby true repentance may enter. In which respect the conscience is
not unfitly compared to the eye, which of all other parts of man's body is most
tender and impatient of the lightest touch, so that the smallest mote vexes
it, and the least prick causes incredible torment: but if once it be affected
with a disease called of Oculists, scirrhosis oculi which ouercouereth it, but
a hard fleshy skin, it becomes of all other parts most insensible, so the
conscience of man is most tender of all other parts, and at the first small
sins vex and torment it, but if through custom in sinning it be ouerspread
with a Callum or thick skin, it becomes insensible and nothing will wound
it.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of that hardness of heart which is joined with sense and feeling
thereof.
Of hardness of heart, joined with sense and feeling thereof.
THe second sort of hardness of heart, is that which is joined with sense and
feeling, when as we see and with sorrow feel our dullness and blockishnesse in
Gods service, our obdurate inflexiblenesse to holy obedience, our hardness of
heart, which at the hearing either of the terrible threatenings of the law, or
sweet promises of the Gospel, cannot relent nor resolve it self into the
tears of unfeigned repentance; and this hardness of heart is commonly incident
unto Gods dear children being at the same time in the state of grace, and is a
part of that inbred corruption and fleshly old man which before our calling
wholly possesses and ouerruled us, and after also bears some sway in us eue^
when we are regenerate til with all our other corruptions we lay this aside also
by death. And this appears in the example of the Prophet David, who desires
the Lord to create in him a clean heart, and to renew a right spirit within
him. Psalm. 51.10.
Psalm. 51.10. in which words he implies that his hardness of heart was so
great, and the corruption thereof so abominable that it was even past mending,
and therefore he does not pray the Lord to purge and reform his old heart,
Ezech. 11.19.
but to create a new one, and to take quite away his stony heart, and to bestow
upon him a heart of flesh, as though his heart were like a building exceeding
ruinous which could no longer be repaired, unless it were razed down even to
the foundation and all new built up again. So whereas he prays the Lord to
renew his spirit in him, he gives us to understand that he has lost the
feeling of the spirit of adoption crying in his heart Abba father, and that
there was in him such an intermission and surcease of the actions and fruits
thereof that it seemed utterly quenched and departed from him. So else where he
prays unto the Lord to quicke^ him according to his loving kindness, Psalm.
119.88.
that he might keep the testimonies of his mouth. Whereby he intimates his
drowsinesse and deadness in Gods service. The Prophet Esaias likewise in the
behalf of himself, and the people complains thus: Esaias 63.17. Esaias. 63.17.
O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from
thy fear. By all which it appears that even the dear children of God do
oftentimes see and feel to their great grief their hardness of heart, which
is joined with exceeding dullness and drowsinesse in Gods service. Yea in truth
this kind of hardness of heart is incident unto them alone. For whilst men are
worldly and carnal though their hearts are most hard and obdurate yet they do
not discern it, neither are they any whit displeased with their estate, but
fondly flatter themselves imagining that they are in exceeding good case and
very devout in Gods service which indeed (as they perform it) is merely
formal, customable rather then conscionable, in show and external but not in
spirit and truth; but when the Lord by the ministry of his word made
effectual by the inward operation of his holy spirit, does pull of the thick
skin of carnal security from of their hearts and causes the seals of
ignorance to fall from their eyes, then and not before do they plainly
discern and sensibly feel that huge mass of inbred corruption, their
dullness and drowsinesse in Gods service, their hardness of heart and
impaenitencie, and now they are much vexed and grieved with them, which in
former times never troubled them. And therefore let not such be dismayed nor
debar their souls of that consolation which of right belongs to them, for
flesh and blood has not revealed this their corruption, hardness of heart,
dullness and deadness in Gods service but the good spirit of God, which has
begun already to work in them, showing them their corruptions and moving
them to an unfeigned dislike of them, and therefore they may assure themselves,
that he who has begun this good work in them, will also bring it in his
good time to perfection: Only (as the Psalmist exhorts,) Let them tarry the
Lords leisure, Phil. 1.6.
wait upon and trust in him and he shall comfort their hearts.

2. Sorts of sensible hardness of heart. The first joined with the use of the
means whereby it may be softened.
the first is of them who carefully use all good means and endeavor with all
diligence to better their estate which they see to be most miserable and to
mollify their hard hearts, and to attain unto hearty and unfeigned repentance.
Which who so does he may assure himself that he is the child of God and in
his love and favor; for earnestly to desire repentance, and carefully to use
the means whereby we may attain thereunto, to be displeased with our
hardness of heart and to labor that it may be mollified, to be sorry that
we can be no more sorry and to be displeased with our selves because we can
no more be displeased with our sins, is very acceptable in the sight of God
though we see but a little progress in godliness, and but a small increase
of repentance which we desire in great measure, for the Lord esteems the
will for the deed, and the affection for the action, and we may assure our
selves that if on our part we be not wanting in the use of the means, the
Lord will not be wanting on his part to supply our wantes, and to satisfy all
our Godly desires.

Of this hardness of heart which very often befalls the dearest of Gods
children we have many examples. Examples of this hardness of heart. Psalm.
77.2.
The prophet David thus complains Psalm. 77.2. In the day of my trouble I
sought the Lord, my sore ran and ceased not in the night, my soul refused
comfort. 3. I did think upon God and as troubled, I prayed and my spirit was
full of anguish. 4. thou keep mine eyes waking; I was astonished and could not
speak. So the church complains thus Cant. 3.1. Cant 3.1. and 5.6.
In my bed I sought him by night whom my soul loved. I sought him but I found
him not. and chap. 5. ver. 6. I opened to my well-beloved but my well-beloved was
gone and past: mine heart was gone when he did speak I sought him but I could
not find him, I called him but he answered me not. Whereby it is manifest that
even the dear saints of God are often times destitute of all comfort and void
of all feeling of Gods favor, and of the powerful working of the graces of
Gods spirit which they have received, though they use the means appointed of
God for the stirring up and increasing of grace in them, which comes to pass
by reason of their hardness of heart, and drowsy dullness of spirit in these
spiritual excercises.

And hence it is that many of Gods children do grieously afflict their souls
because they see these their corruptions and imperfections, and hereby often
times are moved to think that they are destitute of faith, and of all saving
graces of Gods sanctifying spirit, because though they use the means ordained
of God for the begetting and increasing of grace in them, yet they cannot
perceive any fruit that comes thereby, nor feel in their souls any true
comfort or joy in these spiritual excercises. For example some complain that
though they continually hear the word yet they feel no increase of any grace,
no more knowledge, no more faith, no more zeal of Gods glory, no more
mortification of their old corruptions, nor any reformation at all of their
former sinful lives, and therefore they think that they hear the word of
God without any profit, nay that the more they hear it the more wicked and
rebellious they are; and that for this cause it were much better not to hear
the word at all, for as much as it will but agrauate their sins and in
crease their condemnation, for he that knows his masters will and does it
not, Luke 12.47.
shall be beaten with many stripes.

Consolations for such as complain of their imperfections in hearing the word.
and to this end let them know first that this is a usual complaint of those
children of God which profit most in hearing of the word though in truth they
do therein deceive themselves; for in co^plaining that they profit not, they
show they profitt. For whereas men naturally blinded with self love and
carnal security never discern any such want and corruption in themselves,
and therefore though they profit nothing by hearing the word of God yet it
never troubles them, nay they imagine that it is sufficient to present their
bodies into Gods assemblies and to hear Gods word with their outward ears,
though they understand it not nor retain it in memory, nor bring forth any
fruits thereof; these humbled souls by the hearing of the word are freed from
this self love and carnal security, and have the blind eyes of their
understandings opened so as they see their faults and corruptions, and have
their hard hearts softened so as they are grieved and displeased with them,
and their wills also are in some good measure sanctified, so that they
earnestly desire to be freed from their corruptions, and to hear the word of
God with more profit, whereby it appears that though they cannot profit so
much as they desire yet they have made a good progress, and the Lord in his
good time will perfect that good work which he has begun in them; and the
same spirit of God which has wrought in them this desire of profitting by
hearing the word, will also accomplish it, and so open their dull ears and
soften their hard hearts that they shall profit and reap manifould fruits of
the seed of the word which is sowed in the furrows of their hearts. In the
mean while the Lord may in his heavenly wisdom feed them for a time with a
sparing hand to the end that he may truly humble them under the sight and
sense of their corruptions, and that he may hereby so sharpen their appetites
that they may with more hungering desire, and earnest endeavor feed upon the
heavenly manna of his word; but as this should increase their diligence, so it
should not decrease their hope and comfort, for most assuredly when the Lord
has a while whetted their stomach, and by pulling back his hand moved them
more earnestly to desire, and more highly to esteem this precious food of
their souls, he will fully satisfy their hungring desire, nourish them in all
spiritual graces, and make them who are but babes strong men in Christ. In the
mean time let them not faint, but wait upon the Lord, be strong and trust in
him and he will surely comfort their hearts as the psalmist speaks Psalm.
27.16.

Consolations for such as bewail their want of feeling the fruits of their
hearing.
perceive in themselves any increase of knowledge, faith or any saving grace,
they are to know that howsoever no man ought to rest contented in this estate
but are to labor more and more, not only to have but also to discern an
increase of grace in them, and a progress in all virtue and godliness, for
otherwise though they may be the children of god who for a time live in such a
case yet they can not attain unto the assurance thereof nor feel the comfort
of it in there own consciences, nevertheless there is no reason why they
should despair or be utterly discouraged, for though they find no fruits of
their hearing, yet if in obedience to Gods commandment, they will with care
and diligence continue still hearers of the word, they shall undoubtedly in the
end attain unto their desire and discern in themselves a great increase of
grace and godliness. We know that the seed does not presently bring forth
fruit when it is cast into the ground, but first it seems to rott and perish
and then it sprouteth up in a green blade, and then it bears an ear and a
great increase and much fruit; and so it fares oftentimes in hearing the
word of God, for at first it seems quite lost and perished being sown in
some grounds, and yet afterward it brings forth not only a fair green
blade of an outward profession, but also a great increase of the ripe fruits
of true godliness. So also the sick patient taking sovereign physic is not
presently cured, nay in stead of feeling any ease thereby he is made much more
sick in his own sense and feeling, and yet after the physic has a while
wrought with him and purged him of some superfluous and hurtful humors he
finds some amendment, and so by little and little he is restored to his
former health; and so it is also with the spiritual sick patient, he does
not always presently find ease and quiet peace of conscience, nay many times
he is tormented and vexed after he has received the spiritual physic of
the soul the word of God, more then ever in former times, but yet
notwithstanding in process of time when this physic has effectually wrought
with him, it purges him from his filthy corruptions and strengthens him in
all grace and godliness. And therefore though we feel presently no profitable
fruits of hearing let not this discourage us from hearing, nay rather let it
serve as a sharp spur to prick us forward to more diligence, and let us
join therewith hearty prayer, desiring the Lord to water the seed of his word
sown in our hearts with the dew of his holy spirit, and then undoubtedly the
Lord in the end will hear us, and to our exceeding comfort show unto us the
plentiful fruits of all our labors.

the greater are their sins and rebellion against God, Consolations for such
as complain that the more they hear the more they abound in sin.
in this they much deceive themselves; for the word of God does not make them
more sinful, but whereas heretofore they lived in carnal security and
hardness of heart, having their understandings darkened and their consciences
seared so as they could neither see nor feel their sins though they were
manifould and grievous, now the word of God made effectual by the inward
operation of his holy spirit like a glorious light having dispelled the dark
foggie mists of ignorance, and illuminated the eyes of their understandings
with the knowledge of Gods law, they better discern their sins and miserable
estate then in former times. And this the Apostle Paul shows unto us in his
own example Romans 7.9. Romans 7.9.10
For (says he) I was once alive without the law, but when the commandment
came sin revived 10. but I died: and the same commandment which was ordained
unto life, was found to be unto me unto death. and ver. 13. was that then
which was good made death unto me? God forbid: but sin that it might
appear, sin wrought death in me by that which is good, that sin might be
out of measure sinful by the commandment. So that the preaching of the law
does not make us more sinful but reuealeth those sins unto us which before
we discerned not. As therefore the sun shining upon some filthy place does
not make it so filthy, but only does make it manifest which was not seen in
the dark, and as the wholesome physic is not the cause of those corruptions
which it purges out, but by expelling them out of the body shows them unto
us, so the heavenly light and sovereign physic of Gods word does not work
in us our filthy corruptions, and hurtful humors of sin but it reuealeth
them unto us whereas before times by reason of our ignorance and blindness
they were secret and hidden,

That we are not to neglect hearing the word because of the former
imperfections.
or by our own corrupt flesh (which is impatient of any rough handlinge, and
therefore would rather have us sick still then endure any pain in being
cured) that it were better for us to surcease the hearing of gods word as
serving to no other end but to increase our condemnation, let us in any case
resist such motions as being most dangerous tentations which being
entertained will bring us to utter ruin and endless destruction; for if we
deprive our selves of this heavenly light the devil will easily lead us
hudwincke unto all fin and wickedness, if we long abstain from this
comfortable food of our souls they will be hungarstarued, and all the graces
of Gods spirit will wax faint and die in us, if we disarme our selves of this
sword of the spirit, Satan without any resistance will overcome us and take
us captives, forcing us as his miserable slaves to commit all those works of
darkness in which he will employ us. And therefore as we tender the
salvation of our own souls, let us not be discouraged from hearing the word
of God by any suggestions whatsoever, no not though we seem unto our selves
every time we come into the Church to go a step toward hell; for whilst we
use Gods ordinance which is appointed as the means for our conversion and
salvation, there is some good hope, but when we utterly neglect it our state is
most desperate.

CHAP. XL. Consolations for such as bewail their hardness of heart and wants
in prayer.
Consolations for such as complain that they cannot pray at all.
and drowsy dullness of spirit that either they cannot pray at all, or if they
do it is barrainely without all form or fashion; or if they have the
eloquence of the tongue and good set forms of prayer yet they perform it
coldly and drowsilie, without all earnestness and feruencie of spirit, having
their minds carried away with wandering thoughts, so that their prayers are but
mere liplabour, and therefore it were better not to pray at all, because they
cannot perform this duty in any good manner or measure as God requires.

And this is a tentation wherewith even the dearest children of God are much
vexed and troubled, and therefore it shall not be amiss to answer the
several branches of this complaint. First therefore, where as they complain
that they cannot pray at all, this is to be understood either generally of all
times, or specially at sometimes. If they say they can never pray, it is very
likely that either they forget or much deceive themselves, for few or none who
are altogether destitute of the spirit of supplication have any understanding
to discern their want, or any grace to bewail it, but content themselves with
their lip-labor as though they had performed acceptable service unto God. And
it is a work of one and the same spirit to make us see our infirmities with
hatred and dislike of them, and to move us earnestly to desire of God that we
may be freed from them, which earnest desire is hearty prayer. But if they
further affirm that they are most sure they do never pray unto God, I answer
that though this in it self be a most dangerous case, for it is a sign of a
worker of iniquity, not to call upon God as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 53.4.
Psalm. 53.4. yet they have no cause to despair, for the same spirit which has
revealed unto them this their sin and infirmity, and has wrought in them a
dislike thereof, will also remove it and supply their want in Gods good time,
if they will labor for this good gift, and not quench the good motions of the
spirit when God offreth them unto them.

The gift of prayer not in our own power.
But if they cannot deny that sometimes they have had the grace given them of
God to call earnestly upon his name, howsoever in this present time they are
altogether disfurnished thereof, then let them know that their case in this
respect is common withal the dear children of God, for hearty prayer is not in
our own power, neither does it attend upon our own will, but it is the gift
of God which at sometimes in plentiful measure he bestows upon his children,
and at other times he pulls back his liberal hand; to the end that by the
want thereof, we may learn to ascribe the glory and praise of our hearty
prayers unto God, who works in us the will and the deed and is in truth the
only true author of them which praise, otherwise in pride of heart we would
arrogate unto our selves, as being a natural faculty and in our own power;
and also to the end we may more highly esteem it, and with more joy and
diligence use it when we have it bestowed on us, least through our negligence
and slothfulness we move the Lord to take it from us.

Seeing therefore this hearty calling upon Gods name is a gift of God, and a
work of his holy spirit in us which at sometimes heretofore we have discerned
in our selves, let us not altogether be discouraged though at sometimes we want
it; Romans 11.29.
for the gifts of God are without repentance, and though at sometimes they are
withdrawn from our sense and feeling, yet shall they never be taken from us;
and if at any time we have had assurance that the spirit of God has dwelled in
us, by this work thereof effectual prayer, we may assure our selves that it
has not forsaken us, Romans 8.26.
but will again help our infirmities, and whereas we cannot tell how to pray
as we ought, the spirit it self will make request for us with sighs, which
cannot be expressed.

Consolations for such as complain that they cannot pray in any good form.
whereas they complain that they cannot pray in any good form, but oftentimes
fill Gods ears with impatient cries and uncomfortable roarings in stead of
prayers, they are to know that this is often incident unto the children of God,
especially when his hand is heavy upon them, either in some outward affliction
of body, or some inward anguish of mind. For example the Prophet David
confesses that when Gods hand was heavy upon him day and night his prayers
were but roarings. Psalm. 32.3. Psalm. 32.3.
So Ezechias faith, that when he should have prayed he chattered like a Crane
or a Swallow, and mourned as a Dove, Esa. 38.14. Esa. 38.14.
And the poor Publica^e oppressed with the heavy burden of his sins in stead
of a long and eloquent speech utters these few words; O God be merciful
unto me a sinner, and yet our Savior Christ testifies of him that he received
the remission of his sins and went home justified. Luke 18.13.14.
Luke 18.13.14. Neither in truth does the Lord regard the eloquence of the
tongue, but the earnestness of the heart, he respects not our well couched
words and smooth uttered style, but the feruencie of the spirit, and our
humble and hearty desires, which are acceptably heard of him though our tongues
be silent. The sacrifices of God are not eloquent words but a contrite
spirit, a contrite and broken heart will not the Lord despise. Psalm. 51.17.
as it is Psalm. 51.17. The prayers indicted by Gods spirit which also are
according to the will of God, consist not in the words of the mouth, but in
the sighs of the heart which cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26.
as the Apostle teaches us. Romans 8.26. And therefore if we offer unto God an
humble and contrite spirit, if we can sigh and groan earnestly, desiring those
things we want according to his holy will, though we cannot express our
minds in any good order or in a continued form of speech, yet if we can from
our hearts roar with David, chatter with Ezechias and utter this abrupt speech
with the poor publicane, O God be merciful unto me a sinner, the Lord will
hear us and that as speedily as though we could pray unto him with the
eloquence of men and angels. For to what end principally serve words, but that
we may by them express our minds to men who otherwise could not understand
them; but the Lord who searches the hearts understands our sighs which
cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26.
as it is Romans 8.26.27. and he knows our thoughts long before we think
them, as the psalmist speaks Psalm. 139.2. Psalm. 139.2.
He is a spirit yea an allseeing spirit, and therefore our prayers unto him
are the desires of the heart, neither does our words serve to persuade him,
but to stir up our own dull spirits, and to keep us from disorderly wandering
thoughts. Exodus 14.15
So that if we can with Moses lift up our hearts unto God with earnest
desires, this will be a strong cry in the ears of the Lord, and he will
surely hear it. If we can unfeignedly say with the prophet David. Psalm. 38.9.
Psalm. 38.9. Lord I power my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is not
hid from thee, we may be assured he will hear us and grant our request, for
he hears the desire of the poor, he prepares their heart and bends his
ear unto them. Psalm. 10.17
as it is psalm. 10.17. yea he does not only hear them and in some sort
incline to their request, but he will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him, he will hear their cry and save them. as the same prophet speaks.
Psalm. 145.19. Psalm. 145.19
We know that a kind loving father if he see his son exceeding sick will be
very careful and tender over him, to provide all things necessary for him
which may do him good, and though with a faultering tongue and imperfect
speech he ask any thing which is profitable for him to receive, yet how
readily will he harken unto him and grant his desire? yea if his sickness so
increase that he becomes speechless uttering nothing but deep groans, even
this language moves him to no less care in using all means which may do him
good. Shall then we daily observe such fruits of love in sinful man, and
shall we doubt of finding less in the Lord, who is infinite in love, mercy,
and goodness, far be it from us. Nay let us assure our selves, that though
(our souls being sick in sin, and exceedingly dulled and beaten down with
some grievous tentation) we cannot utter any thing but imperfect speeches, yea
though we are through the grieuousnesse of our affliction and greatness of
our corruption stricken dumb and can utter nothing but groans and sighs, yet
if we desire to be freed out of this wretched case and to have the comfort of
Gods spirit, the Lord who searches the heart and understands our secret
thoughts will harken unto us and grant the desires of our heart, at least so
far forth as it will stand with his own glory and our everlasting good.

Consolations for such as bewail their coldness and dullness in prayer.
that they cannot utter unto God a prayer with any earnestness or feruencie of
spirit, but exceeding coldly and very weakly, and therefore they fear that
God will never hear them; they are to remember that the Lord hears us not
nor grants our requests for the worthiness and excellency of our prayers,
but for his son Jesus Christ's sake who is our mediator and intercessour in
whose name we call upon God; and therefore though our prayers be full of
infirmities and uttered with much weakness, yet calling upon the Lord in our
saviors name he will surely hear us as our savior has promised. Ioh. 16.23.
Ioh. 16.23. Verily, verily I say unto you whatsoever ye shall ask the father
in my name he will give it you. Moreover we are to know that we do not offer up
our prayers immediately unto God the father, but by the mediation of Jesus
Christ, who putting our prayers into the goulden vialls which are full of the
precious odours of his merits, thereby perfumeth them and makes the^ an
offering of sweet smelling savor unto God; Apoc. 5.8.
and by washing them in his own most precious blood he purges them from all
their corruptions and perfecteth all their wants and inperfections, so as now
though not in themselves yet in him they will be acceptable unto God and he
will mercifully grant our petitions.

Consolations for such as bewail their distractions and wandering thoughts in
prayer.
they are to know that this befalls also even the dearest children of God,
partly through their own corruption, and partly through the malice of Satan
who labors most to interrupt us in those holy excercises which he knows
most profitable and effectual for our salvation. Whereof it comes to pass
that though diverse hours together we can talk of worldly affairs and hear
the speech of others without any distractio^ of mind, or thinking of any thing
but of the subject of our present speech, yet when we hear God speak unto us
in the preaching of the word, or when we speak unto God in prayer and
supplication, our minds wander hither and thither though we strive never so
much to contain them, because through our natural corruption we are soon
weary of these holy excercises, and Satan is still at hand to suggest into
our minds wandering thoughts in which we take most delight, but this should not
discourage us from taking in hand these holy actions, but rather the
consideration hereof should strongly move and provoke us to more earnestnes
care and diligence so as Satan may not prevail against us; and if
notwithstanding sometimes nay often we receive a foil, let it be an occasion
to move us to take the more pains and to make a double request unto God, not
only that he will grant unto us those things which we desire, but also that
for Christ's sake he will pardon our sins and infirmities in that we have
begged them so coldly and negligently.

That our wants and infirmities in prayer, should not make us neglect this holy
exercise.
because therein we bewray notable corruptions and cannot though we strive
never so much perform them as we ought, let us in no case yield unto this
tentation, but strongly arm our selves against it; and to this end let us
consider that if Satan can persuade us to desist from perfourming those duties
altogether which we cannot perform as we ought, but with great weakness,
corruption, and imperfection, we shall do nothing at all which God requires
of us, for example the Lord commands us to love him with all our hearts, and
with all our soul, and with all our strength, which duty of love we
perform with great weakness and exceeding coldly; but because we can not
do it as God requires and as we ought, shall we not therefore do it at all?
God forbid. So the Lord commands us to trust and to put our whole affiance
in him, but we are ready to rest and rely upon the arm of flesh and
inferior means, either in whole or at least in part, and when they fail us,
our trust in God is very weak and mingled with much diffidence and doubting,
but shall we therefore put no affiance in God, all because we cannot do it so
perfectly as God requires? be it far from us. So in the very like manner the
Lord expressly charge and commands us to call upon his holy name, which
duty oftentimes we perform coldly and negligently, having our minds carried
away with wandering thoughts and worldly imaginations, but shall satan working
upon our own corruption therefore persuade us altogether to desist from this
holy exercise? no, in no case let us not yield to this temptation. For it is
not left unto us at our own choice as a thing indifferent to pray or not to
pray, but it is a notable part of Gods worship and service, and a singular
duty which the Lord expressly inioyneth us to perform, whereunto he has
adjoined most comfortable promises which depend not upon our worthiness, and
the excellency of our prayers, but on his own free mercy and goodness, and
the merits and intercession of our Savior Christ. Psalm. 50.15.
So Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee
and thou shall glorify me. And Matthew. 7.7. Ask and it shall be given you.
Matthew. 7.7.
And Ioh. 16.23. Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the
father in my name he will give it you, Ioh. 16.23.24.
24. ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be full. And the Apostle Paul
charge us. 1. These. 5.17. that we pray continually. Seeing therefore the Lord
expressly requires this duty at our hands; 1. These. 5.17.
though our infirmities and corruptions be never so great, let us labor
continually to perform it, assuring our selves that if in obedience to his
commandment we call upon him, and labor and strive against those
corruptions, which show themselves unto us in this holy action, he that has
enjoined us this duty will also give unto us his holy spirit, if we will
attend his leisure which will teach us how to pray according to Gods will with
sighs and groans, which cannot be expressed, whereas on the other side if our
infirmities and corruptions wholly discourage us, from performing this duty we
shall grievously sin against God in transgressing his commandment, and in
robbing him of a chief part of his worship and service, and also we shall
plunge our selves into a most desperate estate, adjoining our selves unto the
number of those wicked Atheists of whom the Psalmist speaks, who call not
upon God. Psalm. 53.4.

And so much for answering those tentations which Satan and our corruption do
suggest to discourage us from the service of God, Psalm. 53.4.. Sect. 6. Of the
second kind of sensible hardness of heart.
which have their occasion and ground from our hardness of heart, and drowsy
dullness, and deadness in perfourming these holy exercises. The other kind of
sensible hardness of heart is severed from the use of these holy means; for
sometimes it comes to pass especially in the spiritual combat of
temptation, that even Gods dear children are so besotted and astonished,
through the violence of the temptations of Satan, and huge weight of their
own corruptions, that they cannot endeavor in no sort to use these means,
whereby they might be comforted and relieved in this wretched estate, as the
hearing of the word, calling upon Gods name, meditating in the Scriptures, and
holy co^ferences; yea these holy exercises seem for a time odious and
loathsome unto them, until it please the Lord by his own good spirit to
awaken and raise them up out of this spiritual trance, and to give unto them
again the feeling of his grace and favor, and good motions and abilities to
serve him, and reap comfort unto themselves, by these holy duties. In the
mean time such are to support themselves from falling into utter desperation
by calling to their remembrance their state and condition in times past, for if
ever they have had any delight in the holy exercises of religion, prayer,
hearing the word and godly conferences, if ever they could discern in
themselves any faith by the true fruits of sanctification they may take comfort
thereby, assuring themselves that they shall again be restored unto their
former estate, for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans
11.29 Ioh. 13.1.
and those whom he has once loved, he loves unto the end. An example hereof
we have in David, who being troubled and full of anguish in his spirit, his
soul refusing all comfort, and being so astonished that he could not speak,
yet he considered the days of old, and the years of ancient time, Psalm.
77.2.3.4.
he called to remembrance his former songs in the night, occasioned by the
great benefits which the Lord had bestowed upon him, and so knowing that the
Lord was unchangeable in his mercy and goodness, he relieved his poor soul,
which was ready to faint under the heavy weight of present afflictions. And
thus also Job being brought through the violence of those heavy crosses which
the Lord laid upon him, even to the brinke of desperation, so that he spared
not to utter in the bitterness of his souie, fearful curses and most
impatient speeches coming near unto blasphemy, oftentimes comfort
himself by calling to mind his former integrity and righteousness, whose
example if the poor humbled souls will follow they may raise themselves with
true comfort, when they are sunk down under their heavy burden of present
corruptions.

CHAP. XLI. How the weak Christian may be assured that his repentance is true
and unfeigned.
Of the signs of true repentance. and first of the several degrees thereof
whereby he labors to persuade poor humbled sinners that they are utterly
destitute of of repentance; but if he fail of his purpose then he will
endeavor to make them believe that though they have some show of repentance
yet it is not such as God requires: for either he will affirm that it is
hypocritical and dissembled rather for fear of punishment then for hatred of
sin or true love of God; or if it be true yet it is not sufficient as being
in very small measure and in no proportion answearable to our heinous sins.

Against both which tentations it behooves the humbled sinner to arm himself
that he may repel them when they are suggested; and to this purpose that he
may prove his repentance true and unfeigned, he is to take a true search of his
own heart and conscience, and to examine his repentance according to some
undoubted signs which may serve as touchstones to discover whether it be true
and unfeigned, or dissembled and hypocritical. The first undoubted sign of
unfeigned repentance is when we can observe in our selves the several degrees
or parts thereof as they have been wrought in us by Gods spirit, for from the
enumeration of all the parts we may conclude that we have the whole. The first
degree is that by the law we come to the knowledge, and acknowledgment that we
are heinous and grievous sinners who have broken and transgressed all Gods
commandments. Secondly from this knowledge and acknowledgment of our sins
proceeds a true sense and feeling of them and the punishments due unto them,
and an apprehension and applying to our selves the anger of God, the curse of
the law, and eternal condemnation due unto us for our sins. Thirdly from
this sense of our miserable estate there arises in our consciences fear and
horror of being overtaken and overwhelmed of those judgments of God, and
fearful punishments which hang over our heads for our sins. Fourthly from
this fear and anguish of mind proceeds sorrow and bitter grief, because we
have thus hainously sinned, and made our selves obnoxious to all these evils;
and also in the same respects a true hatred of sin which still hangs upon
us, and an earnest desire to be freed from it. Fifthly, Act. 2.27.
this hatred of sin and desire to be freed from it, makes us earnestly to
seek and inquire after some means whereby we may attain unto our desires,
that being freed from all those fearful evils which oppress our consciences
with the weight of them, we may obtain Gods love and favor and the assurance
of our salvation. Sixthly, thus inquiring and searching we find by the
preaching of the Gospel, that our gracious God has sent his son into the
world, to the end that he might save and deliver us out of this miserable
estate if we believe in him, and also has commanded us to believe. Which
being made effectual by the inward operation of Gods holy spirit, we have true
faith begott in us, whereby we are assured of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ, and of
the full remission of all our sins, the consideration whereof does comfort
and raise us up from falling into desperation and utter destruction. Seventhly
after this assurance of Gods love and of the forgiveness of our sins there
follows first a true hatred of sin, because it is sin, an unfeigned sorrow
not so much in regard of the punishment which by our sins we have justly
deserved, as that because we have offended our so gracious a God and tender
loving father. Secondly this sorrow will not suffer us to hide, excuse, 2. Cor.
7.11
or extenuate our sins, 2. Cor. 7.11.
but moves us in all humility to prostrate our selves before Gods mercy
seat, and in grief of soul to confess them, acknowledging that confusion
and condemnation is due unto us, which by no means we can escape but by Gods
mercy, and the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly being assured of the pardon of our sins past, we labor and strive
for the time to come to leave and forsake them, and to mortify the flesh and
corruptions thereof whereby we are led captive unto sin, and also we
endeavor with a fervent zeal of Gods glory to serve the Lord in holiness
and righteousness, that so by our godly lives we may glorify him and
express our thankfulness for all his inestimable benefits. Fourthly if at
any time besides or contrary to our purpose we be overtaken by our corruption,
and fall into sin, there follows in us an holy anger and indignation with
our selves, because we did not more carefully look to our ways; which godly
anger preceedeth to the taking of a holy kind of revenge, to the end that
thereby our sins may be subdued and our corruptions mortified. For example
he that has offended through gluttony and drunkenness being truly penitent
and angry with himself for his sin, will also tame the flesh by punishing
the same through fasting and abstinence. He that has offended by using
excessive pride in apparel, being angry with him self upon his true
repentance does withdraw from himself such costly attire as otherwise in
respect of his calling he might lawfully wear.

The 2. sign that it be total and entire and that both in respect of the
subject and object.
The second sign of unfeigned repentance is that it be whole and entire and
that both in respect of the subject and also the object thereof. In respect of
the subject or of him in whom it is, it is required that it be not of any
part alone, or yet of all parts saving one, but it must be entire and total
of the whole man and of every of his several parts, it must be a
reformation in the forsaking of sin and embracing of righteousness, not in the
body or soul alone but of the^ both, and of al their several faculties and
powers, it must not only be of the outward actions, but also of the inward
affections and cogitations, it must not only be of the tongue and hand, but
also of our wills and hearts, Iam. 4.8.
according to that Iam. 4.8. Draw near unto God and he will draw near unto
you: cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts you wavering minded.
Otherwise if we do not turn unto the Lord with all our hearts, with all our
souls, with all our bodies and every faculty and part of them, if we
willingly entertain sin, and purposely suffer it to lurk in any secret
corner of us, our repentance is hypocritical and not acceptable in Gods sight.
And hence it is that David says, Psalm. 66.18.
that if he should regard wickedness in his heart the Lord would not hear him.
Psalm. 66.18.

We must perform obedience unto all Gods commandment
Secondly, it must be whole and entire in respect of the object: for it is not
sufficient that we perform obedience unto some of Gods commandments, if we
endeavor not to show our obedience unto all, it is not enough if we forsake
some of our sins, if we willingly and with delight entertain and nourish
others, never striving against them nor laboring to mortify them, but if we
would approve our repentance to be sincere and unfeigned both unto God and our
own consciences, we must desire and endeavor to perform obedience, as well
to those commandments which seem hard and most unpleasant unto us, as unto
those which are more easy and delightful, we must not only forsake those
sins which are not so pleasing unto us, but even those which otherwise are as
dear unto us as our right hand or eye; for he that truly repents of one sin
repents of al, he that repents not of any one sin, repents of none as he
ought; he that wittingly and advisedly neglects any one commandment will in
time neglect all, whatsoever outward reformation may serve to be in him; he
that willingly entertaineth any one sin and nourishes it as his dear
dearling in his boosome, will in the end make conscience of none; for a little
leaven leaueneth the whole lump, and even small sins if they be not
mortified, will make room for those which are greatest and most heinous.

The 3. sign when it is presently undertaken.
when our conversion from sin unto God is not deferred in whole or in part
from time to time but presently undertaken: neither is it sufficient to vow
repentance unto God or to purpose it for the time to come, but we must
presently endeavor and labor in it; it is not enough that we subdue some
sins now and perform obedience unto some of the commaundeme^ts, purposing
to labor after more perfection when we have better opportunity, but we must
presently labor and endeavor to perform obedience not to some, but to all
Gods commandments, and we must out of hand set upon all our sins and labor
to mortify all our corruptions, for if the whole body of sin be not beaten
down and subdued together, that which still lives in us, will give life
again unto that which is mortified, that which is still retained in the heart,
will open a wide door to let in that which is expelled. And so we shall but
take in hand an endless and fruitless work, if we do not set aside all
excuses, and instantly labor to destroy the whole body of sin, breaking
through all difficulties and impediments, for we shall never want hindrances
in these holy actions, and excuses for want of fit occasion and convenient
opportunity, will continually offer themselves unto us, and therefore he that
will not turn wholly unto God, till he have a clear passage and plain way
free from all thorme distractions which pull him back, and worldly
encumbrances, which like blocks lying before him hinder him in his journey, may
as well resolve to sit still and never return unto God by unfeigned repentance.

The 4. sign when it is continual and constant.
for it is not sufficient to serve God by fitts, or that our religion should
take us like a tertian ague but every other day; it is not that which God
requires, that we should divide our time between him and the world, or
having begun in the spirit we should end in the flesh, but after we are gone
out of this Sodom of sin, we must go forward in our journey of holy
obedience, and never like Lots wife look back with a desire to enjoy the
pleasures thereof again. We must so run this spiritual race that we may
obtain, now we know that ru^ners of a race, as they do not stand still after
the watchword is given, but labor with all speed to set forth with the first,
so they do not sit down in the midde way, much less run one while backward
and another while forward, but they still hasten on till they come to the goal
and obtain the garland, and so it behooves us to run speedily to the Lord
by unfeigned repentance, and not to desist in this our race till the end of our
lives, if we purpose to receive that crown of glory which the Lord has
promised us. Our life therefore must be a continual repentance, and so long as
we live so long must we grieve for our sins past and present, and strive
after newness of life and a greater measure of sanctification.

The 5. sign when it proceeds from faith.
and they are never disioined the one from the other, neither can we ever
sorrow for sin as we ought, till we have some assurance of Gods mercy and
love in Jesus Christ; for otherwise though our sorrow be never so great yet it
is not so much for sin as for the punishment thereof, not so much because we
have thereby displeased God, as for those torments of conscience which we
presently endure, and the torments of hell which for the time to come we fear.
And therefore this desperate sorrow is it self to be sorrowed for, as being
severed from faith and therefore sinful, Romans 14.23
and not proceeding from any love of God or hatred of sin, but from the fear
of punishment and condemnation.

Why tears are not numbered amongst the signs of unfeigned repentance.
But it may be demanded why amongst the signs of true repentance I have not
numbered tears and weeping for our sins; to which I answer because
howsoever it is a notable fruit of unfeigned repentance, unto which every
christian with true compu^ction of heart is to accustom himself, yet
notwithstanding it is not an inseparable property thereof; for often times
there is tears whereas their is no true repentance, and there is true
repentance whereas there is few or no tears. For the first we may plainly
perceive by continual experience that tears proceed from diverse other causes
then from true repentance, sometimes from excessive joy whereby the pores and
passages of the eyes are loosed and opened, and sometimes from natural and
worldly sorrow whereby the said passages are constringed and straightned.
Sometimes from furious anger, and sometims from compassion and pity; and in
spiritual things sometimes these tears flow from unfeigned repentance,
sometimes from desperate sorrow conceived upon the apprehension of Gods horrible
wrath or of the fearful torments and eternal condemnation prepared for them.
Wherefore it comes to pass that in the abundance of their tears, they utter
from a heart full of raging malice, horrible blasphemies against God. And
example heareof we have in Esau who in the midst of his weeping and howling
comforted himself with the remembrance of his fathers death and of that most
wicked murder which he intended unto his innocent brother. Genesis 27.41.
Genesis 27 41. So the rebellious Israelites being discouraged with the news
which the spies brought who were sent to search the land, are said to have
cried and wept, and yet in the midst of their lamentation to have murmured
against God and his servants Moses and Aaron. number. 14.1.2
So that simply tears are not a sign of true repentance unless they issue
from a broken heart and contrite spirit, from a true hatred of sin, and from
hearty sorrow conceived because we have offended our gracious God. On the
other side if we be in sincerity of heartt, ruely sorry for our sins in
these respects because we hate our sins and love God, and are displeased with
our selves because we have displeased our gracious father, indeauouring to
forsake our sins and to lead a new life in holiness and righteousness, then
though we can seldom or never shed tears which is the ease of some of Gods
dearest children yet our repentance is true and unfeigned, for in this action
the broken and contrite heart is more to be respected then the blubred eyes
howsoever most commonly they go together.

And so much concerning the signs of true repentance, which if after due
examination we can find in our selves, we may be assured that we are truly
paenitent; nay I will say more for the comfort of all humbled sinners if after
diligent search they find not in their own sense and feeling these signs of
true repentance in them at al or at least in very small measure, yet if they
earnestly desire and sencerely endeavor to attain unto true repentance using
those good means ordained of God for this purpose, they may assure themselves
that they have truly repented in the sight of God who accepts of the will
for the deed and of the affection for the action, as before I have showed.

That the assurance of the remission of sins depends not on the dignity of
ourrepenta^ce.
but false and hypocritical: but if the tempter cannot thus prevail, in the
next place he will tell us that our repentance though if be true yet it is not
sufficient, neither is there any proportion between our small repentance and
our great sins as Gods justice does require, To which we must answer that
the remission of our sins and reconciliation with God, depends not upon the
dignity or quantity of our repentance, but upon the righteousness and full
satisfaction of our Savior Jesus Christ; neither do we repent to the end
that thereby we may in whole or in part satisfy for our sins; for though it
could be imagined that the whole substance of our bodies should be resolved
into tears, yet would they not all of them satisfy and appease Gods wrath
for one breach of any of his commandments, neither is it the water of our eyes
no nor yet the blood of our hearts wounded deeply with sorrow, which will purge
us from our sins either in respect of the guilt, punishment, or corruptions
themselves, but it is the water and blood which flowed from our crucified Lord
which cleanses our guilty souls from the filchie spotts of sin, being
applied unto us by a true and lively faith. And therefore let us not with the
popish rabble foolishly imagine that we can by our repentance meritt any thing
at Gods hand or satisfy his justice for our sins, for so shall we rob our
Savior Christ of the glory due unto him for our salvation, and spoil our
souls of all true comfort, but let us repent and unfeignedly turn unto God in
obedience to his commandment, and to the end that thereby we may approve our
faith before God, the world, and our own consciences to be true by this lively
and undoubted fruit thereof, For it cannot be if we have attained to the
assurance of Gods love and the remission of our sins for the merits and
satisfaction of Christ, but that we will love God again, and this love cannot
be idle but will show it self in a fervent zeal of Gods glory, and this
zeal will make us abhor sin whereby our gracious God is dishonored, and
love righteousness whereby his holy name is glorified, and even sorrow with
bitter grief when as we are overtaken with our corruptions and fall into
sin, seeing our Savior Christ has not spared his precious blood to purge
us, when as nothing else could make us clean. Seeing therefore our repentance
does not satisfy Gods justice nor purge away any sin, let us not be
persuaded by Satan that reconciliation with God, and the remission of our
sins depends on the dignity or quantity of our repentance, but let us
assure our selves that it is only the blood of Christ applied unto us by a
lively faith, that purges us from all our sins, and makes full satisfaction
unto Gods justice: And therefore though our repentance be but in small measure,
yet so it be true and unfeigned it is a certain fruit of a lively faith, That
we are not to be discouraged in that some reprobates have showed more outward
signs of sorrow then we.
and he that believes is made partaker of Christ and all his benefits.

and not so much for any hatred of sin or love of God, or unwillingness to
displease him, as for horror of conscience and desperate fear of eternal
condemnation. And therefore though notwithstanding such sorrow, they have been
condemned, yet we may be assured that upon our true repentance, whereby on the
one side we look upon our sins and are grieved for them, and on the other
side behold Gods merciful and gracious countenance in Jesus Christ by a
lively faith, we shall have the pardon of our sins and be made partakers of
eternal salvation. For the promises of the Gospel are not made to those who
afflict themselves with a desperate sorrow, without any hope or desire of Gods
mercy in Christ Jesus, but unto those who turn unto him by unfeigned repentance
which is joined with a true faith and assurance of the remission of our sins
and everlasting life.

CHAP. XLII. How we may prove against Satan's tentations that we have true
faith.
How Satan tempts the weak Christian, to believe that he has no true faith.
whereby he labors to prove that we have no repentance or at least a false
and insufficient repentance, and consequently that the sweet and gracious
promises of the gospel do not belong unto us: now we are to produce and
answer such tentations as he alleges and suggesteth into the minds of those
who are effectually called against their faith; and these are of two sorts:
the first whereby he labors to persuade them that they have no faith; the
second that their faith (if they have any) is so weak, so imperfect and so
mixed with doubting that it is altogether insufficient for their salvation. For
the first he will thus frame his tentation. Though thou boastest much of thy
faith, and thereby presumest that thou shall attain unto salvation, herein
thou may much deceive thy self and altogether fail of thy purpose; for
there may be in many shows and shadows of faith, and yet nothing in them but
infidelity, there are also many kinds of faith, and yet but one justifying and
saving faith, there is a general or historical faith, there is a faith of
working miracles which Judas had as well as Peter, there is a temporaric or
hypocritical faith, there is a dead faith, there is also carnal presumption,
wherewith many who have made goodly shows have been bewitched and deceived to
their perdition; seeing then there are many false faiths, for one true faith,
it is likely that thine is one of the greatest number, and consequently no true
faith. And therefore do not flatter and deceive thy self in thy fond
presumption, by applying unto thy self the sweet promises and gracious
consolations of the gospel, for they appertain only unto those who are endued
with a true lively and justifying faith, of which thou art altogether destitute.

Satan's testimony no good reason, to prove that we have no faith. Ioh. 8.44.
and if it were possible bring it indeed to nothing: to which tentation we may
first answer thus generally, that Satan's testimony is no sound argument to
prove that we have no faith, nor to be believed of us, seeing he is not only a
malicious murderer, who continually seeks our destruction. But also a false
liar from the beginning, who has not feared to be lie men only but even God
himself accusing him of untruth, envy and want of power in that tentation
wherewith he assailed and overcame our first parents: and therefore if he be
so audatiously impudent, as that he durst be lie God himself, we may assure
our selves he will make no scruple of be lying us. Seeing then Satan is a
malicious liar, who desires nothing more then our destruction, let us not
doubt of our faith because of his testimony, nay rather because he says we
want faith, we may assure our selves that we are endued therewith, for that he
may work our final overthrow, it is his usual custom to tell the true
believing Christian that he is destitute of faith, and contrariwise the
unbelieving worldling that he has a strong faith, whereas in truth there is
nothing in him but secure presumption. And therefore let it suffice us that we
know we have a lively faith by the testimony of Gods spirit, and by trying and
examining our faith by the touchstone of Gods words, for on these our faith
depends and not on Satan's testimony.

How we may be assured that we have faith by finding in our selves the degrees
thereof.
and to this purpose it behooves us first that we prove against Satan's false
suggestions, that we have faith: and secondly that we arm our selves by all
good means with the shield of faith, seeking daily more strength and increase
thereof, until at last we attain unto that fullness of faith which will fill
our souls with true peace and comfort, and also beat back all the violence of
Satan's subtle and fearce tentations.

For the first: we may prove that we have a true justifying faith by diverse
arguments, as first by the degrees thereof, from which we may thus reason?
whosoever can truly find in himself the several degrees of a lively faith,
he may certainly be assured that he is endued therewith, but I (may every
christian man say) do truly howsoever in weak measure find these degrees of
a lively faith in me, and therefore I am assured that I am endued therewith.

The 1. degree of true faith, the illumination of the mind.
The first degree unto true faith, is the illumination of our dark and ignorant
minds with the knowledge of the Gospel, or with the maine principles thereof,
wrought in our minds by the outward means ordained of God, and the inward
operation of his holy spirit; whereby we give our assent to that truth of God
in which the understanding is infourmed. And of this the apostle speaks 1.
Tim. 2.4. where he says that it is the will of God, that all men should be
saved, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and come to the acknowledging of the truth, that is to the knowledge of the
truth of God, and assenting thereunto.

The 2. degree a persuasion that our sins are pardonable.
The second degree is an assurance that our sins are pardonable, which is
wrought in us by the knowledge and due consideration of Gods infinite mercy,
and Christ's inualuable merits and indefinite promises of the Gospel, made
with out exception to ill repentant and believing sinners; from whence also
arises a general hope that we shall receive the pardon and remission of our
sins, which hope is nourished and increased by this consideration, that the
Lord has placed us in his church, and graciously granted unto us the outward
means whereby we may be brought unto unfeigned repentance, and have a lively
faith wrought in us, even the ministry of the word and administration of the
sacraments, upon which only condition the covenant of grace and all the sweet
promises of the Gospel, are made and assured unto us.

The 3. ddegree an hungring desire after grace.
and Christ's meritts and righteousness by which we are justified, reconciled
unto God, and receive the pardon and remission of all our sins, but also
after the means and isntrumental causes whereby the assurance of Gods mercy
and Christ's merits is derived unto us, namely true faith and unfeigned
repentance, and the rest of the graces of Gods sanctifying spirit. The which
desire of grace is the beginning of grace, neither can we desire it till in
some measure it be wrought in us; for regeneration and sanctification is
begun at the same time in all the parts and faculties of our bodies and
fowls, so that he who is truly regenerate many faculty or part, is also
regenerate in the whole man. And therefore whosoever has his will renewed and
sanctified to desire that which is good, is also sanctified and renewed in his
understanding, affections, and in all the powers and faculties of body and
soul. Moreover (as before I have delivered at large) our desire of grace,
faith, and repentance, are the graces themselves which we desire, at least in
Gods acceptance, who accepts of the will for the deed, and of our affections
for the actions. And therefore if we earnestly desire to repent and believe, we
do repent and believe in Gods sight: and the Lord has made the like gracious
promises to this earnest desire of grace, which he has made to those who find
themselves plentifully endued with the graces themselves. So Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be
filled. So the virgin Marie says in her song, Luke 1.53. Luke 1.53.
That the Lord fills the hungry with good things, and sends away the rich
empty. And our Savior Christ calls unto him such as thus hunger and thirst,
promising that he will satisfy them. John 7.37. Revel. 21.6. and 22.17. Ioh.
7.37.
Lastly whosoever feels this desire in him joined with a careful and
continual use of the means whereby his desire may be satisfied, he may assure
himself that the Lord who has wrought in him, the will to desire, will also
in his good time work in him ability to perform, and the graces which he
so earnestly desires; for he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him;
he will also hear their cry and will save them. As it is Psalm. 145.19. So
Psalm. 10.17. Psalm. 145.19. and 10.17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their heart and
bendest thine ear unto them. And therefore if in the midst of our
afflictions and grievous tentations, we can cry out with the Prophet David,
Psalm. 38.9. Lord I power my whole desire before thee, Psalm. 38.9.
and my sighing is not hid from thee. We may be assured how miserable soever
we are in our own sense and feeling, that we are in the state of grace, and
shall have our desires satisfied, for he that has begun this good work in
us, Phil. 1.6.
will also in his good time finish and perfect it. as the Apostle speaks.
Phil. 1.6.

The 4. degree an approaching to the throne of grace. Heb. 4.16.
and acknowledge that we are guilty of death and condemnation, and also that
we may in the name and mediation of Christ obtain the pardon and remission of
them. And of this the Apostle speaks. Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore go bouldly
unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in
time of need. And the Prophet Hosea cap. 14.2. O Israel return unto the Lord
thy God: for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. 3. Take unto you words and
turn unto the Lord and say unto him: take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. An example hereof we have
in the Prophet David, Psalm. 32.5. Then (says he) I acknowledge my sin unto
thee, Psalm. 32.5.
neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought I will confess my wickedness
unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. So likewise the
prodigal Son having attained unto the sight of his sin and to a desire of
forgiveness, resolves to go unto his father, and to say; Luke 15.18.19.
Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee; and am no more worthy
to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants. Luke 15.18.19.

The 5. degree a special application of the promises.
and are assured of Gods love and favor, and of the remission of our sins
for the merits, righteousness, and obedience of Jesus Christ, resting upon him
alone for our salvation. An example whereof we have in the Apostle Paul Gal.
2.20. Gala. 2.20.
Thus (says he) I live yet not I now but Christ lives in me: and in that I
now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the son of God, who has loved me
and given himself for me. And this persuasion ought to go before sense and
experience, for first we believe and are persuaded of the truth of Gods
promises and resist diffidence and doubting, and afterward follows joyful
sense and experience of Gods mercy, truth, and goodness toward us. And hence it
is that the Apostle defines faith to be the ground of things which are hoped
for, and the demonstration or evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1. Ioh. 20
29.
Heb. 11.1. and to this purpose our savior Christ says to Thomas. Ioh. 20.29.
Thomas because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest, blessed are they which have
not seen and have believed. An example hereof we have in the Cananitish woman
who though she had no experience of Gods truth in his promises, yea though
she had many repulses yet believed, and afterward to her comfort had joyful
experience of them, Mat. 15.27.
Mat. 15.27.

An these are the degrees of faith, which whosoever finds in himself he may
be assured that he has a true lively and justifying faith notwithstanding all
the tentations of Satan. If therefore having heard the gospel we have
attained unto some measure of knowledge of the chief principles thereof, if we
have given our assent unto this truth in which our understandings are informed;
if hereby we have attained unto this assurance that our sins are pardonable
and have conceived some hope in consideration of Gods infinite mercy and
Christ's merits that we shall be forgiven and pardoned; if we have an hungring
desire after grace and mercy and highly esteem the merits and righteousness
of Jesus Christ, so that we wish nothing more then to be made partakers of
them; if by this desire we have been moved to flee unto the throne of grace,
and there humbly acknowledging our sins have earnestly desired pardon and
forgiveness. Lastly if at any time we have discerned in in our selves a
persuasion of Gods love and of the pardon and remission of our sins, and that
we have or do rest upon the alone merits and obedience of Christ Jesus for
our justification and salvation, then may we be assured that we are endued
with a true justifying faith.

The second argument to prove that we have faith, is the testimony of Gods
spirie Romans 8.15.26.
for as the Apostle speaks Romans 8.15. We have the spirit of adoption
whereby we cry abba father. 16. and the same spirit bears witness with our
spirit that we are the children of God. and ver. 26. Likewise the spirit also
helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the
spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be expressed
etc. Whosoever therefore have this testimony in their hearts and consciences
that they are the children of God, whosoever at any time feel or have felt the
spirit of God powerful in the^, in pouring out their souls in hearty prayer
with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed, they may be assured that they
have received the spirit of adoption and consequently are endued with true
faith, Gal. 5.22.
for the spirit and the fruits thereof (amongst which faith is one of the
chief) are never severed. Moreover the Apostle says 1. Cor. 2.12. that we
have not received the spirit of the world, 1. Cor. 2.12.
but the spirit which is of God that we might know the things that are given
to us of God. That is not only his spiritual graces in this life in which
number faith is one of the greatest, but those excellent joys in Gods kingdom
in the life to come, of which also we have some knowledge and taste by the
illumination of the same spirit. Lastly the Apostle affirms 2. Cor. 1.22.
that God has sealed us, 2. Cor. 1.22.
and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts, and Ephe. 1.13. He
tells the Ephesians that after they had heard the gospel and beleeuea, Ephe.
1.13.
they were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which was the earnest of
their inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the
praise of the glory of God. Wheresoever therefore is this testimony of the
spirit which as an earnest or seal assures them that they are the children
of God there also is faith, for as the Apostle witnesses after that we
believe we are thus sealed.

The 3. argument is the fight between the flesh and the spirit.
the world and the devil, and the combat which is between faith and doubting;
for so long as we are destitute of the spirit and a lively faith, we are wholly
ouerswayed with the flesh, and Satan like a mighty tyrant houldeth us
captive peaceably and without any resistance; but when we have received the
spirit of God and have faith wrought in our hearts, then begins a fierce
battle which never ends till by death our spiritual enemies get a final
overthrow. Though therefore this fight be most sharp and exceeding
troublesome to the poor christian, yet he may thereby gather unto himself
sound comfort and certain assurance that he is endued with the spirit of God
and a lively faith; for when he discerns that he is assaulted with Satan
and his own corrupt flesh, he may be assured that Satan and his own corrupt
flesh, he may be assured that Satan is diseased of his quiet possession by a
superior power which can be no other but the power of Gods spirit, secondly by
his assaulting it manifestly appears that he finds some resistance so as
he cannot peaceably reenter, thirdly that howsoever our faith seem unto us
never so weak yet it is so stre^gthened continually by virtue of Gods spirit
that satan and all the power of hell cannot prevail against it, for otherwise
how could such weakness withstand such might?

Lastly being assured that it is the spirit of God which assisteth and enableth
us to withstand Satan, we may also be assured that in the end we shall obtain
victory, unless we would fondly imagine that the devil is stronger then God,
and the violence of his tentations more forcible to destroy us, then the spirit
of God to protect and defend us; for now they have joined battle and either the
one or the other must get the upper hand, either the spirit of God must thrust
out satan, or Satan the spirit of God; and therefore how can we doubt of
conquest, seeing we are assured that God cannot take the foil, for his power
is omnipotent and with a word of his mouth he is able to destroy Satan and all
his adhaerents, and of his will we need not to make any question, for it will
not stand with his glory to receive a repulse by giving Satan place, after
that he has taken upon him our protection.

How we may know that this combat is fought between the flesh and the spirit.
Yea (will the tempter say) but how will thou know that this battle is fought in
thee, how can thou be assured that it is the spirit of God which fights in
thee against thy spiritual enemies, and not rather thine own tumultuous
passions and perturbations; and diverse tentations suggested by the same devil.
To which it is easy to make answer, for neither does the flesh fight against
satan, nor satan against the flesh, nor either of the^ against themselves,
for so their kingdom being divided could not possibly stand, Mat. 12.25.
as our savior Christ himself has taught us Mat. 12.25.26. And therefore it
must needs be so^e other force which causes this oppositio^ which can proceed
from nothing else but the spirit of God.

But this will more manifestly appear, if we consider the contrary affections
and actions which plainly show themselves in this battle, for we find our
faith assaulted with doubting and infidelity, and these also again beaten
back after they have gotten some ground and subdued with the strength of
faith; we discern also our affiance in God shrewdly shaken with diffidence and
distrust, and afterward this distrust vanquisheth again by affiance, so as
after we have uttered through the violence oftentation some diffident and
impatient speeches, yet at the length we grow to Jobs resolution: Though he
kill me yet will I trust in him. Job. 13.15.
We may also discern our zeal sometime so hot in Gods service that it
expels coldness and the fruit thereof dullness and drowsinesse of spirit,
and sometimes by them it is cooled and in outward appearance quenched; and the
like may be said of all the other fruits of the flesh and the spirit. Besides
which fight and stirring between them and their fruits the christian may
observe in himself a misliking of the corruptions of the flesh, great grief
and vexation of mind, because he is still subject unto them and an earnest
desire to be freed from them, joined with an holy indeauoure in the use of the
means which are ordained of God for this purpose; and howsoever through the
violence of Satan's tentations and his own corruptions ye be sometimes led
captive into sin yet afterward he is grieved for it, he hates and
abhors it, and earnestly desires and indeauoureth for the time to come to
leave and forsake it, and to serve the Lord in newness of life. Now whence
does all this opposition and contrariety proceed? shall we say from the
flesh, why it is against all reason; Iam. 3.11.
for as the Apostle James disputes Iam. 3.11. Does a fountain send out at one
place sweet water and bitter? can the figg tree bring forth olives, or a vine
figgs? or rather as our savior Christ reasons Mat. 7.16. Do men gather
grapes of thorns or figgs of thistles? Mat. 7.16.
so may I demand can the flesh in the which as the Apostle affirms dwells
no good thing, Romans 7.18.
bring forth the fruits of the spirit which are quite contrary to the
nature thereof, namely sorrow for sin, hatred of it self, and the
corruptions thereof, and carnest desire of sanctification and holiness of life:
it is impossible. And therefore we may conclude that they are the fruits of Gods
spirit in us, and consequently that we are the sons of God who are endued with
a true and lively faith; for as many as are led by the spirit of God, Romans 8.
they are the sons of God, which privilege belongs only to the faithful
as appears Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to
them that believe in his name. So that whosoever have the spirit have faith
also, for the spirit and faith which is a fruit thereof cannot be severed.

The 4. argument taken from our sanctification
is our mortification and dying unto sin and rising again to newness of
life; for the blood of Jesus Christ which is applied unto us by faith as it
does wash away the guilt and punishment of our sins, so does it also cleanse
us in some measure from the corruptions themselves; and as his death and
obedience has meritted the pardon of our sins, so also Gods spirit by virtue
whereof we are more and more freed from the bondage and servitude of sin and
Satan, and as by his resurrection he has made way for our second
resurrection whereby we rise to everlasting happiness, so also for our first
resurrection whereby we rise from sin to newness of life. If therefore we
can find in our selves that our sins and corruptions are by little and little
mortified, that we strive and endeavor after holiness and righteousness of
life; if our understandings be somewhat enlightened in the knowledge of Gods
truth and our stubberne wills inclyned to holy obedience, if we discern that
our affections are in some measure changed and renewed, then may we be assured
that we are endued with a true and lively faith, which has applied unto us
Christ Jesus and his bloodshed, death, and merits, by virtue whereof this
work of regeneration is begun in us.

The last argument taken from the several fruits of sanctification.
we may be assured that we have faith by the several fruits of sanctification
and regeneration which proceed from it: for example when we can sorrow and
grieve for our sins past, not for any worldly loss or fear of punishment,
but because thereby we have offended God, when as we hate our present sins
and corruptions, especially those which stick fastest unto us, and are most
pleasing to our corrupt nature; when as we endeavor and strive to forsake and
mortify all sin though our carnal affection be much indeared to it, by
reason of some great pleasure or profit which it brings with it, avoiding
with no less care those sins which bring worldly benefitt, then those which
are accompanied with shame and punishment, when as we love God even when he
afflicts us and in obedience to his commandment, perform such holy
duties, and embrace such virtues, not only which are commendable in the world,
but also those which are accompanied with shame and reproach, when as we love
our brethren, yea even our enemies and show this our love by giving unto those
who want, and forgiving those who offend us, and when more especially we extend
this love and the fruits thereof to those who are of the household of faith,
and amongst these principally to Gods ministers who are instruments appointed
of God, for our conversion and salvation, when as we can submit our selves
unto Gods will, and rest contented in all estates with his good pleasure, when
as we loath this life and the vanities of the world, and desire our dissolution
that we may be with Christ and be freed from our sins; when as we are patient
in afflictions, and in the midst of them have some hope of tasting Gods mercy
and goodness, grounding our hope upon Gods promises and our own former
experience; when as we delight in the hearing and meditating in Gods word, and
continue constant in the profession and practice of his truth, not only when
our obedience is good cheap, but also when it is dear and very costly, and as
well when it is accompanied with loss, as when we are in hope to gain
thereby. These and many other the branches of sanctification are the undoubted
signs of a true and lively faith, and therefore whosoever after due
examination, find that they are endued with them, may also be assured
notwithstanding all Satan's suggestions to the contrary that they have faith,
for this is the root from which these fruits spring and they cannot be severed.

CHAP. XLIII. Satan's tentations grounded upon our want of sense and feeling of
faith, answered.
Satan's tentation whereby he persuades us tha we have no faith, because we
feel it not
which howsoever they be to be observed in every faithful man, yet not at all
times, for oftentimes it comes to pass that the believing Christian does
neither feel his faith nor the fruits thereof, especially in the infancy of
faith and in the cumbate of tentations, which gives occasion unto Satan of
suggesting into his mind a dangerous tentation. Thou braggest much (will he
say) of thy faith, and thou confirmest, this thy persuasion that thou art
endued therewith with many signs and fruits which have accompanied it; but if
now thou examine thy self a right thou shall find in thee no such matter; and
not to stand upon other arguments, I appeal unto the testimony of thine own
conscience, whether at this present thou have any sense or lively feeling of
faith, or can discern those fruits thereof which before thou have spoken of;
if not, then do not flatter thy self in vain with a fond persuasion, for
though thou will not believe me, yet at least believe thine own sense and
feeling which plainly tells thee that either thou never had any true
faith indeed, or if thou had yet that now it is quite lost and perished.

The answer to the former tertations.
For the answering of which tentation we must distinguish between the habit
of faith, and the act of faith; or between faith it self and the work and
function thereof, which is to apprehend and apply Christ's merits and Gods mercy
and loving favor, with all the gracious promises of the gospel; as it is an
habitual faculty of the mind, it always continues and abides in Gods
children, after it is once wrought in them by the spirit of God, but in respect
of the function act or work thereof it has many intermissions, and oftentimes
seems to be cast as it were into a dead sleep. Now we are to know that we
cannot sensibly discern faith, as it is an habitual virtue or faculty of the
mind although we have it in great measure in us, but only so far forth as
it manifests it self in his actions, works, and fruits; and therefore it is
an unsound and false manner of reasoning, to infer because we do not sensibly
feel and discern that we have faith, therefore we are destitute thereof; for
the habit of faith or faith it self may be in us, and yet for a time may be
so hindered by outward accidents, that it cannot show it self in his actions
and fruits, by which alone it is sensibly discerned.

The former answer made plain by similitudes
we know that in the sicknesses and diseases of the body nature is so infeebled
and overcome, that sometimes the party affected falls into a dead swoune
wherein he is deprived for a time, not only of the use of the understanding,
reason, and memory, but also of his senses, motion, and vital functions, so
that in respect of sense and outward appearance, he is quite deprived of all
his vital sensitive and intellectual faculties, but yet a while after by
reason of some outward means used, or by the secret power of nature working
in him, he is restored to the use of all again, and lives, feels much and
understands as in former times, because he had not lost these faculties but
only by some grievous impediment was hindered of the use of them in their
actions and functions; so that here this manner of reasoning appears absurd
and false, these faculties of the soul cannot be sensibly discerned, and
therefore he is quite destitute of them: And thus also it is in respect of our
faith and other habitual virtues, oftentimes through the sickness of the soul
in sin or the outward violence of Satan's tentations, it seems cast into a
swoune and deprived of all the spiritual faculties and virtues thereof, faith,
love, zeal, hope, patience and the rest, but yet soon after by hearing the
word, by godly admonitions, instructions, reprehensions, and consolations made
effectual by the inward operation of Gods spirit it is revived, and all the
spiritual graces thereof show themselves again in their woonted strength; so
that this inference is no less false then the other, there is no sensible
appearance of these sanctifying gifts and graces, and therefore they are quite
lost and perished, for the graces themselves remain though for a time they
appear not in their actions and fruits.

So in the time of winter the fruitful trees are so nipped with the cold
frosts, and so weatherbeaten with tempestuous storms that they appear naked
and bare, not only without fruit but also leaves, so as if we shall judge
according to sense and outward appearance we should falsely conclude that they
are dead; for by experience we know that they live and suck nourishment out of
the earth, even when they are most spoiled of their summer beauty, and though
they are tossed with the winds yet hereby they are not hurt but rather take
deeper root and so are made capeable of more nourishment, and though they be
nipped with cold frosts yet hereby they are not made barren nay rather hereby
their worms and cankers are killed, and they prepared and made fit to bring
forth more fruit in the time of summer, when the comfortable spring
approaches, and the sweet showers and warm sun beams fall and descend upon
them. And thus it is with the spiritual graces in the poor christian, in the
winter of affliction they are nipped with the cold frosts of fear and
doubting, and weatherbeaten with the boisterous blasts of Satan's tentations,
so as they seem even dead at the very root if we shall judge according to
outward sense and appearance, but yet by experience we find that it is far
otherwise, for hereby they are not ouerturned though they be shaken, and this
shaking makes them to take more deep root in godliness, and though they be
nipped and pinched with fears and doubtings yet they perish not, only the
canker-worme of pride, sonde presumption, and self confidence is mortified and
killed; and they hereby are prepared and fitted to bring forth more plentiful
fruits of holiness and righteousness, when the spring of true comfort
comes, wherein the sweet showers of Gods holy spirit distill upon them, and
the warm sunshine of Gods love and favor again appears to them.

The sire is sometime so covered with ashes that it sends forth neither light
nor heat, and therefore in outward sense and appearance it seems quite
extinguished, but when the ashes are removed and more wood added to it, it
bursteth out into a great flame, and makes all the standers by to perceive his
heat and light; and so the graces of Gods spirit are sometimes so covered
with the ashes of our corruptions that there appears no spark of them nor
yet any heat of true comfort, but when our corruptions are removed with
unfeigned repentance, and a new supply of grace ministered unto them by Gods
spirit, then does their light appear unto us and warm our hearts with true
comfort, and not to us alone but even those about us see our shining light and
glorify our heavenly father.

A man has not always the use of his senses, reason, and understanding as in
his sleep, but because we cannot sensibly discern these faculties shall we
therefore conclude that this man who is a sleep is senseless unreasonable and
without understanding; it were most absurd; for if we but expect a while till
he be thoroughly awakened our argument will appear manifestly false: and so
sometime the poor christian is overtaken with the sleep of drowsy security
and is overwhelmed for a time with hardness of heart, and dullness of spirit,
so as none of those spiritual graces which are in him can sensibly be
discerned by himself or others, but shall he or we conclude or believe Satan
so concluding, that he never had them, or now is deprived of them? why it were
as absurd as the other. For when he is awaked out of his drowsy sleep by the
voice of the Lord sounding in his ears, and by the good motions of his holy
spirit his faith, love, zeal, and all other virtues and graces show
themselves in their fruits and actions, as manifestly as in former times.

That we must not conclude that we have not faith because we do not sensibly
discern it.
let us not be persuaded by satan's tentations to believe that we are destitute
of faith and other sanctifying graces of Gods holy spirit, because at sometimes
we cannot sensibly discern them, for though now our souls seem so sick in
the sense of sin that there appears no sign of life, yet the Lord will
raise us up again and restore us to perfect health, though now we see no
fruits of faith whilst we are nipped with the winter of tentations, yet the
Lord will water us with his holy spirit, and warm our frozen hearts with the
lively beams of his love and favor so as we shall bring forth abou^dant fruits
in due time and season; though now there appear not a spark of grace in us by
reason al is covered with the ashes of our corruptions, yet the Lord will surely
ad a fresh supply and blow upon us by his holy spirit so that our light and
heat shall appear to our selves and others, and though now our spirits be
oppressed with drowsy dullness, yet the Lord in his good time will cause us to
awake by hearing his voice, sounding in our ears out of his holy word, and
will again quicken and revive us with his holy spirit, so as after this sleep
we shall be enabled to follow with cheerfulness our labors and works, both
which concern his service, and those duties also which concern our brethren,
only let us not tempt the Lord in prescribing him a time, but wait his
leisure and he will surely help us.

CHAP. XLIIII. How the weak Christian is to comfort himself, when he is
deprived of the sense of faith, and sensibly feels the contrary corruptions.
That the Christian in the want of present sense, must comfort himself with
his former feeling.
or that I should preserve my self from falling into utter desperation, seeing
I cannot feel in me any good thing, nor discern any spark of grace? what
hope remains when as I plainly discern in steed of faith, doubting and
infidelity, in stead of the love of God, hatred and rebellion, in stead of
zeal, coldness and drowsy dullness, and in stead of all sanctifying graces,
nothing else but a heavy mass of filthy corruptions? I answer that when thou
have no comfort in thy present sense, and feeling then thou must call to thy
remembrance the times past, in which thou have by faith apprehended Gods love,
mercy, and goodness toward thee, and brought forth the fruits of thy faith
in the works of holiness, appertaining to Gods service and the works of
Christian righteousness belonging to our brethren, for we may assure our
selves that if ever we have truly discerned these graces of Gods spirit, by
the fruits of sanctification in us, they are not taken from us, for the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29.
as it is Romans 11.29 And where he has begun a good work their he will
finish it and bring it to perfection. As the Apostle speaks Phil. 1.6. Phil.
1.6.
We know that the woman being with child feels no life nor motion of the
child diverse months together, after the time of her conception, and after that
she has felt it stir and move oftentimes, there is an intermission wherein
she feels not the motion there of a good space together, and yet
notwithstanding because informer times she has felt it, she is persuaded that
a live child is in her, and co^fortably hops to have happy travail. And thus
it fares with Gods children oftentimes, after that by the seed of the word
faith is begotten and conceived in them, they feel no life, motion, nor
undoubted signs thereof a long while, and after that they have the remission
of their sins and are reconciled unto God, they have not the feeling and
sense of pardon and reconciliation diverse months, yea sometimes many years
together which the Lord in his wisdom and mercy does that he may move them
hereby unto more serious repentance, and earnestly to hunger after a greater
measure of faith, carefully using the means ordained for this purpose, and
that they may more esteem and be more thankful for his inualuable benefits
after that they have full assurance of them. And after they have a feeling of
faith and other spiritual graces by their motions and fruits, ofttimes again
they are deprived of it, either because they have wounded their consciences by
falling into some known sin, or for that it pleases the Lord to exercise
their faith and manifest his power in their weakness, moving them hereby to
deny themselves and to rest wholly upon him, yielding unto him the whole glory
and praise of their salvation. What therefore is to be done in such a case?
Surely they are not utterly to be discouraged nor to suffer themselves to
sink into the gulf of desperation; but as the sense and feeling of their
state ought to humble them under Gods hand, and to move them to enter into a
due examination of themselves, and to a serious repentance for their sins, so
they must take comfort unto themselves, and prop up their declining faith by
calling to mind former times wherein the Lord has showed his merciful and
gracious countenance unto them, and wherein they in token of thankfulness
have glorified God, by their holiness and righteousness of life. An example
whereof we have in the Prophet David, Psalm. 77. who being grievously
afflicted, could not receive in his soul any true comfort, Psalm. 77.
for howsoever he did think upon the Lord yet he was still troubled, and
though he prayed unto him yet his spirit was full of anguish. What help^ did
he then find in this his present distress? He tells us in the first verse:
Then (says he) I considered the days of old, and the years of ancient time;
I called to remembrance my song in the night, namely his songs of thanksgiving,
whereby he had praised God for his great benefits, and verse. 11. I remembered
the works of the Lord, certainly I remembered thy wonders of old. Job. 31.
So the holy man Job apprehending and conceyuing of God as of his enemy, in
respect of his present sense and feeling, and being moved by his friends to
doubt of his graces, which he had received and to condemn himself for an
hypocrite, comfort himself and strengthens his faith in the midst of al
these grievous tentations, by calling to his remembrance his fruits of faith
and works of sanctification, which he had discerned in himself in former
times, as appears Chap. 31. Whose example if the children of God in like
distress will follow, how miserable soever they are in their present sense and
feeling, yet they may receive unto themselves comfort, because Gods gifts and
calling are without repentance.

That true faith rests not in our sense and feeling.
but also that we do sensibly feel the heavy burden of Gods wrath, and
plainly discern his frowning and angry countenance against us, and therefore
howsoever those children of God who are in his love and favor may have some
faith in them although it do not always so sensibly appear, yet it is
impossibly that we should have any spark thereof seeing we have not any sense
of Gods love and favor; nay do sensibly perceive the clean contrary; to
which we are to answer that faith does not rely it self upon our sense and
feeling; for as the apostle says faith is the ground of things (not presently
inioyed but) which are hoped for, and the evidence or demonstration of things
(not which are subject to the senses and sensibly discerned but) which are not
seen, Heb. 11.1.
Heb. 11. I and we believe that such joys are prepared for us as neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man conceived as it is 1.
Cor. 2.9. and it is a kind of infidelity to believe only those things which
are subject unto our senses and understandings; 1. Cor. 2.9.
and therefore when Thomas would not believe that Christ was risen before it
was made manifest to his senses he is reproved for infidelity, be not (says
he) faithless but faithful. So that when our sense and feeling cease their
faith begins his chief work; and the most excellent faith shows it self
most clearly when we have no sense and feeling, or when we discern and feel
the plain contrary; for it is an easy matter to be strong in faith when God
shows himself gracious and merciful; but when he appears unto us like an
angry judge, when as his wrath flameth out against us, then to behold his love
through the vizard of anger, to apprehend by faith his mercy and goodness
toward us, when our senses apprehend nothing but his wrath and displeasure,
Job. 13.15.
to grow to Jobs resolution in the midst of our bitter agonies and greiuous
afflictions, though he kill me yet will I trust in him, and when we have
received many repulses and bitter snubs yet with the Cananitish woman to
continue our suite, Mat. 15.
argues such a faith as is hardly found no not in Israel. Our want of sense
therefore of Gods love and favor does not argue want of faith, for our faith
is not grounded upon our sense and feeling, but upon Gods gracious promises,
immutable goodness, and infallible truth, and if ever we have tasted of Gods
love and mercy, whatsoever we apprehend in our present sense and feeling,
faith concludes that we are still in his love and favor, for he is without
change or shadow of change as the apostle speaks, Iam. 1.17. and whom he
loves to the end he loves them, Iam. 1.17.
as our Savior has taught us. Ioh. 13.1. Ioh. 13.1.


Though then our sense of Gods love fail yet may our faith continue strong, as
appears plainly in the example of Job, who though he conceived of God in his
sense and feeling that he had hidden his face from him and took him for his
enemy, though he seemed to write bitter things against him and made him to
possess the sins of his youth, yet by a lively faith he still rested and
relied upon him, protesting that though he should slay him yet he would trust
in him. as appears Job. 13.15. Job 13.15.
Yea our Savior Christ himself who could not sin through infidelity, in
respect of his present sense and feeling complayneth that God had forsaken him.

That we are rather to believe Gods word then our own sense and feeling.
If therefore Satan go about to persuade us that we are without faith because
we presently apprehend not Gods love nor feel the sweet taste of his goodness
we are to answer that we are not to build our assurance upon our own
sense and feeling, but upon Gods unchangeable goodness and gracious promises
made unto us in Christ Jesus; and if at any time our sense and feeling tell us
one thing (namely that God has withdrawn his love from us and will never
again look graciously upon us) and the word of God assure us of another thing
(to wit that God will never forsake us, but continue his love toward us unto
the end) we are not to give credit unto our own feeling but unto Gods word;
for otherwise what do we else but prefer our often deceyuinge sense before
Gods infallible truth, and imagine that we can better discern and judge of
our estate then God himself? but the word of God tells us that if we turn
unto the Lord by unfeigned repentance sorrowing for our sins past, hating our
present corruptions, and desiring and indeauouring to mortify the flesh and
the lusts thereof and to serve the Lord in holiness and newness of life; and
if we believe in Jesus Christ resting upon him for our salvation; or though
presently we feel not this faith and repentance yet if ever in former time we
have discerned it in us, that then we are received into Gods love and favor
and therefore shall have his love continued unto us unto the end, be made
partakers of his gracious promises and heirs of everlasting life; for the
promises of the gospel are not restrained to those who feel their faith, but
to those that have faith, not to those who feel that they do believe, but
unto those who do believe.

That conclusions grounded upon our sense are often false.
Neither is the not feeling of Gods love and favor a good argument to prove
that we are out of his love and favor, or the apprehension of his wrath and
anger in our sense and feeling a sound reason to persuade us that we are
subject to his wrathful displeasure; seeing the being of a thing, and the
sensible discerning of the thing to be, are diverse, and therefore howsoever at
sometimes they concur, yet oftentimes they are severed and disioyned: so that
the conclusion which is inferred negatiuely from the senses, to prove the not
being of their object is not only commonly false, but also oftentimes absurd
and ridiculous; for example sometimes we see not the beams of the sun, as in
the night season, or when it is covered with some thick black cloud, but shall
we herehence conclude that the sun shines not, nor will ever again appear
unto us? So the bright beams of Gods love and favor are sometimes hidden from
us in the night of tentations, and so shadowed with the cloud of our grievous
sins that we cannot sensibly discern them, but shall we hence infer that
there is no grace and mercy to be found with God, or that he will never again
make them shine upon us? The one is as absurd as the other, and both grossly
false. So sometimes the Sun is eclipsed by the interposition of the Moon, so
as we cannot discern his light or very dimly, but if any man should conclude
from hence that it were quite taken away, or that we were deprived utterly of
his life-preseruing influence, the experience of two or three hours would show
the sottish weakness of his sensible argument, and so in like manner Gods
favor and love are sometimes so ecclipsed with the interposition of some great
afflictions, that we cannot discern them for a time or but very dimly, but if
we shall infer hereof that they are quite taken from us, and that they cast
forth no comfortable influence on us, our present preservation from being
swallowed up into utter destruction, and the speedy return of woonted joy and
consolation, by the apprehension of Gods love and goodness toward us, will
evidently show that this argument taken from the senses is void of reason.

That Gods dearest children have not at all times sensibly discerned Gods love,
and the graces of his spirit in the^.
Lastly, it appears by the examples of Gods children from time to time, that
though they have been endued with a great measure of faith, and in a high
degree of favor and love with almighty God, yet sometimes in their own sense
they have found in them, in stead of faith nothing but doubting, diffidence and
infidelity, and for Gods love and favor, they have apprehended nothing in
their present feeling, but the wrathful anger of God, and his grievous
displeasure. Look upon the holy man Job who by Gods own testimony was the
iustest man upon earth, and highly in Gods love and favor, and you shall find
that sometimes he shows in his grievous afflictions no sign of faith, but
gross doubting and in outward appearance utter despair of Gods mercy and love,
for he curses the day of his nativity, and wishes that he had never been
borne, he complains that God was his enemy, and had made him as a mark
whereat he shot venimed arrows, that Gods terrors did fight against him, and
that he did hide his loving countenance from him. So the Prophet David a man
according to Gods own heart shows plainly that sometime he has no sense and
feeling of the graces of Gods spirit in him, Psalm. 51.10.
as when he desires the Lord to create in him a clean heart and to renew a
right spirit within him, to restore him to the joy of his salvation and to
stablish him with his free spirit; and sometimes he apprehends in his present
sense and feeling, in stead of Gods love and favor, nothing but his wrath and
displeasure, and therefore complains as one rejected and forsaken of God. So
Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, Psalm. 22.1. and 77.7.
and 88.14.
and art so far from my health, and from the words of my roaring. 2. O my God
I cry by day but thou hear not and in the night and have no audience. And
Psalm. 77.7. he thus complains, will the Lord absent himself for ever? and
will he show no more favor? 8. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his
promise fail for evermore? 9. has God forgotten to be merfull? has he shut
up his tender mercies in displeasure? 10. And I said this is my death, etc. So
Psalm. 88.14. Lord why do thou reject my soul and hidest thy face from me?
15. I am afflicted and at the point of death, from my youth I suffer thy
terrors doubting of my life. 16. Thine indignations go over me and thy fear
has cut me off. The Prophet Jeremy likewise being grievously afflicted in body
and mind, Ier. 20.14.15.
was for a time deprived of the sense of Gods love and favor, apprehending
nothing but present misery, and in stead of faith, affiance in God, peace of
conscience, and other sanctifying graces, he bewraieth his doubting, diffidence
and impatiencie, cursing the day of his birth, and even the man that brought
first news hereof to his father, and wishing that his mother had been his
grave, or her womb a perpetual conception. As appears Ierem. 20.14.15. etc.
The like may be said of the Apostle Peter, for where I pray you was the sense
and feeling of his faith, affiance in God, zeal of his glory, love, fear,
and other sanctifying graces, when as he shamefully denied his master, yea
forswore him with bitter cursing? and yet we must either grant that Peter at
this time was endued with a lively faith, or else that the prayer of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ was not effectual, for he had prayed for him that
his faith might not fail, as appears Luke 22.32. Luke 22.32.
But what should I insist in the examples of these the servants of God, seeing
the alone example of Christ himself is sufficient to clear this point, for
though he were the only begotten and best beloved Son of his heavenly
father yet in his own sense and feeling, he apprehended nothing but Gods
wrath and grievous displeasure, and lamentably complains as a man abandoned
and cast out of all love and favor: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me, which words show both Christ's affiance in God and his present
apprehension in his sense and feeling, for in respect of his affiance and trust
in God he calls him still his God, in respect of his sense and feeling he
complains that he is forsaken. Whereby it is manifest that a man may be
dearly beloved of God, and yet for a time apprehend nothing but his wrath and
displeasure, that he may have faith and affiance in God, yet at the same time
be deprived of all sense and feeling of his love and favor. And therefore when
we are excercised in the combat of tentations, let not satan persuade us
that we are utterly deprived of the love and favor of God, because through the
violence of his tentations and greeuousnesse of our afflictions we do not
apprehend it, nor that we are destitute of faith and all other spiritual
graces because we do not sensibly discern them in our feeling, for this has
been the state of the dear children of God from the beginning of the world
and shall be to the end thereof.

CHAP. XLV. Of the means whereby our faith may be strengthened and increased.
That all who are endued with true faith, use the means whereby it may be
increased.
and also answer Satan's tentations whereby he labors to persuade us that
we are destitute thereof. The second means whereby we may arm our selves
against Satan and his suggestions, is that we most earnestly labor and
endeavor after we have found that we have some faith to increase therein, and
grow up from says to says until we come to that fullness of persuasion which
will bring such peace of conscience as Satan and all his tentations shall not
be able to disturb. Otherwise we shall be continually subject to fears and
doubtings, and exceedingly shaken with Satan's tentations, and in truth not
without cause if we stand still at a state, for howsoever Satan and all the
power of hell cannot prevail against the least measure of true faith to quench
and utterly to destroy it, yet this will bring no sound comfort unto those
which rest contented with this little quantity and never labor after
increase, because this is a shrewd presumption that their faith is false and
counterfaite, for as soon as the seed of true faith is sown in us, and has
taken root it sprooteth up, and till it come to full ripeness, in which
respect our Savior co^pareth it to agraine of mustard seed, which though it be
one of the least seeds of the garden, yet it grows to a great tree. Neither
in truth is it possible that any who have tasted of true faith, and of those
inestimable benefits which it assures us of, should content themselves with a
small pittance and never labor after more, for who is it that having tasted and
eaten a little bit of some delitious meat, does not with a hungring appetite
desire more till he be filled and satisfied, who is it that has any weak
title and assurance of some goodly inheritance, does not earnestly desire and
use all good and lawful means whereby his title may be strengthened and his
assurance confirmed? and can we think that any have truly tasted of faith
and the excellent benefits which accompany it, as namely assurance of Gods
love, and the remission of our sins, peace of conscience, joy in the holy
Ghost, who content themselves with a little modicum and never hunger after
more? or can we imagine that we have any small title or true assurance of
those unspeakable joys of Gods kingdom, and that vnluable patrimony of
everlasting glory, if we never use means to confirm our title and strengthen
our assurance? Surely it is impossible, and therefore if we would have any
sound comfort and peace of conscience, if we would ever attain to a certain
persuasion that we have true faith indeed, let us use most carefully and
diligently all good means, whereby we may strengthen and confirm our faith,
until it grow from a small seed to a great tree, which will bring forth
plentiful fruits of godliness and righteousness, and until it wax of a
small spark unto a great flame which will thoroughly warm our hearts with true
comfort, which are naturally frozen with fear and doubting, for howsoever
Satan cannot quench the least spark of lively faith, yet he will so cover it
with the ashes of his tentations that we shall neither discern the light nor
feel the heat thereof.

The 1. means to increase faith, is the diligent hearing Gods word.
the first tending to the increasing and strengthening of our faith, the other
serving to preserve us from doubting and desperation. The means to strengthen
and increase our faith are diverse, the first is the frequent and attentive
hearing of Gods word, for as this is the ordinary means whereby faith is
begotten and begun in us, so is it a chief means to strengthen and confirm
it; as it is that lively seed from which faith does spring, so is it that
heavenly dew whereby it is watered and increased from a little plant to a
great tree: and therefore as it is not sufficient for a fruitful harvest, that
the blade or branch should sproute up unless it be watered continually with
sweet dew and showers from heaven, and so preserved from dying and withering,
so if ever we mean to reap the ripe fruits of faith to our everlasting
comfort, we must be careful that not only it take rooting, and bring forth
a blade of an outward profession, but also that it may be watered with this
heavenly dew of Gods word, otherwise when the sun of affliction and
persecution arises it will die and wither.

The 2. means meditation in Gods word.
The second means to strengthen our faith is diligently to read and mediate in
Gods word especially the Gospel, wherein is contained those sweet and
gracious promises which are made in definitely unto all who repent of their
sins, and believe in Jesus Christ, resting and relying upon him alone for their
salvation. And to this purpose our Savior wills the Jews to search the
Scriptures, Ioh, 5.39.
because they are they which testify of him. Ioh. 5.39. And hereby David says
that he was comforted in his troubles and even quickened when he was dead,
Psalm. 119.50. Psalm. 119.50.


The 3. means holy conferece
The third means is holy conference with our godly brethren; for hereby those
which are falling are confirmed and the weary hands and weak knees
strengthened as Eliphas speaks Job. 43.4. Job. 4.3.4.
And those who are weak in faith are comforted and established with the godly
instructions, profitable exhortations, and sweet consolations of those who are
more strong; and therefore the Apostle Paul exhorts those who had attained
unto agreat measure of faith that they admit such as were weak into their
company to be made partakers of their Christian conferences to the end that
hereby they might be more and more strengthened and confirmed. Romans 14.1. Romans
14.1.


The 4. means the use of the sacraments.
The fourth means is the holy use of the sacraments; for the Lord has added
them as seals to the handwriting of his covenant of grace to confirm our
faith in the full assurance of his promises, and to take away all doubting. For
whereas the weak conscience might make some scruple in respect that the
promises of the gospel in the preaching of the word are delivered indefinitely
and after a general manner, in the use of the sacraments they are assured unto
them particularly and as it were by name, and that not after some obscure and
hidden manner, but most familiarly by such common signs are are subject to the
senses and within the reach of the shallowest capacity.

The 5. means good works.
A fifth means to confirm our faith is to be continually conversant in good
works, and to bring forth the fruits of holy obedience, for hereby our faith
is exercised and by exercise strengthened and increased; whereas contrariwise
the neglect hereof does wound the conscience and so quench the lively heat of
faith that though it be not quite extinguished, yet it will not sensibly be
discerned. As therefore the strength of the body is increased by exercise and
for want thereof waxes faint and languisheth, and as the stomach is by
outward exercise of the body made more fit to perform his duty of
concoction; so our faith being exercised in good works is made more strong and
fit to perform his duty in applying Christ and the sweet promises of the
gospel unto us, and without this spiritual exercise it waxes faint and the
strength thereof abateth.

The 6. means fervent prayer
The last means to strengthen and increase our faith is continual and fervent
prayer, for faith is not in our own power but it is the free gift of God, as
the Apostle teaches us, Ephe. 2.8. neither can any man come unto our Savior
Christ by a lively faith except it be given him of the father, Ephe. 2.8.
as himself speaks. Ioh. 6.65.
Ioh. 6.65. And therefore when we see the small measure of our faith, we are
with the apostles to pray unto the Lord that he will increase it. Luke 17.5.
Luke 17.5. And when we perceive that it is grieuosly assaulted with doubting
and infidelity, we are in feruencie of spirit to cry out with the father of
the possessed child: Lord I believe help my unbelief. Mark. Mark. 9.24.
9.24. And then we may be assured that the Lord will hear us and satisfy our
godly desires, making us to grow up from faith to faith, till at length we
attain unto such a fullness of persuasion, that we shall be able truly to
say with the Apostle; I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. as it is Romans To. 8.38.39.
8.38.39.

Of the means whereby we may be preserved from doubting and desperation.
which whosoever carefully and conscionably use, they shall assuredly find them
effectual for this purpose: Now we are to speak of those means whereby we
may be preserved from doubting and desperation, of which I shall not need to
speak much, seeing the most of these points are handled before.

The 1. means.
The first means to preserve us from desperation is to call continually unto our
remembrance that the promises of the gospel are general and indefinite,
excluding none how unworthy and sinful soever they be, if they do not
exclude themselves through their own infidelity; Mat. 11.28.
So Mat. 11.28. our Savior calls all humbled and repentant sinners without
exception, saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I
will ease you. Ioh. 3.16.
and Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he sent his only beloved son, that
as many as believe in him should not perish but have everlasting life. Mat. 9.13.
So Matthew. 9.13. our Savior says that he came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance; either then refuse the name of repentant sinner or
acknowledge that he came to save thee. and Ioh. 6.40. our savior says that it
is his fathers will who sent him that every man who believes in him should
have everlasting l fe. Seeing therefore God takes no exception, nor excludes
any let us not exclude our selves through our want of faith and infidelity.

The 2. means
Secondly we are to consider that the Lord has not only propounded his
gracious promises unto us, but also has commanded us to believe them. Mark.
1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.23.
So Mark. 1.15. Repent and believe the gospel. and 1. Ioh. 3.23. This then is
his commandment, that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ etc.
now to believe in Christ is not only to believe that he is a savior, for this
eue^ the devils believe also, but to believe that he is our savior and to rest
wholly upon him for our salvation, and to say with the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.20.
Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith in the son of God, who has loved me and
given himself for me. And to the end that we may be armed against doubting,
and enabled to perform this commandment, it has pleased the Lord to add
unto his word his oath, Heb. 6.18.
that by two immutable things wherein it is impossible that God should lie we
should have strong consolation, as the apostle speaks, Heb. 6.18. Yea, he
has also unto his word and handwriting annexed his Sacraments as seals, that
there might be no place left for doubting. Seeing therefore the Lord has
expressly commanded us to believe, and used al means to enable us to perform
his commandment, let us not now dispute the question whether we are worthy to
believe or no, or whether such grievous sinners are bound to this duty, but
setting all excuses aside let us believe in obedience to Gods commandment.

The 3. means.
Thirdly, we must not always set before us the innumerable multitude and huge
weight of our sins, but withal call to our remembrance the infinite mercies of
God and merits of Christ, who has offered unto his father a propitiatory
sacrifice and full satisfaction for all our sins, 1. John. 2.2.
and not for ours only but for the sins of all the world, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
1. Ioh. 2.2. Seeing therefore our debt how great soever it be is already
discharged; and our sins how outrageous soever* they be, are fully punished
long ago in our Savior Christ, and seeing God himself who has received this
debt and taken this punishment, is of infinite justice and mercy, why should we
now despair of pardon? Nay, why should we not most certainly be assured that
the roull and reckoning of our sins how long soever it be, is quite blotted out
and cancelled, so as they shall never again be laid to our charge.

The 4. means to consider that desperation is a most heinous sin. 1. Ioh. 5.10.
we are to consider that desperation it self is a most heinous and outrageous
sin, for it causes men to deny Gods truth in his promises and to account
him a liar, as the Apostle plainly speaks, 1. Ioh. 5.10. He that believes
not God has made him a liar, because he believed not the record, that God
witnessed of that his Son, it makes them to deny the infinitenes of his
mercies as being ouermatched with the multitude of their sins, and the
sufficiency of Christ's merits, as though they were not a full satisfaction
for their horrible offenses: yea it makes them to deny Gods justice in
thinking that he will punish that sin again in them, which has already
been punished in Christ, and exact that debt which he has already discharged.
Now to deny the truth, mercy, and justice of God is to deny God himself, for
his attributes are his essence, the truth of God is the true God, the mercy of
God is the merciful God, and the justice of God is the just God. So that he
who despaireth falls into the most horrible and capital sin of Atheism
even the highest degree of wickedness, and therefore more hainously offends
God by this sin alone, then by all his other sins whatsoever, though they
appear never so monstrous and abominable in his own eyes. For example the
sin of Cain in despairing of Gods mercy, was far more horrible then his
monstrous sin which he committed in murdering his own brother: the sin of
Judas in despairing of Gods mercy, was without comparison greater then his
sin in betraying his Lord and master, in a word to commit Idolatry,
blasphemy, murder, adultery, and such like are heinous sins, but utterly to
despair of Gods mercy is greater then they all. Though then we have committed
other horrible wickedness against the Lord, yet in no case let us despair, for
this were to add sin unto sin, and to clogg our consciences more with the
last then with all the former, til with their intolerable weight they press
us down unto hell; you would count him worse then madd who being oppressed with
a heavy burden should (in stead of using other means to ease himself) add
thereunto a double or treble weight, till he were pressed down groueling unto
the earth; but assuredly such and greater madness it is when we feel our
consciences clogged with a heavy burden of sin, in stead of seeking ease in
coming to Christ by a lively faith, to fall into utter desperation and thereby
to add a treble weight to the already intolerable burden of sin, which
lies upon our consciences until they be pressed down into the torments of
hell. Every one would esteem him a most desperate wretch, who having offended
such a gracious Prince, as would most surely forgive him upon his unfeigned
sorrow for his fault, should in stead of humbling himself and asking pardon
desperately refuse his Princes mercy, and with all deny his truth in his
promises his mercy, justice, and even disauow him for being a lawful Prince.
But such and much more wickedness do they desperately commit who having
offended God by their grievous sins, who is so gracious and merciful, that
he would most certainly forgive them upon their true repentance, in stead of
humbling themselves by unfeigned sorrow, do desperately refuse to be partakers
of his mercy, and not only so but deny the infinitenes of his mercy; justice,
truth in his promises, and consequently his godhead and being. And therefore
when (the weight of sin pressing us) Satan persuades us to despair of
mercy and forgiveness, let us in any case resist this tentation, and boldly say
unto the tempter; it is enough and too much that I have offended my gracious
God with my other sins, though I do not ad thereunto this sin which is
greater then all the rest, the weight of my other wickedness is already too
too heavy upon my conscience, and therefore far be it from me to load it
with a far more unsupportable burden; I have already too much dishonored my
good God by my horrible sins, and therefore I will in no case more dishonor
him, now then in committing all my other sins, by denying his mercy,
justice, truth, and even the godhead it self; for what were this but being
already in a burning fever to cast my self into the fire, or being gone over
the shoes in the filthy puddle of sin to plunge my self over head and
ears, and even to drown my self in the bottomless gulf of desperation?
nay rather now I will break of my sins by unfeigned repentance and turn unto
the Lord whom I have offended, assuring my self that his mercies are infinite,
and therefore he is ready to forgive, and the merits of Christ a full
satisfaction for all my sins though many and heinous, and therefore in him I
may bouldly challenge forgiveness as a thing of right appertayning to me.

And thus are we to resist Satan's tentations and though we be often foiled
yet to rise again, in no case suffering him to pluck out of our hand the
shield of faith, though he has disarmed us of the breast plate of
righteousness; for if once we be deprived of this part of this spiritual
armor we shall lie open to all his blows and thrusts, until we be wounded to
the very death.

Though the afflicted conscience abhors other sins yet it easily inclyneth
to desperation.
for howsoever feeling the heavy weight of their other sins they earnestly
desire to be freed from the^, howsoever being tormented with the grievous smart
of their other wickedness they hate and abhor it, yet they easily suffer
themselves to be plunged into desperation with every friuoulous tentation; and
quietly offer their hands to be manacled, and bound in these gives of hell
without resistance. But let all such stir up themselves, and gather their
oppressed spirits together, saying to their own consciences I hate and
detest from my heart my former wickedness, and shall I now entertain a sin
more horrible then all the rest; the burden of my other sins oppress me and
make me earnestly to desire ease, and shall I add a load far more
intolerable to my afflicted conscience? I am filled with shame and confusion
because by my former sins I have dishonored my gracious God? and shall I
continue more to dishonor him by doubting of and denying his mercy, justice,
and truth in his promises? I have heretofore with Judas betrayed my Savior
Christ unto the death, yea and with my sins I have whipped, mocked, and
crucified him, and now he having made full satisfaction for my sins, and
called me unto him that he may ease me of this intolerable burchen, should I
with Judas refuse to come desperately cast of al hope of mercy and become mine
own hangman? be it far from me, nay as I hate all other sin so let me
hate this above all the rest, as being more heinous then all the rest; as I
desire to be eased and freed from the heavy burden of other my wickedness,
so I will with all my power resist Satan when he seeks to load me with this
load of desperation as being far more intolerable; heretofore I have
dishonored God by my sins, but now I will give him glory in believing and
acknowledging his infinite mercy, goodness, justice, and truth in his
promises; and seeing by my sins I have crucified the Lord of life, I will
not ad hereunto this outrageous wickedness, to tra^ple his precious blood
under my filthy feet as a thing unholy and of no worth, neither will I
through my unbelief make it to be spilt in vain; but now with all care and
conscience I will gather it up as a most precious balm, and with the hand of
faith apply it to those greisly gashes, and deep wounds which sin has made
in my soul and conscience, and with this spiritual lauer I will wash my
poluted soul till it be thoroughly purged from all uncleanness. And seeing I
have deprived my soul of that inherent righteousness wherewith it was endued
by creation, now I will apply thereunto a far more excellent righteousness
by the hand of faith, even the righteousness of Jesus Christ God and man,
wherewith being adorned I may boldly offer my self into the presence of my
heavenly father and receive the blessing of everlasting happiness.

That desperation is a sin most pernicious.
so also it is unto our selves most pernicious, for whereas other sins make
us worthy of the torments of hell and eternal condemnation, this as it above
all the rest intitleth us unto the right of this hellish inheritance, so also it
enters us into the most certain and present possession thereof even whilst
we live upon the earth. For what are the torments of a despairing conscience
but the flashings of hell fire? and what are their blasphemies which they utter
against God, and their impatient cursinges of their accursed selves, but the
yelling cries of damned souls? And therefore if we would not cast our selves
into the jaws of hell, if we would not whilst we live begin to die an
everlasting death, let us in no case suffer our selves to be plunged with the
violence of Satan's tentations into this bottomless pit of utter desperation.

That we must hope against hope and believe against belief
seeing I am forcibly pressed into it with the intolerable weight of my
sins, and with the sense and apprehention of Gods fearful wrath and
displeasure, feeling no comfort nor assurance that ever I shall receive pardon?
to which I answer that yet in no case they are to despair, but to hope
against hope, and to believe against belief, and as it were from the bottom
of hell to cast up the eye of faith into heaven, laying hold of Gods mercies,
and Christ's merits; knowing that faith is of things not seen neither with the
bodily eye, nor with the eye of reason, and that the Lord seems often to hate
those whom in truth he dearly loves. For so long as we believe Gods
promises and have some hope that our sins are either pardoned or at least
pardonable there is certain comfort; but when as all hope is cast of and that
we reject all Gods promises through unbelief and fall into utter desperation,
there nothing remains but most certain destruction; when sin lies upon
us, it no question exceedingly vexes us with the torments of conscience, but
if we despair we presently in stead of obtaining ease cast our selves into the
torments of hell; the panges of conscience caused by the sense of the heavy
burden of sin, are a good means to bring us to Christ, that we may be eased
of this burden; but despair stays us in the midway, and utterly debarreth
us from ever being partakers of Christ or any of his benefits. And therefore
though the burden of sin be never so irksome and grievous, yet let us be
contented to bear it till we come unto Christ for ease, let us beware in any
case that we do not faint through impatiencie and want of hope and so fall
into desperation, for so shall we but increase the weight of our sins in
exceeding measure, which already we think an intolerable burden, and
consequently our horror of conscience; so shall we bring our selves from a
doubtful or rather hopeful state, to most certain and present destruction, so
shall we change our temporary grief for that which is everlasting, and the
terrors of conscience for the torments of hell; so shall that which we most
fear and flee, presently overtake and ouerwhelme us; for whilst in an
horrible manner we fear the pains of hell, we cast our selves into them by
falling into utter desperation; as if a man for fear of death should cut his
own throat, or for fear of hanging should drink some deadly poison, whereby
they are presently tormented with that which they fearfully abhorred, and
choose rather to be oppressed with the evil they feared, then any longer to
endure the fear it self. Which howsoever it may carry some show of reason in
undergoing a momentany and temporary death, wherein oftentimes the fear is
more intolerable then the pain feared; yet it is extreme madness to plunge
a man's self body and soul into the eternal torments of hell, rather then for
a time to endure the horror thereof, seeing this horror and fear is but a
small fleabiting in respect of those hellish punishments, and as it were but a
smoke of that eternal fire.

CHAP. XLVI. Satan's tentations concerning smalnesse, and weakness of faith
answered.
There is no such perfect faith, which is not assaulted with doubting.
whereby Satan labors to persuade the afflicted Christians that they have no
faith, wherewith if he cannot prevail, in the next place he will tell them
that their faith is so small if it be any at all, so overwhelmed with doubting,
so unfruitful, and so mixed with imperfections, that it will not be effectual
and sufficient for their salvation. Which tentation if we would withstand, we
must not dream or imagine that to have a true faith, is to have a perfect
faith which is never assaulted with doubting nor shaken with any tentations,
for there is no such faith to be found in any of Gods children, seeing the most
perfect are partly flesh and partly spirit, and as the fruit of the spirit is
faith and affiance in God, so the fruit of the flesh is doubting and
infidelity, and these continually assault and fight one against another.

That there are diverse degrees of faith in Gods children.
Again we are to know that there are diverse degrees of true faith, and that
all the children of God have it not in the like measure: for some have attained
to a strong and great measure of faith, as those who are endued with much
knowledge, and firmly assent unto that which they know, and are most
certainly persuaded of their salvation in Christ, and that all the gracious
promises of the gospel do belong unto them, so as nothing in the world shall be
able to separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord;
others are weak and endued with a small measure of faith, as those who have
little knowledge, weak assent and persuasion, being yet but babes in Christ,
and growing up from faith to faith, Romans 1.17.
as the Apostle speaks Romans 1.17. till at length they attain to that
fullness of persuasion, of which mention is made, Heb. 10.22.
Heb. 10.22. Now we are to hold first that this small and weak measure of
faith is notwithstanding a true faith, and therefore sufficient for the
salvation of those who are endued therewith, neither are the promises of the
gospel made to those only who have a strong faith, but to those who have a
true faith; Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him he gave to them prerogative to
be the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12.
even to them that believe in his name. And John 3.18. He that believes shall be
saved, Ioh. 3.18.
in which and such like places there is no measure of faith propounded, but the
promises are made indefinitely to all that believe, how small and weak soever
their faith be in respect of the quantity and apprehension, so that in regard
of the quality it be true and lively.

That a weak and small faith may be a true and lively faith.
it is manifest both by reason and also plain testimonies of the Scripture;
for the first: diversity of degrees in quantity of a thing does not take away
and annihilate the existence and true being thereof; for example a small drop of
water is as well and truly water as the whole Ocean, a little spark is true
fire both in respect of substance and quality, as well as a mighty flame, a
little man is as truly a man as a great Giant: and so a little faith is as well
a true faith as a full persuasion; neither does the small quantity take away
the being, nature, and truth thereof. Secondly, this also manifestly appears
by the Scriptures, whereas many are said to have faith and to believe, who
hearing the doctrine of Christ and seeing his miracles believed, and
acknowledged him to be the true Messiah and their Savior, though at the same
time they had attained to an exceeding small measure of knowledge, and were
ignorant of many of the chief principles of Christian religion, because they
nourished not this their ignorance, but resolved to use all those good means
of increasing in knowledge which God has ordained for this purpose. And thus
many of the Samaritanes are said to have believed for the saying of the woman
and because of his own word. Ioh. 4.39.41. Thus a certain ruler and all his
household are said to have believed, Ioh. 4.39.41 ver. 52.
when they saw the miracle which our Savior wrought in curing the rulers
son of his fever only with his word, ver. 52. Yea the apostles themselves
whose faith our savior Christ co^pareth to a firm rock against which the
gates of hell should never prevail, were notwithstanding endued with weak and
small measure of faith, before the ascension of our Savior, and sending of the
holy ghost. For they were ignorant even of the maine principles of christian
religion, and of diverse articles of faith, and consequently could not believe,
assent, or be persuaded of those things which they did not understand. For
example howsoever they knew and acknowledged that our Savior Christ was the
promised Messiah, Mat. 16.18.
yet they were ignorant that he should redeem mankind by his death; for when
he foretold that he should be delivered into the hands of the Gentiles to be
crucified, it is said that they understood none of those things. Mat. 20.18.
Luke 9.45.
Mat. 20.18. Luke 9.45.. So also they knew not that being dead he should rise
again the third day as the Evangelist shows Mar. 9.32. Mar. 9.32.
And when they heard thereof by the women they thought it a fained thing as it
is Luke 24.11. Luke 24.11. Ioh. 13.38. and 14.5. Acts 1.6. Mar. 10.37.
They were ignorant also of his ascension as appears. Ioh. 13.36. and 14.5.
and of his kingdom, for they dreamed of an earthly kingdom, and of worldly
preferments which they were to have by him, as we may see. Act. 1.6. Mar.
10.37. By all which it plainly appears that though the Apostles were endued
with a true faith, yet their faith was exceeding weak and small, as also it is
most evident in that reprehention used by our savior when they were in some
appearance of danger. Mat. 8.26.
Matthew. 8.26. wherefore are ye fearful o ye of little faith.

That all power of hell cannot prevail against the smallest measure of true
faith. Phil. 3.12.
or that we shall easily be overcome of every tentation and never persevere
unto the end that we may be saved; seeing a weak and small faith may be a
true faith, against which how weak in it self soever it be, yet the gates of
hell shall never prevail against it, for the weaker our faith is, the stronger
shall we find Gods power in sustayning and preserving us, the more that Satan
labors to winnow us in the sieve of his tentations, the more effectually will
our Savior Christ make intercession for us that our faith fail not; the
feebler our faith is in apprehending Christ, the more powerful will his spirit
be in apprehending us and in joining us inseparably in a holy communion with
him. But yet we must not content our selves with a small and weak measure of
faith, but earnestly labor after more perfection, and to grow from faith to
faith, till we attain unto fullness of persuasion, That we must not content
our selves with a small measure of faith
Otherwise we shall make it manifest that we deceive our selves with a show and
shadow of faith, and that as yet we have no true faith indeed, which as it
resembles the grain of mustard seed in respect of the smalnes at the
beginning thereof, so also in the growth and increase, and therefore if ever we
would attain unto peace of conscience, and assurance that we are endued with
a true and lively faith, we must earnestly labor in the use of those means
ordained of God for the increase of faith, and fervently pray unto God that he
will not only sow the seed of faith in our hearts, but also that he will so
water it with the dew of his grace and holy spirit that it may grow from a
small seed to a great tree, and that he will never cease blowing this smoking
flax with the breath of the same his holy spirit, till it increase from a
little spark to a mighty flame, whereby our hearts being warmed with true
comfort, may with fervent zeal seek to glorify his holy name by our
christian and holy conversation.

That the least faith is acceptable to God. Mat. 12.20.
nor us in regard of it, for he will not break the bruised reed nor quench the
smoking flax till he bring forth judgment unto victory, as himself has
spoken. Mat. 12.20. He will not contemn the least measure of his own grace
which he has bestowed upon us; for though it be in never so small a quantity
yet if it be true it is his own gift, and his gifts are without repentance,
neither does he ever contemn that which himself has given, nor take it away
after it is once bestowed; nay rather to him that has shall be given until
he have abundance, Mat. 25.29.
he that has received 5. talents shall receive 5. more, yea and he that has
but one if he do not hide it, but use it to his masters glory shall be
accepted and have his talent doubled. We read in the scriptures that Christ
reproved some for their small faith, but yet we never read nor heard that he
rejected and cast of any, though their faith were never so weak if it were
true, no not him who cried out in the sense of his own weakness; Lord I
believe, help thou my unbelief. Mar. 9.24.
And therefore if with him we find a true faith in us, at least in some
measure, and though it be exceedingly mingled with doubting and assaulted with
infidelity, yet if we can with this man earnestly pray the Lord to help our
unbelief, and with the Apostles heartily cry out: O Lord increase my faith,
the Lord will accept of our hearty desire, and grant our request which is made
by his own spirit in us, and that according unto his own will.

That faith does not justify us as it is a work or faculty in us, but as an
instrument which applies Christ unto us.
and worthiness, (for what were this but to embrace again the doctrine of the
papists which we have rejected, and to seek for justification in our selves,
and for our own merits and worthiness?) but as an instrument whereby we lay
hold of, and apply unto our selves Christ Jesus with his righteousness and
merits, by which only we appear just before God; now a weak faith as truly
though not so powerfully does apprehend and apply Christ Jesus and all his
merits and obedience as a stronger faith, even as a small and weak hand if it
be able to reach up the meat to the mouth, does as well perform its duty for
the nourishment of the body as one of greater strength; because it is not the
strength of the hand but the goodness of the meat which nourishes the body:
So a weak faith laying hold of Christ and applying him and his benefits, to
the believer, is sufficient to nourish him to everlasting life as well as a
stronger, because it is not the worthiness or excellency of the instrument, but
of Christ which it apprehends that is effectual for our justification and
eternal salvation. So in like manner as a small and weak hand is able to receive
an alms as a stronger and greater, and as a little eye does see the whole body
of sun, or some great mountain as well as a bigger: so our faith though
weak and small, does apprehend Christ as truly and effectually for the
salvation of the believer, as the greatest and most strong, our Savior Christ
compares himself to the brazen Serpent, and the believing Christian stong
with the stinge of sin to the Israelites which did behold it to the end they
might be cured: Ioh. 3.14.
now we know that all of them were not a like sharp sighted, but some were
poreblind, some bleare eyed, some saw it but exceeding weakly and dimly, but
yet notwithstanding as many as looked on it were cured and healed, though they
were never so weak sighted; so whosoever being stong with sin do look upon
Christ with the eye of faith, resting upon him alone for their salvation,
though they be never so weak sighted, yet they shall be restored to health and
be eternally saved, because it is not in their sight but in the object thereof
Christ Jesus to justify before God, and to purchase for them eternal
salvation.

CHAP. XLVII. Other tentations concerning faith answered.
Satan's tentation concerning the certainty and constancy of faith answeved.
which he groundeth upon the small quantity and weakness of our faith:
besides which he suggesteth diverse others, as first that true justifying faith
is a firm, certain and constant persuasion, whereas ours if we have any at
all is weak and feeble, instable, inconstant and wavering, and that it is not
only continually assaulted but also often foiled and overcome with doubting
and infidelity, and therefore that it is but a shadow of faith, and not true
faith indeed. The which tentation we may easily answer if we but remember
that which already has been delivered; namely that the best cannot attain in
this life unto such perfection of faith as is quite freed from all infirmities
and corruption, that there is diverse degrees of true justifying faith, some
weaker, some stronger, some in greater, and some in smaller quantity, some
like smooking flax, and a grain of mustard seed, and some like a bright
burning flame which gives light, and the lively heat of true comfort to those
who are endued therewith, and of as high growth as the greatest tree in the
garden, and yet all true faith and sufsicient for salvation. That so long as
we continue in this life our knowledge is but imperfect and vayled with much
darkness and ignorance, for we know but in part, as even the apostle speaks
in his own person, 1. Cor. 13.12.
1. Cor. 13.12. And therefore our assent and persuasion must needs be
imperfect, and but in part, and often assaulted with much doubting: that
howsoever faith and doubting are opposed in their own nature, yet
notwithstanding they may be together in the same subject in respect of diverse
parts. For we are partly flesh and partly spirit, and these two with their
several fruits do continually fight and strive one against the other, and
sometimes the flesh, sometimes the spirit with their several fruits get the
upper hand, in the mean time both retaining their own nature and properties,
howsoever they do not so evidently appear nor so powerfully work their
several actions, when the adverse part prevails, and has put them to the
foil; for example, faith which is a fruit of the spirit, is continually
assaulted by doubting, which is a fruit of the flesh, and proceeds from the
root of infidelity, and sometime faith prevails and sometime it receives
the foil, but yet at the same time howsoever we cannot sensibly discern it,
nor the actions thereof, yet it retains it own nature and properties, neither
is it deprived of his firmness, constancy and certainty howsoever they be
for a time covered and hid out of our sight, like the fire under the ashes, or
the Sun under a cloud, as before I have said.

Though therefore we find in us much inconstancy and doubting, yet let not
Satan persuade us that these are of the nature and properties of our faith,
and that therefore our faith is not true but temporary false and counterfaite,
for this inconstancy and doubting, proceeds not from faith and from the
spiritual and regenerate part, but from the flesh and the part unregenerate;
and therefore howsoever it is assaulted, and sometimes foiled by them, yet in
it own nature it is true certain and constant.

Satan's tentation grounded on the strong faith of some of Gods children
answered.
he will suggest that the Saints mentioned in the Scriptures, had most certain
and strong faith and in exceeding great measure, that they brought forth
continually most notable fruits thereof, and were not subject to such
infirmities and doubting as we feel in our selves. To which we are to
answer, that this tentation is full of untruth, and has no sound part in it:
for first we are to assure our selves that they fell into manifold doubtings
and were subject unto innumerable infirmities and corruptions, which are not
specified in the book of God: neither was it fit or expedient that it should
be a register of all humane infirmities, and of their manifold falls, but only
that some should be recorded for our warning, that we might more warily watch
over our selves, least we should fall into the like sins, and for our
comfort also when we are fallen, in that our case is common with Gods dearest
children; in which respect the Scriptures is not wanting Look upon Abraham the
father of the faithful whose faith was so strong that he above hope believed
under hope, and you shall see that his faith notwithstanding was sometimes
shaken with diffidence and doubting, as when distrusting Gods gracious
promises made unto him, and not resting upon his almighty power, he was
content to take unto him Hagar his maid and commit sin with her, that so by
his own devise he might make good Gods promise and obtain the blessed seed,
as though God could not perform that which he had spoken, unless he helped
him by such unlawful means. So where was the strength and constancy of
Moses faith when he dishonored God before the people in not believing his
word, and by showing his impatiencie. Numb. 20.10.11. where was the strength
and constancy of David's faith, number. 20.10 11.
when he complains that he was forsaken, that God had failed in his
promises, that he had forgotten to be merciful and had shut up his tender
mercies in displeasure? Psalm. 22.1. and 77.8.9. Or of Jobs faith when he cursed
the day of his birth and accounted God his enemy, Psalm. 22.1. and 77.8.9.
who had set him up as a mark against which he shot poisoned arrows? or of
Jeremy when he likewise wished that he had never been borne and bewraieth great
impatiency. Iere. 20.
Ier. 20. Or of Jonas when he rebelled against Gods commandment and fled from
his presence, or when after his miraculous delivery, he murmured and uttered
impatient speeches even against God himself for the loss of a poor gourd
which kept him from the heat of the sun; and when the Lord mercifully and
mildly reproved him saying, do thou well to be angry for the gourd, he
stubbornely answered: I do well to be angry unto the death. Ion. 4.9.
Ion. 4.9. Or of the Apostles themselves when they fled away and forsook their
Lord and master Jesus Christ for fear of worldly punishment, and when after
his death they would not believe the women reporting that he was risen again,
until their own eyes had seen them? Lastly, though it be evident that diverse
of the Saints mentioned in the Scriptures had a far greater measure of faith,
and brought forth much more plentiful fruits then we can discern in our
selves, yet this is no good reason to prove that our weaker and smaller faith
is no faith, or ineffectual for our salvation, for this is an absurd
consequence, the Moon gives much less light then the Sun, therefore it
gives no light at all, one hand is far greater then another, therefore the
lesser is not a true hand, this man excels another in the use of reason, and
therefore the other is unreasonable, because the diverse degrees in the
quantity of things do not take away the truth of their being and existence so
long as they be of the same nature and quality. Besides as the holy ghost has
set down examples of most strong faith in some of Gods servants, so has he
made mention of some who have had but weak and little faith, to the end that
we should so labor to attain unto the highest degree as that in the mean
time we be not utterly discouraged with the lowest; for example as he has
remembered the faith of Abraham who believed above hope under hope, so he has
not forgotten his weak faith who cried I believe, Lord help thou mine
unbelief; as he has mentioned the faith of Job who grew to this resolution:
Though he kill me yet will I trust in him, so he has expressed also the faith
of Nicodemus, in knowledge weak and simple, and in practice and profession
cowardly and fearful, as he has set down the strong faith of Paul, who
grew to this fullness of persuasion that nothing should be able to separate him
from the love of God in Jesus Christ, so he has not left out the little and
weak says of Thomas who would not believe further then he saw and felt. Yea
the Lord in his word has revealed unto us the diverse degrees of faith in the
same men in respect of diverse times; That the scriptures set forth unto us the
diverse degrees of faith in the same believer
at one time like a grain of mustard seed, at another time like a great tree,
at one time like a little smoke, and soon after bursting out into a great
flame, now like a weak reed wavering and declyning with the smallest blast of
any trial, and within a while like an immovable rock which beats back
huge billows and even a whole sea of violent tentations; in a word it sets
out to our view as it were portrayed in a fresh and live picture the diverse ages
of a christian as he is in his conception and preparation to grace, and as he
is in his new birth and first conversion, as he is a babe, and as he grows
from his infancy to greater age and strength, till he come to ripe years and
to be a strong man in Christ. Besides it shows unto us his diverse relapses
through sin the sickness of the soul, and how oftentimes the spiritual
growth is hindered, and the strength of Gods graces abated and much weakened by
the cotidian ague of our corruptions and Satan's tentations, and also after
these fitts be driven away by virtue of Gods spirit, how we receive a greater
increase of grace and measure of strength, whereby we grow more in
christianity and godliness in a year then we did in two before. All which is
set down to this end that we should not make our infancy our (...) and full
growth, but labor to increase in grace till we become of babes strong men in
Christ; as also that finding our selves as weak as little infants we be not
utterly discouraged, for if we suck the breasts of our spiritual mother the
true church, and receive from her the milk and stronger meat of the word and
sacraments, we shall assuredly grow up from grace to grace, and strength to
strength, till of babes we become strong men in Jesus Christ, and that though
we have many great sickness of the soul, and relapses into sin whereby our
spiritual growth for a time is hindered, and our strength in Gods graces much
abated, yet if we often feed upon the comfortable food of Gods word and use
this spiritual physic prescribed by God himself we shall not only again
recover our former strength and health, but also find a great increase of Gods
graces in us.

That Satan cannot prevail against the weakest faith.
yet it is so exceeding small and weak, that with the violence of his
te^tations and huge mass of our own corruptions it will easily be ouerthrown
and turned into infidelity. To which we are to answer, that though hereby our
faith may be shrewdly shaken yet it can never be ouerturned, though it may be
covered with the ashes of our corruptions, yet it can never be utterly
quenched; though through our gretuous foyles and falls in the co^bate of
tentations, it may be as it were brought into a trance, so as we cannot
sensibly discern any action, motion or life of faith, yet the habit and grace
it self, after it is once given of God is never taken away, neither is it
possible that it should be quite destroyed by all the power of hell.

And this may appear by diverse reasons; first because faith is not of our
selves but the free gift of God, as it is Ephe. 2.8. Ephesians. 2.8.
And whatsoever sanctifyng and saving grace the Lord gives that he never
takes utterly away; for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance,
as the Apostle speaks. Romans 11.29.
Romans 11.29.

Secondly, whosoever truly believes, he is truly knit and united unto the
body of Christ and is made partaker of his holy spirit which as it begets
and begins all the sanctifying and saving graces in us, so also it
nourishes, strengthens and confirms them so as they can never utterly
fail, for whatsoever good work he begins that will he also perfect and
accomplish. Phil. 1.26.
Phil. 1.6.

Thirdly, whosoever truly believes he is truly justified, and whosoever is
justified is elected called and shall be glorified, for these inseparably go
together. Romans 8.30.
Romans 8.30. and consequently he that has true faith whereby he is justified
cannot fall away, seeing his justification is as certain as the eternal
decree of Gods election.

That God both can and will vphould the weakest believer.
God both can and will strengthen and confirm all those who are weak in
faith, till they attain unto the end of their faith even the salvation of
their souls, and therefore it is impossible that they which once truly
believe should fall away and be condemned. Concerning Gods power no man can
make any question seeing it is omnipotent and almighty, and for his will he
has fully revealed it both by his word and works, namely that he will not
take away that grace which he has once given, but rather increase it till it
be perfected and accomplished. Esa. 66.13. Gods love compared to the love of a
tender mother.
For the first the Lord says that he will comfort his Church and people, as
the woman comfort her child, Esa. 66.13. now we know that the mother does
not abandon her child, nor deprive him of that comfort which she can give him
because he is sick and weak, but rather the sicker and weaker he is, the more
is her care and diligence in releiuing him in his distress; when he is not
able to digest strong meat she provides for him comfortable food of light
disgestion, when he is so weak that he cannot go she carries him in her arms
or otherwise supporteth him, when he is so sick that he faleth down to the
ground in a swoune, she rayseth him up and never rests till she has
recovered life in him, is this love in a natural mother? then surely much more
shall we find in our heavenly father, Esa. 49.15.
for though a mother may forget the fruit of her womb, yet will the Lord never
forget us, as he has promised. Esa. 49.15. And therefore the greater our
weakness is in grace, and the more greiuous our sickness is through sin,
and the noisome humors of our corruptions the more carefully will he watch
over us, with the eye of his providence, and support us with his almighty power
in our greatest weakness, the more tenderly will he pity us, and in loving
compassion will provide for us, such comfortable food as will be fit to nourish
us and repair our decayed strength, when we cannot go he will with his
almighty hand vphould us, and when we fall into a dead trance he will not rest
till he has again revived and quickened us with his holy spirit. Moreover
our Savior has said, Math. 12.20
that he will not break the bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax. Matthew.
12.20. but he will support our weakness with his almighty power, so that
though with the reed we be borne down to the ground, with the boisterous
blastes of Satan's tentations, yet we shall be raised up again, Psalm. 37.24.
according to that Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall he shall not be cast off, for
the Lord puts under his hand, and he will blow upon us with the breath of
his holy spirit, till he turn our small smoke to a great flame which shall
never be quenched by all the malice of our spiritual enemies. So Matthew.
13.12. our Savior Christ has promissed, Math. 13.12
that whosoever has, to him it shall be given and he shall have abundance.
Neither does he limit or define any quantity less or more but indefinitely
promisseth abundant increase even unto the least, so far is he from taking
away that which he has once bestowed. And whereas we through our weakness
and frailenesse are easily cast down and fall away, and therefore have good
cause if we should only look upon our infirmities to doubt and despair of
perseverance, yet in respect of Gods omnipotent power, watchful providence,
and promissed assistance we may confirm our selves in faith, hope, and
certain assurance of continuing unto the end; for the Lord vpholdeth all that
are falling, and lifts up those who are already down, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 145.14. Psalm. 145.14
the power of God is manifested in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9.
his riches in our beggerlinesse, his mercy and goodness in our frailenesse,
and manifold corruptions, and with his holy spirit he helps our infirmities,
as it is Romans 8.26. To. 8.26.
We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort yet without sin* and
therefore he is able sufficiently to have compassion on them that are ignorant
and out of the way, because that he also was compassed with our infirmities,
and the apostle reasons. Heb. 4.15. and 5.2.
Heb. 4.15. and 5.2

The formen point illustrated by examples.
administration, and practice, that he will not deprive any of that sanctifying
grace which he has once bestowed, though the measure thereof be never so
small; neither can we observe either by our reading the whole book of God or
by our own experience that any man having received the least grain of true
faith has utterly been deprived of it, and rejected of God. Even the
disciples themselves when they were reproved for their little faith, were by
him strengthened and confirmed, so that all the power of hell could not
prevail against it, and though Satan indeauoured to sift them as wheat, yet
Christ's intercession was more mighty to defend them, then the devil to
destroy them, and his intercession a stronger propp to vphould them, then the
weight of Satan's tentations to overthrow and bring them to ruin; so he who
cried out I believe Lord help thou my unbelief, though his faith was weak yet
it perished not, but rather received a greater increase. Yea he rejected not
Thomas in his wilful doubting and obstinate incredulity, but offered all
occasions of confirming his weak faith, and never ceased till he had fully
assured him of his resurrection. In a word all the saints of God at one time
or other have had experience of this mercy, power, and goodness of God in
supporting their weakness, vphoulding them in their great infirmities, and in
raising them when they were fallen to the ground; and to this end our Savior
was anointed by Gods spirit unto the office of his mediation, that he should
preach the gospel unto the poor, heal the broken hearted, that he should
preach deliverance unto captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, and set
at liberty them that are bruised. Luke 4.18. Luke 4.18.
To this end he had familiar society with the frail and weak, with those
who had little faith, that he might increase it, and no faith, that he might
begett it, with publicanes and sinners and men full of infirmities; to this
purpose he calls such as thirst and hunger feeling their own emptiness of
grace, and earnestly desiring to be filled and satisfied, and such also as
labor and are heavy laden with the unsupportable weight of their corruptions
promising that he will ease them, lastly to this end he has ordained the
ministry of the word and administration of the sacraments, not only to beget
faith where it is not, but to nourish and increase it where it is weak and
feeble, and therefore though our faith be never so weak and small let not
Satan persuade us that therefore it shall be overthrown and turned into
infidelity, for the Lord has assured us both by his gracious promises in his
word and also by the performance thereof in his works from the beginning to
this day, that where he has given the least measure of faith or any other
sanctifying grace, there he will also increase, strengthen, and confirm it,
and where he has begun any good work there he will finish and perfect it,
notwithstanding our frail weakness, and the forcible violence of all our
spiritual enemies.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of our justification.
ANd so much concerning those tentations of Satan which he suggesteth to the
end that he may frustrate our effectual calling. Of the efficient cause of
our justification. Romans 8.30.
The next subordinate cause and means of our salvation is our justification,
for whomsoever the Lord effectually calls those also he justifies. as it is
Romans 8.30. In speaking whereof I will first show what it is, and afterward
answer such tentations of Satan as he suggesteth into our minds, to the end
that he may infringe the doctrine of justification, and make it vain and
unprofitable unto us.

For the first. Justification is an action orworke of the whole trinity the
father, son, and holy ghost, whereby God graciously and freely imputing unto
every faithful man the righteousness and obedience of Christ the mediator
does accept of him and pronounce him to be just and righteous, for the glory
of his name and salvation of the believer.

The efficie^t cause of our justification is God alone as appears by manifest
testimonies. Esa. 43.25. I, Esa. 43.25. Ezec. 16.8.
even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for my own sake and will not
remember thy sins. So Ezech. 16.8. The Lord thus speaks to his church and
people; I spread my skirts over thee and covered thy filthiness. 9. Then I
washed thee with water, yea I washed away thy blood from thee and anointed
thee with oil. 10. Romans 4.5. and 8.33. Psalm. 51.4.
I clothed thee with broydred work etc. whereby he signifies that he purged
it with the blood of Christ from all sin, and adorned it with the rich robe
of his righteousness. The Apostle likewise says that it is God who justifies
him who in himself was ungodly. Romans 4.5. and 8.33. It is God who justifies,
who shall condemn? The reason hereof is manifest because it is the Lord
against whom we have sinned, as David speaks Psalm. 51.4. And he alone is our
supreme judge who has authority to absolve or condemn us, and therefore he
only can give unto us the pardon and remission of our sins and accept of us
as just and righteous.

And this work is not peculiar unto any one person, but is commune to the
whole trinity. For God the father being fully satisfied by the full
satisfaction, righteousness, and obedience of Christ the son, applied unto
us by the holy spirit, does pardon and forgive us all our sins, and
pronounces and accepts of us as innocent, and endued with perfect
righteousness.

The motive or impulsive cause, which moved the Lord thus to justify us, was
not any thing in us or out of him self; but of his mere mercy, and free good
will wherewith he has loved us from the beginning, as it manifestly appears
Romans 3.24. Romans 3.24.
Where the Apostle says that we are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. and Tit. 3.5.7. Tit. 3.5.7.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth and renewing of the holy
ghost. 7. That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life.

The isntrumental causes are of two sorts: first on Gods part the word and the
sacraments, whereby the Lord offreth, conuaigheth, seals, and assures unto
us his mercy and grace, Christ Jesus with his merits, righteousness, and
obedience, the remission of our sins, and everlasting life.

Secondly on our part a true and lively faith, whereby we receive and apply
unto our selves the mercy of God, Christ Jesus and all his benefits, resting
upon him alone for our salvation.

The material cause.
his inhaerent holiness, his fulfilling of the law, his death, sacrifice, and
full satisfaction. So that we are not justified by the essential
righteousness of the godhead, nor by our own works joined with Christ's
merits, nor by any inhaerent righteousness infused of God through the merits
of Christ; or by any other thing in our selves or any other mere creature, but
by the alone righteousness of our mediator Jesus Christ God and man, which is
out of our selves and in Christ as the proper subject thereof, and not
belonging to us till by the spirit of God and a lively faith it be applied
unto us and so becomes ours.

Of the formal cause.
The formal cause of our justification is a reciprocal imputation or
transmutation of the sins of the believer unto Christ and of his
righteousness unto the believer: whereby it comes to pass that the
faithful man has not his sins imputed unto him, nor the punishment due unto
them inflicted on him, because Christ has taken upon him the guilt and
punishment, and by making full satisfaction unto his fathers justice, has
obtained the pardon and remission of al his sins. And also is clothed with
the glorious robe of Christ Jesus righteousness, and so appearing before God
both free from all sin and endued with perfect righteousness he is
justified, reconciled, and eternally saved. And of this imputed righteousness
the apostle speaks, Romans 4.5. Romans 4.5.
But to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. 6. Even as David declares the
blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works,
saying. 7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. 8. blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not sin. and 2.
Cor. 5.19. 2. Cor. 5.19.
For God was in Christ and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing
their sins unto them etc. 21. For he has made him to be sin for us which
knew no sin that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. And
the Apostle affirms 1. Cor. 1.30. That Jesus Christ is made unto us of God,
wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. So that now Christ's
righteousness is our righteousness, his obedience our obedience, his merits
our merits, as certainly, perfectly and effectually, even as if we our selves
had been most innocent fulfilled the law, or made full satisfaction to Gods
justice. By which it appears that in respect of our selves we are justified
freely of Gods mere mercy and grace, without any respect of our own
righteousness or worthiness; but yet through Christ and for his righteousness
and obedience imputed puted to us, Romans 3.23.24.
both which are signified by the Apostle Romans 3.23.24. where he said that all
in themselves are wretched sinners without difference, and thereby are deprived
of the glory of Gods kingdom, 24. and are justified freely of his grace,
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.

The final cause.
The final cause of our instification is two fold, the chief and principal is
the glory of God, for hereby the Lord has most notably manifested his infinite
justice and mercy, his justice in that he would rather punish our sins in his
only begotten Son, then he would suffer them to go unpunished; his mercy in
that for our sakes he spared not his best beloved Son, but gave him to
suffer death, yea the death of the cross, that by his one oblation he might
make full satisfaction for our sins, and purchase for us everlasting life;
and also in that he vouchsafes unto us the outward means of his word and
Sacraments, and the inward assistance of his holy spirit, whereby we are
united unto Christ and have a lively faith begotten in us, which apprehending
Christ his righteousness and merits we are justified, sanctified, and
eternally saved. And this end is signified by the Apostle Romans 3.24.25. where
he says that God has justified us freely by his grace, Rom 3.24. and 5.21.
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, to declare his righteousness
by the forgiveness of sins and might show himself just by justifying him
who is of the faith of Jesus. And cap. 5.21. he says, that as under the law
sin had reigned unto death, so now grace reigns by righteousness unto
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ephe. 2.5.6.7.
So Ephesians. 2.5.6.7. he affirms that God has quickened us in Christ who were
dead in our sins and has raised us up in him; that he might show in the ages
to come the exceeding riches of his grace through his kindness toward us in
Christ Jesus.

The inferior and subordinate end is that our salvation may hereby be firmly
assured unto us, for now our salvation is not in us but in the hands of God,
and it is grounded not on our own works and worthiness, but upon the
righteousness and obedience of Jesus Christ, which is a most certain and
firm foundation which will never fail us. And this the Apostle shows Romans
4.16. whereas he says, Romans 4.16.
that the coucnant of grace whereby we are assured of everlasting salvation is
made by faith, that it might come by grace, and the promise might be sure to
all the seed.

Of the parts of our justification.
The parts of our justification are two, the remission of our sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, for as in every natural man there is the
corruption, guilt, and punishment of sin, and the absence or privation of
holiness and righteousness, so in Christ we have a remedy for both: for the
first by his passion and suffering: for the other by his actual obedience and
perfect fulfilling of the law. And this is manifest Romans 4.6.7. where the
Apostle distinctly makes mention, Romans 4.6.7.
of the righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed without works, and of the
forgiveness, covering and not imputing of sin. That Christ's actual
obedience, whereby he fulfilled the law is imputed vnted unto us.
Neither was it sufficient for the obtaining of everlasting life and
happiness, that our mediator should by his death make full satisfaction for
our sins, both of commission and also omission, but also that he should cloth
us with his active obedience, whereby we might appear perfectly righteous
before God.

The truth hereof may further appear, if we consider first that our Savior
Christ was not bound to fulfill the law for himself, because he was from the
first moment of his conception assumed into the hypostaticall and personal
union with the second person in Trinity, and consequently was not only man
but God also, and therefore not bound to any law, neither needing any legal
righteousness being already endued with a far more excellent righteousness
even the righteousness of God. So that either our Savior performed obedience
to the law to no purpose, or else to this end that he might impute it unto us,
and thereby indue us with such a most perfect and everlasting righteousness as
might give unto us the right of eternal life.

Secondly, if only our sins were pardoned and we not not made partakers of
Christ's active righteousness, our imputed righteousness should not excel the
righteousness of Adam before his fall, for he neither committed sin of
omission nor commission till he transgressed Gods commandment in eating of
the forbidden fruit; but we are made partakers of a more excellent
righteousness by faith, then we lost in Adam, even the righteousness of God
by the faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.22.
as the Apostle speaks Romans 3.22. which consists not only in the absence
of evil and sin, but in the prefence also of actual holiness and
righteousness.

Thirdly and lastly (because it is my purpose only to touch this point by the
way as not so properly belonging to this treatise) we are united unto Christ
Jesus, and he is become our head and we his members, by reason of which union
as he communicates himself unto us, so also that which belongs unto him as
he is our mediator, and consequently not only his passive obedience whereby
he has made full satisfaction for our sins, but also his actual
righteousness whereby he perfectly fulfilled the law.

And thus it appears that our justification consists of two parts, the
first the remission of our sins for the full satisfaction of Christ by his
death and sufferings, the other the imputation of his habitual and active
righteousness.

The remission of sins is the first part of justification, whereby God
forgiueth for the death and full satisfaction of Christ, all our sin both
original and actual both in respect of the guilt and punishment, so as they
shall never be imputed to our condemnation, neither in this life nor in the
life to come. Psalm. 32.1
And of this the psalmist speaks, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose
wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. 2. Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. So the Apostle says that God was in
Christ, and reconciled the world to himself not imputing their sins unto
them. 2. Cor. 5.19.
2. Cor. 5.19.

The imputation of Christ's righteousness is the other part of our
justification, whereby God imputes unto every believer the righteousness of
the mediator Jesus Christ as if it were properly their own and performed by
them, that being clothed therewith they may be perfectly righteous in Gods
sight, and so obtain the right unto everlasting life and happiness. And of this
the apostle speaks, Romans 4.6. Romans 4.6.
Even as (says he) David declares the blessedness of the man unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works. Romans 9.30.
and Romans 9.30. The Gentiles which followed not righteousness have attained
unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith. So Phil. 3.8.9.
Phil. 3.8.9.
The Apostle says that he accounted all things loss and judge them to be
dunge, that he might win Christ, and might be found in him not having his
one righteousness which is of the law, but that which is of the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith. Ier. 23.6.

Now this righteousness of Christ is twofold, his habitual and inhaerent
holiness and innocence, whereby he was free from all corruption and sin
both original and actual; and endued with all holiness and purity of
nature, from the first moment of his conception. And of this the Apostle
speaks. 2, Cor. 5.21. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us. 2. Cor.
5.21. 1. Pet. 2.22. Heb. 4.15.
and 1. Pet. 2.22. Who did no sin neither was there any guile found in his
mouth. So Heb. 4.15. He is said to be without sin. And 1. Pet. 1.19. 1. Pet.
1.19. Ioh. 8.46.
He is called the lamb undefiled and without spot. And himself challenges
the Jews Ioh. 8.46. Which of you can rebuke me of sin. And this holiness
being imputed unto us, is opposed to our original sin and natural
corruption. The other is his actual righteousness, whereby he performed
perfect obedience unto the law in all his thoughts, words, and deeds, through
the whole course of his life. And this being imputed unto us, and becoming
ours by reason of that union which is between Christ and us, is opposed unto
our actual transgression, whereby we have broken the whole law of God both in
omitting the duties which are commanded, and in committing the vices and
sins which are forbidden.

The persons who are thus justified are all the faithful, and they only who
do apply the righteousness of Jesus Christ unto themselves by a true and
lively faith. And thus the Apostle does limmitt and restrain it. Romans 3.21.22.
Romans 3.21.22. and 4.5.
Where he says that the righteousness of God is made manifest without the
the law; to wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all and upon all that believe. and 4.5. To him that works not but believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.
And our Savior has promised, that whosoever believes in him shall not come
into judgment, but has passed from death to life. Ioh. 4.24.
Ioh. 5 24.

The time when we are thus justified is first in this life as soon as true
faith is begot in us by the ministry of the word, whereby we particularly
apply unto our selves Christ Jesus and all his benefits, resting and relying
upon him alone for our justification and salvation; the which shall be fully
perfected at the day of judgment, when as our Savior Christ shall pronounce
the sentence of absolution saying Come ye blessed of my father, take the
inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Mat. 25.34.
Mat. 25.34.

CHAP. XLIX. That we are not justified by our works and merits.
Satan's tentations concerning justification of two sorts.
Now we are to speak of and to answer such tentations as are suggested by our
spiritual enemy, to the end that he may persuade us that we are
notiustified, or that he may move us to seek for justification where it is
not to be had, and so in the mean time neglect it where only it is to be
found, and the alone means whereby it is to be inioyed. In speaking whereof I
shall not need to handle things so largly as those points which went before,
partly because our justification does inseperably follow our effectual
calling, and therefore he that is assured of the one needs not to doubt of the
other, partly because the most of those tentations which Satan suggesteth to
impugn and make void our assurance that we are justified are already
answered, namely those which concern the remission of our sins, and true
faith in Jesus Christ, and partly because those tentations which Satan
suggesteth into the minds of afflicted christians are the self same which the
lims of Satan the antichrist of Room and all his apostaticall sinagogue do
hold and defend; and therefore I shall not need to entreat hereof at large
because these points in controversy have been already and will be hereafter
so copiously, learnedly, and religiously handled by others of greater
abilities, and far more excellent gifts.

But let us come to the matter in hand. The tentations of Satan concerning
this point are of two sorts; the first tend to persuade us to labor after and
to rest upon an imperfect and maimed righteousness for our justification,
whereby we can never be justified in Gods sight, and so in the mean time he
causes us to neglect the alsufficie^t and most perfect righteousness of Jesus
Christ by which alone we are justified before God and eternally saved; the
other tend to make us doubt of our true justification, that so he may either
make this gracious work of God frustrate in us, or else at least deprive our
souls of that true consolation and peace of conscience, which depends upon
the assurance of our justification.

How Satan tempts us to neglect Christ's righteousness and to rest upon our
own.
he will labor to persuade us that it is not the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, imputed unto us by God and apprehended and applied unto us by faith,
whereby we are justified in Gods sight, for this imputative righteousness is
but merely putatiue and imaginacy but by that inhaerent righteousness which is
in our selves; for Christ (will he say) did not fulfill the law and died, that
this his righteousness and obedience should become ours by imputation, but he
died for us to the end he might merit for us the spirit of God, which should
infuse into us an inhaerent righteousness, and he shed his blood to the end that
our good works being dipped and died therein, might become perfect and so
justify us in Gods sight; and therefore that we are not justified by faith
alone, but by our other graces and virtues also, and our good works
proceedding from them; neither by faith at all as it is an instrument which
applies Christ and his benefits unto us, but as it is a grace or virtue
infused into our selves. Against which tentation it behooves us most carefully
to arm our selves as being most dangerous and pernicious, for it robs God
and our savior Christ of the whole glory of our justification and salvation,
and deriueth some, yea the greatest portion unto our selves, as being chiefly
justified by our own means; and also it depriueth our souls of all true
comfort and full assurance that we are justified and saved, by taking out of
our hands the strong staff of our salvation, the perfect righteousness of
Jesus Christ and by putting into them the weak reed of our own works, which
will presently break and fail us, when we most rest upon it, and so we shall
unrecoverably fall into the horrible pit of deep desperation, when as we are
abandoned of our chief hope, that is, when on the one side the huge weight of
our grievous sins, and on the other side the great imperfection of our most
perfect righteousness, and the filthy pollution of our most glorious works
appear unto us.

And to the end that we may be the better enabled to resist this dangerous and
damnable tentation, I will first show that we cannot be justified before the
tribunal of Gods judgment by our inhaerent righteousness and good works;
and secondly that we are justified by faith alone as it only applies unto us
Christ Jesus his righteousness and obedience.

That we are not justified by our works proved by the Scriptures.
and strong arguments which are grounded upon them. For the first, the Apostle
plainly says, that by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight, for by the law comes the knowledge of sin: but now is the
righteousness of God made manifest without the law, having witness of the law
and the Prophets; to wit the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus
Christ, Romans 3.20.21.22. Phil. 3.9.
unto all and upon all that believe. Romans 2.20.21.22. So Phil. 3.9. He
disclaimeth his own righteousness, and rests upon the alone righteousness
of Christ Jesus, which is made ours by faith for his justification and
salvation. I have (says he) counted all things loss and do judge them to be
dunge that I may win Christ, and might be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith. Phil. 3.9. and
Gal. 3.10.11. Phil. 3.9. Gal. 3.10.11.
He affirms that as many as rest in the works of the law are under the
curse; and that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is
evident because the just shall live by faith. So Romans 4.5. To him that works
not but believes in him that justifies the ungodly his faith is counted for
righteousness. Romans 4.5.
And our Savior Christ teaches us to say and acknowledge when we have done
all to our uttermost power which is commanded us that we are still
unprofitable servants Luke 17.10. Luke 17.10.


That the former places are to be understood of the works of the moral law,
and not of the ceremonies only.
but of the ceremonies only, to which again we reply that no such frivolous
distinction can be gathered out of the Apostles words, nay the plain contrary
evidently appears, by his maine scope and drift in his whole discourse of our
justification, and also by some particular places. His chief scope is to beat
down the pride of all, both Jews and Gentiles to the end that the whole glory
and praise of our justification and salvation might be ascribed to the free
mercy, grace, and goodness of God alone; now it is most certain that the
moral duties are in themselves far more excellent then the ceremonial, and
consequently more fit to puff us up with a spiritual pride, and to make us to
rest in our selves for our justification, ascribing at least some part of the
praise unto our own works and virtues; so that if the Apostle had only
spoken of the works of the ceremonial law, man's pride should not be beaten
down, neither should God have the whole praise of our salvation, and so his
discourse should be vain, as not tending to prove and enforce that, for which
end and purpose he chiefly undertakes it. Again this should nothing concern
neither the Gentiles in former times, nor any true Christians since the coming
of Christ, forasmuch as they did not nor do not, neither were nor are bound to
observe the ceremonial law, and consequently could never once dream of
obtaining righteousness by fulfilling the ceremonies; but they would rather
ascribe the glory of their justification to their moral duties, to which they
found themselves bound by the law of nature written in their hearts, or do find
themselves bound by the moral law of God written in his word; and therefore it
was necessary for the beating down of their pride, and that they might
ascribe the whole glory unto God of their justification and salvation, that the
apostles in this discourse should prove that they were not justified neither by
observing the law of nature written in their hearts, nor yet the moral law of
God revealed in his word. Whereby it manifestly appears that howsoever the
Apostle excludes the works of the ceremonial law from being causes of
justification, yet not them alone but the works of the moral law also.

The former point proved by particular testimonies.
but of the moral law also. In the second chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, he plainly disputes as well of the law of nature, to the obedience
whereof the Gentiles were obliged as of the law given by Moses. Romans 3.19.20.
Chap. 3.19.20. He says that all the world are made culpable before God, and
therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Now
if this consequence be good he speaks not only of the ceremonial but of the
moral duties, for the former belonged not to the gentiles, and therefore the
neglect of them did not make them culpable, nor debar them of being justified
by their own works. Romans 10.5.6 Gal. 3.11.12 21.22.24.


Secondly Romans 10.5.6. and Gal. 3.11.12.21.22.24. The Apostle puts a plain
difference between the righteousness which is by the law, and the
righteousness which is by faith, and makes a flatt opposition in the act of
justification not between moral and ceremonial duties, but between doing and
believing, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
faith and works.

Thirdly he says, Ephesians. 2.8.9. that we are saved by grace through faith not
of our selves, nor of works least any man should boast himself. If he had
spoken only of works they might (though foolishly) have wrested it to
ceremonies only seeing the Ephesians were not bound to the ceremonial law, as
being strangers to the common wealth of Israel, as himself speaks ver. 12.
but when he says also not of our selves, verse. 12.
he excludes al whatsoever is in us from being the cause of our salvation, not
only ceremonial but also moral duties. So writing to Titus he says Tit.
3.5. Titus. 3.5.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done but according to his
mercy, he saved us, in which place we are necessarily to understand the works
of the moral law; for Titus being a Grecian was not bound to observe the
ceremonial law, and therefore he was not so much as circumcised as the apostle
plainly affirms, Gal. 2.3.
Gal. 2.3.

Fourthly Paul speaks of that law by which we come to the knowledge of
sin, Romans 3.20. and 7.7.8.9.
as appears Romans 3.20. and 7.7.8.9. But the knowledge of sin came
especially by the moral law, and therefore of this law the Apostle speaks.

Lastly the Apostle speaking of the works of the law alleges these
sentences. Gala. 3.10. Gal. 3.10.
As many as are of the works of the law are under the curse, for it is written
cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them. So that he speaks not of the ceremonial law
alone but of the whole law of Moses and of all things contained in it. and ver.
12. ver. 12.
And the law is not of faith, but the man that shall do those things shall
live in them. Which cannot be understood of the ceremonial law alone, but of
the works of the moral law yea of them especially.

That the Apostle excludes as well the works of the regenerate, as of the
unregenerate.
Secondly it is answered that the apostle speaks only of the works of those
who are not regenerate nor endued with faith, and not of the regenerate and
faithful. Which shifting cavil the apostle clearly takes away, not only by
applying his speeches unto all men without any limitation; but especially in
that example of Abraham which he brings for this purpose; who though he were
long before regenerate, endued with faith and exceeding plentiful in good
works, yet he flatly excludes all his works from being any causes of his
justification. So Romans 4.2. Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works he had wherein to rejoice but not with God.
and ver. 3. and ver. 3.4.
Abraham believed God and it was counted unto him for righteousness. 4. Now to
him that works, the wages is not counted by favor but by debt. 5. But to him
that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly his faith is
counted for righteousness.

Reasons to prove that w^ are not justified by our works. Romans 8.1.33 34.
The reasons which may be brought to the same purpose are exceeding many, but I
will briefly touch, some few only. First justification is manifestly opposed to
condemnation: and they are both judicial words used in civil courts, and
therefore to be understood both iudicially and not after a diverse manner. But to
condemn signifies not to infuse any fault or crime in to the person
condemned; but to pronounce him guilty and faulty: And therefore to justify
signifies not to infuse righteousness into the person justified; but to
declare, pronounce, and repute him as just and righteous. Secondly, by the same
means whereby we obtain the remission of our sins, we are also justified and
made righteous; but we obtain the remission of our sins not for our works
or inhaerent righteousness, or any virtue that is in our selves, but by and for
the alone merits, obedience, and full satisfaction of Christ, apprehended and
applied unto us by a lively faith, as appears Romans 3.25. And therefore by
this means alone we are also justified. Romans 3.25.


Thirdly, whosoever are justified freely by grace they are not justified by
their own merits, works, or inhaerent righteousness: Ro^. 3.23.24
but the scriptures testify that all the faithful are justified freely by
Gods grace, as appears Romans 3.23.24. All have sinned and are deprived of the
glory of God. Ephesians. 1.7. and 2.8.
And are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. So Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we have redemption through his blood, even
the forgiveness of sins according to his rich grace. Tit. 3.5.7.
and 2.8. By grace are you saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God. and Tit. 3. not by the works of righteousness which we had
done, but according to his mercy he saved us etc. 7. That we being justified by
his grace should be made heirs according to hope of eternal life. And
therefore none are justified by their own merits, works, or inhaerent
righteousness.

Lastly, the apostle Paul himself gathers many absurdities which would
follow this doctrine of justification by works: first that our faith should be
vain, and the promise of God void, Romans 4.14. Romans 4.14.
Secondly that Christ Jesus should die in vain if we have righteousness by
the law. Gal. 2.21. Gal. 2.21.
Thirdly that we should have cause of boasting and glorying in our selves.
Ephesians. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.9.
for if a man were justified by his own inhaerent righteousness, he should
have whereof to glory, and so God should be robbed of the whole praise of our
salvation. Romans 4.2. Romans 4.2.
But the Lord of purpose has justified us freely of his grace, and not for our
works and inha rent righteousness, that all glorying in our selves might be
excluded: as appears Romans 3.27. Ephesians 2.9. Romans 3.27. Ephesians. 2.9.
Fourthly it would follow hereupon that we should still be under the curse of
the law, which is denou^ced against all who continue not in all that is written
in the book of the law to do them, as the Apostle reasons Gal. 3.10. Gal.
3.10.
Fifthly that the obedience and satisfaction of Christ should be maimed and
imperfect, unless it were patched up with our own righteousness: the
contrary whereof the Apostle affirms Heb. 7.25. namely that he is able
perfectly to save all them who come unto God by him. Lastly, Heb. 7.25.
hereupon it would follow that we should continually waver in doubting, in
respect of our manifold corruptions and imperfect righteousness, and should
have our souls deprived of that peace of conscience which follows
justification by faith, as it is Romans 5.1. Romans 5.1.
Lastly with the Jews we shall bring our selves into most certain danger of
being rejected and cast of, from being the people and Church of God, if with
them we go about to stablish our own righteousness, in the mean time not
submitting our selves to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.4.6.
which is of faith in Jesus Christ, as it is Romans 10.4.6.

CHAP. L. That faith alone justifies.
How it is to be understood that faith alone justifies.
namely that we are nor justified by works: the second is that we are
justified by faith alone: whereby we are not to understand that faith by it
own virtue, or as it is a faculty, habit, work or action in us, does
justify us, but as it is the alone instrument whereby we do apprehend and
apply unto us Christ Jesus, his righteousness and obedience, by which only
righteousness which is out of our selves in Christ as the proper subject
thereof, being offered in the word and Sacraments, and applied by faith we are
justified in Gods sight, Phil. 2.9.
as appears Phil. 2.9. Secondly whereas we say that faith alone justifies,
we do not understand such a faith, as is alone without works, charity, and
other sanctifying graces, which were nothing else but imaginary dead, and but
as it were a carkase of faith which breaths not; but that amongst all other
graces, virtues and faculties of the soul faith alone, and not any of the^ is
the instrument whereby we apply Christ Jesus unto us, who being thus applied
does justify us.

That though works do not justify us yet they are necessarily required as
fruits of our justification.
Otherwise we affirm that other graces of Gods spirit and even good works
which is a fruit of them all, do necessarily accompany our justification, not
as instruments or causes thereof, but as inseparable effects and fruits
thereof. So that howsoever we exclude works from the act of justifying, yet
we necessarily require them in the subject or person justified; we affirm
that faith alone justifies, but we deny that such a faith which is alone
does justify us; we maintain that we are justified by faith alone without
works, but with all we affirm that faith which is without works does not
justify us as being dead, false and imaginary. This may be made plain by
some similitudes: to the being of an honest man there is necessarily required
honest actions, not as causes but as effects, neither are his honest actions
the cause of his honesty, but his honesty the cause of his honest actions; to a
living man there is necessarily required as well breathing which is an action
or effect of life, as the soul which is the cause thereof, and so to a
justified man there is necessarily required, as well good works which are the
effects of justification, as faith which is the isntrumental cause thereof;
for faith and works are never severed in the subject or party justified,
although they are disioyned in the act of justifying. So the eye only sees
and not the forehead, but yet the eye severed from the forehead sees not,
because it is but a dead eye, the hand writes and not the body, but the hand
severed from the body writes not, because it is a dead hand. The foot goes
and not the head or heart, but the foot which is severed from the head or
heart goes not, and so faith only justifies, and not hope, not charity, not
works, but the faith that is severed from hope, charity, and works,
justifies not, because it is but a dead faith; as therefore when we say the
eye only sees, the hand only writes, the foot only walks, our meaning
is not that these parts being alone, and severed from the rest, see, write, and
walk, but that amongst all other parts, the action or function of seeing
belongs peculiarly unto the eye, writing to the hand, walking to the foot:
so when we say that only faith justifies, our meaning is not that the faith
which is alone, and severed from other graces and the fruits of them good
works, justifies; but that amongst all other graces this act of justifying
peculiarly and properly belongs unto faith, and not to any other grace,
virtue; or works.

Testimonies to prove that faith alone justifies us. Romans 3.28.
both by testimonies of scripture and apparent reasons. For the first, it is
manifest, Romans 3.28. where after long disputation concerning this point, the
Apostle expressly concludes thus. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified
by faith without the works of the law. And chap. 4. verse. 5. To him that
works not, but believes in him, that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. and 4.5.
So Gal. 2.16. Know that a man is not justified by the works of the law but by
the faith of Jesus Christ: Gal. 2.16.
even we I say have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the
law, no flesh shall be justified. And cap. 3.11. And that no man is justified
by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: Gal. 3.11.
for the just shall live by faith. 12. And the law is not of faith. And hence
it is that the righteousness of Christ, whereby we are justified is called the
righteousness of faith. Romans 9.30.
because faith is the only instrument, which appehendeth and applies this
righteousness unto us, for our justification.

Reasons to prove that faith alone justifies.
First, that which alone applies unto us Christ Jesus and his righteousness,
that only justifies us: but faith alone applies unto us Christ Jesus and his
righteousness, and not hope, charity, or any other grace: and therefore faith
alone justifies.

Secondly, that which only makes the promises of the Gospel firm and sure
unto us, that alone justifies us; but faith alone resting upon Gods mercy and
Christ's merits, makes the promises of the Gospel firm and sure unto us
(which would be most uncertain if they should depend on the condition of our
works and worthiness; seeing they are most imperfect, and we most corrupt and
unworthy of Gods least mercy; as the Apostle plainly shows. Romans 4.16.
Therefore it is (namely the covenant of grace) by faith, Romans 4.16.
that it might come by grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seed:
and therefore faith alone justifies us.

Lastly, Ioh. 3.14.15.
our Savior Christ Ioh. 3.14.15. makes this comparison. As Moses lift up the
serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. From which we may
thus reason; As the Isralites who were stung with fiery serpents, were cured
not by any outward means of physic and surgerie, or any thing in themselves,
save only by looking upon the brazen serpent, which for this purpose was set
up by Gods commandment; so we being stung of the old serpent, with the sting
of sin cannot be cured by any means without or within our selves, but by
beholding the true substance Christ Jesus, signified by this shadow, with the
eye of faith.

And thus have I proved, first that we are not justified by our works, and
inherent righteousness; and secondly that we are justified by faith alone: not
as it is the chief and principal cause, for in this respect God justifies;
not as it is the matter or meritorious cause of our justification, for in this
respect the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ justifies us; but as it
is the alone instrument and only cause in us which applies that meritorious
cause unto us, whereby alone we are justified in Gods sight.

we speak of, is but imaginary, That the imputatio^ of Christ's
righteousness is not putatiue and imaginary.
and a vain fantasy; as if a man who were defiled with dirt should be
reputed clean by the imputation of another cleanesse, or as if a beggar
should be esteemed rich, by imputation of another wealth. To which we are to
answer, that the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, is no
imaginary dream, but a matter plainly expressed in Gods word, as also the
not imputation of our sins is therein specified. In the fourth of the Romans
this word is used by the holy Ghost an eleven times. Romans 4 3.4.
So verse. 3. Abraham believed God and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. And verse. 4. To him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed for righteousness. And verse. 6.
Even as David declared the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works. And verse. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not sin, etc.

That not our own but Christ's righteousness is imputed unto us for our
justification.
it is true that we are justified by imputed righteousness; but not by the
righteousness of Christ, which is out of our selves; but our faith, which is
formed and perfected with charity, and other graces, and good works is
imputed for righteousness: or more plainly, God accepts of the works of
the faithful, and their inherent righteousness, though imperfect and
unworthy in themselves, for and through Christ, for such righteousness which
may justify us in his sight. For the answering of which objection we are to
know, that this word imputing, or imputation, is taken two ways in the
Scriptures: first when as the thing imputed is in our selves, and so it is said
Psalm. 106.31, Psalm. 106.31. Romans 5.13.
that the fact of Phinees was imputed unto him for righteousness; so Romans
5.13, But sin is not imputed while there is no law. Secondly, when as the thing
imputed is out of our selves; and of this, Leuit. 17.4. Numb. 18.27.
mention is made Leuit. 17.4. and Numb. 18.27. And in this latter sense the
word is to be understood in the doctrine of justification, and not in the
former. For our sins were imputed unto Christ, when he offered himself to
stand in our place, to pay our debt and to make full satisfaction to his
fathers justice, by suffering those punishments which we by our sins had
deserved; in which respect the Scriptures say that he was reputed amongst the
wicked, Mar. 15.28. 2. Cor. 5.21.
Mar. 15.28. and that he was made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.21. not by infusion
of our sins and corruptions into his most holy nature, but by imputation
only. And contrariwise, we are made just or justified not by infusion of
inherent righteousness into us, but by imputation of Christ's righteousness,
when as believing in him, notwithstanding that our nature is still defiled with
sin and manifold corruptions, through the mere mercy and free grace of God
for the merits and obedience of Christ we are reputed just, as though we had
never committed sin, and had performed perfect obedience unto Gods
commandments, and so adjudged heirs of everlasting life.

So that this imputation consists not in Gods reputing of us just, in respect
of our inherent righteousness infused into us; but in the free mercy and
grace of God, which for Christ his sake covers our sins, which are indeed
inherent in us, so as they shall never be imputed unto us for our condemnation,
and imputes unto us the righteousness which is not in us but in Christ,
wherewith being fully possessed, he reputeth of us as most innocent and
perfectly righteous.

The former point proved by testimonies of the Scriptures. Romans 4.4.5.
it is most manifest where ye Apostle Paul sets down the word in both these
senses, denying that in this doctrine of justification it is to be understood
of the former, and affirming it of the latter. To him (says he) that works,
the wages is not imputed by favor, but by debt (namely, because he has
merited it by his own righteousness) 5. But to him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted or imputed
for righteousness; even as David declares the blessedness of the man unto who^
God imputes righteousness without works. In which words he plainly shows,
that there is a kind of imputatio^ which has his ground or foundation in works
and inherent righteousness, and this he affirms is not of grace. And that
there is another kind of imputation, which has not it ground and foundation in
him to whom it is made, but in the free mercy of God justifying the wicked
without his works, and therefore not only destitute of inherent
righteousness whereby he might be justified, but also guilty of inherent
corruption and actual transgression, whereby he might be condemned if God
should enter into judgment with him. So also he plainly affirms Ephesians. 2.8,
that we are saved by grace through faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and that not of our selves; it is the gift of God. 9. Not of works, least any
man should boast himself.

The former point proved by the example of Abraham.
this may be proved by the example of Abraham, upon which the Apostle in the
former place insisteth; for by that imputed righteousness whereby he was
justified, we are also justified: but the Apostle plainly affirms that this
imputation was not of Abraham's inherent righteousness, with the which
notwithstanding he was plentifully endued; for (as he says) if Abraham were
justified by works, he had wherein to rejoice, but not in God; but that
Abraham believed in God, and this was counted to him for righteousness, Romans
4.2.3.
as it is Romans 4.2.3: and therefore we are not justified by our works and
inherent righteousness, but by the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us.

That perfect righteousness is required to our justification. Iam. 3.2.
must consist in perfect obedience and fulfilling of the law of God, in that
exact manner and measure which Gods justice does require: but this cannot
possibly be done by any righteousness which is in us, which is most imperfect
and mingled with many sins and corruptions, for in many things we sin all,
as it is Iam. 3.2. and he that says he has no sin is a liar, as John
speaks 1. ep. 1.8. and our best righteousness is like a polluted cloth, 1.
Ioh. 1.8. Esa. 64.6.
as it is Esa. 64.6. but by the alone righteousness of Jesus Christ, which
being imputed unto us is sufficient to answer and satisfy Gods exact and most
perfect justice. That our righteousness whereby we are to be justified must be
perfect, Romans 3.31.
and such as the law and exact justice of God requires, it appears Romans
3.31. whereas the Apostle plainly affirms, that when faith is imputed unto
righteousness, Iam. 2.10.
the law is not made void, but rather confirmed and fulfilled. Do we then
(says he) make the law of none effect through faith? God forbid. Yea we
establish the law. But this cannot be done by our righteousness, which is
imperfect and mingled with innumerable sins, but by the alone most perfect
righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed unto us. Again, the Lord has
commanded and straightly charged, that in our civil judgments the righteous
shall be justified, Deuteronomy. 25.1.
and the wicked condemned, Deuteronomy. 25.1. And the wise man says, that he that
justifies the wicked, Pro. 17.15.
and he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination unto the Lord,
Pro. 17.15. And the Prophet Esaias denounces a woe against them which commit
this sin, Esa. 5.23.
chap. 5. verse. 23. Now, shall the Lord require this of us, and shall we think
that he whose will is the rule of justice, will justify any whose
righteousness is imperfect, and not according to his law? No, he has told us,
that it is more easy that heaven and earth should pass away, Luke 16.17.
than that one title of the law should fall unaccomplished, Luke 16.17. And
therefore let us not trust unto our own imperfect righteousness, but wholly
rest upon the alone righteousness of Jesus Christ by a lively faith for our
justification. For he is the Lord our righteousness, Iere. 23.6. Esa. 45.24.
Iere. 23.6. In him we have righteousness and strength, Esa. 45.24. He is made
unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor.
1.30. 1. Cor. 1.30.
By his obedience many are made righteous, Romans 5.19. And that which was
impossible to the law, Romans 5.19.
in as much as it was weak because of the flesh, God sending his son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.4.
and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us; as it is Romans 8.3.4. In a word, in him alone we
have all our righteousness, in him we shine gloriously in the sight of God,
and he is that bright shining Sun of righteousness, from whom we borrow all
our light, without whose rays of holiness we should remain in the darkness
of our sins and corruptions.

Lastly, the Apostle sets down the form of our justification, namely, the
imputation of our sins unto Christ, and the imputation of his righteousness
unto us. 2. Cor. 5.21. He which knew no sin was made sin for us, 2. Cor.
5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. As therefore Christ
was made a sinner for us, so we are made righteous before God in him; but
Christ Jesus was not made a sinner for us by infusion of our sins and
corruptions into his nature (for he was always most holy, pure, undefiled
and without sin, 1 Pet. 1.18.19 and 2.21.
as the Apostle witnesses of him) but by imputation only, as being our
surety who had taken upon him to discharge all our debt: and therefore in like
manner we are made righteous, not by infusion of righteousness, but by
imputation only.

That justification by imputation is not imaginary, but real and in truth.
that to be justified by imputation is but an imaginary mockery, as if a
poor man should be reputed rich; to this we are to answer, that it is but a
frivolous cavil: for we do not teach that God esteems and reputeth us
righteous, being wholly defiled with sin and quite destitute of all
righteousness; but that he makes us perfectly righteous, by washing away our
sins with the precious blood of Christ, and by applying and appropriating unto
us his perfect righteousness and obedience by virtue of his spirit principally,
and a lively faith instrumentally, whereby we are united unto Christ and become
members of his body, and consequently have right and full interest unto all
that which this our head has done for us; and so being made partakers of his
righteousness and merits, God reputeth us as we are in truth perfectly just and
righteous. If a man being poor and far in debt should be accounted and
reputed exceeding rich and nothing indebted, it were indeed but a mere
imagination. But if another of great sufficiency should take upon him to be his
surety, and not only discharge all his debts, but should bestow upon him
great sums of money and much treasure, this man whatsoever he was before
time in himself, may now be esteemed rich and out of debt. So if we (as we
are far indebted to the justice of God and exceeding beggarly, yea stark
naked of all righteousness) should be reputed as we are thus in our selves
righteous and nothing indebted, it were but a mere mockery; but seeing our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has taken upon him to be our surety who is
himself all-sufficient, and seeing he has perfectly and fully answered all
our debts wherein we were engaged to Gods justice; and not only so, but also
has communicated and bestowed upon us the infinite rich treasures of his
righteousness and obedience, giving unto us full interest and possession hereof,
outwardly by his handwriting of the Gospel, and his Sacraments as seals
annexed thereunto, and inwardly by the virtue and cooperation of of his spirit
applying them unto us: and lastly, seeing we also have received the full
assurance of all this heavenly and spiritual rich treasure by the hand of
faith, we are in truth quite out of debt, and exceeding rich with his
righteousness which is now become ours, and therefore are so reputed and esteemed
in the sight of God.

CHAP. LI. Satan's temptations moving the weak Christian to doubt of his
justification, answered.
That our justification is plainly revealed unto us in the word of God.
whereby he labors to persuade us to rest upon a false and imperfect
righteousness for our justification: now we are briefly to speak of those
which he suggesteth into the minds of weak Christians, to the end that he
may make them doubt of their justification, that so he might (if it were
possible) make frustrate this work of God, or at least rob their souls of
all comfort and peace of conscience, which always accompanies the assurance
of our justification; for being justified by faith, we have peace toward God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1.
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.1. First therefore he suggesteth that our
justification is an action of God, and therefore unknown to us; so that we
cannot possibly attain unto any certain knowledge that we are justified of
God, unless he assure us hereof by some special and extraordinary revelation.

For the answering whereof, we are to understand that this act of God in
justifying a sinner, is as clearly revealed ordinarily in the Scriptures, as
any other thing concerning our salvation, and that every true believer may as
certainly conclude by undoubted arguments grounded on Gods infallible truth,
that he is justified before God, as by natural reason he can prove that he
lives and breaths. For first our effectual vocation and justification are
inseparably linked together by the Apostle Romans 8.30. Romans 8.30.
So that whosoever can prove that he is effectually called, he may also most
certainly infer that he is justified. But every true believer may come to the
certain knowledge that he is effectually called (as before I have showed at
large) and that not by any special revelation, but by the will of God,
revealed in his word by the inward testimony of Gods spirit, and the undoubted
signs of effectual calling, which he observes in himself; and therefore
without any particular revelation we may attain unto the assurance also that
we are justified, that is, that our sins are pardoned for the merits and full
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and we clothed with his righteousness.

Secondly, whosoever can come to the assurance that he has a true and lively
faith, he may also be assured that he is justified; for it is the nature and an
inseparable property of true faith, to apply unto the believer Christ Jesus
and his righteousness, whereby he is justified before God; and hence it is
that the Scriptures plainly affirm that we are justified by faith and not by
any thing else which is in us, as before I have sufficiently showed. But we may
come to the certain assurance that we have a true faith, by the undoubted
signs and inseparable fruits thereof, which we may discern in our selves
(as has been already plainly proved) though we never have any special
revelation: And therefore without any such particular revelation we may attain
unto the certain assurance that we are justified in Gods sight.

Thirdly, that which the Gospel assures us of, we need not to make any doubt
thereof, or once call it into question: but the Gospel assures us, that
whosoever believes in Christ Jesus, and truly repent them of their sins,
shall be made partakers of all the gracious promises of life and salvation
therein contained; So Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And
chap. 5.24. Ioh. 5.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word and believes him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has
passed from death to life. Matthew. 11.28.
And Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will
ease you. And therefore whosoever believe in Jesus Christ, approving their
faith to the world and their own consciences, to be true and unfeigned, by the
fruit thereof, unfeigned repentance, he may assure himself of all the gracious
promifes of the Gospel, and consequently of the remission of his sins, and
his justification for the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Lastly, the Lord has not only after a general manner propounded these
promises unto us, and left us to our own liberty to believe or not to believe
them, but he has bound us to the performance of this duty by his express
commandment, Mark. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.23.
Mark. 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel. And 1. Ioh. 3.23. This is his
commandment that we believe in his son Jesus Christ, that is, that we do
not only after a general manner believe that he is the savior of mankind,
but that we believe that he is our savior, who has redeemed, justified, and
will most perfectly save us, and rest wholly upon him alone for our salvation.
And he that thus believes, needs no other arguments to assure him that he is
justified and shall be saved; for he has the witness in himself, even the
testimony of Gods spirit, crying in his heart Abba father, and bearing
witness unto his spirit that he is the child of God: and not to believe this
is to make God a liar, because we will not believe the record that he has
witnessed of that his son, 1. Ioh. 5. 10.
as the Apostle speaks. 1. Ioh. 5.10. Yea (as before I have showed at large)
he has added unto the hand writing of his word, which contains also his oath
for our better confirmation, his sacraments; whereby he particularly conuayeth
and gives unto every believer, as it were proper possession of Christ Jesus
and all his benefits, to the end that there should be no place left to
doubting, nor any need of any particular revelation, for our further assurance.

That we are made just not by infusion but by imputation of righteousness.
and those who are made just do continually the works of righteousness; but
thou, will he say to the humbled sinner, continuest still in thy corruptions,
and thy wickedness cleaves fast to thee, and compasses thee about; and in
stead of doing the works of righteousness, thou continually heapest up the
full measure of thy sins; yea thy best actions are so stained with
imperfections and so full of infirmities, that they justly provoke Gods wrath
against thee.

To which we must answer, that indeed whosoever is justified is made just,
but not by infusion of inherent righteousness into our selves, but by
imputation of Christ's most perfect righteousness, as before I have showed; for
hereby our sins are pardoned, he having taken them upon himself, and
satisfied Gods justice by suffering those punishments which we had deserved;
and also he has perfectly fulfilled the law, that he might make us partakers
of his active obedience; and so imputing both unto us, has made us perfectly
just and righteous in Gods sight.

So that now the Lord does not require obedience to his law at our hands, to
the end that we should be justified in whole or in part, by our own
righteousness; neither are we to this end to observe Gods commandments, that
we may offer unto God our works and inherent righteousness, desiring thereby
to be justified; for, as I have showed, our best righteousness is imperfect,
and mingled with manifold corruptions, so as it would rather condemn us, then
justify us, if the Lord should examine it according to the exact rule of his
most perfect justice: but we offer unto God for our justification, the most
perfect righteousness and full satisfaction of Jesus Christ, which by his
merits and sufferings he has once made for us, desiring thereby wholly and
only to be justified and saved.

That our works are not causes but effects of our justification.
they are not causes but effects and fruits of our justification; neither is
it possible that we should do any good work acceptable in Gods sight, till we
are justified, and reconciled unto God in Jesus Christ, for our works cannot
please him, till our persons please him, and whatsoever we do, before faith
has purified the heart, it is sin and odious in the sight of God: but as
soon as we have faith begotten in us, presently it apprehends, Christ and
his righteousness, whereby we are justified, and then being justified, faith
works by love and brings forth in us the fruits of sanctification; which
though they be mingled with much corruption, and manifold imperfections, yet
God in Christ accepts of them as perfect, and will crown them with glory,
and immortality.

That now the Lord does not require of us perfect righteousness.
Neither does the Lord now require of us, that we perfectly at once shake off
all our corruptions, but that we labor as much as in us lies, to mortify and
subdue them according to the measure of his grace, and holy spirit, which he
has bestowed on us; he does not straightly command that we should instantly
banish and expel sin from dwelling in us, but that we do not suffer it to
reign in us, nor willingly obey the flesh in the lusts thereof, submitting our
selves unto sin, as servants and vassals to their Lord and master; he does
not inioyne us that we should wholly vanquish our corruptions, and obtain a
full victory over them, but that we proclaim open wars against them, and
manfully fight and strive under the conduct of his spirit, against the flesh,
and the sinful lusts thereof; and when we are taken captive of sin, that we
labor to attain unto our former freedom, in the mean time sorrowing and
groaning under the heavy weight of our corruptions, and crying out with the
Apostle, Romans 7.
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death; and
that we confess our miserable estate unto our captain and leader Jesus
Christ, desiring him to assist us with the power of his holy spirit, that
thereby we may be freed out of the hands of these our spiritual enemies, whose
bondage and captivity is so irksome and grievous unto us. Neither does the
Lord now require that we perform absolute and perfect obedience to his
commandments, but that to will be present in us, that we consent and approve
his law to be good and delighting in it concerning the inner man, that we
desire and endeavor to perform that good we cannot, and forgetting that which
is behind, endeavor our selves to that which is before, and follow hard
toward the mark, Phil. 3.13.14.
though we cannot attain unto the end of our race, till we come to the end of
our lives. Finally, the Lord does not require of us a whole harvest of goodness
and righteousness, but the first fruits thereof; he does not stand so much upon
our actions, as upon our affections, upon the perfection of our works, as upon
the alacrity of our wills, and integrity of our hearts; the righteousness
which he requires is an humble confession of our unrighteousness, a sincere
hatred of our sins, a holy endeavor in the use of the means to mortify our
corruptions, and to rise from the death of sin, to holiness and newnes of
life; which whosoever can offer unto God, they may assure themselves that they
shall be accepted through Christ, as righteous in Gods sight, notwithstanding
their manifold imperfections and corruptions.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK ENTREATING OF SANCTIFICATION AND PERSEVERANCE, as also of
Satan's temptations which he suggesteth against them both, and of such answers
wherewith the Christian may refute and repel them.
CHAP. I. Of Sanctification, and the causes thereof.
That God is the principal efficient of our sanctification.
Now we are to speak of our sanctification, which is the next effect of Gods
election, and inseparably joined with our justification: wherein I will observe
my former order, first setting down the doctrine of sanctification, and then
answering those temptations of Satan which do most impugn it.

Sanctification, what is it.
For the first, Sanctification is an action of the whole Trinity, whereby the
believer already justified, is by little and little renewed according to Gods
image in holiness and righteousness, by the mortification of the flesh, with
the corruptions thereof, and the quickening of the spirit.

And this is our sanctification, which is expressed in the Scriptures by diverse
names and phrases; for it is called regeneration, the new birth, renouation,
the putting off or mortifying of the old man, and the putting on or quickening
of the new man and such like.

The efficient cause of our sanctification is God himself, who as he alone
justifies us and freeth us from the guilt and punishment of sin, so he only
sanctifies us and delivers us from the tyranny of sin, so that it shall
no longer reign in our mortal bodies, freeing us in such measure as pleases
him from our natural corruptions, Leuit. 20.8.
which heretofore wholly ouerswayed us. And this appears by plain testimonies
of holy Scriptures. John 1.13.
John 1.13. It is said that the faithful are borne, not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Ephesians 2.10.
So Ephesians. 2.10. we are said to be Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works: which phrase the Apostle uses to note unto us, that as God
only did create us, so he only does renew and regenerate us. The Lord
likewise does appropriate this work unto himself as belonging to another.
Ezech. 36.26. Ezech. 36.26. and 34.28.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put into you, and I will
take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you an heart of
flesh. And hence it is that the Apostle desiring the sanctification of the
Thessalonians beggeth it at Gods hand, 1. These. 5.23. The very God of peace
sanctify you throughout. 1. These. 5.23. Psalm. 51.13.
And David finding the want hereof in himself, has his recourse unto God.
Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit
within me. So that as God does begin in us this work of sanctification, so
likewise he does accomplish and finish it. And therefore as we are wholly to
ascribe unto God our election, vocation and justification, so also our
sanctification, that he may be all in all in the work of our salvation. For as
he only formed us, so he only can reform us, as he is the author of our
natural generation, Genesis 1.28.
for by his blessing we have our being, so also of our spiritual regeneration,
for by his spirit only we are renewed. Neither must we imagine that it is in
man's power to renew himself, no more than to beget himself: for as well may
the Blackmoore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, as we do good who
are accustomed to do evil, Ierem. 13.23.
Ierem. 13.23. yea, as easily may the dead man raise himself, as we may raise
our selves from the death of sin to newness of life, Ephesians. 2.1.
Ephesians. 2.1. It is only the water of Gods spirit that can wash away our
Ethiopian blackness, and turn our spotted uncleanness into snowie
whiteness; it is only the God of life that can make us rise from the death of
sin to newness of life.

But here it may be demanded, that if sanctification be wholly the work of
God, and not in our own power, why do the Scriptures exhort us to sanctify
our selves, to mortify our sins, and to walk in newness of life? I
answer, that though sanctification be wholly from God, yet these exhortations
are necessary; for he works this work in us, not as in stocks and stones,
but as in reasonable creatures, of whom he requires consent of will, desire
and endeavor in the use of the means ordained of God, for the beginning and
perfecting of this work of sanctification in us. And although this will,
desire, and endeavor, be his work likewise, yet these exhortations to
godliness are to good purpose; for with the exhortation God joins the
operation of his spirit, and whilst he commands us, he gives power also to
perform that which he commands; whilst he exhorts us to sanctification,
he himself sanctifies us with his spirit.

That the work of sanctification is common to the three persons in Trinity.
Tit 3.5. Ephesians. 2.4.5. Heb. 9.14.
that as all other works of God which he exercises toward his creatures, so
this work of sanctification likewise is common unto the three persons in the
Trinity: for first God the Father sanctifies us by giving us his son and
sending his spirit, and therefore this work is ascribed unto him, Tit. 3.5.
Ephesians. 2.4.5. God the son sanctifies us, by mortifying our sins by virtue of
his blood, purging our consciences from dead works, that we may serve the
living God, and by virtue of his resurrection raising us also from the death of
sin to newness of life: and lastly, by his death has merited for us Gods
spirit, and rising again has sent him unto us, whereby we are regenerate:
and therefore he also is said to have sanctified us, and God is said to have
sanctified us in him, Ephesians. 5.26. 1. Cor. 2.11.
Ephesians. 5.26. 1. Cor. 2.11. God the holy Ghost also sanctifies us, by applying
the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection unto us, and so immediately
begins, continues, Ioh. 3.5, 6. Act. 11.16. Tit. 3.5.
and perfecteth this work in us, and therefore most usually in the Scriptures
this work is ascribed unto him, Ioh. 3.5, 6. Act. 11.16. Tit. 3.5.

And thus it appears that God himself is the principal and only efficient
cause of our sanctification; upon which point I have the longer insisted, to
the end that we should not in this work rest upon our own strength, for then
we shall be subject to many discouragements, and lie open to innumerable
temptations, grounded upon our small measure and slow progress in our
sanctification, as also upon the great difficulties and manifold
discouragements, which both stay us in the birth, and hinder our full growth in
true godliness; all which in respect of our own power prove this work not
only hard, but even impossible for us to be perfected and accomplished. But
rather that we rely our selves upon the Lords infinite power and gracious
promises, whereby we are assured, notwithstanding our own exceeding
weakness, that he will not only begin, but also finish and perfect this good
work in us.

The motive cause Gods sole mercy.
the motive cause which moved the Lord to sanctify us, was his own mercy
and Christ's merits. The first is expressed by the Apostle 1. Pet. 1.3. whereas
it is said, 1. Pet. 1.3.
that God according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again, etc. The
other is implied by Paul Ephesians. 2.5. where he says, that God has quickened us
in Christ; Ephesians. 2.5.
who by his death merited not only the remission of sin for us, but also
Gods spirit, whereby we are sanctified. So that it was not any good
inclination unto holiness in us, or any thing else wherein we excelled others,
which moved God to sanctify us, Ephesians. 2.1.3.
for we were all alike the children of wrath and dead in our sins, but only
his own boundless mercy and the alsufficient merits of Christ our Savior,
were the only causes which moved the Lord to give us his spirit, whereby we
are regenerate and raised from the death of sin to holiness and newness of
life. And therefore let us not arrogate the praise of our sanctification in
whole or in part unto our selves, but ascribe all the glory to God who is the
sole author and finisher of it.

Of the isntrumental causes of our sanctification. Ioh. 15.3. and 17.17. Iam.
1.18. 1. Pet. 1.23.
are either external or internal; the external are first the word of God, of
which our Savior speaks Ioh. 15.3. Now are you clean through the word which
I have spoken unto you. And cap. 17.17. Sanctify the^ with thy truth: thy word
is truth. So the Apostle James chap. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with
the word of truth, etc. And the Apostle Peter affirms, that we are borne anew
not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God, etc. The word of God
therefore is an isntrumental cause of our sanctification. In which respect
also the Ministers, by whose ministry we are converted and regenerate, are
said to be our spiritual fathers who have begotten us unto God: 1. Cor. 4.15.
Philem. v. 10.
as appears 1. Cor. 4.15. and Philem. verse. 10. in both which places Paul
chalengeth this title unto himself. Another external cause of our
sanctification are the Sacraments, especially the Sacrament of Baptism;
whereof it is that Ananias says unto Paul Act. 22.16. Arise and be baptized
and wash away thy sins. Act. 22.16. Ephesians. 5.26.
So Ephesians. 5.26. it is said that Christ gave himself for his Church, that he
might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word. The
which places as they are to be understood principally of the washing of
justification, whereby we are purged from the guilt and punishment of sin; so
also of the washing of sanctification, whereby we are cleansed from the sins
and corruptions themselves.

The internal instrument of our sanctification is a lively faith, without
which the other outward instruments are ineffectual, in those who are of
years; neither must we think that the bare action of hearing, or the outward
washing, take away our sins and corruptions, unless the word and things
signified in the Sacraments be applied unto us by a true faith. For the word
which we hear profits not, unless it be mixed with faith in those that
hear it, Heb. 4.2.
Heb. 4.2. And unless those that are capable of faith believe with all their
heart, Act. 8.37.
it is to no purpose to be baptized, Act. 8.37: and therefore unto the other we
must join this instrument of a lively faith, if we would attain unto true
sanctification. For faith purifieth the heart, and is fruitful in the works
of love, Act. 15.9. Gal. 5.6.
as the Scripture speaks.

Of the manner how our sanctification is wrought.
in the next place let us consider of the manner how this work is wrought in
us. For the understanding whereof we are to know, that we being united unto
Christ, principally by Gods spirit, and instrumentally by a lively faith, and
so made members of his mystical body, do participate the virtue of his
death, burial, and resurrection, whereby not only our justification but also
our sanctification is derived unto us. For first, by virtue of his death our
sins are mortified, and our corruptions crucified together with him: as
appears Romans 6.6. Knowing this, Romans 6.6.
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Secondly, by virtue of
his burial, this death of sin is as it were further continued, and thereby
our sins and corruptions are more and more subdued and kept under, that they
cannot rise and rebel against the spirit. And of this the Apostle speaks Romans
6.3. where he says, Romans 6.3.
that we are buried with Christ into his death. Thirdly, by virtue of his
resurrection there is a quickening power derived into us, whereby we are
revived and raised up from the death of sin to holiness and newness of
life. And of this mention is made Coloss. 2.12.13. where it is said, that as we
are buried with Christ, Col. 2.12.13. Romans 6.4.
so likewise we are raised up and quickened together with him: and Romans 6.4.
the Apostle says, that we are buried with him by baptism into his death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we
also should walk in newness of life.

Of the ends of our sanctification.
now we are briefly to speak of the other causes, as they lie in order. The
material and formal causes of our sanctification may best be considered in
the parts thereof. The final cause is twofold: Gods glory, which is the
chief and principal cause of our sanctification; and the eternal salvation of
those who are sanctified, which is subordinate to the other. For the first,
that Gods glory is the end of all our good actions and holy conversation,
Matthew. 5.16.
it appears Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. 1. Pet. 2.12.
So 1. Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they
shall see glorify God in the day of visitation. And the Apostle Paul wills
us, that we do all things whatsoever to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10.31.
1. Cor. 10.31.

For the other, we are therefore sanctified that we may be saved, and also be
assured of our salvation: and this we may gather out of the Apostles words Tit.
3.5.7. where he says, that God has saved us by the washing of the new birth,
and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.7.
that we should be made heirs of eternal life. Neither can we ever enjoy
everlasting happiness, unless we be regenerate, Ioh. 3.3.
according to that Ioh. 3.3. Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. So the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15.50.
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does
corruption inherit uncorruption, 1. Cor. 15.50. And Apoc. 21.27. it is said,
Apoc. 21.27.
that no unclean thing shall enter into Gods kingdom: and therefore the
Apostle Heb. 12.14. uses this as an effectual argument to move us to embrace
sanctification, because without this holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb.
12.14.
On the other side, if we be regenerate and show the fruits thereof in a
holy conversation, by dying to sin and rising again to newness of life,
then may we be certainly assured of our salvation: and therefore the Apostle
wills us by these works of holiness to make our calling and election sure,
2. Pet. 1.10.
affirming that if we do these things we shall never fall. 2. Pet. 1.10.

CHAP. II. Of the effects, subject, object, and time of our sanctification.
Of the effects of our sanctification.
are a detestation of our former sins in which we have taken our pleasure
and delight, and an hearty love of righteousness and holiness, which before
our regeneration were loathsome and unpleasant unto us; when notwithstanding
our infirmities and often falls we can say with the Apostle Paul, that we
would feign do that good we cannot, and hate that evil which we do, and
howsoever we cannot perform perfect obedience to all Gods commandments, yet
we delight in the law of God in the inner man, Romans 7.15.19.22.
Romans 7.15.19.22. Secondly, from these affections of loving good and hating
evil, there arises an earnest desire to embrace the one and flee the other,
and from this desire proceeds a settled purpose of heart, and a careful
endeavor to mortify our flesh with the corruptions thereof, and for the time
to come to frame our lives according to the rule of Gods word, the which
purpose and endeavor is joined with the diligent use of all good means, whereby
we may attain unto our desire. Thirdly, when as this desire and endeavor to
lead a godly life is hindered by our spiritual enemies, the flesh, the world
and the devil, there follows in the man regenerate a spiritual combat,
wherein he strugleth and strives to withstand their temptations, and to go
forward in his course of holy obedience. And if he prevail and foil his
spiritual enemies, then there follows peace of conscience and joy in the
holy Ghost; but if he be overcome and led captive unto sin, through the
violence of their temptations, then does he not lie still and suffer sin to
reign in him, but he seeks to rise again by unfeigned repentance, which is
accompanied with these seven fruits: First, a care to leave that sin into
which he is fallen. Secondly, 2. Cor. 7.11.
an utter condemning of himself for it. Thirdly, an holy anger against
himself for his fall. Fourthly, a fear least again he should fall into the
same sin. Fifthly, a desire ever after to please God. Sixthly, a zeal of the
same. Seventhly, revenge upon himself for his former offense. And these are
the effects of true sanctification, which whosoever can find in himself, he
may be assured that he is sanctified and shall be saved.

Of the subject of our sanctification.
neither is there any sanctified but those only that are elected and shall be
saved, as appears Ephesians. 1.4. Neither is this work begun in any one part of
them alone, but in all the parts, powers, and faculties of soul and body, as
appears 1. These. 5.23. The God of peace sanctify you throughout: The mind
is enlightened with the true knowledge of Gods will revealed in his word, Psalm.
119.18. Col. 1.9. Psalm. 119.11. Romans 7.18.
which before was blinded with ignorance. The memory is enabled to retain
those holy things which the understanding conceiueth. The will flees that
which is evil, and imbraceth that which is good. The affections are purged
from their corruptions, and made serviceable to holy reason. The body also is
sanctified, 1. Cor. 3.16.
and made a fit temple for the holy Ghost: so that whereas heretofore the
members thereof were the ready servants of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans
6.19.
they are now become the servants of righteousness unto holiness. Lastly, the
actions and outward conversation which heretofore were sinful and scandalous,
are now holy and righteous, serving both for the advancement of Gods glory,
and the edification of our christian brethren. In a word, whosoever are truly
sanctified, they are also wholly sanctified, that is, as the Apostle speaks,
sanctified throughout, in every part and faculty of body and soul. And
therefore whosoever would be assured that he has attained true
sanctification, he is to labor to compose and frame the whole man, his mind
and imagination, his will and affections, his outward actions, life and
conversation, according to the exact rule of Gods law: in all of them
mortifying the old man, and his inbred corruption, and embracing the contrary
duties of holiness and righteousness. Otherwise if our sanctification be not
of the whole man, and every part in their several measure, it will in the end
be vain and fruitless; for as it is to no purpose for citizens being
besieged, to fortify one place of the wall, and leave another part
unfortified, or to keep strait watch at some of the gates and leave others
open; so it will not avail us to fortify some parts against the power of
sin, and to leave others weak and naked, nor to guard some of the outward
passages of the senses, and neglecting some other, suffer them to lie as an
open entrance to let in our spiritual enemies, for so they will easily
surprise us, and lead us captive unto sin; but if we would be in any safety
in this strait siege, we must set a strong guard, and a careful watch, over
every part and faculty of our bodies and souls.

Of the object and time of our sanctification.
is sin and corruption, and holiness and righteousness, that we may fly
the one and embrace the other, mortify the flesh and the lusts thereof, and be
quickened in the spirit that we may be conformable in all holy obedience unto
the law of God, avoiding that which he has forbidden, and laboring to
perform that which he has commanded.

The time when sanctification is wrought in us, is presently after we are
effectually called and justified; for as soon as the virtue and power of
Christ's obedience, death, and resurrection, is applied unto us by a lively
faith, it does not only free us from the guilt and punishment of sin, but
also mortify the flesh with the corruptions thereof, and quickneth us in the
inner man, enabling us to forsake our former sins, and to serve the Lord in
holiness and newness of life. But howsoever our sanctification be begun
presently after our conversion, yet it is not so soon finished; but as the
seed being cast into the ground, does first take root, and then is scarcely
discorned, afterward shoots forth into a blade, and so springs up by
little and little, till it brings forth an ear, and lastly it ripeneth and
yields to the sower plentiful increase: so when first the seeds of
sanctification are sown in us, by virtue of Gods spirit, they have a time to
take rooting, when as they make little or no show to our selves or others, but
afterward they send forth as it were a blade of a holy profession, and the
ripe fruits of godliness. Notwithstanding these fruits in this life are not
purely clean, and without mixture; but as in the fairest field there is
amongst the cleanest wheat some tares and cockell: so in those that are most
sanctified, there are many corruptions of the flesh, mixed with the good
fruits of the spirit, Apoc. 22.11.
the which the christian is still in weeding and plucking up by the roots so
long as he lives, but yet can never overcome this great work, till the winter
of death wholly nippeth and kills these weeds of sin. We must not therefore
presently after our conversion, dream of a perfection in sanctification; no
nor yet at the first, estimate the trueness thereof by the greatness of the
measure: for as it is in the natural generation and growth of the body, so
also in spiritual regeneration; all is not finished at the first, but
perfected by degrees. As soon as we are converted, we are but babes in Christ,
Heb. 5.14.
and, in respect of our infancy in knowledge faith and other graces, such as
have need rather of milk than of strong meat: Romans 8.29.
in the rest of our life we grow up from strength to strength, till we come to
man's estate, unto which age we cannot properly be said to have attained, till
by death we wholly lay aside the old man, and the corruptions thereof: and
lastly we attain to our consummation and full perfection, when at the latter
day we shall rise again, and both in body and soul be endued with perfect
holiness, whereby we shall be enabled to perform obedience to Gods will, in
that degree which his justice requires.

CHAP. III. Of the parts of Sanctification.
That sanctification contains two parts, mortification, and vivification.
mortification, and vivification, the which also are said to be the parts of
true repentance, but in a diverse sense: for they are attributed unto
sanctification, as they are the work and action of God, who by his holy spirit
does mortify and quicken us, and is the sole author and cause of our
sanctification; and unto repentance as they have reference unto us, who being
regenerate and endued with Gods spirit, do labor in the mortification of our
corruptions, and endeavor to serve the Lord in newness of life; for, Spiritu
sancto acti agimus, we being first moved and set a work by Gods spirit, do
work together with him. This division has it ground and warrant in many
places of holy Scriptures, in which it is expressed in diverse phrases and
forms of speech. Psalm. 34 14. and 37.27. Esa. 1.16.17. Romans 5.11.18 Ephesians.
4.22.23.
Psalm. 34.14, Escew evil and do good. Esa. 1.16.17, Cease to do evil,
learn to do well. Romans 6.11, likewise, think ye also that ye are dead to
sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord. And v. 18. Being free
from sin ye are made the servants of righteousness. Ephesians. 4.22, That ye cast
of concerning the conversation in time past the old man which is corrupt
through the deceiuable lusts. 23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.
24. And put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. So Romans 7.4.8.13. 1. Cor. 5.7. Col. 2.12.3.9. Gal. 5.16. 1.
Pet. 2.24.3.11. By all which places and many others it is clear and manifest,
that our sanctification consists of these two parts, the mortifying of the
flesh, and the quickening of the spirit.

Mortification is the first part of sanctification, Of Mortification what it is
and how it is wrought.
wherein the spirit of God applying unto us the virtue and power of Christ's
death and burial, does by little and little weaken, subdue, and kill in us our
natural corruption, the flesh and the lusts thereof, so that they are not so
powrfull as in times past to stir up in our minds evil motions which are
contrary to the will and word of God.

In this description is set down first the cause of our mortification, which
is the virtue and efficacy of Christ's death and burial, Romans 6.4.5.
communicated and applied unto us by the spirit of God, whereby we are
ingrafted into the body of Christ, and so made partakers of the power and
virtue of Christ's death, which being derived unto us, does not only take away
the guilt and punishment of sin, but also does mortify and kill our natural
corruptions, which heretofore wholly ruled and ouerswaied us. Secondly, the
form manner and progress of this work is here expressed, namely, the
weakening, subduing, and killing of our corruption by little and little; so that
this work is not perfected at once, and in an instant, but by degrees: first
it is weakened and the power thereof somewhat abated, so as though it bear sway
in us, yet it does not wholly ouerrule us without resistance, as it was used to
do in the time of our ignorance: then being further enabled by virtue of Gods
spirit, working in us, we prevail against it, so that though it often rebel,
yet do we subdue it and obtain victory. Lastly obtaining a greater measure
of the spirit, we mortify and kill it; that is, though we do not utterly
deprive it of life and motion, yet we give it such a deadly wound that it never
recouereth his former strength, but still pineth and languisheth, till with the
death of the body it also dies and is wholly abolished. Now whilst it is in
this consumption and near unto death, having a long time before been weak,
oftentimes it seems to recover strength, and to offer some violence unto the
regenerat part: but this must not discourage us, as though now it were on the
mending hand, and like to be restored to it former health and strength: for as
it fares with those that lie upon their deathbead; so it is with our sick
flesh, and the corruptions thereof, after that nature seems spent, and the
power thereof wholly decayed, oftentimes falling into some grievous fit, wherein
there is a fight between life and death, their strength seems redoubled and
far greater than ever it was: but be of good comfort, it is no sign of
health, but a pange of death which near approaches.

And thus you see the death of sin and our natural corruption. Now as in the
death of the body there is a certain progress therein, namely, when the dead
carcass is also buried; so also there is not only a death of sin, Romans 6.4.
Col. 2.12. and 3.3.5.
but also a burial, the which is wrought by the virtue of Christ's burial
applied unto us by Gods spirit, whereby it comes to pass that sin which is
already slain and dead, does so remain and continue; so that this burial of
sin is nothing else but the further progress and continuance of our
mortification. Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.4.
Romans 6.4. We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, etc. So Col.
2.12.

That the work of mortification is hard and necessary.
which as it is a work most hard, so also most necessary: the difficulty
appears by the name which is borrowed from the practice of Surgeons, who
before they cut off any member, do first mortify it, that after they may take
it away with less sense of pain. And this is employed by our Savior Christ,
whereas he inioyneth us, if our right hand or eye offend us, to cut it off and
pluck it out: and plainly expressed by the Apostle Paul Col. 3.5. Mortify
therefore your members which are in the earth, fornication, uncleanness, Col.
3.5.
the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness, etc. where
calling these sins by the name of members, he intimates thus much, that they
are as dear unto us as the members of our body, and also that it is as
unpleasant and painful unto us to forsake our natural corruptions, as to be
deprived of the hand, eye, or foot. But though this work be most hard, yet it
is most necessary; for the best things that are in the flesh and unregenerate
part, even the wisdom thereof is death and enmity against God, Romans 8.6, 7,
8.
because it is not subject to the law of God, neither in deed can be, Romans
8.6, 7. neither can we do any thing pleasing unto God so long as we are in the
flesh, as it is verse 8. Lastly, if we live after the flesh, we shall dye, even
the everlasting death of body and soul; but if we mortify the deeds of the
body by the spirit we shall live, even the life of holiness and
righteousness upon earth, and the life of glory and eternal happiness in
Gods kingdom. And therefore if it be necessary to be in amity with God, whose
loving kindness is better than life; Psalm. 63.4.
or to perform obedience unto the law of God, or to do any thing pleasing in
his sight, or to escape death and damnation, or to enjoy life and eternal
salvation, then is it also necessary to mortify the flesh and the lusts
thereof, how hard and unpleasant soever this work seems unto us. So that the
difficulty must not discourage us, but rather double our diligence; and because
it is a pain intolerable to part with our sins, so long as they remain
like lively members of the body of our flesh, therefore as Chirurgians (to make
the pain tolerable to the patient) do first use means to mortify themember
which they purpose to cut off; so let us use all good means to weaken the
strength of sin, and to mortify our carnal affections, and then we shall
suffer them to be quite cut off and taken from us without any extraordinary
passion or sense of pain.

Of Vivification, what it is, and the causes thereof.
wherein the spirit of God communicating and applying unto us the virtue and
efficacy of Christ's resurrection, does raise us up from the death of sin to
holiness and newness of life.

The cause of our vivification is the virtue and efficacy of Christ's
resurrection applied unto us by Gods spirit; the which virtue flowing from his
deity, was first powerful in his own flesh, raising it out of grave, and
giving it victory over sin and death, and being derived from our head, and
communicated unto us who are members of his body, it does also revive us who
were dead in our sins, and inableth us to lead a new life in holiness and
righteousness, according to the rule of Gods word. This appears, Romans 6.4.
where he says that we are buried with him by baptism into his death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we
also should walk in newness of life. Phili 3.10.11.
So Philip. 3.10, 11. where Paul desires not only to be clothed with the
righteousness of Christ applied by faith for his justification, but also to
know and feel the virtue of Christ's resurrection, that by this means he might
attain unto the resurrection of the dead. And as Paul earnestly desired this,
so also he attained unto it, as himself professes. Galath. 2.20. Thus (says
he) I live, Gal. 2.20.
yet not I now but Christ lives in me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I
live by faith in the son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me.
Now this efficacy and virtue of Christ's resurrection is applied unto us by
Gods spirit, which unites us unto Christ our head, and therefore usually in
the Scriptures this work is ascribed unto him. Romans 8.11.
So Romans 8.11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies, because his spirit dwells in you.

Of the manner how our vivification is wrought.
the manner how it is wrought follows to be spoken of. First, the spirit of
God dispelleth the clouds of ignorance, and illuminateth the eyes of our
understanding with the beams of true saving knowledge, wherewith being
enlightened, we rightly judge that folly and madness, in which we thought
formerly our chief wisdom consisted, and approve that as only wise, which
before we condemned as extreme foolishness. Of this the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 1.17. where he prays that God would bestow upon them the spirit of
wisdom and revelation through the knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1.17.
that the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened, etc. After the
understanding is thus enlightened, then also the will is changed; and whereas
before regeneration it was corrupt, perverse, and rebellious, now being
sanctified, it begins to hate and avoid that evil which in former times it
loved and embraced, and to like and delight in that good which formerly it
loathed and abhorred: so that the regenerate man says with the Apostle, that
to will is present with him, though he find no means to perform that which
is good; Romans 7.18.22.
and that he is delighted in the law of God concerning the inner man, though
the law of his members rebelling against the law of his mind, lead him captive
to the law of sin. Finally, the understanding being enlightened, and the will
reformed, there follows the renewing of all the affections, the thoughts,
imaginations, powers and faculties of the soul: and lastly, the internal parts
being quickened, there insueth the renewing of the body, the outward actions,
life and conversation.

That the work of sanctification is not finished in an instant.
so this of vivification, is not perfected and finished in an instant, but in
continuance of time and by degrees; neither do we so long as we continue in
this life, receive any great measure thereof, but only the first fruits,
which is but as it were a little handful in respect of that large harvest of
godliness which we shall attain unto in Gods kingdom, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.23.
Romans 8.23. Whereas therefore the Church is said to be perfectly purged from
all spots of sin, Ephe. 5.26, 27*
Ephesians. 5.26, 27. it is to be understood of our justification, whereby the
faithful are delivered from the guilt and punishment of sin, and adorned
with Christ's perfect righteousness; and not of our sanctification, which is
only begun in this life, but not perfected till the life to come, as it is
notably set down 2. Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 2. Cor. 5.1, 2. etc.


CHAP. IIII. Satan's temptations, whereby he labors to entice us to commit
sin, answered.
Of the kinds of Satan's temptations whereby he indeauoreth to hinder our
sanctification.
the right understanding whereof serves much for the answering of all contrary
cauils and objections, which are suggested into our minds by our spiritual
enemies. Now, having showed the truth of this doctrine, let us in the next
place propound Satan's temptations, which he commonly uses to hinder this
work of sanctification: to the end that the weak christian may be the better
enabled to answer them in the day of trial.

The temptations which Satan suggesteth to hinder our progress in godliness
are of two sorts: either allurements to entice us to go aside out of the
narrow path of holiness, into the broad way of sin and wickedness; or
discouragements to disharten and weary us, in travailing this spiritual
journey. By the first, he sweeteneth the bitter pill of sin that it may seem
pleasant to our carnal appetites, to the end that we may greedely swallow it
to our everlasting bane; by the other he labors to make wholesome godliness
loathsome and altogether unpleasant to our sensual taste. Those he commonly
uses before we have sinned, to cause us presumptuously to fall into it: and
these after we have sinned and wounded our consciences, to the end he may
move us desperately to surcease our labor in the works of sanctification, as
being not only difficult, but altogether impossible.

Of Satan's temptation, whereby he allureth us to fall into sin.
he inforceth by extenuating the sin unto which he allureth us, by putting us
in mind of the mercies of God, and merits of Christ, and by hiding from us the
curse of the law, and the punishments threatened against sin both in this life
and the life to come. Why (will he say) make thou such scruple of committing
this sin which is so pleasant or profitable unto thee; seeing it is in it
own nature but very small, and almost no offense at all, being compared with
the great transgressions which others have committed, who notwithstanding are
said even in the Scriptures to have been most godly and righteous, yea, and
highly in Gods love and favor; why therefore should thou who art far
inferior unto them, stumble at this small straw, seeing these great blocks
could not hinder even the most religious from inioying the pleasures of sin?
Consider also the common frailty of mankind, and the natural corruptions of
the best, whereby they are ready to fall when the least occasions are offered,
into sins far greater then this which so much pleases thee. Remember that
thou can not be a saint in this life, nor freed from that corruption which so
fast cleaves unto thee; and therefore seeing thou must needs sin; now sin,
when thereby thou may have pleasure or profit, for do what thou can, yet
thou shall often fall. And why will thou not rather be lead with delight, then
be drawn with necessity? Consider likewise that thy God is most merciful,
and therefore still ready to pardon thy sins; and the rather, because he
knows thy frail weakness in resisting sin, and inability to perform
obedience to his law: and also that Christ died, not for the just but the
unjust, not for the righteous, but for the sinner: and therefore be thy sins
never so many, yet applying the merits of Christ by faith, neither their guilt
nor punishment shall be imputed unto thee. Call to mind also the gracious
promises of pardon and forgiveness, which are made unto thee in the Gospel;
for the obtaining whereof, nothing is required of thee but faith and
repentance: now this faith thou have already, and this repentance thou may
have hereafter when thou have inioyed the pleasure or profit of this sin.
Neither does repentance go before, but follows the committing of sin; so
that unless thou first sin, thou have no cause of repentance nor need to
repent.

That the world and the flesh further the former temptation.
wherewith he allureth us to entangle our selves in the snares of sin: into
which we are more ready to fall through the corruption of the flesh, which
naturally loving sin, does, with the evil motions and desires thereof,
further Satan's temptations; and the instigation of the world which pricketh us
forward and draws us on into the steep descending way of wickedness, into
which we are ready to run headlong of our own accord; partly alluring us
with pleasures, riches and worldly glory, the desired objects of our carnal
desires; and partly drawing us with evil examples, first to a liking, and then
to the practizing of those sins, which we see committed by others.

Against all which temptations that we may be the better armed, let us in the
next place propound some arguments whereby we may be withheld from falling
into Satan's snares of sin, into which his suggestions, the worlds
allurements, and our own corruptions lead and draw us: and then being hereby
moved to a true detestation of our sins, and an earnest desire of having a
divorce sued betwixt us and them, I will afterward set down some means, by
the careful use whereof we may be enabled to stand in the day of temptation,
and preserved from falling into those sins which we already condemn in our
judgments and dislike in our affections.

The preservatives to keep us from sin, of two sorts.
the first, tying us to holy obedience in the bands of love: the other, binding
us from falling into sin with the cords of fear. Of the former rank are
these and such like holy considerations.

The first reason taken from Gaeds love toward us.
First, we are to set before us the infinite love of God toward us base and
vile creatures, altogether unworthy of his least favor by reason of our
sins; the which his love as it plainly appears in all other his mercies and
manifold benefits bestowed on us, so especially in sending his only begotten
and dearly beloved son, not only to suffer some small misery, but even
death it self, yea that cursed ignominious and cruel death of the cross for
us, who were not his loving friends or faithful servants, but opposed enemies
and rebellious traitors, who had renounced his service and yielded our selves
as slaves to Satan ready to do his will. Seeing therefore our good God has
so dearly loved us, who were altogether unworthy his love, and most worthy
of his anger and heavy judgments, O why should not this flame of his love
toward us, kindle some sparkles of love toward him again, who is in himself
the chief goodness, and to us most kind and gracious? If for our sakes who
were his abject enemies, he has not spared his own son but gave him to die
for us; should we not for his sake, who is our chiefest friend, be as willing
to part with our sins, and to kill and crucify all our carnal corruptions?
Neither can we by any other means so clearly show our love to God as by
hating sin, which above al things in the world is most hateful and odious
unto him, and the only cause which makes him abhor even his excellent
creatures, so that though he loved them as being his own works, yet he
detested them being defiled with the filthy spots of sin; yea so odious is
sin unto our righteous God, that he could not choose but punish it in his
dearly beloved son, who bare our transgressions and sustained our persons,
and when there was no other way to subdue the power of sin, he gave it a
mortal wound even through the body of our blessed Savior, and delivered him
to be crucified, that by this means he might also kill and crucify our
corruptions. Seeing therefore sin is most odious and detestable in the eyes
of God, we cannot better show our love toward him, which his love toward us
has so well deserved, than by hating and flying that which he so much
abhors.

The second reason, taken from Gods benefits. Ephesians. 1.4.
let us call to our remembrance his innumerable benefits, which are the
undoubted signs of his love toward us. First he has elected us unto
eternal life that we should be holy. Seeing therefore he has made special
choice of us amongst many who are rejected, therefore let us exceed others in a
holy care of serving him, and avoiding those things which are displeasing in
his sight; he also has created us to the end we should worship and serve him
our Lord and Creator: Act. 17.28.
and therefore seeing we have our being from him, let us in all our actions
seek his glory and avoid sin, whereby he is dishonored. Yea he has not
made us the vilest of his creatures, but reasonable men according to his own
image and likeness, and therefore let us not deface this glorious workmanship
with the filthy spots of sin. He has redeemed us out of the cruel bondage
of our spiritual enemies, by giving his son to be the price of our
redemption, and therefore seeing we are bought with a price so inestimable, let
us not wilfully again make our selves the bondslaues of sin and Satan, 1.
Cor. 6.20. Luke 1.74.75. 2. Cor. 5.15. Romans 6.6.8.18
but glorify our redeemer in our bodies and in our souls, serving him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. He has effectually
called us and selected us out of the corrupt mass of mankind, and therefore
let us walk worthy our vocation, 1 Thessalonians 4.17.
for God has not called us unto uncleanness but unto holiness. He has
freely justified us, imputing unto us Christ's righteousness, and pardoning all
our sins, both in respect of the guilt and punishment; and therefore being
made free from sin, let us no longer live therein, but now become the
servants of righteousness; and seeing he has forgiven much, let us also love
much, laboring to manifest our love by the fruits of holy obedience. Luke 7
47.
He has reconciled us unto himself in his son, and therefore let us not by
our sins make him our enemy, nor again build up this wall of separation
which Christ our Savior has broken down. Col. 1.21.22. Ephesians. 2.14.
He has adopted us in Christ to be his sons and heirs of everlasting life,
and therefore seeing we are the sons of God, let us yield obedience to our
heavenly father, and not live in our sins like the slaves of Satan, least
provoking his just displeasure against us by our rebellious wickedness, we
should be disinherited of our heavenly patrimony. He has granted unto us the
peace of conscience and joys in the holy Ghost, and therefore let us not by
our sins disturb our peace and wound our consciences, turning our sweet joy
and comfort into grief and bitter heaviness. Finally, he has added unto
these spiritual gifts, innumerable temporary benefits, health, wealth,
liberty, food, apparel, and therefore let us not abuse his gifts by
profaning them with our sins, but rather use them as encouragements whereby
we may be moved with all cheerefulnes to serve so bountiful a master. In a
word, as the gifts of God are infinite which concern this life and the life to
come; so are the reasons drawn from them infinite, which may serve to
restrain us from sin, and contain us in the course of holy obedience: the
which if we continually retain in memory (even those benefits which are
common to all true Christians, and those which every one receives in his
particular place and calling) we will not (unless our ungratefulness be
intolerable) easily hearken to Satan's temptations, nor for the vain
pleasures, uncertain riches and momentanie honors of this wicked world be
hired to commit sin, which we know to be displeasing and odious in the sight
of God, who in his endless love has bestowed upon us such innumerable
benefits.

The third reason, taken from the death and sufferings of our Savior Christ.
let us call to mind the death and suffering of our Savior Christ, and say
unto our own souls, Has Christ my redeemer paid for my redemption even his
dearest blood, and shall I sell my soul to sin again for this vain
pleasure or base commodity? Has he not spared to power out the full streams
of his most precious blood, that in this pure lauer I might be purged and
cleansed from the filthy spots of sin; and shall the world cause me with her
Sirens songs to leap again into this filthy puddle? Should he suffer
himself to be crucified that by his death he might kill sin, and shall I now
put life into it again, reviving that which he has mortified? Did he in his
infinite love give himself for me, and shall I trample this precious gift
under foot, preferring before it the trifling vanities of this wicked world?
Should honor allure me to commit sin, seeing the glorious son of God has
abased himself and undergone ignominious shame to free me from it? Should
pleasures entice me to break Gods commandments, seeing my Savior Christ left
the bosom of his father, at whose right hand there is fulness of pleasures and
joys for evermore, and endured the grief and miseries of a wretched life and
cursed death, that thereby he might satisfy Gods justice for my
transgressions? Should I be persuaded to commit sin, with the base hire of
uncertain riches, seeing Christ has redeemed me, 1. Pet. 1.18.19
not with silver or gold, or any other corruptible thing, but with the
inestimable price of his most precious blood? Should my sensual taste and
curious palate, move me to sin in drunkenness and gluttony, seeing Christ
to redeem me has hungered and thirsted, and in steed of drink had offered unto
him gall and vinegar? Shall I be moved to sin by anger, and to seek unjust
revenge, seeing Christ being injured opened not his mouth, Esa. 53.7.
but like an innocent lamb suffered himself to be led to the slaughter? Far
be from me such a desire; nay rather because my Savior Christ has suffered all
this for me, to redeem me out of my spiritual bondage, I will resolve rather
to be deprived of all worldly benefits, and endure patiently the greatest
miseries and afflictions, than by wilful falling into sin make my self
again the slave of Satan. And thus have I showed how the remembrance of
Christ's death and passion is a notable corrasiue to kill our corruptions: and
as men are accustomed to show unto Elephants the juice of the Grape or
Mulberie, to make them more fierce and encourage them to a more courageous
fight; so have I by offering to our view the precious blood of this immaculate
Lamb, endeavored to redouble our valor in fighting this battle of
temptations against our spiritual enemies.

The fourth reason, taken from the union which is betwixt Christ and us.
let us remember the union that is between Christ and us, whereby he is become
our husband, we his spouse, he our head, and we his members. The consideration
whereof may serve as a forcible argument to restrain us from falling willingly
into any sin; for if we be the spouse of Christ, far be it from us to
behave our selves like Satan's strumpets, prostituting our souls to sin that
we may receive the gain of some worldly vanities, and to incur the grievous
displeasure of our most loving husband, for the pleasing of our carnal lusts
and sensual appetites; if we be the members of Christ's body, far be it from
us to make his members the instruments of sin and servants of
unrighteousness; 1. Cor. 6.15.
for what were this but as much as in us does lie, to draw our holy head into
the communion of our sins and wickedness, and to make our Savior who in
himself has wholly vanquished and gloriously tryumphed over sin and Satan,
in his members to receive a foil? Nay rather seeing we are the spouse of
Christ, let us labor to adorn our selves with the glorious goulden garment of
holiness and righteousness; and though we have some spots of our natural
infirmities in our outward parts, yet let us in a glorious manner deck our
selves within with integrity and uprightness of heart; and so the King our
heavenly husband shall take pleasure in our beauty, Psalm. 4.5.
and place us at his right hand in his kingdom of eternal glory. Seeing also
we are the members of Christ's body, therefore let us endeavor to conform our
selves to the holiness of our head, and by our righteous lives and
conuersations make it manifest, that we are quickened and led by the same spirit.

The fist reason taken from the spirit of God dwelling in us. 1. Cor. 3.16.
Ephesians. 2.21.22.
let us call to mind that our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, which
once were polluted and unclean, but now sanctified and purged by this our holy
guest, that they may be fit habitations for himself to dwell in. And then let
us consider that it is a most horrible indignity against the majesty of God,
to profane with our filthy sins the holy temples of his most holy spirit,
and to make them more fit to be sties for filthy swine and unclean spirits,
than mansion houses for God to dwell in; Ephesians. 4.30.
that by our sins we vex and grieve the good spirit of God, and make his
lodging loathsome unto him, and so as much as in us lies, we drive him away,
and as it were thrust him out of doors, if not by violence, yet at least by our
hard and uncivil entertainment: yea that by our sins we do not only
defile, but even destroy the temple of God, and thereby also cast our selves
headlong into eternal destruction. 1. Cor. 6.17.
For if any man destroy the temple of God, him shall God destroy, as it is 1.
Cor. 3.16. If therefore we would not profane Gods temple, abuse his glorious
presence, vex our holy guest, destroy his mansion and our selves also, let us
most carefully avoid sin, and nourish all the good motions of Gods spirit,
wholly submitting our selves with cheerful alacrity to be guided and governed
by his directions, and so we shall perfume these holy temples with the odours
and incense of holy obedience, 1. Pet. 2.5.
which smelling sweetly in Gods nostrils will move him to dwell in us with
pleasure and delight, all the days of this our pilgrimage, and afterward to
transport us into those eternal mansions of his kingdom of glory, where we
shall continue in all joy and happiness for evermore.

CHAP. V. Of the second sort of preservatives to keep us from sin.
The first reason taken from Gods all-seeing wisdom and all-filling presence.
the second sort whereby we may be withdrawn from committing sin, may be
taken from that fear and reverence of God, which ought to be in every one of
us: unto which we may be moved by diverse effectual reasons. As first by the
consideration of Gods all-seeing wisdom, and all-filling presence, whereby he
sees even our most secret thoughts, and is a present witness of all our
hidden actions. For this being remembered, who dare in such a glorious presence
commit that wickedness, which he knows hateful unto him, before whom he
commits it? He is counted an ungracious child, who will wittingly break
his fathers commandment even before his face; and he is esteemed a desperate
malefactor who dare presumptuously offend against the law in presence of his
judge; how then can our ungracious impudency and desperate presumption be
excused, who dare offend and sin in the sight and presence of a father so
gracious, and of a judge so just?

The second reason taken from Gods exact justice.
let us call to mind Gods justice, which is so exact, that rather then he
would let sin go unpunished, he punished it in his dearly beloved son. If
therefore thou sin, thou can not corrupt him with bribes, nor pacify him
with fair words, nor overcome him by entreaty, nor stop the course of
justice, with the intercession of friends. For, has he not spared his son,
and will he spaire his servants? has he punished sin in his own child, and
will he wink at it in a common subject? could neither the entreaty, nor
tears, nor groans, nor strong cries, nor bloody sweat of his best beloved
son, appease his wrath and satisfy his justice, but that standing in our
place he must needs bear our punishment, and being surety for sinners he
must die for sin? and shall they who are the principalls escape, who in stead
of pleading his payment, do contemptuously refuse it, and as it were tread it
under foot? It is true indeed that Christ suffered for us that we might
escape, and paid our debt that it might not be required at our hand; but seeing
all sinners have not their part of Christ and his merits, but only those that
are in Christ; and those only are in Christ, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit; seeing also those only are partakers of all the gracious
promises made in him, who approve their faith by the lively fruit thereof
unfeigned repentance; and those only do truly repent, who sorrow for their
sins past, hate their present corruptions, and desire and endeavor to serve
God in newness of life; how can we have any assurance that Gods justice is
satisfied for us, and that we have escaped condemnation, if we quench the good
motions of Gods spirit, and obey the flesh in the lusts thereof, and if still
being in love with our sins, we resolve to go forward in our course of
wickedness?

The third reason taken from Gods fierce anger against sin, showed in his
fearful judgments executed upon sinners.
let us call to our remembrance Gods fearce wrath conceived against sin, and
his fearful judgments which he has executed upon sinners, and that not
only particular men, but also whole states and commonwealths. Let us call to
mind the general deluge in which all mankind saving eight persons were
drowned; the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by fire and brimstone; the
rooting out of the whole nation of the Cananites; the reiection of the Jews;
the overthrow and utter defacing of those famous Churches of the Corinthians,
Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Collossians, Thessalonians; and the rest
mentioned in the Revelation. And to the examples of former times add those
which every man observes in his own experience; and then consider withal
that the cause which moved the Lord to execute in his just displeasure these
heavy judgments upon mankind, was nothing else but sin, and it will be a
forcible reason to withdraw us from it. For the Lord is immutable and
unchangeable in his course of justice, and he hates sin now as deadly as in
former ages; neither will he spare us more than others, if we live in our
sins without repentance: nay certainly as our sins being aggrauated by many
circumstances are more odious unto him, so will the Lord proportionably inflict
more heavy judgments upon us then he has upon others, whose sins have not
been so great and presumptuous. For if the Lord give us now extraordinary
knowledge, or at least the means thereof, and we sin against this knowledge
and against our own consciences; if he has in most abundant measure,
multiplied his mercies upon us, and we hereby be made more unkind and
ungrateful; if he has given us warning by innumerable examples of his heavy
judgments executed upon others in former times, and in our own days, yea even
in our own sight, lays heavy punishments upon such as have committed no
other sins then we our selves are guilty of, and yet we continue in our
sins without repentance, how is it possible but that we should provoke Gods
fierce wrath against us, and draw down violently upon our selves with these
cartropes of iniquity, Gods fearful plagues and heavy judgments. It is
true indeed that God is long suffering and slow to anger, but if hereby we
take occasion to continue in our sins, and do delay our repentance, what do
we else but treasure up against our selves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans
2.5.
and the declaration of the just judgment of God? It is most certain that God
is not easily provoked to wrath and anger, but let not this encourage us to
continue in our sins; for if it be once inflamed, it is so fierce and
terrible, that with the heat thereof it dries up the seas; and so powerful
that he makes therewith the earth to tremble and the mountains to melt like
wax in his presence, and the voice of his fury does break and rent in sunder
the ceaders, yea the mighty strong ceaders of Libanus, as the scripture
speaks. As therefore fire does burn more hotly in such solid matter as is
long in kindling, then in flax or straw which is soon inflamed, and soon
extinguished; so the anger of God is not easily inflamed, but if it be once
kindled, it burns so furiously that nothing will quench it, but the blood of
Christ applied by faith, and the streaming tears of unfeigned repentance.
Seeing then Gods judgments are so fearful, and his anger so terrible, let us
carefully take heed of provoking his wrath against us by our sins, He
2.10.31.
for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

The fourth reason taken from them day of judgment.
when as we must give an account not only of our words and works, but also of
our secret thoughts, before a most just judge, who with the all-seeing eye of
his divine knowledge searches and beholds the very heart and reins, in the
presence also of men and Angels. And this will restrain us from falling into
sin, though it may be so secretly acted that we need not to fear in this
life, either shame or punishment. For let it be supposed that we can hide our
sins from the sight of all men, yet what will this benefit us if God against
whom we sin, and before whom as our supreme judge, we must give an account
do look upon us? what will it profit us though time wear our offenses out of
man's remembrance, if God keep a faithful register of them, and ingraue our
reckoning with a pen of iron? what will it help us if by our cunning
conueyances, we can hide our sins and avoid shame, or with an impudent
forehead can face them out without blushing, if our nakedness be discovered,
and our shame proclaimed in the presence of God and all his Saints and Angels?
What will it avail us to be exempted from punishment in this life, through our
great power and uncontrollable authority, or to escape the penalty of
human laws by the intercession of friends, or by corrupting the judge, or by
procuring the princes pardon; if again we must be arraigned before such an
upright judge, as respects no persons, receives no rewards, and being found
guilty, be condemned unto the eternal torments of hell fire? When therefore
we hear the voice of Satan's temptations alluring us to commit sin, let us
also have the voice of the Archangell sounding in our ears, Arise ye dead and
come unto judgment: when the world tempts us unto sin on the one side by
intising promises of honors, pleasures, and riches, and on the otherside, by
terrifying threatenings of loss, danger, or punishment, let us call to mind
the day of judgment, when either we must hear the sentence of salvation,
Matthew. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father and inherit the kingdom prepared for you etc, or
the sentence of condemnation, Depart ye cursed into hell fire which is prepared
for the devil and his angels: and then shall not the momentanie vanities of
the world so forcibly draw us into the snares of sin, 2. Pet. 3.11. Jude.
14.15.
as the remembrance of the heavenly joys prepared for us in Gods kingdom will
retain us in holy obedience; then will not the worlds threats of temporary
miseries so strongly urged us to wound our consciences with the sting of sin,
as the fear to hear the definitive sentence of eternal condemnation will
restrain us from it.

The fifth reason taken from the manifold evils of sin.
let us call to mind the manifold evils, which sin causes both to body and
soul, in this life and the life to come; and so though the ugliness of it
self will not make us to flee from it, yet the miserable effects which it
produces may move us to abhor it. Consider therefore that there is no evil
under the sun, in this life or afterward, which is not a fruit of this
cursed root: it subiecteth the body to sickness and diseases, hunger and
thirst, cold and weariness; the mind to ignorance and blindness, the will to
perverseness, the affections to all preposterous disorder; it ruinateth the
estate, and brings a man to poverty and extreme misery; it makes the
whole man obnoxious to the curse of the law, the anger of God, and all those
innumerable evils, which ever accompany them. In this world it brings the
body to death and corruption, and in the world to come both body and soul to
condemnation, and endless destruction; it depriueth us of our heavenly
inheritance, and the everlasting joys of Gods kingdom, and plungeth us into
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. In a word there is no evil
which can be imagined which does not proceed from this evil of sin, and
therefore though it seem never so sweet to our carnal appetites, yet being
mixed with this gall and wormwood of innumerable evils, let us loath and
abhor it; when the vain and uncertain benefits which it promises move us
to embrace it, let the miserable evils which accompany it, and the most
assured and surpassing joys which it depriueth us of, make us to avoid it as
a deadly stinging serpent.

CHAP. VI. Of some special means whereby we may be preserved from falling
into sin.
The first means is to avoid the occasion of sin.
tempting him unto sin; and be moved unto a christian resolution, of
possessing body and soul in holiness and purity: now we are to speak of
some special means, whereby the christian thus resolved may be preserved from
falling into such grievous sins, as wound the conscience, and hinder him in
the course of sanctification. 1. These. 5.22.
First, he that would avoid sin, must carefully also avoid the occasions
thereof, which are strong inducements to draw him unto sin; for as it is
great folly for a man who dreadeth burning to be always meddling with fire and
gunpowder; so is it no less madness to think that we can preserve our selves
from sin, and yet intertaine all occasions thereof, continually suffering the
sparks of Satan's temptations to fall as it were into the tindar of our
corrupt affections. It is not possible that he who is inclined to gluttony and
drunkenness should contain himself from these sins, if he give himself to
company keeping, and take his chief delight in pleasing his taste with the
daintiest meats and drinks: or that he who is choleric, should refrain
from anger, and yet thrust himself into needless controversies and hot
contentions: or for him that is lascivious to abstain from uncleanness, and
yet frequent unchaste company, read wanton books, view obscure spectacles,
use filthy communication, and pamper himself in gluttony, and drunkenness.
In a word we cannot avoid any sin, unless we also flee and shun the
occasions and means thereof; and therefore let us be as careful and watchful
in the one as the other, or else we shall most certainly loose our labors.

The second means, to make conscience of the least sins.
if we would not fall into greater sins, we must also make conscience of
those which are less; and think with our selves that no sin is small,
seeing the least deserves the anger of God and everlasting death: otherwise if
we willingly intertaine even small corruptions, we shall at length make no
conscience of heinous transgressions; and these little thieves being let in,
will in time set wide open the door of our hearts, that the greatest and
grossest may easily enter, and so rob and spoil us of all grace and
goodness.

The third means is continually to stand upon our guard.
let us continually stand upon our guard, carefully watching over our own
hearts, that we be not surprised at unawares; for thousands are the baits
which are laid to entrap us, and ten thousand snares does Satan lay to
entangle us; and therefore it behooves us to look narrowly to our ways, and
to be always as ready to give Satan the repulse, as he to make the
encounter. And considering that if we do not assault sin, it will most
surely set upon us, and at one time or other will give us the foil if we only
lie at ward and never offer blow against this our enemy; therefore it
behooves every christian soldier, not only to give sin a repulse, but also
to wound it in the head, and beat it down, that it may not again assault
him, or at least not with wonted power and violence: and for as much as he has
many enemies which cannot at once be overcome, therefore he is to labor to get
every day the masterie of some sin, and to bring it in subjection, that so in
continuance of time he may vanquish all, and obtain a full and final victory
our all his corruptions.

The fourth means, to rest on Gods assistance and not on our own power.
we must not stand in our own power, nor trust in our own strength, but
wholly rest and rely upon Gods promised assistance. For if once we rob God of
his glory, and arrogate the praise of our victory over sin and Satan unto
our selves, the Lord will withdraw his helping hand, and leave us unto our
selves, till by our grievous falls we have learned to acknowledge our own
weakness, and to rest wholly in the power of his might. For as all other
sins are odious unto God, so especially the sin of pride, because it makes
vile man corriuall with God in his praise and glory, of which he is most
jealous; and therefore the Lord suffers, even his own children, to fall into
grievous sins, that hereby they may be humbled; and so uses other sins as
a counterpoyson to cure pride.

Ths sift means is fervent prayer.
seeing we stand not by our own strength but by the power of Gods might, let
us as often as we see our own weakness and aptness to fall, have our
recourse unto God, by fervent and effectual prayer; craving his aid and
assistance that thereby we may be enabled to stand in the day of temptation.
And when by virtue thereof we have given sin the foil, and repelled Satan's
suggestions; let us remember to return praise and thanksgiving to the Lord by
whose help we have beaten back our spiritual enemies: and then we may be
assured that the Lord will uphold us by the power of his spirit from falling
into sin; or if we do fall, he will speedily raise us up by unfeigned
repentance.

CHAP. VII. That in the most sanctified, remain some relics of sin, and
the causes thereof.
Satan's temptation, whereby he discourageth the Christian in the work of
sanctification.
wherewith he labors to hinder our sanctification by alluring us to commit
sin: now we are to speak of the other sort, whereby he seeks to discourage
us in this work, as being not only hard and difficult, but even impossible.
And these also are of two kinds; the first taken from the great mass of our
natural corruptions and small measure of our sanctification; the other from
some actual sins which we have committed. Concerning the first, he thus
frames his temptations: Thou labourest much (will he say) and tirest thy
self in attaining unto sanctification, but all in vain; for do thou not
see on the one side the irresistable violence of thy natural corruptions, which
continually choke in thee all the good motions of Gods spirit, and forcibly
draw thee into all sin and wickedness; and on the other side, thy small
measure of grace and sanctification, which is exceedingly stained with thy
manifold imperfections? How therefore can such weakness withstand such power?
And how is it possible that thy feeble spirit should overcome thy strong flesh,
especially seeing it is assisted with the strong aides of the puissant world,
and the mighty power of innumerable devils? Neither art thou vainly to imagine
that God will enable thee to overcome all these difficulties, for he has given
thee over to thine own weakness, otherwise if it were his will to make thee
one of his holy ones, he could with the powerful operation of his spirit, long
ago have perfectly purged thee from al thy corruptions, and given unto thee a
great measure of sanctification. Seeing then it is impossible, in respect of
thy weakness and thine enemies power, to accomplish this work which thou have
taken in hand, and seeing thou have no assurance that God will strengthen thee
with his spirit, which thou have a long time resisted and vexed, by quenching
the good motions thereof; thou have now no show of hope to effect that which
thou desire; and therefore it were much better for thee to cease striving
against the stream of thy corruptions, and to follow the natural current of
thy desires: for when thou take all the pains thou can, thou art in one
day carried further backward toward thine old conversation, than thou can in
many months get forward in the course of sanctification.

That our sanctification is imperfect and mingled with our corruptions
to the end he may hinder him from travailing this way of holiness which
leads to Gods kingdom; for the answering whereof we are to know, that the
sanctification of the most holy is imperfect, both in respect of the relics
of sin, and corruptions which continually cleave to them, and in respect of
the manifold wants and defects of their best actions. Neither are we so washed
in the lauer of regeneration, but that there remain in us some stains of that
scarlet ingrained dye of our corruptions; we have not so clearly escaped out of
our old captivity of sin, but that we retain still some gauls and bruses,
which make us to go haltingly in the ways of righteousness; we have not so
vanquished this spiritual enemies, but that still it will assault us, yea and
often foil us, though it cannot subdue us; we have indeed overcome these
cursed Canaanites, so that they cannot rule and reign in us as in former
times, but we have not utterly expelled them from dwelling amongst us; so that
do we what we can, yet still they will be as thorns in our sides to vex and
grieve us. Heretofore the lusts of our flesh like tyrannical Lords did against
all law and justice ouerrule us; but now by virtue of Gods spirit assisting us,
we have weakened their force and brought them under, yet not so but that still
they will rebel against the spirit, and continually exercise us in the
spiritual warfare. So that the regenerate man is not wholly spirit, as the
carnal man is wholly flesh, but is divided into two factions or parts, and
always is at civil wars within himself: for so far forth as he is
regenerate he is holy, pure, and undefiled, but so far forth as he is
carnal, he is sinful, corrupt and full of al pollution: as he is regenerate
he wholly loves and embraces true holiness and righteousness, and abhors
and flees sin and wickedness; but as he is unregenerate he loves sin
and the vain pleasures thereof, and loatheth righteousness as irksome and
unpleasant. In the spiritual part he contemns the world, and having his
conversation above he minds heavenly things; but in the carnal part he
loves the world, and is pressed down with the cares and pleasures thereof, so
that his mind cannot as it would mount aloft in divine meditations; in the
spirit he serves the law of God, in the flesh the law of sin.

That we must not dream of perfection in our sanctification.
to be endued with perfect righteousness, and to have the spirit in full
measure; but to have the corruptions of sin lessened and their power abated,
so that they cannot wholly ouersway us as in former times; to have some holy
desires and good endeavors of serving God in holiness and righteousness,
which also we express in our actions, although in great weakness and
imperfection; to have the first fruits of the spirit in this life, expecting
the whole harvest in the life to come: neither let us yield to Satan,
suggesting unto us, that we are not at al sanctified, because we have some
relics of our old corruptions and manifold imperfections in our best actions;
or that therefore our holiness which we have, is so small that it is to no
purpose, and that which we want so great and hardly come by, that it is not
possible we should ever attain unto it; seeing these suggestions are
sufficiently confuted both by the Scriptures and examples of all Gods children.
For the Scriptures teach us, that in many things we sin all; that if we say
we have no sin, Iam. 3.2. 1. Ioh. 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us: and therefore because we
continually offend, our Savior requires that as we ask our daily bread, so
also we should pray daily for the forgiveness of our sins. The Apostle also
tells us, that there is a continual fight in every Christian, Gal. 5.17.
the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, the
one tempting us unto sin, the other stirring us up to holy obedience.
Moreover, the examples of Gods saints are pregnant for this purpose, neither
was there ever any so perfectly sanctified, but there remained in them some
relics of their natural corruptions, which also showed themselves in actual
sins and grievous transgressions; as appears plainly in the examples of the
Patriarchs, David, Peter, and all others. But most clearly does the Apostle
Paul show this in his own person, Romans 7.
propounding himself as a true pattern of a man regenerate; for though he had
attained unto a great measure of sanctification, yet he complains of the
great force and violence of his inbred corruptions, Romans 7: for so great
strength thereof remained in him, that it forced him to abuse the law of God,
taking occasion thereby to work in him all manner of concupiscence, and so in
steed of killing sin did revive it in him, verse. 8, 9; that it made him to
omit the good he would, and to do the evil that he hated, verse. 15.19; that it
rebelled against the law of his mind, and led him captive to the law of sin,
ver. 23; that he saw no possible means in himself to subdue utterly these
corruptions, and therefore seeks for help elsewhere, crying out, Wretehed man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? v. 24.

That our wants and corruptions should not discourage us, but redouble our care
and diligence.
let not Satan persuade us that we are not yet sanctified, or that it is lost
labor to go forward in this work, because of the great power of our
corruptions and small measure of sanctification, which is stained also with
manifold imperfections; but rather let the strength of our corruptions redouble
our care and diligence that we may subdue them: and considering that there are
diverse degrees of holiness, let us as soon as we have ascended one step,
never rest striving till we have ascended a higher, until at length we come to
the top of perfection and the highest step of true holiness; according to the
exhortation of the Apostle Apoc. 22.11. He that is righteous let him be
righteous still, Apoc. 22.11.
he that is holy let him be holy still, that is, let him continue and daily
increase in righteousness and holiness.

That our relics of sin shall not be imputed unto us.
with Satan's temptations drawn from the relics of our sins, the strength
of our corruptions, and the imperfections and small measure of our
sanctification; let us further consider, first, that these relics of sin
shall not be imputed unto us, nor come in judgment before God to our
condemnation, because by faith we are united unto Christ, and so made partakers
of the virtue and merits of his death and passion, whereby he has satisfied
Gods justice for our sins, so that they cannot now condemn us, nor draw upon
us any punishment; and likewise we are made partakers of his perfect
righteousness and obedience to the law, which as a rich robe does cover and
hide our patched rags of imperfection. So then though we see the relics of
sin and our manifold imperfections, let us not be discouraged hereby from
laboring in the work of sanctification, but rather strive and endeavor to
mortify our sins, and aspire to more and more perfection. And if besides our
purpose we be led captive of sin, let us remember that we have an advocate
with the father Jesus Christ the just, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
and that he is the reconciliation for our sins; so that though they make us
condemn our selves in our own consciences, yet they shall never condemn us
before God. And this the Apostle Paul shows unto us: for having in the
seventh chapter of his epistle to the Romans declared, that the faithful have
remaining in them the flesh and relics of their old corruptions, which
powerfully hinder them from doing the good they would, and move them to commit
the evil which they would not, least any hereby should be discouraged in the
sight and sense of his corruptions, he presently adds in the beginning of
the eighth chapter, that notwithstanding the flesh and the corruptions thereof,
which before he had spoken of, remained in us, yet there was no condemnation to
those who were in Christ Jesus: and he yields this reason, because the law
of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, had freed them from the law of
sin and of death, that is, because the power and virtue of the spirit of God
(which is the author of life, by uniting us as members unto the body of Christ
in whom we live, and by sprinkling our consciences with his precious blood) had
delivered them from the force and power of sin and death, so that now it
could not condemn them, nor oblige and bind them to guilt and punishment as
in former times. Seeing therefore the sting of sin is taken away that it
cannot condemn us, let us not so fear it as that it should move us
desperately to cast away our weapons not daring to encounter it; for though
this our enemy may assault us, yet it cannot overcome us; though it may wound
us, yet it cannot kill us; though it may give us a foil, yet in the end we
are sure of victory, if we manfully resist and labor to subdue it.

That the Lord in the Gospel requires not perfect obedience to the law.
as was required under the Law, which is altogether impossible to our corrupt
nature, and was never to be found in any man (our Savior Christ excepted) but
only that we strive and labor to attain unto it; he does not require of us
that we should at once free our selves from the flesh and the corruptions
thereof, but that we endeavor to mortify it, according to the measure of grace
and strength which we have received from him; he does not require of us that
we be without sin, but that sin do not rule in our mortal bodies, that
we should like slaves obey it willingly in the lusts thereof, and that also
we hating and abhorring it do continually make war against it, and subdue
it by little and little, seeing we cannot at once wholly vanquish it. He does
not now require of us yt we should perform perfect obedience to the law, which
Christ has performed for us, but that we do our best endeavor, and though we
cannot attain to our desire, Romans 7.12.22.
yet at least that we be delighted in the law of God concerning the inner man
and consent unto it that it is good, holy and just. In a word, this is the
Christian man's righteousness which God requires, that he hate sin, and love
godliness, that he desire and endeavor to mortify the flesh and corruptions
thereof, and labor to lead a new life in holy obedience; and if contrary to
his desire and purpose he do the evil which he hates, or leave undone the
good which he loves; that he sorrow and grieve for his sins and
imperfections, and making confession hereof before the throne of grace, do
implore mercy and forgiveness in Christ Jesus. And if we offer unto God this
righteousness, it will be acceptable unto him, notwithstanding our manifold
imperfections; for he measures our deed by our will, and esteems more of
our affections than of our actions; August.
Nec intuetur Deus quantum quilibet valeat, sed quantum velit, and quicquid vis
and non potes Deus factum computat: He respects not what we can do, but what
we would do, and that which we could perform and cannot, he esteems it as
though it were performed. So that he reputeth him righteous who earnestly
desires and labors to be righteous, and him perfect who acknowledging and
bewailing his imperfections strives to attain to more perfection. Wherein he
fitly may be compared unto a tender loving father, who esteems of the least
endeavors of his beloved son, more than of the best actions of a servant,
because he regards not so much the excellency of the action, as the person
and cheerful will of the agent.

Why the Lord accepts of our imperfect righteousness.
is first because (we being made members of Christ's body) our persons are
acceptable unto him, and therefore our works also (not in their own worthiness,
or for their own merit, but in and for Christ) are accepted; the corruptions
and stains of them being washed away in his blood, and the imperfections of
them being covered with Christ's perfect righteousness. And thus being adorned
in the garment of our elder brother Christ Jesus, we obtain the blessing of
our heavenly father. Secondly, our righteousness and holiness does proceed
from the spirit of God dwelling in us; and from hence our works being
imperfect in themselves, do receive their dignity, excellency, and
estimation in Gods sight, as being the fruits of his own spirit, howsoever
mingled with our corruptions.

Lord to reject and cast us out of his love and favor; That our sins will not
move the Lord to reject us.
for we are the Lords children, and he our gracious father: now we know that a
loving father will not reject his child, because he is sick, lame, or in
miserable estate, but rather he is more tender over him, till he be recovered
of his infirmities: but what are our sins but the sickness, wounds and
misery of the soul, with which we are vexed and turmoyled whilst we
continue in this life? and will our heavenly father, whose love infinitely
surpasses the love of the most tender mother, cast us out of his favor,
because our souls are sick in sin, and molested with many miseries which
do accompany it? It is impossible; especially considering that we desire
nothing more than to be cured of these diseases, and to be restored to perfect
health. The Lord is our heavenly husbandman, and we his husbandry; now we
know that the good husbandman does not forsake his land, because it brings
forth thorns and thistles, but rather is so much the more diligent and
painful in weeding and tilling it, that it may be fitted for good seed and
bring unto him plentiful increase; and so the Lord will not cast us off, because
we naturally bring forth the weeds and thistles of sin and corruption, but
in his infinite love he will with the operation of his holy spirit, plow up the
fallow grounds of our hearts, and weed out our corruptions, that so we may like
good ground well husbanded, bring forth the ripe fruits of holiness and
righteousness.

The first cause, the manifestation of Gods mercy.
For first hereby it comes to pass, that the Lord has the whole praise of
our salvation, seeing he saves us of his mere mercy, and not for our works
and worthiness. Whereas if our righteousness and sanctification were perfect,
we would be ready to share with God, ascribing part in the work of our
salvation unto our selves, and not wholly attribute it to Gods mercy and
Christ's only and all-sufficient merits: and therefore the Lord has left in us
the relics of sin and manifold imperfections, that hereby it may appear
that we are not saved for our own worthiness and deserts, but of his free
grace and undeserved love.

That there might be a sit object of his mercy and patience.
Secondly, he has left in us these relics of sin and manifold imperfections,
to the end that there might be continual matter and a fit object, wherein he
might exercise, and by exercising manifest, to the praise of his grace, his
patience, long suffering, love, goodness, and infinite mercy, in the pardoning
and forgiving of them, which would not so plainly appear if at once he had
endued us with perfect righteousness.

That he might show his power in our weakness.
Thirdly, that hereby he might make way for the manifestation of his power in
our weakness and imperfections. If we were perfectly righteous and endued
with all grace, it were no wonder if we should withstand Satan's temptations
and get the upper hand in the spiritual combat; but seeing we are of our
selves sinful, exceeding weak and full of all imperfections, hereby is the
infinite power of God manifested, in that we are notwithstanding enabled, to
withstand Satan and all the power of hell which oppose themselves against us,
seeing nothing else could uphold such feeble weakness against such puissant
might. Of this the Apostle speaks 2. Cor. 12.8, 9: 2. Cor. 12.8.9.
for having oftentimes besought the Lord to be freed from the corruptions of
his flesh, he receives this answer, that Gods grace was sufficient for him,
and that his power was made perfect through weakness.

That he might stir us up to continual thankfulness.
Fourthly, hereby the Lord continually puts us in mind of his mercy and
manifold benefits, to the end that we daily tasting of them, may also daily
return unto him thanks and praise. If he should at once free us from sin,
and indue us with a full measure of grace and perfect righteousness, we would
soon be forgetful of his abundant mercies, and this forgetfulness would
work in us unthankfulness, and this unthankfulness would make us neglect his
worship and service. And therefore he does not at once enrich us, but lets us
continue in our poverty, that so we may continually depend upon him: and like a
wise householder he does not suddenly advance us to our highest preferments,
for then we would leave his service and betake us to our ease and pleasure;
but he bestows his benefits by little and little, and so keeping us still in
expectation of receiving more, he retains us still in his service, and every
day increasing his bounty, he puts also into our mouths new songs of
thanksgiving, and gives us daily new occasion of praising his magnificence.

That he may hereby work in us true humility.
Secondly, as the Lord hereby aduanceth his own glory, so also he works our
good, and furthereth our eternal salvation. For first by leaving in us these
relics of sin and manifold imperfections, he works in us true
humility, which of all other graces is most acceptable unto him, and
mortifieth our pride, which of all other vices is most odious and abominable in
his sight. For when we see our manifold infirmities and corruptions of sin,
all cause of pride and self-conceit is taken away, and we in all humility are
moved to confess, Lam. 3.22.
that it is Gods mercy that we are not consumed; how much more that
notwithstanding our vileness and unworthiness, he has made us his sons and
heirs of everlasting glory. And thus, of the flesh of this Viper sin, does
the Lord make a sovereign antidote against the deadly poison of pride. And as
good Surgeons do not suddenly heal up the wound, but keep it open till
they have drawn out the core and healed it to the bottom, for otherwise it
would putrify and become more dangerous; so the Lord will not at once heal
the wounds of our sins, but leaves them as it were open and uncured till he
have drawn out the core of pride, which being left in us (though we were
healed of all our other sins) would more endanger us than all the rest.
Wherein the Lord confirms and furthereth us in the way of salvation; for
nothing more weakneth and disableth us than pride, nothing more strengthens
and vpholdeth us than humility, because the strength whereby we stand and
repel our spiritual enemies is not our own ability, but the power of Gods
might, and the Lord withdraws his assisting hand from the proud, to the end
that he may learn to be more humble by his grievous falls; yea he resists
him, and therefore how is it possible that he should stand? but contrariwise he
gives grace to the humble, and fills him who acknowledges his own
emptiness with good things, 1. Pet. 5.5. Luke 1.53.
but the proud who is full in his own conceit he fendeth empty away.

That we may be moved to rest on Christ alone.
Secondly, he leaves in us corruptions and imperfections, to the end that we
should not rest in our own righteousness for our justification and salvation
(which though it were as great as Adams in the state of innocence, yet it were
no sure ground to rest upon) but in the alone righteousness of Christ Jesus,
which is all-sufficient and a foundation so unremovable, that all the power of
hell cannot ouerturne it, nor any that are built upon it. Upon which sure
pillar we would hardly rely, so long as we have in our hand the reed of our
own righteousness, we being naturally inclined rather to seek for
salvation in our selves than elsewhere.

That we may be exercised in the Christian warfare.
Thirdly, he leaves in us these spiritual enemies, that we may exercise our
selves in fighting against them, and so be kept from idleness the mother and
nurse of all evil; and as he would not at once cast out the Canaanites before
the Israelites, but by little and little; least the land should grow unto a
wilderness, and the wild beasts should multiply against them: so he would
not suddenly cast out our spiritual enemies, but suffers us to prevail
against them by little and little, least giving our selves unto idleness when
there is no opposition made against us, there grow in us as in a wilderness the
noisome weeds and thorns of sin, and the wild beasts of all outrageous
wickedness, which would devour and utterly destroy us. Whereas contrariwise
when we are assaulted outwardly with the forces of satan and the world, and
inwardly with the flesh and our natural corruptions, we have enemies against
whom we may exercise our faith, affiance, hope, patience, courage, and all
other graces which we have received, and by exercise increase them: we fight
the Lords battles like his valiant soldiers, and being assisted by his holy
spirit we obtain victory, and with our conquest a more excellent crown of
eternal glory: Revel. 2.26.27. and 3.21.
as appears Revel. 2.26, 27. and 3.21.

That we may be moved to loath the world and to long for eternal life.
that hereby he may make us to loath this world and vale of misery, wherein we
can do nothing but break the commandments of our dear loving father; and
may be moved to desire that heavenly life in Gods kingdom, when having laid
aside all corruption, we shall be endued with all perfection, and be fully
enabled to perform such obedience unto God as he requires. For seeing sin
is not fully vanquished till it be subdued by our death, nor we ever at rest
and free from the assaults thereof, till we rest in the grave; therefore the
children of God are content to forsake the world, because they can no otherwise
forsake their sins; and desire rather to endure death, than they would have
sin to live with them, as appears in the example of the Apostle Paul Phil.
1.22.23. Phil. 1.22.23.


The conclusion of the former point.
which are in their own nature evil; and therefore though we are continually
to bewail them, and to desire by all means to be freed from them, yet we are
not desperately to sink under them, not daring to encounter them, seeing now
they cannot condemn us, nay not so much as hurt us, but rather are so ordered
by Gods all-wise providence, that they serve for the manifestation of his
glory, and furthering of our salvation, so that we do not with willing
delight nor slavish fear yield unto them, but to the uttermost of our power
make resistance, and desire and endeavor to overcome them.

The last consolation taken from our assured victory against sin.
that though our flesh be never so strong, and the innumerable corruptions
thereof seem irresistable, and though on the other side our spiritual man
seem never so weak and feeble, yet we are not hereby to be discouraged,
seeing the regenerate part shall most certainly obtain the victory in the
end, though in the conflict it receives many foyles. And though this little
David seem in the eyes of a carnal Saul, to be far to weak, and altogether
unable to encounter that great Goliath, the flesh with the powerful lusts
thereof, yet in the end it will most certainly prevail and get the conquest;
because the spirit is the Lords champion which goes out in the name of the
Lord to sight against his enemies; the flesh the devils soldier who is Gods
enemy: That, is strengthened and supported with the power of God which being
insinit is irresistable; this by the power of Satan, and the world, whose
power is finite, and so restrained and ouerruled by Gods might, that they
cannot stir without his leave and permission. Unless therefore we would
blasphemously imagine, that the flesh and his assistants are of greater power
than God himself, or that God will suffer this disgrace that his champion
should be overthrown by his professed enemies; we may most certainly assure
our selves that we shall get the day and obtain a famous victory. And
therefore let not Satan discourage us, by setting before our eyes our own
weakness, and the mighty oppositions which are made against us; but arming
our selves with the christian armor, and trusting wholly in the power of Gods
might, let us valiantly encounter our spiritual enemies, and never give over
fighting till by death we have given unto them a final overthrow, and so shall
we be crowned with an invaluable crown of immortal glory.

CHAP. VIII. Satan's temptations drawn from our slow progress in
sanctification, answered.
Satan's temptation grounded upon our little profiting in christiantie.
drawn from the relics of sin which remain in us, and the small measure
of our sanctification: the second temptation whereby he laboreth to discourage
the weak christian, from going forward in his course of true godliness, he
takes from his slow progress and slack proceedings in sanctification, upon
which occasion he thus assaulteth him. Thou laborest much (will he say) and
toylest thy self with intolerable pains that thou may become a sanctified
man, but all in vain; for though thou hear the word often, and read
much, and prayest continually, and beatest thy brains with daily care, to the
end that thou may attain unto some perfection in christianity; yet, do
thou not see how little thou profitest by all thy labors, seeing thy knowledge
is still small, thy faith weak, thy charity cold, thy heart dull and hard,
thy good works few and imperfect, and all thy zealous resolutions easily
hindered and quite overthrown with every small temptation? Why then do thou
strive against the stream, and undertake a task which is to thee not only
hard but even impossible? for do what thou can, yet all will be to little
purpose, seeing this work is full of great difficulties, thy self disabled
with manifold corruptions, and thy enemies which oppose against thee exceeding
strong and mighty, as thy self find by lamentable experience, and thy much
laboring and little profiting do clearly prove. Cease therefore thy bootlesse
travail, and rather embrace thy pleasing delights, than turmoyle thy self
with vain labor.

That the dislike of our dullness and backwardness is accepted of God.
that if we dislike our own dullness and backwardnes in profiting and growing
forward in sanctification, if we be truly sorrowful and bewail our great
wants and imperfections, and labor earnestly in the use of the means whereby
we may attain unto knowledge, faith, and all other sanctifying graces, and
also be enabled to bring forth the fruits of holy obedience; then are we
accepted of God and shall in the end most certainly obtain our desire, though
yet we can see but small profit of all our labors; neither shall all the power
of our spiritual enemies so far prevail against us, as utterly to hinder us
in this work, but that we shall undoubtedly go forward although not so
speedely as we desire. For this holy desire of profiting in godliness, this
endeavor and careful use of those means which are ordained by God for this
purpose, are not natural, but the work of Gods spirit begun in us; and we are
with the Apostle to be persuaded of this same thing; Phil. 1.6.
that he that has begun this good work in us will perform it until the day
of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. We are to assure our selves with the Prophet David,
that the Lord will fulfill these holy desires of those that fear him, Psalm.
145.19.
Psalm. 145.19. We are undoubtedly to believe that the Lord will not suffer us
to be tempted above our power, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but will give a good issue with the temptation, 1. Cor. 10.13. We are not to
imagine that he will break this bruised reed, nor quench this smoking flax
seeing he has promised the contrary, Matthew. 12.20.
Matthew 12.20. And though this little grain of mustard seed for a time lie
hidden in the earth, and when it sprouteth up springs so slowly that we
cannot sensibly discern the growing thereof; yet in Gods good time being
watered with the dew of his holy spirit, it will become one of the greatest
trees in the Lords garden. For seeing the Lord has given us this grace, not to
be wanting in the use of all good means, we may most certainly assure our
selves that the Lord for his part will not be wanting, in giving his blessing
and granting the assistance of his holy spirit, which he has promised to
those that desire it. Luke 11.13.


That Gods spirit dwelling in us, will in the end perfect this work.
let us consider that these small beginnings of grace and first fruits of the
spirit, are most undoubted signs that he dwells in us: now wheresoever he
dwells, he sanctifies his own lodging, and is not idle till he have effected
this work which he has undertaken and begun. Though therefore this work in
regard of thy slow proceedings seem hard, yea, even impossible, yet consider
that that which is possible to man, is impossible to God; though thou see
many difficulties and mighty oppositions by thy powrefull enemies, yet let not
this discourage thee, seeing the Lord who is with thee is almighty, and
therefore able to repel the violence of all opposers, and to make the most
heavy and pinching yoke light and easy. Though in thy self thou art most
weak and feeble, Matthew. 11.30. Ephesians. 6.10. Phil. 4.13.
yet thou art strong in the power of Gods might, and enabled to do all things
through the help of Christ which strengthens thee.

as certainly decreed and promised the means tending thereunto, That the Lord
has as certainly decreed and promised our sanctification as our salvation.
which are the effects of his election and the forerunners of our salvation;
but one especial effect of his election is our sanctification, and the way to
salvation is the path of righteousness and holiness; and therefore this is no
less certainly assured unto us, that we shall be sanctified, and enabled to
walk in this way of righteousness and holiness, then that we are elected and
shall be saved. Though then we are weak and unstable, 2. Tim. 2.19.
yet the foundation of God remains ever sure; though in regard of our own
feebleness, and manyfould imperfections, the work of sanctification seem
altogether impossible, yet this should not move us to doubting nor discourage
us in our course, seeing it has not any ground upon our own strength, but
upon Gods immutable decree, and never failing promises. Ephesians. 1.4. Ioh.
14.16.17. Ezech. 11.19. and 36.26. Ier. 31.33.34. Joel. 2.28.29.
When then our small progress in true godliness, caused through the violence
of our corruptions and oppositions of our spiritual enemies, discourageth us
making this work of sanctification seem impossible, let us call to mind that
the Lord has as certainly decreed, that we should be his saints here upon
earth as his saints in heaven, that he has most faithfully promised, that he
will direct us with his holy spirit, take away from us our stony hearts and
give us fleshy hearts, illuminate our blind understandings with true saving
knowledge, indue us with a lively faith, and with all other sanctifying graces,
enable us to perform in some measure holy obedience to his heavenly will,
mortifying our corruptions and enabling us to serve him in newnes of life; all
which gracious promises we are as undoubtedly to believe, as those which
concern either the remission of our sins, or everlasting happiness. And
therefore though our own dullness, backwardness, and little profiting in
sanctification, should work in us true sorrow, yet this should not discourage
us doubting of the issue of all our labors, but knowing that God is alike true
in all his promises, let us, setting aside all difficulties, beleene against
belief, and undoubtedly persuade our selves that the Lord will finish that
good work which he has begun in us, though as yet it has but small
proceedings, if we hungar after more perfection, and carefully use the means
whereby we may attain to true holiness.

CHAP. IX. Satan's temptations whereby he aggrauateth our sins in general,
answered.
How Satan terrifieth the Christians conscience by aggravating his sin.
which he groundeth upon our natural corruptions and our small measure of
sanctification. Now we are to speak of such as he suggesteth after we have
committed some actual sins: and these are either in respect of our sins in
general, or else some special sin into which we have fallen. Concerning the
first, when the weak Christian (who has a tender conscience, and therefore
cannot be persuaded to lie securely in his sin) has through the strength of
his own corruptions, and violence of his temptations, committed any sin
against his knowledge and conscience, then does the tempter (who before his
fall exceedingly extenuated and minced his sin, now after that he is fallen
into it) out of measure aggrauate the grieuousnesse and hainousnes of his
offense, partly in respect of the nature and quality of the sin it self,
and partly in respect of the circumstances, as being committed after his
calling, against his knowledge, in such a time or place, and by such a person,
as God is thereby most dishonored, and his brethren offended by his bad
example. And thus having as it were stretched out his sin upon the tentars of
his temptations, and with the blasts of his false suggestions made of every
small drop a great bubble, then does he also set before him the curse of the
law, Gods fearful judgments, the plagues and punishments of this life, and
everlasting death and condemnation in the life to come, continually accusing
and terrifying him as being guilty of all these fearful evils, by reason of
his sins, to the end that hereby being utterly discouraged, he may
desperately cast off all care of continuing in his former course of godliness,
as if now it were altogether in vain and to no purpose.

The means to withstand the former temptation, are renewed faith and repentance.
it behooves us not to rest in the remembrance of our former faith and
repentance, but as we have renewed our sin, so also must we renew our sorrow
for it, bewailing our corruptions, which have so prevailed against us as to
move us to transgress Gods commandments, hating and detesting our sin into
which we have fallen, and purposing for the time to come to leave and forsake
it, and to serve the Lord in holiness and newness of life. And this our
repentance we must approve to be unfeigned by those fruits thereof which the
Apostle mentions, 2. Cor. 7.9, 10, 11. that is, we must study and endeavor
to amend, 2. Cor. 7.9.10.11.
confess our sin unto God in all humility, and most earnestly crave remission
both of the fault and punishment, have a godly indignation against our selves
because we have sinned, and a sonnelike fear not so much in respect of the
punishment, as of offending and displeasing God our most gracious loving
father; and an earnest desire that we may be so renewed, that we be not again
so overtaken; a more fervent zeal in loving God and keeping his commandments
than before our fall; and lastly, we must take a holy revenge of our selves,
that thereby we may so tame our flesh, that it may not hereafter be so
powerful in us, as to overcome and lead us captive unto sin.

And thus having renewed our repentance, we must also renew our faith, by
applying unto our selves all the gracious promises of the Gospel, concerning
life and salvation in Christ Jesus, made unto all repentant sinners; and by
calling to our remembrance that Christ the just has borne the punishment due
unto us who were unjust; that with his death and merits he has fully satisfied
Gods justice, appeased his wrath, and washed away our sins with his blood;
that he has fulfilled the law for us, and taken upon him our curse, that we
in him might be blessed; that by suffering for us, he has freed us from all
punishments of this life and the life to come, that he ever lives to make
intercession for us; so that though we sin, yet there is no fear of
condemnation, seeing we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
just, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
who is the reconciliation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 2.1, 2.

Satan's temptation persuading us that we are still in the flesh. Romans 8.1.
seeing they are restrained to those only who are members of Christ Jesus, in
which number are none but those who are regenerate, renewed, and governed by
Gods spirit, according to that Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those
which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit. But thou (will he say) art not in Christ, for being ingrafted in this
vine thou would bring forth the grapes of godliness, whereas there
springs nothing from thee but the briars and brambles of iniquity; neither
walk thou after the spirit, for then in thy life thou would show the
fruits thereof, but after the flesh, which wholly ouerruleth thee and casts
thee headlong into all sin and wickedness.

What it is to walk after the flesh and after the spirit.
that it is not the committing of a sin or of many sins, which proves
that we walk not after the spirit but after the flesh, (for so should all the
children of God be carnal and not spiritual, yea even the Apostle Paul
himself who complained that he did the evil which he hated, and found no
means to do that which was good, but when he would do good, evil was
present with him: and that there was a law in his members rebelling against the
law of his mind, which led him captive unto the law of sin) but to walk
after the flesh is willingly to obey it in the lusts thereof; to commit sin
with pleasure and delight; to embrace that which is evil with full consent of
will cheerfully and with all readiness; to run headlong into wickedness
stubbornly, presumptuously and securely; to have sin not only dwelling but
also reigning in our mortal bodies; to live therein without repentance, never
grieuing for it, nor endeavoring to forsake it, nay rather greatly loving and
making such high account of it, that we had rather part with our lives than
be divorced from our sins. Whosoever therefore through his weakness and
infirmity is led captive unto sin, and being enthralled by this tyrant
earnestly desires liberty, and does not willingly run, but is violently
drawn by Satan's temptations and his own corruptions, and having sinned is
not therewith delighted, but exceedingly grieved that by his sin he has
displeased God; and seeing his own weakness and infirmities does bewail
them, and flees unto God by fervent prayer, desiring the assistance of his
holy spirit, whereby he may be enabled to mortify his flesh and the
corruptions thereof which he deadly hates, and to serve God in holiness and
newness of life; such a one may assure himself that he walks not after the
flesh but after the spirit, and that he is in Christ Jesus, and has escaped
condemnation, though through his infirmity and strength of his inbred
corruptions he falls often into sin.

The differences between the sins of the regenerate man and the unregenerate.
Though therefore the sanctified man sins, yet this does not prove that he
is still in the flesh and unregenerate; seeing there is great difference
between his sins into which he now falls, and those which he committed
before he was sanctified, or those which they commit which still live in the
flesh. For first the unregenerate man does continually sin, heaping up one
wickedness upon another, the man regenerate but sometimes, when he is
overcome by his corruptions; the wicked man commits sin with greediness,
the godly man with some kind of irksomeness and after a sort unwillingly; the
one draws sin unto him as it were with cartropes, Esa. 5.18.
the other is violently drawn to sin with the strength of his corruptions;
the one hunteth after sin and the occasions thereof, the other is hunted by
sin and Satan's temptations, till being out of breath and fainting for
weariness he is overtaken and led prisoner. The carnal man sins with full
consent of will, and with pleasure and delight, the spiritual man does not
yield without some resistance of the regenerate part, and as it were grudgingly
and with the misliking of the spirit; he that is unregenerate suffers sin to
reign in him, and yields unto it such willing and hearty obedience as the
loyal subject does to his lawful King, but the sanctified man obeys it as
though it were an usurping tyrant, repiningly and by co^straint, rather drawn
with force than moved by any love or liking. The wicked man commits sin
upon deliberation, advisedly and of set purpose; but the regenerate man for the
most part suddenly, besides his purpose and contrary to his resolution. The
ungodly man's heart and conscience seldom or never controules him for his
sin, or if it do, yet it suddenly vanishes like a flash of lightning; but
there is a fight in the heart of the godly man, the carnal part drawing one way
and the spiritual part another. When the carnal worldling offends he is in
his common way, for he makes an occupation of committing sin; but when the
regenerate man sins he is out of his course, and is never at rest till he
comes into his way of righteousness again: when the wicked man has
committed one sin, that is an argument to move him to commit another, Eccl.
8.11.
because judgment is deferred, and he has escaped punishment; but the true
Christian (like one who runs a race for some great wager) if he stumble and
fall, when he rises again he does more carefully look to his feet, and
strives to run the more swiftly in the way of righteousness, that so he may
redeem with more than usual speed the lost time wherein he was hindered by his
fall. Finally, the unregenerate man being fallen into the puddle of sin, does
wallow therein with pleasure and delight, and never strives to rise again by
amendment of life, but the man regenerate though he fall, yet he rises up
again by true repentance, and never rests till he have thoroughly washed his
polluted soul with the blood of Christ applied unto him by a lively faith. The
one remembers his sins which he has committed, with gladness and
rejoicing, yea bragging and boasting of his outrageous wickedness; the other
never thinks upon them but with grief and sorrow, neither is there any thing
in the world whereof he is more ashamed than of his sins. Seeing therefore
there is such great and manifold differences, between the sins of the
sanctified and those who are unsanctified, let not Satan persuade us that we
are still in the flesh and unregenerate, because will we nill we, we often fall
into sin, if in our manner of sinning we can find these differences which
we never discerned in former times.

CHAP. X. Satan's temptations taken from particular sins into which we have
fallen answered.
That sins committed after repentance, exclude us not from pardon.
ANd so much concerning those temptations which Satan suggesteth in respect of
our sins in general: now we are to speak of such as concern particular
sins, and these are of two sorts; for either Satan seeks to overthrow our
faith, and to discourage us from going forward in our course of godliness, by
setting before us and exceedingly aggravating those sins which indeed we
have committed, or by persuading us falsely that we have committed such sins,
as being unpardonable are not incident to the child of God. The former sort of
temptations are taken either from some heinous sin once committed, or from the
often falling into the same sin. Concerning the first, he aggrauateth the
sins of the faithful two especial ways, either because they have been
committed after repentance, or voluntarily against knowledge and conscience. In
the former respect he is ready to suggest, that the children of God do not
commit any sin after they have truly repented of it; and if any do, either
he never truly repented, or if he did, yet after his fall there is no place to
a second repentance, nor hope of Gods mercy. For answering whereof we are to
know, that howsoever the state of those who thus sin is somewhat dangerous,
and they more hardly recovered than others (even as those diseases are perilous
and hardly cured, into which we fall by a relapse after the recovery of
health) yet this is incident to the children of God who have truly repented,
and notwithstanding this grievous kind of falling they are not debarred of
Gods mercy in Christ Jesus. And this appears partly by reasons, and partly
by examples. For first, the gracious promises of the Gospel concerning the
remission of sins, are indefinite and without limitation, of time, or sins,
whether committed before or after repentance. So Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. 1. Ioh. 2.1, 2.
and I will ease you: and 1. John 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate
with the father, etc. In which and in many other places, the Lord assures us
that he will receive to mercy all repentant sinners, of what nature and
quality soever their sins are. Secondly, in the law were sacrifices
appointed for the sins of the people, not only those who were newly received
into the Lords covenant for their sins past, but also for those sins which
were daily committed, after that they had long been therein. Thirdly, the Lord
inoyneth us that we forgive our brother seventy times seven times, if so often
he offend us and repent of his fault; and therefore himself much more, whose
mercy is infinite, and more exceeds ours than the whole sea a little drop,
will pardon us if as we often sin, so also we often turn unto him by
unfeigned repentance. This also manifestly appears by examples, for did not
the Prophet David after his true conversion fall grievously by committing
murder and adultery, the Apostle Peter by denying his Lord and Savior, Noah
by drunkenness, Lot by incest, and yet afterward they truly repented again
and were received to mercy? So that this point is clear and manifest, that the
dear child of God, after his true conversion and unfeigned repentance may fall
into grievous sins, and yet truly repenting of them, may have them remitted,
and be received again into Gods wonted love and favor.

An objection answered. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
But here the tempter will object that the Apostle affirms Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
That it is impossible that those who have been once enlightened, etc. if they
fall away, should be renewed by repentance: seeing by so sinning, they crucify
again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him. And therefore
whosoever sins after his true conversion, can neither repent nor receive
mercy. To which we must answer, that the Apostle in this place does not speak
of every falling into to sin, for so he should be contrary to the other
Scriptures before alleged, but of a general falling away by apostasy, and of
a malicious persecuting of the known truth, which is the sin against the
holy Ghost, the which is joined with continual impenitency, and therefore
cannot be pardoned. And this appears manifestly by the words of the text; for
he does not simply say if he fall into sin, but if he fall away, namely by a
general and malicious apostasy: and again, he shows of what manner of
falling he means in the words following, whereas he says, that such as thus
fall away, crucify unto themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him.
Now they are said to crucify Christ again, who with an unplacable hatred do
scorn and deride Christ crucified, renouncing all part and hope in his death
and sufferings, as did some of the malicious Jews, and as some apostates do
in these days. And therefore this place makes nothing against the repentance
and receiving to mercy of such as fall through infirmity into some particular
sins, though never so heinous.

That all sins of knowledge are not presumptuous.
The second sort are taken from sins committed voluntarily against our
knowledge and conscience; which if we have fallen into, he presently suggesteth
that we have sinned presumptuously against God, and therefore cannot be
reckoned in the number of Gods children, nor conceive any hope of pardon and
forgiveness. For the answering unto which temptation, we are to know these
two things; first, that all sins committed against knowledge and conscience
are not presumptuous: secondly, that though we should fall into presumptuous
sins, yet we may be the children of God, who are neither debarred of true
repentance nor of Gods mercy. For the first, we are to know that not the
heinousness of the sin committed makes it to be presumptuous, but the
manner of the fact, and the mind of the offender; for howsoever Peter fell
grievously, yet we cannot say that he fell presumptuously, What it is to
sin presumptuously.
because he sinned through infirmity and fear of danger, whereas to sin
presumptuously, is to sin of a stubborn wilfulness, either through the
neglect of Gods justice and judgments, or through the abuse of his mercy and
benefits. In the first respect they offend, who having diverse times themselves
sinned, and yet escaped punishment, or having seen others in the like case,
do take occasion hereby to sin again, hoping to escape as in former times:
and of such the wise man speaks, Eccles. 8.11, Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8.11.
therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil.
In the other respect, such offend as take occasion upon Gods mercy and long
suffering to fall into sin, presuming before they commit it, that God upon
their repentance will in his infinite mercy forgive them: and thus they abuse
Gods mercy and goodness which should lead them to repentance, as an argument
to make them more desperately to run into all wickedness. Romans 2.4.
So that to sin presumptuously, is not to sin upon knowledge, and against a
man's conscience only, unless there be joined therewith a presumptuous hope to
escape punishment, or that not withstanding the sin committed, he shall
receive pardon in respect of Gods infinite mercy. Now many of Gods children may
fall against their knowledge and conscience, and yet not presume either to
escape Gods judgments or to be partakers of his mercy, as namely those who are
carried headlong into a sin without any time of deliberation through the
violence of their corruptions, or overcome by fear of some present danger, or
some other unruly passion.

That sins of knowledge are pardonable.
that though these sins against knowledge and conscience be not
presumptuous, yet they are unpardonable, seeing the committers of them have no
part in Christ's sacrifice, and consequently can hope for no mercy at Gods
hands: and this he will endeavor to prove by that saying of the Apostle, Heb.
10.26.
Hebr. 10.26. For if we sin willingly after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there nemaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a
fearful looking for of judgment etc. For the answering whereof, we are to
know, that the Apostle in his doctrine is not contrary to our Savior Christ:
but he has taught us, that not only sins against knowledge are pardonable
upon true repentance, but even horrible blasphemies against the majesty of
God, yea, all sins whatsoever saving the sin against the holy Ghost. Matthew.
12.31, 32. Secondly, Mat. 12.31, 32.
we know by experience, that both David and Peter fell grievously against
their knowledge and conscience, wittingly, and in a sort willingly, and yet
they both repented and were received to mercy: and therefore the Apostle
speaks not of all kind of voluntary falling, but first of sin committed
with full consent of will, pleasure, and delight: the which kind of sins are
never committed by Gods children after their true conversion; for as they are
in part carnal and unregenerate, so are they in part spiritual and
regenerate, which is to be understood; not only of the understanding part,
but also of the will and affections. So far forth therefore as their will is
regenerate, they do not will nor yield unto sin; and though they consent
unto sin, yet this consent is not absolute and entire, but with some dislike,
grudging, and resistance of the spiritual part; the which dislike and
resistance, though sometimes it cannot easily be discerned in the very act of
sin, whereas the weak motions of the spirit are violently ouerborne, through
the violent strength of their natural corruptions, and so ouershadowed by the
cloudie mists which their unruly passions cast before their understanding, that
they cannot at all perceive any dislike or resistance against the temptation:
yet after the sin is committed, and the good motions of the spirit are again
revived out of their deadly swound, then do they hate and detest that sin
which before seemed pleasant unto them and earnestly desire with the Apostle to
be freed from it. Lastly, the Apostle in that place does not speak of every
particular sin committed with full consent of will, for so also the elect
offend before their conversion, but of a general and malicious apostasy from
the known truth, and a scornful rejecting of the sacrifice of Christ once
offered for sin: so that the sense is thus much, that if we wilfully and
maliciously sin, by renouncing the sacrifice of Christ offered for sin, we
cannot hope to be saved by any other sacrifice, but are to expect judgment and
condemnation, seeing such tread under foot the son of God, and count the
blood of the testament an unholy thing, and even despite the spirit of grace,
as he explaneth himself in the verses following.

That the christian may fall into presumptuous sins, and that so falling, he
may be received to mercy.
the second is whether the christian man may fall into presumptuous sins, and
if he do, whether they be pardonable or no. For the first, though it must
needs be confessed that it is a fearful case, to neglect Gods justice and
judgments because of his long suffering, or to take occasion upon the
abundance of Gods mercies and readiness to forgive, to provoke him continually
by our sins; yet it cannot be denied, but that a true christian, through the
strength of his inbred corruptions, may fall into these presumptuous sins;
neither is there any privilege in the holy Scriptures to exempt them from any
sin whatsoever, but that either before or after their conversion they may
fall into it, saving only that unpardonable sin which is committed against
the holy Ghost. Moreover, David prays the Lord to keep him from presumptuous
sins, Psalm. 19.13.
and that he would not suffer them to reign over him, Psalm. 19.13. where
first he shows that of himself he was apt to fall into such sins, if the
Lord did not preserve him from them; and secondly he implies, that the Lord
might for good causes known unto himself, suffer him to commit these sins
of presumption, and therefore he further prays that if he should fall into
such sins, it would please the Lord to raise him by true repentance, and not
suffer them to rule and reign in him. So that it appears that a true
christian may fall into these sins: now, that having fallen he may rise
again by true repentance, and receive pardon and forgiveness, it is likewise
manifest. For if once the Lord receive us into the covenant of grace, and
acknowledge us for his children, then nothing in the world, no not the most
grievous sins which we can fall into, can separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39.
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.38, 29. Secondly, our Savior tells us, that
every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men upon true repentance, Mat.
12.31.32.
saving only the blasphemy against the spirit which is always joined with
final impenitencie. Matthew. 12.31, 32. Thirdly, the promises of the the Gospel
are general and indefinit, excluding no fortes of sins whatsoever, so they
perform the condition of faith and repentance. And therefore also presumptuous
sinners, repenting and believing, are assured of mercy and forgiveness.
Lastly, if David might fall into these sins, then David also might repent and
receive pardon, seeing he was truly justified, sanctified, and a chosen
vessel of the Lord elected to everlasting life.

That it is a fearful thing to fall often into the same sin willingly.
now we are to speak of them which he suggesteth unto the weak conscience,
after the committing of one and the same sin diverse times; upon which
occasion he is ready to persuade the weak christian, that he never truly
repented, otherwise he would never again fall into the same sin; and the
howsoever the child of God may fall into diverse sins, through want of care
and experience, yet it is not incident to any of this number to fall again and
again into the same wickedness, after they have had warning and sufficient
knowledge of the evils thereof. For the answering whereof we are to know, that
in truth it is a grievous and fearful case to be thus overtaken, and to be so
besotted with the pleasures of sin, that neither instruction nor our own
experience can make us to see the evils of sin, and work in us a care to
avoid and shun it. The burnt child (as the proverb is) dreadeth the fire;
he that has been deceived and thereby much indamaged, is afterward more
wary; he that has cast himself into any grievous disease through some
unwholesome meats, is ever after more careful of his diet; he that has once
been assaulted by his enemy at unawares, and has received griesly wounds,
will after he is cured go better armed and furnished, that he may not again
be overtaken of the like danger. And therefore seeing experience of all other
evils does teach us to avoid them, what a lamentable thing is this, that no
warning will make us take heed of sin, which is the greatest evil and cause
of all the rest? that having drunk this deadly poison and been grievously
sick thereof in our consciences, we should being recovered be enticed with
the pleasant taste thereof to swallow it down again? and that having received
grievous wounds, we should after take no better heed, and go no better armed
and prepared to make resistance, but for want of care and watchfulness expose
our selves again to the like danger of our spiritual enemies? But yet we are
to know that this sometimes, That the child of God may fall often into the same
sin and yet be received to mercy.
through our great frailty and corruption, may be the estate of a true
christian and faithful servant of God, to fall again and again into the same
sin, neither does any thing privilege them from committing that sin again
which they have once committed. For first the same inbred corruption still
dwells in them and is ready again to give them the foil and to lead them
captive into the same sin, if the Lord uphold them not, so that inrespect of
their own strength they may fall again as in former times. Secondly, the same
causes still remain which may move the Lord to leave them to themselves, and
suffer them to fall, namely that hereby they may be more humbled, and more
seriously bewail their corruptions, that they may more earnestly implore his
mercy, and he more manifest it in pardoning their sins to the praise of his
glory. Thirdly, howsoever this is not usual with the children of God, to fall
diverse times into, a sin which is great and grievous, yet every one finds
in his own experience that he often commits such sins as are not so
heinous, through infirmity and weakness; as to hear the word negligently and
carelessely, to be distracted with wandering thoughts in prayer, to fall into
unjust anger, to lie and use idle communication and such like, of which
notwithstanding repenting he is received unto mercy. So that it is not the
often falling into the same sin, that excludes us out of the number of Gods
children, or debarreth us of pardon, so that we often repent lay hold upon
Christ with a lively faith. Neither do the scriptures limit and restrain Gods
mereie, and the virtue of Christ's merits, to the pardoning and taking away of
diverse sins, once committed, but extend them also to the same sin committed
diverse times, yea to all sins whatsoever of which we truly repent.

CHAP. XI. Satan's temptations persuading the christian that he has sinned
against the holy Ghost, answered.
Of the sin against the holy Ghost.
but if he cannot so prevail, then he will falsely accuse them of those sins
which they never committed, and especially of that unpardonable sin against
the holy Ghost, taking advantage of their ignorance, that so he may plunge them
into desperation, and utterly discourage them from going forward in the course
of godliness. The which his temptation is so usual and common, that there is
scarce any who are exercised in this spiritual warfare, if they be converted
unto God out of their ignorance, whom he does not encounter with this weapon.
For as much therefore as ignorance is the chief ground of this temptation,
therefore the best means to strengthen our selves against it, is to know what
this sin is, which if we once understand, there is no danger of being foiled
in this assault.

What the sin against the holy Ghost is.
The sin against the holy Ghost, is a general denial and oppugning of the
truth and all religion, of which the understanding and conscience by the
illumination of the spirit are persuaded and convicted, proceeding from an
obstinate will and purposed malice against God and his truth. The which sin
is committed of two sorts of men; first, of those who have made profession of
the truth, and afterward become Apostataes, not from some part only but from
all religion, condemning, blaspheming, and persecuting as heretical and
impious, that truth which before they professed, and of which they were
persuaded. And thus did Hymeneus and Alexander sin, 1. Tim. 1.20.
of whom Paul speaks 1. Tim. 1.20. Secondly, of those who were never
professors thereof, Matthew. 12.24.31. Steven Gardner. See his story in the
book of Martyrs.
whose consciences notwithstanding are convicted of that truth which they do
oppugn: an example whereof we have in the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew.
12.24.31. and in many of the learned Papists in these days, who maliciously
deny and persecute that truth which they know and are convicted of.

How to distinguish the sin against the holy Ghost from other sins.
for thus David offended who was a man according to Gods own heart; nor every
denying of the known truth, if it proceed from fear and infirmity, and not
from malice and obstinat rebellion, for thus Peter sinned in denying his
master; nor all kind of opposing and persecuting of the truth, if it be not
against knowledge and conscience, but upon blindness and ignorance, for thus
Paul offended before his conversion, 1. Tim. 1.13.
as appears 1. Tim. 1.13. and many of the Jews who crucified Christ, as the
Apostle Peter testifies, Act. 3.17.
Act. 3.17. nor all malicious opposing against every known truth, but of the
truth in general and all true religion, for this sin is an universal
apostasy from God and his truth, and not only a defection from some
particular point thereof. So that though a man sin against knowledge and
conscience, through infirmity and not of malice; though he deny the truth
through fear and weakness, though he persecute it through blindness and
ignorance; though he wittingly oppose against and willingly persecute some
particular point thereof, and yet hold and profess the general, howsoever he
has most hainously offended, yet he has not committed this unpardonable sin
against the holy spirit, and therefore is not excluded from repentance, nor
upon his repentance from pardon and forgiveness. Whereby it manifestly
appears that these poor christians which labor under the burden of sin,
are merely deluded by Satan's false suggestions, and grosely abused through
their own ignorance, when as he makes them believe that they have sinned
against the holy Ghost. But let such know to their comfort that so long as they
would not commit this sin, or fear least they have already fallen into it,
they are as yet most free from it, seeing it is not done of infirmity or at
unawares, but upon a malicious will, clear knowledge and settled resolution.

Of impious and blasphemous suggestions.
and horrible blasphemies against God and his holy spirit, which he fears to
be the sin against the holy Ghost. I answer as before, that seeing these
thoughts are a trouble unto him, and seeing he fears to commit this sin,
thereby it is manifest that he is not fallen into it, as appears by that
which has been said. Secondly, he is to know that his state is common with
Gods faithful children, who are thus vexed especially in the conflict of
temptations, and before they have received a great measure of faith, and
fullness of persuasion of Gods love and favor, whereby they are moved entirely
to love him again. Neither needs this to seem strange unto any who
considers of that mass of natural corruption which remains in us, even
after regeneration, which continually boyleth and fometh up the filthy scumine
of wicked thoughts and blasphemous imaginations; and of the malice of our
spiritual enemy Satan, who is still ready to tempt us by his suggestions to
the most horrible and outrageous sins; if not in hope to overcome us, yet at
least to vex and trouble us. As we may see in the example fo the holy man Job,
whom he spared not to tempt unto fearful blasphemy.

But though we cannot keep the devil from assaulting us, let not this
discourage us, hay rather let us be moved hereby with more care and
watchfulness to withstand him, for if we resist him he will flee from us. Iam
4.7. Iam. 4.7.
But in this our resistance two things especially must be observed: the first
is the means whereby we must give him the repulse; which is partly by the
sword of the spirit, the word of God, whereby we beat back the temptation by
proving the wickedness thereof by some testimony of scripture, according to
our Saviors example; and partly by lifting up our minds unto God in prayer,
desiring strength to withstand the temptation. Secondly, we must take heed
that we do not reuolue the temptation in our minds, but presently repel it,
least these hellish sparks taking hold of the tindar of our corruptions, do
at length inflame us with horrible wickedness, which at their first falling
might easily have been extinguished. And if we thus speedely repel these
horrible blasphemies suggested by Satan, they shall never be imputed unto us,
but unto him from whom they proceed, and that both in respect of the fault and
punishment.

CHAP. XII. Arguments to prove the certainty of our perseverance grounded upon
Gods will and immutabilitie.
Satan's temptation moving the christian to doubt of his perseverance.
Now in the last place we are to entreat of our perseverance which he
impugneth with no less subtlety and violence. For though the christian man
have attained to some assurance, that he is elected, called, justified, and
sanctified, yet Satan will not give him over, but laboreth to persuade him,
that notwithstanding all this he may finally fall away and become a reprobate.
Let it be granted (will he say) that thy state now is such as thou supposest,
yet thou art in no safety, neither can thou promise unto thy self any
assurance of attaining unto everlasting life and happiness, seeing those only
which continue unto the end shall be saved: Matthew. 24.3.
whereas thou have no assurance of thy perseverance, nay contrariwise thou art
in respect of thy frailty and mutabilitie, certain of nothing more then thine
uncertainty. Call to thy remembrance the example of thy first parents, who
were perfectly righteous and holy, more accomplished in all graces than any of
their posterity, more strong and able to endure and resist all temptations, as
being endued with free will, and therefore able both to choose the good and
refuse the evil, who notwithstanding all this were overcome, and of the
children of God made the slaves of sin and Satan. Did they therefore fall
who were perfectly righteous, and can thou who are most imperfect hope to
stand? were not they who were full of all graces able to endure the encounter
in the day of trial, and can thou hope to make resistance who art full of
sin and corruption? were they vanquished who were strong champions, and do
thou who art weak and feeble hope for victory? were they allured by Satan's
temptations, to commit sin, and fall from God, who could freely will the good
and nill the evil; and can thou hope to perseruer and continue constant,
whose will is captiued and ouerruled by thy corruption? Consider further thy
mutabilitie and inconstancy, thy exeeding weakness and frailty, thy
corruptions and imperfections; and on the other side set before thee, the
mighty power, the subtle policy, the vigilant watchfulness, and unwearied
diligence, of thy spiritual enemies who continually assault thee: and then
think with thy self if there be any possibility, that thy weakness should
withstand their power, thy ignorant simplicity their prudent wisdom, and thy
careless negligence their careful diligence. Lastly, call to mind the
manifold examples which thou have both read and seen, of such as have been of
greater gifts and graces, and made a much fairer show then thou, of holiness
toward God and righteousness toward men, who notwithstanding have finally
fallen away and become reprobates, and therefore why may not thou be one of
this number? Seeing then the case thus stands do not foolishly flatter thy
self with a vain hope, that because thou art elected, called, justified, and
sanctified, therefore thou shall be saved; for though now thou art elected, yet
hereafter thou may become a reprobate; though today thou art a child of
God, and in his favor, yet to morrow thou may through thy sins, be a
child of the devil, and in Gods displeasure be rejected; though now thou art
a member of Christ, thou may become a limme of Satan; and though now thou
art endued with the spirit of God, and with all the graces and gifts thereof,
yet by thy sin thou may easily loose both it and them; and be wholly and
finally given over to run on thy former wickedness unto eternal death and
condemnation.

The general means to strengthen the christian against the former temptation.
the which temptations, if we would withstand, it behooves us not to ground the
certainty of our perseverance upon our own resolution, strength and graces
which we have received, for these are altogether insufficient to uphold us
against the assaults of our spiritual enemies, who are far more stronger
then we; but wholly distrusting in our own ability, let us rest and rely wholly
upon the Lord, for as it is he alone who has bestowed upon us all the gifts
and graces which we have received, so also have we our growth and perseverance
in them from him only. And so we may be assured of our perseverance,
notwithstanding our own weakness and inconstancy, for it is God which
stablisheth us in Christ, 2. Cor. 1.21.
as it is 2. Cor. 1.21. Though in respect of any thing that is in us we might
every hour fall away; yet we are sure to continue in those graces which we have
received, mauger the malice and power of all our enemies, for we stand not in
our own strength but are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, 1. Pet. 1.4.
as the Apostle speaks 1. Pet. 1.4. Though we should every day loose
everlasting life and happiness through negligence, or sell it away for the
vanities of the world and pleasures of sin if it were in our own hands, yet
all this is not sufficient to disinherit us of our heavenly pattrimonie, for it
is not at our own disposition but our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
as it is Col. 3.3. And therefore though in ourselves we are as weak as
reeds, and as unconstant and changeable as the wind and weather, yet are we
ten thousand times more sure to persevere in that grace which we have received
unto everlasting life, than Adam in the state of innocence; for he stood by
his own strength, which though it were great, yet it was finite, but we by the
almighty power of God; he by the virtue of his own free will, which was
mutable and subject to alteration, but we by the will of God which being
immutable admits of no change.

controversy between the true Christian and the enemies of his salvation, the
state whereof stands thus; The state of the Controversy.
whether he that is elected in Gods eternal counsel, and is effectually
called, that is, severed from the world, given to Christ, and ingrafted into
Christ by the spirit of God and a lively faith, justified, sanctified, and
endued with the sanctifying gifts and graces of Gods spirit, may after all this
fall away, lose the spirit of God and the graces thereof, and become as
profane and wicked as ever he was before his conversion, lose also his
justification, be cut off from the body of Christ, and finally become a
reprobate. This the enemies of our salvation affirm, but we deny as being a
thing impossible, not in regard of our own strength, constancy, or great
measure of grace which we have received, but in respect of Gods will and power
who vpholdeth us, Christ's intercession who prays for us, and Gods holy spirit
always dwelling in us, whereby we are so strengthened and confirmed, that all the power of hell cannot prevail against us.

The first argument grounded upon Gods will, considered in his decree of
election.
and afterward answer the contrary objections which are made against this
truth by the enemies of our salvation.

The reasons which may be alleged for this purpose are many; the first sort
are taken from Gods own nature, as it is described in his word and exercised
in his works toward us. As first we may be assured of our perseverance,
because it is grounded upon Gods will, which may be considered either in his
secret counsel and decree of election, or in his will revealed in his word.
From the first we may thus reason; Whomsoever the Lord in his eternal
counsel has elected to everlasting life, they shall most certainly be saved,
and persevere in the means tending thereunto, which are no less contained in
Gods decree than our salvation it self. But the Lord in his eternal counsel
has elected all the faithful unto eternal life. And therefore nothing can
hinder their salvation, nor yet their perseverance, without which it is
impossible they should be saved. The first part of this reason is clear and
manifest: for not to effect that which one has decreed and purposed, argues
either impotencie and want of power, or inconstancy, neither of which without
blasphemy can be ascribed unto God; Iere. 32.17. Psalm. 115.3.
for there is nothing hard unto him, Iere. 32.17, but he does whatsoever he
will, Psalm. 115.3, Matthew. 19.26. Job. 42 2.
yea even those things which unto men are impossible are possible unto him,
Mat. 19.26, for he can do all things, Job, 42.2. Neither is the will of God
mutable, for this argues a want of wisdom, Psalm. 145.5.
whereas his wisedoms is infinite and knows no end, Psalm. 145.5; and he
perfectly sees and knows all things in one view, Heb. 4.13.
past, present, and to come, Heb. 4.13: and therefore we may conclude with the
Apostle, that the purpose of God in his election remains sure, Romans 9.11.
Romans 9.11. and the foundation of God (that is, his unchangeable decree)
continues firm, 1. Tim. 2.19.
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. Whosoever
then are elected they shall most certainly be saved, neither is it possible
that they should fall away: as our Savior implies Matthew. 24.24. whereas he
says, that the false Prophets should show such great signs, that if it were
possible they should deceive the very elect. Noting hereby that this is
altogether a thing impossible, that they should be deceived and seduced with
false Christ's and false Prophets.

The second part of this reason, namely, that all the faithful are elected, is
also of most undoubted truth; for whosoever have a true faith they are
justified, whosoever are justified are also effectually called, elected, and
shall be glorified; What said I? shall be? nay are already glorified, as the
Apostle affirms, Romans 8.30.
to note the undoubted certainty of their salvation, Romans 8.30. Moreover, the
Apostle makes faith an inseparable fruit of our election, and proper and
peculiar unto the elect, Tit. 1.1. Act. 13.48.
calling it the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1. And Act. 13.48. it is said, that
as many as were ordained unto eternal life believed, where he makes Gods
election the cause of faith. And contrariwise our Savior tells us, that they
believe not, Ioh. 10.26.
who are not his sheep, Ioh. 10.26. So that it is manifest that those who
believe are elected, and those who are elected shall be saved.

certainly come to pass: The second reason, grounded on his will revealed. Ioh
6.39.40.
but God wills that all should have everlasting life whom he has given to
Christ, in which number are all those who are effectually called, as our
Savior testifies Ioh. 6.39. And this is the fathers will which has sent me,
that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day. And he wills likewise, that he that believes in
the son should be saved, as it is verse. 40. And therefore those who are
effectually called and believe in Christ, cannot possibly perish, but shall
most certainly have eternal life.

The third reason, taken from Gods immutabilitie in his love.
and also in his gifts. In the former respect we may thus reason: Whomsoever
the Lord loves with a constant and immutable love, those shall most certainly
be saved, seeing it is the nature of love to desire the good of the party
beloved, and to seek his welfare as much as it can; but the Lord loves his
faithful ones with a constant and perpetual love, as himself testifies Iere.
31.3. Iere. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with mercy have I
drawn thee. So Ioh. 13.1. Forasmuch as he loved his own which were in the
world, Ioh. 13.1.
unto the end he loved them. And therefore all the faithful may assure
themselves that they shall be saved, and being once assured of Gods love, they
may with the Apostle be undoubtedly persuaded, that nothing in the world shall
be able to separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

An objection against the former reason ansivered.
that the sins of the faithful do provoke the Lord unto anger, and move
him to cast them off in his just displeasure, and to withdraw from them his
wonted love and favor: and therefore seeing sin separateth them from Gods
love, it may also plunge them into condemnation. To which I answer, that
indeed the sins of the faithful do in themselves deserve the everlasting
wrath of God and eternal death, if they were not taken away by Christ, who
has by his precious bloodshed satisfied his fathers justice; and that even now
they so offend by their sins their gracious father, that they had need to
renew their faith and repentance, before they can have any sensible assurance
that they are reconciled unto him, and received into his love and favor. It is
most true that God is displeased with the sins of his children, according to
that Esa. Esa. 64.5. How God is said to be angry with his children.
64.5. Behold thou art angry* for we have sinned. But this anger does not
exclude them out of his love, seeing it is not the anger of an enemy but of a
gracious father, who is not angry with their persons to destroy them, but with
their sins to convert and save them. As therefore children with their faults
provoke their parents to anger, and move them to turn their fatherly smiles
into bitter frowns, and the fruits of their love into the effects of hatred in
outward show, as namely severe countenances, sharp reproves, and rigorous
chastizements; and in respect of these outward signs and effects of their
anger they are usually said to be out of favor and in their fathers
displeasure, howsoever in truth at the same time they entirely love them, and
use all this wholesome severity not because they hate, but because they would
reform them: So Gods children when by their sins they do offend him and
provoke his anger against them, are said to be out of his favor, not that God
does ever change his fatherly affection or purposes utterly to reject them,
but because he changes the effects of his love into the effects of hatred in
outward show, as when inwardly he suffers them to be vexed with the terrors
of conscience, and with the apprehension of his anger and displeasure, and
outwardly whippeth and scourges them with temporary afflictions; all which he
does not for any hatred to their persons, for he never hates those whom he
has once loved in Christ, but for the hatred of their sins, and love of the
sinner, whom by this means he brings by the rough and unpleasant way of
repentance, unto the eternal pleasures of his kingdom.

Our perseverance proved by Gods immutabilitie in his gifts.
and that notwithstanding his momentanie displeasure his love may be eternal.
Now secondly we are to know, that as God is immutable in his love so also in
his gifts, as faith, repentance, hope, affiance, charity, etc. according to
that Romans 11.29, Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. But yet this is to be
understood with diverse cautions; for first it is not to be understood of all
the gifts of God, not of temporary gifts, nor of the gifts of the spirit which
are common to the wicked with the godly, for these being not essential to a
Christian nor necessary to salvation, the Lord gives or takes away, as in
his infinite wisdom he thinks best; neither yet are we to understand it of
all gifts of the spirit which are proper to the elect, for some also of these
being not of the essence of faith, but only effects and fruits thereof, he
takes away from his children for a time; as namely, the purity of their
conscience, and the peace which does accompany it, the sense and feeling of
Gods love and favor, Psalm. 51.9, 10, 11, 12, 15.
cheerefulnes of spirit, joy in the holy Ghost, patience, the gift of prayer
and such like; because his love and the salvation of the faithful may stand
with the want of these gifts for a time. Neither are we to understand this of
the actions and sensible fruits of Gods graces, for these also have their
intermissions, the graces themselves notwithstanding remaining: for as the
Sun does always shine, and yet sometimes the beams thereof are not
discerned, being hindered from spreading themselves by the interposition of the
clouds or of the earth, and the fire does continue light and hot in it self,
and yet being covered with ashes does give neither light nor heat to the
standers by; so these graces of Gods spirit, faith, hope, affiance, love and
such like, may in respect of their substance habitually remain in us, and yet
for a time not send forth the light and heat of joy, comfort, peace and the
rest; and though they retain their nature still, yet they may be hindered from
exercising their actions and functions; as namely, when as the conscience is
wounded with some wilful sin committed against the knowledge, or in the
spiritual conflict of temptations, as before I have showed at large. Lastly,
this is not to be understood of their measure and degree, for these graces have
their full and waine, their ebb and tide, their perfect strength and their
faint languishing; but of their substance and true being, in which respect they
never utterly fail but continue without intermission unto the end, for as the
gift of faith, so all other the like graces are the work of God, as our
Savior teaches us, John 6.29: and we may assure our selves of this, John 6.29.
That he that has begun this good work in us, will also finish and perfect
it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6.
as the Apostle speaks, Philip. 1.6.

CHAP. XIII. Of the fourth and fifth reason to prove the certainty of our
perseverance, grounded upon Gods power and truth.
The fourth reason grounded upon Gods omnipotency.
for if God in respect of his infinite love, be willing that we shall be
saved, and persevere in the means of our salvation; and be immutable also and
unchangeable in his love and will; and likewise in respect of his power infinite
and almighty, able to effect whatsoever he wills: then surely being assured
that we are in the state of grace, and in Gods love and favor, there is no
doubt but we shall be saved, and persevere in the means which are inseparably
joined with our salvation. But as the Lord in respect of his love is most
willing, so in respect of his power he is able, continually to uphold us in
the state of grace, and to frustrate and defeat all the malice and might of
all our enemies, who labor to hinder our salvation; for he is omnipotent and
mighty to save, Esa. 63.1.
as it is Esa. 63.1. And though through our frailety and weakness we might
continually be vanquished and drawn from God, yet now there is no doubt
hereof, seeing we do not stand in our own strength, 1. Pet. 1.5.
but are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, as it is 1.
Pet. 1.5. though in our selves we are impotent and feeble, yet we are strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and being armed with the armor of
God, Ephesians. 6.10, 11.
we are enabled to stand against the assaults of the devil, as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 6.10, 11. Though we are of little force in regard of our own
strength and able to do nothing, yet are we able to do all things through the
help of Christ which strengthens us, as it is, Philip. 4.13: though we be
weak in faith, Phil. 4.13.
and unable to stand, yet being the servants of God we shall be established;
for God is able to make us stand, Romans 14.4. In a word, Romans 14.4.
though our spiritual enemies are stronger than we, yet shall they not be
able to pluck us from Christ; For the father which gave us to him is greater
than all, Ioh. 10.28, 29.
and none is able to take us out of the fathers hand, as our Savior reasons,
John 10.28, 29. And therefore when we are discouraged and ready to faint, in
the sight and sense of our own weakness, and our enemies mighty power, let
us comfort our selves in the Lord, saying with the Apostle, I know whom I have
believed, 2. Tim. 1.12.
and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day, as it is 2. Tim. 1.12.

The fifth reason groundad on Gods truth in his covenant. Apoc. 1.5. 2. Cor.
1.20. Luke 16.17.
which is so infallible, that whatsoever he has spoken, promised, or
couenanted, that he will most certainly perform: for God is a faithful and
true witness, Apoc. 1.5. and all his promises in Christ are Yea and Amen, 2. Corinthians. 1.20. So that it is more easy that heaven and earth should pass
away, than that one title of Gods word should fall unaccomplished, Luke 16.17.
But the Lord in his word has assured all that believe, that he will uphold
them and preserve them unto everlasting life, against all the fury of their
enemies; as may appear both by his covenant which he has made with his Church
in general, and also by particular promises made to all the faithful.
Concerning the first, the Lord makes this covenant with his Church, Esa.
59.21. I will (says he) make this my covenant with them; Esa. 59.21.
my spirit that is upon thee and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even for ever.
If therefore Gods spirit never departs from them, and they for ever confess
and profess his word and truth, then certainly they can never fall away nor
loose their heavenly inheritance. For, Romans 8.11.
if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in us, he shall
also quicken our mortal bodies, because his spirit dwells in us, as it is
Romans 8.11. Romans 8.11.14.^7
And as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, verse.
14. And if we be children, we are also heirs, etc. verse. 17. So Ierem. 32.38.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. ^er. 32.38, 39, ^0
Verse. 39. And I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me
for ever, for the wealth of them and of their children after them. 40. And I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will never turn away from
them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me, etc. If therefore the Church and people of God shall fear
him for ever, if his covenant be everlasting, if he will never depart from
them, nor they from him, then certainly there is no doubt of their
perseverance. ^er. 31.31.32.
And chapter 31.31.32, The Lord says that he will make a new covenant with his
Church, not according to the covenant which he made with their fathers. 33. But
this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after
those days (says the Lord) I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people,
etc. And I will forgive their iniquity; and I will remember their sins no
more. In which words the Lord couenanteth, that his law should ever remain so
deeply engraven in their hearts, that nothing should blot it out, and that
they should continually meditate and delight themselves therein; Romans 2.15. 2.
Cor. 3.2.
for thus this phrase of writing in the heart is usually taken in the
Scriptures. So likewise he assures them of the perpetual pardon of their
sins, so that their sins should never make frustrate that covenant which he
had made with them. Hos. 2.19.20.
So Hos. 2.19. And I will marry thee unto me for ever, yea, I will marry thee
unto me in righteousness and in indgement, and in mercy and compassion. 20. I
Will marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. If
therefore the Church of God shall be married unto him for ever in
righteousness and faithfulness, and in mercy and compassion, then can neither
their faith and righteousness toward God, nor his mercy and compassion
toward them fail, but both shall continue unto the end. Seeing then the
covenant which is between God and us does assure us of the continuance of his
love and mercy, and of our perseverance in his fear and holy obedience we
need not to doubt either of the ceasing of his love, or our falling away. For
though the mountains remove and the hills fall down, yet shall not his mercy
depart from his children, neither shall the covenant of his peace fall away. As
the Lord himself protests Esa. 54.10. Esa. 54.10.


An objection taken from our faltinesse answered.
by the covenant of grace which God has made with his Church; for whatsoever
ye Lord promises to the whole body of the Church, that he also promises to
every particular member thereof, seeing the whole contains all his parts: so
that whatsoever belongs to the whole body, that also belongs to all the
members. But it may be objected that howsoever this covenant on Gods part is
firm and eternal, yet by our fault and transgression it may be made void and
frustrate. I answer that so likewise the covenant made with the Israelites was
firm on Gods part, but made frustrate by their sins, but the Lord has made
a new covenant with us, not of works but of grace, upon the condition of faith
and repentance, which being observed on our part our sins and unworthiness
cannot make it frustrate and of none effect; as before I have showed more at
large.

Of the particular promises of our perseverance. Psalm. 1.3. Ezech. 47.12.
by Gods particular promises made to his faithful ones. Psalm. 1.3. it is said
of the righteous man, that he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of
waters that will bring forth her fruits in due season, whose leaf shall not
faid, etc. As therefore the tree planted by the river side does not wither,
because continually it sucketh moisture, whereby it is quickened and refreshed:
so the righteous man perseuereth in his righteousness, because he is
continually revived and quickened with that spiritual moisture, which he
sucketh from Christ who is the lively root, whereof he is a branch. Psalm.
15.5, Psalm. 15.5. Psalm. 37.24.
He that does these things shall never be moved. Psalm. 37.24, Though (the
righteous man) fall, he shall not be cast off; for the Lord puts under his
hand. Psalm. 112.6, Surely he shall never be moved, Psalm. 112.6.
but the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. And verse. 9. Verse.
9. Psalm. 125.1.
His righteousness remains for ever. Psalm. 125.1, They that trust in the
Lord shall be as mount Syon, which cannot be removed, Ioh 4.14.
but remains for ever. Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never be more a thirst, but the water which I shall give
him shall be in him a well of water, springing up to everlasting life. Where by
this water we are to understand the holy Ghost, Ioh. 7.38, 39.
as appears Ioh. 7.38. He that believes in me as says the scripture, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of the water of life. 39. This (says the
Evangelist) spoke he of the spirit which they that believed in him should
receive. So that to drink of this water is through faith in Christ to be made
partakers of the holy Ghost, whom whosoever receives shall retain him unto
the end. As therefore he that has a living fountain continually springing in
him cannot be a thirst; so they who have this fountain of life perpetually
springing in them, they shall never thirst any more, but it shall continually
refresh and quicken them, till they have attained unto everlasting life. Ioh.
6.35.37. ^^.54.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst. And verse. 37. All that the father gives me
shall come unto me; and him that comes to me I cast not away. And verse. 51. I
am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread
he shall live for ever. And verse. 54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day, etc. Now
whosoever believe in Christ, they eat his flesh and drink his blood; for
faith is the mouth of the soul whereby we feed on this heavenly food; and
therefore all the faithful shall have everlasting life; nay as he says they
have it already and shall not come into condemnation, but have passed from
death to life, Ioh. 5.24. and 10.28.
as it is Ioh. 5.24. and Ioh. 10.28. I will give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. 29. My
father which gave them me is greater than all, and none is able to take them
out of my fathers hand. In which words he both shows his will in his promise,
and his power to perform it, and therefore whosoever are the sheep of Christ,
they cannot be taken from him, neither for a time nor eternally, for so it
should follow if Christ's reason be of any force, that they who took them from
him should be stronger than Christ and his father, which were a horrible
blasphemy for any to imagine.

An objection tending to frustrate the former promises, answered.
and to the sheep of Christ so long as they are his sheep, who abide in his
word and follow him. But when they cease to believe and to be his sheep, they
do not appertain unto him, for they only remain the Disciples of Christ who
abide in his word, and have his word abiding in them, Ioh. 8 31. Ioh. 8.31. and
15.7.
and 15.7. To which I answer that this is an idle trifling in a circular
disputation, and a vain begging of the question in controversy. For the
question is, whether the faithful may be assured of their perseverance in
faith, whether a member of Christ may be assured to continue a member of
Christ, whether a sheep of Christ may assure himself that he is to remain
for ever a sheep of Christ; we hold the affirmative part and prove it by
diverse testimonies; they deny that these promises are absolute, but on this
condition, that we are assured none can pluck us from Christ, so long as we
continue and retain the nature of the members and sheep of Christ. But I
would feign know what it is to be plucked from Christ, but to cease to be a
member or sheep of Christ, and to loose their nature: and what it is to be a
sheep of Christ but to hear his word and to follow him. When as then our
Savior Christ promises that none shall pluck his sheep from him, he
promises that none shall be able to make them cease to be his sheep, nor
deprive them of their nature which is the essential form which makes them to
be sheep, rather than other who neither hear his word nor follow him. Whereas
therefore they affirm, that these promises do assure us to persevere, so long
as we continue and retain the nature of the sheep and members of Christ, what
is it but idly to repeat the same thing? namely that Gods promises do assure
us to persevere, so long as we do persevere; that we shall not be plucked
from Christ so long as we remain with Christ; that we shall continue the
members and sheep of Christ, so long as we continue to be his sheep and
members; that we shall not loose our faith so long as we continue faithful.
And what is it to say that the sheep of Christ shall so long continue to be
his sheep as they retain their nature, but to grant also that they may loose
their nature, and consequently cease to be Christ's sheep, and so be plucked
from him which is quite contrary to his promise?

CHAP. XIIII. Of eight other reasons which prove the certainty of our
perseverance.
The sixth reason taken from Christ's intercession.
For whatsoever Christ himself makes request for in the behalf of his
faithful, that without doubt the father grants unto him, Ioh 11.42.
for God hears him always, Ioh. 11.42. But he continually makes request for
them that their faith fail not, Luke 22.32. Ioh. 17.9.11.15.21.
as appears Luke 22.32. He prays for them, Ioh. 17.9. that the father would
keep them in his name whom he had given unto him; That they may be one, as he
and the father are one, verse. 11; That he would preserve them from evil, verse.
15; and what greater evil than to fall from grace and God also? That they all
may be one, as the father is in Christ and Christ in him, verse. 21. That they
be with Christ where he is, and may behold his glory, Verse. 24.
verse. 24. He makes also intercession for all those whom he has redeemed,
that they may be saved, notwithstanding their sins into which they fall
through the strength of their corruptions, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
as appears 1. Ioh. 2.1.2. And therefore all these things are granted unto
him by the father, for the faithful. So that now they may say with the Apostle
Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies. 34. Who shall condemn? Romans 8.33, 34, 35.
It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also
at the right hand of God and makes request for us. 35. Who shall separate us
from the love of God etc.? And though our corruptions be many and our
weakness great yet we need not doubt of our perseverance to everlasting
life. For we have an high priest who is able perfectly to save them that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, as it is
Heb. 7.25. Heb. 7.25.


The seventh reason taken from our union with Christ.
whereby he becomes their head, and they his members. For there is no head
that will willingly permit any of it members to be rent and torn from it,
because then it should have a maimed and imperfect body. But Christ Jesus is
the head of all the faithful, and they the members of his body. Ephesians. 5.30.
Ephesians. 5.30. And therefore he will not suffer any of them to be pulled
from him, and so perishing make a maime in his body, seeing he is also
omnipotent and able to save all those who depend upon him. Moreover seeing our
Savior Christ who is our head, has past all dangers, and now lives and
raineth with God his father, we are also assured that we shall live and reign
with him. For he has obtained this eternal glory, not for himself alone,
but also for all the members of his body, as appears Ioh. 17.21.24. and
therefore now there is no doubt of perishing, Ioh. 17.21.24.
seeing our life is hid with Christ in God, as it is Col. 3.3; and consequently
no less safe than his who now reigns and triumphs over his enemies. Col.
3.3.
Whereof it is that they are said in respect of the certainty of their
assurance, to have already everlasting life, and to have passed from death to
life, Ioh. 5.24. 1. Ioh. 3.14.
Ioh. 5.24. 1. Ioh. 3.14.

The eight reason taken from the spirit of God dwelling in us.
we must needs persevere in grace; neither is it possible we should fall away,
seeing it is the fountain and root from which all graces flow and spring, and
seeing it continually fights against and subdueth the flesh and the lusts
thereof. But after we have received the spirit of God it continually dwells
and abides with us; for this is that spiritual water of which whosoever
drinks shall never be more a thirst, Ioh. 4.14. and 7.39.
but it shall be a well of water springing up into everlasting life, as it may
appear by comparing Ioh. 4.14. with chapt. 7.39. So Ioh. 14.16. Ioh. 14.16.
I will pray the father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever. 17. Even the spirit of truth, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him;
but ye know him, for he dwells with you and shall be in you. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
And 1. Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, (that is, with full
consent of will) for his seed remains in him; neither can he sin, because
he is borne of God: where the spirit is called the seed of God, because by
virtue thereof we are begotten unto God. If therefore by virtue of this spirit
we are so preserved that we cannot sin with full consent of will, nor have
it reigning in us as it did before our regeneration, then certainly we shall
be preserved thereby from falling away, and notwithstanding our sins we
shall persevere in grace to everlasting life.

The ninth reason taken from the effects of the spirit. 1. Ioh. 2.20.27 Romans
8.14.17.
for first it teaches and guides us in the way of Gods truth, as appears 1.
Ioh. 2.20.27. And as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons
of God, Romans 8.14: and those that are sons are also heirs, even the heirs
of God, and coheires with Christ, verse. 17. Neither is it possible that those
who are guided with the spirit should sin with full consent of will, much
less fall away. For whosoever is borne of God sins not, namely after this
manner, neither can ever their spiritual enemies finally prevail against
them; for he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not, 1. Ioh. 5.18.
as it is 1. Ioh. 5.18. Secondly, the spirit of God witnesses to our spirits
that we are the sons of God, Romans 16.17.
and consequently heirs of his kingdom, as it is Romans 16.17. and his
testimony is true and infallible. It also is the earnest of our inheritance,
and a pledge to assure us that God will make good his promises unto us, Ephesians.
1.14. 2. Cor. 1.22. and thereby also we are sealed unto the day of redemption,
Ephesians. 1.14. 2. Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 4.30.
Ephesians. 4.30. And therefore seeing the Lord has confirmed our assurance by the
testimony of his spirit, by this earnest, pledge, and seal, we need not to
fear our falling away or to doubt of our perseverance. But of this I have
already written at large in treating of the certainty of our election.

The tenth reason, taken from Gods continual aid.
for if he be always ready to strengthen and support us, we can never
finally be overthrown, but though we fall, yet we shall not fall away, but
shall be raised up again in despite of all our enemies. For God is faithful,
and will not suffer us to be tempted above our power, but will give a good
issue with the temptation, 1. Cor. 10.13.
that we may be able to bear it, as it is 1. Cor. 10.13. 2. Pet. 2.9.
And he knows to deliver the godly out of temptation, as the Apostle speaks
2. Pet. 2.9. And therefore be our weakness never so great, yet let us not
fear our final falling away, but knowing whom we have believed, let us
persuade our selves of our perseverance, knowing that he is able to keep that
which we have committed unto him, 2. Tim. 1.12.
as it is 2. Tim. 1.12.

The eleventh reason taken from the nature of faith.
whereby we may undoubtedly be assured of our perseverance. The second sort of
arguments may be taken from our selves, and first from the nature of true
faith wherewith we are endued, which is not temporary but constant and
permanent. For he that has a true and lively faith, is like the house builded
upon the rock, which neither the rain nor floods nor winds could overthrow,
Matthew. 7.24, 25: Matthew. 7.24.25. and 16.18.
neither shall the gates of hell overcome him, chap. 16. verse. 18: he is like
the good ground in which the seed falling is not stolen away, nor choked up,
nor withers for want of root, but he receives the seed and keeps it, and
brings forth fruit with patience, Luke 8.15.
as it is Luke 8.15. And contrariwise it is a most undoubted mark of an
hypocrite who never was endued with a true faith, when as his faith is
temporary, and he falls away, according to that 1. Ioh. 2.19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us; 1. Ioh. 2.19.
for if they had been of us they would have continued with us. But this comes
to pass that it might appear that they are not all of us.

the state of grace, The twelfth reason, taken from examples. Psalm. 51.10.11
and have been raised and restored again by unfeigned repentance: and thus did
David fall and that most grievously, and yet was not deprived of Gods spirit,
as appears Psalm. 51.10.11. Thus did Peter fall by denying his master, Noah by
drunkenness, Lot by incest, and yet they were not deprived of those graces
which they had received; howsoever for the time they were much eclipsed and
weakened, neither were they rejected by God, but upon their true repentance
were received into his former love and favor.

The last reason, taken from the inabilitie of the causes which should hinder
our perseverance. Romans 1.35.
For there is nothing in the world so powerful, but it is altogether too weak
to work this defection. For first, afflictions cannot deprive us of grace, nor
hinder our perseverance, as it is Romans 8.35: for though they are the fiery
trial, yet they do not burn us, but refine us from our dross, neither do
they hinder our salvation, but rather cause unto us a far most excellent and
et ernall weight of glory, as it is 2. Cor. 4.17: 2. Cor. 4.17.
nor yet our flesh, for though it be never so strong, yet the spirit of God
dwelling in us, will in the end mortify and subdue it. Not the world, for our
Captain Christ has overcome it, not only for himself but also for his
members, Ioh. 16.33: yea and he enableth us also by his holy spirit to
overcome it. John 16.33. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
For all that is borne of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our faith, as it is 1. Ioh. 5.4. Not the
devil, for if we resist him, Iam. 4.7. 1. Ioh. 5.18.
he will flee from us, Iam. 4.7. And he that is, borne of God keeps himself,
and the wicked one touches him not, 1. Ioh. 5.18. Not our sins, for they are
punished and fully satisfied for in Christ; and if we sin, we have an advocate
with the father, 1. Ioh. 2.1, 2.
etc. 1. Ioh. 2.1, 2. And for the corruption of sin, though it dwell in us, yet
it shall not reign in us, Romans 6.12. Though we fall into it, Romans 6.12. 1.
Ioh. 3.9.
yet not with full consent of will, 1. Ioh. 3.9 for the regenerate man sins
not, but his corrupt flesh dwelling in him; Romans 7.
as it is Romans 7. Not any temptation, for the Lord is faithful, and will not
suffer us to be tempted above our power, 1. Cor. 10.13
but will give a good issue unto it, 1. Cor. 10.13. Not any thing in the world,
Romans 8.38.39.
Romans 8.38.39, for all things whatsoever shall be so disposed by the wise
providence of God, that though they be never so hurtful in their own nature,
and apt to draw us from God, yet they shall work together for the best unto
them which love God, as it is Romans 8.28.

And thus have I proved the certainty of our perseverance, both by plain
testimonies of Scripture, and also infallible reasons: I had purposed (as in
the other points going before) to have answered such objections as are commonly
suggested by Satan, and stiffly urged by his instruments the Popish rabble
against this truth, and accordingly had almost finished that which I intended;
but diverse reasons moved me to desist from my purpose, as first and especially
his earnest desire who is at the chief charge of printing these my labors,
who fearing that the greatness and dearness of the book might be a
hindrance to the sale thereof, entreated me to forbear the publishing of this
controversy, which being somewhat long, would have increased the volume and
consequently the price. To whose request I more willingly condescended, partly
because the controversy before handled, of the certainty of faith and
assurance of our salvation, is of the like nature, so that the proouing of the
one is the confirming of the other, and the answering of those objections which
are made against the certainty of our assurance, is a sufficient refutation of
those which are objected against our perseverance, many of the testimonies of
Scriptures and other reasons which are alleged against both, being the very
same: And partly because I understand, that my godly learned and most dear
brother, purposes presently to publish his Lectures upon the 15 Psalm, wherein
this controversy is largely and much more excellently handled and determined,
than I was any ways able to have written of it. Notwithstanding, if my book
seem maimed in respect of this defect, and if I see it be desired that it
should be entire and full in it self, I will hereafter most willingly supply
that which yet is wanting, if I perceive that my labors are approved as
profitable for the Church of God. In the mean time I commend them to Gods
blessing, who only is able by the assistance of his holy spirit to make them
effectual for those ends for which I intended them, he being the sole
fountain of all true comfort and consolation: desiring the Christian reader
who shall find fruit and profit by these my labors, that as I have not been
wanting unto him in my pains and best endeavors; so he will not be wanting to
remember me in his prayers unto Almighty God, for the continuance, increase,
and holy use of all his gifts and graces which he has bestowed on me. To
this God most wise, most gracious, and most infinite in all perfections, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all glory, praise, power and
dominion both now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Christian Reader, because there was some haste required in printing of this
book, part thereof from page 371 to page 578 was committed to another Printer,
who wanting a Corrector suffered these faults to escape which are material. As
for others which are apparent at the first view, I have left unobserved.

THE ERRATA.

Page 25. line 14. read must needs be. page 48 l. 13. r. another, p. 371. l.
4. r. fleshy. p. 375. l. 6. r. repeateth. p. 378. l. 13 r. think ye. p. 391.
l. 30. r. selves. p. 396. l. 5. r. all accompany. p. 399. l. 29. r. goodly
shows. l. 34. r. health. p. 405. l. 6. r. also have them. p. 408. l. 23. r.
mock repentance. p. 409. l 3. r. do not. l. 12. r. (...). l. 14. r. (...). p.
412. r. he freeth those. p. 418. l. 4. r. Ho every. l. 18. r. and that he will.
l. 24. r. and with all his heart desires to be. p. 420. l 4, 5. r is properly
to God. p. 425. l. 24. r. (as of himself unwilling) l. 27. r. heinous, no more
then. p. 427. l 5. r. mercies. The. l. 27. r. heinous, no more then p 438. l.
29. r and rest. p. 440. l. 18. r. Lord mercy. p. 442. l 22. r. Ho every p.
446. l 31. r. if when we were p. 449. l. 10. r. that he who for. l. 30. r. of
his bounty. p 451 l. 27. r. honor and glory. p. 455. l. 6. r. and now he. p.
463. l. 30. r. true in thesi, yet false in hypothesi. p. 473. l. 26. r.
powerfully. l. 33. ministry. p. 474. l. 4. r. ministry. p. 475. l. 22. r.
and mere cluill. p. 477. l. 10. r. and though. l. 13. r. entertain it. p.
479. l 32. r. the hond of this. lin. last r. works of sanctification. p. 481.
l. 10. r. so the branches. p. 484. l. 5. r. it seareth. p. 486. l. 4. r. seared
l. 29. r. sight and feeling. p. 487. l. 24. r. with an hard. p. 501. l. 29. r.
in God at al. p. 507. l. 34. r. may seem to be. p. 510. l. 30. r. truly sorry.
l. 36. r. the case. p. 514. l. 25. r. destruction, but. p. 522. l. 1. r.
vanquished. l. 10. r. striving. p. 526. l. 8. r. similitudes. l. 19. r. moves
and p. 531. l. 20. r. the 5 verse. p. 538. l. 10. r. up until it. l. 19. r.
having any. p. 540. l. 7. r. more strong. p. 553. l. 29. r. alms as well as. l.
33. r. strong. Our. p. 557. l. 9. r. seen him? p. 566. l. 13. r. one oblation
lin. 21. r. where ho p. 569. l. 7. r. and judged lin. 8.1. his own. p. 571. l.
26. r. imaginary. p. 574. l. 7. r. Apostle. p. 578. l. 19. r. necessarily.


