THE CONFLICT BETVVEENE THE FLESH and the SPIRIT. OR THE LAST PART OF THE
CHRISTIAN WARFARE: Wherein is described the nature of these Combatants, the
malice and power of the Flesh and fleshly lusts, with the means whereby we may
subdue and overcome them. By JOHN DOWNAME Batchelar in Divinity, and Preacher
of Gods Word.

GAL. 5. 17. For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do
the thing that ye would.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse street, near Saint
Gyles Church without Cripple-gate.

1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR FRANCIS BACON, KNIGHT, Lord KEEPER of the Great
Seal, I. D. wishes all increase of grace with true honor in this world, and
everlasting happiness in the life to come.
THere is no time (Right Honorable) for careless security, when there is no
place free from danger: But whilst a Christian lives in this world he is
encompassed with perils, walks among snares, and is beset on all sides with
many mighty enemies. For though he were at peace with all visible creatures,
yet those (...) of which the Apostle speaks, do in all times and places make
war against him. Without him there are many legions of wicked spirits
assisted with the strong aids of worldly enemies, which being far superior
unto him in power and policy do besiedge and beset him on every side,
watching all opportunities to work his destruction; within him he harbors
many secret traitors even innumerable fleshly lusts, which (if he prevent not
the danger by continual watchfulfulnesse) are ever ready to open the gates of
his soul and letting in those foreign forces, to join with them in
spoiling him of those rich treasures, Gods saving graces, and in making him thc
miserable captive of sin and Satan. In which regard it becomes all
Christian Soldiers whiles they live in the Church militant, not to dream of
peace or ease, but to stand always in their station with undaunted valor, and
unwearied watchfulness, and to be armed continually with the whole armor of
God that they may resist these enemies and obtain the victory. But especially
this courage and care is required of Gods Ministers, that they may with Timothy
(...) 2. Tim. 1. 18.
(...). Unto which is required not only that they be valourous in fighting
the Lords battles, but also prudent and skillful in the military discipline,
that they may be able to teach and train others in these feats of Arms and
how to use their valor, strength and weapons for their best advantage, seeing
they are called of God, not to be common Soldiers but Captains and Leaders of
his holy armies The consideration and conscience of which duty has moved me
(the least and unworthiest of this number) to entreat of this Christian
Warfare, that for the present the weak and unskillful might have some help
and direction for the strengthening of themselves and defeating of their
enemies, until some of Gods greatest Worthies do undertake this task and
purtray perfectly this spiritual pattern of military discipline, which I (as
I could) have rudely delineated. The finishing of which work in all the parts
thereof was when I first undertook it, in regard of my weakness and other
employments in the work of my ministry, so far in my conceit above my
hopes, that I durst scarce aspire unto it in my highest desires, though in this
kind ambitious above my strength. And yet now the Lord who takes delight to
manifest his power in the weakness of his instruments, has enabled me to
finish the last part of this work. And as in the other parts to describe the
Warfare between the Christian and his foreign enemies, the Devil and the
World, with the means whereby he may be enabled to overcome; so in this, the
intestine war that is in our selves between the Spirit and the Flesh: wherein
if we will get the victory we must after a sort flee and abandon our selves,
and if we will kill our enemies, we must mortify and crucify our earthly
members. The which my poor labors I humbly offer to your Honors patronage,
not because I think them worthy your learned view, or so perfect that they may
merit approbation in your judicious censure, but that passing as tolerable in
your estimate, they may appear even commendable to weaker judgments, and
(like mean servants of Honorable Lords) may be more esteemed and better
entertained, when as they come abroad graced with your name. Neither have I
offered this Discourse of Christian Warfare to your view (like Phormio to
Annibal) as though I thought I could hereby add any thing to your skill in
this military discipline: but only that it might find shelter under such
Honorable shade against the storms of seuerer censures, knowing that the
weaker the pupil is the more need he has of a strong Patron and Guardian.
Nor dare I say that hereby I desired to honor your name by commending it to
posterity as truly honorable (although these paper monuments are oftentimes
more durable then those which are erected of lasting Marble) for what glory can
my dim candle add to your sunshine? And what increase can my mite add to
your treasury? And yet though the main Ocean be never the fuller by the
access of small springs and little streams; notwithstanding they run into it,
as taking some delight to do their homage; and those who are of meanest
ability to honor their superiors, do take some pleasure in indeauouring to
do it, because hereby they manifest their will, and in their greatest
impotencie express in some sort their love and duty. The which not only your
personal worth may challenge as due from all of my profession, as excelling in
those treasures which we only acknowledge worth the coveting, the invaluable
riches of the mind in all kinds, especially those chiefly precious Jewels
learning and religion: but also the outward exercise of these excellent
endowments for the good of others, by letting heretofore some streams
(invaluable in their worth and unmatchable in their kind) flow out in common
from the fountain of your rich mind; and now in place of honor and
government by approving your self a notable pillar of Gods holy Temple, in
professing and upholding his true Religion, a worthy Maecenas of the Godly
learned, and a faithful and uncorrupted Patron under his excellent Majesty,
in the freee bestowing of Church-preferments upon such as you conceive are
worthy to be preferred. The Lord enrich you more and more with all gifts and
graces of his holy Spirit, and make you faithful unto the end in the employing
of his rich talents, which he has committed so bountifully unto you, for the
advancement of his glory, and good of his family; that so when you are called
to give an account of your Stewardship you may do it with joy, hearing that
blessed Euge: Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Your Honors in all humble service to be commanded, JOHN DOWNAME.

The Contents of the First book, of this Christian Warfare, between the
spirit and the flesh.
CHAP. 1. Containing an Introduction into the following discourse wherein is
showed, that our spiritual enemies are many, mighty and dangerous, especially
our own flesh with the lusts thereof.
1 THat we are to expect no peace in this life, but to fight against the
enemies of our salvation. 2 That we are daily assaulted with foreign forces,
the devil and the world. 3 That our outward enemies are not so dangerous, as
our own flesh and fleshly lusts. 4 That Satan and the world could not hurt
us, were they not aided by our own flesh.
CHAP. 2. Of the flesh, and the diverse significations of it, and what we are to
understand by it in the following discourse.
1 That there is in every Christian this fight between the spirit and the
flesh. 2 Of the diverse significations of the word flesh, and first as it is
taken for things materially subsisting. 3 Of the diverse significations of the
word flesh taken for accidents and qualities. 4 That the flesh is taken for the
corruption of nature. 5 That the flesh in this discourse signifies the
unregenerate part in a Christian.
CHAP. 3. What we are to understand by the spirit in this discourse.
1 That the word spirit is diuersty taken in the scriptures. 2 That the spirit
in this discourse signifies the part regenerate. 3 That this combat is not
maintained by bare qualities alone, but as they are backed by the holy spirit
and Satan the wicked spirit. 4 The former point proved by diverse reasons. 5
That the spirit does not dwell in us essentially, more then in other
creatures. 6 That the faithful have special right even unto the very essence
of the spirit, and that he dwells in them in respect of efficacy.
CHAP. IIII. Of the erroneous conceit of the Papists, who by the flesh
understand the body and the sensual faculties only.
1 That the Papists propound unto us a friend to fight against in steed of our
enemy. 2 That the chief doctors of the Papists by flesh understand the body. 3
That the Papists in their purest doctrine understand by the flesh our bodies,
and the inferior and sensitive faculties only. 4 That the practice of popish
mortification plainly shows, that by the flesh they understand the body
only. 5 That the Popish Doctors are to be justly taxed for teaching this
doctrine, and the people for putting it in practice. 6 That our opposition
against the Papists in this doctrine is very necessary.
CHAP. V. That the body and sensitive faculties only are not the flesh proved
by testimonies and reasons.
1. 2 The point proved by testimonies of scriptures. 3 Reasons proving that the
body only is not the flesh: The 1 taken from the names, and the 2 from the
actions, and the 3 from the sins which are attributed unto it. 4 The 4 reason,
because original sin has ouerspread the whole man. 5 The 5 reason, because
the body and soul are friends and not enemies. 6 The 6 reason, taken from the
words of the Apost. Romans 7. 18 7 The 7 reason, because the body is not
absolutely evil as the flesh is. 8 The 8 reason, because the faithful are
tempted to such sins, as properly belong to the understanding and will.
CHAP. VI. Testimonies of fathers proving that the body alone is not our enemy
the flesh.
1 The point proved by testimonies of Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory,
Hierome, Basil and Theoderet. 2 That Satan has assaulted not only the body
and affections, but also the mind and understanding. 3 That no part is more
corrupted than the mind and understanding. 4. 5 That the soul chiefly
sins, and in it the mind and understanding. 6 That the body is but the
servant of the soul in acting of sin. 7 That the soul only properly sins.
8. 9 That the body is not the flesh, proved by the testimonies of the
adversaries themselves.
CHAP. VII. Objections of the adversaries answered, whereby they endeavor to
prove, that the body and sensitive faculties are the flesh.
1 first objection, because this our enemy is usually called the flesh. 2. 3
The reasons why the corruption of nature is called the flesh. 4 The second
objection grounded on 1 Cor. 9. 27. answered. 5 The third objection grounded on
Rom 12. 6. answered 6 The fourth objection, because the chief poison of
corruption is to be discerned in the sensitive faculties answered. 7 The last
objection, because certain sins are proper to the body and sensitive faculties
answered.
CHAP. VIII. That the flesh is a most dangerous enemy. First because it is
exceeding malicious.
1 That by the flesh alone we are exposed to all danger. 2 That in the flesh
dwells nothing that is good. 3 That all manner of evil is in the flesh. 4
That the flesh is the author of all wickedness. 5 That the flesh is more
malitions then the diuill or the world. 6 That the flesh is the author of all
our sins. 7 That the flesh is the cause of the deprivation of our nature, and
of the defacing of Gods image in us. 8 That the flesh brings us into a most
base condition. 9 That whilst we live in the flesh we cannot please God. 10
That the flesh sets man at emnitie against God. 11 That the flesh is the
cause of all our punishments. 12 That the malice of the flesh is the more
dangerous, because it is masked under the coullor of freindship. 13 How we may
defeat the malicious treasons of the flesh.
CHAP. IX. That the flesh is an enemy exceeding powerful and mighty.
1 The flesh is to the unregenerate a mighty King, and to the regenerate a
powerful Tyrant. 2 Of the strength of the flesh being considered in it self.
3 That the flesh is mighty being compared with the spirit. 4 Of the multitude
of our fleshly lusts. 5 That the power of our enemies should make us shake off
all security. 6 That the might of our enemy should not discourage us from the
fight, but make us the more courageous.
CHAP. X. Of the policy of the flesh, and that it is more dangerous and
pernicious then it power and strength.
1 That the policy of the flesh in it own nature is exceeding pernicious. 2
That the policy of the flesh is most pernicious unto us. 3 That the policy of
the flesh should make us more watchful and vigilant.
CHAP. XI. Of certain particular deceit of the flesh respecting our persons.
1 The first deceit that we are nothing so evil as in truth we are. 3 The
means to defeat the former policy. The second policy that the good things
in us are much better then in truth they are. 4 The means to defeat this
policy also.
CHAP. XII. Of the policies of the flesh respecting our estates.
1 The first policy to persuade the faithful that they are hated of God
because they are afflicted. 2 The 2 policy to persuade us that we are in an
happy condition, when our estate is most miserable. 3 That outward privileges
are no sure testimonies that we are in Gods love* 4 That worldly prosperity is
no sure sign of Gods love or our happy condition. 5 That a civil life is no
sure sign that we are in the state of grace and salvation. 6 That a bare
profession of the true religion is not sufficient for salvation. 7 The fleshes
deceit in persuading men to rest in external ceremonies. 8 Of the means to
defeat the former policy.
CHAP. XIII. Of the policies of the flesh toward temporary believers.
1 That the flesh in a subtle manner deceives temporaries. 2 That we must
labor to have all spiritual graces in sincerity and truth, and first our
knowledge. 3 How we may discern a true iustifiing faith from that which is
temporary. 4 Of the differences between true and false repentance. 5 Of the
differences between the obedience of the faithful and of hypocrites. 6 Of the
fleshes deceit in moving us to leave off from doing good duties that we may
avoid hypocrisy.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the policies of the flesh in alluring and persuading us to
sin.
1 The 1 policy is to persuade us that sin is no sin. 2 The 2 policy to
tell us that the sin is but small which it persuades us to committ. 3 The 3
policy, to tell us that if we committ lesser sins they will preserve us from
greater. 4 The 4 policy is to persuade us that we are in no danger of falling
into some sins. 5 The 5 policy is to persuade us that we may safely use the
means and occasions of sin. 6 The 6 policy is to draw us by degrees to
committ heinous sins. 7 The 7 policy is to draw us from things indifferent
to sin. 8 The 8 policy is to persuade us to sin by the examples of the
saints.
CHAP. XV. Of the pollicyes of the flesh which it uses to hinder our
repentance.
1 The 1 policy to persuade us, that our common sins are no sins, and our
heinous sins small and venial. 2 The 2 policy is to extenuate and cover our
sins with vain excuses as 1 to pretend corruption of nature. 3 Secondly the
flesh teaches us to pretend custom. 4 The 3 deceit is to pretend poverty
and necessity. 5 The 4 policy is to pretend a necessity of living in our sins
by reason of our callings. 6 The 5 deceit is to persuade us to continue in our
sins because of the corruptions of the times. 7 The 6 policy is to persuade us
to continue in our sins because God is merciful. 8 The 7 policy is to
persuade us to defer our repentance.
CHAP. XVI. Of the policies of the flesh which it uses to hinder us from
performing holy duties and virtuous actions.
1 Of the 1 policy of the flesh in blinding our minds and corrupting our
judgments, that we may not discern between good and evil. 2 The 2 policy in
alleging the difficullties that are in Christian duties. 3 The 3 policy is
to persuade us to defer the doing of holy and Christian duties. 4 The 4
policy in moving us to rest in fair promises and faint purposes. 5 The 5
policy is to withdraw us from more excellent duties by occasion of doing some
lesser good. 6 The 6 policy is to move us to perform good duties
unseasonably. 7 The 7 policy is to move us to neglect some present good upon
pretense of doing some greater good afterward.
CHAP. XVII. Of the policies which the flesh uses to interrupt us in doing of
good duties, and to alienate our hearts from them.
1 How the flesh interposeth when we are exercised in doing good duties. 2 How
the flesh corrupts and poysoneth our best duties. 3 How the flesh persuades
us to abate of our zeal, and to intermit virtuous actions for a while. 4 How
the flesh persuades us to rest in that which we have already done or
suffered.
CHAP. XVIII. Of certain advantages which the flesh has against us in the
spiritual conflict.
1 That the flesh has great advantage against us because it dwells in us. 2
That the daungerousness of this enemy is much increased by this cohabitation. 3
The means of preventing the former danger. 4 Of the second advantage which
the flesh has, namely that it is indefatigable and never wearied. 5 Of the
means to frustrate the former advantage.
The second Book entreats of the Conflict it self, and of the means
whereby we may get the victory.
CHAP. I. That there is a combat between the flesh and the spirit in every
true Christian.
1 Testimonies of scripture to prove that there is this conflict in them. 2
That the Apostle in the 7 of the Romans speaks of this conflict in himself
as he was regenerate. 3 That all the regenerate have feeling and experience of
this conflict. 4 Of the contrary effects which the Christian feels in
himself which show that this Conflict is in him. 5 The point proved by Gallat.
5. 19.
CHAP. II What the conflict between the flesh and the spirit is, and what are
the causes of it.
1 The conflict between the flesh and the spirit described. 2 Of the causes of
this conflict, and first Gods will for the manifestation of his glory. 3 The
second cause is because it is profitable for the faithful* and first to train
them up in humility. 4 That this conflict is effectual to make us deny our
selves. 5 By this conflict we are moved the more to hate sin. 6 That we are
moved hereby to flee unto God by fervent and frequent prayer. 7 It serves to
work in us patience and contentment. 8 That by this conflict our hearts are
weaned from the world. 9 That this Conflict is suitable to the time and place
wherein we live,
CHAP III. Of the formal and essential causes of this conflict.
1 That there was no conflict in the time of innocence. 2 How the causes and
occasions of this conflict were begun in us. 3 That there is no conflict
between the flesh and the spirit in the state of corruption. 4 That the peace
of the unregenerate is more pernicious, then the most dangerous war. 5 That
Gods love in sending his Son to redeem us, made way for this conflict. 6
That our sanctification unperfected is the cause of this conflict. 1 because of
the great contrariety between grace and corruption. 7. Secondly because
these enemies so opposite dwell together. 8 New such contraries can dwell
together and not abolish one another.
CHAP. IIII. Of the combat it self and the manner how it is fought in us.
1 When we be called of God to this conflict. 2 Of the second summons to this
conflict. 3 The manner of the conflict it self. 4 That this fight is fought
not with carnal but spiritual weapons. 5 The first end at which the flesh
aymeth in lusting against the spirit. 6 The second end at which it aymeth in
this lusting. 7 The ends at which the spirit aymeth in lusting against the
flesh.
CHAP. V. Of the manner of the fight between the flesh and the spirit in our
several faculties and parts.
1 Of the conflict between the flesh and the spirit in the mind. 2 Of the
conflict between them in the understanding. 3 Of the conflict between
spiritual and carnal wisdom. 4 The conflict between the judgment of the
flesh and the spirit. 5 How these faculties of the mind prevail against one
the other. 6 The cause why the godly learned differ in judgment from one an
other. 7 That this should make us conform our judgment to the analogy of
faith. 8 The conflict in our thoughts and imaginations. 9 The conflict between
spiritual and carnal wisdom. 10 Of the conflict between the flesh and the
spirit in the conscience.
CHAP. VI. Of the manner of the conflict between the flesh and the spirit in
the will, heart and affections.
1 Of the conflict between carnal and renewed will. 2 Of the conflict
between faith, and in fidelity and presumtio^. 3 That the conflict between
the flesh and the spirit, is most turbulent in the affections and sensual
appetite. 4 Of the conflict between the affections and passions.
CHAP. VII. Of the diverse effects which this conflict between the flesh and
spirit produces in us.
1 That the man regenerate cannot with full consent of will choose or refuse
either good or evil. 2 That the regenerate man cannot at all times do the
evil which the flesh chooses. 3 That by reason of this conflict he cannot do
the good he would. 4 That though the flesh cannot wholly hinder the spirit from
good actions, yet it interrupteth it in them.
CHAP. VIII. Of the subject of this conflict between the flesh and the spirit.
1 That there can be no conflict in them that are perfectly sanctified. 2 That
this conflict is not in the unregenerate. 3 That the conflict that is in the
regenerate, and that which is in the unregenerate differ much, and 1 in their
grounds and causes from which they arise. 4 Of the 2 difference which is in the
moving causes of these conflicts. 5. 6 Of the 3 difference, which is that the
conflict in the unregenerate is between diverse faculties, and the 1 the
regenerate is in the same. 7 The 4 difference is in their contrary effects. 8
The 5 difference is in the subject matter or occasion. 9 The last difference
between them is in respect of time.
CHAP. IX. That the conflict of conscience is not in all that are unregenerate
nor in them only.
1 That there is no comfort arises out of the conflict of conscience. 2 That
the conflict of conscience may be in the regenerate. 3 That this conflict of
conscience is not in those who are extraordinarily ignorant. 4 That the
conflict of conscience is seldom in simple people. 5 That it is not in proud
iusticiaries and civil worldlings. 6 That it is seldom in those who are
transported with violent passions.
CHAP. X. Whether the conflict between the flesh and the spirit be in all the
regenerate, and if it be, whether it be in the same manner and measure.
1 That this spiritual conflict is in all the regenerate that are of years. 2
What we are to think of Infants and Ideotts. 3 That this conflict is not in
all the regenerate in like manner and measure. 4 That this conflict is often
weak in strong Christians.
CHAP. XI. How we may know whether this conflict be fought in us, that is,
whether the spirit of God dwell in us or no.
1 That every faithful man may and ought to be assured that the spirt of God
dwells in him. 2 The 1 infallible sign is the ministry and means by which
it has been wrought in us. 3 The 2 sign is the effects and fruits of the
spirit, and 1 we may discern the spirit by the nature of the gifts and graces
in us. 4 That the graces of the spirit may be known by their constant and
continual operations. 5 Of the particular effects of the spirit, the 1 whereof
is spiritual illightening, and of the differences between the illightening of
the regenerate and unregenerate. 6 The 2 effect of the spirit is to prepare our
hearts for faith and then to work it in us, and how both of these are done. 7
The differences between iustifing faith and the faith of presumptuous
worldlings. 8 The differences between iustifing faith and that which is
temporary and hypocritical. and 1 in the preparation unto them. 9 The 2
difference in their nature and parts. 10 The 3 difference is in their
properties. 11 The 4 difference is in their concomitants. 12 The 5 difference
is in their effects. 1 true faith purifieth the heart. 13 The 2 effect wherein
they differ is in respect of their operation. 14 The 3 effect respects their
diverse joy. 15 The 4 effect respects confession and Christian apology. 16
The 5 effect respects contentment, 17 The 6 effect is the ouercomming the
world. 18 The last of true iustifiing faith is rejoicing to think of Christ's
coming to judgment. 19 The 3 effect of the spirit is the spirit of adoption.
20 The 4 effect is the spirit of supplication.
CHAP. XII. How we may know that Gods spirit dwells in us by our
sanctification, and the qualities and gifts of holiness infused in us.
1 The 5 effect of the spirit is the work of sanctification. 2 Of the 6 effect
of the spirit which is repentance, and of the preparation thereunto. 3 That
faith is the cause and foundation of our repentance. 4 That the spirit dwelling
in us purges us from our natural corruptions. 5 The differences between the
mortification and repentance which is in the regenerate and that which seems
to be in the unregenerate. 6 That the spirit is known to be in us by his
quickening of us in the inner man. 7 The differences between the quickening of
the spirit in the regenerate, and that which seems to be in the unregenerate.
8 The operations of the sanctifing spirit signified by diverse metaphors, and
first by wine an oil. 9 The spirit compared to water. 10 The spirit compared
to fire. 11 That we may know that the spirit dwells in us by the operations
signified by the former metaphors. 12 Of the special fruits of the spirit
whereby we may knew that it dwells in us. 13 Of other special fruits of the
spirit respecting our neighbors. 14 Of some other special fruits of the spirit
respecting our persons.
CHAP. XIII. Of the event and success of the fight between the flesh and the
spirit.
1 Of the foyles which the spirit receives in this conflict. 2 That from the
foyles of the spirit arise earnest desires to be freed from the slavery of
sin. 3 Secondly an endeavor in the use of all good means to be preserved
from such foyles for the time to come. 4 How far the flesh may prevail
against the spirit, and 1 that common graces may be lost for a time. 5 Secondly
that the shows and semblances of saving graces in temporaries may perish
utterly. 6 That true saving graces in the regenerate may be lost seemingly. 7
Other graces springing from those which are fundamental may for a time be
lost. 8 That saving and fundamental graces may be lost in some degrees in
respect of their operations. 9 Whether David lost any degree of his
fundamental graces when he committed adultery and murder. 10 That our
spiritual graces in the Conflict do not stand in their own strength. 11 An
objection against the former doctrine answered. 12 Of the assured victory
which the spirit obtains over the flesh in this Conflict. 13 An objection
against the former truth answered. 14 That there are two degrees of the spirits
victory 1. in this life. 15 Of the second degree of victory at the hour of
death.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the reasons which may encourage us to this Conflict against
the flesh.
1. The 1. reason because it is the will of God, that we should fight against
it. 2 The 2. reason is the necessity of this Conflict. 3 The third reason
taken from the manifold evils which are done unto us by the Flesh. 4 The fourth
reason is taken from the assurance of victory,
CHAP. XV. Of the means whereby we may be enabled to overcome the flesh.
1 The 1. means that we put on the whole armor of God. 2 The second means,
is to observe certain rules for the weakening of the flesh: and first that we
do not nourish the enemy which we would overcome. 3 That we must withdraw
from the flesh the provision and munition whereby it is strengthened. 4 That
we must stop all the passages to keep back provision for the flesh. 5 That
we must take heed especially of some principal sins which most strengthen
the flesh. 6 That we must moderate our selves in the use of things
indifferent.. 7 That we must avoid the other extreme of hurting our bodies,
whilst we go about to tame the flesh.. 8 That we must take from the flesh
the weapons and armor whereby it most prevails.
CHAP. XVI. Of other means whereby the flesh may be subdued and overcome.
1 That we must keep a narrow watch over our selves and over our enemies. 2
That we must keep this watch in all things. 3 That we must keep this watch
over all the faculties and parts of our souls and bodies. 4 That we must keep
a special watch over our tongues. 5 That above all other parts we must keep
this narrow watch over our hearts. 6 That we must keep this watch in our
spiritual armor.
CHAP. XVII. Of two other rules to be observed of those who would subdue the
flesh.
1 The third rule is that we withstand the flesh in all the occasions and
means of sinful lusts. 2 The fourth rule is that we resist the flesh in the
first beginnings of sin. 3 That the longer we defer the fight, the more
difficult and doubtful we make the victory. 4 That if we do not withstand the
first assaults of the flesh, we are not so wise as worldlings in their
generation. 5 How dangerous it is to give away the first motions unto sin;
showed by examples.
CHAP. XVIII. Of three other rules to be observed for the subduing of the flesh.
1 That we must think no sin so small that we may willingly commit it: To
which end we must consider first that by the least sin Gods Law is
transgressed. 2 The great evils which come of the least sins. 3 That small
sins, willingly entertained, are no less dangerous then the greatest. 4 That
the avoiding of small sins, is a notable means to preserve us from greater.
5 That even the least sins are the poison of the Soul, and the livery of
Satan. 6 That enemies prove most dangerous when they are most despised. 7 That
if we do not hate small sins as well as great we hate none with Christian
hatred. 8 The sixth rule is that we must neglect no sin as though we were in
no danger of falling into it. 9 The seventh rule is that we set no stint to our
mortification. 10 That our mortification must extend it self to all sinful
corruptions, and to all times.
CHAP. XIX. Of the first means to strengthen then the Spirit, which is to
avoid the means whereby it is weakened.
1 That our sins are the chief means whereby the spirit is weakened. 2 Of some
special means whereby the spirit is most weakened. 3 That we must not provide
for the spirit poison in stead of wholesome nourishment, nor carnal weapons in
stead of spiritual. 4 That we must not remit any thing of our first zeal in
holy duties. 5 That we must avoid sloth and negligence.
CHAP. XX. Of the means whereby we may comfort, cheer and strengthen the
Spirit to this Conflict.
1 The first means, earnest and longing desires after spiritual strength. 2
The second means is a careful endeavor in the use of all good means for the
strengthening of it. 3 The third means is to nourish the good motions of the
spirit. 4 The fourth means is serious care to maintain our peace with God and
the peace of conscience. 5 The fifth means is to preserve our selves pure and
clean from all pollution. 6 The sixth means is to keep the spirit and the
graces thereof in continual exercise. 7 The seventh means is frequent and
fervent Prayer. 8 The conclusion of the Book.


A In this Conflict two things to be considered 1. The enemies and combatants
which are described 1. By their names and natures, the Flesh. Chap. 1. to. 8.
Spirit.
Secondly, their properties where is showed that the flesh is an enemy
exceeding dangerous; the which appears first in respect 1. Of it own nature
because it is very Malicious Chap. 8. In it self.. 1. to. 5. Unto us.. 5. to.
13.
powerful in respect both of it strength and that either simply in it self.
Chap. 9. 5. 1. 2. compared with the Spirit,. 3.
Policy the which is considered either 1 Generally where is showed that it is
great in it self. Chap. 10.. 1. pernicious to us.. 2.
Specially whereof the special deceipts which respect either city our persons
and states. Chap. 11. 12. 13. Certain duties required which are of two sorts.
The 1 respect of mortifying of our sins. Chap. 14. 15. The second the
practice of virtuous actions. By which it seeks. 1. To hinder us from
practicing them. Chap. 16. 2. 2. To disturb us in them. Cha. 17. 1. 2. 3. To
withdraw us from them. Cha. 17.. 3. 4.





Of diverse advantages which it has against us the which are two* the 1. That
it dwells in us. Chap. 18.. 1. 2. 3. 2. That it is never weary in fighting
against us. 4


B. 2. The fight between them.

B B. In the fight consider two things: 1. The Conflict it self where consider
1. That there is such a Conflict in every Christian. lib. 2. chap. 1. 2. The
nature of it, where consider those things which are more essential, as 1. The
causes of it which are efficient, Chap. 2. Formal. Chap 3.
2. The manner of it in respect of 1. The whole person regenerate, Chap. 4. 2.
His several faculties and parts, Chap. 5. 6.

less essential the which are three 1. The effects of it the which are two 1.
That the man regenerate cannot with full consent of will choose and commit any
evil. Chap. 7.. 1. 2. 2. That he cannot with full consent of will choose and
do any good.
2. The subject in whom it is fought which is handled 1. Negatiuely where is
showed that this fight is not in those who are 1. Perfectly regenerate. Chap.
8.. 1. 2. Unregenerate. Where of the differences between the combat that is
in the unregenerate and the regenerate. Chap. 8. 9.
2. Affirmatively. Where is showed that it (...) all the regenerate, and the
signs of it. Chap. 10. 10. 11. 12.
3. The event and success of the fight.


C. ^ The ^^^nes (...) ^^^aine v^^tory.

C C. The means of victory unto which two things are required A due
preparation to the fight unto which two things are required 1. That we remember
certain reasons which may encourage us to the fight. Chap. 14. 2. The right
use of certain means whereby we may be enabled to over come: the which are
two 1. The putting on of the spiritual armor. Chap 15.. 1. 2. The observing
of certain rules which are of two sorts 1. Tending to weaken the flesh the
which are two 1. To withdraw all means by which it is strengthened. Chap. 15.
2. To use all means by which it may be weakened. Chap. 16. 17. 18.
2. Tending to the strengthening of the spirit the which are two 1. To shun
the means whereby it is weakened. Chap. 19. 2. To use the means whereby it is
strengthened. Chap. 20.



2. A valourous carriage of our selves in the Conflict.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE CHRISTIAN WARFARE BETWEEN THE SPIRIT AND THE FLESH:
Wherein is showed what they are, and the dangerousnes of this enemy the flesh,
with the advantages which it has against us.
CHAP. I. An Introduction into the following Discourse, wherein is showed, that
our enemies in the Christian warfare are many, mighty and dangerous, especially
our own flesh, with the lusts thereof.
. Sect. 1. That we are to expect no peace in this life, but to fight
continually against the enemies of our salvation.
IT was the error of the Apostles in the infancy of their faith, that being
admitted Christ's disciples, they should abound in earthly privileges; for as
they imagined that their Lord and Master should like a mighty Monarch rule in
the world, triumphing over all his own, and the Churches enemies, and reigning
in all maiesticall glory and peaceful plenty: so they hoped that they, who
for the present followed him in the state of affliction, should afterward
securely rest from all troubles and dangers, have the chief preferments in his
glorious kingdom, and the largest share in this worldly happiness. The like
conceit possesses many at their first entrance into the profession of
Christian Religion, who do not with Abraham and the rest of the Patriarchs,
see and believe the Heb. 11. 13.
promises afar of, but expecting present reward and wages for their service,
imagine that now they have for Gods sake forsaken the pleasures of sin, they
shall have in leiw thereof immunitie from dangers, and freedom from
afflictions, fame and favor among men for their well-deseruing, secure
plenty, and prosperous peace in regard both of outward and inward enemies. And
therefore being sick of the same disease, the like medicines are to be used
for their recovery, which our Savior applied unto his Apostles; namely they
are to be informed that ( Ioh. 18. 36.
) Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, that ( and 16. 33.
) in the world they shall have afflictions, and ( Act. 14. 22.
) by many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of heaven; that ( Math. 10. 34.
) Christ came not to bring peace and security, but fire and sword, wars and
dissensions, not only between strangers and enemies, but also among nearest
kindred and dearest friends. Which wars and garboiles though they do not
presently appear after our conversion unto God, and deliverance out of that
Egyptian servitude of sin and Satan, lest being discouraged with our rough
entertainment in our first entrance into the Christian warfare, we should
return into our thraldom, and redeem a base and dishonorable peace, at the
dear price of hellish bondage; yet are we sure to meet with these
difficulties and dangers, before we can be full conquerours and enter into the
possession of the holy Land.

. Sect. 2: That we are daily assaulted with foreign forces the world and the
Devil.
For no sooner is the Christian waged into Gods warfare, by receiving the
Presse-money of some saving graces, and taking upon him the colors of an
outward profession, whereby he is known to be a servant and souldior of Jesus
Christ; but presently there sets upon him a world of enemies, sometime
assaulting him in the open field, by affliction and persecution, and sometime
out of the secret ambushments of earthly prosperity. Besides with visible
forces of worldly foes, he is continually encountered with principalities and
powers, spiritual wickednesses in high Ephesians. 6. 12.
places, and invisible enemies, even innumerable legions of infernal spirits,
and the mighty troops of that hellish army.

. Sect. 3. That our outward enemies are not so dangerous, as our own flesh and
fleshly lusts.
But though these foreign foes being mighty and malicious, are exceeding
terrible to the Christian soldier; yet are they nothing so dangerous, as
those in bred enemies which we nourish in our own bosoms, who like secret
traitors disarme us of our chief weapons and munition, when as we are
assaulted with those professed enemies, and lay us open and naked to be spoiled
by their invasions, and wounded by their blows. For so were we in our creation
(through Gods infinite goodness) furnished with such impenetrable Armor of
innocence and righteousness, that Satan with all his hellish army could not
hurt us; and therefore not being able to prevail by force and violence, he
entertained with our first parent^ a treacherous parley, wherein he persuaded
them to put of their arms, and to entertain into their souls a troop of his
tentations, which were no sooner entered, but presently they vanquished all
their forces, ransackt their souls of all spiritual graces, and brought them
into ^ miserable subjection through his hellish tyranny. And that he might the
better keep them in perpetual obedience, he did not only kill and spoil
the natural inhabitants, Gods saving graces, but placed, even in the chief
Castle of their souls, a strong garrison of carnal corruptions and fleshly
lusts, which should reserve this like a conquered city, for his own use, and
as it were open the gates unto him and his tentations, when as he pleased to
make an entrance.

. Sect. 4. That Satan and the world could not hurt us, were they not aided by
our own flesh.
And this was the fountain of all our misery, and the chief cause and means
of Satan's tyrannous sovereignty, and of our base thraldom and slavery; yea
this is the cause why he still prevails and holds us captive to do his
will. For those foreign forces, led under the conduct of Satan and the
world, could never vanquish us; unless the flesh and the lusts thereof did
betray us into their hands; their wisdom could not circumuent us, unless
these secret traitors gave them continual intelligence of all advantages;
their malice and power could not hurt us, if they had not a strong party to
assist them in our own bosoms, who by their m^^^nous sedition and civil
wars, weaken us and strengthen them; neither could they ever conquer us, if
these intestine rebels did not open the gates and let in the troops of their
tentations. And therefore as I have indeauoured to arm and strengthen the
weak Christian against the forces of those foreign enemies, so it now
remains, that I should add to the former, this last part of the Christian
warfare, describing this conflict between the flesh and the spirit; and
teaching the Christian with what aids and supplies he must support his
weakness in these dangerous encounters, how he must keep under these wicked
traitors, and so carry himself and menadge his weapons, as that he may be
assured to obtain the victory.

CHAP. II. Of the flesh and the diverse significations of it, and what we are to
understand by it in the following discourse.
. Sect. 1. That there is in a christian this fight between the flesh and
spirit.
WHere first we will speak of the enemies which fight one against another in
this Warfare, and then of their conflict. In the former we will consider,
first, what these enemies are, and then how dangerous and pernicious unto us if
they be not subdued and kept in subjection to them which fight on our side
against them. The enemies which thus fight with one another are the Flesh and
the Spirit, with an innumerable army of their motions and lusts. Both which,
with all their forces dwell in every true Christian, making mutual opposition,
the one nilling what the other wills, and hindering and destroying, that which
the other furthereth and aduanceth. This plainly appears by the Scriptures,
which both discover this hostile dissension and contrary faction in the same
man, and the opposition and conflict which arises from their emnitie and
cohabitation, their natural division and local union. So the Apostle speaks
plainly of this conflict in all Christians. Gal. 5. 17. Ioh. 3. 6. Gal. 5. 17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary one to another; and particularly in himself, where he thus
complains, But I see another (...). Romans 7. 25.
law in my members, rebelling, or warring, against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members. And
again, I my self in my mind serve the law of God, but with my flesh the law
of sin. And hence it is that the Apostle Peter exhorts us, to fight
valiantly against these lusts, because they do continually make war against
us. Dearly beloved (says he) I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which 1. Pet. 2. 11.
fight against the soul. 1. Pet. 2. 11.

. Sect. 2. The diverse significations of the word flesh, taken for things
materially subsisting.
Now that we may like Christ's faithful soldiers, after a lawful and laudable
manner thus fight against them, we must in the first place labor to know what
they are, least we mistake our enemies for our friends; to which end we are to
understand that the flesh is diversely taken in the scriptures: As (to omit many
acceptations of it which are far off and nothing pertinent to our present
purpose) sometime it is taken for all mankind; In which sense it is said, that
all ( Genesis 6. 12.
) flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, that is, all mankind; that all
flesh is ( Esa. 40. 6.
) grass, that is, all mankind is frail and momentany, and that God would (
Joel 2. 28.
) pour out his spirit upon all flesh, that is, upon men of all sorts and
conditions. Sometimes it is taken for the whole man, d 1. Pet. 3. 18.
consisting of soul and body. And thus our Savior Christ is said, to have
been put to death concerning the flesh, that is, his humane nature, his body
being severed from his soul, and his soul (in his present sense and feeling)
from his God, when as upon the cross he bore his wrath for our sins: and
the Psalmist, having said, that he would not fear Psalm. 56. 4.
what flesh could do unto him, Psalm. 56. 4. expounds himself in the
eleventh verse; In God (says he) have I put my trust, I will not be affraide
what man can do unto me. Sometimes it is taken for the body of man alone
consisting of many members. And so the Apostle exhorts us to cleanse 2. Cor.
7. 1.
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit; that is body
and soul; and the Psalmist says, that the enemies Psalm. 79. 2.
of the Church had cruelly given the flesh of Gods Saints to the beasts of the
earth, that is the dead bodies of Gods servants, which also as he says in the
same place, were given to be meat to the fowls of the heaven. Sometime this
word flesh signifies the whole nature of man, as it is born in corruption and
polluted with original sin. And thus our Savior says, that, that which is
born of the flesh, is flesh, that is, if John 3. 6.
the parents be defiled with sin, then needs must the children be polluted with
their corruption; for a stinking fountain cannot bring forth sweet waters; and
who (as Job says) can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? And thus the
Apostle Job 14. 4.
says, that they who are in the flesh, that is, remain in that Romans 8. 8.
corrupt and sinful condition in which they were borne, cannot please God. But
in none of these senses are we to conceive the flesh to be our enemy; for
neither may we Timon-like be at enmity with mankind; nor like mad men make
war and offer violence against our own persons, nor ought we with the
Baalites and Papists to fight against our own bodies; neither is there any
war in the natural man borne in corruption, seeing he is wholly flesh and
under Satan's government, who like the strong man, whilst he keeps the
house, possesses all in peace; saving that now and then there is some civil
dissension and small iarres between the will and conscience, and one passion
with another, which are quickly taken up, as we shall show hereafter.

. Sect. 3. Diverse significations of the word flesh, taken for accidents and
qualities.
But we are further to consider that the flesh is not only thus substantially
taken for things really and materially by themselves subsisting, but also for
accidents and qualities; In which sense it is taken two ways in the
Scriptures: First for that quality of corruption, frailetie and infirmity of
the humane nature, which is not sin, but rather the effect and punishment
which attends and waits upon it; and in this sense it is said of the
Israelites, that he turned away his wrath from them, because he remembered that
they were but 1. Cor. 15. 50.
flesh, and a wind that passes away and comes not again. Thus also it is
said that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and what this
flesh and blood is, he expounds in the next words, neither does corruption
in herit 2. Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4
corruption. And thus the Apostle says, that though he walked in the flesh,
yet he did not war after the flesh, not with weak and carnal, but with
strong and mighty weapons, which were able to cast down all that opposed
against them; and in this sense (as I take it) are we to understand the speech
of our Savior to his Apostles, The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is
weak. And in this signification Mat. 26. 41.
the flesh is not to be taken for a malicious enemy, but rather a weak and
feeble friend, which is not to be opposed in hostile manner (as it were) with a
sword and spear, but rather to be strengthened with the cordials of comfort,
after that the corruption of sin, which is the cause thereof, by the physic
of the Word is purged away.

. Sect. 4. The flesh taken for the corruption of nature.
Secondly, the flesh is taken for the whole corruption of nature, or for that
original sin, whereby the whole nature of man, with all the powers and
faculties of his soul and body ate wholly defiled, the image of God utterly
defaced, and he quite disabled unto all good, and made prone unto all manner of
evil, the which as it is the child and offspring of our first parents sin,
so is it the mother and nurse of all actual transgressions, and of all our
rebellion against God and his will. And this carnal corruption possesses and
ouer-spreadeth the whole man before regeneration, defiling and disabling his
body and soul, with all the members, parts and faculties of them, reigning and
ruling in him in his full strength as a King and sovereign, and making him
obedient to the sinful lusts thereof; and after regeneration it still
remains and dwells in him, (although wounded and weakened) like a wicked
enemy and false traitor, rebelling against the Spirit, and resisting the good
motions thereof; and though it be deposed from the regencie, and expelled (as
it were) out of the heart of the Kingdom, yet (like the cursed Cananites) it
still keeps residence in the borders of the land, and after it is beaten out
of the City does still dwell in the Suburbs, whence it much molesteth the
spiritual part, and is to the regenerate man a snare to entangle him, and a
trap to catch him, a scourge to his Ios. 23. 13.
sides, and a thorn in his eyes, sometime assaulting him by open violence, and
sometime indangering him by secret ambushments and hidden underminings. In
which sense the flesh is taken either for the whole nature of man, as it
comes into the world corrupted and defiled with sin, seeing he is nothing
but a mass of corruption and a sink of all filthiness, till he be regenerate
by the Spirit of God; or else for that part of a Christian which remains
still unregenerate after his effectual calling and sound conversion unto God.
In the former signification we are to understand all those places, where
unregenerate and wicked men are called flesh, as where our Savior says, that
that which is Ioh. 3. 6. Romans 7. 5.
borne of the flesh is flesh: and the Apostle Paul, that, when we were in the
flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law did work in our members, to
bring forth fruit unto death; and that they who are in the flesh cannot please
God. In the later Romans 8. 8.
we are to understand it when it is applied unto the faithful, who are but in
part regenerate, to signify the relics of natural corruption and the
vicious quality of sin, which still dwell and remain in them unmortified
and unsubdued. So the Apostle complains, that there was given him a prick in
the flesh, that in his flesh dwelled 2. Cor. 12. 7. Romans 7. 18. 25.
no good thing, and that in the flesh he served the Law of sin. And thus he
would have the incestuous person delivered to Satan, for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit 1. Cor. 5. 5.
(that is the regenerate man) might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. But
most plainly and distinctly does he speak of it, where he says, that the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and that
these are contrary Gal. 5. 17.
the one to the other, bringing forth in the same man diverse and contrary
fruits, as he there at large describes them.

. Sect. 5. That the flesh in this discourse signifies the part unregenerate in
a christian or the relics of corruption remaining after sanctification.
Now in this last sense we are to take the word flesh in the following
discourse, understanding thereby those relics of corruption, which after
regeneration do still remain in us, the corrupt quality of sin adhering to
all the parts and faculties of our souls and bodies, unmortified and
vncrucified, or that part of a Christian which is unregenerate and continually
fights and strives against the spirit. And this is the malicions enemy that
assisteth Satan and the world, to work our utter overthrow, unto which the
Scriptures have given many names, whereby the nature and qualities there of are
employed, that we may the better know it, and arm our selves to fight against
it. For it is called the ( Romans 6. 6. Ephesians. 4. 22. Col. 3. 9.
) old man, not only because in age and antiquity, it almost matcheth humane
nature; but rather to imply unto us, that (like those, who, by reason of their
old age, have had much experience) it is very subtle and politic, and so full
of sleights and stratagems, that if we be not exceeding wary and watchful it
will easily circumuent us. It is called also the ( 1. Cor. 2. 14.
) natural man, because this corruption ouerspreadeth the whole nature of all
men who are unregenerate; for howsoever in the first creation we were good and
free from sin, yet after the fall of our first parents, we were so
degenerate and infected in our natures with the poison of their corruption,
that it is as natural familiar and easy to sin and offend God, as for a man
to eat, drink and sleep, for a fish to swim, a bird to fly, or for a stone
to descend downwards. It is called the old Adam, to lead us unto the fountain
from which it sprung, that is, not God who made all things good, but our first
parents, who as they lost the image of God by their fall and were wholly
corrupted in their own natures, so they derived their corruption unto all
their posterity, and having first defiled themselves with this spiritual
Leprosy did also infect therewith all that numerous offspring which descended
of them. It is called the ( 2. Cor. 9. 17. Romans 8. 10.
) body, because this corruption dwells in the body, and exercises it self
in it by it, as by it instrument in the committing and perpetrating of all the
works of darkness; and that we may the more clearly discern what body the
Apostle means, he calls it the ( Romans 6. 6.
) body of sin, and the ( Col. 2. 11.
) body of the sins of the flesh, because the flesh by the body commits
all manner of sin and wickedness. It is called the body of death, because it
is the cause of death and Romans 7. 24.
condemnation, in which sense Elizaus his Disciples said, that death was in the
pot, that is, deadly poisonous herbs, which would cause them to dye who had
tasted of them. It is called also ( Romans 7. 8. 11
) sin, not only because it self is sin, but also the root and fountain
of all other wickedness, and the ( Romans 7. 17.
) sin that dwells in us, because like the strong man it keeps sure
possession till a stronger comes and dispossesseth it, even the Spirit of God
dwelling in us. It is called ( Iam. 1. 13. 14.
) evil concupiscence, because it fills us with sinful lusts, and makes us
to to stand in opposition against the will of God, desiring and willing, that
which he nilleth and condemns. It is called ( Heb. 12. 1.
) (...), the sin which encloseth or besetteth us about, because this hellish
Captain with a whole army of sinful lusts enuiron us on every side, so as
we cannot possibly of our selves escape out of their ambushments. Finally, it
is called the law of sin, the ( Romans 7. 23.
) law of the members, and the ( Rom* 8. 2.
) law of death; because it is the rule of all the natural man's actions,
guiding him into all wickedness, the commander of all his parts and members,
unto whose injunctions they do like subjects yield free and willing obedience,
the which their service and subjection is in the end rewarded with everlasting
death of body and soul.

CHAP. III. What we are to understand by the Spirit in this discourse.
. Sect. 1. That the word Spirit is diversely taken in the Scriptures.
AND thus we have showed what the flesh is which is one of the champions in
this spiritual combat: now we are to consider of the other, which is the
Spirit; and that we may the more distinctly know what it is, we must
understand that the word Spirit is diversely taken in the Scriptures; and to
omit many acceptations which are altogether impertinent to our present purpose,
we may observe, that it is sometimes taken generally, for all spiritual and
incorporeall substances, and sometimes more specially for some one of them; And
thus it sometime signifies the whole ( Ioh. 4. 24.
) deity, and sometime every one of the persons, the Father, the ( Ioh. 6. 63.
) Son, in respect of his divine nature, and the ( 1. Ioh. 5. 6. 7.
) holy Ghost, who has this name of spirit, after a usual and peculiar manner
given unto him. But howsoever God and every of these holy and divine persons,
do fight in us, and for us against the flesh, seeing it is their grace that
supporteth us, and their strength whereby we overcome; yet we are not to
understand by spirit in the following discourse this divine nature, who being
omnipotent none is able to resist. Sometime it signifies the ( Eccles. 12. 7.
Act. 7. 59. 2. Cor. 7. 1.
) soul of man, even as the flesh is taken for the body; but these are not
opposites and enemies but dear friends, who so entirely love, that they fear
nothing more then to be separated and to part company. Sometime it signifies
that chief and excellent faculty of the soul called ( 1. Cor. 2. 11. Romans
12. 2. Luke 1. 47.
) reason and understanding; but neither can it here be taken in this sense;
because this spirit it self is corrupt and sinful, and this natural reason
and wisdom is enmity against God, and against this spirit whereof we speak,
which opposes and fights against it, as against his chiefest enemy.
Sometime it is taken for the vigor and efficacy of the understanding and
reason it self, as where the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, to be renewed in
the spirit of their mind. Sometime by spirit we understand the ( Luke 1. 15.
Gal. 3. 2. Act. 2. 18.
) gifts and graces of the spirit, as Faith, Love, Hope, Joy and the rest; which
being fruits of the Spirit, do stand in opposition to the lusts of the flesh,
and in some sort do fight against them, they being contrary the one to the
other. Finally, the Spirit sometime signifies a new quality of holiness,
created and wrought in all the Elect by the Spirit of God, whereby all the
powers and faculties of his soul and body are renewed according to the image
of God, in wisdom, holiness and righteousness; In which sense we are to
understand it in this place.

. Sect. 2. What we are to understand by Spirit in the following discourse.
The spirit then whereof we entreat, is the new man, or the regenerate part of
a Christian which is nothing else but a created quality of wisdom, holiness
and righteousness, whereby we are in the whole man renewed unto Gods image;
which continually fights against, and in the end overcomes the flesh with
all the lusts thereof. And Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
this is the other champion in the spiritual combat, which also is described
unto us in the Scriptures by diverse names, that we might the better conceive
of the nature thereof; For first it is called the Spirit, both to note the
cause and author of it, which is the Spirit of God; and to teach us, Ioh. 3. 6.
Romans 7. 6.
that it is of a simple, pure and immortal nature, and most opposite to that
which is carnal, earthly and sensual. It is called the new man, in opposition
to the old Adam, and that corruption of nature which was derived immediately
from Ephesians. 4. 22. Col. 3. 10.
him, and to point out the difference between the flesh and the spirit in
respect of their causes; for the cause of the flesh, was the old man, our first
parent Adam, from whom it was propagated; the cause of the other, was the new
man or second Adam, Christ Jesus, who by his Spirit has regenerated 2 Cor. 2.
15.
and begotten us unto God: making us to become new creatures, renewed according
to the image of God. It is called the spiritual man both to point out the
cause from which it has it being, even the Spirit of God, which regenerateth
Gal. 6. 1.
and sanctifies us, and also in respect that it self is the cause of many
spiritual actions, and is wholly taken up and exercised about spiritual and
divine objects; above all things seeking to be enriched with Gods saving
graces, and to have sure title and just claim to the Kingdom of heaven, which
is the inheritance of the blessed Angels and holy spirits. And finally to put a
difference between him who is led by the spirit, and him who is merely
natural and worldly, the one resembling and imitating the old Adam, who was
from the earth, earthly; the other the second Adam, who was from heaven,
heavenly; the one led by the sense, and seeking only things sensual and
carnal; the other soaring aloft, and minding those things which are divine and
spiritual. It is called the ( Ioh. 3. ^. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
) regenerate man, to note, that we have it not by natural propagation, but by
spiritual regeneration and new birth; whereby being begotten by the word and
spirit we are borne unto God. It is called the inner man, and the ( 1 Pet. 3.
4.
) hidden man of the heart; because it swayeth and rules principally in the
soul, mind and b Romans 7. 22. Ephesians. 3. 16.
heart, inlightning the understanding and sanctifying the will and affections,
and so making them conformable to the word and will of God; and cannot be
discerned outwardly by the sense, but only when it shows it self in the
effects and fruits thereof. It is called a ( 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15.
) new creature, because it is no relic or remainder of that image of God,
according to which we were at the first created, but a new work of Gods holy
spirit, by his sole omnipotent power made of nothing, and not of any
praeexistent matter which it found in us. Finally, it is called the law of the
spirit, and the law of the e Romans 8. 2. and 7. 23.
mind; because it is engraven and written in our hearts, ruling and governing
us, directing and inclining us both in our souls and bodies unto all holy
obedience, f Romans 8. 1. 14.
and inciting us to the performance of all Christian duties, wherein this law
of the Spirit differs from the laws of men, for although it be the
intention of lawgiuers to make men good; yet their laws do this only thus
far forth, as they give notice unto them what they ought to do and leave
undone; but the holy spirit dwelling in us, does not only, by inlightning our
understanding, teach us what is our duty, but also inclines our hearts and
affections unto obedience, causing us to put in practice the things we know.
And it is called the Law of the spirit of life. For as the natural spirit or
soul is the cause of our natural life; so Gods holy spirit is the cause of
the life of Grace; according to the saying of our Savior. It is the spirit
which quickneth, and the words which I speak unto John 6. 63.
you are spirit and life. The which spirit of life is originally in our Savior
Christ, and from him derived unto us who are united unto him, and to no other.
For as the natural spirit extends unto no member which has not connection
with the head; so this holy spirit of life is derived unto none who is not
joined in communion with Christ our head, according to that 1. Ioh. 4. 13.
Hereby we know that 1. Ioh. 4. 13.
we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit.

. Sect. 3. That this combat is not maintained between bare qualities only,
but as they are backed by the holy spirit, and Satan the wicked spirit.
And thus have I showed what the flesh and the spirit are, which are the
combatants in this spiritual Warfare, the one being that natural corruption,
and carnal concupiscence, in which we are conceived and borne, the other a
created quality of holiness, whereby we are renewed unto Gods image, which
through the sin of Adam was defaced in him and his posterity; and is
continually preserved, supported and strengthened by the Spirit of God dwelling
in us from which also it had first ^t being. Neither are we so to understand
it, as though this combat were only maintained by bare and naked qualities,
of renewed purity, and old corruption, but that they are also backed and
vpheld by those spirits which are the causes and the authors of them; namely
the holy Spirit of God, and the impure and wicked spirit Satan, the author of
all sin and wickedness. For whilst men remain in the state of infidelity,
the strong man Satan keeps possession and dwells in them, though not after
a gross and sensible manner, as in demoniacks, yet inuisibly and spiritually,
ruling and reigning in them, and (as the Apostle speaks) holding them captive
to do his will. In which his regiment and government, he imployeth the 2.
Tim. 2. 26.
flesh and our carnal concupiscence as his deputy and chief instrument, to
lead sinful men into all wickedness, the which he continually animateth,
inrageth and strengthens unto all evil. But when a stronger then he comes,
even the good spirit of God, he casts him out, and taking possession
dwells, reigns and rules in our souls and body, creating in us that
quality of holiness and righteousness called the spirit, which he
substituteth as his vicegerent and chief deputy in the regenerate man. And
though he does not quite expel the flesh, Satan's lieutenant out of us, yet at
the first entrance he gives him a mortal wound, of which he never recouereth,
and deposes him from his vice-gerencie, so that howsoever it still dwells,
yet it reigns not in our mortal bodies, as in former times. Only Romans 6. 12.
Gods spirit suffers this enemy to inhabit still with us, that by the
opposition which it makes, it might exercise the spiritual part in the
Christian Warfare, that hereby it might be made more vigilant and diligent,
more strong and active, and in the end obtaining victory might be crowned with
the greater glory. In which combat and conflict he leaves not the spiritual
man to himself, but continually sends unto him fresh aids of renewed graces
whereby he is enabled to overcome. Even as on the other side Satan, the prince
of darkness, though he be thrust out of his possession and regency, yet he
leaves and forsakes not his wounded and weakened deputy the flesh, but
labors continually to recure his wound, ministers unto him new strength, by
his hellish tentations and suggestions, and by breathing and infusing into him
the poison of enmity and malice against God and all goodness, stirs him up
to rebellion against his holy spirit, and to make war against that garrison
of his graces which he has placed in us.

. Sect. 4. The former point proved by diverse reasons.
So that not only the quality of holiness, but the holy spirit, not only
the gifts and graces of the spirit, but the holy Ghost himself dwells and
reigns in the man regenerate, keeping still possession, after that Satan is
driven out, and strengthening the regenerate part against all the assaults of
the flesh, and the lusts thereof. The which may appear by these reasons,
first because we are called the habitation 1 Cor. 3. 16 and 6. 19.
of God, and the temples of the holy Ghost, which cannot be understood of his
gifts and graces only, which are improperly said to dwell in Temples, seeing
this belongs rather to persons then unto things and qualities, but of the
holy spirit himself. Secondly, the spirit of God, and not his gifts and graces
only, are the bond of the spiritual union which we have with Christ; for
dwelling in Christ our head, and in us likewise who are his members, it makes
us to become one mystical body with him, even as the head and diverse members
make one natural body, being animated and quickened by the same soul. Thirdly,
the actions which in the Scriptures are attributed to the spirit dwelling in
us, cannot fitly be applied to bare qualities, but properly belong to the
spirit it self. For this spirit dwelling in us, is said to rule and govern
us, to guide, direct, teach and instruct us, to sanctify and purify us, to
convince us of sin, and to replenish us with all saving graces. Now the
quality of holiness, and the author by whom it is created; the graces
themselves, and he that infuseth them and works them in us are diverse.
Fourthly, as Satan keeps his residence in wicked men, working them unto all
manner of sin, and holding them so captive, that they do his will, (for so
the Apostle says, that the Ephesians walked in time past according Ephesians. 2. 2.
to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience, etc.) So the spirit of God coming and thrusting him
out of possession, dwells in us, leading us into all truth, replenishing us
with all grace, and enclining us to all holy obedience, and to the performance
of all good and Christian duties. Lastly, the spirit dwelling in us, and the
new man, are plainly distinguished in the Scriptures. For so the Apostle
says; ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of
God Romans 8. 9.
dwell in you, now if any man have not the spirit of Christ (that is the same
holy spirit which dwells in our head and Savior Christ) he is none of his.
And else where he prays, that God would grant unto the Ephesians, according
to the riches Ephesians. 3. 16.
of his grace, to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man. By
all which it appears that not only the quality of holiness wrought in us
by the spirit, and the saving graces thereof, but also the spirit it self,
dwells in us, assisting and strengthening us in this christian warfare
against the devil and the flesh with the lusts thereof.

. Sect. 5. That the spirit-doth not dwell in us essentially more then in other
creatures.
Notwithstanding, I do not, nor dare affirm, that the spirit of God dwells
in us essentially more then in any other creature, communicating his essence
with us, as an essential part of us. For his nature and essence being most
simple and indivisible, in comprehensible, and omnipresent, filling all places
without repletion, and containing all, it self being infinite and contained of
nothing, cannot be said thus to dwell in man; for this were to deifie and make
a God of him; much less do I say that the spirit assumeth our nature, (as the
second person assumed the nature of Christ) to subsist in him by personal
union and to become one with him and he with us, for thus also we should fall
into the same error of deifying man, and besides then the third person in
Trinity should be incarnate as well as the second. Yea contrariwise we are to
know, that the spirit is said to be given us in the same sense, as he is said
to be sent forth unto us: Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit
Gal. 4. 6.
of his son into your hearts, crying, Abba father. Now by this phrase of
sending forth; the holy Ghost teaches us, that the spirit is in one manner in
Christ; and in another manner in us; for he is in him most properly,
substantially, and essentially, as being his spirit, coessentiall with him and
coeternall: in which respect the Apostle makes him and the spirit all one. 2.
Cor. 3. 17. The Lord is that spirit, and where the spirit of the Lord is there
is liberty, and Col. 2. 9. he says, that in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily: but in us not primarily, and originally, but as he is sent
forth of Christ unto us, by whom Col. 2. 9.
we have special right unto him since his resurrection, by John. 16. 7
virtue of his promise, John 16. 7. If I go not away, the comforter will not
come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto you. And by his mediation
and intercession now sitting at the right hand of his father: according to
that, I will pray the father, and he will give you another comforter, that he
John. 14. 16.
may abide with you for ever. So that the spirit is in Christ originally and
above measure, even the fullness of the spirit, Ephesians. 4. 7. Ioh. 1. 14. Psalm.
133. 2.
but in us in that measure which we have received from him, according to that
of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 7. Unto every one of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ: and that of the Evangelist: Ioh. 1. 14. The
word was made flesh and dwelt among us, full of groce and truth. 16. and of
his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace; Finally this oil of
the spirit (like that of Aarons) was first powered upon our head Jesus Christ,
and from him descended to us, as upon the skirts of his clothing, or rather
members of his body.

. Sect. 5. That the spirit-doth not dwell in us esscentially more then in other
creatures.
Furthermore although the spirit of God does not essentially dwell in us more
then in all other creatures; yet the elect and faithful have right unto him
above all others, even in respect of his essence, and efficacy, because he is
ours by Gods free and gracious covenant, wherein he has promised that he will
be our God, and we shall be his people: now Esa. 59. 21. Eze. 11. 19. and 36
26. and 37. 14.
he is ours in his son, and by his holy spirit. So in many places the Lord
promises to give unto us his holy spirit, which is not only to be understood
of the gifts and graces of the spirit, but also of the virtue and efficacy of
the spirit dwelling in us, and effectually working these graces in our hearts;
for so the Apostle says, that the Love of God is shed abroad Romans 5. 5.
in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given unto us; where he shows,
that by Gods gift we have right not only to the graces of the spirit, but
even after a special manner to the spirit himself. Besides where Christ is
said to dwell in us, and to be united unto us by his spirit, we are to
understand, that the bond of this union, is not only bare qualities, and gifts
and graces of the spirit, but even the spirit it self, which dwelling in
Christ our head essentially, is after an unspeakable and mystical manner, yet
really and truly communicated unto us who are the members of his body. In
which respects, though the spirit of God in regard of his essence be alike
present to all creatures, yet is he not said to be given unto them, or to be
their spirit, because they have no right unto him by covenant as we have, nor
any interest by Jesus Christ, neither yet any efficacy, operation nor influence
of saving grace from him, in all which he is proper only to the Elect.
Moreover by virtue of this donation and right, the holy spirit becoming ours,
does work in us after a special and powerful manner, he is intimate,
familiar and in near acquaintance with us, like inmates or coinhabitants,
comforting, directing, ruling, strengthening, and cherishing us. In which
respect we are said to be his ( Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19. 2. Cor. 6. 16.
) houses and temples in which ( Romans 8. 9. 11 1. Cor. 3. 16. 2. Tim. 1. 14.
) he dwells. Whereas contrariwise worldlings and infidels, to all these
purposes are mere strangers unto him, because they receive him not, but make
their bodies habitations for unclean spirits. For so our Savior says, that
the world cannot receive this spirit of truth because it sees him not,
neither knows him, but ye (says he to his Disciples, and in them to all the
faithful) know him, for he dwells with you, and Ioh. 4. 14.
shall be in you. Furthermore this holy spirit is given to the Elect and
faithful in a special manner, not only in the fruits and streams of his
graces, but also to be unto them as the root and fountain from which they
spring and flow, and the author, worker, preserver and continuer of all grace
and goodness in them; according to that of our Savior. Whosoever drinks of
the water that I shall give him Ioh, 7. 37. 38.
shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well
of water, springing unto everlasting life. And again; If any man thirst let
him come unto me and drink; He that believes on me (as the Scripture has
said) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this, (says the
Evangelist) be spoke of his spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: for the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. Now the streams of Gods graces, and the everlasting springing
fountain from which they flow are diverse, and to be distinguished, the one
being the cause and the other the effect, the one the tree the other the
fruit. Finally, to conclude this point, although the spirit dwells in us, in
respect of essence as in other creatures; yet he does after an especial manner
exercise his nature and show his presence by his virtue and efficacy more in
the faithful then in the whole earth, in that he chooses them for his own
peculiar people, takes full possession of them as of his own right, reigns
and rules in their hearts and consciences, as in the chief seat of his
Kingdom, unites them unto Christ their head, purges and purifieth them from
their sin and corruption, replenisheth them with all sanctifying and saving
grace, defends, preserves, and strengthens them from all enemies, and from
the inundation of all dangers by his almighty power and especial providence
watching over them. And finally inlighteneth them in all truth, and guides
and directs them in the way of holiness and righteousness which leads to
Gods kingdom. And even thus does Satan dwell in the children of unbelief;
not by communicating his essence unto them, for then they should be no more men
but incarnate devils, but by taking full possession of them as his own
vassels, by infusing malice into their hearts, and all manner of corruption and
sin into all the powers of their souls and bodies, by setting up his throne
in them, and ruling them with his power according to his own pleasure, 2. Tim.
2. 26.
and making them to become his slaves to do his will; finally by leading and
guiding them into all manner of wickedness through his tentations and
suggestions, until at last he brings them together with himself unto
condemnation and utter destruction in the fire of hell.

CHAP. IIII. The erroneous conceit of the Papists, who by the flesh understand
the body, and the sensual faculties only.
. Sect. 1. That the Papists propound unto us a friend to fight against in stead
of our enemy.
Having showed what our enemies in this spiritual warfare are, we should now
proceed to warfare are, we should now proceed to discover their nature and
properties, were it not that these enemies were by the devil and the world
disguised: yea quite hid from our sight in secret ambushments; and our
friends through their malice mustred against us, as though they were our
enemies, that so whileft we bend all our forces against them who oppose us in
this seeming hostility, these may suddenly set upon us, and assault us at
unawares, giving us deadly wounds when we fear no danger. For the plotting
and contriuing of which stratagem they use the vassals of Antichrist, the
clergy of Rome as their chieftaines and especial instruments, who hiding our
true enemy, the corruption of nature, which has ouerspread all the powers and
parts of our souls and bodies, under the close covert of their cunning
sophistry, do in stead thereof, offer to our view seeming foes of their own
fancying. For by the flesh they would have us to understand (not the relics
of corruption which keep their chief residence in the soul, mind, and will)
but the body it self and the flesh thereof; and at most the inferior, brute
and sensitive faculties of the soul; and by the spirit they understand the
intellectual faculties, the mind, reason and understanding, and so affirm
this to be the fight between the flesh and the spirit, when as the body and
sensitive parts do rebel and stand in opposition against the understanding
and reason, and contrariwise when these strive to maintain their regency by
keeping them under and subduing them to their laws and orders. And although,
being sometime convinced with the evidence of truth, they give together with
us the same verduite, affirming that not the body it self is meant by the
flesh, but the corruption of it, that it is only the instrument of the soul
in wicked actions, and the soul it self the chief cause of sin, and that
the mind, understanding and reason are poisoned and tainted with natural
corruption; yet by and by they are ready again to make void their evidence
and to reuerse this sentence, and relapsing into their old absurdity, they
either understand grossly by the flesh the body alone, or when they please to
deal more liberally with us, they also grant that the Inferior parts of the
soul, the animal and sensitive faculties are thereby included and
comprehended, and so imagining that therefore our regeneration is in the
Scriptures said to be imperfect, because, howsoever the mind and
understanding are truly and perfectly regenerate, yet the body remains in
the state of corruption, they here hence conclude, that in the soul remains
no part of this original corruption, but only in the body. All which does
evidently appear, not only by their gross practice* for if they did not
imagine that the body were the chief cause of all sin, why do they so
miserably and superstitiously afflict it, placing their mortification only in
a bodily exercise, and corporal punishments? and if they did not think that
the soul and intellectual faculties were pure and free from this corruption,
why do they so much magnify and extol it, ascribing all our falls and
faylings either to the body alone, or to the reaand mind only through the
corruption and default thereof)

. Sect. 2. That the chief Doctors of the Papists by flesh understand the body
But this also may appear by their doctrine: For not to produce many
testimonies out of a multitude of Authors, but only to name two or three of
the chief and most refined, Thomas Aquinas himself howsoever sometime he
agrees with us, holding that the flesh is the ( Aquin. in Ro^. 7. lect. 4.
) corruption of nature and orginall sin, as appears in his readings upon
the Romans, yet in other places he confounds the flesh ( Aquin. in Ephesians 5.
lect. 9.
) and the body, and makes the body sin and death, and the natural body to
be all one, although in these places, by body and flesh he understands the
vices and corruptions of them, as he expounds himself in other ( in Romans 7.
lect, 4. et cap. 8. lect. 2.
) places. So likewise he holds that by the spirit part regenerate, or
inerman, we are to understand the ( ibidem.
) mind and reason, which as he says is called the inner man, because that is
said to be man, which is principal and chief in him. And thus he opposes the
flesh and the heart, or the mind and reason; where speaking of the Apostles (
in Romans 7. lect. 3.
) words; I know that in me, that is in my flesh there dwells no good thing,
he says that this is not to be understood of his reason: for in me, that is,
in my heart good dwells, according to that, Ephesians the 3. where the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 3. 17. De perfect. Amoris Dei. Cap. 5.
that Christ himself dwells in our hearts by faith. So also Lewis Granada, a
chief Doctor of their superstitious devotion and mortification, joining with
the famous heathen Philosopher Mercurius Trismegistus, inu^igheth against the
body, as though it alone were this corrupt flesh, which is the author and
fountain of all our sin and evil. Unless (says he) O son thou hate thy
body, thou can not love thy self, for it is impossible seriously to intend
both, unto things mortal and divine. But first of all of necessity thou must
put of this garment which thou cariest about thee, being the covering of
ignorance, the foundation of wickedness, the bond of corruption, the dark
veil, the living death, the carcass of the senses, the moving sepulcher, the
household thief, which hates whilst it flattereth, and enuieth whilst it
hates, etc. which speech of the heathen man he judges so full of light and
truth, that for it alone he well deserved the name of Mercurius Trismegistus
the thrice great or excellent. And in the same Chapter having demanded, how it
can possibly be, that any man can hate himself, that is his own body, unto
which naturally he is so obliged in the bond of friendship, that the Apostle
says, No man yet ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it?
answers that this is an argument properly of Ephesians. 5.
flesh and blood, and that Gods spirit and grace, ask rather and with better
reason, how it can possible be that they should not hate it; For whereas the
most pernicious enemies unto man are, hell, the devil, the world, the flesh and
sin, this last is the greatest, but the next unto it is our flesh, which is
the mother and seed of all sin. Thus also Bellarmine, although in many
places he speaks as much for us De paeniten. lib 4. ca. 6. Tom. 3.
in this question as we would have him, yet he commends whipping and
tormenting of the body, as a work satisfactory tending to the mortifying of
the flesh, alleging for it these absurd and ridiculous reasons; first the
Apostles example, who says, that he did chastise his body (for so the vulgar
lattine reads it) that so he might bring it into subjection. Whereby body he
grossly understands the very body of the Apostle (whereas it here rather
signifies the body of sin and corruption, which else where he calls the
body of death) and by chastizing, whipping, whereas the word (...) signifies
to suppress or keep under. And although he grants that the Apostle here
uses a borrowed speech from those who according to ancient custom fought for
a maistery; and says, that he did evil entreat and keep under his body,
like those champions who either with their sistes, or with bags of sand did
beat and bruise their adversary till they were black and blewe, yet he says
(and only says it without any show of reason) that it is very probable that
Paul used to whip his own body, both because the Greek word signifies so
much (which is utterly false) and because this kind of punishment was usual
among the ancients; which also we must take upon his word, seeing he neither
alleges, nor in truth is able to allege any authority for it. His other
arguments to commend whipping and afflicting of the body, are the Publicans
smiting of his breast, whereby he showed the compunction of his heart in his
humiliation and penitent confession of his sins; some testimonies of Hierome
which speak of fasting, sackcloath and beating of the breast; Gods approouing
and commanding the paying of voluntary vows, the which he childishly
restrains Numb. 30.
to fastings and other afflictions of the body, and among the rest to whipping,
though there be no color for it in the place which he alleges. And finally
he produces the example of John the Baptist whose garment was Cammels hair,
his meat locusts, his bed (as he says, but proves not) the ground, his house
the desert. All which reasons and examples being far unfitting the wit of
such a subtle sophister, and in truth nothing to the purpose, I will pass
over, supposing that the bare repeating of them is a sufficient confutation,
and that like abortiue birthes they will presently dye, as soon as they come
to light.

Sect. 3. That the papists in their purest doctrine understand by the flesh
our bodies and the inferior and sensitive faculties only.
And thus do they (as it were in their dream or dotage) by the flesh
understand the body alone, but when they are most awake, and in the best
strength of their memory and understanding, they do by the flesh understand
the inferior parts of the soul, the sensitive faculties, the appetite, and
imagination, as they are corrupted, which also according to the doctrine of the
last council of Trent, they hold not to be sin but only the punishment of
it, though the Apostle makes the flesh, not only to be the cause of all other
sin, but also with a certain emphasis calls it sin it Romans 7. 17.
self. So on the other side by the spirit they understand the superior part of
the soul, the reason, understanding and will, which they magnify and extol,
as though it were free in it self from al corruption, the cause of all good,
and a professed enemy to the flesh, fighting against it continually with all
the lusts thereof. And thus Thomas Aquinas says, that the flesh is said to
fight against the spirit, in as much as the sensitive appetite Aquin in Romans 7.
lect. 3.
tends to the contrary of that which reason desires, according to that of
the Apostle. Gal. 5. the flesh lusts against the spirit. So Lewis de Granada,
says, that there are in our soul two principal parts, which of Divines are
called the superior and inferior parts. And that in the superior L. Gren^t
de perfect. amo^is Dei cap. 7.
(which is called the spirit and the mind) is the will and understanding which
rules the will, and is as it were it eye and guide. In the inferior is the
sensitive appetite with the imagination which also is the eye of the appetite
of which it is moved; and these parts he makes to be (as it were two common
wealths in man, the one of beasts, the other of Dulcis precator. lib. 1. par.
2. Cap. 19.
Angels. That he calls else where the flesh, concupiscence, sensuality, or
the sensitive appetite, whence all the perturbations of the mind do arise, as
it is corrupt and made inordinate through sin. And in the same place he
compares the superior part to a wife of so great beauty, nobility and
wisdom, as is possibly incident to that sex, making the man happy who is
married unto her; and the inferior part he compares to a servant, a witch and
sorceresse, upon whose love this man is so besotted that putting away his wife,
he makes himself a pray to his slave, etc.

. Sect. 4. That the practice of popish mortification plainly shows that by
the flesh they understand the body only, their mortification being nothing
else but a bodily exercise.
And this is their purest conceit concerning the flesh and the spirit, which
being wholly corrupt, how great is the corruption. For in their practice they
manifestly show that by the flesh they understand the body, seeing for the
mortification thereof they appoint only bodily exercises, which tend to the
vexing, tormenting and weakening thereof; as penance, pilgrimages, watchings,
whippings, rough clothing, hard lodging and such like: supposing that they
fight against the flesh, when they make war against their own bodies by
afflicting and punishing it. Wherein that I may not seem to slander them, I
will insert an history of Memor. lib. 2 in tract. de satisfact. Cap. 1.
monkish mortification, as it is recorded by their famous S. Clematus in his
Book called the Ladder of Paradise, and in the fifth staff of his ladder.
Which story for the worthiness of it, is related by Lewis of Granada in his
Book entitled the memorial of a Christian life, as a perfect pattern of
mortification, and is most unfaithfully translated into english by one Hopkins
a Priest, for the practice and exercise of the english Catholics. And not to
alter his method though most confused, because it is well enough sorted and
suited to the matter, nor to tire the reader with viewing over every particular
in that heap of trash, briefly he tells us, that himself coming into a
much admired monastery, he saw among the Monks in their practice of penitence,
such wonderful things, as the eye of the negligent has not seen, the ear of
the slothful has not heard, neither has entered into the heart of the dull
and sluggish. To wit, such things and words as might overcome with violence
even God himself, and such fashions and endeauours, as would speedily incline
him to show mercy. For (says he) I saw some of the penitents stand abroad in
the open air, watching there whole nights, until the morning, never moving
their feet out of the same place; and when they were grievously vexed with
drowsinesse coming upon them, they offered force to nature, and would not take
any rest, but reviled themselves, and with disgraces and contumelies offered
against their own persons, they rowsed up their spirits. Others I saw
standing in prayer and having their hands bound behind their backs like
malefactors, they inclined their pale faces toward the ground, crying out that
they were unworthy to look unto heaven. Neither did they presume in their
orizons to say any thing to Almighty God, by reason of the fearful doubting
of their thoughts and consciences, but only offered their silent souls and
their mute minds unto God being full of darkness and desperation. I saw
others sitting on the pauement covered with sackcloth and ashes, which hid
their faces between their knees, beating their foreheads against the earth.
Others I saw who in respect of their habit, cogitations and actions seemed out
of their wits, whose minds were so stupefied with excessive sorrowing, that
they stood like copper images, compassed about with darkness, and made
insensible (as it were) for all vital actions. Others humbly desired of God to
be here vexed and tormented, that there they might have mercy; and many
afflicted and cast down through a burdened conscience, said that it should
well satisfy them to be freed from hell torments, though they should never
attain unto the joys of Gods kingdom; and that it was sufficient if they
were freed from Gods great and terrible commination, and those unknown, hidden
and hellish pains, neither durst they desire to be delivered from punishments
altogether. In others I saw David's words effected indeed, men possessed with
sorrows, made crooked to the end of their lives, going mournfully all their
days, and casting out noy some smells out of the putrified parts of their
bodies; who lived without all care of their flesh, forgot to eat their bread,
mingling their drink with groans, and their bread with ashes. There you might
see their burned tongues like wearied dogs hanging out of their mouths. Some
among them tormented themselves in the scorching heat of the Sun; others
contrariwise afflicted themselves with extreme cold. Some tasting a little
water that they might not be parched with thirst, so contented themselves
without drinking more, others eating a small bit of bread, would cast away the
rest, affirming that they were unworthy to feed on the meat which belonged to
reasonable men, because they had carried themselves unreasonably like unto
beasts. Some amongst them excited others, saying, let us run brethren and
not obey this filthy and wicked flesh, but let us kill it, as it has first
killed us. And thus (says he) these blessed penitents behaved themselves.
Their knees, with their continual praying, were grown hard; their eyes
failing and ouerwearied, were sunk deep into their heads, the hair of their
brows and eyelids being fallen away and lost, their cheeks seemed burnt with
the heat of their scalding tears, their faces so withered, pale and deformed
that they differed not from dead men. Their breasts were made sore with their
blows, and being black and blew with bruises, they did spit blood, what use
had they of any bed? what cared they for clean and whole clothing? All there
were torn, filthy and full of lice. And in a word what is their affliction who
are possessed with a Devil, in comparison of these? what the bitter vexation
of those who mourn for their departed friends? what their sorrow who live in
banishment? what the punishments of cruel parricides? surely the pains and
torments which all these unwillingly suffer, are nothing being compared with
their voluntary penance. And not content with punishments inflicted by
themselves, they would entreat their great judge and governor of their
Monastery, who was a very Angel amongst men, that he would put irons and
chains about their necks and hands, and fasten their feet in the stocks,
not suffering them to come out till they were to be buried. Ye^ indeed they
would not so much as have any burial. (Neither will I hide their wonderful
charity toward God and the penitence of these blessed men.) For being to dye
and to become citizens of that heavenly City, they would with earnest prayers
adjure their Abbot, that he^ would not vouchsafe them human burial, but like
brute creatures cast them either into the rivers or into the open fields to be
devoured of beasts; which sometimes he also did being overcome with their
importunate requests. But what was the quality of their place and habitation?
Surely it was very dark, unhandsome, stinking, foul and filthy, so as it
might fitly be called a prison for condemned persons, and the very sight
thereof might well be a mistress of perfect paenitence and mourning. Yea they
were not contented with those torments which could be inflicted by men; but (as
he further says) they desired of God with many groans and great lamentation,
that they might be taken away by the Devil, or fall into some grievous
diseases, or loose their eyes, and so become a miserable spectacle unto all
men, that so by these present pains they might escape future punishments. Now
if we would know the fruit of all their labors, and what inward peace and
security they had by these outward torments and vexation; this also in that
worthy Story is made known unto us, namely, that as they passed their doleful
days in these selfe-deuised tortures and torments of body, so at the day of
death they were no less vexed with terrors of conscience, affrighting fears,
and dreadful doubtings; as in truth what other can be expected from them who
by their superstitious devises have robbed God of the glory of his free grace
in our salvation, derogated from the all-sufficiencie of Christ Jesus our alone
Savior his merits and obedience, and in a great part arrogated the praise of
the remission of their sins, and attaining unto everlasting life, to their
own penance and satisfactions?

. Sect. 5. That the Popish Doctors are justly to be taxed for teaching the
former doctrine: and the superstitious people for putting it in practice.
Now by this which has been said it appears what the Church of Rome and her
adherents conceive and hold concerning the flesh, in respect both of their
doctrine and their practice. Wherein they are justly to be taxed, first of
untruth and falsehood, in that they do herein teach gross errors which are
directly contrary to the whole course of Scriptures, as it shall (God willing)
afterward plainly appear. Secondly, of damnable pride, and that first in
this respect that they afflict and torture their bodies by their voluntary
penance for mere ostentation to be seen and praised of men, (for else to what
end serve their going barefoote on their pilgrimages; and their whipping of
themselves in the open streets) of all which their torments, if any pitying
them more then they do themselves, would have them c^sed and freed; the best
way were to follow the advice of Plato, who seeing men take compassion on the
proud Cynick Deogenes, because he voluntarily stood in a great storm of
rain, told them, that the only way to rid him out of that misery, was to
withdraw themselves, and to let none remain to look upon him: for there would
surely but few be carried about in this pageant of penance, if there were no
spectators who might encourage them with their applause. Secondly, their pride
appears in the acting and suffering of this voluntary penance in respect of
the end, which is not so much to mortify the flesh, as to make satisfaction
to Gods justice for their sins, or to merit his favor and the joys of
heaven; wherein as they derogate much from Gods mercy, and the all sufficient
merits and satisfaction of Jesus Christ, so also they manifest their hellish
pride, which will not suffer them wholly to deny themselves, and ascribe the
glory of their justification and salvation only to Gods free grace and Christ's
sufferings and obedience: but needs will they share with them in the praise, in
part at least pay their own debt, and give something toward the purchase of
our heavenly inheritance; In which respect it may truly be said, that the
leaner they make their bodies with penance and punishment, the more their
hearts are fatned with pride and vainglory; and the more they subdue and
keep under their fleshly carkase, the more their minds are lifted up with
opinion of their merit and deserving. Thirdly we may in this regard justly tax
them to be those imposters and deceivers of whom the Apostle speaks, who
seek to deceive men of their heavenly reward; seeing they hold not the head
Christ, but in part rest upon Col 2. 18. 19. 20. 22. 23.
their own superstitious devices, being (as the Apostle there speaks,)
vainly past up in their fleshly minds, and placing the chief of their
Religion, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, in subiecting
themselves to human ordinances after the commandments and doctrines of men;
which things have at the most but a show of wisdom, in will worship and
humility, and not sparing or punishing of the body. Lastly, herein we may well
charge them with gross hypocrisy, and false treachery, seeing they betray the
poor Christian who asks their counsel and advise in this spiritual
warfare, whilst they pretend his strengthening and defense. For as they
profess Christ in show, but oppose him in truth, being those limbs of
Antichrist who make war against him and his members; so they outwardly
proclaim war against the world and the flesh, when as in truth none are
greater friends unto them; for that the flesh our true enemy may escape
untouched and unhurt in the christian conflict, they disguise and hide it,
least it should be known, and craftily substitute into the place thereof our
bodies which are our friends to receive deadly wounds and blows by the sword
of mortification; and whilst they afflict and persecute them, as though they
were the only troublers of this our Israel they (as Iesabell Baalls Priests)
cherish and nourish the corruption of nature, the flesh and the whole army of
carnal lusts (as it were) at their proper charges giving them meat and
drink at their own table.

. Sect. 6. That our opposition against the Papists in this doctrine is very
necessary.
And thus have I spent more pains and paper upon this base subject then it
deserves, and both by their doctrine and practice showed what the Church of
Rome and her favorites think of the flesh and of the means whereby it may be
mortified and subdued, partly that all might take heed of the bewitching cups
of the whore of Babylons fornications, seeing those who have drunk thereof,
have been so intoxicated and made drunk with these enchanted potions, that
like mad men and enraged bedlems they have not only wrastled with God
himself, to spoil him of his glory, murdered his holy Martyrs and caused the
streets to run with rivers of their blood, but also frantiquely have offered
violence to their own persons, grievously tormented their own bodies, and
sought to satisfy their insatiable cruelty, by drinking deep draughts in
their own blood. Partly also to preserve all, who love the truth from these
superstitious cruelties in the practice of their mortification, seeing
corrupted nature, and blind superstition, with as strong a stream of
violence, carries men headlong into these inhumane and unnatural practices
against their own persons, as the pleasures of the flesh transporteth others
who are licentious and profane to the embracing of them. The which we may
plainly see in the practice of the Baalitish priests, who with knives launched
their own bodies, and in the experience of all ages among the heathens and
infidels, yea even of our own times, not only among the Sauadges and
Barbarians, but above all others among the Papists who are all ready rather to
torment their bodies, then to cross their carnal wills, to torture the flesh,
rather then to subdue their fleshly lusts; yea even to mortify with voluntary
penance their natural parts and members, rather then to labor in the
crucifying of the old man, and to forsake any of their darling sins. But
especially my maine drift herein is to discover our true enemy that we
discern it from our friends, and to show what in truth the flesh is, that so
we may labor to subdue and mortify it, seeing it is ready in craft and
subtlety to hide or disguise it self, and to substitute another in it place,
that so we may spend our strength in vain, and being spent and tired in
fighting against those who are friends unto us, may be the more easily overcome
at the first encounter of our spiritual enemies.

CHAP. V. That the body and sensitive faculties only are not the flesh proved
by the Scriptures, and diverse reasons.
. Sect. 1. That the body and sensitive faculties only are not the flesh proved
by testimonies of the Scripture.
AND therefore having showed what is the erroneous conceit of the Papists
concerning the flesh, in the next place we will confute it, and prove that by
flesh we are to understand, not the body and inferior and sensitive faculties
of the soul, nor yet only the corruption of them both; but also the
corruption of the whole man, and principally of the reason and will which they
magnify with so many praises. And this will appear by the clear evidence of
the holy Scriptures, by strong and demonstratiue reasons grounded upon them, by
the testimony of the Fathers, yea even of the Adversaries themselves. And first
in the whole course and current of the Scriptures we may observe that there is
much more spoken of the sinful corruption of the soul, then of the body; and
in the soul, not only of the inferior, sensitive and animal faculties, but
also of the superior and intellectual, as of the corruption and deprauation
of the mind, understanding, reason, wisdom and will. The Apostle joins
them both together, 2. Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore (says he) these promises
(dearly 2 Cor. 7. 1.
beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Where he necessarily
implies, that both in himself, and in those beloved Saints to whom he
writes, there was remaining corruption and filthiness of nature, which was to
be purged away, not only in the body which here is signified by flesh, but
also in the soul, which is here understood by the Spirit. So Ephe. 2. 3. Among
whom (says he) also we all had our Ephesians. 2. 3.
conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires
of the flesh and of the mind. And Romans 8. 8. he tells Chrysostom. in Romans 8.
Ser. 13. Romans 8. 8.
us, that they, who are in the flesh cannot please God. Where by flesh we
cannot understand the body (for then the servants of God could not please him
in this life) but the corruption of nature, with which our bodies and souls
are defiled, till they be renewed and sanctified by Gods spirit. And thus
Chrysostom expounds this place. What then (says he) shall we destroy our
own bodies, and so go out of the flesh that we may please God? Do thou
command us to be murderers, when as thou pretendest to draw us unto virtue?
Ye see what absurdities do hence arise, if these things be simply and
literally understood. But by flesh here he means not the body or bodily
essence, but a worldly and carnal life addicted to wantonness and voluptuous
pleasures, which make the whole man to become flesh. For as they who are led by
Gods spirit, have also their bodies made spiritual, so they who are led by the
flesh and are addicted to carnal delights, they make their souls to become
fleshly and carnal, not by changing the essence and substance, but by spoiling
it of true nobility. And this manner of speaking is used in the Old Testament,
where the flesh signifies that gross and earthy life, which is filthily
entangled in all absurd pleasures. For God says to Noah, my spirit shall not
stay with these men because they are flesh. And yet Noah himself was clothed
and encompassed with the garment of flesh; but this was not the fault that
offended God, to be compassed with flesh, because this was the work of nature,
but in that they had made choice of a carnal and sensual life. And therefore
Paul says, They who are in the flesh cannot please God; and also adds; But
you are not in the flesh but in the spirit, not understanding simply the
substance of the flesh, (for so they were in it to whom he writes) but such a
flesh which is drawn and oppressed with lusts and passions. Even as the like
speech of our Savior is to be understood, but you are not of the world, not
because they had not their habitation in the world, but because they were not
defiled with worldly malitiousnesse. And afterward more fully expounding those
words; You are not in the flesh but in the spirit; What then (says he) were
they not in the flesh? and did they go about without bodies? What sense or
reason were in such a speech? And therefore you see that he means by flesh a
Ambros de fide resurect. To. 3.
fleshly life. And thus also Ambrose expounds this place, The Apostle (says
he) by denying those to be in the flesh whom it is manifest to have been in the
flesh, did not condemn in them the substance of flesh, but their sins and
sinful corruptions, that is the works of the flesh.

. Sect. 2. Other testimonies to prove the former point.
And unto these testimonies of Scripture many more might be added. As Tit. 1.
15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled. So
the Apostle says, that the wisdom or ( Romans 8. 7. (...).
) minding of the flesh is emnitie against God, and that the ( Col. 2. 18. (...).
) mind as well as the body is fleshly. And thus he exhorts the Ephesians to
be renewed in the spirit of their minds, thereby implying that not only the
body and sensitive faculties are naturally corrupted, but c Ephesians. 4. 23
also the mind* the chief part of man, and hereof the spirit, that is, the
prime vigor and chief faculty of the mind. For what needs any renouation
if there were not in them the taynture of their old corruption? So Romans 12. 2.
And be Romans 12. 2.
not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind,
that you may prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God.
Whereby he implies that naturally they were corrupted, even in the
understanding part, and ignorant of the will of God, till they were renewed and
enlightened by the Spirit of God, which renouation is not finished at once, but
by little and little, even to the end of life; according to that 2. Cor. 4. 16.
Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
Again, where the Apostle prays unto God that the minds of the faithful
might be renewed, he plainly intimates that they were by nature corrupt and
sinful. And thus he prays that the faithful Thessalonians might be
sanctified 1 These. 5. 23.
wholly, and that their whole spirit, and soul and body might be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And that the Ephesians
might have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, and
that the eyes of their understanding being in lightened they might know what was
the hope of their Calling, etc. Of which prayers they had great need, seeing
as the Apostle testifies of them, they together with the rest of the Gentiles
had their understandings Ephesians. 4. 18.
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance which was
in them, because of the blindness of their heart. Ephesians. 4. 18. Finally the
Apostle plainly determines this question, whereas he says that the enemies
with whom we wrestle in this Christian Warfare, are not flesh and blood, but
spiritual wickednesses, even the wicked spirit, the world and our own
corruption.

. Sect. 3. Reasons to prove that the body only is not the flesh. The first
taken from the names that are given unto it.
Unto these testimonies of Scripture we may add many reasons to prove, that
by the flesh we are not only to understand the body and the sensitive
faculties or the corruption of them both; but the sin and pollution which
has ouerspread the whole man, soul and body. First because the names in the
scriptures which are given to the flesh do intimate thus much, for it is
called the old Adam and the old man, which consist as well of a reasonable
soul, as of a Omne peccatum Caro dicitur. Ambr, in Ephesians. ^. Ezech. 18. 4.
natural body; It is called sin, according to that of Ambrose; All sin is
called the flesh; and the soul sins as well as the body, as the Prophet
implies, where he says; that the soul that sins shall dye. It is called
the evil concupiscence, and the act of lusting belongs to the soul and not
to the body. It is called the evil which encloseth us, namely all the whole
man, body and soul, and finally it is called the law of sin and law of
death, and laws are given by the chief commander and supreme sovereign,
which as all confess, is not the body, but the soul, and herein the reason
and understanding. Secondly, the actions covet, desire, or lust, Gal. 5. 17.
which is an act of the soul, and not of the body; and therefore Chrysostom
Gal. 5. 17* Non hic carne^ apellat corpus, alioquin quomodo concupiscit,
quandoquidem concupiscentia non ca^n^ est sed animae Chrysostom. in Gal. 5.
concludes that the Apostle means not the body but the soul, for otherwise
(says he) how can the flesh be said to lust; seeing lusting belongs not to
the body but the soul, for the body is to be reckoned among those things
which are moved and not which move, as being not ^ragent* but a patient.
Thirdly, the sins which are attributed to the flesh show plainly that we
are thereby to understand the corruption of the soul, as well as of the body.
So the Apostle reckoning up Adultery uncleanness, Call. 5. 9. 20.
murders, drunkenness and such like; But also Idolatry, Witchcraft, Heresy,
which are the sins of soul and mind, and not properly and immediately of
the body: And this Austine observed. Who knows not (says he) that
Idol-seruice, emnitie, contention, aemulation; stomaching, August. de ciuit.
Dei. lib. 14 cap. 2.
dissension, heresy, envy are rather the vices of the mind then of the flesh;
seeing it may be that for idolatry, or some error of heresy, a man may
abstain from the pleasures of the flesh? Where further it is to be noted,
that these works of the flesh, are not only in the wicked and unregenerate,
but also in the godly and sanctified in respect of their flesh or part
unregenerate, for of such the Apostle speaks, seeing they only are exercised
in the spiritual conflict, and they, and none but they, have the spirit in
them lusting against the flesh.

. Sect. 4. Reason 4. Original corruption has ouerspread the whole man body and
soul.
Fourthly the corruption of original sin (which in the man regenerate is all
one with the flesh) has ouerspread not the body alone, but also the whole man
body and soul: for the image of God was thereby defaced which principally
consisted in wisdom, original righteousness and holiness, and these were
cheifely and immeadiately seated not in the body, but in the soul: and in this
regard the whole man, the soul as well as the body, needed to be washed in the
blood of Christ, and in the lauer of regeneration, because all his powers and
parts were defiled and corrupted. The which will better appear if we consider
of some particulars. For in the mind and understanding are seated, as in their
proper place, the sins of ignorance, not only in the unregenerate, according
to that of the Apostle; the natural 1 Cor. 2. 14.
man perceives not the things which are of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can be know them, because they are spiritually
discerued; but also the relics thereof remain in the regenerate, for we know
but in part, and we see but as through a glass darkely; in which regard Christ
tells 1 Cor. 13* 38.
Peter that flesh and blood had not revealed unto him that our Savior was the
Son of God, meaning by flesh and blood, human reason and understanding. And
unto this we may add the sins of infidelity and doubting; errors and
heresies. In the conscience also there is stupiditie and terrors, whereby it
is either asleep, and observes not our actions to approve that which is good,
and to accuse us for evil, or being awakened does with horrible fury pursue
and terrify us admitting of no pacification. In the cogitation and imagination
vanity and much wickedness, according to that Genesis 6. 5. Where it is said,
that God saw that Genesis 6. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart, were only evil continually.
Finally in the will remains much averseness to good, and pronenesse to evil,
great rebellion and stubbornness against God whereby we resist his holy Ier.
17. 10.
will. in respect whereof the Prophet says, that the heart of man is wicked
above all things; and the Apostle tells us that in our wills there is no
inclination unto any thing which is good, unless, God first works it in us.
By all which it appears, that by the flesh we are to understand the
corruption Philip. 2. 12. Bernard. de Aduentu. domini. Sermon. 5.
of soul and body, according to that of Bernard; As (says he) the old Adam
was spread over the whole man, and professed him wholly; so now let Christ have
all who has created all and redeemed all, and will also glorify all.

. Sect. 5. Reason 5. Because the Body and spirit are not enemies but loving
friends.
Fifthly, the Flesh and the Spirit are as the Apostle tells us, contrary one
to the other, and like mortal enemies in hostile manner they fight together
seeking one another ruin and destruction; but such emnitie is not between
the soul Gal. 5. 17.
and body, for then they would seek one another overthrow, whereas
contrariwise they mutually love and cherish the one the other, and are much
grieved when they must part asunder; so the Apostle tells us, that no man
Ephesians. 5. 28. 29.
ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes it and cherishes it, even as
the Lord the Church, and in this regard he wills the husband to love his
wife, as his own body. And this argument Chrysostom uses. Whereas (says
he) the Apostle tells us that the flesh lusts against the spirit, he
speaks of a Chrysostom. in Gal. 5.
twofold knowledge, whereof the one is contrary to the other, to wit not the
soul and body, but virtue and maliciousness; for if they should be so
opposed, they would destroy one another, as water, fire, and light darkness,
etc. Now whereas the opposition and fight is not between the body and the
soul, but the flesh and the Spirit, hereof it will clearly follow, that we
are not by flesh to understand the substance of the body, but the quality of
corruption in soul and body; for these enemies are of like nature, and
therefore as by the spirit we understand not the substance or essence of the
holy spirit, but a created quality of holiness and righteousness, in the
whole man; so contrariwise we are by the flesh to understand not our bodily
substance, but the sinful quality of corruption which has defiled soul and
body.

Sect. 6. The sixth reason taken from the words of the Apostle. Romans 7. 18.
Sixthly, the Apostle says, that in him that is in his flesh dwelled no good
thing; where the flesh cannot signify the body as it is distinguished from the
soul; for so it is not true which the Apostle speaks, seeing his body was
not only the habitation of his soul, but also the Temple of the holy Ghost.
Neither was it here the Apostles purpose to distinguish between his soul and
his body, but between grace and natural corruption which had ouerspread the
whole man, so far forth as he remained unregenerate; as contrariwise by
spirit he understands the whole man, as he is regenerate and sanctified. And
this is the reason why he corrects himself saying in me, that is in my
flesh, because he would not be injurious to Gods spirit dwelling in his body,
which makes him thus to explicate his speech, of his flesh or part
unregenerate, in which the holy spirit dwells not. So Chrysostom tells us
that the Apostle calls 1 Cor. 6. 19. Chrysostom. in Call. 5.
Flesh not the natural body, but the depraved will, as when he says, you are
not in the Flesh but in the Spirit; And again, those who are in the flesh
cannot please God. What then is the flesh to be destroyed? Why he who spoke
these things, was not he compassed with flesh? etc. By flesh therefore he
means earthly, sluggish and retchlesse thoughts. So that this is not the
accusation of the body, but the fault of the negligent soul.

Sect. 7. The seventh Reason because the body is not absolutely evil, as the
flesh ^^.
Eighthly, that which is called the flesh, is in other places, called the evil
concupiscence, the evil which encloseth us, and the law of sin; but the body
is not evil absolutely, for it is the good creature of God as well as the
soul; but respectively, as together with the soul it is tainted and defiled
with corruption. So Austine tells us that our flesh that is Aug. de
ecclesiast. dogmat. Cap. 76.
our body is good, yea very good, as being the workmanship of our only good
God; and it is not evil as Sethianus, Ophianus and Patricianus would have it;
nor the cause of evil as Florianus has taught, nor yet compacted of evil and
good, as Manichaeus blasphemeth, but whereas it is good by creation, it is at
the choice of the mind made unto us either good or evil, not by the change of
the substance, but by the wages of execution. With whom Chrysostom agrees,
saying, that the Apostle does Chrysostom. in Romans 7. Sermon. 13.
nor call the flesh (that is the body) sin, but it is the work of God, which
if we wisely use it, is exceeding fit for the pursuing of virtue. Neither is
the body our enemy in this spiritual conflict, but our friend which assisteth
us in the fight, and takes our part against the flesh with the rest of our
spiritual enemies; namely as it is employed by the soul, in praying, fasting,
watching, hearing the word, holy conferences, giving of alms and such like
religious and Christian duties. So Hierome testifies that this life to mortal
men is a place Hieron. ad Licinium.
of Combat, here we fight that elsewhere we may be crowned, and no man can
go securely among serpents and scorpions. We are compassed about with great
troops of enemies; the whole world is full of them; the frail flesh which
within a while will become dust, fights alone against many, etc. For as the
body partaketh with the soul in the state of corruption, so also in the state
of regeneration, the one being sanctified as well as the other. For whereas
the Apostle speaking to the faithful tells them, that they were washed and
sanctified, he excludes not their body but understands it of the whole
person body and soul. And this he plainly testifies, saying, that the
unmarried woman cares for the things 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 34.
of the Lord, that she may be holy, both in body and in spirit: And therefore
he exhorts the Corinthians to the washing and purging of the whole person.
Having (says he) these gracious promises, (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our
selves from 2. Cor. 7. 1.
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. So whereas he affirms that our bodies are temples of the holy Ghost, he
implies, that they are regenerate and sanctified; for what communion can there
be between light and darkness, God and Belial, the holy spirit, and a
polluted cage of unclean spirits? And therefore as our souls are not in this
life perfectly regenerate, but have remaining in them many relics of
corruptions, so our bodies are not quite without regeneration, but are in part
washed and purged by Gods holy Spirit, that they may be fit habitations for
himself to dwell in. To which purpose Hierome says, that the Apostle does not
praise the spirit, and Hieron. in. Romans 8.
dispraise the flesh, because that is good and this is evil: Seeing himself
says, that the Virgin cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
in body and in spirit, and contrariwise does accuse the spirit, saying men
corrupted in their minds, etc. So Chrysostom says, that Christ has
destroyed the kingdom of sin, and has made the flesh more able and
spiritual for all good duties, not by changing the substance of it, but by
raising and inciting it hereunto. For as fire being joined with iron, Chrysostom.
in To. 8.
does make the iron like unto fire, though it remain the same in it own
nature: so the flesh of the faithful who are endued with the holy Ghost, is
changed by virtue of the spirit, and being made spiritual and lofty is
lifted upon high together with the soul. And as the body is thus in part
sanctified, so also the affections and inferior faculties of the soul, as
love, hope, desire, hatred, and the ^est, and are made serviceable to the soul
for holy and religious duties: and whereas whilst we were in the state of
unbelief, they fought on the devils side, and provoked us to the committing of
all wickedness, now they forsake his camp and take part with the army of Jesus
Christ, inciting us both in our souls and bodies, to the ready performance of
all holy duties. And as the Apostle numbreth idolatry, witchcraft and heresy
which are more properly belonging to the superior faculties of the soul among
the works of the flesh: so contrariwise he reckons love, joy, and peace,
among the works of the spirit, which Gal. 5. 22
are affections belonging to the inferior part.

Sect. 8. The eight reason. Because the faithful are tempted to such sins as
properly belong to the understanding and will.
Lastly, even the faithful and regenerate are tempted, not only to sins
wherewith the inferior faculties of the soul are delighted, as lust,
wantonness, intemperance, and the like; Iam. 1. 14.
but also unto such sins as properly belong to the vnderderstanding and will,
as errors, heresies, infidelity, doubting of Gods mercy, truth, providence,
security, impenitency and hardness of heart. Now of what are they thus
tempted, but as the Apostle tells us, of their own concupiscence? and
therefore this concupiscence extends as well to the superior as the
inferior faculties of the soul. Yea not only are they tempted but often are
foiled by yielding to the tentation; of which I need no other proof, but that
experience which every Christian may have in himself, if without partiality
he will examine his own conscience: for who is so enlightened that does not
find in his mind much darkness? who so sanctified, that does not acknowledge
many errors whereby he has been overtaken in his judgment; and much vanity
in his cogitations? Who is so humbled and has so denied himself, that does
not feel in his will much perverseness and rebellion against the will of God?
Finally, who has his remembrance so confirmed and strengthened in grace, that
does not see his forgetfulness of God and of holy duties? And who is so strong
in his faith, that does not find many assaults of doubting and infidelity?
All which does plainly prove that even in the regenerate the relics of
carnal corruption do remain not only in the inferior and sensitive
faculties of the soul, but also in the superior and intellectual.

CHAP. VI. Testimonies of Fathers to prove that the body alone is not our
enemy the flesh.
. Sect. 1. Testimonies to prove that the body is not our sinful flesh.
Unto these reasons we may add diverse testimonies for the better clearing of
this August. de ciuit Dei lib. 14. cap. 3. tit. 5. col. 7^5.
point. And first Saint Augustine tells us, that the corruption of the body,
which ouerburtheneth the soul, is not the cause of the first sin but the
punishment. Neither does the corruptible flesh make the soul sinful, but the
sinful soul makes the flesh corruptible. From which corruption of the flesh,
although there arise many prouocations of vices and vicious desires, yet not
all the vices of a wicked life are to be imputed to the flesh (that is the
body) least hereby we acquit the devil of them who has no flesh. Again, he
that magnifieth the nature of the soul, as though it were the chief
goodness, and accuses the nature of the flesh as evil, without doubt he
does August. de ciuit. dei lib. 14.. cap. 5. tit. 5. col. 758
carnally affect the soul, and after a fleshly manner shun the flesh, because
he so judges out of human vanity, and not out of divine truth. So in
another place, the soul is not better then August. in psalm. 145.
the body in merit but in nature; for the soul is sinful and stained with
many corruptions of concupiscence. But yet impure gold is better then the most
purified lead. And else where he says; The flesh therefore is not evil if it
want evil, that is, sin wherewith August. de continent. cap. 8. Tit. 4. col.
998.
man is corrupted, neither is he evil made, but does evil, for in both parts
soul and body he was made good of our good God, but he does evil whereby he
is made evil. Now as by all these testimonies he shows what the flesh is
not, namely not the nature or substance of the body; so in many other places he
shows what it is, namely the law of sin and corruption of nature, which
has ouerspread and defiled the soul and body. To name one or two for all. In
his book of retractations, he says that the Apostle by the names of flesh and
blood, understands the corruption of them both. And again, Carnis et
Sanguinis nomine ipsam corruptionem carnis et sanguinis intelligendus est
apostolus nuncupasse. August retract. Lib. 2. cap. 3. August. de fide et Symb.
c. 10. Chrysostom in Gal. 6. Chry. in Genesis 6. Homil. 24. Gregor. moral. lib. 3.
c. 11. Moral. lib. 14. cap. 29.
the soul when as it affects those things which are carnally good, is named
the flesh. With him agrees Chrysostom, for writing on the words of the
Apostle, they have crucified the flesh with the lusts of it, he says, that he
here calls their evil deeds the flesh, for if they should have crucified
their bodies, how then could they have lived? And again, it is the manner of
the Scriptures to call by the name of flesh those, who only mind carnal
things, and never think on that which is heavenly. Thus also Gregory says,
that the Scriptures are accustomed to signify by the names of flesh and blood
the sins of the flesh. And in another place; It is written (says he) that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, and how then shall I
believe that in truth the flesh shall arise at the last day? I answer in the
holy Scriptures the flesh is sometime taken according to nature, and sometime
according to fault and corruption; in the former sense, this now is bone of my
bone, and flesh of my flesh: and again, the word was made flesh. In the other
sense is it to be taken; my spirit shall not strive in these men, because they
are flesh, and the speech of the Apostle, but you are not in the flesh, but in
the spirit; not that they were not in the flesh to whom the Apostle wrote, but
because they had overcome the passions of their carnal desires, etc. So
Hierome on the Hieron. in Rom 8.
eight of the Romans, says, It is to be noted that the Apostle there accuses
the works of the flesh and not the substance. And thus also Basil
understands it; for (says he) he that is called the old man, signifies
together all sins and Basil. de baptis. lib. 1. Theod. in Gal. 5. 17. Ibidem.
defilements particularly, as it were in his parts. So Theoderet; The Apostle
calls flesh the inclination of the mind unto those things which are evil;
and the spirit grace which inhabiteth and guides the mind unto those things
which are good. And again; it is manifest, that idolatry, witchcraft and such
like sins, are not proper to the flesh, (that is the body) but to the soul;
and therefore he does not accuse the flesh, but the wicked and slothful
cogitation.

. Sect. 2. That Satan has assaulted not only the body and affections, but
the mind, and vnderstanstanding.
And thus have I showed by the Scriptures and fathers, that by the flesh we are
not to understand the body and the sensitive part of the soul alone, but the
sinful corruption of our nature: and that this has ouerspread and infected
not the flesh or affections alone, but even the mind and will. For Satan
having a desire to conquer us, and to hold us for ever under his subjection,
did not only by assault, take in the body and sensitive faculties (as it were)
the outsconces, but has also skaled and surprised the reason and
understanding, which is the strong tower and castle of our soul, through the
strength whereof he commands all the rest. And having gotten possession of
it, he has placed in it a strong garrison of his hellish army, to keep it for
his use; knowing that if he can hold the mind under his government, he may by
the help thereof keep all the rest. And this makes him to use all his skill
and diligence, in darkening and deluding the reason and understanding, and to
this purpose he does sometimes possess it with a spirit of slumber by making
it drunk with the intoxicating cups of ignorance and error; sometimes he
dazeleth and darkeneth it with the smoke and vapors of hellish temptations,
that it may see no more, nor in other manner, then he will have it, and sometime
he abuses and deceives it by casting between the things presented unto it,
and the eye of reason false colors, and then as a man looking through a green
glass thinks a christiall stream and filthy puddle all alike, so the eye of
our judgment being deluded, with Satan's false glasses or glosses which he
casts before it, can put no difference between right and wrong, good and
evil.

. Sect. 3. No part more corrupted then the man i^ and understanding.
And by reason of this the devils diligence, and politic care, it comes to
pass that no part or faculty of man is more infected and corrupted with the
poison of sin then the mind and understanding. It cannot be denied but that
the mind and reason of man do in their natural endowments as far exceed
the body and sensitive faculties, as the Sun in his chiefest brightness does
the smallest and and dimmest Star; It is true also that by those relics of
light, which remain in the understanding a man is excellently guided in
natural, civil, and mere morrall actions, and by virtue thereof is able to
atchieue great and difficult matters: but as in physical bodies the best
substance has the worst corruption: so is it also true in Divinity, that the
more excellent the faculties of the soul be, the worse they be in the state of
corruption. For the reason and understanding in man is the chief rebel, which
leads and rules the body and inferior faculties (as it were) the baser sort
of the common people: and therefore the more politic, eloquent and potent
this rebel is, the more dangerous also and pernicious; seeing he holds the
more powerfully all his subjects and inferiors in their emnitie and opposition
against their supreme sovereign. And in this regard the soul is much more
worthy blame then the body, and in the soul, the reason, mind and
understanding then the will, because it is the chief ringleader in this
rebellion, and the archtraitor which gives laws and governs all the rest;
for as the judgment allows or disalloweth, esteems or vilifieth, so the
will chooses or refuses, and the affection loves or abhors. Even as
contrariwise the chief praise belongs unto it in our conversion unto God,
because with it self it causes all other parts which it commands to return
unto him and to submit themselves in all obedience to his rule and government,
whereof it is that true repentance is called (...) the changing of the mind,
because this being the first and principal act in our conversion does give
denomination to all the rest. And this chief faultiness of the soul in the
state of rebellion and corruption, as it appears by the former reasons, so
does antiquity give testimony unto it. So Chrysostom says, that the soul
here is more to be blamed and accused then the body, because Chrysostom. in Ephesians.
2. Sermon. 6.
the body designeth, no evil without direction from the soul, but
contrariwise the soul commits much wickedness without the use and
assistance of the body. So Austine says that the flesh (that is the body)
without the soul cannot covet. And Aug. de Genesis ad literam. lib. 10. cap. 12.
although the cause of carnal concupiscence be not in the soul alone, yet
much less is it in the body alone. And therefore it arises from both, to wit,
from the soul because no delight is felt without it, and also from the body,
because neither without it is there any sense of carnal pleasure.

Sect. 4 That the soul cheifely sins, and in it the mind and understanding.
But the chief faultiness of the soul will better appear, if we consider
that in the acting of this sinful tragedy, the soul, and in it, chiefly
the mind and understanding, plays the chiefest part; for it is the Graund
Captain in this sinful army which leads the body and inferior faculties,
and appoints them to the accomplishing of its particular designs: it is
naturally the devils steward, which receiving immediately instructions from
this hellish master, does appoint to every inferior part their task as common
servants. It is the devils forge wherein he first hammereth and fashioneth his
sinful temptations. It is the master workman in the shop of our sinful nature,
which sets on work all the other parts as under prentizes, for first the
mind thinks on mischief, or entertaineth the devils temptations, then the
judgment allows it, if not simply, yet in respect of some circumstance, if
not as an hellish hook, yet as it is covered with the baits of worldly
vanities, either esteeming the sin for it own sake, or at least for the
wages and reward, and so then the will chooses it, and the heart affects it,
the concupiscence desires it, and the body accomplisheth it. So that if the
mind were bound to the good behavior, and either would not think on
wickedness, or at least would vilify and contemn it, our peace with God, and
our own consciences would be kept, and we should have no sinful seditions,
and tumultuous vproares in the inferior parts and members. In a word the mind
and understanding is the spring head from which all the streams of sin do
run and flow; and therefore the devil first poysoneth and corrupts it,
that so it may taint and infect all the other parts, as we may see in the
example of our first parents whose judgment he first corrupted, and then with
case infected their will and affections. Wherein he deals with us as Elisha
with the Aramites; first blinding us and then misleading us at his pleasure.
For whereas God in the little world of man has appointed the reason and
understanding, to be as the Sun to give light and directions unto all the
other parts and faculties, that so they may orderly exercise their functions
and operations, Satan knows right well that if he can eclipse this light,
by the opposition of changeable trifles, or utterly darken it by the
interposition of earthly vanities, there can thereupon nothing follow, but
sinful disorder and dangerous confusion in all our actions. And thus the
Apostle lively describing man's misery and sin, first points at this as the
chief fountain, that there is none that understands nor seeks after God,
and Romans 3. 11. 12. Ephesians. 6. 12. Col. 1. 13. 1 Pet 1. 14. Romans 13. 12
then that, they are all gone out of the way and become unprofitable. And this
is the cause why the kingdom of sin is called the kingdom of darkness;
and sinful lusts are called the lusts of ignorance; and sinful works, the
works of darkness; because ignorance is the scepter of the devils kingdom by
which he reigns and rules in the children of disobedience; all carnal
lusts spring from the blindness of the mind, and the darkness of ignorance
is the veil which hides all wicked works, not only from others, but also
from their own eyes who committ them and so encourages them to go in these
sinful actions.

. Sect. 5. That the soul is the chief actor of sin proved by testimonies.
And unto this truth the ancients have given their suffrage and testimony.
Chrysostom says; that in every sin, the soul Chry. in (...). Hom 21.
Chrysostom. in Romans 7. Sermon. 10.
first sins, and afterward the flesh, and unless the soul were first
overcome, the flesh could never sin. And expou^ding those words of the
Apostle, when we were in the flesh; that is (says he) in evil actions or in a
carnal life. Neither would he say* that before times they were in the flesh,
and that now they walked about without bodies, etc. Moreover least any man
should accuse the body, he does not say, which evil actions the members
themselves have wrought and done, but which were wrought in our members, that
he might show how that the first beginnings of wickedness were derived
elsewhere, namely from our thoughts working them, and not from the members
which were driven by their motion. For the soul holds the place of the
artizan or musition and the flesh of the instrument giving that kind of sound
or music which the musition makes it; and therefore it is not to be ascribed
to the flesh if there be discord in the music, but rather to the soul by
which ^^ is ruled. So writing on those words of the Apostle, that as the
Gentiles did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to
a reprobate mind to do those things that are not convenient: he says, that
the Apostle hereby discovers that our sins do not arise primarily from our
bodies, as certain heretics would have it, but from the mind, to wit from
the evil concupiscence, as it were from the fountain from which all evils
flow. For the mind being reprobate, all other parts are so too, as the
coachman being disordered which drives the coach, all that is under his rule,
must needs be disordred and out Ambros. in Romans 7. Fulgent. de myster. mediat.
ad Trusim. lib. 1.
of frame. So Ambrose demanding, what it is to be subject unto sin,
answers, nothing else but to have the body corrupted through the sin of the
soul; into which sin chooses it self to drive man as a captive unto it,
that he may do its will. And Fulgentius likewise says, that although sin
seems to be committed Mat. 15. 19.
of a man corporally, yet it takes it beginning from the heart; neither is any
thing done outwardly, unless it be first inwardly concluded by the judgment
of the mind, the truth whereof truth it self has showed us, saying that
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. So Austine
August. quaest. super Exodus li. 2. c. 2.
says, that not in the body or inferior faculties, but in the will of man is
the original of all vices.

Sect. 6. That the body is but the servant of the soul in acting sin.
So likewise they teach, that the body is but the servant of the soul which
can or dare do nothing but by the masters August. in psalm. 145. Sermon. 27. T.
10. Chrysostom. in Romans 6. Ser. 11.
appointment. So Augustine says, that the flesh is an obedient servant to the
soul: this rules, the other is ruled, the one commands, the other obeys.
In which regard he would have the Manachees derided, who imputed all sin unto
the flesh, the which he would have, to Gods glory, duly praised, and all the
fault to be attributed to the will. Chrysostom likewise compares the body to
arms and weapons, which are to be esteemed according to their use. The
soldier uses them whilst he fights in defense of his country; and the
thief against common friends who are of the same country, the which is not
the fault of the weapons but of those who abuse them unto evil: And so (says
he) the body is either this or that, not in it own nature, but by the
predominant direction of the mind. And in another place, the soul so uses
the body, as the Smith the hammer and the anuile, upon which it forgeth and
fashioneth the idols of all corruption and filthiness; and frames the images
of all carnal pleasures. Nor is the flesh the prompter and teacher of sin,
nor the inuenter of all maliciousness, or the framer and disposer of the
things which are done; but it is the shop of the soul, which works and
accomplisheth in it and by it whatsoever it effects, Thus Ambros. de
Paeniten. lib. 1. c. 14. Nihil p^c^a^t oculi si non oculis animus imperet.
Seneca.
also Ambrose concludes; You see then, that the mind is the author of our
fault, and that the flesh is innocent, saving that it is often the instrument
of sin. Yea even the heathen man by the light of nature could discern this
truth; affirming that our eyes offended not, if they were not ruled and
commanded by an evil mind.

Sect. 7. That the soul only properly sins
Yea so far is it off that our bodies should be chiefly corrupted, and the
principal authors of sin that if we speak properly the soul only sins,
and the corruption of the soul alone is sinful, and as for the corruption of
the body it is rather the punishment of sin then sin it self. So August.
de ciuit dei. lib. 14. c. 3.
Austine says, that the corruption of the body which cloggeth the soul is not
the cause of the first sin but the punishment. So Chrysostom. in mat. 5. hom.
17.
Chrysostom speaking of our Saviors speech concerning the cutting of the right
hand, and pulling out the right eye; he says, that he intends not the
disturbing, much less the destroying of the frame of the body. Far be it
from us so to conceive, for he does no where show that there is any fault in
the body, but every where conuinceth the will of the evil; for not so much
the eyes, as, by the eyes, the mind and reason do see; whereof it is that
sometimes the eyes do not discern those who are present before them, the
mind and cogitation being otherwise occupied. And elsewhere he plainly
affirms, that the In. genesis 12. hom. 32.
perverse will is the cause of all evil. And again, our mortal body is not
the cause of sin, but our wicked will is the root of Io. 1. cor. 6. hom. 18.
all evil. For why did not Abels body make him unjust? And why does not the
want of bodies benefit the Devil? Will you know the cause, because the mortal
body brings to men not only no detriment, but much profit and benefit. And
therefore he concludes, that it is the work of the Devil to make foolish men
rather to accuse their body, God himself or their neighbor, then their
corrupt mind, least finding the cause of their sinning, they should pluck up
the root of all their evils.

Sect. 8. That the body is not the flesh proved by the testimonies of the
adversaries themselves and 1. out of Tho. Aquin.
And thus have we proved by testimonies of Scripture Reasons and Fathers, that
by flesh in the spiritual conflict, we are not to understand the body and
inferior faculties of the soul, or the corruption of them both, but the
corruption of the whole man in every part and faculty, and especially in the
mind, understanding and will which above all the rest are chiefly taynted and
defiled. Now let us also produce the testimony of the adversaries themselves,
who howsoever in their doctrine they commonly confound the body and the flesh
as being all one; and in their whole practice of mortification, do bend all
their strength against the body to subdue and keep it under, yea even to
torment, consume and destroy it, as though it were their mortal enemy; yet
having sometime their eyes dazeled with the light of truth, they acknowledge
even the same verity of doctrine which we teach and defend against them. Thus
Thomas Aquinas, their great school Doctor, extends the flesh and corruption
of nature to the whole man, the soul as well as the body, for writing on the
words of the Apostle, Aquin. in Romans 7. lect. 3.
In me that is my flesh, dwells no good thing, he says, that in man as he is
a sinner dwells no good thing, neither in his body nor mind. Now this is
spoken by the Apostle of himself, and that as he was in the state of grace and
regeneration as Aquinas a little before acknowledges and therefore must
necessarily be referred to the part unregenerate both soul and body. And
commenting on these words of the Apostle, The flesh lusts against the spirit,
he says, that Aquin. in gal. 5. 17.
here is a doubt to be cleared; namely that, seeing to lust or covet, is an act
proper to the soul; therefore as it may seem it cannot agree with the flesh:
unto which we are to say with Austine, that the flesh is said to covet or
lust, in regard that the soul does lust or desire according to the flesh; as
the eye is said to see, when as rather the soul sees by the eye. And
therefore the soul then lusts by the flesh, when as it desires those things
which are pleasant according to the flesh. But the soul lusts or desires by
it self, when as it is delighted in those things which are according to the
spirit, as works of virtue and divine contemplation. Yea but if the flesh
lusts by the spirit, how is it said that it lusts against it? namely in
this respect, as the concupiscence of the flesh, hinders the concupiscence of
the spirit. But this answer is not sufficient, for if both kinds of
concupiscence come from the soul, the one immediately, the other mediately
according to the flesh, this makes no contrariety between the spirit and the
flesh, as he understands it, but only in the same act of concupiscence which
is in the soul alone in respect of the diverse manner of lusting, the one kind
by the body, the other by it self. And therefore this answer would better
fit the objection and agree with Austines speech, that there is in the soul
a double concupiscence, the one in the part regenerate which is spiritual, the
other in the part unregenerate which is carnal, the which are directly
contrary the one to the other. And thus he might answer another objection
which himself makes against his own words; for whereas the Apostle says,
that the spirit lusts against the flesh, he obiecteth, that if we here take
the spirit for the holy spirit, and grant that spiritual concupiscence is
only against that which is evil, it will follow, that the flesh or body
against which the spirit lusts is evil, which was the error of the
Manachees. To which he answers that the spirit lusts not against the nature
of the flesh, but against it desires only as they extend to superfluity. But
this answer crosses his former speech, whereby he affirmed that the flesh or
body had no concupiscence at all, but that it was an act proper to the soul
alone. And therefore the objection were better satisfied if we say that there
is not only in the regenerate part of the soul, the concupiscence of the
spirit, but also the relics of carnal concupiscence in the part
unregenerate, which fight as contraries and enemies the one against the other.
But as Aquinas affirms, that concupiscence Aquin. in To. 7. lect. 3. Lect. 4.
is only an act of the soul, and consequently evil and carnal
concupiscence, as well as holy and spiritual, wherein he agrees with us; so
also be grants in some places that the flesh is the corruption of nature or
original sin, which is derived unto us from our first parents. So he says,
that the carnalitie which imports or signifies the rebellion of the flesh
against the spirit, proceeded from the sin of our first parents, because it
belongs to that fuel of corruption derived from that sin. So he
expounds the law of the members to be that fuel and of sin and corruption
which moves us to sin, and is the punishment of the sin of our first
parents in us who are their posterity. And yet more plainly Aquin. in Romans 8.
lect. 2.
speaking of those words of the Apostle. But you are not in the flesh, he says
that it is evident that this is not to be understood of the substance of the
flesh, seeing the Romans were mortal men clothed therewith, but he takes
the flesh for the vices and corruptions of the flesh, according to that, 1.
Cor. 6. 9. Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. So that when
he says, ye are not in the flesh, the meaning is, ye are not in the vices, and
corruptions of the flesh, living as i^ were according to the flesh.

. Sect. 9. Testimonies out of Bellarmine to prove the former point.
But much more clearly does the arch-champion of the Papists, Cardinal
Bellarmine assent unto this truth; the flesh (says he) in the Scriptures
almost every where is opposed to the Bellarm. de Sacramen. eucharist. lib. 1.
c. 14.
spirit or some thing else more high and heavenly. For it does not signify the
substance of the flesh, but the infirmity or corruption, or humane and fleshly
cogitation; all which are to the same effect, seeing it arises from our
corruption, that a man will take upon him to judge of divine matters after an
humane sense. And in another place he says, that sin taken properly Bellar.
de amiss gratiae and stat. peccati. lib. 5. c. 10.
cannot be in the body, but in the mind. For sin is unrighteousness, and
unrighteousness truly so called, can there only have place where true
righteousness has it place. Now who over has placed righteousness, truly
and properly taken, in the members of the body? But why does he affirm this
truth? Surely to confirm an untruth; for hence he concludes, that whereas
the Apostle says, that concupiscence is sin, and that it dwells in the
flesh and not in the mind, hereby he plainly shows, that it is not sin
properly but figuratively. But the Apostle speaks properly when he calls
concupiscence sin, neither does Bellarmines argument prove the contrary,
seeing the Apostle does not (like the Jesuit) by flesh understand the body but
the part unregenerate and the corruption of nature, which is as well (yea much
more) in the soul as in the body; the which I have fully proved, and
Bellarmine himself will presently confess. For in another place having said
that Austine by the name of concupiscence De Amissione great. and statu peccati
l. 5. c. 15.
understands the corruption of the inferior part of the soul which
rebelleth against the superior, he presently adds; But it must not be
denied that the like sin and corruption is to be found in the superior part;
for even this part of the soul also is prove to lust after honors,
vainglory and other vanities* and although it be against our wills it does
sometimes bring forth such desires. And therefore S. Paul, numbreth among the
lusts of the flesh, not only whoredom and drunkenness, but idolatry,
emnitie, heresy, as Augustine has diligently observed. lib. 14. de ciuit. dei
cap. 2, 3. and. 4. Where he shows that the flesh is sometimes taken for the
whole man, as he is without the grace of God after the fall of Adam, and that
he is said to be carnal who lives according to himself and not according
unto God. So elsewhere answering Caluins and Beza Bell. de. amissi. grat^ae et
stat. peccat. lib. 5. c. 7
his objection, who say, that the flesh in the seventh of the Romans, is to be
taken for the whole man, as he is in the state of corruption, because S. Paul
numbreth the mind among the parts most corrupted 1. Tim. 6. and commands
vsto be renewed in the spirit of our minds; to this he answers, that in many
places of the holy Scripture we are without doubt Ephesians. 4. 23.
by the flesh to understand as well all the superior as the inferior
faculties corrupted with sin. Neither do we deny but that with this sin
the mind also of (...) is corrupted, etc. No marvel therefore if the works
of Bellarmine are not suffered to be read without special license, nor
scarce to be found in common shops throughout Spain and Italy, seeing in this
and innumerable other points of Popery he differs from the most of their
other Writers, and generally from the whole course of their practice, both in
those and all other places, as has in this particular been before
sufficiently proved.

CHAP. VII. Objections of the Adversaries answered, whereby they endeavor to
prove that the body and sensitive faculties are the flesh.
1 Objection, because this our enemy is usually called the flesh.
NOw in the last place it remains that we answer some objections; whereby
they endeavor to prove that by the flesh we are to understand our bodies and
sensitive faculties only with their corruption; and not the soul and superior
faculties. And first they reason that this spiritual enemy of our salvation
is the body and inferior faculties of the soul, seeing it is usually called
by the name of flesh and carnal concupiscence. To which I answer that this
manner of speech is not proper but tropicall and figurative, and to be
understood by a metonymie of the subject for the adiunct or quality, flesh for
the fleshly quality of corruption which has defiled soul and body, the which
is usual with the Hebrews who in their ordinary phrase, put the abstract for
the concrete, and the subject for the quality that belongs unto it; the
which also the Greeks and Latins do sometimes imitate, as when they called a
wicked fellow (...) Scelus. But it may further be demanded why this
spiritual enemy should by this metonymie be called the flesh rather then
sin and corruption, if it were not chiefly seated in the body. I answer
that it is thus called to show how deeply our nature is tainted and infected
with the poison of sin, in that it is, (as it were) incorporated into our
flesh, and one of our essential parts turned and (as it were) transformed into
corruption, and i^ into them; so as there is nothing naturally remaining but
even a mass of corruption and lump of sin. And secondly to intimate unto us
the dangerousnesse of this enemy, in that it is not only domestical,
dwelling in us, but (after a sort) essential and inherent, so as it is not
possible to avoid it, but we must deny our selves, nor to kill it, unless we
crucify our own flesh, nor to vanquish and subdue it, unless we overcome our
selves. Yea but why is this corruption of nature called carnal and fleshly,
rather then animal and spiritual, if it were not seated in the body, rather
then in the soul? I answer that this corruption having defiled both the
special parts of man the body, as well as the soul, it was indifferent by a
synecdoche to understand the whole corruption of nature, by the name of either
part. But if this answer will not satisfy: but that they will further object;
that the soul is the principal part and therefore the name or denomination
should follow it especially if it be chiefly taynted and corrupted, and the
archauthor of all sin: I answer that notwithstanding all this, our enemy in
this spiritual conflict is called the flesh rather then the soul or spirit,
to note unto us the great contrariety, and irreconcilable emnity that are
between the combatants in this warfare; for as opposite are these the one to
the other as light and darkness, heaven and hell, God and the Devil, good and
evil. And therefore to express this contrariety which is between them,
names were chosen which were most extremely opposite: and it is not called
after the soul, because there is some agreement between the soul and the
body, and some resemblance between the spirit and the soul, but after the
body, which being the grosest and most earthy part of man is most opposite and
Ephesians. 4. 23.
different to the spirit which is the purest part of the mind and reason.

Sect. 2 The reasons why the corruption of nature is called the flesh.
And unto these diverse other reasons may be added. For first this corruption of
nature is called the flesh, because the body is the instrument of the soul to
execute and put in practice the lusts and desires of sinful concupiscence,
according to that Romans 6. 13. Neither yield ye your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin. And the soul lusts Romans 6. 13
by the body; whereof it is, that the sin of evil concupiscence is
attributed to the body as the instrument, though the mind be the chief egent,
even as the eye is said to see, when as the soul rather sees by the eye, and
the sword is said to kill, when as it is the man rather that kills with the
sword. Secondly, because the sinful corruption of our natures does discover
and manifest it self rather by the outward actions of the body and
concupiscence of the flesh, then by the secret cogitations and desires of the
mind and will. For whilst this poison lurketh in the mind and will, it is
secret and hidden always to others, and oftentimes even to our selves; but
then it comes to be known, when as it swells in our carnal concupiscence,
and breaks out in the sores of wicked actions. And as it fares in the
natural birth, so in this hellish brood of sin, after that the Devil or
our corrupt flesh, have cast into the mind the cursed seed of sin, the
concupiscence warmeth, fashioneth and nourishes it, and so though in the first
conception it was unknown even to the parents themselves that bred it, in the
further growth thereof by lust, and in the birth by the outward action, it is
made manifest, both to them and others. Whereof it is that the holy Ghost
calls this sin and corruption* concupiscence of the flesh, not because it
gave unto it the first being in nature, but did only first discover it, and
as it were brought it forth into the world. Thirdly, because the baits and
allurements wherewith the Devil and the world entice us to sin, are offered
most usually unto our minds and understandings by the mediation of the body
and the outward senses, as riches, honors, and voluptuous pleasures; for these
objects being tendered to the senses, they present them to the understanding
and will, which approve and choose them, not caring to swallow the hook of sin,
so they may feed on the bewitching bait. But what is the cause hereof? Not for
that the senses and carnal concupiscence do first infect the superior
faculties, but because being already corrupted they are ready to entertain al
such wicked motions. And as inferior servants, do not, nor dare not, persuade
their sovereigns to such sinful actions as are contrary to their liking and
odious unto them, as those who are royally munificent and bountiful to base
bribing and unconscionable pilling of their people, those who ate chaste and
temperate to wantonness and excess; but only unto such vices as they are by
nature somewhat inclinable unto: so is it in this little kingdom and
commonwealth of man; for the understanding and reason are first corrupted and
fallen from that integrity, spiritual wisdom and excellency in which they
were created, wherewith they were enlightened with the knowledge of God and of
spiritual and heavenly things in which originally they took all their delight
and sweet contentment, and now being blinded with ignorance, and not able to
discern or relish these divine delicates, they cease to live this spiritual
life and can take no pleasure in heavenly things, and therefore give themselves
over to all sensuality, and willingly entertain all corrupt motions of the
flesh, which by the mediation of the body and carnal appetite may conueigh
unto them any earthly delight. And thus the soul is said to lust by the flesh,
when as it desires those things which are delightful and pleasant according
to the flesh; even as contrariwise the concupiscence of the soul, in it
created purity, Quid est secundu^ carnem ambulate^ carnalibus concupiscenti^s
consentire etc. August. sermon. 7. T. 10.
was, when it delighted it self in those things which were spiritual and
heavenly. To which the speech of Austine fitteth well, What (says he) is it
to walk according to the flesh? Nothing else but when we consent to carnal
lust. And what is it to walk according to the spirit? It is to be so assisted
with Gods holy Spirit in our minds, as that we do not obey this fleshly
concupiscence.

. Sect. 3. An other reason why this our spiritual enemy is called the flesh.
Fourthly, the whole corrupt man body and soul is called flesh because the
soul as well as the body being given over to all sensuality, does only desire
and joy in fleshly delights and the vain pleasures of sin, whereof it fitly
has it name from the objects and actions about which it is wholly exercised.
And this reason Austine gives, the soul (says he) is therefore called
flesh, because it only desires Anima vero cum carnalia bona adhuc appetit
c^^o nominatur. August de fide et Sym. cap. 10.
those things which are carnally good. Yea will some say, but their remain yet
in corrupts nature some relics of divine light, and some sparks of created
wisdom, which condemn fleshly pleasures, and oppose against carnal and
sensual lusts: I answer that there are indeed even in mere natural men,
some conflicts between their reason and affections, their conscience and
concupiscence, but seeing that commonly the issue of this skirmish is the
victory of the lusts and passions, and the base yielding of the mind and
reason, to subject themselves to their laws in the members, and to agree to
the carnal conclusion of these inferior parts, they are fitly with the
sensual faculties entitled with the same denomination of flesh, sinful
concupiscence and the rest. Fifthly the corruption of nature, as well in the
soul as the body, is called flesh, because by the flesh and carnal seed in
our generation sin is propagated unto the whole man, soul and body. And
finally because the soul, reason and understanding, forgetting their created
excellency, supremacy and authority over the other inferior parts, do
basely subject themselves to become servants and slaves unto the flesh, for the
contemptible wages of sinful pleasure. And whereas they were made to rule the
body, now they spend all their study and pains in doing service unto it, in
pampering of the belly and decking and adorning of the back, and in devising
all means for the pleasing of the fleshly appetite, and satisfying of the lust
and carnal concupiscence. And therefore justly with their rule and
government, they loose also the honor of their titles, and whereas whilst
they remained Lords and Kings, they gave names to the body and inferior parts,
which were called after them reasonable and spiritual, now becoming their
servants they loose their own names, and are called after their Lords and
masters whom they have chosen to serve, fleshly and carnal. And this reason
Austine gives, As the spirit (says he) serving the flesh is not unfitly
called fleshly, so the flesh serving August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 13. c. 20.
the spirit, is fitly called spiritual; not because it is turned into spirit,
but because by an admirable facility and readiness to obey, it is subjected
to the government and rule of the spirit.

. Sect. 4: The second Objection grounded ^n 1. Cor. 9. 27.
The second reason objected is grounded upon the Apostles words. 1. Cor. 9. 27.
But I keep under (or as the vulgar Latin has it) chastise my body, least by
any means when I my self have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway. Where the Apostle makes the body (as they think) 1 Cor. 9. 27.
the enemy against which he fights, and the chief object of mortification.
To which I answer first, that we do not deny, but that the body is corrupted,
as well as the soul, Romans 7. 23.
and that sin holds part of his residence even in our earthly members; in
which regard this natural corruption is to be subdued even in the body, by
those exercises of mortification which the Scriptures have prescribed, as
fastings, watchings, laborious exercises in the duties of Christianity and of
our spiritual callings. And to this he exhorts us. Col. 3. 5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon Col. 3. 5.
the earth; whereby he means those sins which dwell in our earthly members,
to wit, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence,
as he expounds himself in the next words. But all this does not exempt the
soul, from being the seat also of natural corruption; yea even the chief
palace where sin dwells. Secondly, I answer that by body in this place is
not meant the substance Romans 7. 14.
of the flesh, but the whole corrupt man, or part unregenerate both soul and
body; In which sense the Apostle elsewhere calls himself carnal, extending
this fleshly corruption to his whole person; even as by members we are to
understand those special sins which dwell in the members, as the Apostle in
that place of the Collosians explaineth it. And this he calls this ( Romans 7.
23. 24.
) body of sin, the law of sin which was in his members, and the body of
death, and says, that the old man is ( Romans 6. 6.
) crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, and that in
Christ we are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, in putting off
the body of the sins of the flesh. And finally that if Christ be in us c
Col. 2. 11. 6.
(namely by his spirit) the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is
life because of righteousness; where by death of the body we are to understand
the mortification of the flesh in respect of sin; as appears by the
Antithesis, whereby d Romans 8. 10.
we are to understand the quickening of the inner man to newness and
holiness of life.

Sect. 5. The third objection grounded ^n the ap^st. words Romans 12. 6.
Thirdly, they object the words of the Apostle Romans 12. 6. Let not sin reign
in your mortal body; from whence they conclude that the seat of sin is in
the body and not in the soul and reason. To which the answer is easy; namely
that by the name of body, here we are not simply to understand the body alone,
but by a Synechdoche of the part for the whole, the person of man consisting of
soul and body. And this is usual in the Scriptures by one part to signify
the whole person, and as by the body to include the soul, so in other places,
by the soul to include the body. As, the soul that sins shall die, and
all the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins
were Ezech. 18. 4. Genesis 46. 26.
threescore and six. And thus Ambrose expounds this place. The Apostle
(says he) calling it mortal body, understands Mortale ergo corpus dice^s
totum homi^e^ significauit. Ambro. ^n hu^c locum.
the whole man, because they who obey sin are called mortal. For the soul
(says he) that sins shall die, that is the whole man, for none shall be
judged without their bodies. And that the Apostle by naming the body did not
exclude the soul, it appears in the next words, that you should obey it in
the lusts thereof; whereby he shows that sin is not only in the body, but
first and principally in the powers and faculties of the soul.

(...)
Fourthly it is objected, that the chief poison of corruption is in the
sensitive and inferior faculties, seeing experience teaches us that the
mind, reason and understanding, is infected by them, and so blinded and
mis(...)sion and carnal concupiscence, that men give t(...) over to all
sensuality and become like unto (...) which I answer, that indeed the poison
of (...)ceedingly taynted the concupiscence, appetite, affections and all the
sensitive faculties, and that they being infected do infuse their poison into
the superior faculties, and like filthy sinkes of sin do send up noisome
sents into the upper parts, the mind and reason; for the objects move the
senses, and the sense? the will and understanding, and it is true, that in this
little common wealth of man the lusts and passions like rebels rise against
reason their king and sovereign. Finally we deny not but that the mind is
drawn to think on that evil which the heart affects, and is corrupted by
giving way to these sinful lusts, and by plotting and devising the means
whereby they may be satisfied: but yet all this proves not that the fountain
of corruption is in the body and sensitive parts, for the poison is first sent
from the mind to the heart, which being infected and corrupted returns it
back again to the mind: even as the liver sends gross black blood to the
spleen, which regurgitating and ouerflowing, sends it back again to the
liver, and so the fountain of blood being corrupted, it corrupts the whole
body. Neither does this intestine rebellion arise first from the inferior and
subject parts; but from the sinful corruption of their superiors, whereby
they are misgouerned, either through loose negligence, or desperate
malitiousnesse; for why does the heart affect that which is evil, but because
the mind esteems it, the judgment approves it, and the will chooses it,
if not simply, yet as it is bayted with some worldly profit, preferment or
voluptuous pleasure. But it may be further urged, that there are many who have
great knowledge and deep judgments, that notwithstanding are much corrupted
in their hearts, passions and affections. To which I answer, that though they
have some knowledge, yet not saving knowledge, and though they have great
illumination, yet no spiritual wisdom and prudence, to apply this light
after an holy manner to particular actions. For this christian prudence in doing
any thing, first propounds the end of the action which moves us to undertake
it, and then first it rightly councelleth, secondly rightly deliberateth and
judges of the counsel, and lastly rightly and constantly commands that
which is counseled and determined. Now the natural man though he has wit to
counsel, yet no true judgment and consideration to approve of that which is
best; but like Absalon hears diverse counsels, and in conclusion chooses the
worst. And therefore the Apostle prays for the Collossians, Col. 1. 9. 10.
not only that they might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, but
also, with all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might walk
worthy of the Lord, etc.

Sect. 7. The fifte Objection is that there are certain sins proper to the
body and sensitive faculties
Lastly it is objected that whoredom, surfeiting and drunkenness, proceed
from the body and sensual appetite and are sins proper unto them, and
therefore the mind and reason is not always the chief author and fountain
of sin. To which I answer that though these actions of eating, drinking,
lusting and committing uncleanness, are immediately from the sensual
concupiscence and the body, yet the corruption and sinfulness of these actions
is from the mind and reason. Either because it bridleth not the appetite, or
pricketh it forward to excess, because it takes delight in these voluptuous
pleasures, for not the body it self, but the soul by the body takes pleasure
in eating, drinking and satisfying of the lusts. Neither are these actions in
themselves sins, but the immoderation and excess, or the misapplying of them
to wrong objects, as we may see in lust it self, which in it own nature is
not evil, for then Corpus concupiscit, at neque fornicationem nec adulterium
sed simplicitur commixtionem etc. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 3. Sermon. 6.
it could in no case be lawful, but when a man lusts after strange flesh. So
Chrysostom says, that the body lusts and desires, but neither formication
nor adultery, but commixtion, the body coueteth, yet not dainties but meat,
not drunkenness but drink. And elsewhere; the body (says he) is made to do
this or that, not out of it own nature, but out of the ouerruling judgment of
the mind. The eye indeed when as it curiously beholds another beauty
becomes an instrument of Chrysostom. in Romans 6. Ser. 11.
unrighteousness, but not out of it natural action (for the natural office
thereof is to see and not to see euilly) but out of the cogitation infusing
malitiousnesse. Whereas if it were thereby restrained as with a bridle, it
would become an instrument of righteousness. And the same is to be said of
the tongue, hands and all other members. And in another place; Thou will (says
he) object, that the body draws thee into fornication. To which I answer,
not the body but the incontinency of the mind, etc.

CHAP. VIII. That the flesh is a most dangerous enemy. First because it is
exceeding malicious.
. Sect. 1. That through the flesh alone we are exposed to all danger.
BY this which has been said it appears sufficiently what our enemy is;
and now in the next place we are to consider that it is not an enemy to be
contemned, but exceeding dangerous and pernicious; for howsoever it may seem
at the first sight to be weak and of small strength, yet is it the mightiest
and chiefest Captain under the prince of darkness, by whose aid and
assistance he gets the victory, and without whose help he could do
nothing. For though he should assault us with a huge army of his temptations,
and have his strength reenforced, and even twice doubled with the aides of all
our worldly enemies, yet they could never prevail against us, but should be
sure of a shameful overthrow, unless these inbred enemies did betray us into
their hands, and secretly open the gates of our soul to let in the troops of
their temptations. The which is apparent in the example of our Savior Christ,
who being free from the inward corruption of the flesh, was not at all
endaungered with the outward temptations of the devil. And whereas the hellish
sparks of his suggestions fall into our corrupt hearts (as it were) into tinder
or gunpowder, by which they are nourished and much increased in their strength
and violence: they did no more work upon our blessed Savior, whose pure
nature was no jot tainted with carnal corruption, then a weak dart that
lights upon an impenetrable armor, or a small spark of fire that should
fall into a sea of water. Needs then must the flesh be a dangerous enemy,
seeing all danger is by and through it: needs must it above all be most
pernicious, seeing it exposes us to all mischief, and nothing without it were
able to hurt us. The which should persuade us to bend all our strength against
it, seeing if we subdue our carnal corruptions, we shall easily put to flight
the devil and the world; whereas in vain shall we fight and strive against
these foreign forces, if we do not first kill and crucify these secret
traitors, for no more busy can we be in building forts and bulworkes to
strengthen us against their strong assaults, then they will be in rasing and
ruinating them, that they may give an easy entrance to these outward enemies.
And this was the practice of the Apostle Paul, who did not beat, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
the air and spend his strength in vain by fighting against a shadow or
fantasy, but like a pollitique soldier discouers and singles out his most
dangerous enemy, even this body of corruption which dwelled in him, and though
he could not quite kill or thrust him out into perpetual banishment, yet he
employes all his strength to subdue and keep him under, and uses him like a
base bondslaue beating him black and blewe, and giving him daily deadly
wounds, that so he might never gather strength, nor be able to stand out in
rebellion against the part regenerate.

Sect. 2 That in the flesh dwells nothing that is good.
But the daungerousnesse of this enemy will the better appear, if we consider
both how dangerous it is in respect of it own nature, and in regard also of
diverse advantages which it has against us in the conflict. The daungerousnes
of it in respect of it own nature will appear if we consider that as on the
one side it is most malicious; so on the other very mighty and powerful. The
wicked malitiousnesse of it may be considered both in it self and in it own
nature, and as it is exercised toward us, that is, the true Christian, or the
part regenerate. For the former; the flesh is so wicked and malicious, that no
good thing remains in it, for so the Apo: plainly confesses, I know that in
me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing. From which absence of algood,
Romans 7. 18.
one of the ancie^ts gives the notatio^ of the latin name. Thou flesh (says
he) art naked and utterly destitute of all virtues, and Tu caro cunctis
virtutibus denudata es, ideoque diceris caro a carendo, quia cares omni bono.
Idiot. in ortho dorogr. de conflict. carn. et animae. c. 1.
art therefore called flesh from thy wanting, because thou art naked of all
that is good. In which respect the flesh is much worse then the devil
himself; for though he be wicked, yea that wicked one by a kind of eminency,
yet is there in him some relation and respects of good, namely as he is the
creature of God, and in respect of his essence and substance, as also his gifts
of wisdom, power, swiftness, etc. Being considered in their own nature, and
not in regard of his abuse. But in the corrupt flesh there is nothing but a
lump and mass of sin, not any part of Gods workmanship, an utter absence
of all good gifts, and nothing but folly, ignorance, dullness, impotency and
whatsoever may be called by the name of evil; for as it is destitute of all
good, so is it evil in all relations: for as the flesh is all evil, so all
evil is in the flesh, and from the flesh is all evil. In which respect we
may truly say that the flesh is unto this evil of malitiousnesse, subiectum
adaequatum, a subject equally extended unto it, for there is no part or power
of the flesh which is not wicked and sinful, nor any wickedness of sin
which is not to be found in this center of wickedness. For first the flesh is
wholly wicked and malicious. The ( Romans 8. 7.
) wisdom of it is emnitie against God. The ( Romans 3. 18. and Ephesians. 4. 18.
) understanding of it a dungeon of ignorance; the ( Genesis 6. 5 Ier. 13. 23.
) imaginations only evil and that continually, the ( Ephesians. 4. 19. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
) will stubburne and perverse, standing out always in an utter opposition and
obstinate rebellion to the will of God. And if the superior faculties of the
flesh be nothing else but a sincke of sin, what can we expect, but that the
inferior parts must in their degree be suitable in corruption? And therefore as
the Apostle speaks of sinful men, so may we speak of the fountain and
author of all their sin; the eyes of it are Romans 3. 18. 19.
full of adultery, the throat an open sepulcher, the tongue of it used to
deceit, the poison of aspes is under it lips, the mouth of it is full of
cursing and bitterness, the feet swift to shed blood, destruction and misery
are in it way, the way of peace it has not known, neither has it the fear
of God before it eyes.

. Sect. 3. That all manner of evil is in the flesh.
Secondly, as the flesh is wholly evil, so all manner of evil is in the flesh.
For it is the common sewer in which all filth and loathsome poison of sin
meets: and in a full source runs together; it is the devils storehouse of
wickedness, and his armory in which he lays up all the weapons of impiety;
It is the sea of sin from which all wickedness flows, and into which it
flows back again. In a word it is the fruitful womb into which the devil
casting the seeds and spawnes of his hellish temptations, they receive warmth,
nourishment, grows, and in the end life and the perfect shape of all kinds
of sin. For there is not any sin whatsoever though never so monstrous and
abhommable, but has it being in this wicked flesh; if not appearing, yet at
least secretly lurking in this filthy dungeon, if not in the full growth, yet
at least in their seeds and chief principles. There lies hid impious
Atheism, filthy profaneness, abominable idolatry, palpable ignorance,
cursed infidelity, damnable hypocrisy, hateful pride, bold presumption,
fearful desperation, wicked treasons, horrible murders, beastly incests,
adulteries, thefts, covetousness, ambition, cruelty, falsehood, deceit, with
a huge swarm of innumerable other sinful abominations. And though these
vices and corruptions do not always burst out into the sores of outward
actions; yet (like dangerous impostumes) they lie hidden within the body of
this flesh; though they are not always exercised in their functions and
operations, they being subdued with Gods sanctifying spirit in the faithful,
and with his restrayning grace in the unregenerate, yet these cursed habites
and hidden faculties do still remain, even in the regenerate in some degree,
although in part mortified and weakened, and in their full strength in wicked
men. And as the egg has in it potentially all the parts of the bird, and
only needs to have the damme to sit and houer over it, until by her warmth
it may be hatched; so the flesh contains in it all manner of wickedness, and
if the filthy spirit, like an ugly toade, houer over it, and (as it were) warm
it with the heat of his hellish temptations, there will be hatched the killing
cockatrices of all sin, if the spirit of God do not crush them in the shell.
Neither is this the state of some alone, but even of all mankind, so far
forth as they are unregenerate, whereof it is that what David had spoken of
some special and notorious sinner of his times, the Apostle in the third
Chapter of the Epistle to Romans 3. 19. ^0.
the Romans, extenceth it to all mankind, being considered in the state of
corruption.

Sect. 4. That the flesh is the author of all wickedness.
Lastly as the flesh is all evil, and all evil in the flesh, so as it is also
a fruitful mother of all wickedness, and a filthy sink from such arise the
noisome sents of sin, and that poisonous fountain from which do flow the
streams of all evil. And this our Savior notes whereas he says, that which
comes out of a man (namely from the inner fountain Mark. 7. 18.
of a fleshly heart) defiles him. So the Apostle James makes this carnal
lust the mother, as the Devil is the father of all sin and wickedness, for
receiving the seeds of Satan's tentations (as it were) into a fruitful womb,
it Iam. 1. 14. 15.
first conceiueth, and then brings forth sin, and so sin when it is
finished brings forth death. And the Apostle Paul tells us what cursed
fruits do spring from this root of bitterness, namely Adultery, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Gal. 5. 19. 20
Heresy, murder and many other horrible abominations. Neither in truth can in
otherwise be; for who (as Ioh says) can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Or what Job. 14. 4.
can we expect from an evil tree but evil fruits? as our Savior Math. 7. 18.
has taught us. And seeing the flesh is a sea of wickedness, and a fountain
poisoned in the very head, there can nothing flow from it but corrupted
streams. And therefore as the Lord gave nine commandments to dry up (as it
were) these streams of wickedness, so he gave the tenth to damme up the well
head, for in vain it is to stop the current, if the fountain it self be ever
springing.

Sect. 5. That the flesh is a more malicious enemy unto us, then the devil or
the world.
And thus it appears how evil and malicious this wicked enemy the flesh is
in it own nature; now let us consider how it stands affected toward us: in
which respect we are to know that it matcheth (if not exceeds) the world,
yea the Devil himself in mischief and maliciousness; for howsoever it
disguiseth it self under the vizard of friendship and (courtier like) makes
semblance of all love, yet is it in deadly hatred with the spiritual man,
continually disturbeth his peace, undermines his safety, and is still plotting
his ruin and destruction. Neither is it possible to conceive a more bitter
opposition in all things, then between the flesh and the spirit; for what the
spirit undertakes, the flesh crosses, what that furthereth this hinders,
and at all times and upon all occasions the one nilleth what the other wills.
In which respect it may truly be said, that these two cannot reign and
flourish in the same man at once, for the prosperity of the one, is the ruin
of the other, the kindling of fleshly lusts is the quenching of the spiritual,
the nourishing of carnal concupiscence after earthly things, is the choking
of spiritual concupiscence after that which is divine and heavenly, and the
feeding and fatning of the one, is the pinching and straruing of the other,
according to that of the Psalmist, he satisfied their canall Psalm. 106. 15.
desires, but with all he sent leanness into their souls; for the pampering
of these lusts bring the soul into a desperate consumption; and the satisfying
of them takes away all appetite after spiritual nourishment From which
mortal and malicious opposition, we may plainly gather, that there is no
peace to be expected, no not any intermission or surceasing of this war,
unless one of the combitants be killed and destroyed; for as fire and water
being put together, never cease striving and fighting, till either the fire be
extinguished, or the water consumed; so is it in this spiritual conflict
between these irreconcilable enemies. The which should add much to our
Christian resolution, and make us courageously to assault this enemy with
careful diligence, renewed spirits and redoubled strength, seeing there cannot
be so much as as a truce, much less a secure peace between us, nor any means
to preserve the life of the spiritual man, unless we kill and crucify this
malicious enemy.

Sect 6. That the flesh is most malicious unto us because it is the author of
all sin.
But this maliciousness of the flesh will better appear, if we consider the
effects and fruits that it brings forth against us: which may either be
referred to our sin or to our punishment. The former appears by that which
has been said, for it is this sinful flesh which works in us all manner of
evil concupiscence, and from the inward corruption of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies as our Savior teaches us. And so far off is the Law of God from
stopping this flood of wickedness, that it swells so much the higher, and by
the opposition of Gods will takes occasion of greater rebellion, breaking
down all the bounds and banks that should stay and keep it in. And as a
wild beast or cursed ban-dogge grows more fierce and enraged when as they are
resisted, or when they are curbed in and tied up: So this sauadge flesh and
sinful corruption take occasion by the knowledge of the law the more to
transgress it, and the more that they are checked and restrained, the more
violent they grow in their wicked outrage. And this the Apostle testifies out
of his own experience; But sin (says he that is the sinful flesh) taking
occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; for
without the law sin was dead. Now sin is the greatest evil that can be
imagined, as being opposite to God the supreme goodness, neither is death,
punishment, hell, condemnation, nor the Devil himself, so absolutely evil,
nor so extremely contrary to Gods glorious Majesty. In which regard the
flesh which is that sinning sin as the Apostle calls it, and deep festered
and ever running fore which sends forth this filth of corruption, is chiefly
to be hated of those who love God, as being the principal prouoker of
rebellion against our supreme sovereign, the bellows which inflame us with
the fire of concupiscence, the cause which makes us so often to offend our
gracious God, the thief which robs us of all saving graces, the wall of
separation between us and heavenly happiness, and that arch-enemy which would
often every day thrust us into hell and the gulf of destruction, if we were not
supported by Gods grace and holy spirit.

Sect 7. That the flesh is the cause of the deprauing of our nature and the
defacing of Gods image in us.
And as it is the cause of all evil of sin, so consequently of the evil of
punishment: for this is the running and fretting Leprosy which has
monstrously defiled the whole man; and defaced that glorious image of God in
which we were created, turning our spiritual wisdom, into folly and
ignorance, and our created holiness and righteousness into all injustice and
hellish impiety. Yea this flesh and fleshly lusts do not only deface the
image of God, but even the image of a man, whilst they take away from him his
reason and understanding, and so all difference between him and a beast, for
through the sinful concupiscence of the corrupt flesh, man turning away from
his Creator to the creatures, loses not only the image of God, but even the
image of himself, and has the image of the creatures imprinted upon him. And
hereof it is that man, Gods most excellent workmanship, is so monstrously
deformed, and so horribly abased, that he is become in his natural condition
vile and ugly in the sight of God and his holy Angels; yea even a terror and
shame to himself, if once the Lord open his eyes and give him a sight of his
naked deformities. As we may see in the example of Adam, who being made the
most beautiful and glorious of the creatures, was so misshapen and deformed
with these sinful lusts, that he could not endure the sight of himself, but
as he did run into the bushes to hide his deformities from the eyes of God, so
if it had been possible he would have hid himself from himself, and
therefore for want of a better covering, made him breeches of Fig-leaues to
cover his nakedness. Thus also Job, when by the light of Gods presence he came
to a sight of his own corruptions, he was vile and base in his own eyes,
abhorred himself, and repented of his Job. 42. 6.
sins in dust and ashes. So that nothing makes us more vile and base then
the flesh and carnal lusts, even as contrariwise nothing more intituleth us to
honor and dignity, then to be cleansed from this natural filth, and to be
adorned with holiness, whereof it is that the Apostle matcheth these two
together, for having exhorted us to purge our selves from the sin of
uncleanness, he wishes us in the 1. These. 4. 3. 4.
next place to possess our vessels in sanctification and honor.

Sect 8. That the flesh brings us into a most base condition.
Secondly, but this will better appear, if we further consider into what a
base condition we are brought, if the flesh and the lusts thereof do get the
dominion over us, for whereas there is no estate so vile and abject as the
estate of a bondslaue, because he is in all things subject to the command of
his master, there being no place left unto expostulation, nor so much as any
liberty to demand a reason; nor no bondage comparable to the bondage of Satan
and our own sinful lusts, because there is no masters so unjust and cruel,
the flesh subiecteth us to this miserable thraldom. For if Satan command
these abject vassals, they must obey, though it directly tend to the dishonor
of God, the hurt of their neighbors, and the utter destruction of their own
bodies and souls. And in the like or greater slavery they are to their own
sinful lusts. If unjust anger provoke them to revenge, they must kill and
slay; if filthy lust impose upon them never so hard a task, they must
undertake it, though it be to the ruin of their states, the stayning of their
fame, yea the hazard of their lives, and damnation of their souls. If
covetousness command the compassing of some wealth, they must make no question
of right not wrong; of hurting other men or their own persons. If ambition
would have them to aspire to preferment, they must not stick to tread all
under foot that stand in the way, they must lie and dissemble, swear and
forswear, and climb up the craggie rock of honor with intolerable toil,
though they are in danger by falling to break their necks, either when they
are in the midway, or when they be come to the top of their hopes. If
voluptuousness and sensuality will have their appetite satisfied, they must
toil and moyle and endure many days labor for an hours delight; In a word,
they who are in subjection to the sinful flesh* they are above all men in the
world in the greatest slavery, being like unto Cham, who was a servant of
servants, not so much in respect of outward subjection, as in that they are
embondaged to their own carnal lusts; for as there is no servant or slave so
base and vile, so there is no tyrant in the world so proud and cruel.

Sect 9. That whilst we live in the flesh we cannot please God. Romans 8. 8.
A third fruit and effect which springs and proceeds from this sinful
flesh is, that whilst we live in it, and it in us, we cannot please God, nor
do any thing which is acceptable in his sight; so the Apostle plainly tells
us, that they who are in the flesh cannot please God; and the reason hereof is
clear and evident, because to be in the flesh, is to be the servant of sin
and the vassal of Satan, and to do nothing but what they like and command;
and therefore seeing nothing in the world can be imagined, so opposite and
contrary unto God as they, nor any thing so odious and abominable in his
sight; and seeing their friends be Gods enemies, and those things which please
them, be most displeasing in the sight of God, needs must all those actions
which are done in the flesh be odious unto him and make the agents obnoxious to
his wrath. Now what a miserable condition is this, into which man is brought by
his sinful flesh, that both his person and all his actions his words, works
and secret cogitations should be utterly misliked and disallowed of him who is
the supreme King and judge of heaven and earth, who has all power in his hand
to reward infinitely those whom he likes and allows, and to punish in like
proportion, those whom he disalloweth and misliketh.

Sect 10. The flesh sets man at emnitie against God. Romans 8. 7.
Fourthly the flesh nourishes perpetual emnitie between God and the carnal
man, for so the Apostle says that the wisdom of the flesh, or the carnal
mind, is emnitie against God; for the flesh and carnal lusts are in great
league and amity with the Devil and the world, and they all three unite all
their forces, to fight against God and all his friends; and howsoever they are
often vanquished by his almighty power, yet like malicious enemies the stand
continually against him in open rebellion, rather to testify their malice and
hatred, then out of any hope of prevailing against him. And therefore they who
will be friends unto these fleshly lusts, the wicked world and the
arch-traytor Satan, must needs hereby make themselves enemies unto God,
according to that of the Apostle, Know ye not that the amity of the world is
emnitie with God, and whosoever will be a friend of the Iam. 4 4.
world, is the enemy of God. And again, if any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him; and the reason which he renders is this, because
the world and the flesh with the sinful lusts thereof are combined together,
for (says he) all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father but is of the world. For this
carnal lusting after earthly things, breeds 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
a neglect and loathing of things spiritual and even of God himself: for
their appetite being filled and glutted with the sweet poison of fleshly
delights, they have no taste nor relish of those heavenly excellencies, and
they who have their senses filled with the seeing of worldly pleasures, have
their spiritual sense so dulled and deadded, that they cannot smell Gods
odiferous sweetness in his Word and holy ordinances. But as the Beetle chooses
rather to be in the dung then among the sweetest flowers, and the filthy hog
is more delighted with rooting in the dunghill, then to walk about in the most
pleasant garden: so those who are carnally minded are best pleased, when as by
any means they may satisfy their sensual and fleshly appetite, and take no
pleasure in spiritual or heavenly things; yea so contrary and opposite are
they unto God in all goodness, and such emnitie there is between them, that
nothing gives unto them greater distaste and coffeehouse. And as these
fleshly lusts enrage men against God; so also do they Ephesians. 2. 3.
provoke Gods wrath against them; and therefore the Apostle says, that whilst
they had their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires
thereof, they were also the children of wrath, and in that respect in danger
daily to be consumed with the fire of his displeasure. Now what a fearful
condition is this, to be at emnitie, mortal opposition and in hostile terms
against God himself? For as the Apostle says, do we provoke God unto anger?
Are 1 Cor. 10. 22.
we stronger then he? Can it be well with the earthen pitcher when it dasheth
it self against the strong rorke? Or can the seely Mouse escape destruction
when he provoke and encountreth the fierce Lion? And how much more may they
be assured of utter ruin and destruction who are at emnity with God himself,
who is not only able to arm all the creatures against them, but with a word
of his mouth to cast them into hell?

Sect 11. That the flesh is the cause of all our punishments.
Finally, as the flesh is the cause of all sin, so also of all punishment;
and therefore (because it were infinite to stand upon the particular evils and
mischiefs which this malicious enemy causes unto us,) look how many plagues
and punishments are inflicted upon mankind, either in state or name, soul or
body, and impute them all to the flesh, as the fountain of these bitter waters
from which they spring and flow. And yet all these being put together are not
comparable to those fearful punishments which it causes to carnal men in
the life to come. For it excludes them out of Gods kingdom and cutteth off
all hope of having any part in the heavenly inheritance. For they that are in
the flesh, are unregenerate and unsanctified, and without holiness they can
never see God; and out of this heavenly city are excluded, dogs and
sorcerers, and whore mongers, and Heb. 12. 14.
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. And more
plainly, the Apostle having reckoned up Apoc. 22. 15.
the fruits of the flesh, directly affirms, that they who do Gal. 5. 21.
such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And lastly the
maliciousness of this wicked enemy and the sinful lusts thereof herein
appears, in that nothing will satisfy them but our death and destruction.
For they are those mortal weapons which kill and murder us, and the edge and
point of them is not only directed against the body, but against our souls,
which are much more precious. And this argument the Apostle uses to persuade
us to shun and avoid them; Dearly beloved (says he) I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the
soul. The end of which war is not only to get 1 Pet. 2. 11.
the victory, and to keep us in subjection, but to cast all that are conquered
into the prison of hell, and to plunge them into everlasting condemnation of
body and soul. So the Apostle says, that when we were in the flesh the
motions of sins which were by the Law did work in our members to bring forth
Romans 7. 5. Romans 8. 6. 13.
fruit unto death, that to be carnally minded is death: and yet more plainly,
that if we live after the flesh we shall die; and that he who sows to the
flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, whereby is meant eternal death and
destruction, as appears by the antithesis following; but he that sows to
the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. And the Apostle Gal. 6.
8.
Peter likewise tells us, that the Lord reserueth the unjust unto the day of
iudgemen to be punished, but chiefly them that 2 Pet. 2. 10.
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness.

. Sect. 12. That the malice of the flesh is the more dangerous, because it is
masked under the coulor of friendship.
Now this malitiousnes of the flesh is so much the more dangerous* because it
is masked and disguised under the color and coue^ture of the nearest
friendship; for whilst in outward show it seems a nearer friend, then a
kinsman or dearest brother, and like another self appears most careful of
advancing our present and future good, it does most maliciously undermine our
safety, and betraieth us into the hands of our professed enemies; neither can
Satan and the world be more ready to besiege and assault us with the forces
and troops of their temptations, then the flesh to yield us into their hands
by giving free entrance to these assaylants, Yea it does not only open the
gates of our souls to let in these mortal enemies, but being entered, it
ioineth with them, assisteth these hellish forces with a strong army of carnal
lusts, and sighteth against our souls, robbing and ransacking them of all
spiritual graces, and wounding them even to the death with the wounds of
sin, if they were not recured with the precious balsum of Christ's blood. So
that we have just cause to complain with our Savior, that it is not a stranger
or professed enemy, but a wicked Disciple and false Judas that continually
follows us, waiting all opportunities whereby he may betray us; and that he
who eats bread with us has lift up his heel against us. And as David
complains of Achitophel. It is not a professed foe that does us this
mischief, but it is thou, a man, mine equal, my guide and John. 13. 18. Psalm.
55. 13. 14.
mine acquaintance, our counselor and companion that walks with us to the
house of God. It is one who was borne and bred, lives and dies, eats,
drinks, sleeps, walks and talks with us, which notwithstanding watches
all occasions of bringing us to destruction; for like tinder receiving the
sparks of Satan's temptations it nourishes and increases them, till at
length our souls be inflamed with a world of wickedness. Whereby it appears
that the flesh with the lusts thereof are enemies above all others most
dangerous and pernicious; for being secret traitors they are much more
malicious then professed enemies, malice and hatred being of such a nature,
that the more they are smothered and concealed, the more they are inwardly
increased and enraged. They have also the fittest opportunities to work our
overthrow in that lying and living with us, they can easily take the best
advantages, and then set upon us when as we are most weak or secure, and
least provided to make resistance. Moreover being secret traitors they are so
much the more able to do us mischief, because suspecting no hurt from them,
we do not arm our selves against them, nor fortify our souls against their
assaults; whereof it comes to pass* that we are often overcome and led
captive unto sin, before we discovered the enemy or did discern that we were
encountered. Finally they fight with us not by marching against us in the open
field, but out of secret ambushments, when we fear no danger, and so
oftentimes put us to flight, before we have any time to recollect and marshall
in order the forces of our mind, or to make any head against their fury. Now
what can be more dangerous then to have always in our company such a
treacherous Judas, who is still plotting the fittest means whereby he may
betray us into the power of our enemies? to have always with us such a
flattering, false Ioab, who when he performs all complements of kindness,
does but watch his opportunity to stab and kill us; to be besieged with mighty
enemies, and to have within the walls of our city secret traitors, who are
still ready to open the gates to let them in, and being entered to join with
them, that so together they may work our overthrow?

. Sect. 13. How we may d^eaet the malti^^s treasons of the flesh.
But it is not enough to know our danger, unless we also be acquainted with
the means how we may prevent it. And therefore let us inquire how we may
avoid these pernicious treasons and escape the peril of these secret
ambushments. And first taking notice that the flesh, whilst it professes
friendship and offers unto us much profit and many delights, is our mortal
enemy, and a slye traitor which takes part with the chief enemies of our
salvation, we must hearken to the Prophets counsel in another case. Trust ye
not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth
from her that lies in thy bosom, and always Mica 7. ^.
have it in jealousy, then most suspecting it, when as it offers to satisfy
our desires. And when it commends unto us the vanities of the world,
promising that in the fruition of them we shall have great contentment, let us
beware of secret treachery, and again and again look under these baits to
see if there be not hidden under them the hook of sin, and curiously search
if these booties are not purposely set out, to make us fall into Satan's
ambushments, that so he may overcome us and lead us captive to do his will.
For who would give any credit to such a false traitor, as has before his eyes
brought so many to utter ruin, yea which we know by manifold experience, has
many hundred times betrayed us to the Devil and the world, when as it has
tendered unto us the fairest promises and pretenses. Secondly, seeing we know it
to be a traitorous enemy we must disarme and weaken, captive and hold it in
subjection, that so though it have ever a malicious will to hurt us, yet being
disabled, it may not have any power to rebel against us. Thirdly we must keep
a narrow watch over it and over our selves, that it does not take us at any
advantage, and often look to our senses, as it were the gates of our souls,
that they be not by our flesh and carnal corruption vnbarred and left open to
entertain the forces of our spiritual enemies. And because our vigilance is
not sufficient to prevent the plots and practices of this subtle traitor, let
us often entreat, by our most fervent prayers, the keeper of Israel who never
slumbreth nor sleeps, that he will watch over us, and by his holy spirit
discover and deface these treacherous enemies.

CHAP. IX. That the flesh is an enemy exceeding powerful and mighty.
. Sect. 1. That the flesh is to the unregenerate a mighny king, and to the
regenerate a powerful tyrant-
WE have showed that the flesh is a most malicious enemy, so that it wants no
will to bring us to destruction: And now it remains that we show how mighty
and powerful it is in effecting that which it desires and lusts. The which
will appear if we consider the mighty power, and subtle policy of these
malicious enemies. Their power appears both in regard of their strength and
number. For the first, if we look upon the flesh in it full strength, as it
is Romans 6. 12.
in a man unregenerate, and is not subdued nor has the vigor thereof abated
by Gods spirit, we shall find that it reigns as a mighty monarch in the
little world of man, holding every faculty, power and part both of soul and
body in subjection. The which the Apostle plainly intimates, where he
exhorts those whom Christ by his spirit has regenerated and freed from this
regiment, not to let sin reign in their mortal bodies, that they should
obey it in the lusts thereof. Yea it reigns not only as a King and absolute
sovereign; but as a Lord or tyrant who having conquered mankind does hold
them in subjection as miserable captives and bondslaues, selling them over to
the committing of all actual transgressions, for the base price of earthly
vanities. The which the Apostle intimates in these words; but I am carnal,
sold under sin. Whereby Romans 7. 14.
he signifies that the flesh dealt with him like a proud and cruel tyrant,
seasing upon him like one who had bought a slave in the market, and forcibly
compelling him to do his will. The which if the Apostle might truly speak of
himself though he were regenerate, in respect of that part which remained
unsanctified, then how much more may it be verified of those who remain in the
state of corruption and unregenerate, who are wholly under the dominion of
sin? Now if we would see with what power and irresistable force, this cruel
tyrant did rule in all the sons of men, whilst they remained in the state of
corruption, hereby it will appear in that they were so utterly unable to free
themselves out of this thraldom, that they never durst nor could attempt their
liberty, because their wills were no less captiuated, then their other parts
and faculties, and it was their chief delight to live in this slavery. Neither
were any outward helps available, because being possessed and ruled by this
legion of wicked lusts, like the Doemoniake in the Gospel, nothing would
contain them nor restrain their fury, but they break easily all those
chains, gives, and Mar. 5. 2.
fetters wherewith they were bound, being (like mad men) a like harmefull both
to themselves and others. For neither would Gods love and many benefits allure
them and contain them in obedience, nor his wrath and fearful judgments
terrifiee and restrain them from sin; Neither the law of God, containing so
many gracious promises to them who obeyed it, and so many terrible threatenings
against them that transgressed it, both of temporary plagues and everlasting
punishments; nor the execution of these dreadful judgments in the punishment
of the whole world by a universal deluge, of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and
brimstone, with many other cities and countries which have been made examples
of Gods wrath against sin; besides the experience of innumerable particular
persons, and even of themselves, visited by the hand of God in a fearful
manner, were all sufficient and strong enough to curb and keep under, these
sinful passions and corrupt lusts, nor to subdue and thrust out of his regency
this powerful tyrant the flesh; till Christ Jesus himself came who is the
wisdom and power of his father, and conquered him on his cross, triumphing
gloriously over him together with the rest of our spiritual enemies; and
until he apply the virtue of this victory unto us and by his powerful spirit,
which is infinitely stronger then all men and Angels, do vanquish this mighty
tyrant, give him a deadly wound of which he continually languisheth, and
deposing him from his regency, do set up in our hearts the gracious and
glorious kingdom of our blessed Savior. So that we may conclude this In
Johan. lib. 3. cap. 34.
point with the saying of Cyrill. The voluptuous lusts of the flesh without
doubt are of mighty power, by which the minds of men are wholly diuerted from
all honesty and goodness.

Sect. 2 Of the strength of the flesh being considered in it self.
But least those who are regenerate should contemn this enemy, as being weak
and impotent, because it is in part mortified and the strength thereof abated
by virtue of Gods spirit dwelling in them; let us in the next place know, that
though it be not in them so puissant and powerful as in those who remain in
their natural corruption, yet it is exceeding strong and mighty, whether we
consider it simply in it self, as it works and rebelleth in those who are
sanctified, or compare it with the spiritual and regenerate part. The former
is notably set down by the Apostle in his own person, in the seventh chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans, where he shows that this corrupt and sinful
flesh is so far off from any conformity to the law, that taking occasion by
the commandment, it wrought in him all manner of concupiscence, and so abused
the law which was purposely given to restrain him from sin, and to subdue
and mortify his corruptions, as a means to give strength, life and vigor
unto it. Whereby the law which was ordained to life, became to be unto death.
Further showing verse. 8.
the power of his fleshly corruption he says, that it took occasion by the
commandment to deceive and slay him, working verse. 9.
death unto him by that which is good; that it overcame him verse. 10.
and like a slave sold him under sin, that it made him to do that which he
allowed not, to omit the good which he affected, and verse. 11.
commit the evil which he hated; that though he were delighted verse. 12.
in the law of God and desired to obey it, yet evil was present with bim That
though he constantly resolved to serve verse. 13.
God, yet the flesh like a strong rebel making war against verse. 14.
him, did often foil and overcome him, and carried him into captivity to the
law of sin. Yea of such force and might did this holy Apostle find the flesh
in him, that it forced him to cry out; wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death. So else where he tells us, that Gal.
5. 17.
the flesh is not so subdued, but that it continually makes war against the
part regenerate; and stands in such strong opposition against it, that the
godly cannot do the good they would. With whom the Apostle Peter agreeing
tells 1 Pet. 2. 11.
us, that the fleshly lusts do fight against our souls. Finally as it
hinders us often times from yielding any obedience to the law, and enforces
us to transgress it; so when we do perform any duties which it requires, it
so defiles and staineth them, that we have just cause to acknowledge with the
Prophet that our best righteousness is but like a polluted Esa 64. 6.
cloth.

Now this strength of the flesh unless it be wounded, subdued and kept under
by Gods spirit, is always in it full vigor, yea in daily growth,
notwithstanding all natural means which can be used. For the decay of nature
it self does not make it decay, but even in sickness it retains health and
vigor, and when through old age the body is weak and decrepite it continues
firm and strong.

Sect 3. That the flesh it mighty being considered comparatively with the
spirit.
So also if we compare it with the spiritual part, the flesh is much greater
and stronger; and therefore would easily overcome it and quench al Gods graces
in us, if God should leave us to our selves to be supported and defended by the
strength which we have received, and not continually send us new supplies, and
uphold us with the power of his own spirit. For the Apostle tells us, that
in this life we have received but first fruits of the spirit, which is but an
handful Romans 8. 23.
in comparison of the harvest, the whole croppe of grace being reserved, till
we shall receive with it the fullnes of glory. And in regard that the flesh in
quantiiy did so much exceed the spirit, he sticks not to say, that the
Corinthyans though sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be saints, were
carnal and but babes in Christ; yea having himself 1 Cor. 1. 2. chap. 1. 2.
received such a great measure of grace, he notwithstanding in the sight and
sense of his great corruption acknowlegeth Romans 7. 14.
that he was carnal and sold under sin. Hereof it is that Divines compare
the flesh to the great giant Goliath, and the spirit to little David; and not
unfitly, for as David was far unequal to the mighty Giant, and therefore
prevailed not against him by his own strength, but by the power of God
assisting him, in whose name he came against him, so by the same means only
the spirit gets victory over the flesh, God giving it strength to overcome
because it fights his own battayles.

. Sect. 4. Of the multitude of ^^ fleshly lust*
Finally unto the strength of our enemy we may add their multitude, for
though they be one in name, to note that they are all of the like sinful
nature, and as one combined in malice to work our destruction, so are they
many in number, even whole legions of unlawful lusts, which continually
multiply themselves, by begetting a new offspring after the old are killed and
subdued. Whereof it is that the apostle Peter wills us, to abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, speaking plurally of them as
being many, even a whole army which makes war against us.

Sect. 5. That the power of our enemies (...) us t^ shake of all security.
The consideration whereof should move us to shake of all security, arising
from contempt of our enemies and seeing they are so mighty in strength, and
many in number, let us use so much the more care, diligence, and vigilance to
defend our selves against their fury, buckling unto our selves the whole
armor of God, and using all means both for the vveakning of our enemies, and
the nourishing and strengthening of Gods graces in us. Especially let us call
upon God, the Lord of boasts, desiring him by our fervent prayers, that he
will by his spirit abate the power of the flesh and the sinful lusts thereof,
and re*inforce and strengthen the army of his spiritual graces in us, by
sending to them daily new ^i^es and ^^esh supplies, that so in the end we may
obtain the victory.

Sect 6. That the might of our enemies (...) discourage (...) courageous.
Neither should the power of these spiritual enemies daunt and discourage us,
an^ so make us cowardly to she, or yield our selves as slaves unto them;
because being so much too strong for us, there is no hope of with standing
their fury or obtaining victory. But let us still remember that we fight the
Lords battles, and therefore he being on our side, we are sure (if we will but
fight) to obtain the victory in the end. Let us remember that our Graund
Captain JESUS CHRIST has by his death overcome sin, and led it captive upon
his cross, triumphing gloriously over it together with the rest of our
spiritual enemies, so as none of them shall be able to hurt us. With which
meditation the Apostle comforted and encouraged himself in his tedious
conflict with the flesh; for having pitifully complained and cried out;
Wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He
presently 2 Samuel 2^. 9.
adds; I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; By whom alone he had
obtained strength, whereby he was able to stand in the fight, and was assured
in the end to get the victory. Yea let us call to mind that he by his spirit
has applied unto us the virtue ^f his death, whereby he has given unto our
flesh such a deadly wound, that it shall never recover o^ it, but languish in a
continual consumption, until by our death it be fully abolished. And
therefore when we like weak and white-liuered soldiers are tired in the
fight, let us fly to the standerd and fight under the shield, of Christ our
Savior, who is our true Eleazar (the comfort of God) and so mighty and
omnipotent, that he is able to vanquish and overcome all our enemies alone,
only he would have us to fight with him in the battle, that so we might also
accompany him in his glorious triumph. Let us remember that though our
spiritual part be but the first fruits, yet it is an earnest of the whole
harvest; though it be but small in quantity, yet it is full of virtue and
vigor, the God of life giving life unto it, and like a little quintescence,
which is stronger in operation, by that virtue which it receives from the fire
of Gods Spirit, then a great quantity of common waters. Whereas contrariwise
the flesh, though it be much greater and stronger, yet being deputed to
mortification and having received a fatal blow, of which it daily
languisheth and decays; it is a giant indeed in strength and bigness, but
yet such an one as being in a deadly consumption, pin^th away by little and
little till it be wholy abolished. And on the other side the spirit as a
child in age statute, yet is in a continual growth until it come to man's
estate and a perfect age in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. X. Of the Policy of the Flesh; and that it is more dangerous and
pernicious then it power and strength.
Sect 1. (...).
IT now remains in the next place, having seen the power of the Flesh, that
we also consider of the policy of this enemy. The which as it is great in it
self, so also most dangerous and pernicious unto us. For howsoever the
strength of the flesh be very great, yet the policy thereof does far exceed
it; for being not a possessed enemy, but a secret traitor, it is more exercised
in cunning undermining of our safety with subtle sleights and pollitique
stratagems, then in assaulting us after an open and hostile manner with
strength and violence. Hence it is that the Lord tells us by the Prophet,
that the heart (whereby he understands the soul of man, or that part of the
soul which remains unregenerate) is deceitful above all things, and so
desperately wicked in this depth of fraud, that none can Ier. 17. 10.
know it but the Lord, who is omniscient, and knows all things. For howsoever
Satan the old Serpent in respect of his natural abilities and long
experience, may be more cunning and politic in himself, yet his deceit is
not so great, in abusing and wronging us, as is the deceit of our own flesh.
For this being a part of our selves, yea of every power, faculty and member of
our souls and bodies, it is of the privy counsel of all our thoughts, and
knowing our most hidden imaginations and secret intentions, it can take
advantage of them to work our own overthrow; where as Satan being ignorant
of them, cannot by all his craft and subtlety so much endamage us. And in this
respect Satan cannot deceive us, unless our own flesh assisting him do
first deceive us, whereof it is that our Savior, being pure from all fleshly
corruption, and most free from this carnal guile, could not possibly be
deceived with Satan's policies and most subtle stratagems. Whereas on the
other side our own flesh can easily abuse and cozen us, though it have no
help at all from the arch-enemy of our salvation. And hereof it is that the
flesh in the Scriptures is called the old man, to note unto us, that as men in
this age, grow by their long experience very pollitique, and unless they be
sanctified with Gods grace and holy Spirit, very subtle, crafty and full of
fraud, so the flesh exceeds and abounds in fraud and treachery.

Sect. 2. Of the strength of the flesh being considered in it self. Romans 8. 7.
Now this fraud and policy of the flesh, as it is most malicious in it self,
so it is most pernicious unto us. The former appears in that it takes part
with satan, the wicked one, against God himself the chief goodness; for so
the Apostle tells us, that the wisdom of the flesh is emnitie against God.
And that this policy is most pernicious unto us, it is manifest, first because
it often prevails, and much deceives us; as the Apostle out of his own
experience complains- Romans 7. 11. Sin taking occasion by the commandment
deceived me. In which regard that may justly be Romans 7. 11.
said unto us which the Prophet speaks in another case, Trust ye not in a
friend, put ye not confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from
her that lies in thy bosom. For so often and commonly are we hereby deceived
and abused, that we have just cause to subscribe to the wise man's saying: He
that trusts in his own heart is a fool. Secondly the perniciousnesse of
this policy unto us hereby appears Pro. 28. 26.
in that it tends unto no less hurt then our death and utter destruction,
for so the Apostle tells us; that the wisdom Romans 8. 6.
of the flesh is death, and therefore he joins these two together, that
sin, or his sinful corruption deceived and slew Romans 7. 11.
him; because it was such a deceit as brought death and destruction, unless
he had been redeemed and freed from it by the precious death of Jesus Christ.
Finally, the danger of this carnal policy and deceit is so much the greater,
because it is so subtle and secret so deep and disguised, that it can hardly
be discerned and found out; according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, The heart
is deceitful above Ier. 17. 10.
all things and desperately wicked, who can know it? So that our longest line
cannot sound the bottom of his gulf, out quickest and most piercing sight
cannot discover the multitude and strength of these subtle enemies, because
they display not their colors in the open field, but lie hidden in secret
ambushments: yea they mingle themselves amongst our own forces, and disguise
themselves in our own coats and habits. They make show of simplicity and
sincerity, when as there is nothing but craft and deceit: and these dangerous
bogges seem outwardly fair green fields and firm ground, but having with
this outward show invited us to them, we are ready to sink, and to be
swallowed up and perish, when we rest upon them. In which regard it behooves
us to follow the Wise man's advice: Pro. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all
diligence. And the exhortation Pro. 4. 23 Heb. 3. 12. 13:
of the Apostle: Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief in departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily,
whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. For how hard is it to overcome those enemies, which
are so hardly discovered? and to frustrate and prevent those deceits which
cannot without great difficulty be so much as discerned?

Sect. 3. That the policy of the flesh should make us more watchful and
vigilant.
But let this difficulty in sounding of the depth of this hellish policy, and
in searching out those deceipts which lie lurking in these dark corners,
only make us more vigilant and diligent to discover them but not daunt and
discourage us, or make us less confident and courageous in fighting this
spiritual conflict; for be the flesh never so politic and even inspired with
all the subtlety of the Devil, yet have we a wisdom to direct us in
comparison whereof all this depth of craft and cunning is but childish folly.
And though there be in our corrupt nature such a maze of deceit, that we
cannot enter into it, or being entered can not tell how to get out; and though
it be such a dark dungeon of deceit, that by the light of our own wisdom
and understanding we cannot see into it; yet the Lord has given unto us his
word to be our line, which if we follow we shall find every creek and corner,
turning and winding of this Labyrinth of wickedness; and to be a light shining
in the darkest places, which is able to dispell this Ci^erian darkness, and to
discover clearly all these subtilties and 2 Pet. 1. 19.
crafty policies, teaching us also the way to prevent and defeat them, so as
we shall not be in danger of these secret ambushments. So the Apostle tells
us, that the Word of Heb. 4. 13.
God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword; piercing
even to the dividing a sunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And
therefore as the darkest dungeon vvhereall things are hidden and unseen,
becomes as light as any other place, if there be made an open passage, for
the sunne-beames to shine into it* so as all the filth and sluttish corners are
manifest to every beholder, which before by reason of the darkness none could
discern: so this dungeon and depth of carnal policy hides all things, and
is it self hidden from our sight, so long as we bring unto it no other light
then our dark understanding: but if once the beams of Gods shining truth, and
the bright rays of his holy Word do inlighten us, we shall easily discern
these deep and dark deceipts, and discover all the secret filthiness and
abominable wickedness which lies lurking in these secret corners. So that if we
will make choice of Gods Word to be a lamp to our feet and a light unto our
Psalm. 119. 105.
paths; we shall easily avoid those secret snares which lie in our way, and
escape those subde stratagems and dangerous ambushments, which the flesh has
purposely laid to ensnare and circumuent us. If we will often and seriously
study in this holy book, we shall find all the sleights and subtilties of
those spiritual enemies laid open, together with the means how we may
defeat them. But vvithal, because the flesh does continually cast fogges and
mists before our eyes, that we may not discern this light; and like some
kinds of fish does purposely muddy these clear waters, that so it may the
better glide away and not be discovered; we must continually desire the Lord
to open our eyes, that we may see the wonderful things of his Law, and that
he will by the light of his holy Spirit so illuminate our minds, and dispell
these fogges and mists which Psalm. 119. 18.
the flesh daily raises, that we may see all the deep policies, and dangerous
subtilties of the flesh, and have such a measure of spiritual wisdom and
understanding, that we may be able to prevent and escape them.

CHAP. XI. Of certain particular deceipts of the flesh respecting our persons.
. Sect. 1. The first deceit that we are nothing so evil as in truth we are
But come we from the general to some particulars, which as they are most
common and ordinary, so also most dangerous and pernicious, for more easily
might I number the hayres of a man's head, or the stars of heaven. Yea the
grass in a large field, or stones upon the sea shore, then all the deceipts of
our corrupt flesh. Besides my late worthy assistant in the work of my
ministry, that excellent light of Gods Church, which (ah) M. Daniell Dike.
too soon did set unto us, that he might for ever gloriously shine in heaven,
has in his book of the deceitfulness of the heart so sweetly and divinely
discoursed on this subject, that he has eased me of this labor. Yet this
discourse so necessarily requiring, that I should say something of this
argument, as that it will seem maimed if it go without it, I will a little
insist upon it, and for our more orderly proceeding I will refer these
deceipts of the flesh to two principal heads. The first such as respect our
persons and states, the other such as concern certain duties which God
requires of us. For the former, it is a common and most pernicious policy of
the flesh to persuade us, that we are nothing so evil, corrupt and wicked as
in truth we are. To the entertaining of which conceit we are the more easily
induced by reason of ignorance and blindness of mind, pride and self-love
which naturally raigns and rule in us. For though we be wholly, from the crown
of the head to the sole of the foot, defiled with sin, and thereby utterly
disabled unto any good duty; yet we see that the most have an opinion of
their own worth and excellency; For many boast themselves in the goodness of
their natures, as though therein they might be accepted, not only of men, but
also of God himself; many vaunt of their pure naturals, and works of
congruitie, which before grace received they are able to perform in the
strength of their natural abilities; many do rest in their own civil
justice and honesty as though it were sufficient to justify them in Gods
sight, many bless themselves in their legal righteousness, as though thereby
they could merit heaven with some small help; and finally many with the Angel
of the Church of Laodicia do think themselves rich and so increased in goods,
that they stand in need of nothing; when as in truth they are wretched and
miserable, poor, blind and Apoc. 3. 17.
naked. But let us take heed of this policy as being most dangerous and
pernicious, seeing it makes men rest in themselves and upon the weak reed of
their own righteousness to their utter perdition, and keeps them from
flying unto Christ, and from hungring after his righteousness by which alone we
are justified and saved. And as it keeps us from embracing Christ by faith,
so also it hinders our repentance, and nourishes in us carnal security and
hardness of heart: for we must first see our sins before we can ever bewail
or turn from them, and whilst we have any opinion of our own good natures,
or our legal righteousness, we can never as we should bewail our sinful
corruptions, nor carefully use any means to be purged from them.

. Sect. 2. The means to defeat the former policy.
Whereby it appears that no policy is more pernicious if it prevail against
us, seeing it spoileth us of our Savior Christ, and of all the gracious
promises of life and salvation contained in the Gospel, which are all made on
the condition of faith approved to be lively and justifying by the fruits
thereof in unfeigned repentance. The which should move us to use all our care
and endeavor that we may defeare it: to which purpose we must not look upon
our selves as we appear in the twilight, or rather in the dark night of
natural knowledge, nor yet through the false spectacles of pride and
self-love, which will hide and disguise our vices and corruptions and make
them to show themselves in virtues colors; but we must look upon our selves
in the glass of the law, and try our thoughts and words, our works and our
ways by the rule of Gods word, and so shall we plainly discover our
blemishes and difilements, yea our monsterous deformities and ugly corruptions,
with the auersenesse of our wills to all good, and the perverseness and
crookedness of our hearts affections. For there shall we see that our
understandings are so blinded that though they be wise unto evil, yet to do
good Ephesians. 4. 18.
they have no knowledge; that our judgments are wholly Ier. 4. 22.
corrupted, mistaking evil for good, and good for evil, right for wrong, and
wrong for right, truth for falsehood, and falsehood for truth; that our
imaginations are evil and that continually; that our consciences are either
seared through security or affrighted with terrors and horrors through
despair, and either accusing when they should excuse, or excusing when they
should accuse; that our memories are slippery to retain any good thing, and
retentiue like brass or iron in keeping and preserving sinful and wicked
impressions, that our wills stand in open rebellion against God nilling what
he wills, and wills what he nilleth. That our hearts are auerse to all
goodness and cleave fast to all worldly and sinful vanities; that our
affections are wholly corrupted and disordered and all the members of our
bodies are the ready instruments of sin. There shall we find that by reason
of this corruption we are notable to think a good thought, nor so much as will
that which is good, that we are altogether unprofitable servants, yea 1 Cor. 3.
5. Phill. 2. 12. Ephesians 2. 1. 3.
rather the slaves of sin and Satan* the children of wrath, and not only
sick but even stark dead in our sins; that we have not only in us utter
barrenness of all good, but the seeds of all wickedness, lurking and lying
hid, which sproute forth upon all occasions, when as they receive any warmth
and moisture from the temptations of Satan and Ier. 13. 23.
the world; yea would of themselves daily come to growth and ripeness if they
were not continually nipped and restrained by the common grace of Gods spirit,
Finally that the blacke-moore may as easily change his blackenesse, and the
leopard his spots, as we our sinful condition into a better estate; yea that
in stead of making any satisfaction by paying the old score, we are ready to
increase our debt by adding new sins unto the old, and so plunge our selves
into more fearful condemnation. And thus may we defeat this policy of the
flesh and coming unto a true sight of our own natural vildenesse, we may
abhor our selves in sackcloath and ashes, and renouncing our own
righteousness, may hunger after the all-sufficient righteousness of Job. 42.
Christ, and applying it unto us by a lively faith may find it effectual for
our justification and salvation.

Sect 3. The second policy that the good things in us are much better then in
truth they are
Secondly as the flesh persuades us that we are nothing so ill as we are in
respect of our sinful condition, so that the good things which we seem to
have are far better and of much greater excellency then in truth they are,
and as there it looks upon our faults and vices though the thick fogge of
ignorance which makes them to be scarce visible and discernable; so when it
beholds any appearance of good in us it puts on the spectakles of pride
and self-love which make them seem to be far greater then they are in
deed; every moal-hill a great mountain, and every small star as large as
the Sun it self. Thus it magnifieth to a mere worldly man the goodness of
his nature, as though this alone without any further help would bring him to
heaven; and makes him believe that his common gifts are special endowments,
that Gods restrayning grace in him, is sanctifying and saving grace, and his
moderated and blunted vices and corruptions to be singular virtues and great
perfections. Thus it persuades the proud iustifiarie to rest in his inhaerent
righteousness and legal obedience for his justification and salvation. And to
this end it bleareth his eyes so as he cannot see any wants and imperfections
in it, and works in him a conceit, that it is most perfect both in the parts
and degrees, when as there is nothing but defects and corruptions. Thus it made
the young man in the Gospel to boast that he had done all commanded in the
law, when Mat. 19. 20.
he had transgressed all; and to ask after a greater task, what lack I yet,
when as his work was not so much as begun, Luke. 18. 11. and 23. 23.
and as yet he had done nothing. Thus it made the proud Pharisie to brag of
his legal righteousness even unto God himself, and to rest in his paying of
small tithes, minte, commine and Annise, as though he had done the weighty
things of the law. Finally thus it persuades the sincere professor to
ouerweene his gifts, and to magnify above measure the graces which he has
received. It makes him believe that his little mite is a rich treasury, and
his small grain of musterseede, and first degrees of faith, to be already a
great tree; that he is good wheat able to endure the fan or the blasts of
any temptations, whereas if Christ prayed not for him, that his faith might not
fail, he would when Satan should sift him, prove but light corn, if not
very chafe; Finally that he is so strong in Christ, that he can willingly
suffer martyrdom for his name sake, and with Peter to presume that though all
the world should forsake him, yet he would not; when as the voice of a poor
damsel will make him start back, and the smallest loss of goods or
impeachment to his credit, will easily move him to abjure his profession. The
issue of which deceit is most dangerous if by Gods grace it be not prevented,
for the maine end at which our deceitful flesh herein aymeth is, either to
puff us up so in pride, that we forget God the sole author of our gifts,
and spoil him of his praise, by arrogating it unto our selves; and that we
grow insolent in respect of men, contemning those who in our false conceit
come short of us. And secondly that we rest contented with that measure of
grace which we have, as being abundantly sufficient; and never use any means,
whereby our imperfect and defective graces may be increased and grow to
greater perfection.

. Sect. 4. The means to defeat the former policy.
Now if we would stand in the day of temptation, and not be overtaken with this
deceit of the flesh; the best way is first, that we deck our selves with
humility, as the Apostle exhorts: remembering that the way to obtain 1 Pet.
5. 5.
more grace at the hands of our heavenly father, is to bemoane our small
measure, to be empty in our own conceit, and to hunger and thirst after
more, for he resists the proud, but gives his grace to the humble, he
fills the Luck. 1. 53.
hungry with good things, but sends the rich empty away; neither does he
ever raise and build the goodly palace of his grace and virtue, but where he
has first laid the foundation of humility. And therefore let us not (as the
Apostle Romans 12. 3.
exhorts us) think of our selves more highly then we ought to think, but
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man, the measure of faith.
Secondly, let us cast away those false spectakles of pride and self-love,
which make our small gifts to seem so great, and examine our graces by the
neuer-deceiuing light of Gods word. And there we shall plainly see how far
we come short of that perfection which God requires, what a little pittance it
is we have in comparison of that which we want, and how our small measure is
blotted and stained with the flesh of our corruptions. Thirdly, let us not
commend our graces to the eye of our deluded judgments as shopkeepers do
their courser wares, by setting courser by them; we have in our sight the
example of others who come short of us; but let us compaire our little sparks
of grace with those bright flames which have shonne in the Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles, yea in our Savior Christ himself, and so we shall not
be proud of our progress, but ashamed rather of our small, profitiencie; and
with the Apostle forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth
Phil. 3. 13.
to those things which are before, we shall press toward the mark, for the
price of the high calling of God, in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XII. Of the fleshes policies respecting our estates.
Sect 1. The first policy respecting our estate is to persuade the faithful
that they are hated of God because they are afflicted.
ANd these were the chief deceipts of our flesh respecting our persons. Now
concerning our estate it uses a wicked policy whereby all men are exceedingly
abused and deluded, which is to draw us unto a false judgment concerning our
estate, as either to think our selves miserable when we are in the way to
happiness, or happy when we are in the way to perdition. Concerning the
former it is commonly used by the flesh toward the children of God when they
are in the state of affliction either of body or mind. For when poverty
pincheth them, or reproaches are cast upon them, or sickness se^zeth on their
bodies, or griefs upon their minds; when they are cast down in the sight of
their sins, and are terrified in their consciences with the apprehension of
Gods displeasure, then the flesh is ready to persuade them that these are
signs of Gods wrath and of their reprobation and damnation. But concerning
this policy I shall not need here to say much, seeing I have sufficiently
armed the Christian against it in the first and third part of this Christian
warfare, where I have proved that this is a false judgment of the flesh and
quite contrary to the Scriptures, which teach us that afflictions either of
body or mind are unto us marks of Gods love and signs of our adoption, when
as we make a right use of them, and are by these fatherly chastisements
reformed and amended.

Sect. 2. The second policy to persuade us that we are in an happy condition
when our state is most miserable.
But the contrary unto this, as it is much more dangerous, so also much more
frequent and common; namely for the flesh to persuade us that we are in an
happy and blessed condition, when as in truth we are in the very laws of
eternal death and condemnation. And thus the flesh abuses either those, who
being in the bosom of the Church are professed worldings, or such as in their
profession and conversation do make some show of Christianity. Concerning the
former; how many are there that bear the name of Christians, who are slaves to
the world and their own lusts, and the very bondslaues of the devil, making
no conscience of their ways, but given over to all liscentiousnesse, and to
commit all manner of sin with greediness? and yet are deluded by the devil
and their own corruption, with this conceit, that they are in Gods favor,
and that they among other shall be saved. How many are there that live in
ignorance and infidelity, and worship no other God but the idol of riches,
pleasures and worldly glory; that make no conscience of swearing, forswearing,
blaspheming, of profaning Gods Sabbaoths, unjust anger, furious revenge,
malice, envy, cruelty, oppression, whoredom, drunkenness, fraud and all
manner of outrageous wickedness: and yet are deceived by their own corrupt
flesh, persuading them that God will never call them to an account for any of
these things, but either not observes them, or will soon forget them; or if
at all he do remember them, yet he will not at all lay these things to their
charge if they profess themselves Christians, and have time even at their last
hour to call for mercy?

Sect 3. Outward privileges no sure testimonies that we are in Gods love.
Now the chief arguments which the flesh uses to delude men with this false
judgment are two. First because they are Christians by profession and not
Turks, Jews or Infidels, and members of the true Church who have their part
in those royal privileges, the Word, Sacraments and Prayers in the
assemblies. But let such know that all these privileges will no more benefit
them, then they did the rebellious Jews, who having these perrogatiues long
before them were utterly rejected for their rebellion and disobedience, that it
will do them no more good to pretend the name of Christ or his Church, then it
did them to cry out, the Temple of the Lord the Temple of the Ierm. 7. 4. 12.
Lord, or to boast of their circumcision, sacrifices and legal ceremonies. Let
them remember that; not the hearers of the law, but the doers thereof are
justified; and that these who are only hearers and not doers of the word do
but deceive themselves. Let them call to mind, that he who was privileged
Iam. 1. 22. Mat. 22. 13.
to come to the wedding feast of the Kings son, but was found there without
his wedding garment, was haled from thence and cast into utter darkness where
is weeping and gnashing of teeth; that though the tares are suffered to grow
with the good corn in the same field even until harvest, yet then they shall
be pulled up, gathered into bundles and cast into the fire. And that though the
Mat. 13. 30.
goats and sheep be suffered here to graze together yet the time shall come
when they shall be severed, and the goats being set on the left hand shall
hear that dreadful sentence. Depart from me ye accursed into hell fire
prepared for the devil Mat. 21. 41.
and his Angels. Let them know that by all these outward privileges the which
they have so much abused, they shall have their punishments hastened and
increased; For judgment must begin at Gods own house, and he will plague 1
Pet. 4. 17. Ier. 25. 29.
the city where his name is called upon. If our King be so just and virtuous
that he will severely punish wickedness in the common wealth, how much more in
those who are in his own family? If the jealous husband hates filthiness in
strangers, how much more in his own spouse or children? And if the husbandman
will scarce suffer a brier or thistle grow in the fallowe field, how much more
will be pull them up when as they grow among his corn and in such grounds as
he has best tilled and most carefully manured? if the Bridegroom can abide no
loathsume annoyance in any corner of the house, how much less will he endure
it in his bridal chamber? Yea let strangers speed how they can, the Lord will
not suffer himself, to be dishonored by those who profess themselves to be
his servants, but as they cause his name to be blaspheamed by their sins, so
he will cause it to be glorified in their punishments. Let the weeds in the
woods grow till they wither with age, yet they shall be pulled up if they be
found in the parden wherein God delights. And if Sodom and Gomorrah shall not
escape unpunished, then Corazin and Bethsayda shall fall into a much more
fearful condemnation, who hearing Christ's heavenly Sermons and seeing his
miracles, continued in their sins without repentance. And the Apostle tells
us that, the Mat. 11. 21.
earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and Heb. 6. 7. 8.
yet brings forth nothing but thorns and briars is above all other soyles
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Sect. 4. That worldly prosperity is no sure sign of Gods love or our happy
condition.
The second argument which the flesh uses to persuade carnal worldlings that
they are in an happy condition and in the love of God is, because they abound
in earthly prosperity and with many temporal blessings, which they esteem as
so many testimonies of Gods love and signs of their own salvation. And surely
it cannot be denied but that these things are good in their own nature, as
being the gifts of our good God, which he gives as rewards of virtue and the
temporary wages to those who serve him; but yet they are not absolutely and
simply good, but in respect of their use of an indifferent nature, good to the
good, and evil to those who abuse them unto evil. And therefore as the
children of God who have a right use of these temporal blessings, when they
use them as instruments of their bounty and beneficence, to the glory of God
and the good of their fellow servants, may esteem them as pledges of Gods
love and earnest-pennies of their salvation; so carnal worldlings who abuse
them to pride, forgetfulness of God, profaneness, wantonness, oppression,
cruelty and all manner of sin, have just cause to think, that they are gifts
given them in Gods wrath, that they may be snare^ to entangle them to their
deeper condemnation, according to that of the Psalmist let their table become a
snare before them, Psalm. 69. 22.
and that which should have been for their welfare let it become a trappe.
Again the Scriptures teach us that we cannot by these outward things judge
either of Gods love or hatred toward Ecle. 9. 1. 2.
us, seeing all these things come alike to all, and there is Job. 21 6. 7. 8.
Psalm. 73. 1. 2. etc.
one event, to the righteous and to the wicked, or if there be any difference
it is commonly in this, that the wicked flowrish in all worldly iollitie, when
as the godly are afflicted with many miseries; as it is notably observed and at
full described both by Job, David and Jeremy. Thus we see Abell Ier. 12. 1.
murdered, and Caine waxing great and building cities, Pharaoh and the
Egiptians reigning as Lords and tyrants, and the poor Israelites making
brick, beaten and misused; Nebuchadneser like a great monarch ruling over
nations, and the people of God subdued and led into miserable captivity. And
the experience of our own times teaches us, that we cannot conclude that we
are in Gods favor and in the state of salvation, because we thrive in the
world and have good success in all our endeauours, seeing by this reason we
might infer that the great Magor, the Turk, Persian and many other Infidels
and Pagans were better beloved of God then Christian Princes, and among
Christians many profane and carnal men, then the sincere lovers of Gods
truth; because they more abound in these worldly blessings. But of this point
I shall need to say little here, seeing, I have written so much of this
argument in my second part of this Christian War-fare.

Sect. 5. That a civil life is not sure sign that we are in the state of
grace and salvation.
And thus the flesh abuses those who are professed worldlings: Neither does it
deal less deceiptfully with those that make some show of religion; the which
are of two sorts civil iusticiaries and temporary hypocrites. Concerning the
former, it persuades them, that they are in good estate because they live
ciuilly and unblameably among their neighbors in respect of notorious crimes
which are punishable by the laws of men; and makes them to bless themselves
because they are no murderers, adulterers, drunkards, thieves, perjured
persons, and covenant breakers; but contrariwise deal honestly with all men,
keep their word, pay every one their due, and sometimes also give an alms to
those that are in want and misery. And because in respect of their duty
toward God, they are of that religion which the Prince is of, and the Law
requires, and are no recusants, but come to the Church with the rest of their
neighbors, and there hear divine service, and the word preached, and receive
the Sacrament as often as the law inioyneth. Though in the mean time they are
utterly ignorant of the true God, his persons, nature and attributes of Jesus
Christ and his natures and offices, and the great work of redemption, and in a
word of all the principles of true religion. And though they make no conscience
of performing any duties of the first table (as of Prayer, hearing the Word;
receiving the Sacrament, sanctifying the Sabbath) in spirit and in truth, as
God requires, but only formally for custom and fashion sake, yet their
corrupt flesh makes them believe, that God will accept of their good meaning
and superstitious devotion, and will be well satisfied with their bodily
exercise and liplabour, though their hearts be far from him; yea though in
the very time of his service they set up idols in their hearts, and have all
their cogitations wholly taken up with their pleasures, profits and other
vanities of the world. But that we may not be overtaken with this deceit, let
us know and remember, that God will not accept of us, unless with David we
have respect unto all his commandments, and make Psalm. 119. 6.
conscience of performing as well, (yea principally) the duties of the first
table, as of the second; that the fear of God and his true religion* is the
head and first beginning of saving wisdom; and that it is but a counterfeit
and carnal Psalm. 111. 10.
righteousness, such as was in the heathens, which does not spring from the
root of piety; that we cannot have a lively faith without saving knowledge,
nor do any good works without faith; that without faith we cannot please
Heb. 11. 4. Romans 14. 23.
God, and whatsoever we do without it is sin. That if our justice arise not
from godliness, it is but merely moral civility, and if our love of our
brethren spring not from the clear fountain of Gods love; then it streameth
from the filthy puddle of self-love. Let us know that God will be worshipped,
not after the commandments of men, but after his own revealed will, and that
whosoever serve GOD principally because the princes law requires it, and not
because God commands it, he worshippeth his King above his God. That bodily
exercise profits 1 Timothy 4. 8.
nothing, and that the Lord will be worshipped in spirit and Ioh. 4. 24.
truth; that God regards not formal service which rises rather from custom
then conscience, and that the religion of the soul, is the soul of religion,
without which it is but a dead carkase. That God can endure no riuals in his
service, nor no halting between Jehovah and Baal, God and the world; he cannot
abide a double or divided heart, but he will either have all, or leave all to
the Devil and the world; and finally that our good meaning will be no current
payment in the day of account, seeing it has not Gods image and stamp upon
it, but is coined in the forge of our own brain, and has on it the print of
our own inventions, which the Lord esteems no better then high treason
against his royal crown and dignity.

Sect. 6. That a bare profession of the true religion is not sufficient for
salvation.
And thus the flesh deceives civil iusticiaries: the like deceit it uses
toward hypocrites, with whom it deals diversely according to their diverse
kinds. For either they are gross hypocrites, who though they make a great
show of religion, yet their lives are so evil and scandalous, that their
hypocrisy is detected and manifest, not only unto others, but also to their
own hearts and consciences; or more cunning and subtle, who by their outward
profession and seeming conformity to the law, deceive not only other men, but
themselves also. Concerning the former; the flesh deceives them with a vain
conceit that the bare profession of the true religion is sufficient for their
salvation without all practice and obedience, that it is enough to say that
they have faith, though they be utterly barren of all good Works, to cry,
Lord, Lord, though they neglect the will of our heavenly Father, that they be
hearers of the word, though they be not doers of it, and that they profess
that they know God, though in their works they deny him, being abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. But this is so contrary to the
whole course T^. 1. 16.
of the Scriptures, that who so is but a little conversant in them, may
plainly see, yea palpably feel this deceit* neither is it possible, that any
should be deluded with it, but those whom the god of this world has blinded,
and for want of love to the truth are given up of God to be seduced 2 These. 2.
11.
with strong delusions, and to believe lies. For there we shall Romans 2. 13.
plainly see, that these conceits are crossed and contradicted in direct and
express terms; namely that not the hearers but the doers of the word are
justified; that if we hear Iam. 1. 22. Ioh. 13. 17. Luke. 11. 28. Mat 7. 21.
Iam. 2. 14. 17. 26
and do not, we do but deceive our selves: that they only are blessed, who
hear the word and keep it; that not every one who says Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of our Father
which is in heaven; that it will naught avail us to boast of our faith, if it
do not appear in the fruits of good works, seeing such a faith as is without
works, is but a dead carkase, without life or soul, and therefore cannot
justify nor save us. So the Lord sharply reprehendeth and condemns wicked
men, for Psalm. 50. 16. 22.
making profession of his religion: Unto the wicked, says God, What have thou
to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my covenant in thy
mouth; seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? etc.
And then concludes: Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces and there be none to deliver. So the Prophet Jeremy. Behold ye trust in
lying words that cannot profit. Will ye steal murder, and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and Ier. 7. 8. 9.
burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods that ye know not, and
come and stand before me in this house which is called by my name, and say, we
are delivered to do all these abominations?

Sect. 7. The fleshes deceit in persuading men to rest in external ceremonies.
But if this deceit be too gross, as having nothing to color or countenance
it but the slight thin veil of a bare profession, then it will persuade us to
place all religion about external rites and ceremonies, and to think that we
have done enough, if we be strict in the observation of them, although in the
mean time we make no conscience of many Moral duties, and utterly neglect the
weighty things of the Law. So the Pharisees of old placed Mat. 23,
all their religion in some legal rites and humane traditions, in external
washings, sacrifices, and tything mynte, cummine and annise, and neglected the
duty of children to their parents, the pure and sincere service of God, and
the weighty points of the Law, judgment, mercy and faith. And the Apostle
tells us of some in his times, who placed all their religion in the
observation of days Sabbaths, Holidays, and New Moons, and in their
observance of certain ordinances, Col. 2. 16. 21.
as touch not, taste not, handle not, all which did perish with the using? And
wherein does in these days the religion of the Papists chiefly consist, but
in the observation of such holidayes, washings, purifications, fastings from
certain meats, at certain times, and in use of their rites and ceremonies
which they prefer before, and press more, then many Moral duties or the
essential parts of Gods service, with which they will much more easily
dispense, then with their traditions and superstitious inventions? With which
deceit if the flesh prevail not, it is ready to thrust us into the contrary
extreme, and to place all religion in the opposing of these superstitious
ceremonies, and to spend all our time which should be spent in attaining unto
the knowledge and practice of true godliness in declaiming against
will worship and humane traditions. As though it were enough to be free from
superstition, though we be destitute also of all true religion, to oppose
against false worship, though we do not practice that which is true, to be
zealous against ceremonies, and to be key-cold in embracing the substance,
truth, faith, mercy, judgment, brotherly kindness and the rest.

Sect. 8. The means to defeat the former policy.
But that we may not be overtaken with this deceit, nor be persuaded to spend
the strength of our devotion about ceremonies and things of small moment, let us
know, that there is no less order and due proportion, then justice and
judgment in the commandments of God, the Lord requiring that those things
which are chief and principal in their own nature should have the first and
chief place in our obedience. So the Moral duties are to be preferred before
ceremonial; and among them, our duty to God before our duty to our brethren,
the duties of greatest importance before the mean, and the mean before the
least. Which order who so transpose and will prefer the duties toward men
before their duty unto God and the ceremonies before the substance; such men's
religion is hypocritical and odious in Gods sight. Hence is it that the Lord
condemns Esa. 11. 12. 13
the Sabbaths New Moons, sacrifices, and solemn assemblies of the Jews,
because they put all their religion in them, and neglected judgment, mercy,
relieuing the oppressed, and judging the fatherless. Thus he condemns Esa.
58. 5.
their fasts and the afflicting of their souls by these bodily exercises,
because they were joined with strife and debate, oppression and cruelty, yea so
odious is this ceremonial service being severed from the more weighty and
substantial, that the Lord professes, that he that kills Esa. 66. 3.
an Ox, is as if he s^^e a man, he that sacrifices a Lamb, as he that
cutteth of a dogs neck, he that offreth an oblation, as he that offers
swines blood, he that burns incense as if he blessed an idol. So he
professes, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6.
not because he simply rejected sacrifices, which himself had commanded, but
if they were severed from mercy, or preferred before it. And says that he
spoke not unto their fathers, nor commanded them in the day that he brought
them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or Ier. 7. 22. 23.
sacrifices; but this thing (says he) commanded I them, saying, obey my
voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all
the ways that I have commanded you that it may be well unto you. Implying
hereby, that as these maine Moral duties were first commanded, so also they
should be first and chiefly practiced. Finally, the Apostle tells us that
true religion consists not in outward rites, signs and sacraments, but in
the truth and sincerity of the heart; Circumcision (says he) verily
profits, if thou be a keeper of the Law, but if thou be a breaker of the law
thy Romans 2. 25. 28
circumcision is made uncircumcision; For he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But he
is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

CHAP. XIII. Of the policies of the flesh toward temporary believers.
. Sect. 1. That the flesh in a subtle sort deceives temporaries.
ANd thus the flesh deceives the grosser kind of hypocrites: But when men
have received such a measure of illightening, that these dark fogges and
mistes of ignorance are somewhat dispelled, and have their sleepie consciences
somewhat awakened, so that they are able and ready to tell them that all which
is formerly spoken of, will be to little purpose, if they make no further
progress in the ways of God; Then the flesh uses more refined and subtle
policies, and condemning as much as any others carnal Gospellers, civil
iusticiaries and gross hypocrites, it persuades them to be like Agryppa
almost, (and but almost) Christians; and to rest in some shadows and mere
counterfaits of saving graces and Christian obedience, which are so like unto
them, that unless they be brought to the all discovering light of Gods word,
and diligently examined by this touch stone of truth, they can hardly be
discerned, I will not say by others (which is merely impossible) but even by
those that have them. And this is the estate of temporary believers in whom
there is almost nothing wanting which is in sound Christians but sincerity and
truth. For they are allowed by their sinful flesh to be as like Christians
as possibly may be, so they be not so indeed and to run before many true
believers in outward duties, and even to knock at heaven gates, so that they
will there rest but for a time and never enter. They have knowledge often times
in far greater measure then many of Gods dear children; faith, repentance,
obedience, and that in such a degree, that in outward appearance many true
Christians come far short of them. And therefore seeing above all deceipts
this is most deceitful, we are to bend all our care and study that we may
discover and defeat it.

. Sect. 2. That we must labor to have all spiritual graces in sincerity and
truth. and first our knowledge.
To which purpose we must not only labor to have all saving graces, and to
be enabled unto the performance of all Christian duties; but also after
assurance that they are in us and done by us in sincerity and truth. And to
this purpose we are often to examine and weigh them in the balance of the
sanctuary, and to observe the infallible marks and signs, whereby our true
graces and virtuous actions may be discerned, not only from vices and gross
corruptions, but also from these near counterfaits and shadows of them, which
are insubtill hypocrites and temporary believers. For there we shall find
that though the knowledge of temporaries be in respect of the measure very
great, yet it fails in the quality and effects; for it is barely learned by
hearing and reading, and not taught by the spiritual annoynting, whereof the
Apostle speaks 1 Ioh. 2. 20.
which the faithful only receive: it is much inspeculation and theorie; and
little in practice, spiritual power, feeling and repentance; and they know the
things of God appertaining to salvation, as a man knows a strange land by
reading which he never travailed; whereby he is enabled to discourse of it,
and of the fruits and benefits contained in it, though he never tasted them,
nor has any hope ever to enjoy them; whereas the true believer, though he be
in his pilgrimage, yet knows heaven and heavenly things, as his own
country, and the blessings contained in it, of which he has already tasted
and had feeling experience, and is assured after a while when he has finished
his journey to have the full fruition of them. And hereof it is that the
knowledge of the hypocrite brings small joy and comfort with it, and though
it exceed in measure, yet it cheareth not the heart, like the least knowledge
of a sound Christian, even as the knowledge of the Lawyer in the evidences of a
man's lands may be greater then the owners: but yet he cannot read them with
like comfort, because he has no right unto them.

. Sect. 3. How we may discern a true iustifing faith: from that which is
temporary.
So also hypocrites and temporaries have faith whereby they not only know and
believe the whole word of God and the promises of the Gospel to be true, but
also give their assent unto them, yea make some kind of application of them
unto themselves; And yet there are diverse essential differences between this
faith of hypocrites and of true believers. For first they differ in their
causes, the one being wrought by the ministry of the Gospel made effectual
by the inward cooperation of Gods Spirit; the other by Satan and carnal
corruption, abusing and misapplying of these promises in Christ. Secondly in
their grounds; for a lively faith is grounded upon Gods revealed truth, but
the faith of hypocrites upon no other ground then the false suggestions of
Satan, unwarranted conceits, carnal security and fond presumption, which
cause the hypocrite to apply unto himself the mercies of God, and merits of
Christ, and the sweet promises of the Gospel when as he is in no sort
qualified and fitted according to the word to receive or have any interest in
them. For before we can believe with a true faith, we must be humbled in the
sight and sense of our sins, we must deny our selves and become vile in our
own eyes and have an hungring and thirsting after Christ and his
righteousness, and an high valuation and esteem of them above all things in
the world, all which are wanting in the says of hypocrites. Thirdly true faith
is joined with unfeigned love of God, for he that is assured that much is
forgiven him, he loves much, not only God himself but his neighbors, yea
even his enemies for Gods sake, and those above all the rest in whom he
discerns the image of God m^st clearly shining: But the faith of hypocrites
being always accompanied with self-love makes a man to value himself above
all things, yea God himself the chief goodness. Fourthly where there is true
faith there is always a sore combat and conflict between the flesh and the
spirit, between faith purifying the heart, and unbelief laboring to retain
the pleasures of sin and all our ^nbred corruptions which are pleasing or
profitable: but the faith of hypocrites is still quiet and peaceable because it
is nothing but carnal presumption, which being corrupt and sinful agrees
well with other corruptions; neither does Satan move, or as much as in him
lies suffer to be moved of any questions, because he would possess all
things in peace, and not have his kingdom divided in it self. Secondly, true
faith is the instrument of a mutual donation, for as it receives Christ who
is given us of God, so it offers and consecrateth our bodies and souls unto
Christ who by the gift of God has as much right unto us as we unto him: But
the faith of hypocrites would have part in Christ and all his benefits, but
Christ must have no part in them, or if any at all, he must be contented with
their tongue only, whereas the world and the devil must have their hearts.
Secondly, true faith is not easily daunted or dismayed, but commonly shines
most clearly in the dark night of afflictions, and manifests it self in it
chief strength, when carnal reason will minister no comfort; but the faith of
hypocrites rests only upon the proppe of worldly prosperity which being
pulled away sinketh and fails; and whilst this fair green blade, which
springs out of the stony ground, is moystened with the dew of temporal
benefits, it sprouteth up and flowrisheth; but no sooner does the sun of
affliction and persecution arise but presently it withers and fades. Lastly
true faith is always a living and fruitful faith, and is continually
exercised in good works and Christian duties, and in love and obedience
toward God; but the faith of hypocrites is dead, barren and fruitelesse, or if
it bear any fruits at all, yet have they no respect to God, but are done out
of pride or self-love, for fear of punishments or hope of rewards. But more
of this afterward.

. Sect. 4. The difference between true and false repentance.
Thus also the hypocrite has some kind of repentance, the which the flesh
commends unto him as greeing well enough with it self, and that to this end
that he may content himself with it and never labor after sound repentance.
Which deceit that we may prevent we are to learn and observe the many
differences between this counterfaite and false repentance and that which is
sound and sincere. For true repentance springs from a lively faith assuring
us of Gods love, which causes us to bewail our Zach. 12. 10 Luke 15. 18.
sins, because by them we have displeased our gracious God, who so loves
us, and whom we so love: but the sorrow of hypocrites rises from infidelity
and self-love, which makes us mourn because by our sins we have made our
selves obnoxious to punishments. Godly sorrow arises from a true hatred of
sin, which being odious unto us as an ugly serpent, or grievous as an heavy
burden, does cause us to sorrow and mourn because we cannot be rid of it,
nor shake it off; but worldly sorrow from our love of sin, because we are
loath to leave it, and yet must needs for fear of further punishment. Godly
sorrow drives the sinner to God with David and makes him to humble himself,
acknowledge his sin and ask pardon; But the sorrow of hypocrites drives
men from God, and makes them to deny their sin, or to excuse and and minse
it. Godly sorrow works a change and alteration to amendment of life; but the
hypocrite though he hangs down his head like a bulrush for a day, and
blubbreth his cheeks with tears, yet either he leaves not his sin at all
or only as he leaves and puts of his clothes with a purpose to resume and
put them on the next day. Godly sorrow does chiefly respect the sin,
whereby the Christian has offended God, but the sorrow of hypocrites looks
chiefly to the punishment whereby they have displeased themselves. Finally,
the sorrow of the faithful is constant and continual from the first day of
conversion to the end of their lives; but the sorrow of hypocrites is but by
flashes and spurts, and commonly cease when they are freed from their smart
and pain.

Sct. 5. The differences between the obedience of the faithful and of
hypocrites.
The like differences also we may observe in the other part of repentance
which is amendment of life and new obedience. For the obedience of the
faithful springs from their faith and love of God, but the obedience of
hypocrites from self-love and carnal respects; the faithful propound unto
all their good works the glory of God as their chief end: but the hypocrite
propounds to himself chiefly his own good and that in worldly and carnal
repects. The true believer performs total obedience in respect of the
subject, with all the powers and parts of his soul and body: but the hypocrite
contenteth himself with bodily exercise which is without the power of
godliness, and does not worship God in spirit and truth, nor with a willing
and cheerful heart, but contradicting the Romans 7.
Apostles speech he may say, the evil which I love, that do I not, but the
good which I hate that do I. So also the faithful Christian performs total
obedience in respect of Psalm. 119. 6.
the object, and having regard unto all Gods Commandments, he flees from all
sin and embraces all holy duties: yea above all sins, hates those most
which cleave fastest unto him, and labors most to bring his heart to the
love of those duties to which naturally he is most backward. But the hypocrite
seeming to make conscience of one table neglects the other, or if he
forsakes many sins and does many duties; yet he has some darling sins
which he holds as sweet under his tongue, which he will by no Job. 20. 12.
means part with, and some duties there are so contrary to his corrupt nature,
that there is no arguments that can be used which can move him to practice
them. Finally the obedience of the faithful is constant and permanent, and the
longer it continues, the more it grows and increases but the obedience of
hypocrites is unconstant and by fits only and flashes; and commonly like a
naughty jade he is most free and forward in the beginning of the journey, but
quite tired before he come near unto the end.

Sect 6. The fleshes deceit in moving us to leave of from doing good duties
that we may avoid hypocrisy.
And thus we may defeat the policies of the flesh, whereby it draws us to
hypocrisy: wherewith if it cannot prevail with us, it will labor to draw us
into the contrary extreme; and because hypocrisy is odious unto us, it will
move us more to disguise and bide our profession of religion, to refrain from
all good speeches, which might glorify God, and edify our brethren, to
conform our selves to their fashions which bear us company in outward show
though in heart we be far unlike them, and to neglect all good actions and
holy duties, as meditation, fasting, prayer, giving of alms or to do them in
great secrecy, and ^s it were by stealth, for fear lest men taking notice of
them, should think us too glorious in our outward show, and condemn us of
hypocrisy. The which conceit so ouerswayeth with diverse who are otherwise
good Christians, that they are ashamed and ready to b^ush, when they are taken
at unawares in doing religious duties; as though they were guilty of some
great fault. And so much the rather because the most godly Christians, having
the relics of hypocrisy, as of all other sins remaining in them, are
guilty to themselves of this corruption, as finding it often to prevail with
them, and therefore labor with so much the more diligence to avoid all
semblance and appearance of it. With which deceit that we may not be overtaken
let us consider, that we ought not so to avoid the show of hypocrisy, as that
we do in truth shun Christian apology and profession, whereby God is to be
glorified, and our neighbors edified: that we fall into the sin of
hypocrisy indeed, whilst we thus labor to fly the appearance of it; for it
is hypocrisy to seem that we are not, and disguising and dissembling our
religious and honest hearts under the outward show of a carnal conversation,
to appear worldlings, when in truth we are sincere, though weak Christians:
as Jacob though to a better end, took upon him the habit of Esau, whose
profaneness he hated. Let us know that we dishonor God, when we hide and
dissemble his gifts and graces in us, and wrong our neighbors who might walk
in our light, if we did not cover it (as it were) under a bushel; and that
they in some degree are ashamed of Christ and his truth who dare not before
worldlings either profess it in their words, or practice it in their works.
Let us remember that our Savior requires not only that we should have the
light of holiness in our selves, but that we should also, let it shine before
men, that Mat. 5. 8.
they seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in heaven; only
he condemns these outward shows of good works when as thereby we do not
seek Gods glory, but our own. And the Apostle charge Christians to have
their conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas 1 Pet 2. 11.
they spoke against them as evil doers, they might by their good works, which
they should behold, glorify God in the day of Psalm. 119 46.
visitation. That David professed his love to Gods commandments before Princes
and was not ashamed; and that Daniel would not smother for a few days his
practical profession of religious duties, though it were to the extreme
hazard of his life. Let us consider that one special duty of Christianity
which we owe unto our neighbors is, that we shine before them by our holy
example, which is required in the sixth commandment, as a means of preserving
the life of their souls, and therefore that we are guilty of spiritual
murder if we neglect it. Finally seeing carnal worldlings are not ashamed to
profess their service and allegiance to their master Satan, but with all
boldness utter blasphemous oaths, ribald words and rotten speeches which
corrupt the hearers, and audaciously perform all sinful actions, which are
without the compass of men's law, not caring who hear or see them; let it be
our shame, to be ashamed of the service of our great Lord and Master, who is so
infinitely good in himself and gracious toward us; but let us with all
confidence and courage perform all holy Christian duties which we owe unto
him, though we live in the midst of an adulterous and sinful generation:
lest being ashamed before such of Christ Mark. 8. 38.
and his words, he be ashamed of us, when he comes in the glory of his
Father with his holy Angels.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the policies of the flesh in alluring and persuading us to
sin.
Sect 1. The first policy to persuade us that sin is no sin.
WE have spoken briefly of the deceipts of the flesh which respect our persons
and estates; and now we are to speak of the other which concern certain
duties which God requires; the which are of two sorts, the first respect the
withstanding, subduing and mortifying of our sins; the other the exercise and
practice of virtuous actions. Concerning sin, God requires two things of us;
the first that we should not commit or fall into it; the second that being
fallen we should not securely live and lie in it, but rise out of it by
unfeigned repentance. Against both which the flesh opposes, using many policies
and deceipts first to draw us to the committing of sin, and having committed
it to continue in it without repentance. To the former purpose it uses diverse
deceipts. As first it puts upon the foul face of sin a fair vizard, and
dresseth this filthy strumpet in the habit of virtue; it adorneth it with
borrowed ornaments, and beautifieth it with false colors; in titling wicked
vices, with virtuous names, ^s though it would commend nothing unto us, but
what God himself commands. Thus that we may embrace and live in it, the
flesh graceth superstition with the name of devotion, doubting and infidelity,
with the name of humility, security and presumption, it calls faith and
affiance in God; Choler and unjust anger, zeal for Gods glory; lust it
terms love, drunkenness good fellowship, prodigality, bounty and
munificence, and base niggardliness and covetousness good husbandry and
frugalitie. And having thus marshalled and raunged these foul vices in the
rank of virtues, and beautified them with these false and borrowed colors, it
does further authorize them by testimonies of Scriptures, and not only offreth
them to our choice as things indifferent, or tolerable, but presses them upon
us as profitable and necessary. Which policy of the flesh if we would
defeat, we must first labor to be illightened with the knowledge of Gods
truth, and with the inward illumination of Gods Spirit, that so we may
discern between virtue and vice, good and evil, which are easily confounded
and mistaken the one for the other in the dark night of ignorance, and through
the natural blindness of our minds. Secondly, we must not take nor embrace
any thing suddenly, and rashly which Satan or our own corrupt flesh
commends unto us, but examine and try all things by the light of Gods Word,
and the touchstone of truth, which will plainly discover unto us what is to be
embraced, and what avoided, what to be treasured up in our hearts as pure gold
and good treasure, and what to be rejected as dross and base metal. Finally
we must labor to purge our hearts from pride and self-love, which above all
other things corrupt our judgments, making those things to seem lovely which
we love, and worthy our choice because we have chosen them. And contrariwise
we must adorn our selves with humility denying our own wills and carnal
lusts, make the will of God revealed in the Scriptures to be the rule of our
wills and the guide of our affections.

Sect. 2. The ^ec^nd policy to tell v^ that the sin is but small which it
persuades us to committ.
In the second place, if the flesh cannot persuade us that our sins are no
sins, but rather virtues, then it will entice us to commit them under this
color, that they are but small sins: telling us, that we cannot be Saints
on earth and pure from all sin, but must of necessity be subject to many
infirmities and frailties, that in many things we sin all, and that there is
no man so just on earth that sins not, that the righteous fall seven times a
day, and therefore that it is too much precisenes to stand so strictly on every
triffle; and finally that the best of Gods children which ever lived have had
their imperfections, as Abraham his lie, Joseph his vain oath, Moses his
unbelief, Peter his dissimulation, etc. and that these are so venial in their
own nature, that either God will not punish them at all, or but very lightly.
For the defeating of which deceit let us know, that the least sin that is,
in it own nature, offends the infinite Majesty of God, provoke his fierce
wrath, subiecteth us to the curse of the Law, and makes Gal 3. 19
us liable, to eternal death and condemnation. For the guilt of sin is to be
measured not only by the act, but also by the object, and therefore seeing the
object is the infinite Majesty of God who is offended by the least sin, ^t
becomes, after a sort of infinite guile, and so delerueth infinite
punishment. The which answerably should be inflicted upon him who least
offends, if Christ by bearing his small, as well as his great sins in his
body upon the cross, had not freed him from it. And therefore let us think no
sin small which provoke God unto anger and offends his infinite Majesty;
let us think no sin in it own nature slight and venial, which plungeth a
man into everlasting death and condemnation, and which can no otherwise be
purged away and pardoned, but by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. Secondly
let us know that there are no sins small unto them who think them so; for
sin is not to be measured so much by the matter and act of it, as by the
form and maliciousness of it; in which respect willing entertainment given to
any finne, makes it to become wilful, and presuming that we may live in it
because it is but a little one, makes it to be a sin of presumption, and so
exceeding great and worthy of the greatest punishment; as we see in the
example of him, who would needs gather sticks on the Sabbath, because he
presumed that this was a small and tolerable breach of Leuit. 24. 10.
Gods commandment. To this purpose tends the speech of our Savior, that
he who neglects and breaks the least of Gods commandments, and teaches
men so, he shall be the least (that is none at all) in the kingdom of heaven.
Man. 5. 19.
Thirdly, even our least sins, if God should let us feel the weight of them,
would be an intolerable burden, and so sting our conscience that we should
never rest, as the experience of many afflicted in mind does plainly
manifest; and therefore let us think no sin light which with the weight
thereof, if it should lie upon us, would crush and press us into hell.
Fourthly let us know that there is no less danger in small sins then in those
which are great and heinous, first because as these exceed them in their
quality or quantity, so they exceed these in number, as being common and
ordinary. Now as the ship will be sunk as well by many small holes, if they
be not stopped, as at a great leake, and may be ouerburthened and perish as
well by a multitude o^ small pibbles, as by a few milstones: so may our souls
sink and perish if they be surcharged with a multitude of lesser sins, as
well as with heinous sins being rarely committed. Secondly because small
sins are commonly accompanied with impenitency, security and hardness of
heart; and men not regarding them, do like and live in them without desire of
amendment; whereas those which are heinous, making deep wounds and gashes in
the heart and conscience, do cause men to be more sensible of them, and more
earnest in looking after the core; as we may see in the example of the Pharisees
and publicans: now our other sins though never so damnable, yet will not
condemn us, if they be not joined with impenitencie, and contrariwise the most
venial sin will prove unpardonable, if we live and dye in it without
repentance. Whereof it is that our Savior tells the Pharisees, that
Publicanes and sinners should go to heaven before them. For as small sparks
of fire lighting in combustible matter, will if they be not quenched burn a
whole City, and contrariwise a great flame does little hurt if it be speedily
put out; so if the least sparks of sin be nourished with the oil o^
security it will prove dangerous and damnable whereas, though it be a great
flame of wickedness, it will not do that hurt, if we soon extinguish and
quench it with the tears of repentance. Lastly, let us know that the
allurements which the flesh uses to make us live in small sins without
repentance are vain and frivolous. For if we do not desire and endeavor to
be Saints on earth, we shall never become Saints in heaven, if we do not
labor to shake off daily our imperfections, and to grow unto more perfection
in this life, we shall never attain unto it in the life to come; if we do
not seek to be pure in heart, we shall never be blessed in the vision of God.
If we be not precise and conscionable in flying Mat. 5. 8.
the least sins, we shall surely become secure and presumptuons. Moreover let
us remember that the least sins are not fraileties and infirmities, if we live
in them securely and wilfully; as contrariwise the greatest may deserve this
name if we commit them suddenly, and rise out of them speedily. Even as a man
may be said to fall through weakness and infirmity into a deep gulf, when
as slipping at unawares he uses all his endeavor to recover himself; and on
the other side it is not weakness but wilfulness, if he fall but into a
shallow ditch, if he will not labor to get out again, but lies grouelling
in the water until he be drowned. Let us know, that though in many things we
sin all, yet they who belong to God do not make a trade of wilful sinning,
and being sometime overtaken they are not at rest till they have risen again by
unfeigned repentance and though there be none so just who sins not, yet all
who will be saved, must be so just as not to suffer it to reign in them. And
finally that though the best of the Saints, Patriarchs and Apostles had their
infirmities, yet none of them could ever be found that nourished, defended and
continued in them wittingly and willingly, after their judgments have been
rightly informed and their consciences convinced. And therefore the examples of
their slips will not countenance our wilful sins, no not our least
infirmities, yea rather it will make us the more inexcusable if seeing them
fall (as it were) before us, we do not look the better to our footing.

Sect 3. The third policy to tell us that if we commit lesser sins, they will
preserve us from greater.
Thirdly, the flesh deals most deceiptfully with us, whilst it persuades
and inticeth us to entertain some smaller and lesser sins, promising that it
will rest contented with them, and crave no more, and so these lesser sins
shall serve as preservatives to keep us from those which are great and
heinous, and these small allowances, being given to these sauadge beasts, our
sensual and unruly lusts, shall keep them in quiet, which if they be too much
restrained and famished will with violence break all bonds and with outrageous
cruelty utterly destroy us. And thus it persuades us, that if we will let the
world have quiet possession of some little corner of our hearts, God shall for
his share have all the rest; that if we will use small oaths, as ornaments to
our speech, it will never move us to dishonor God by outrageous blasphemies;
that if we will at least in some companies, either to please them or advantage
our selves, dissemble our religion, and be seemingly conformable to their
example; we may still be as zealous in our hearts as ever we were, and never be
in danger of relapsing to worldlines and prophanenes. That if we will not be
ouerstrict in sanctifying Gods Sabbaths, we shall be the more constant in
ordinary duties: that if we will use wanton dalyance, and give our tongues
liberty to utter obscene and ribald speeches, our flesh will rest contented and
never move us to commit filthiness in act: that if we will use deceit, usury
and oppression for a time till we have gotten some competency of estate, we
shall leave these unlawful courses, when as we are not pressed unto them by
any necessity. Whereby it grossly abuses us, and from one degree of sin
draws us unto another, using lesser sins as strong cords to draw on
greater, as the small point of the piercer which makes way for all the rest,
and the Devils pioners to smooth the passage, that he may easily bring against
us the greatest ordinance. For who sees not by daily experience that those who
make the world sha^ers with God, do in the end give it possession of the
whole, that those who swear vainly in their ordinary communication, within a
while make no conscience of forswearing and blasphemy; that dissimulation in
religion brings to abnegation and apostasy. That neglect of holy duties ends
commonly in open profanation; that filthy words draw many on to filthy
actions, and that when once men have given way to unlawful courses for the
getting of some small competency, they will much more continue in them for the
obtaining of abundance. Neither in truth is any other thing reasonably to be
expected; For do we think that we can drive away beggars from our doors by
using every day to cast them scraps, or that they will be weary of craving till
they see us to be weary of giving? Can we quench the fire of our concupiscence
by casting oil upon it? Or satisfy our dropsy desires by giving them a
little drink? Is it a safe way to let little thieves which are of the same
company lodge in our houses, to keep out great one, and preserve our goods? Is
it the best means to set fire on the Kitchen, that the rest of the house may
be preserved from burning? And will it not rather creep from thence to the
Hall, Parlour and the rest of the building. Finally is it held good policy to
give our enemy leave, to make some small breaches in our walls, whereby he may
enter and surprise us, to suffer him to have some competent allowance and quiet
possession in some corners of our Cities, and not rather to keep him aloof,
and utterly to starve and famish him, so as he may have no strength to assault
and endanger us? Again let us know that there being no other argument to
restrain us from sin, but Gods commandment, when we have broken our bounds,
by giving way to lesser sins, we are ready to grow loose and dissolute, for
he that in one thing neglects Gods commandment, has as great reason to
neglect it in another. That we quench the Spirit by these voluntary sins,
and by polluting his lodging do make him weary of it, and (if we do not
cleanse it by unfeigned repentance) utterly abandon it and so leave the full
possession to Satan and our own lusts. Let us consider that we cannot
satisfy our liquorous lusts by giving them a taste of sin, which is so sweet
to their pallet, but shall hereby make them much more greedy and eager; and
that we may better stand firmly on the hill top, then when we have begun
running to stay our selves till we come to the bottom. Finally let us
remember, that no man who has had any show of goodness, does at once become
curragiously wicked, but by degrees, one sin drawing him on to another, and the
lesser to the greater, till at last many particular acts bring men to a custom
and often use grow to an habit.

Sect. 4. The fourth policy is to persuade us that we are in no danger of
falling into some sins.
Fourthly the flesh oftentimes deceiues us by bringing us into careless
security, whilst it makes us believe, that there is no danger of falling
into some sins; for when it cannot persuade us that sin is no sin, or if
any at all, yet so small and venial that we may live in them without peril to
our souls, or hazard of our salvation, then it is ready to suggest, that there
is no cause why we should fear falling into many sins, because they are so
heinous and monstrous, and we not only in our natures are so auerse unto them,
but also have received such a measure of grace and strength, that no
allurements can draw us to them. Thus when the Prophet told Hazaell what
horrible outrages he should commit, he was so blinded with this deceit of the
flesh, that he would not believe it, but cried out unto him, what is thy
servant a dog, that I should do such things. And when our Savior told
Peter, that he should 2 King. 8. 13.
deny and abjure him, consulting only with his flesh, he was ready to presume
upon his own strength, and rather doubted of his Masters truth, then of his
own courage and fidelity. Now by this decipt we are made wretchlesse and
secure, and keep no watch over our selves, because we fear no assault of such
enemies, whereby it comes to pass that we are supprised at unawares, and
carried captive of sin because we never expected, and therefore never armed
our selves against such mighty enemies; as we may see in the example of David
who having long made conscience of small infirmities and seriously repented
even for his secret slips and least sins, never feared falling into adultery
and murder, and so was the more easily overcome, because he neglected his
watch and suspected no danger. And thus Lot having been preserved pure from
the filthiness of Sodom, was overtaken by incest, when having no other
company with him but his own daughters he grew secure and feared nothing; for
the defeating of which policy let us consider that whilst we live in this
world, we are but in part regenerate, and that in our flesh as there dwells
no good thing, so contrariwise, there lie secretly lurking the seeds of all
sins, which are ready continually to sproute and shoot forth, when they are
watered and warmed with Satan's temptations, if they be not nipped and
restrained by the sanctifying grace of Gods holy spirit; that our hearts so
far forth as they are unregenerate, are a sincke of sin and a sea and gulf
of wickedness, wherein the devil c^sting the spawne of his temptations,
begets ugly monsters of all sorts both small and great. And that as our
bodies when they are at the purest, have in them sufficient matter for all
manner of diseases, so our souls being much more corrupted are aptly disposed
to any sin. Secondly, knowing and remembering that through this corruption we
are prone to all sin, let this humble us in the sight of our frailty and
weakness, and cause us with more earnestness to crave Gods assistance and
denying our selves to rest on his strength, which alone is able to preserve us
from falling. Thirdly, let this move us to shake off all carnal security and
presumption of our own graces, and to keep continually a narrow watch over
our hearts, that we be not at unawares overtaken through the deceitfulness of
sin. Let it make us to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, as
the Apostle exhorts, and whilst we think we stand take heed of falling.
Phil. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Let us be persuaded hereby to labor and endeavor daily to purge our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and finish our sanctification in
the fear of God. Finally, let 2 Cor. 7. 1.
us remember that the man is blessed that fears always. But as for those who
harden their hearts, through security and Pro. 28. 12.
presumption; they are of all others most ready to fall into all evil and
mischief.

Sect. 5. The fifth policy i^ to persuade us that we may safely use the means
and occasions of sin.
A fifth policy which the flesh uses to draw us unto sin, is to persuade
us, that we may safely use the means and occasions of sin, and yet be
preserved from the sin it self. And thus Lot was allured to drink
excessiuely, never suspecting his falling into that brutish drunkenness, and
much less that abominable incest with his own daughters. Thus David securely
lived in idleness and wantonness, never thinking, that these would be the
means to bring him to whoredom. Thus Solomon gave his strength unto women,
and defiled himself with unlawful lusts, never imagining that this corporal
whoredom would be the occasion and means to make him commit also spiritual
whoredom with Idols and strange Gods. Thus Iehosaphat lincked himself with
wicked Ahab by marrying his daughter, and yet supposed that he should no way
be tainted with his impieties; and Peter presumed that he should be constant
in his love to his master; and the profession of the truth, and yet
consorteth himself with the high Priests servants. And thus in our times many
think that they may be safely present at the Mass and idolatrous service, yea
themselves have about them many means and occasions of idolatry, and yet not
fall into the sin it self; many think they may ordinarily swear and yet
never commit the sin of perjury; that they may nourish covetousness, and yet
never commit theft, fraud, oppression or any injustice; that they may drink,
pamper the belly and use all manner of wanton dalliance, and yet be far enough
off from fornication and adultery. Now that we may not be abused with this
deceit, let us consider, that where the Lord forbids any sin, there he
also forbids the occasions and means thereof* because those who do not
carefully avoid these, they cannot possibly escape the other. That they who
go in the way will (though the never think of it) come thereby to the town or
place to which it leads. That if we always walk upon the ice or slipperie
places, we shall ever be in danger of falling, and often fall though we be
never so weary; and therefore the Psalmist pronounces him blessed, who has
not walked in the way of sinners. That as they who use surfeiting and
drunkenness, yea drink dangerous poisons, cannot look to enjoy Psalm. 1. 1.
their health, because they use the means which bring men ordinarily to
sickness and death; so they who use the means of falling into sin which is
the sickness of their souls, cannot look to enjoy the life of grace, but
will quickly fall into spiritual diseases which in the end will bring them to
utter destruction. Finally, that they who use the means and occasions of evil
do desperately run into temptations presume of their own strength, and so
are Eccle. 3. 26.
given over of God; and being abandoned of his assistance, must needs fall and
come to ruin; for he that loves danger shall perish therein.

Sect 6. The sixth policy i^ to draw us by degres to commit heinous sins.
Sixthly, the flesh oftentimes deceives us, by drawing and intycing us by
degrees to the committing of those sins which are most great and heinous, as
first to look and cast wanton glaunces, then to lust, then to consent to the
committing of the fact, then to plot and devise of the means, how it may be
effected, then to the act it self, and lastly to the often reiterating of the
same sin. Thus first it defiles the heart with covetousness, then causes
it to be discontented with our state and portion, then to covet other men's
goods, and finally to devise and put in practice the means whereby they may
be gotten from them, as fraud, deceit, extorsion, oppression and such like
unlawful courses. And thus it draws us into all kinds of wickedness, by
alluring us to keep company with those that love and live in it, then for
carnal and by-respects to wincke at and tolerate their sins whose persons we
affect; then to think them light and venial; then for company sake to commit
them, least we should be thought more precise and scrupulous then the rest of
our consorts; and finally to defend our wickedness, yea to boast and brag of
it, as though it were some virtuous action and much for our credit to live in
it. And thus it brings us to the highest step of the ladder of wickedness,
unto which it could never have mounted us, unless it had carried us by these
degrees; and makes us embrace the most heinous sins, as it were our choysest
friends, which before we took for our greatest enemies, and therefore hated
and avoided them, by bringing us first acquainted with all the allies, friends
and attendants which wait upon them. For the preventing of which deceit our
best course is to keep a narrow watch over our selves that we be not thus
overtaken; specially over our own hearts, that we may withstand the first
motions unto sin and even crush it in the shell that it may never come to
hatched. Secondly, to take notice of our least sins, that we may not
securely live in them, but having fallen may recover our selves by unfeigned
repentance And lastly that seeing our selves are too too retchlesse and secure,
we do often and unfeignedly desire the Lord to watch over us, and by his spirit
to waken our consciences that they may admonish us of the evil which we are
ready to fall into, and so prevent the committing of it, or accuse us being
fallen that we may arise again by repentance, and afterward be made more
careful of our ways.

Sect. 7. The seventh policy is to draw us from things indifferent to sin.
A seventh policy of the flesh is, to draw us from that which indifferent and
in it own nature lawful, unto that which is unlawful and sinful; for
whereas things indifferent are not simply good, but only in their right and
moderate use, the flesh allureth us to abuse them through immoderation and
excess, whereby they become sinful and evil. Thus because the creatures
are good in their own nature: and the blessing of God unto us if they be
sanctified by the word and prayer, and be used soberly for the better fitting
and enabling us to Gods service, and for the performance of all religious and
Christian duties, the flesh allureth us to love them excessiuely more then the
creator himself and then all saving graces and heavenly happiness, and so
chiefly to value, affect and seek them and to place all our happiness in the
fruition of them. Thus because riches, honors and pleasures, are in their own
nature good, it persuades us to love them excessiuely, to set our hearts upon
them and seek them more diligently then the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and so through our abuse to make them become unto us shameful
Idols with which we commit sperituall whoredom. Thus because recreations are
lawful, if we use them lawfully, seasonably, and with moderation, that so we
may be the better enabled for the duties of Gods service, it allureth us to
abuse them through excess, and to spend all, or the chief part of our time in
them, whereby of recreations they become occupations, which take us wholly up,
and shoulder and thrust out all Christian duties of our callings with all
religious duties of Gods service, or to use them unseasonably on the Lords day,
which should be consecrated as holy unto him, and be wholly spent in divine
duties and religious exercises. So because meats and drinks are lawful and
of an indifferent nature, the flesh draws us to abuse them by intemperance
and excess, surfeiting and drunkenness, and so to become gross epicures who
make their belly their God. Because apparel is necessary to keep us warm
and hide our nakedness, the flesh persuades upon this ground to excessive
bravery, and strange attyers: because sleep is warrantable in the moderate use
of it, it allureth us to immoderate sloth and sluggishnesse, which consumes
our precious time, and so dulleth the spirits, that we are made unfit for any
good duties. And finally because honest mirth is commendable, it provoke us
securely to embrace carnal delights, and passing all bonds of sobriety, to
turn our mirth into madness, to the dishonor of God, the discredit of our
profession and the wounding of our own consciences. And thus the flesh
spurreth us on in the use of these things indifferent, and never suffers us
to rest, until we have wholly passed the bonds which God has set us, and have
turned our Christian and lawful liberty into unchristian and lawless
licentiousness. The which deceit is so much the more dangerous, because it
inticeth us to the embracing of those things, unto which we are naturally
carried and hurried with our carnal desires, and sinful appetites; as also
because the things wherein we offend are in our own nature lawful and the
good blessings of God, which makes us securely to use them, never suspecting
any danger. Now if we would not be overtaken with this policy, we must keep
a vigilant watch over our selves in the use of things indifferent, that our
liberty do not turn to libertinisme. Let us consider not only what is
lawful, but also what is expedient in respect time, place, persons and other
circumstances, which not being observed, things lawful in themselves become
unlawful unto us through our abuse; that they who will always do the
uttermost that they may, will often do that which they should not; and they who
will presumptuously walk upon the brinke of the river, will sometimes slip in
and be in danger to be drowned; that these things which are not absolutely
good, but of an indifferent nature, are unto us according as we use them, good
to those which use them well, and evil to those who abuse them unto sin;
that we are naturally exceeding inclinable to this abuse, if we be not very
watchful and wary; and finally that those things which are not simply good,
but as they are confined within their bonds and measure, their cautions and
conditions, become evil and unlawful, when these limits are exceeded and
these cautions not observed.

Sect 8. The eighth policy is to persuade us to sin by the examples of the
saints.
Finally the flesh persuades us to sin, by proposing unto us the example of
the Saints; and that either enticing us to embrace sin generally, because all
of them generally have sinned; or else alluring us unto particular sins, by
propounding unto us particular examples; and as it were special patrons for
every kind of wickedness. As for example Noah and Lot for drunkenness, David
for whoredom and murder; Jeremy and Jonah for murmuring and impatiency, Peter
for denying of Christ and dissembling of our profession. For the defeating of
which deceit let us consider that the virtues of these men and not their vices
are propounded unto us for imitation; yea that their sins are ^et before us,
that seeing their falls we should be more watchful and wary, or being
fallen we should not despair, but be encouraged to rise with them by unfeigned
repentance. Finally let us know, that without this repentance we can have no
comfort by their example; and that if we do soundly repent with them, it will
cause in us many a deep sigh and doeful groan, and so we^ all find much more
bitterness in our sorrow, then we have done sweetness in our sin, and
that where as the delight was vain and momentarie, the grief will be great and
permanent. And therefore look not upon David sporting himself in his
unlawful lusts, but Psalm. 38. 6. and 6. 6.
behold him afterward when he is bowed and goes crooked under the weight of
his sin, complaining as a man affrighted with the terrors of conscience and
rejected of God, making tears his food, and watering his couch with them.
Look not upon Peter saving himself by forswearing his master, but behold him
afterward weeping bitterly. Finally look not upon the Church delighting her
self with her lovers, and with that spiritual whoredom committed with them;
but listen unto her pitiful lamentations, when being led into captivity, she
is grievously afflicted for her sins.

CHAP. XV. Of the policies which the flesh uses to hinder our repentance.
Sect 1. The first policy is to persuade us) that our common sins are no sins,
and our heinous sins small and venial.
WE have spoken of some special and notable deceipts which the flesh uses to
allure us to the committing of sin; and now we are briefly to consider of
some other which it uses, to make us being fallen to continue in our sins
without repentance. The first whereof is to blind or hinder the eyes of our
understandings, and to corrupt and delude our judgments, that we may think
our common sins to be no sins, and our great and heinous ones to be small
and venial, with which deceit we are the more easily abused if we thrive and
prosper in our evil courses, and have not our eyes cleared by the sharp
waters of afflictions. For when God suffers us to go on in our evil ways
without check, we either think that he approves, or not much misliketh them;
or else continue securely in them and never call them to examination. For the
defeating of which policy the best means are first, diligent studying and
meditating in the book of God, which is that all-sufficient light whereby we
may discover these works of darkness, and that most upright judge, which not
only adiudgeth what is good and evil but also in what measure and degree.
Secondly, that we often pray unto God that our eyes may be anointed with the
eye-salue of his grace and holy spirit, that being cured o^ their natural
blindness, they may be able to discern between evil and good, darkness
and light. Finally, that we do not live in carnal security, but often
examine our works and ways by the rule and square of Gods word, and
especially those wherein we thrive and prosper, and so we shall perceive
plainly which are just and straight, and which are crooked, and also in what
measure and degree.

Sect. 2. The second policy is to extenuate and cover our sins with vain
excuses* as first corruption of nature.
Secondly if it cannot persuade us that our sins are no sins, then it will
extenuate and cover them with vain excuses, and make them so little light, and
venial, that as it will make us believe, we may without danger continue in
them. And first it pretends corruption of nature and human frailty* which
is so great in all men, that do what they can, they must needs be guilty of
many sins. But in this we may vanquish our flesh with it own weapon, for
therefore we should not give willing entertainment unto any sin, because
through our infirmity, and the strength of natural corruption, many will
thrust in upon us whether we will or no; therefore we should fight the more
courageously against these enemies, because they are so instant to press upon
us. Yea in truth this should double our repentance, seeing there does not only
some streams of wickedness flow from us, but also we have the fountain in
our selves; especially considering we were not thus by creation, but through
our own default, whereby we have defaced Gods image, and brought our selves
into this state of corruption.

Sect 3. Secondly the flesh teaches us to pretend custom.
Secondly men excuse themselves for living impenitently in their sins, by
pretending custom, which has taken such fast hold upon them, that they can by
no means shake it off. Thus the swearer pretends, that he would willingly
leave vain and blasphemous oaths, but that he is so inured unto them, that he
often swears at unawares. Thus the voluptuous man says, that he would be
content to leave his carnal delights, as drinking gaming, rioting, whoring,
but that he has so accustomed himself unto them, that he cannot forsake them
nor give them ever. But let such know that it is high time for them to come out
of their sins by repentance, seeing they have brought themselves into a most
miserable and fearful condition; for sin is turned into another nature, and
by pleading custom holds them in subjection (as it were) by virtue of a law.
And Satan who through their natural corruption held them in the vilest and
basest slavery, has his possession confirmed by their customable service of
him in their actual transgressions, and now the strong man holds the house
with some show of right, having so long possessed it that he can plead
prescript on. Of these men I would demand if ever they mean to come out of
their sins by unfeigned repentance or no. If not* what appearance of hope is
there but that they must be eternally miserable in the fire of hell. But if
they do as all will pretend, why do they it not presently. For if custom be
too strong for them already, how much more irresistable will it be, when it is
more and more confirmed by much practice and continuance? But I am so fettered
in sin by an ill custom, that I cannot shake it off. Yet know that though it
be hard, yet upon the necessity of thy salvation it must be done; and therefore
in stead of breaking these cords with a Sampson like resolution, let not time
and use double them and make them stronger. Yea rather untwist them by little
and little, if thou can not at once break them; and by a contrary custom of
piety and righteousness, disuse thee from thy sins by degrees, indeauouring
first to set thy heart at liberty. For if the heart being delivered out of the
bondage of sin, begin now to hate it, then neither will the tongue delight to
speak it, nor the hand to act it. And therefore pretend not custom, seeing it
is not this, but our malicious wills, that embrace it and our hearts that affect
it, which make us continue in our sin without repentance, neither can custom
hold us unto any thing which is in our own power to alter, if our wills with
any resolution do break away from it. For tell me thou who pretendest this
excuse; if this custom should be punished in every particular act with some
forfeiture, whereby thy estate would be impouerished, or some punishment
inflicted on the body, which would bring unto thee more damage and smart, then
thy sin does pleasure and delight; would thou not leave thy sin and hate
it, if not for it self, yet for the penalty sake inflicted on thee for it? And
will thou not regard thy precious soul as well as thy corruptible body; and be
as careful to avoid eternal damnation, as well as some worldly loss?
Finally know, that it will prove but a miserable excuse at the day of
judgment, when God and our own consciences shall accuse us for our sins, to
say that we committed and could not leave them, because we were accustomed unto
them; and all one, as if the manslayer should excuse his murder, by telling
the judge that he could do no otherwise, because he had for a long time been
accustomed thereto, by killing of many other: Or as if the thief should excuse
his theft by saying, that he could not choose but do it, because his hands for
a long time have been inured to stealing. And therefore let us not continue in
sin because we have sinned, thinking that we can be excused by pleading
custom* but because we have long and often committed these sins, let us be
so much more earnest in the exercise of repentance. For as the Apostle tells
us, Christ has 1 Pet. 4. 2. 3.
suffered in the flesh, that we should no longer live the rest of our time in
the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. For the time past of our
life may suffice us, to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked
in lasoiuiousnesse, lusts, excess Romans 6. 19.
of wine, reuellings, banquettings and abominable idolatries. So the Apostle
Paul exhorts us, that as we have yielded our members servants to uncleanness
and to iniquity, unto iniquity; so now we should yield our members servants
to righteousness, unto holiness.

Sect. 4. The third deceit is to pretend poverty.
Thirdly the flesh deceives us, by pretending the poverty and necessity of our
estate as a sufficient cause, and reasonable excuse, why we should continue in
our sins, and makes us believe, that though we neglect all means of
knowledge, faith and all saving grace, and all duties of Gods service, we may
be dispensed with because our whole time is little enough to be employed for
the obtaining of worldly necessaries; yea that we may use wicked and unlawful
means, for the supplying of our wants, as all manner of fraud and deceiptfull
dealing in our trades and occupations, which is no better then theft it self
in the sight of God. But let us know that though we be never so poor, this is
no excuse why we should neglect any religious duty, or commit any sin. For
one thing is necessary and happy are we, if with Mary we quite our selves of
worldly encumbrances and choose the better part. That if we be poor in earthly
things, we have greater cause to labor after saving graces and heavenly
treasures, which alone without the other are all-sufficient to make us rich.
That when we have carked and cared, toyled and moyled to provide earthly
things, yet all is in vain except Gods Psalm. 127. 1.
blessing be upon our labors; and we cannot expect it either by neglecting
holy duties which he has commanded, or by committing such sins as he has
forbidden and Mat. 6. 33.
condemned. That we have Gods gracious promise of earthly necessaries, if we
first and chiefly seek his kingdom and righteousness: That poverty, if we use
it well, is no hinderance to grace in this life nor glory in the life to come;
as we see in the example of the Disciples, yea Christ himself, who being most
poor in worldly things, were Psalm. 34. 10.
most rich in spiritual and heavenly treasures. Finally let us know, that if
we serve and seek the Lord, he will take care for us, and not suffer us to
want any thing which is good, and that they of all others are best provided
for, who have his providence to watch over them. Or though we should be pinched
in respect of earthly things, yet it is much better with Lazarus to go poor
to heaven, then with Dives having abundance, to be cast into hell.

. Sect. 5. The fourth policy is to pretend a necessity of living in our sins
by reason of our calling.
A like conceit unto this is, when as the flesh persuades us that we may
neglect good duties, or commit and live in diverse sins because we live in
such callings as do force us to take these courses, without which we could not
maintain our charge. Thus it persuades shopkeepers, that they should not be
able to live in their trades, if they should not use lying and deceit; and
other tradesmen as Cooks, Tailors, Shoomakers, Vintners, Butchers, Carriers,
and such like, that they may be dispensed with, though they neglect the service
of God, and labor in the works of their callings on the Lords Sabbaths,
because otherwise they should loose their custom, together with those gains,
by which they are enabled to maintain themselves and theirs. Yea and thus it
persuades others to live in unlawful callings, because they have no other
means, as Players and Playmakers, gan^esters, and those who keep gaming
houses, and such like. But let the former know that no particular calling
should withdraw us from performing the duties which belong to the general
calling of a Christian; that they shall in the end find those gains the
greatest losses, when to keep a market for our body and sta^^, we neglect the
spiritual market of our souls, and the means whereby we might attain unto
the riches of saving graces and heavenly happiness. That those who seek to
compass riches by unlawful means, they either fail of their end, and so
labor in vain, or together with them get a curse, which will make them
moulder and consume away, or if they continue, will bring to the possessors but
small comfort, when they must leave their riches behind them and carry their
sin with them before their judge. Let them know that no man in any lawful
calling is brought into such streights, but that if there be prudence,
providence and wise forecast joined with it, he may find some time and
opportunity for the service of God and the feeding of his soul: and though he
do not use the means of thriuing in his calling as others do, who so
earnestly follow their worldly business that they neglect all holy duties, yet
may they expect from God upon their weaker endeavors a greater blessing, which
may make their state become Dan. 1. 15
as fat and in as good liking, as those children were in their bodies who fed
only upon pulse and water: or though God sees it good to scant them in
worldly things, yet they shall enjoy the little they have with abundant
comfort, seeing they are unto them little pledges of Gods great love, and in
the mean time have their bodily wants exceedingly recompensed with the peace
of a good conscience, the joy in the holy Ghost, and the spiritual riches of
all saving graces. As for those whose callings are unlawful their best course
were to exchange them for those that are lawful, seeing they have no better
excuse of their living in them, because they have no other means to maintain
themselves, then Harlots, Thieves and Pickpurses, who are alike ready to
allege that therefore they use these courses, because they have no other
means whereby they may live. For better it were for them not to live at all,
then to live in sin to the dishonor of God and hurt of their brethren;
better it were that their bodies should pine and famish in this world, then
that their bodies and souls should eternally be tormented in the fire of hell.

. Sect. 6. The fifth policy of the flesh persuading us to continue in our sins,
in regard of the corruption of the times.
Fifthly the flesh deceives us, whilst it persuades us to continue in our
sins without repentance, by alleging that the times wherein we live, and
the persons among we dwell, are so evil and wholly corrupted with sin, that
there is a necessity laid upon us of conforming our courses to the example of
others, seeing if we purge our selves from the sins which commonly reign,
and make conscience of those vices which others commit; we shall not only
expose our selves to the scorn and obliquie of all that observe us, as being
more strickt and precise in our courses then we need, but also (as the Prophet
speaks) make our selves a common prey. For the defeating of which Esa. 59. 15.
deceit, let us know that we must be of the little flock of Christ, if ever
we mean to be in their number, unto whom his fathers pleasure is to give a
Kingdom; that we must not Luke. 12. 32.
follow a multitude in doing evil, unless we think also to be partakers in
their punishments, that we must not fashion Exodus 23. 2
our selves to the example of the world, if we would not perish Romans 12. 2.
Ioh. 15. 19.
with it, but must be transformed by the renewing of our minds, and be severed
from the world and culled out of it, if we would be in the number of Christ's
Disciples, or become true members and subjects of his kingdom. That it is
better to go into heaven alone, then to go into hell and have all the world
to bear us company. Let us remember that we must through good report and evil
report, go on in 2 Cor. 6. 8.
our Christian course, with the blessed Apostle, if we ever mean to accompany
him in heaven. That it is no great matter to suffer ascoffe for Christ, who
has for our sakes suffered the bitter death of the cross; that we must not
refuse to be the sheep of Christ, nor alter our nature to a woluish condition,
because we would not be injured by wolves and goats, unless we would with
them be set at Christ's left hand and hear that dreadful sentence of
condemnation denounced against us. That we shall in the Mat. 25.
end overcome by suffering, and receive a crown of our patience, which without
all comparison will exceed our pains. Let us further consider that no man is
careless of the health of his body, because the air is infected, and the
country full of contagious sickness, but does so much the more carefully use all
good preservatives to keep him from these Epedemical diseases, and the like
care we would have of our souls, if we loved them as well as we do our
bodies. In regard whereof the Apostle uses this as an argument to make us more
watchful and diligent, in redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Finally let us know Ephesians. 5. 16.
that neither time nor place in which we live, will excuse us before God, if we
live in our sins, seeing as the best time or place will not privilege us
from falling into sin no not Paradise it self, and the society of the
Angels, as we see in Adam; so neither will those times and places which most
abound with evil poison us with the contagion of sin, if we have about us
the preservative of a good conscience, and have sincere and upright hearts,
which make us with Enoch in the midst of worldly destructions to walk with
our God. Yea rather when we are Genesis 5.
on all sides compassed about with wicked men, the heat and zeal of our
godliness (as it were by an antiperistasis) will be intended and increased. As
we see in the example of Noah, who continued just, when all the world were
wicked. Of Abraham who was upright in his ways among the wicked Cananites, of
Lot whose soul was righteous, though he lived among the filthy Sodomites Of
Joseph and Moses in the Court of Pharaoh, David in the Court of Saul, and of
Nehemiah, Daniel, the three children, and many others, who feared and served
the Lord, though they lived, yea bore office in the Court of the Kings of
Babylon.

. Sect. 7. The sixth policy of the flesh in persuading us to continue in our
sins because god is merciful.
A sixth policy which the flesh use h, to persuade us to continue in our sins
without repentance is to tell us of Gods mercy, which is so endless and
infinite, that notwithstanding we go on in our own courses yet we shall be
saved. With which that we may not be overtaken, let us consider; that it is an
horrible abuse of Gods mercy, when we take occasion thereby to continue in our
sins, which in the Scriptures is offered unto us as the maine argument
whereby we are invited unto repentance. So the Psalmist says that there is
mercy with the Lord that he may Psalm. 130. 4. Romans 2. 4.
be feared; and the Apostle tells us, that the riches of Gods goodness, his
patience and long-suffering do inuit us to repentance. It is a notable motive
to persuade a rebel to yield and submit himself to his Prince, because he
is gracious and merciful; but if any will go out or continue in his rebellion
upon this ground, his presumption alone would make him worthy to be hanged,
because the grace and goodness of his Prince should work in him love and
obedience, and make him loath and even ashamed to offend and displease so
gracious a sovereign. Secondly, let us know that howsoever Gods mercy in it
self is infinite and incomprehensible, yet in respect of the object and
exercise of it, it is limited by his truth, which appropriateth it only to
repentant sinners, because such only do lay hold of it, and apply it unto
themselves by a lively faith; without which application, the mercy of God can
do us no more good, then a sovereign salve can cure a wound, which is cast
behind the door and never applied unto it. Lastly, let us know, that as God is
infinite in mercy, so also in justice, yea in truth these are all one in God,
his mercy being a just mercy, and his justice a merciful justice, only they
seem to differ in respect of the object, and diverse manner of exercising them
toward his creatures. In which regard notwithstanding it may truly be said,
that he is just in justifying a sinner, because believing in Christ his sins
Romans 3. 26.
are satisfied for by his merits and obedience; and that he is merciful
toward the wicked in bearing with them so long, and affording unto them so
many means to bring them to repentance. But if these means be contemned, then
the acceptable time and day of salvation being past, there is no more place for
mercy, but only for justice; in the manifestation whereof toward the wicked
and reprobate. God is no less glorified, then in the declaring of his mercy
and truth toward the faithful and Elect. Neither must we think it any
disparagement to Gods mercy, that it is not effectual for the salvation of
all, seeing the fault is in themselves who despise it; neither is the
infiniteness thereof at all limited or shadowed, because it is not extended to
those who reject it, no more then the mercy of the Prince is ecclypsed, who
sends his pardon to a malefactor with this condition, that he shall have the
benefit of it, if he will receive and plead it; and for the time present be
sorry for his fault, and for the time to come endeavor to amend; and yet
afterward hangs the offender, when he refuses to receive it, and withal
professes his resolution to continue in his wicked courses. Besides the
infiniteness of Gods mercy is not only manifested by the number which he
forgiueth, but also by the quality and greatness of the debt which he
pardons and remitteth. In which regard the infinite grace and goodness of
God would clearly shine in the salvation of one sinner though there were no
more then he, because he forgiueth the infinite guilt and punishment of his
sin, whereby he has offended his infinite majesty.

. Sect. 8. The seventh policy of the flesh in persuading us to defer our
repentance.
Lastly, if the flesh cannot draw us to a resolution of living in our sins
without repentance; then it allureth us to defer it from time to time,
because it will never be too late to perform this duty though it were delayed
to the last hour of our lives; which deceit that we may defeat, let us know,
that this is a like abuse of Gods infinite mercy and goodness, when as by our
presumption we make it serve as a reason to continue us in our sins, which
should be the chiefest motive to hasten our repentance. Secondly let us
consider that we have no assurance of our lives for the space of one hour, nor
that we shall have power to repent, if we despise Gods present grace though our
lives should be prolonged for many years. Thirdly, that without repentance
there can be no salvation, which being the chief thing, deserves our first
and best endeauours; and what folly is it to seek first for vain and
momentary trifles, and to defer this greatest and most important business to
our last and uncertain times, seeing if we be prevented by death there is no
hope, but that we shall go unto hell. Fourthly let us know that the longer we
defer our repentance, the more hard and difficult shall we find it to be
done, for if we cannot shake off our sins, when like strangers they are first
entertained, much less shall we be able to do it, when they are of familiar
acquaintance, yea by long custom become habitual, and as it were turned into
a second nature. Finally let us remember that this late repentance is commonly
false and counterfaite, not springing out of faith and the love of God, but out
of self-love and fear of approaching judgments. The which lamentable
experience makes too manifest, seeing few among many hundreds perform that
which they promised, when the hand of God correcting them is pulled back, but
after their recovery out of those sickenesses which they thought mortal,
return to their former courses, yea become more worldly and wicked then ever
they were before. But of this argument I have largely entreated in the first
part of this Christian warfare, and therefore will content my self here to
have so briefly touched it.

CHAP. XVI. Of the policies of the flesh which it uses to hinder us from
performing holy duties, and virtuous actions.
Sect 1. Of the first policy of the flesh in blinding our minds and
corrupting our judgments, that we may not discern between good and evil.
WE have heard of some notable deceipts which the flesh uses to draw us unto
sin, and being fallen to make us lie in it without repentance: now let us
consider of some chief policies which it uses about holy duties and virtuous
actions. And these are of three sorts; the first it uses to hinder us from
embracing and practicing them. The second to disturb and inturrupt us in them,
the third to alinate our hearts and withdraw us from them. For the first; it
uses many deceipts to keep us from embracing virtue and bringing forth the
fruits of new obedience. As first of all when we have some inclination to
embrace virtue and to practice Christian duties in the general, it cunningly
indeauoureth to dazzle the eyes of our mind, and to corrupt our judgments,
that we may mistake virtue for vice, and good for evil. To which end it
either moves us to judge of them according to common error, and the false
opinion of worldly men, who by selfeloue are easily brought to condemn that as
naught, which is most contrary to their carnal appetite; or else it disguiseth
virtues beauty with the foul and ugly vizard of vice and sin, or so
besprinkleth and besmeareth them with the black colors of false imputations,
that we are ready to abhor and reject them at the first view; without any
further trial or examination. Thus it brandeth a Christian conversation with
the name of a malancholick or monkish life, devotion with the name of
superstition, and a conscionable care to approve our hearts and all our ways
unto God it terms nice scrupulositie, and needless, yea peevish
preciseness. Thus a religious care to sanctify the Sabbath it calls
Iudaisme, zeal, fury and madness, or at best rashness and indiscretion;
humility it terms baseness, magnanimity pride, bounty lavishness,
frugalitie niggardliness, meekness cowardice, and Christian courage and
fortitude it intitleth with the name of desperate and audatious boldness. Now
the means to preserve us from being overtaken with this deceit, is to pull of
these deformed vizards, and to behold virtue and all Christian duties, in their
own native beauty by the never deceiving light of Gods word. And not to listen
to the false opinion of the world and the flesh, which make light darkness,
and sweet sower, but to examine by the Scriptures what God approves, and what
he disliketh and condemns. To which purpose we must daily exercise our
selves in the study and meditation of Gods word, which will so enlighten,
rectify and inform our judgments, that we shall never be deceived by those
foggy and false mistes, which the devil, the world or our own corrupt flesh,
do cast before them.

Sect 2. The second policy in alledginge difficulties that are in christian
duties.
A second deceit which the flesh uses, to discourage us from seeking after
virtue, and endeavoring to practice Christian duties, is to persuade us, that
the house of virtue is situated on so high an hill, that we shall be out of
breath and quite tired before we can clime unto it; and that there is so much
difficulty and so many discouragements in a Christian life, that it would be
but in vain to enter into it, it being impossible that we should go forward,
and that better it were not to give the onset, then in the first skirmish to
be foiled, and forced to make a shameful retraite. To this end it is ready
to tell us, that we must leave all our delights, which so much content us, and
exercise our selves in such duties as are quite against the hair, and through
the contrariety which is between them and our nature, so displeasant and
distasteful to our appetite, that we shall not live one merry day after we
have taken upon us this mopish and melancholicke profession. Yea and for the
better countenancing of this deceit, it is ready to abuse Gods infallible
truth, and to set before us the afflictions of the Saints, their mournings and
lamentations, the poverty and reproaches, in prisonments, banishments and
cruel death, assuring us (as the truth is) that if we follow them in the same
courses we shall meet with the same crosses, seeing it is expressly said,
that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy 3 12.
must suffer persecution. Now that we may be armed against this subtle
encounter, let us know, that the chief strength of it lies in laying open
and amplifying the discouragements which might hinder us in our Christian
course, and in the concealing and hyding of those helps and comforts which
might be encouragements to our good proceedings. For though the work of
repentance be unto us hard and difficult, yet seeing it is not only an act
done by us, but chiefly and principally a grace and gift of God, who is ready
to bestow it freely upon al who desire to have it, and do endeavor to embrace
and practice it, the difficulty should bring with it no discouragement, seeing
God is alsufficient to effect his own work, and by the power of his word and
spirit, to make that easy and delightful which is naturally impossible and
unpleasant. Again let us know that in repentance there is a change not only
of our actions, but also of our hearts and minds, whereby it comes to pass,
that those sinful delights which were formerly most sweet to our carnal
appetites, are now most bitter and loathsome to the part regenerate; and those
godly and religious exercises which were to the flesh and natural man most
distasteful and tedious, are now to the man regenerate most pleasant and
comfortable; as we may see in David who esteemed Gods word and holy ordinances
above all manner of riches, and found Psalm. 19. and. 119
them sweeter to his taste then the honey or the honey comb; and in Job who
professes, that he esteemed the word of God much more then his necessary
food. And therefore though new Job. 23. 12.
obedience be irk some and painful to those who are unregenerate, yet not to
those who are sanctified, changed and renewed in the spirit of their minds.
Even as we see those pains and serious studies which were so tedious and
contrary to our disposition whilst we were children, are sweet and
delightful when we are come to years of discretion. Furthermore let us
consider that though it be a most toylesome labor unto us to run in the
Christian race being considered in our selves, because we are stiff and
benumbed, and sore and lame in all our joints through the fetters and boults of
sin which have long hanged upon us, yet being strengthened by the spirit, and
being made partakers of this spiritual annoynting, we are made able, nimble
and active to run in the ways of God, according to that of the spouse, Draw
me, and we will run after thee, and of the Prophet; I will run the way of
thy Cant. 1. 4. Psalm 1 19. 32. Phil. 4. 13.
Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart; and that also of the Apostle;
I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. Finally let us
know, that as we have in the way of Christianity many crosses, so also many
comforts, as for example, for the present we loose the applause of worldlings,
and lie open to obloquie and reproach; but for recompense we have the
approbation of God and our own consciences; we have wars with men, but
peace with God; we loose carnal rejoicing in the pleasures of sin, but instead
thereof we have spiritull rejoicing in the assurance of Gods love, the
remission of our sins, and the salvation of our souls; we are stripped of
worldly wealth, but we are enriched with spiritual treasures, Gods sanctifying
gifts and graces, and gloriously decked both with inward sincerity and the
rich roabes of an holy conversation; we forgo carnal security which within a
while would bring us into horror and despair in the sight of our sins, and
that horrible vengeance which is due unto them; but we have in exchange
spiritual security, whereby we quietly rest upon Gods promises and providence
in the midst Psalm. 23. 4.
of all dangers, and can with David walk through the vale of the shadow of
death, and yet fear no evil. And thus our worldly losses are even in this
life infinitely recompensed with our spiritual gains, and how much more when
we come to the fruition of our future and heavenly 2 Timothy 2. 12. Romans 8. 18.
hopes, for if we suffer with Christ we shall reign with him, and these
present sufferings, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us; for they are light and 2 Cor. 4. 17.
momentary; but they shall cause unto us a far most excellent and an eternal
weight of glory. And therefore let us not so remember the cross, as that we
forget the crown, nor so look to the foulness of the way, as that we do
not regard the gloriousness of our palace unto which we are trauayling; but
let us consider that by mount Caluarie we shall come unto mount Sion the City
of the Saints, and that by our many tribulations we shall enter into the
kingdom of Act. 14. 22.
heaven. And so shall we with Moses, prefer afflictions with the people of
God, before the enjoying of sinful pleasures which last but for a season, and
esteem the reproach of Christ greater Heb. 11. 25. 26.
riches then the treasures of this worldly Egypt, having respect to the
recompense of reward. Yea so shall we be like unto Jesus Heb. 12. 2.
Christ, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is now set down at
the right hand of the throne of God, where we also shall sit with him if we
follow his example.

Sect. 3. The third policy is to persuade us to defer the doing of holy and
Christians duties
But if the flesh cannot persuade us utterly to neglect good duties, because
we discern that they are necessary for our salvation, then it will move us
to defer them for a time, telling us hereafter they will be more seasonable,
and that we also shall have better leisure to perform them. For the defeating
of which policy let us know, that there is no time alike seasonable for the
exercise of a godly life unto the time present; For whilst it is called to
day, and Psalm. 95. 7. 2 Cor. 6 2.
the Lord calls upon us to perform holy duties, it is the acceptable time
and day of salvation which being once past, will never return again. That
those duties which are first in excellency, should be first also in time, and
that no wise man puts off matters of greatest weight, but gives them
prioritie and precedencie both in respect of time and place. Let us remember
that our lives are short and momentanie, and that it were but all too little,
though they should be wholly spent in Gods service; and that this short time is
so uncertain, that we have no assurance of living another day or hour, in
regard whereof it is great madness to put off those duties, for the doing
whereof we chiefly came into the world, and upon the performance of them our
salvation depends, and to prefer before them trifles, which for the present
are of small value and will not profit us any whit at the day of death and
judgment. That we cannot by our own natural strength do any good duty, but
as we are assisted by Gods Spirit, and that if we from day to day quench the
good motions thereof and will not open, when he knocks so hard and often at
the door of our hearts, we shall move him to depart from us and leave us to our
impenitencie, security and hardness of heart. Finally let us know, that if it
be now troublesome and tedious to perform holy duties and virtuous actions,
how much more will it be so, when our vices are grown habitual, and by long
custom are turned into another nature. Furthermore whereas the flesh
pretends many occasions of present distraction and multitude of business,
and tells us, that we may more conveniently perform Christian duties, and
betake our selves to a godly life, when these troubles are a little over; as
for example, that we may better serve God, when as we have settled our worldly
estate, and are freed from distractions which for want hereof, do now disturb
us, when we have gotten such a sum of money, such a farm or Lordship,
attained to such honor and preferment, or have had the fruition of this or
that pleasure upon which we have set our hearts; let us know that all these are
but frivolous excuses, like unto theirs who being invited to the marriage
supper of the Kings Son Mat. 22.
refused to come, which will in no case be accepted of God as sufficient when
he calls us to account, seeing they only discover our doting love on worldly
vanities and our utter neglect of spiritual and heavenly things. Let us
consider that it is a great indignity, to consecrate unto the world our chief
strength and prime service, and to destinate unto God the after leauings, of
which also we are uncertain, whether we shall perform them or no; that it is
great folly and want of judgment to provide, first temporary necessaries, yea
superfluities, for our bodies, and lean to a second uncertain care the
eternal salvation of our souls. That we have no assurance to live till we
have attained earthly things, and afterward to provide for heavenly; and
therefore if we think heaven better then earth and those everlasting joys,
better then these momentany trifles, it were our wisdom to prefer and seek
them in the first place, seeing we cannot be assured of them both; and leaving
of which Martha to be encumbered with worldly business, to choose with Mary the
better part: For though many things might be convenient and worth Luke 10 41.
our seeking, if we had a lease of life, and leisure enough to look after
them, yet this one thing is necessary, that by fearing and serving the Lord,
(which was the maine end for which we came into the world) we may glorify him,
and so gather assurance of our own salvation.

Sect. 4. The fourth policy of the flesh in moving us to rest in fair
promises and faint purposes.
Fourthly when a^ the flesh cannot entice to use mere dela, es, and do just
nothing; then it will persuade us to rest in that which is as good as nothing,
namely fair promises and faint and false purposes and resolutions, that we
will become new men out of hand: Especially if we have our desire in some
things which we presently hope for, as deliverance from some affliction,
freedom from some danger, or recovery from some sickness. But when we have gone
thus far there it makes us to stay, by offering unto us, if we will continue
in our old courses some access of worldly wealth, or the fruition of sinful
pleasures; and having prevailed so much with us, it stays not here, but
makes us soon after more carnal and wicked, more slothful and negligent in
the performance of all good duties then ever we were before. With which deceit
if we would not be overtaken; let us know, that it were better not to promise
at all, then having promised not to perform and pay, for what is this to mock
God who will not be mocked? What is it but to dally and to play childs play
with him, seeking to please him with complementall promises and fair words?
That the Lord is not pleased by our making vows and promises if we do not
also pay them seeing we do hereby but multiply our sins adding to our former
evil courses couenantbreaking and falsifying of our promises, even with God
himself. Finally that we do but quench the good motions of the Spirit, when
as we do not nourish and cherish those good purposes and resolutions which he
suggesteth unto us; but suffer our selves to be carried away by the contrary
motions of our sinful corruption. And therefore the Psalmist bids us vow
and pay unto the Lord our God; the which the Prophet Esaias makes a note of the
Psalm. 76. 11. Pro. 20. 25. Esa. 19. 21.
faithful, and the contrary by the wise man is said to be a property of a
fool. When (says he) thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for
he has no pleasure in fools, Eccl. 5. 4.
pay that which thou have vowed.

Sect. 5. The fifth policy is to withdraw us from more excellent duties by
occasion of doing of some lesser good.
But if it cannot by all the former devises and deceipts persuade us to neglect
such duties as are truly good, then will it by the occasion of doing some
lesser good, withdraw us from that which is greater and more excellent, in
which regard that good which is of a mean and inferior nature becomes unto
us evil, because it is abused by our flesh to shoulder and thrust out that
which is of greater worth and weight. And thus it persuades men to read the
Scriptures at home on the Lords day, and in the mean time to neglect the
public assemblies, the ministry of the word and Prayer with the
congregation; yea sometime to pray privately in the Church, or to read some
good book, that so they may neglect to join with the rest of Gods people with
unanimity and uniformity in the public service of God; thus it moves men
to prefer the outward rest of the Sabbath before the works of necessity or
mercy, which God requires as special parts of the sanctification of it; as
helping the distressed, visiting the sick, indeauouring to prevent some great
and emminent danger, either to our neighbors or our selves; the which was the
sin of the hypocritical Pharisees which our Savior so sharply reprehendeth;
teaching them and us, that the Lord preferred mercy before sacrifice, and such
was Martha Mat. 9. 13.
her sin in neglecting Christ's Sermon the food of her soul, that she might
minister unto him food for his body. For the preventing of which deceit, we
must labor to have our judgments rightly informed out of Gods word, Luke. 10.
^0.
not only in the knowledge of that which is good, and to be embraced of us,
but also in what degree of goodness every Christian duty is, that every thing
in due order may be esteemed, chosen and practiced by us, the highest degrees
before the mean, and the mean before that which is inferior unto it. The
duties which we owe unto God in the same rank and degree, before those which
we owe to our neighbor, the end, duty and service it self, before the
means whereby we are enabled thereunto, As for example the obedience and
seasonable practice of the things we know, before hearing and reading, which
are the means of knowledge, when as of necessity the one must give place to
the other. And the love and true service of God, before the love which we owe
to our neighbors, when as they will not stand to geather. And finally honest
recreations which are the means whereby we may be the better Dut. 13. 1. 2.
fitted for the works of our callings, must give places unto duties them
selves which they enable us unto.

Sect 6. The sixth policy is to move us to perform good duties unseasonably.
Like unto this is an other deceit of the flesh, whereby it moves us to do
that good which we resolve to do unseasonably, and to our great hinderance in
our course of godliness: as when to distract us in prayer, it puts into our
minds good meditations and profitable instructions, which we have formerly
heard and learned, or to hinder us from hearing the word it causes us to
think of some duty or work of mercy which is not pertinent to the present
purpose; or to keep us from sanctifying the Sabbath, and consecrating it
wholly, as an holy rest unto God, it moves us to think upon the duties of our
particular callings and of providing for our children and familes. Now the
means to frustrate this policy is wisely to discern it, and to observe and
set a watch over our hearts, that they may seriously and only intend the well
performing of those duties about which we are employed, that so we may do
them with all our might: for as the proverb is, he that huntetb after two
hares at once, shall catch neither; and as nature intends not many things at
once, so neither does grace; because the virtue and powers either of body or
mind, being distracted by diverse objects, do (like the river divided into
many streams) but weakly perform their functions and operations, and being
united* are much more strong and active.

And not unlike to the former is that other deceit, whereby it moves us to
neglect the doing of some present good upon the pretense of doing some other
and greater good afterward, whereby it not only defeateth our present good
purpose, but commonly does also wirhdraw us from doing that future good for the
performance whereof the other was neglected. And thus when we are purposed to
pray unto God, it persuades us to delays, under this color that we may
afterward perform this duty more effectually, when we are not so dull and
heavy, so troubled with distractions, nor so assaulted with temptations. And
thus generally it diswadeth us from performing any service unto God, pretending
that we may have afterward better means and fitter opportunity, and so may
do it in such manner as may be more acceptable unto God. And thus also it
moves us to neglect the works of mercy all our life long, pretending that we
may do them much more amply and liberally by our last will, which takes not
effect till after death. For the defeating of which policy let us know, that
we cannot perform service unto God till he calls and enableth us by his
spirit thereunto, and that we are called when the Lord offers means and
opportunity, which if we neglect, we know not whether he will afterward
honor us so much as to appoint us to these holy services which we have
carelessly and causlesly omitted. Let us remember, that the time present is
ours, and therefore at our pleasure to be used for all good purposes, but the
time to come is out of our reach, and we know not whether we shall catch hold
of it yea or no. That it is better to do a certain good, though not so great
and excellent, then to neglect it, in hope of doing that which is uncertain,
though in it own nature more eminent and commendable. Finally consider, that
if we use well the time present for doing God that service which we are able,
he will with the enlarging of our desires, enlarge also our means and
opportunity of doing greater good in the time to come.

CHAP. XVII. Of he policies which the flesh uses to inturrupt us in the doing
of good duties, and to alienate our hearts from them.
Sect. 1. How the flesh interroseth when we are exercised in doing good duties.
ANd thus the flesh hinders us from the performance of all good duties. In
the performance of them it deals also no less deceiptfully, and that either
to inturrupt and distract us, that we may do them only formally and to no
purpose, or else so to corrupt and poison our best graces and most virtuous
actions, that they may become unprofitable, yea hurtful unto us. For the
former when we endeavor to seek the Lord in his holy ordinances, and set our
selves to perform the pious duties of his service, if it cannot by the former
deceipts wholly hinder us from doing of them, it will (like David's false
friend) accompany us to the house of God, as though it likewise were delighted
in these holy exercises; but to no other end, but that it may frustrate and
defeat our holy desires. For when we labor to hear Gods word, to call upon
his name, or singe his praises, this sin that hangs on us and presses us
down, does either make us dull and drowsy, lumpish and heavy, so that we
cannot attend these holy exercises with any cheerfulness and alacrity of
spirit, but offer unto God dead and carrion-like sacrifices, which having no
heart nor life in them are loathsome unto him: or else it works our minds to
some carnal proiudice or dislike of our teachers, or of some passages in his
Sermon, whereby we are affected with choler and spleen toward him; or to
think meanly and basely of him in respect of some natural infirmities or
defects; or else because of the mediocritie of his gifts; or it hangs so
heavily on us that it makes us weary of these holy exercises before they be
half ended. Or if non of these, yet it will never fail to distract our minds
with worldly cogitations and wandering thoughts, so as we cannot intend these
religious duties, but perform them with the lips, ears, and outward man,
but not with the heart, in show and ceremony, but not in spirit and truth.
And thus the flesh like Judas waits upon us that it may betray us, it goes
with us into Gods market, that it may hinder us from buying any spiritual
merchandise, it thrusts in with us into Gods armory, when as we go to
furnish our selves with spiritual weapons, that it may make us neglect them
and leave them behind us, or else so weaken us that we cannot carry them with
us; it will like Hushai force kindness upon us, and by no persuasions will
stay behind us; but it is to this end that by cunning policy it may
frustrate our enterprises, and so betray us into the hands of our enemies. For
the defeating of which policy our best course is, to leave behind our chief
corruptions by renewing of our repentance, before we come to perform these
holy exercises, and keep under those which we carry with us, watching over
them with all diligence, that they do not distract nor hinder us. To which
end we must come unto these holy duties with due preparation, and being come
we must meditate on Gods glorious presence before whom we stand, we must with
all diligence look to our hearts, because that the Lord chiefly requires
them in all duties of his service; we must think of the excellency, weight and
fruit of these Religious exercises, that our hearts being inflamed with the
love of them, we may perform them with all cheerfulness and delight. And
finally we must continually crave the assistance of Gods gracious spirit, that
thereby we may be in some good measure enabled to perform them so, as that
they may be acceptable to God, and profitable for our own salvation.

Sect. 2. How (...) duties.
Thus also when we have in the regenerate part an earnest desire to embrace
virtue and to be enriched with saving graces, like a cunning sorceresse it
labors to infect them with the poison of corruption, and like a subtle
Merchant it sophisticates these pure wares and intermingleth with them the base
refuse of sinful vices, that they with the other may become vendible. Thus if
we be devout and earnest in religion, it seeks to taint us with wilworship
and superstition; if we excel in knowledge, it labors to puff us up with
selfe-conceipt, to contemn plain truth, and curiously to affect nice and
unprofitable speculations, and to despise others in comparison of our selves
whom we think do come short of our measure. With our faith it intermingleth
presumption and carnal security; which our love, lust and jealousy; with our
zeal, rashness and corrupt anger; with our humility baseness; with our
courage audatiousnesse; with our constancy pertinacy and obstinate
inflexiblenesse; and finally with all our graces and excellent virtues pride
and vain glory, whereby we ouerweene them, or arrogate the praise of them, or
magnify our selves before others who have not attained to our pitch and
proportion. And thus this cunning coyner embases the pure metal of grace and
virtue, by mixing with it the copper or rather dross of carnal corruptions,
setting notwithstanding upon it virtues stamp and superscription, that so it
may go for current with us, and by mingling these poisons with our wholesome
food, does make it become unto us mortal and pernicious. For preventing of
which deceit we are often to examine our virtues, and to try if they be not
tainted and infected with the contagion of the next extremes; let us often
bring them to the touchstone of Gods truth, which is only sufficient to make
us discern the differences between the pure gold of Gods graces, and the base
metals of our own corruptions; and let us continually desire the help of Gods
holy spirit, which is that heavenly fire, that can part and sever the solid
substance from the dross, purifying he on, and consuming the other, and the
pure gold from other base metalles of any kind.

Sect. 3. How the flesh persuades us to abate of our zeal, and to intermit
virtuous actions for a while.
The third and last kind of policies which the flesh uses are those, whereby
it seeks to alienate our hearts and affections from embracing and practicing
of holy virtues and Christian actions. And first of all, if it cannot persuade
us wholly to forsake them, and at once to desist from the exercise of them;
then it will allure us to abate our fervor and zeal in piety, to intermit all
virtuous actions for a little while, and not to fall altogether, but in some
degrees from our former sincerity, either pretending that if we go more
slowly, we shall go more surely or that we are more zealous then needs, seeing
with fair less strictness in our courses we may attain unto happiness; or
else though upon some occasions we slacken our pace in the ways of godliness
for a while, we may hereafter make more speed and easily recover and redeem
our lost time, by our future diligence. With which deceit that we may not be
overtaken let us consider that there is no standing still in the Christian
course, seeing he who does not daily go forward in it will questionless go
backward; and what then can become of them who are in the way of declination
and backsliding? That if we give way to our spiritual enemies for a time, and
be persuaded to lay aside our Christian armor, they will give unto us deadly
wounds before we shall be able to put it on again, and that we may much more
easily keep them out of the gates of our city, then drive them back when they
are once entered. Let us know that if we slacken our hold, we shall hardly
recover it in our fall; and that we may be as desperately endangered by a
lingering consumption of grace and goodness, as by a fever of Apostacy. Let us
remember that if our heat come once to lukewarmenesse, it will within a while
turn to keycoldnes, and that if the Devil and our own corruption can but a
little while disacquaint our hearts from God and his ways, they will not leave
till they have made them mere strangers, if they have a little loosened them
from him they will with much more ease pull them quite asunder. And therefore
let us carefully watch over our selves, that there be no declination in grace
nor the least backsliding from our former sincerity, but forgetting that which
is behind, let us reach unto those things which are before, and press hard
toward the mark, for the price of the high Phil. 3. 13. 14
calling of God in Christ Jesus. For if we slacken our pace in the ways of
godliness, and sit still, though but a little while, we shall grow so stiff
and sore, that we shall have little desire to go on in our journey. And by our
negligence we shall loose our sweet communion with God, the light of his
countenance, the sense of his love, and joy and comfort of his spirit, which
are our chief encouragements that make us go on in the way of godliness. Of
the lively feeling whereof, when we are deprived, we shall either
disconsolately sit down and loose our crown, or faintly proceed with much
weakness and weariness.

Sect. 4. How the flesh persuades us to rest in that which we have all ready
done or suffered.
Another deceit like unto this, whereby the flesh allureth us to desist from
virtuous actions, is to make us to rest in that which we have already either
done or suffered, as being abundantly sufficient for our salvation. Which that
we may defeat, let us consider, that though it were true, yet it is of no
force to make us leave off or intermit our virtuous actions. For what
ingratitude and gross negligence were this in a servant, who having done a
little work would loyter and surcease his pains, because he is assured that
his Lord is so bountiful, that he would not hold back any part of his wages?
And how much more in us seeing the riches of our reward is so inestimable and
permanent, that we have just cause to think our whole life, which is but short
and momentanie to be too too little (though we could attain to the age of
Methuselah) if it were solye employed in glorifying our gracious God by our
faithful service, which if we do not, but content our selves only with that
which stands upon the necessity of our salvation* we plainly show, that all
we have done is but false and counterfeit obedience, seeing it did spring and
flow only from foolish self-love, and not from the sincere love of God.
Foolish I say because it shall surely be frustrate of it end, or though it
should not, yet of that measure of glory which those who are wise will labor
after, for according to that measure of grace we have received, and obedience
which we have performed, we shall have our portion and proportion in that
heavenly happiness. But be it that thou art not so ambitious of blessedness, but
that the least part and lowest place will well content thee, consider in the
next place, that in this life we are never so rich in grace and the fruits of
obedience, that we may now give over and spend upon the stock, unless we
mean to be bankerupts in goodness; for if there be not a growth there will be a
decrease, if not a progress, then a regresse in the ways of godliness, and
when we neglect the service of God, then do we begin to serve the Devil, the
world and our own flesh. Besides true saving grace is not like the Moon
sometime in the full and sometime in the waine, but like the light of the
morning which still increases till it be perfect day; It is always in the
growth until we come unto a perfect age in Christ, which perfection we shall
not attain unto till we have laid down Pro. 4. 18.
these bodies of flesh. And that which a while grows and Phil. 1. 6.
then stands at a stay, was but a false conception, and like an Embrio in the
womb, which though it may delude a woman with a deceiving hope, yet this joy
will bring bitter Mat. 24. 13.
sorrow without all comfort in the end. Again consider, that all Gods promises
are made to those alone who continue Apoc. 2. 10. and 3. 21.
constant in their faith and obedience to the end. He that indureth to the end
shall be saved, and be faithful unto Eccles. 11. 3.
the death and I will give thee the crown of life; and to him that overcomes
I will grant to sit with me in my throne etc. And as the tree falls so shall
it lie. And therefore our former graces and good works should not make us
slothful and sluggish for the time to come, but much more painful and
diligent in embracing and practicing them, seeing if we now desist we shall
surely loose all our former labor. Finally what soldier will thus foolishly
reason; I have fought long and endured many brunts in the battle, and now I
will take my ease, because I have almost obtained the victory, what traveler
will sit down in the midst of his journey, because he has gone far and
taken much pains, seeing all his labor is lost if he come not to the end? And
who running in a race will give over before he come to the goal, excusing
himself that he has run well in the beginning; because he is sure to loose
the garland with all his former pains? Yea rather because they have begun
well they will continue till by their constant labors they have obtained their
reward. And therefore let us not be less wise or industrious for the assured
gayning of heavenly and everlasting happiness, then we are for the momentany
and uncertain possession of earthly trifles; but after we have done much good,
let us still hold on to do more, for blessed is the servant (not who has done
well in former times but) who when his master comes shall be found so doing.
Mat. 24. 46.


CHAP. XVIII. Of certain advantages which the flesh has against us in the
spiritual Conflict.
. Sect. 1. That this enemy the flesh has great adua^tages against us; because
it dwells within us.
Having discovered the dangerousnes of this enemy the flesh in it own nature,
it now follows according to our order propounded, that we further consider
that this peril is much intended and increased, in respect of diverse
advantages which it has against us in the spiritual Conflict. And these are
principally two; the first is, that this enemy is not far off, whereby we
might have leisure and opportunity of fitting and preparing our selves against
the Conflict, before he could approach unto us, but dwells with us, yea in us.
He is not only near at hand, and (as it were) in the Suburbs, close unto the
gate of our souls, but it lodges even within the walls of the City, not in
the out-parts and back lanes, but it keeps strong possession in the chief
forts and castle of our minds and wills, our hearts and affections, where our
chief strength and Ipsi gestamus laqueum nostrum nobiscum circumferimus
inimicum. Bernard. de Quadrages. sermon. 5.
treasure lies. And (as one says) we bear our snare with us, and carry our
enemy about us whether so ever we go. The which danger is much aggrauated in
that he does not profess his emnity, but is in outward show a familiar friend
who eats, drinks and sleeps with us; it makes show of love, but indeed
mortally hates us, it is like an helper, but is in truth our greatest
Adversary, and like Sanballat and Tobiah it offers his pains in building
the walls of our City, which may repulse foreign forces, when as it intends
nothing but our ruin and to betray us into the power of outward enemies. For
no sooner does Satan and the world besiege and assault us with their
tentations, but presently it joins with them, and being acquainted with all
our counsels, it reuealeth unto them our secrets, even our hidden thoughts
and unknown desires and like a wicked Dalilah, having by treacherous flattery
undermined us, it discovers to these cursed Philistims where our chief
strength lies; yea it secretly opens the gates of our hearts, and not only
lets in all their forces, but as soon as they are entered joins with them,
and laying violent hands on the spiritual man, it labors all it may to
captiuate and destroy him. And therefore the wilye red Dragon never makes war
against us, until he be assured first of these inbred traitors and carnal Hic
est qui manus nostras proprio cuigulo alligat et baculo nostro nos caedit
Bernard. ibid.
aids; And as one says, it is his policy to bind us always with our own
girdle, and to overcome and beat us with our own staff. Yea not only does
the flesh dwell and co-inhabite with us, but it also adhereth and inseparably
cleaves unto us, as being a part, and the greater part of our selves. Whereby
the dangerousnes of this enemy appears, for the war which it makes against
the new and spiritual man, is not only civil and domestical (which
notwithstanding is much more perilous and terrible then that which is
foreign) but without any metaphor, properly, and truly intestine, and (as it
were) in our own bowels. Besides this combat between them is fought in a
place of great disadvantage, namely this world where the worser Brande quidem
periculum est et grauis lucta adusus domesticum hostem etc Bernard. de Quadri.
sermon. 5.
parts has many friends and strong aids, even millions of wicked men and
whole legions of Devils, and contrariwise the better part has few friends and
many enemies. Great surely (says one) is the danger, and the conflict sore and
grievous against an enemy so domestique, especially seeing we are strangers
and he a citizen; he inhabiteth his own country, and we here are exiles and
strangers. Yea in truth this war is more intestiue then that which was
between Rebecca her twins. For not only does here one person fight against
another, nor (as some would have it) the body against the soul of the same
man, nor yet one faculty alone against another of a different nature, the
sensitive against the reasonable, and the will and affections against the
judgment and conscience; but also the selfsame faculties against themselves,
reason against reason, will against will, the same affection against the same,
love against love, fear against fear, and hope against hope. In which respect
this fight with our flesh is much more dangerous then our fight with Satan
himself; for though he be sometime yea often near us, yet not always, and
when he is nearest* he is not alike near as our own flesh, which adhereth to
every part and faculty of body and soul. Though he casts into our hearts and
minds the fiery darts of his tentations, yet if we catch them upon, and quench
them with the shield of faith they will not hurt us. Yea though he buckle and
close with us, yet if the Spirit of God dwelling in us resist this foul
spirit, he will fly away at least for a season, and we Luke 4. 13.
shall be rid of his noisome company; but our flesh and carnal corruptions
inseparably cleave unto us, and though they be never so often overcome, by
fasting, prayer, watchings and such like spiritual exercises, yet as long as
we live, we cannot be quite rid of them, nor wholly subdue them, and an hilate
their strength, but after they seem to be withered they will again flourish,
after they are weakened they will recover strength, after they seem to
languish with age, they will regaine their youthful vigor, yea when in
outward show they appear mortified and quite dead, they will again revive and
standing stoutly in their strength they will re*enforce the fight against us.

Sect 2. That the daungerousnes of this enemy is much increased by reason of
this cohabitation.
From whence it may plainly appear, how exceeding dangerous the flesh with
the lusts thereof are unto us, seeing they are enemies not only strong and
subtle, but always hard at hand, not only besieging and besetting us, but
even dwelling with and in us. Whereby they have no small advantage against us,
for never leaving but adhering and cleaving unto us in all places and at all
times, they are ready to vvatch all occasions and to take all opportunities of
doing us mischief, laying traps and snares for us in all our enterprises. For
do we undertake the performance of holy and religious duties? Why then they
dog and follow us to the exercises, and distract us with vvorldly cogitations
and wandering thoughts, and oppress our minds with dullness, drowsinesse and
carnal weariness. Are we employed in the duties of our callings? They will
make us negligent and lazy, and carry us away with carnal pleasures, or so
wholly and earnestly intent on them, that we shall spare no time for Gods
service nor for the enriching of our souls with spiritual treasures. Do we
eat and drink to relieve and sustain our bodies? They are ready to make our
tables snares, turning sufficiency into superfluity, and necessary food into
excess and bellycheare, surfeiting and drunkenness, where the soul and
spirits are so oppressed, that they are utterly unfit for any Christian duties.
Do we intend to refresh our selves with honest recreations? They do attend
and wait on us, moving us to consume a great part of our time in them, which
should be allotted to better exercises, and even to spend our strength and
spirits in the immoderate use of them, whereby instead of being refreshed and
cheared, we are disabled and made utterly unfit for the duties of
Christianity and of our callings, and are so wholy taken up in the means,
that we neglect the maine ends for which we use them. Yea do we after our
labors betake our selves to our rest? When we lock our chamber doors, we
cannot shut out these enemies, but whether we will or no, they will be our
bedfellowes, and are always ready at our lying down to distract us from any
good meditations or serious examination of what we have done or omitted the
day past, to fill our minds with vain dreams and wicked imaginations, and
to oppress nature, in stead of refreshing it; vvhilest we give our selves to
too much drowsinesse. And thus these cowards stick not to strike us even when
we are down, and if we stand upon our vvatch and guard when we are
waking, to give us deadly vvounds when we are a sleep never suspecting any
danger.

. Sect. 3. The means of preventing the former danger, is to stand upon our
guard and to pray the Lord to watch over us.
Now if we would be secured against that dangerous advantage which the flesh
has against us, the best way is not to be secure, but continually to stand
upon our guard, and as the Apostle exhorts Timothy, to watch in all things,
that we be not circumuented by this enemy, who is always present with us to
take all opportunities of vvorking our destruction. For who walking among
snares or scorpious would not carefully look to every step? What man carrying
a serpent in his bosom will not 2. Tim. 4. 5.
use his best heedfulnesse to preserve himself from stinging? Who being among
the thickest of known thieves, will not look to his purse, and have always
an eye to his choysest jewels, that he be not robbed by them? What citizens
having their mighty and malicious enemies, not only besiedging them in the
suburbs, but even entered into the city, and always ready in arms to surprise
them, will lie snorting in security and not carefully stand upon their vvatch
and guard? Yea who having a cruel and malicious enemy lodging in his own
heart, and always ready to prye into all his thoughts, words, and actions that
he may take all opportunities to circumuent and hurt him, would not be moved
hereby to hearken unto the Wise man's counsel, and keep his heart with all
diligence, that so Pro. 4. 23.
he might defeat this enemy, and be preserved from evil in the midst of
these dangers? And yet this is not enough if we go no further; for we must not
only watch, but pray also, if we would be freed from these tentations. Neither
is our care and providence sufficient to keep us in the midst of these
dangers, seeing if we sometime be awake, we be at other times asleep, if now
we keep a narrow watch, soon after we will be secure and retchlesse, and
therefore* we must pray the keeper of Israel, who neither slumbreth nor
sleeps, to watch over us and to preserve us from these perilous and pestilent
enemies, and of him we must beg with David, not only that he will set a watch
before our mouths and keep the door of our lips, but also over our works
and ways, yea even the secret thoughts of our hearts, that they may not be
tainted and corrupted, subdued and led captive unto sin by this sinful
flesh, which adhereth unto us and dwells in us.

Sect. 4. The second advantage which the flesh has is that it is indefatigable
and never wearied.
The second advantage which the flesh has against us, is that whereas we are
faint and soon wearied in this spiritual conflict, the flesh using herein a
natural motion, is altogether indefatigable and never wearied; whereof it is
that it is so impudently importunate, that though it has many repulses yet it
will take no denial* though in the conflict it be often beaten back and put
to flight, yet it will never quite leave the field. But unite it scattered
forces, and receiving new aids and encouragements from the devil and the
world, it will a fresh assault us and renew the fight; herein resembling an
hunger-starued dog who will by no means leave the house where he has often
been relieved, but no sooner is beaten out of one door, then he reentreth
into another. So one says, that the flesh rages with furious Nazianzen. de
animae suae calemitati. page 934.
strength, and never rests from the war the success whereof is very
doubtful, for sometime the flesh is subdued by the spirit, and sometime again
the spirit unwillingly follows the flesh, and although it desires that which
is better, yet it does that which it bateth, etc. For the flesh is ruled by no
words, it is broken and weakened with no labors, nor yet bowed or softened
with any length of time; but always with blind eyes hasteneth against our
lives and (like him possessed with the legion) it lusts to be on the steep
mountains and craggy rocks; and if sometime it be forced for a while to give
place to the fear of God, painful labors, and divine oracles, yet again
like a plant bended down by the hands of the gardener, it returns to it
perverse faultiness. Yea oftentimes the more these fleshly lusts are
resisted, the more enraged and violent for the time they grow, and the means
and medicines which God has appointed to cure them, make the disease but the
more desperate, an example whereof we have in those heathen Princes of which
the Psalmist speaks, who when Christ by his word and spirit would reign over
them, unite all their forces and rebel against him saying, let us break his
bonds in sunder, and cast away his cords from us. Psalm. 2. 3.
So the Apostle confesses, that the more he charged the Romans 7. 8.
Law upon his sinful lusts, the more they rebelled, and took occasion by
the Commandment to work in him all manner of concupiscence, wherein these
lawless lusts may be fitly likened unto lime which is kindled and inflamed by
water, wherewith all other fires are quenched, and do resemble their Lord and
leader the devil, who the more he is crossed of his ends, the more he rages;
and are 1 Pet 5. 8. 9.
fitly by the Prophet compared to a raging sea, which the more the tide and
current is crossed and opposed by the Esa. 57. 20.
wind, the more tempestuous it waxes, swallowing and devouring all that is in
the way, with his lofty wanes and surging billows.

Sect. 5. Of the means to frustrate the former advantage.
Now if we would not have these advantages which the flesh has against us
pernitions to our souls, let us labor that as it is never weary in fighting
against us, so we also may not be weary and faint in this conflict; but let us
with undaunted courage, not only sustain the assaults of this enemy, but also
provoke and set upon him with all his sinful lusts, that we may mortify and
subdue them, though we cannot wholly expel them and drive them out. For if our
sinful flesh be never weary in running such courses as will bring us to
destruction, let us be never weary in stopping and opposing it, and
contrariwise in running the Christian race which will bring us to salvation. If
it be never weary of tripping at our heels, that we may fall, and in clinging
unto us as a heavy burden, that it may slacken our pace, stay us in our
course, and so make us loose our crown; let us never be weary in looking
warily to our footing that we may not slip nor slide, or being fallen that we
may speedily rise again by unfeigned repentance, nor yet let us think any
pains too much that we may shake off this weight of corruption, and this
sin that does so easily beset us, that we may run with patience the race
that is set before us. To which end let us first consider, that if we will Heb.
12. 1.
take this pains, we shall in the end be assured of victory, the which may
well put courage into us, and make us hold out in this conflict, for if the
flesh is not wearied in this fight after many wounds and foyles, though in the
end it be sure of a shameful overthrow, much less let us faint who are
assured in the end to obtain a joyful victory. Secondly, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
let us meditate of the riches of the crown; and of the gloriousness of the
triumph, which we shall enjoy after we have suffered a little while the pains of
this spiritual warfare; and when we are weary in running the Christian race,
let us comfort and refresh our selves by having continually in Heb. 12. 2.
our eye the goal and garland, imitating and looking unto Jesus the author
and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him despised all
the toil and trouble which he found in the way. And finally let us being
weak and faint in our selves pray continually unto God for the assistance of
his holy spirit to strengthen us in this conflict, and to renew and repair our
wearied, fainting and decayed graces, that so receiving new life vigor and
strength from him we may thereby be enabled to hold out unto the end; let us
when we are tired crave this holy annoynting which will so supple and soften
our stiff ioints and weary limbs, that we shall be able to continue in the
Christian race, till being come to the goal we shall obtain the garland.
Neither let this discourage us, that the more sharply we deal with the flesh,
the more it is enraged; for it is but like the fury of an enemy, who has
received a mortal wound, which if for the present it be resisted, the blaze
of the choler quickly goes out, and fainting in his strength he will fall at
our feet, it is but like the reluctation and resistance of a base minded
slave, who by a few and small stripes, is so enraged that he is ready to
catch his master by the throat, but if he be thoroughly hampred and soundly
beaten, he will fall down at his feet and bear what stripes he pleases to
give him without resistance. And therefore let us make this use of the rage of
the flesh, to be moved thereby to unite our forces and redouble our blows, and
then though it make never so many gallant brauadoes, it will quickly yield and
we shall be sure of an happy victory.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRISTIAN WARFARE BETWEEN THE FLESH AND THE SPIRIT,
INTRE Ating of the conflict it self, and of the means whereby we may get the
victory.
CHAP. I. That there is a combat in every true Christian between the Flesh
and the Spirit.
Sect 1. Testimonies of scripture to prove that there is this conflict in
every man that is regenerate.
NOw having showed the nature of our enemy, how dangerous he is, and how we
may be armed and prepared to withstand his assaults and obtain the victory;
we are to entreat of the combat and conflict it self. And first we will
show, that there is in the faithful such a combat and conflict indeed and
truth, although worldly and carnal men who never found it in themselves are
ready to think it to be but a mere conceit. The which will appear by
plain testimonies of Scripture, for the Apostle tells us, that the flesh
lusts against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, and that these are
contrary the one to the other, so that we cannot do the things we would. Where
by flesh and spirit (as I have proved) we cannot understand the body and soul
but the part Gal. 5. 17.
regenerate and unregenerate, the corruption of nature and the quality of
holiness in every faculty and power of them both. So in his own example he
shows the practique and experience of this truth in the seventh chapter of
the Romans, for he professes that he could not do the good he Romans 7. 19.
22. and. 23.
would nor leave undone the evil he would not, that he was delighted in the
law of God in the inner man, but at the same time found another law in his
members rebelling and making war against the law of his mind, and bringing
him into captivity to the law of sin which was in his members; and plainly
says that when he was thus led captive unto sin, it was no more he that did
it, but the sin, that is, the sinful corruption that dwelled in him.

Sect 2. That the Apostle in the seventh of the Romans speaks of this
conflict in himself as he was regenerate.
Now that the Apostle did not speak this of himself as he was unregenerate,
as some would have it, nor as he was under the law, as others would have it,
in his state of humiliation and preparation to his conversion, and so
consequently not of the conflict between the flesh and the spirit, but
between the conscience and the corrupt will; it may easily appear by the
Scripture it self, for the Apostle does not write in the preterperfect-tense,
what he had Arminius in Romans 7.
been in time past, but in the present-tense as his state was when he wrote
this Epistle. And besides the things which he speaks of himself do plainly
euince this, which cannot be truly attributed to a man unregenerate, or under
the law, and only in his preparation to his regeneration; but are proper unto
them who are converted and in part sanctified. For first he allows not the
evil he does, and consents unto the law that it was good, and therefore
his conscience and judgment were in part enlightened and rectified, he
wills the good he did not, and the evil which he did, that he nilleth, and
therefore his will was in part regenerate; he hates the evil he does, and
delights in the law of God after the inner man, and therefore his affections
were in part sanctified, he did not the evil which was committed, but sin
that dwelled in him, and there is a sore conflict between the law of his
mind and of his members, which was nothing else but the combat between the
flesh and the spirit, and therefore in respect of his whole man he was in part
regenerate. Finally he desires earnestly to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, and professes, that with his mind he served the law of God,
though his flesh served the law of sin, and therefore he was not the slave
of sin and Satan, as all are who are unregenerate and under the law, but
the servant of God, and a subject of the kingdom of Jesus Christ. And thus
Austins, upon his second and sounder thoughts, reuoking his former Ego enim
putabam dici ista non posse, nisi de ijs, quos it a haberet carnis
concupiscentia subiugatos, vt facerent quicquid illa compelleret. August.
contra Julian Pelagian lib. 6. cap. 11. Col. 11 35. T. 7. Vide etiam retract.
lib 1. Cap. 23 et lib. 2. c. 1. Tom. 1.
error expounds this place; I thought (says he) that these things, (to wit)
I am carnal, sold under sin, and led captive unto the law of sin by the
law of my members, could not be truly spoken of any, but of such as are so
inthralled of their carnal concupiscence, that they did whatsoever it
compelled them, which to conceive of the Apostle were mere madness, seeing in
many of the Saints, the spirit so lusts against the flesh, that it cannot thus
prevail. But afterward I gave way to other of better judgment, or rather to
the truth it self, plainly perceiving in these words of the Apostle the
groaning and complaint of the Saints striving against their carnal
concupiscence, etc. Whereof it came to pass that I understood this place as it
was understood by Hilarie, Gregory, Ambrose, and the rest of the holy and
famous Doctors of the Church, who do all think that the Apostle did
courageously fight against his carnal concupiscence, which he had in him
though he desired to be freed from it, and that in these words he professes
this his conflict. And a little after; neither can well any man's spirit lust
against his flesh, unless the spirit of Christ dwelled in him. So Gregory
Nazianzen acknowledges and deploreth this conflict which he felt in himself
between the flesh and the spirit. Neither am I (says he) wholly mind or
spirit, that is, pure nature, nor on the other side wholly flesh, that is
nature corrupted, but composed of both, I am an other thing and yet both of
them. Whereof it is, that I continually suffer perpetual tumults of war, the
flesh and the spirit encamping against one another. I am the image of God, and
am drawn into vice, though I struggle and Greg. Nasian. de animae ^uae
calamitat. page 93. 934.
strine against it, the worse part wickedly conflicting against the better; so
as not without great labor and daily wrestling, the hand and help of God
assisting me, I flee and resist vice. And these thus conflicting the one with
the other, the eye of God beholding them from heaven has aided the spirit,
subdued the tumult and rage of the trouble some flesh, ad stilled the swelling
waves of carnal preturbations. And so also the flesh rages with furious
strength, and never rests from making cruel war; and though there may be
sometime an intermission, yet there is never a dismission from the fight.

. Sect. 3. That all the regenerate have feeling and experience of this conflict.
And these testimonies out of the Scriptures and Fathers may be sufficient to
convince the carnal, and unregenerate, who having no feeling of this conflict
in themselves, because they are wholly flesh, do imagine that it is not in any
other. For as for those who are in part regenerate, and yet have the old man
and the relics of sinful corruption dwelling and remaining in them, they
will easily acknowledge this truth, even out of their own feeling and
experience, though no other testimony or reason could be alleged. Neither is
it possible that this mortal combat should be sought in any, but that they
must easily feel the terrible encounters and cruel blows given on either
side. Not between diverse faculties, as the conscience and the will, the mind
and judgment against the affections and the sensual faculties (the which is
also in the unregenerate); but the self same faculties, as they are regenerate
fighting against themselves as they are unregenerate; as error against truth,
and truth against error in the same mind and understanding, faith against
doubting, and doubting against faith in the same heart, willing against
nilling, and nilling against willing, about the choosing and refusing of good
and evil in the same will, the love of God conflicting and combating with the
love of the world, the fear of God with the fear of men, affiance in God with
diffidence in him, and confidence in the creatures, hope of heavenly
happiness, with hope of enjoying earthly vanities, as also with presumption
and despair, and contrariwise, obedience against disobedience and rebellion in
the same desires and actions; as we shall more fully and plainly show in the
following discourse. All which does plainly prove that their whole man is
divided, and part-takings in all their faculties and powers of body and mind,
the one adhering and deauing to God, the other drawing to Satan and the world,
the which is more feelingly discerned and experimentally felt by every true
Christian, then it can be demonstrated and euidenced by any man's writing.

Sect.. 4 The contrary effects which the Christian feels in himself, do
prove plainly that this conflict is in them.
Finally the contrary effects which every Christian may observe in himself do
sufficiently argue and demonstrate, that there are contrary causes in him from
which they proceed, and as it were many soldiers of contrary factions, led
under their Captains the flesh and spirit, which like mortal enemies
continually make war the one against the other. For who finds not, after
his regeneration and conversion, himself to be as a kingdom divided, and
that as in his spiritual and renewed part, he has a great desire to serve his
Lord and redeemer, and takes delight in his laws preferring them with David
before all Psalm. 119.
manner of riches; so in his fleshly part and the old man that he is
inclinable unto the service of sin and Satan for the base hyre of worldly
vanities? that as in the one he affects and loves piety and purity,
righteousness, mercy and holiness of conversation; so in the other he is
transported Ephesians. 5. 9.
with self love, and is much addicted to the pleasures of sin? As in the one
he believes God and the truth of his promises and threatenings, trusts in
his word, power and providence, loves and fears him above all things; so in
the other he is subject to doubting and infidelity, to distrust in God and
affiance in the creatures, to the love of earthly things and the immoderate
fear of man. Finally as in the one he aspireth unto Immortality and
everlasting happiness, and having his conversation in heaven, minds not
earthly things, out chiefly seeks after P^^^. 3. 20.
those things which are above; so in the other he lies grouelling on the
earth, walloweth himself in the puddle of sensual pleasures, and unlawful
lusts, meditateth and thinks only on momentanie riches and murable
preferments, or the means whereby he may compass them, never seeing, seeking
nor regarding, that heavenly happiness and weight of eternal glory prepared
for the faithful. And from this contrariety in affection and disposition, the
Christian may discern the like contrariety in all his actions which arise and
spring from them* For one while the spirit lifts him aloft in heavenly
meditations, and another white the flesh pulls down his thoughts, and fi^^^h
them upon earthly vanities; now with pu^^ing speed he runs in the ways of
God, and say^^^h with full sails, having the wind and tide to help him
forward, and soon aften the flesh diuerteth him into the by paths of sin,
or makes him sit still, o^ to return into his old courses, or tripping at his
heels causes him to fall* or so settereth his feet and presses him down,
like a heavy burden, that (like them noubled with the ^p^ialtes or the night
Marc) though he has a great desire to run a pace, yet can he scarce stir,
but he runs as it were up a sleep hill, and sails against the wind and
tide. Finally now he loves God and is ravished with delight when he inioyeth
his presence in his courts, and feels sweet communion and fellowship with him
to his inestimable joy and comfort, and this makes him to contemn the world
and to take all his pleasure in spiritual and heavenly things and by and by the
world catches him in her birdlime of carriall delights, and fettereth him in
her golden chains, so as he is made negligent in Gods service, and therefore
either omitteth it altogether, or else performs it with drowsy dullness,
senseless deadness, and carnal weariness, whereof it is that he can take
no manner of comfort and contentment in it. Yea rather he sees Gods angry
countenance frowning upon him in the abuse of his holy ordinances, and being
terrified therewith he goes away discontented and dismayed.

Sect. 5. The point proved by. Gal. 5. 19
And of these contrary effects and fruits of the Spirit in the same Christian,
the Apostle plainly speakeths Gal. 5. 19. Now (says he) the works of the
flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witcheraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, enuyings, murders, drunkenness, reuilinge and
such like. For the seeds of all (...) grievous sinner lie lurking in our
corrupt flesh, and though they be so nippped and suppressed by the contrary
motions of the spirit, that they can never come to full ripeness, yet do they
often appear to the best Christians in their first motions and suggestions. So
contrariwise he says, that the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering gentleness* goodness, faith, meekness and temperance. To
which purpose verse. 21.
Hierome says, whatsoever we speak, do or think, is sowed in Omne quod
loquimur, agimus, cogitamus in duobus seminatur agtis carne et spiritu etc.
Hieronym. in Gal. 6.
two grounds the flesh and the Spirit; if the things be good which issue from
the mouth, hand and heart, they are sown in spirit, and shall bring forth
abundant fruit to eternal life; if they be evil they are taken from the
field of the flesh, and will bring forth unto us the fruit of corruption.

CHAP. II. What the Conflict between the Flesh and the Spirit is, and what are
the causes of it.
The conflict between ^^^ flesh and ^e spirit described.
BY this it appears that there is a combat in every Christian between these
enemies now in the next place let us consider what i^ is; and the causes of it.
Where then needs no curious definition, seeing the very name does
sufficiently express the nature of it; For it is nothing else but a continual
conflict between the unregenerate part the flesh, with the lusts thereof, and
the part regenerate, the spirit with all the holy qualities, graces and motions
thereof, by reason of their contrariety in nature and conjunction in place,
whereby they mutually lust and strive one against the other, the flesh willing
and in bracing that evil which the spirit nilleth and hates, and nilling and
shunning that good which it wills and effects, and contrariwise. For in
this conflict they mutually assault one another with vnreconcilible emnitie and
immediate and unplacable contrariety, so that as the one gets, the other
loses, as the one gathers strength, the other is weakened; and look how
much this prevails and triumphs, so much his enemy and opposite is foiled
and dejected. Like herein to a pair of scales, in which the rising of the one
is always joined with the going down of the other, or like the spleen in the
body, the swelling whereof is joined with the others consumption. Yea alike nay
much more contrary then light and darkness, heat and cold the one whereof
increases, as the other decreaseth.

Sect 2. Of the first and chief cause of the conflict which is Gods will for
the manifestation of his own glory.
The causes of this conflict are either efficient and more remote, or formal
and essential; the later is plainly expressed, the former employed in the
description of this conflict, namely Gods will appointing this fight; and to
this purpose, not perfecting our sanctification in this life, but in part
regenerating, and in part leaving us unregenerate. Yea but why did not the
Lord, who through his infinite wisdom was as able to have recreated and
renewed us at once by his sole word as he did first create and make, us perfect
this work of regeneration, replenish us with abundance of his spirit and with
sanctifying graces thereof, and quite abolish the flesh with the lusts
thereof? I answer though there were no other reason but the good pleasure of
his most wise will, it were sufficient to satisfy us, for he best knows
what to give, and when to give it, what measure of his grace is fittest for him
to bestow, and the most seasonable time for us to receive it. But yet diverse
reasons may be yielded why the Lord suffers the flesh and the sinful lusts
thereof still in some measure and degree to remain in us, and to fight with
and assault the spiritual part, all which may be reduced to two heads; first
because this course is most profitable, and secondly most fitting and
seasonable. It is most profitable both for the setting forth of Gods glory, and
the advancing and furthering of our own good. It does more manifest and
magnify the glory of God, for the weaker we are in our regenerate part, and
the stronger the flesh is with all other the enemies of our salvation, the more
clearly his wisdom and power shines and appears, which so strengthens
this weak part, that it is able to stand in the day of battle; yea that it
obtains a full and final victory, and puts all it mighty enemies to
flight. Whereas if we were perfectly regenerate and the flesh utterly
vanquished and abolished, it were no great wonder, that we were not overcome,
if we had no enemy or but a vveake one to set upon us. And this moved the Lord
to suffer the prick in the flesh to molest the Apostle, and the messenger of
Satan to buffet him, notwithstanding he so earnestly prayed to be delivered
from 2 Cor. 12. 9.
them, that the al-sufficiency of his grace assisting him might appear, and
his power might be gloriously manifested in his weakness and infirmity.
Secondly God is more glorified, when as we seeing the strength of our flesh
and natural corruptions, and our frailty and weakness, wants and many
infirmities of our spiritual part are moved hereby to attribute the whole
glory and praise of our salvation to the alone mercy of God, both in respect of
the beginning and persecting thereof, and utterly denying our selves and our
own righteousness, do wholly rest and rely upon the perfect and
all-sufficient righteousness and obedience of his son Jesus Christ: where as
if there were in us perfection in holiness, we would hardly acknowledge the
Lord to be all in all in the work of our salvation, but would be ready to
attribute something unto our selves. Thirdly, the wisdom and power of God is
more manifested and glorified, when as he does his great works by contrary
means and causes which in their own nature would rather hinder them. And
therefore he will have us Ioh. 9. 41. 1 Cor. 3. 18. Apoc. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 12. 9.
blind that we may see, foolish that we may become wise, poor that he may
enrich us, weak that we may be strong, imperfect in our graces, that we may
be endued with more perfection, and finally will have us pass by the gates of
hell, that we may come to a greater measure of heavenly happiness. It were not
so much, if the Lord should perfectly sanctify us, and presently give us
eternal glory; but to give this blessedness to us who have so many wants and
corruptions, yea to make our imperfections to serve as means for the
increasing of our happiness, this does exceedingly magnify his power and
wisdom. Fourthly, we are hereby made more thankful unto the Lord, and more
cheerful in singing to his praise, when we are supported and saved
notwithstanding our imperfections, then if he should indue us at the first
with all perfection. For the more sensible we are of Gods benefits, the better
we esteem them, and so consequently receive them with greater thankfulness:
but the more we have found the want of them, and how little we have deserved
them, the more sensibly do we apprehend their excellency when we enjoy them;
the more we have groaned and labored under the burden of our infirmities and
corruptions, the more weereioyce when we a(...)ed from them; and our restoring
out of a state of in perfection unto perfection, is much more acceptable, then
if we (...) always been preserved in it. Even as i^ gives us more contentment
having been poor to be made, then to be borne rich; to enjoy our liberty
after thraldom, the^ if we had never been embondaged; and makes us more thank
full to our benefactors, when as by them we have been adopted, then when we
have been borne to a goodly inheritance. And so in the like case we are more
thankful unto God for freeing us from our sinful corruptions, by little and
little, then if at the first he had made us pure and perfect, and for giving us
victory over the flesh after a painful and doubtful conflict, then if we
had never been assaulted but had always enjoyed a secure peace. And this we
may see in the example of the Apostle, who having through the violence of the
flesh been led captive unto sin, and thereby forced lamentably to cry out, O
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of Romans 7. 24. 25.
this death? does presently in the sense of Gods mercy which had delivered
him, burst forth into thankful praises; I thank God through Jesus Christ my
Lord. Lastly, hereby we more glorify God when we are assured by our growth in
sanctification and in all saving graces of the spirit, by which we are
enabled to resist the flesh and the lusts thereof, that they are the free
gifts of God and that he begins, continues and increases them in us,
which if they were always from the beginning perfect in us, we would think
them to be some natural faculties and abilities and not given us of God. And
these are the reasons which do chiefly respect the glory of God.

. Sect. 3. That this conflict ^^ profitable for the faithful, to train them
up in humility.
Secondly, the Lord suffers the flesh still to dwell in us and daily to
assault us, because it is profitable for our own good, and the furthering and
assuring of our heavenly happiness. First because it is a notable means to
train us up in humility, which is a grace most acceptable unto God, and to
subdue our pride and all vainglorious conceit, which above all other vices
is most odious and hateful, when as we see and consider what a miserable
vastation and spoil of all those graces and excellent endowments which we had
by creation sin has made in us; how it has poisoned, corrupted and disabled
all the powers and faculties of our souls and bodies, how it has made us
unfit for any good thing, and prone unto all evil; and that these stains and
blots of sinful corruption do in a great part remain in us after our
regeneration, so assaulting us with all malice and fury, darkening our
understandings, wounding our consciences, perverting our wills, hardening our
hearts, and corrupting and disordering all our affections, that were we not
continually assisted and vpheld by the spiritual grace of the Almighty God,
we should sink and fall in the conflict, and be made an easy pray to our
malicious enemies: this may well subdue our lofty and proud conceits, and
make us pull down with shame our peacockes plumes, when as we look to the
foul feet of our filthy corruptions, see the ruins remaining of Gods goodly
building, and how all our natural forces do quite fail us and forsake us,
when as we most rely on them; yea when as we see even after regeneration such
relics of corruption and rebellion remaining in us, that did not the Lord
continually send unto us fresh aides of renewed graces we were not able to
stand nor maintain the fight against ou^ carnal corruptions. In consideration
whereof we are justly moved to humble our selves and to give all glory unto
God, who works in us the will and the deed, and not only begins, but
continues and perfecteth the work of our salvation; and finally to
acknowledge, that what grace or spiritual strength we have more then others,
we 1 Cor. ^. 7.
have it from God and not from our selves, and therefore that we have no cause
to boast of it seeing it is received, but must return God the glory of his
own gifts. And thus does the Lord in his infinite power and wisdom turn
evil into good, and like the most skillful Physician does make our sins (as
it were the flesh of the Viper) a most wholesome preservative and cordial for
the dispelling from our hearts more dangerous poisons.

. Sect. 4. This conflict is effectual to make us deny our selves.
Secondly, whereas we cannot be Christ's Disciples unless we deny our selves,
nor be partakers of his righteousness for our justification, unless we
renounce our own, nothing can be more effectual to this purpose, then the
sight and sense of our own imperfections and corruptions; for when we
plainly discern, that there is nothing in our selves to rest upon for the
satisfying of Gods justice, this will make us to flee unto Christ, to hunger
and thirst after his perfect and all-sufficient righteousness, and to make us
wholly to rely upon him for our justification and salvation. Which when we
do, we may be more secure and better assured of heavenly happiness, then if
we were as perfect in our own inherent righteousness, as our first parents in
the state of innocence, seeing they fell into sin and misery through the
strength of Satan's temptations, but we cannot; so long as we wholly rest
upon Christ and are vpheld by his omnipotency. And as hereby our selves have
great assurance of our happy condition; so do we more glorify our Lord and
redeemer, seeing we acknowledge the al-sufficiency of his grace, and yield
unto him the whole glory of our salvation.

Sect. 5. By this conflict we are moved the more to hate sin.
Thirdly, we are hereby moved to abhor sin, which God so hates, with
greater detestation, when as by our own experience we find and feel the
venom and poison of it working in our selves, and to bewail and forsake it
with more earnest endeavor, when we discern and see what miserable effects it
produces, and what bitter and cursed fruits it brings forth in us. As namely
that it has corrupted our whole nature, disabled al our strength, defaced in
us Gods glorious image, incensed his wrath against us, made us subject to the
curse of the law, deprived us of the glory of God, and made us guilty of
eternal damnation. From all which miseries nothing could free us, unless the
son of God had dyed for us, and washed us from the guilt and punishment of
all our sins in his most precious blood. All which plainly discovers the
haynousnes and tyranny of sin, and makes us thankful unto our Savior who
has freed us from it.

Sect. 6. We are moved hereby to fly unto God by frequent and fervent prayers.
Fourthly, by the sight and sense of these sinful corruptions still dwelling
in us, we are occasioned to flee oftener unto God by fervent prayers,
acknowledging and bewayling them before the throne of grace, earnestly craving
the remission of them, and the assistance of Gods grace and holy spirit whereby
we may be enabled to mortify our corruptions, and to flee all sin for the
time to come; and to return unto him praise and thanksgiving when we have
received these graces from him. Fifthly, whereas there is nothing more
dangerous unto us then sloth and security, we have through these corruptions
dwelling in us the benefit of spiritual exercise, whilst we make war
against them, withstand their assaults, prepare our selves for the conflict,
watch over our own hearts that we be not surprised at anawares with their
deceiptfull policies, mortify and subdue them with the sword of the spirit,
exercise the spiritual graces received from God, and our selves in all holy
duties which God requires for the obtaining of victory; by which they are more
and more confirmed and increased. So also hereby we have great cause to be
more careful and watchful over our hearts and ways, seeing we have dwelling
in us a secret enemy who watches all opportunities to supplant us and to
betray us into the hands of Satan and the world; the which should make us
work out our salvation with fear and trembling; and vvhilest we stand to
take heed of falling; this should cause us to Phil. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians.
6. 10.
stand daily and howerly upon our guard, and to keep the spiritual armor
girded fast upon us as the Apostle exhorts us.

Sect. 7 It serves to work in us patience and contentment. Lam. 3. 39.
Sixthly, it may serve to make us go on in our pilgrimage with contentment,
and to bear all afflictions which are laid upon us with meekness and
patience, not only because we have deserved them by this sin that dwells
in us, according to that in the Lamentations; Wherefore does a living man
complain, seeing he suffers for his sinned but also because we know and
have experience that these corrections are necessary to bridle and mortify the
flesh with the lusts thereof, and serve as drawing salues to draw out the
core of our corruptions, as the launcher and searing iron to help and heal
our impostumations of sin, as bitter potions to purge away our corrupt
humors, and as salt to season us, that we may not be tainted and perish in our
fleshly puterfaction; and to make us more wise and wary, that we may not
nourish our enemy, but mortify and crucify it, seeing it is the chief
author of all our calamities.

Sect. 8. By this conflict our hearts are weaned from the world.
Seauenthly, it is profitable for the weaning of our hearts and affections from
the world, and to make us long after our heavenly happiness, when as we find
our selves tired and wearied in fighting, not only with foreign foes, but
with these intestine and secret traitors in our own bowels; whereas if having
gotten full conquest we should have continual peace and our victory crowned
with earthly prosperity, we would never so much long after our heavenly
happiness. And this chiefly made the Apostle to long after his dissolution
and to be with Christ, because he found himself so often foiled with this law
of his members, and Phil. 1. 21. Romans 7. 23.
led away captive by his sinful flesh. Eighthly as it makes us to long after
the crown of victory, so it will make it, when we shall obtain it much more
glorious; for the Lord will have us first to fight and overcome our spiritual
enemies, and then he will reward us with the crown of victory; first he will
have our spiritual graces exercised and manifested in the conflict, and then
being approved he will give us a proportion of glory according to the
propertion of our graces. So our Savior promises (not to the Souldiars which
lie quietly in their garrison, assaulted with no enemy) but to them who
fighting overcome, that they shall sit with him on his throne, clothed with
white raiment, and shall eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God. And this order Paul uses in Apoc. 2. and 3.
laying hold on these blessed hopes, first to fight the combat, and then to
receive the crown. I have (says he) fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. 2 Timothy 4. 8.


Sect. 9. T^^^ conflict is suitable for the time and place wherein we live.
Lastly, as it is profitable that these relics of sin should remain in us,
and also suitable and seasonable to the time and place wherein we live. For it
is appointed by God that we should not in this life attain unto perfection,
but that we should only labor after it and attain unto it in the life to
come; that we should, whilst we be here, be in our nonage and come to our
perfect age in Christ and our heavenly inheritance after we are dissolved and
be with Christ. This world is appointed for our painful pilgrimage, wherein
we must toil and travel, endure many miseries and be indaungered to the
malice and furious assaults of our spiritual enemies; and it is not seasonable
to expect our rest and joys, until we be arrived saufe in our own country.
Finally it is appointed of God to the place of our warrfare, and therefore we
must not look to have our enemies quite expelled or vanquished, but here we
must fight daily and approve our faith and Christian valor to our chief
sovereign; and then afterward when by death we have gotten a full and final
conquest, we shall be crowned with the crown of victory. Finally it is not
Gods pleasure that we should in this life attain to our full stature and
perfect measure of sanctification and holiness, but that we should be still
growing from one measure of grace to another, and by peecemeale consume the
body of sin which hinders our growth, until by death it be sully abolished.

CHAP. III. Of the formal and essential causes of this conflict.
Sect. 1. That there was no conflict in man in the time of innocence.
We have showed the chief efficient causes of this conflict: let us now
consider of those causes which are formal and essential; and because
contraries are best illustrated by their contraries, as heat by cold, darkness
by light, and the miseries of a dangerous war, by the blessings and benefits
of an happy peace; let us consider (that we may reduce this discourse ab ouo,
even the first principles and grounds) how that there was a time, when this
conflict and civil broils were not to be found in the little world of man. The
which was twofold, the one was that truly golden age, in which man created
according to Gods own image lived in the state of innocence, when as there was
a blessed peace and heavenly harmony between the body and soul and all the
faculties, powers and parts of them both. For the understanding being
enlightened from God with heavenly wisdom, did both know and observe the
law of nature written in the heart; the which served as a just rule, whereby
it was directed in the knowledge of good and evil, truth and falsehood, right
and wrong. Wherein the judgment being thoroughly informed, the mind gave unto
the will true evidence and information, concerning all things presented unto
it, the which it readily received, cheerfully embracing what it approved, and
refusing and avoiding what it disalowed. The affections also quietly and
joyfully obeyed reason as their Lord and Sovereign, like souldiars following
their Captain and as blind men do their guides; and the body was both a fit
and ready instrument unto the soul for the executing of all good designs, and
in all things like a faithful servant was ready at command. And thus whilst
the understanding and reason, placed as Gods vice-ioy in us obeyed him as the
supreme Sovereign, the will was also ruled by reason, and the affections with
all the parts of the body were subject unto them both; and all conspiring and
agreeing together made a sweet harmony, and like loving and wel-agreeing
subjects in a well ruled commonwealth, they all stood firm in their united
forces.

Sect 2. How the causes and occasions of this conflict were begun in us.
But when Satan the arch-enemy of mankind, and chief author of all discord
and dissension, saw and seeing envied our happy estate and condition, he
plotted all means whereby he might work our ruin. And perceiving, that
though our estate were strong, yet it was mutable, we being left of God to our
own free will, either to stand or fall, to retain the good, or to choose the
evil; he mustreth together all his forces, and lays siedge to this
wel-walled and strong manred City; against which he could no more prevail,
then the Grecians at the siedge of Troy, by powerful violence and fierce
assault, till with his Sinon-like or rather serpentine subtilties, he had
persuaded us under show of love and peace to put of our armor of created
graces, and to pull down with our own hands the walls of our defense. And
then seeing us thus weakened and disarmed; and yet lying in the drunken and
drowsy sleep of retchlesse security, he enters in upon us accompanied with
a crewe of hellish souldiars the first and chief whereof were disobedience,
unbelief in God, and credulity to the Devil, damnable pride, envy
discontent, aspiring ambition, and unthankfulness. All which being let in by
that breach which our free will abusing it liberty had made in our souls,
presently they all fell to burning, sacking and spoiling us of all Gods rich
graces, our created wisdom and holiness, and surprised all our strong holds,
making themselves conquerours of all our powers and parts, and every one of
this hellish crewe and sinful vices choosing for their dwelling and
possession those places and parts which they thought most fitting for them. As
for example ignorance, error, curiosity and many thousands of sinful vices
choosing for their dwelling and possession those places and parts which they
thought most fitting for them. As for example ignorance error, curiosity and
many thousands of sinful imaginations, like the Iebuzites surprise and keep
the chief tower of the mind; worldliness and profaneness, subdue and hold
reason in subjection; perverseness and rebellion surprise the will; but in the
heart there are encamped (as it were in the chief market place of the city)
such a multitude of our hellish enemies, as cannot either be named or numbered,
even many legions of unlawful lusts, infidelity, wicked hopes, hellish
despair, hatred of God, love of the world, pride, disobedience, deceit
cruelty, ambition, covetousness, voluptuousness with the rest. All which with
innumerable others of this hellish army, being entered; did not utterly race
down this goodly built City, but only killing and casting out Gods graces
which were the natural inhabitants, they kept their holds and places for their
own use and dwelling. Neither were the substance of the soul or body, or the
essentials, the powers, parts and faculties of them, lost, annihilated or
utterly destroyed by the fall of our first parents (although their energy and
virtue was greatly impaired* their edge blunted, and vigor deaded) but only
those excellent qualities, and rich ornaments of heavenly wisdom, holiness
and righteousness, wherewith they were beautified after Gods own image, were
quite taken away. The which (being as it were the strong garrison which kept
the City) were no sooner expelled, but the sinful lusts triumphing in their
victory, held all under their subjection to the devils use as their chief
Sovereign.

Sect. 3. No conflict between the Flesh and the Spirit in the state of
corruption.
Now there was not in eitheir of these estates this combat and conflict in us
between the flesh and the spirit whereof we entreat; not in the state of
innocence, for then was there in us a sweet harmony and consent between all
our powers and parts of soul and body, and there being no sinful lust or
unruly passion in us, but a great multitude of well-agreeing graces we enjoyed
a blessed peace. Nor in the state of corruption was there any such conflict,
because the strong man Satan possessing all, all that he possessed was in
peace; only (as it happens often among soldiars of the same band, who strive
one with another about the booty and prey) there was some contention between
the will and the conscience, and between one unruly passion and another, but
it was only like those hot contentions between the Jesuits and the Priests,
who much disagreeing about profit and sovereignty one with another, yet all
agreed and joined together, as one man, like true vassals, to do all service
to their Lord God the Pope, yea (as it may probably be suspected) even their
quarrels and contentions, were part of his service, and in their disagreeing
they yielded obedience to their holy father; for so in like manner in the
hottest contention between our sinful lusts* they yielded their obedience
to the devil as their chief sovereign, who if he saw by this strife any
disadvantage arising to his hellish kingdom through this hot contention, was
both able and ready to accord their differences (as the Pope did those between
the Priests and Jesuits) and so to join them together like friends in doing
him service.

. Sect. 4. The peace of the unregenerate more pernicious then the most
dangerous war.
But this hellish peace was ten thousand times more dangerous and pernicious to
our poor souls and bodies, then the most cruel and perilous war to the
weakest enemy; and so much the rather because we had no apprehensio^ of the
danger, nor feeling of our own misery. Because we were borne the bondslaues of
the devil, and so still brought up in doing him service in the unfruitful
works of darkness, for which we had only the present pay of worldly
vanities, though when we had labored most in his toylesome works, we were
oftentimes cozened of our wages. Herein like unto the Israelits under the
Egyptian Pharaoh, who when they were best used, had but their onions, garlic
and flesh pottes, whereby only they were but better enabled to do their
drudgery and work in their brickekils, and sometime in stead of these poor
comforts, they had for all their labor, sore beatings and cruel blows; and
yet being bred in this servitude and knowing no better, they rather choose to
return unto it again, then to take any pains in going to the land of
promise. So and much worse was our miserable bondage to the Pharaoh of hell,
for at the best we had for all our drudgery, but the stinking garlic and
onyons of worldly vanity, which he gave not for love to us, but in love to
himself, giving us this food (as the rider gives prouender to his horse) that
we might be the more hartened to do him service. And out of his hellish
hatred and cruelty toward us he often withheld from those who did him most
faithful service, this pay of earthly prosperity, and in stead thereof
afflicted and misused them with the blows and stripes of misery and
afflictioon. Nevertheless being borne and inured to this hellish thraldom
(such was the height of our misery) we desired still to live and dye in it,
taking our whole delight, and placing our chief happiness in pleasing our
tyrannical master by serving him in the works of darkness and doing all
abominable wickedness; although we were sure after that we had been toyled
in his service and scorched in his bricke-killes, we should for the
accomplishment of our reward be cast into the fire of hell.

Sect 5. Gods infinite love in sending his only soon to redeem us, made wa^
for this spiritual conflict.
But when we were in this desperate condition, and now come to this height of
misery, that we desired still to live in it, and (like the Israelits with
Moses) would have been angry with any who should have offered unto us means
of deliverance, because not only our other parts and faculties, but also our
wills and hearts, our love and liking, with all other our affections, were
enthralled in this service, and voluntarily leaving their Lord and creator,
wholly adhaered to Satan and delighted to do his will: even then our gracious
God, infinite in all mercy and goodness, of his mere grace and free good
will, sent his only son into world to redeem us with his precious death, to
vanquish and subdue all the enemies of our salvation, and to set us at liberty,
who were embondaged, and were so in love with our thraldom, that we did not
so much as desire to be freed from it. Who having thus paid the price of our
redemption, and provided a sovereign salve for all our sores of sin, does
not so leave us (for then we should have been never the better) but applies
the power and efficacy of his merits unto us, and (as it were with his own
hand) ^ayeth the plaster upon our mortal wounds, whilst by his word made
effectual by his spirit, he makes known unto us this excellent work of our
redemption, and the promises of grace and salvation made to all believing and
repentant sinners, by which he begets this faith in us, wherewith, as with
an hand, we lay hold on and apply unto us his righteousness, death and
obedience for our justification and redemption and so in respect of right we
are freed from our sins, so as they cannot condemn us because God in Christ
has forgiven them, and also from the tyranny and thraldom of Satan, death,
hell and condemnation, Romans 8. 1. 3^
so as they shall be never able to hurt us or lay any thing to our charge. And
not resting here, our powerful Savior sends his spirit with many legions of
his graces into our hearts, who pull us out of the dominion of sin and Satan,
so as they cannot rule and reign in us as in times past, regenerate and
purify us from the filth and corruption of sin by power of the same death
which delivered us from the guilt and punishment due unto it, and enable us to
serve God in newness of life by applying likewise unto us the virtue of his
resurrection.

Sect. 6. Sanctification begun and not perfected is the formal cause of this
conflict* first because of the great contrariety between grace and corruption.
But this (as I have before showed) is only begun and not perfected and
accomplished in this life, not for want of sufficient virtue in Christ's death
and resurrection, but through the weakness of our faith we being but partly
regenerate and partly unregenerate, in part spiritual and in part carnal. And
that I may follow the similitude, though the great tyrant Satan be thrust from
his throne, so as he cannot any longer rule us as a King, yet he is not quite
expelled out of our quarters, but still he molesteth us as an enemy and though
the legions of his lusts are beaten from the strong holds, and driven out of
the market place and chief gate of the City, yet they lie lurking in the
suburbs and secret corners; and no sooner give we them through our retchlesnes
the least advantage, but they steal through our sleepy watch and guard, or
cunningly thrust in at some posterne gate, and so assault us with all violence
and malice. So that there may be two maine and essential causes given of this
conflict between the spirit accompanied with Gods graces, and the flesh
attended with many sinful lusts; the one is the antipathy and contrariety
which is between them, which is exceeding hostile and full of al emnity and
opposition, as it may appear if we consider the contrariety of their natures
for what is the spirit, I mean the created spirit infused into us, but the
quality of holiness and righteousness renewed according to Gods image? And what
is the flesh, but the defacing of this image, the deprivation of this original
righteousness, and the stain of natural corruption which has ouerspread and
defiled all the powers and parts of our souls and body? so that the flesh
resists the spirit in a double opposition, both as it is a privation and want
of righteousness, and as it is a corruption making us prone to all
unrighteousness. And therefore the contrariety which is between them is as
great and unreconcilable as between light and darkness, health and sickness,
heat and cold, good and evil, so that the prospering of the one is the ruin
of the other; the increasing of the one is the decreasing of the other, and the
ones preuayling and victory, is the others weakening and utter ourthrow. The
other is their cohabitation and dwelling together in the same place and
subject, which ministers unto them mutually occasion, and imposes a necessity
of their continual opposition, even as when fire and water, heat and cold
meet together, there can never be any agreement, or so much as a truce till
the one of them have gotten the upper hand, and the other as much as lies in
the power of the contrary quality, be subdued and abolished.

. Sect. 6. Secondly because these enemies so contrary and opposite dwell
together.
Neither are we so to conceive it as though these enemies so opposite dwelled
in the same City, but in diverse holds, or in the same man in respect of his
diverse parts, but even (as it were) in the same house and chamber, in the same
faculties and parts. More plainly, the flesh does not only dwell in the body
or inferior and sensual parts; and the spirit in the soul alone, or the
intellectual and reasonable faculties, for so they might part their bounds and
dominions, shut the door against one another, and sometime enjoy a peace or
truce without the others molestation; but in the same understanding and will,
body and affections, so that the whole soul in respect of it diverse faculties,
is partly flesh and partly spirit, and cannot be divided but only
distinguished, the understanding, will, affections and body being partly
regenerate and partly unregenerate, partly sanctified by Gods spirit, and
partly sinful and corrupted with those relics of sin remaining in them.
For example the image of God is in part renewed, and the image of sin and
Satan in part remains. As in the understanding ignorance is inchoatiuely
dispelled and driven away, and the light of knowledge shines in it, not
perfectly, but still the fogge and mists of ignorance remaining, observe this
light being wholly mingled with it. So the perverseness and rebellion of the
will is changed into loyalty and obedience, but yet imperfectly, and therefore
the relics of corruption remaining the same will obeys and rebelleth,
wills and nilleth both good and evil; the affections which were corrupted
and disordered, are by the spirit sanctified and reduced to order, yielding
their obedience to their sovereign holy reason; but this sanctification being
but begun and imperfect, the relics of corruption do still remain, so
that the same man both loves and loatheth both spiritual and carnal things,
trusts and distrusteth God, and contrariwise distrusteth and trusts in the
creatures, hops and dispaireth in Gods mercy, fears God and immoderately
fears man, humbles himself before God ascribing unto him the whole glory,
and is puffed up with pride, arrogating some part of that which is due unto God
only unto himself. So the same appetite being but in part sanctified, is
partly temperate and partly intemperate, partly sober and partly addicted to
excess; and the same body in the like respect, is partly the instrument of
righteousness unto holiness, and partly the instrument of unrighteousness
unto sin. In which respect the new man and regenerate part, may fitly be
compared to a child, which is perfect in all the parts of a man in the first
hour he is borne, but yet little and weak in respect of his strength and
stature, notwithstanding still increasing and growing till ^ee come to be a man
of ripe and perfect age. And contrariwise the part unregenerate is as fitly
resembled to an old man, worn out with age and decrepite, who also has in
him all the parts of a man, but yet weakened and enfeebled. Who though he has
a greater stature, yet is not much stronger then a child; and though he be,
yet herein is his disadvantage, that whereas the other increases daily and
waxes stronger, he decreaseth and decays, waxing every day more feeble then
other, till at last by death all his strength is wholly abolished, so as now
the weak child being grown to man's age, may triumph over him and trample on
his grave.

Sect. 7 How such contraries can dwell together and not abolish one an other.
Yea but how can such mortal enemies and contraries so opposite dwell together
without the abolition and utter destruction of the one party, seeing they do
not only like the Canaanits and Israelits dwell in the same land, or the
Israelits and Iebusits in the same City, but in the same man, and which is more
not in diverse, but even in the very same part and faculty. To this I answer,
that though these contraries cannot dwell together in their prime vigor and
full strength, and therefore in the state of perfection, there could be no
conflict, because there could be no flesh, nor yet in the state of corruption,
because there could be no spirit, yet they may, when their degrees are abated
and their vigor and full strength is somewhat blunted and deadded. In which
respect this residence of the flesh and spirit, is fitly compared to the
residence of the light and darkness in the air, in the twilight or dawning
of the day, when as there is not one part of the air dark and another light,
but the whole air partly light and partly dark, he darkness and light being
mingled together; or of heat and cold in the same lukewarm water, where
they are not divided in place, but the whole water is partly cold and partly
hot; or of water and wine in the same vessel, in which there is not one part
wine and another water, but the whole mixture is partly water and partly wine;
or of sickness and health in those which we call weak and sickly, through some
spice or relics of an Ague or Fever; of whom it cannot be said, that he is
sick in one part and sound in another, but that he is partly healthy in his
whole body, so far forth as he is recoured, and partly sick so far forth as
the relics of his sickness remain in him. In all which these contrary
qualities do not friendly conioyne themselves, nor agree one with another,
neither do they communicate their properties, virtues and contrary qualities
to produce this mixture, but both of them stand still in hostile terms in the
same subject, laboring continually to get the victory, and wholly abolish his
enemy and opposite.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Combat it self and the manner how it is fought in us.
Sect. 1. When we are called by God to this conflict.
We have showed what are the causes of this conflict; and now we are in the
next place to speak of the combat it self, and of the manner how it is
fought in us. To which purpose we are to know, that the acceptable time and day
of salvation being come, when as the Lord is purposed to deliver us eternally
out of the hands and power of sin and Satan, reigning and ruling in our
hearts as Kings, yea Gods, as the Scripture speaks; holding the Romans 6. 12. 2
Cor. 4. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
whole man with all the powers and faculties of his soul and body in
subjection to do their will; that for the time which remains, we may be his
servants and souldiars, to obey him in all things, and to make war under his
standard, against the spiritual enemies of our salvation, it pleases him by
the ministry of his word, made effectual by the operation of his spirit, to
open our blind eyes, that we may see and plainly discern, that wretched
bondage under sin and Satan in which we live, the innumerable miseries into
which it plungeth us for this present life, and that hellish condemnation and
everlasting torments, which if we live and die in this thraldom, do attend us
in the life to come. Thereby is discovered unto us the tyranny of the devil,
whereby he reigns and rages in us, working our hearts to his will, and
inclyning us to drudge in his service, for no other reward but the uncertain
pay of worldly vanities, which shall be accompanied with endless destruction;
the ugliness and intolerable weight of sin which as an heavy burden
presses us down to hell, the terrible wrath of God inflamed against us by our
sins, and the curse of the law ready to attach us. Finally that our lives be
momentary and uncertain, and therefore also the pleasures of sin can be but
alike unsure and of short continuance; but the life to come and both the
pleasures and joys, and the pains and torments of it are everlasting, and
there is no hope to enjoy the one and escape the other if we live and dye in
our present condition. And thus when by the ministry of the word we are
brought to a sight and sense our damnable and wretched estate our sleeping
consciences are awakened, our hard and flintie hearts are thoroughly humbled and
softened, bruised and made contrite, so as our former carnal security being
shaken of, we relent and mourn in the sight of our sin and misery Being thus
cast down and humbled, the Lord by the preaching of the Gospel makes known
unto us his love in Christ, the infiniteness of his mercy and goodness
together with that singular pledge there, of his dear and only son, given
to the death for our redemption; the sweet promises of the Gospel assuring all
of the mercy and forgiveness of their sins, and deliverance out of the hands
of all our spiritual enemies whom Christ by his death has vanquished and
subdued, and of eternal life and salvation of body and soul, if we will lay
hold upon Christ and his righteousness by a living faith, and bring forth the
fruits thereof by forsaking our sins and turning unto God by unfeigned
repentance. Which means of coming out of our present misery and of attaining
to a better estate, being made known unto us, we begin to conceive that there
is some possibility of coming out of the thraldom of sin and Satan, and
of attaining to salvation; the which inflameth our hearts with an earnest to
come out of our bondage, and to this end, to be made partakers of Christ and
his righteousness, who alone can help us, and a firm resolution to deny our
selves and all other means as vain and unprofitable, and to cast our selves
wholly upon our Savior Christ for our justification and salvation. From hence
arises a constant endeavor in the use of all good means to attain unto
faith, whereby we may be assured of Christ and his benefits, and particularly
apply them unto our selves for our own use, which being likewise wrought in us
by the sweet and gracious promises of the Gospel and we thereby persuaded of
the pardon of our sins, of Gods love and our own salvation, in the next
place we desire to have our assurance confirmed more and more by a lively s^n^e
and feeling, and an experimental knowledge Phil. 3.
that we are by Christ our redeemer delivered out of the hands of our
spiritual enemies. To which end we desire the assistance of Gods grace and
holy spirit, by which we may be actually delivered out of the bondage of sin
and Satan, that they may no longer have dominion over us; and to find and
feel the virtue and power of Christ Jesus his death as effectual or our
sanctification as our justification, for the enriching us with saving grace, as
for the assuring us of eternal glory, for the mortifying and subduing of the
corruption of sin, as for the f^^^ng of us from the guilt and punishment*

Sect. 2. The second summons to this conflict.
Which desires are no sooner wrought in us by the ministry of the word, made
effectual by the inward operation of Gods spirit, but presently the Lord, rich
in mercy and goodness, by the same means does satisfy them, and sends his
spirit accompanied with a strong army of sanctifying graces to take possession
of us for his use, to reign and rule in us, and to thrust down Satan from
his throne, and to depose him from his regencie or rather tyranny over us; and
to subdue, kill and mortify all those garrisons of sinful lusts, so as
they shall not be able under their great General to rule and reign in us as
they did in former times. For example he causes knowledge, spiritual
wisdom, judgment, discretion, holy reason and spiritual cogitations to
enter into the head, and by strong assault to encounter ignorance, curiosity,
carnal wisdom, error, rash giddiness and carnal imagination; Christian
resolution and holy obedience to enter the will and to set upon cowardly fear
and inconstancy, unflexible stubbornness and stiff rebellion, faith and love
with innumerable numbers of holy affections to take possession of the heart,
and to subdue and vanquish infidelity, self-love and love of the world, with
those many legions of unlawful lusts and unruly passions which Satan had
placed in it; spiritual concupiscence and holy desires, temperance, sobriety,
and chastity, to seat themselves in the inferior faculties and sensual
appetite, and to thrust out, and to hold possession against carnal
concupiscence, worldly lusts intemperance, wantonness and uncleanness with
the rest of their opposites; Finally purity and honor, to seize upon the body
and all the members thereof, and to drive out and cleanse it from all
uncleanness and noysomnesse, wherewith it had been defiled like a filthy stye
of impure beasts, through the inhabitation and abuse of sinful lusts.

Sect, 3. The manner of the conflict it self.
Which royal and heavenly army of Gods saving graces, led under the conduct of
his holy spirit, do no sooner enter the field and encounter their enemies,
but presently they put them to the worse, and causing them to retire do get
the victory. Satan the strong tyrant that held all in quiet possession and
ruled as he list, is put to flight, spoiled of his power and regency, and the
spirit of God seateth himself upon the throne, and the flesh and the lusts
thereof in the first conflict receive such deadly wounds that they never
recover of them, but languish in a continual consumption till at last they be
wholly abolished. And therefore being in the first battle thus weakened,
foiled and discomfited, they have never the courage afterward in a martial
manner to proclaim war against the spirit, and the army of Gods graces which
do accompany i^, to bid the^ battle and to fight against them in a pitched
field; but crafuly and cunningly reentrouping their scattered forces, they like
the sauadges or Irish kernes, will only fight upon advantages, and therefore
make secret ambuscadoes, and hide themselves (as it were) in the woods and
thickers from which they sally out at unawares, when we are most secure, and so
skirmishing with us they sometime wound and foil us and for a time cause us to
retire. And so otherwhiles they set out some booty of worldly profit or
pleasure, with which they allure us to come, when we think not of it, within
the danger of their shot; and sometimes (as it were in the night) when we are
brought into a deep sleep of retchlesse security, they make some inuoades
upon us wast and spoil, and do much mischief, firing our he(...) with
unlawful lusts, corrupting or gagging the conscience which as the centinell
should give us warning of their approach, wounding and misleading the will unto
some perverseness, and carrying the members of the body as captives unto sin.
But when the spirit taking notice of these conflicts rises up to give them
battle, gathers his scattered forces and entering the field sounds the
alarem to the fight, then the rebels quit their standings and run away or
yield themselves as captives to suffer the punishment which their rebellion
has deserved. Howbeit they do not long continue under subjection, being only
kept under by slavish fear, but upon every opportunity they rebel again,
and give fresh assaults to Gods graces in us, though in the end they are
assured of an utter overthrow; like herein unto thieves and cut purses, who
when they are apprehended and cast into prison, are only restrained from their
wicked courses, but not reclaimed and amended; or unto gally-slaues who are
forced to labor at the command of their enemies, whilst they are tied in
chains and feel the smart of the whip, but no sooner do they break loose
and make an escape, but they are ready to encounter with all fury the same
persons who not long since they so seruilely obeyed; or finally like unto their
father devil, who though he be continually foiled and put to flight, yet is so
wholly transported with his inueterate malice, that he continually opposes
God in all things especially in the salvation of his Elect, and makes
continual war against Michaell the Arch-angell, or the Prince of Angels
Jesus Christ, and the army of his Saints, though he be not able to prevail
against them.

Now this fight between these enemies is maintained on both sides not by handy
blows, sword and shield, pike and shot, for of the fight of the spirit the
Apostle says, that though we walk after the flesh, yet we do not war after
the flesh. (For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through
God to the pulling down of strong holds) casting 2 Cor. 10. 3. 4. 5
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ. And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
obedience is fulfilled. But as the enemies are spiritual, so is the manner of
the fight spiritual, by inward lusting and concupiscence, whereby motions and
inclinations, either good or evil are stirred up in the heart and soul. And
thus there is a contrary lusting between these enemies: the flesh lusting
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh as the Apostle plainly
teaches us. In which their contrary lusting, they both of them mainely aim at
two general ends. Gal. 5. 17.


Sect. 5. The first end as which the flesh aymeth in lusting against the spirit.
The first end at which the flesh in it lusting aymeth, is to stir up and
incline us unto such lusts, desires and motions, as are sinful and contrary
to the law of God, as to infidelity, impenitency, pride, self-love, hatred,
envy, uncleanness, covetousness and such like; or to speak more distinctly,
it endeavors to beget and stir up, preserve and nourish evil cogitations
in the mind, wicked inclinations in the will and sinful affections and
desires in the heart, in which respect it is fitly compared to a fiery furnace
or boiling pot, which continually send up sparks and smoke; and by the
Apostle James it is likened to a filthy harlot, which by her alluring baytes
inticeth to commit folly with her, upon which follows the conception and
birth of sin and death. And our Savior Christ tells I am. 1. 14. 15.
us, that from within, even in the heart, (that is the sinful Mat 14. 18. 19.
flesh and natural corruption, which chiefly resideth in the heart) proceed
evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness,
wickedness, deceit, lasciuiousnes, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride,
foolishness, etc. Contrary to this is the lusting of the spirit, which
endeavors to stir up and persevere good motions and inclinations in us, as
good meditations in the mind, good resolutions in the will, good desires and
affections in the heart which are conformable and agreeable to the holy will
and word of God. Thus the Apostle John says, that we have received an unction
from 1 Ioh. 2. 10.
the holy one whereby we know all things. And Saint Paul exhorts us not to
quench the spirit, that is the good motions which arise from it, as it were
sparks from the fire. So David. I will bless the Lord who has given me 1
These. 5. 19. Psalm. 16. 7.
counsel; my raynes also instruct me in the night season, that is, those
sweet meditations and motions which the spirit secretly in the night season
puts into our minds and hearts. And the Prophet Esaias says, that the ears
of the faithful shall hear a voice behind them, saying. This is the Esa. 30.
21.
way walk ye in it, when they turned to the right hand, and when they turned
to the left. Which is to be understood not only of the voice of Gods
Ministers, outwardly speaking unto us in the ministry of the word, but also of
the voice of the spirit, secretly by the good motions thereof leading us into
all truth. For so our Savior accordingly promises, that he would send his
spirit the comforter, who should convince the world of sin, righteousness
and judgment; and that when he was come, he should lead the faithful into
all truth; and reveal unto them things to Ioh. 16. 8. 13.
come.

Sect. 6. The second many end at which the flesh aymeth in lusting against the
spirit.
The second maine thing at which the flesh aymeth in this conflict is, either
to repress and smother the good motions and inclinations which the spirit
exciteth and stirs up in us, or else to poison and corrupt them, that they
may become unprofitable and turned into sin. So when the spirit moves us to
perform some good duty of Gods service, of justice or mercy, it will labor to
quench this motion, and to withdraw us from it, either by alluring us utterly
to neglect it, and to spend our time rather in pursuing worldly vanities, or by
persuading us, that there is such difficulty in it, that we shall not be
possibly able to compass and atchieue it; or if we do that it will not be
worth our labor, or finally by intycing us to defer and delay it, because we
may be fitter, or have better opportunity to perform it hereafter, then at
this present; in which respect the Apostle says, that through this opposite
lusting of the flesh, we cannot do the good we would. But if it cannot Gal. 5.
17.
persuade us either utterly to neglect the duties of Gods service which he
commands, or to defer them till we get some better opportunity, then it
will endeavor to inturrupt and distract us in them and to stain them with our
corruptions and imperfections that they may not be acceptable. As when we set
our selves to pray or hear the word, it will put into our minds worldly
cogitations and wandering thoughts, that so we may not intend these holy
exercises or else oppress our hearts with drowsy dullness, deadness of
spirit and carnal weariness, so as we cannot perform them with any
cheerfulness. And of this the Apostle complains; namely, that when he
delighted in the law of God in the inner man, he saw another law in his
members, Romans 7. 22. 23.
warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the
law of sin which was in his members. Esa. 64. 6.
And this is the cause why our best righteousness becomes like a menstrous
cloth, and why our best prayers, need to be perfumed with the sweet odours of
Christ's intercession, before they can ascend unto God, and become sweet
incense in his nostrils.

Sect. 7. The ends at which the spirit aymeth in lusting against the flesh.
Contrariwise the spirit labors and endeauoueeth to suppress and subdue
those evil motions which the flesh rayseth in us, and still moves us to take
the first and best opportunities of serving God and doing his will. So also it
purifieth our hearts by faith from all our sinful corruptions, and makes us
to labor and strive against our infirmities and imperfections that we may
with feruency of spirit and cheerfulness of heart perform all holy service
unto God; and when in these our endeauours we come short of our desires,
through this sinful flesh which does so easily encompasse us, it moves us to
bewail our imperfections, Hhb 12. 1.
and still more and more to labor in the use of all good means, whereby we
may attain unto more perfection; as we see in the example of the Apostle
Paul, who kept under this body of corruption, beating it, as it were, black
and blewe, that he might hold it with the lusts thereof in subjection; whereof
when he failed and was 1 Cor. 9. 27. Romans 7. 23. 24.
either hindered from doing good, or led captive unto sin, he makes lamentable
complaints of these rebellious lusts; and not contenting himself with that
portion of grace and godliness unto which he had attained, he forgate what
was past and still did labor and strive to attain unto Phil. 3. 12.
more perfection. And thus the spirit mastereth and subdueth the flesh so as it
cannot have full liberty, and take it full swinge in sin, as it desires
according to that of the Apostle. Whosoever is borne of God does not commit
sin, for his 1 Ioh: 3. 9.
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin (namely like the unregenerate
with full swing and consent of will) because he is borne of God.

CHAP. V. Of the manner of the fight between the flesh and the spirit in our
several faculties and parts.
Sect. 1. The conflict between the flesh and the spirit in the mind.
But let us descend to some particulars, and consider the manner of this fight
between the flesh and the spirit in our several faculties and parts. And that
both the superior and inferior faculties. In the superior, as both the mind
and the will whether we consider them severally or jointly. Concerning the
former, the mind of the faithful being but in part renewed and regenerate,
the relics Est mihi men's duplex altera bona et boni sequax: at terra mala et
mali consectatrix: etc.
of our sinful corruption do remain in it, which continually fight against
the renewed graces of the spirit, they laboring to expel and thrust them out,
and the other to keep their possession and continue in them. So Nazianzan;
There is in me (says he) a double mind, the one being good follows that
which is good, the other being evil follows Nazianzen. de calamit. animae
suae. Tom. 2. Page 934.
also evil. That chearefully and willingly obeys Christ, and desires the
light; this contrariwise is devoted to flesh and blood, and is ready to
entertain Beliall drawing us to darkness. Whereof it comes to pass that
this is delighted in earthly things and in the flitting and frail profits of
this life, as though they were the chief good, and loves riotous feastings
hatred, gluttony, and the filthiness and willy deceipts of the works of
darkness, and goes the broad way, being compassed about with such a dark
cloud of folly, that it faineth unto it self pleasure out of it own
destruction. But the spiritual mind rejoices in heavenly things, which we
enjoy through hope, places all confidence of life and salvation in God alone,
esteems worldly profits subject to innumerable casualties, as vile and
contemptible smoke, loves honest labors, poverty and landable cares, and
takes the narrow way that leads to life.

Sect. 2. The conflict between the flesh and spirit in the understanding.
Now this conflict in the mind between the flesh and the spirit, may be
diversely considred in respect of the diverse faculties which belong unto it. And
first the understanding being in part regenerate and sanctified, and in part
unregenerate and corrupted, partly enlightened with spiritual and saving
knowledge, and partly obscured with the relics of ignorance; and not only
so, but also much defiled and depraved; there is a continual conflict
maintained in it, between sanctified knowledge and spiritual wisdom on the
one side, and carnal curiosity, palpable ignorance, and that wisdom of the
flesh which is worldly and devilish on the other side. For first carnal
curiosity neglecting those things which are profitable necessary and revealed
to this end that we should know them, labors after nice and idle
speculations and curious questions, which as they are vselesse and vain, so
also abstruse and secret; or else diueth into Gods hidden counselles which he
has forbidden us to search and pry into. But saving knowledge not only
leaves secret things as belonging to the Deuteronomy. 29, 29.
Lord our God, but also represseth and mortifieth, as much as may be, that
vain curiosity, and restraining us from going about to understand above that
which is meet to understand, it understands in sobriety, according as God
has Rom: 12. 3.
dealt to every man the measure of faith. It apprehends things revealed as
belonging unto us, and aymeth more at the use and fruit in practice, then at
the theorie and speculation, and to have feeling and experience of a little
rather then a bare conceit and ability to discourse of much. And yet it
rests not in a small measure, yea in truth not in the greatest proportion,
but still it labors after spiritual growth and increases daily more and
more until it come to perfection in Jesus Christ. Secondly, this saving
knowledge continually combatteth with the contrary extreme palpable ignorance,
for our understandings are but partly enlightened with the knowledge of Gods
truth, and the relics of ignorance do in part remain So the Apostle says
that we know but in part and see but as through a glass 1 Cor. 13. 12
darkely; and yet we stand not at a stay, but labor to attain unto that
perfection of knowledge whereby we shall know as we are known. And this is
the cause of this conflict whilst ignorance striving to keep it place in the
understanding, rayseth thick mists and dark fogs to obscure the light of
truth, and to put out or dazzle the eyes of the mind; and on the other side
saving knowledge does endeavor with the sunneshine of truth shining clearly
in Gods word, to dispell and scatter these mistie fogges by little and little,
until it shine forth brightly unto perfect day.

Sect. 3. The conflict between spiritual and carnal wisdom. Iam. 3. 15.
Finally spiritual and renewed wisdom fights with that wisdom of the
world which is earthly, sensual and devilish, as the Apostle calls it; the
one b^ing so wholly taken up and exercised in spiritual and heavenly things,
which it sees, knowerh and esteems, as most excellent, and therefore
contemning worldly vanities as dross and dung yea loss, in comparison of
them, it little looks after them, where of it comes to pass, that it has
little policy, either to get and compass, or to possess and keep them; the
other being wholly deuouted to earthly things and transitory trifles, looks
only downward, and not being able to discern the glorious beauty of those
divine excellencies (no more then those eyes which having long pored in the
dark, can behold the bright beams of the Sun, but are rather made more
blind then any way illightened with them) it is only delighted in beholding
those things whose beauty is subject to the senses and natural reason; about
which being continually exercised, it grows very wise and quicksighted in
discerning them, and very pollitique in plotting and using in all means both
for the getting and keeping of them. And as these two use contrary Organs and
instruments, the one a spiritual, the other a carnal eye, so also contrary
means and lights to discern their contrary objects. For the spiritual eye is
best enabled to see divine and spiritual things by the cleate light of Gods
truth shining in his word and the inward illumination of his spirit which
makes it better able to discern those things which are spiritual and
heavenly; but the carnal eye (like the eyes of battes and owls) not being
able to endure this sunne-like brightness, discerns best of the excellency
of worldly things in the night of ignorance, and then it is most clear sighted
to hunt after them, and most willy and pollitique to catch and hold them. And
thus it is said of mere natural men, that the eyes of their minds do only
serve them to act cunningly the works of darkness, because they best suit
with the darkness of their understanding, according to that of the Prophet;
My people is foolish, they have not known me, they have foolish children, and
have none Ier. 4. 22
understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. So the Apostle tells us, that they that are after the flesh do
mind or savor the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit the
things of the spirit; where by sauouring or minding, he means understanding,
approving and magnifying these things. The which as it is true of diverse
persons and subjects so of the diverse part regenerate and unregenerate in the
same person; and so whereas the Apostle says, that the natural man
understands not the things that are of the spirit, learned Z^^^hez
understands 1 Cor 2, 14.
it not of him who is merely carnal, but of the unregenerate part of him who
is sanctified. And so in Mat, 16. 23.
truth must the like words spoken by our Savior to the Apostle Peter be
necessarily understood of his part alone which was unrenewed. Math. 16. 23. Get
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou sauourest not
the Mat. 16. 16.
things that be of God, but those that be of men; seeing at this time he was
truly converted and a famous Apostle of lesus Christ, who a little before had
showed that in his part regenerate he sauoured the things of God, by that
notable confession of his faith in Jesus Christ.

Sect. 4 The conflict between the judgment of the flesh and spirit.
And thus we see the conflict between spiritual wisdom and carnal; from
which arises another between the judgment of the flesh and the spirit, for
so far forth as the mind is illightened with spiritual wisdom and
knowledge, answerably the judgment discerning between truth and falsehood,
right and wrong, good and evil, does allow, approve and esteem the one, and
disaloweth, rejects and vilifieth the other; but so far forth as it Mat.
22. 29. Eccles. 9. 2.
still remains blinded and misled through natural ignorance, the judgment
mistaketh error for truth, wrong for right, and evil for good; So our
Savior says to the Pharisees, ye air not knowing the Scriptures. And David
himself being ignorant of the state of the godly and wicked Psalm. 73. 15. Act.
10. 14. 34. 35.
in this life in respect of prosperity and adversity, and that these things
happen alike to all, was ready by a false judgment to condemn the generation
of Gods children, but after that going into the sanctuary his mind was
enlightened with the knowledge of the truth his judgment then gave right
evidence. And the Apostle Peter being ignorant of the abrogating of the
ceremonial law after the death of Christ, and of the breaking down of the
partition wall between the Jews and Gentiles, judges the creatures of God
unclean which he had sanctified, and that he was so confined within the land
of Jury, that he might not preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles, but when God
by vision had enlightened his mind with the knowledge of the truth, he
reformed also the error of his judgment.

Sect. 5. How these faculties of the mind preuatle one against the other.
And this is the conflict fought in the mind between knowledge and ignorance,
true and false judgment in which they (as it were) stabbe and wound one
another, and interchangeably both preuile sometimes, and sometimes are again
foiled and get the worst. As for example knowledge in the regenerate part of
the mind, assaulteth ignorance in the part unregenerate, and with the light of
Gods truth, scatters and dispelleth the dark mistes of ignorance, and soon
after ignorance through the neglect of reading; meditation, hearing the word,
prayer and holy conferences gathers strength, and bleareth again the eyes of
the understanding, that it cannot so clearly at least after a saving feeling
and experimental manner discern the things of God; but then again knowledge
being renewed and strengthened by those holy exercises, recouereth it self and
wins the field. So truth in that part of the judgment which is regenerate
enters the listes, and strikes at error in the unregenerate part, giving it
such a deadly wound that it never recouereth thoroughly of it, and for the
present it may be falls into a dead sownde, but yet it oftentimes through the
help of subtle sophistry, nince and sound destinctions and cunning
paralogismes, brought in to aid it by the world and corrupt affections of the
sinful flesh, which make advantage to themselves by profitable errors, it
recouereth strength and truth gets a foil for the time; but being again
renewed and confirmed by the light of Gods word, it gives error in the end a
shameful overthrow.

Sect. 6. The cause why the godly learned differ in judgment from one another.
From hence we learn what is the cause why men not only very learned, and
endued with a great measure of knowledge, but also regenerate, godly and
religious, do often in their judgment much differ from one another in the
points of Religion; namely because their minds and judgments are but in part
regenerate, so that the relics of ignorance and error do still remain in
them, which i^ the cause that they but know in part, and see the truth of God
(as it were) through a glass darkely, like the man in the Gospel who when his
sight was first restored, discerned men walking, as it had been trees; the
which imperfection of their spiritual sight and knowledge, works in them
only a doubtful opinion, and not any wel-setled judgment, which makes them
to take that way which their conceit apprehends as the most likely and
probable; like diners men intending to travel toward the same City, who
being uncertain and doubtful of the right way, do choose diverse paths, one
being more direct, and others leading them out of the way or much about; but
yet all aiming to go toward the same place, they are ready to return into
their way again, and to make more have in traveling, when upon inquiry
receiving better information, they do perceive their former error. And this
also is the cause why the same men otherwise go ly and religious, do leave the
way of truth and fall into errors after their judgments have been truly
enlightened, the flesh prevailing over the spirit in a new assault, and dazzling
the eyes of their mind whilst with it mistes and fogges it darkeneth the
light which formerly did shine unto them. The which befalls them sometimes
not only in the knowledge of those points of Religion which are of less
consequence, but also exceeding weighty and fundamental, as we see in the
example of the Corinthians and the Galathians, even after the truth of the
Gospel had been preached unto them, the one erring in the doctrine of the
resurrection from the dead; the other in the maine point of justification by
faith in Christ without the works of the law. Whereby the way we may note the
error of the Church of Rome whilst it teaches that the Church cannot err.
For every man living has the flesh still dwelling in him and with it the
relics of error and ignorance, which sometime misleadeth and misguideth him;
and that which is the condition of every man, is the case of all, the same
reason being of the whole and all the parts. And where as it Ioh. 16. 13. 1.
Ioh. 2. 20. 27.
may be objected that the Church has special promises of being enlightened by
the spirit and guided into all truth, to this I answer, that the like promises
also are made to every particular member of it, who notwithstanding may and do
err in some particulars, and therefore the promise is to be limited, first
unto al truth necessary to our salvation; and secondly that they shall by the
spirit receive this privilege, that whereas the wicked continue and perish in
fundamental errors, the faithful though they may fall into them and continue
in them for a time, yet they shall not live and dye in them, but shall in Gods
good time after their going astray, hear the voice of Gods word and spirit
reuoking and recalling them into the right path, and saying this is the way
walk ye in it. Esa. 30. 21.


Sect. 7 That this should make us to conform our judgment to the analogy of
faith.
Again seeing through the flesh dwelling in us we are subject to ignorance
and error, this should make us to conform our judgment and opinion to the
analogy of faith, and as to hold fast those doctrines which are manifestly
grounded upon the Scriptures, so to be modest and sober in maintaining such
points as are doubtful and controuersall, when as other of our brethren differ
from us; because we may err by reason of those relics of ignorance remaining
in us; and they may err also out of human frailty, and therefore are rather
to be pitied then hated, and to be drawn not with rigor, but with the spirit
Phil. 3. 15. Gal, 6. 1.
of meekness. Finally, seeing the relics of ignorance and error will never
leave us till death divide us, this must make us labor continually in the use
of all good means, whereby our minds may be more and more illightened, and
our judgments informed in the knowledge of Gods truth, that so we may be
strengthened against those sharp encounters where with ignorance and error
will daily assault us. And especially we are to hear the word, study and
meditate in the Scriptures* and call often and earnestly by fervent prayers for
the assistance and illumination of Gods holy spirit, whereby we may be
preserved from all errors and led into all truth. For if David who was wiser
then his ancients, and had attained unto more knowledge then his teachers, had
need to make that prayer; Open mine eyes O Lord, that I may see the wonderful
things of thy law; Psalm. 119. 18.
and if the Apostle Paul who was immediately taught by Christ and had received
such abundance of revelations, desired above all things still more and more to
know Christ and to find and feel the virtue and power of Christ's Phil. 3. 10
death and resurrection, then how much more should we who come far short of
their perfection?

Sect. 8. The conflict in our thoughts and imaginatio^s.
The next conflict which is to be considered in the mind is between the
actions and opperations of it, which like unto the mind it solfe being partly
spiritual, and partly carnal; do continually strive and fight against one
another. And these are our thoughts and cogitations, our meditations and
imaginations which labor mutually to expel one another and to keep the mind
in their sole possession. For when the spirit lifts up the mind in divine
contemplations, and causes it to think and meditate on heavenly things as the
end of our hopes, or on the service of God the duties of Christianity, or of
our lawful callings, as the means whereby we may attain unto them; then the
flesh depresseth and pulls it down, and as it were clippeth the wings, or
casts upon them the lime or slime of sin, when as it is soaring this lofty
pitch, and by suggesting such thoughts as are simply worldly and wicked, or
else impertinent and unseasonable in respect of the present employment, do
cause it to stoop unto earthly vanities, and so leaving the substance to catch
a shadow. But the spiritual part finding it self thus defeated of those
spiritual excellencies, which so earnestly it persueth, does not rest thus
dejected and depressed, but shaking of the thoughts of sinful vanities and
sensual delights, and bathing it self in the precious blood of Christ by a
lively faith, it is washed from the filth of earthly corruption, and as it were
picking and pruning it ruffled feathers, when the Sunne-beames of Gods loving
countenance shine upon it, it leaves the earth and up again it mouneeth in
spiritual and heavenly thoughts; and remembering that we are but Phil. 3. 20.
Col. 3. 1. 2.
Pilgrims on earth, and that heaven is our country, it causes us by divine
meditations to have our conversation there whilst our bodies are on earth; and
knowing that we are risen with Christ, it makes us to seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and to set our
affections on things above, and not on things which are one the earth.

Sect. 9. The conflict between spiritual and carnal memory.
And this is the conflict between the flesh and the spirit in our minds and
understanding. To this we may add the combats that are between them in our
memories, for these being but in part regenerate and the relics of corruption
remaining in them, there is a great conflict whilst the memory so far forth
as it is spiritual, labors to blot out and deface all worldly, wicked and
sinful impressions, and to have imprinted in it, those heavenly and
spiritual documents and instructions which have been entrusted unto it by the
sanctified understanding; and whilst it endeavors to cast out the rubbish
and noisome filth of prophannesse, ribaldry, scurtilous jestes, maliciousness
and all manner of impiety and wickedness, that so it may be a fit, sure and
faithful treasury of wise sayings and Religious discourses. And contrariwise
whilst on the other side the flesh and unregenerate part stands in direct
opposition to the spirit, by reprinting and repeating those lessons of impiety
and prophannesse which before our conversion especially and since also we had
learned in the school of the devil and the world, and by working in us
oblivion and forgetfulness of all good things, whereby these heavenly
treasures and spiritual jewels are (as it were) presently cast out of doors,
as soon as they are received, these holy lessons are no sooner written but
they are presently blotted out and cancelled; and these waters of life do no
longer stay with us, then common water continues in a leaking vessel, or in a
sieve.

Sect. 10. Of the conflict between the flesh and spirit in the conscience.
Finally, there is also the like conflict between the flesh and the spirit in
the conscience, whereby I understand not the fight between it and the will,
affections and carnal appetite, which may be in those who are unsanctified and
merely natural, of which I shall speak more in the following discourse; but
that conflict which is in the same faculty, as it is partly regenerate and
renewed by the sanctifying grace of the spirit, and partly unregenerate, the
relics of sinful corruption remaining in it. For as it is regenerate it is
so enlightened and rectified by the spirit of grace, that like a true witness
it gives an infallible testimony between God and us, excusing us when we do
well, that we may proceed in well doing, and accusing us when we have done
evil, that we may forsake it and recover our selves by unfeigned repentance;
yea before the doing of either of them both, it gives testimony and
approbation unto that which is good, that we may embrace and practice it, and
also discovers that which is wicked and sinful, that we may shun and
avoid it. Neither does it only play the part of a witness, but also of a
judge, and according to this true evidence, it either justifies us or
pronounces the sentence of condemnation against us. From the former where of
arise peace, comfort and spiritual joy in the holy Ghost, whereby we are
encouraged to proceed in all holy duties; and from the other either fear
whereby we are restrained from falling into sin, or sorrow and repentance
not to be repented of causing salvation, after 1 Cor. ^. 1^
that we are fallen. But contrariwise as the conscience is unregenerate it
remains blinded with ignorance and corrupted with malitiousnesse, and
therefore is continually ready to play the part of a false witness, either
dawbing and coloring over our sin with deceiptfull colors, that we may
ignorantly fall into it, or excusing it, being committed as though it were
venial or none at all, that we may continue in it without repentance; or on
the other side it is ready to accuse us when we do well; and in the service
of God, or the use of our Christian liberty about things indifferent, to raise
in our minds superstitious fears and causeless doubts, that so we being
affrighted, may be hindered from Christian duties, or discouraged after we
have done them. And so answerably it plays the false Judge condemning where
God and a good conscience justify, and justifying where they condemn. The
which false sentence is the cause of carnal security when we continue in
sin, and of causeless terrors and needelesse fears when we are careful to
perform our duty. The which if at any time it be reuersed by a good
conscience enlightened by Gods word and holy spirit, and the ugliness and
haynousnesse of sin be discovered and laid open; then the carnal and
corrupt part of conscience which before seemed feared and senseless, being
pricked and awakened, fills the mind with loud cries and grievous
accusations with terrible horrors and hideous fears, and now as eagerly
moves to despair, as it did before to security and presumption; telling us
that our sins are unpardonable, and that it is too late to turn from them by
repentance. But then again the good conscience puts it to silence, and
allayeth and quieteth the fury of it, by witnessing unto us that our hearts are
upright with God, notwithstanding that we have been over taken and have fallen
through frailty and infirmity, or at least by bathing it self from the filth
of sin in the precious blood of Jesus Christ which is sufficient to purge us
from the pollution even of those sins which are wilful and presumptuous;
with which washing of blood applied by the hand of a lively faith, it causes
us to join that washing of water, in the tears of unfeigned repentance and
amendment of life.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner of the conflict between the flesh and spirit in the
will heart and affections:
Sect. 1. Of the conflict between the carnal and renewed will.
ANd thus have we showed the conflict between the flesh and the spirit in the
mind and understanding with those faculties which belong unto it. Come we now
to that fight which is between them in the will; the which is much more sharp
and sensible; for it likewise being partly regenerate and partly unregenerate,
there is a continual combat between these contrary factions, whilst the
regenerate part wills and enforces that which is good, and nilleth and
rejects that which is evil; and contrariwise the part unregenerate wills
and chooses that which is evil, and nilleth and refuses that which is good.
As for example the spiritual part being guided by the understanding,
enlightened with saving knowledge chooses and embraces God as the chife
goodness, his kingdom and righteousness as the chief happiness and
refuses and contemns the world and earthly vanities, the service of Satan,
and the momentany pleasures of sin, which in the end bring death and
destruction, though they for the present be bitter to the flesh, and much more
imbittered by afflictions, and these be sweet and delightful to the carnal
appetite. But contrariwise that part of the will which remains unregenerate,
being directed by that wisdom of the which is worldly, sensual and
devilish, neglects and refuses the present comforts of grace which it
relisheth not, and the future hopes of heavenly happiness, which it knows
not, as being out of sight and beyond the apprehension of sense, uncertain and
not to be compassed without great difficulty; and contrariwise chooses and
embraces this present world with the vain honors, uncertain riches, and
sinful pleasures of it because they are subject to the senses and may be
had in present possession. In which conflict they mutually encounter one
another; and as they get their advantages, sometimes the one and sometimes the
other prevail, and cause the adverse part to give ground. And this conflict
with the issue of it the Apostle felft in himself, Romans 7. 15.
Romans 7. 15. For that which I do I allow not; for what I would, that do I
not, but what I hate that do I. And again. Cui rei ego suspicabam ligatus,
non ferro alieno sed meaferre a voluntate etc. Aug. confess. lib. 8. cap. 5.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find
not; for the good I would I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I
do. So Austine confesses, that whilst he desired his sound conversion, be
found himself bound, not with other men's chains, but by his own iron and
obdurate will. The enemy (says he) did hold my will, and thereof made a strong
chain to bind me; for out of perverse will, sprung unlawful lust, and
whilst I obeyed lust, it became a custom, and whilst custom was not
infringed it became necessity, with which linkes infolded one in another a
chain, as I said, was made, and held me bound in a miserable servitude. And
my will renewed which begun to move me to worship and enjoy thee freely my
God, and only sure joy, was not yet fit to overcome the other confirmed by
age. And so my two wills, one old, the other new, that carnal and this
spiritual, did fight between themselves renting my soul in sunder by this
their discords And so I understood in mine own experience that which I had
read, how that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh. And I surely was in both, but yet more I in that which I approved in
my self, then in that which I disallowed. For in this rather I was not I,
because for the most part I did suffer that unwillingly which I did Confess.
Lib. 8. Cap. 10.
willing. And a little after. Do not diverse wills distract the heart of man when
he deliberateth what to prefer in his choice. And all appear good and
strive with themselves, till at length one thing be choosen, unto which all the
will is carried together which before was divided in sunder. And so when
eternity delights above, and the pleasure of temporal good detaineth below,
the same soul does not with the whole will, will this or that, and therefore
it is distracted with much grief, whilst it prefers that in true
judgment, and yet cannot part with this through long acquaintance.

Sect. 2. Of the conflict between faith and infidelity and pr^sumption.
And thus we have seen the combat between the flesh and the spirit in the
understanding and will severally; now let us come to that conflict which ^s in
them being jointly considered, between faith and the contrary extremes
infidelity and vain presumption. The which I refer to both these faculties,
because (as I take it) the first beginnings and least degrees of faith are
chiefly in the will and heart, even as the perfection and highest degrees of
it are in the mind and understanding. For after a man by humiliation and
contrition is fitted and prepared to receive faith, and after that the law
has brought him to a true sight and sense ^f his sins* of the punishments
which by them he has deserved, and that by himself his estate is despeperate
and remediless, being utterly unable to come out of this miserable and
forlorn condition; and that the Gospel has generally showed that Jesus
Christ, sent into the world by his father to this end, is an all-sufficient
Savior who by his blood purges us from the guilt and punishment of all our
sins, and by his righteousness and obedience justifies sinners, then the
spirit of God assisting the ministry of the word works thereby in his heart
some earnest desires to be made partaker of Christ and these benefits, which we
call hungring and thirsting after his righteousness, and this I affirm to be
the first degree of justifying faith and not only a preparation unto it,
because they are pronounced blessed who thus hunger and thirst after Christ and
his righteousness, and there is no blessedness to those who live in the state
of infidelity. Then there Mat. 5. 6.
is wrought in his will a firm resolution to choose Christ alone for his
Savior, and to rest and rely upon him only for his salvation, which is the
second degree of true faith, unto which when the Christian has attained by the
lively sense and experimentiall feeling of Gods love in his holy ordinances of
the virtue and power of Christ's death and resurrection for the mortifying of
his sins, and the renewing and quickening of him in all saving graces, and
finally by his daily walking with God in the works of holiness and
righteousness, and that sweet communion which he has with him in spiritual
exercises, he grows from one degree of faith to another, till at last there
be wrought in the mind not only a certain, but also a full persuasion of
Gods love, the remission of his sins and his own salvation. But yet the
flesh and relics of corruption remaining in us, when we have attained unto
the greatest perfection which this life yields, as in the part regenerate,
there is full and certain persuasion, so in the unregenerate part dwells
doubting, infidelity and vain presumption, which continually assault one
another, and sometimes the one, sometimes the other prevails and gets the
better in the particular skirmish, although in the conclusion and end of the
fight, faith always overcomes and a obtains a full and final victory. In
the mean time, even after that by faith we have laid hold on the promises,
and have grown to a great measure of strength and to an high degree of
persuasion, doubting and infidelity taking the opportunity of some grievous
temptation, do give unto our faith many wounds and foyles, of which
notwithstanding it recouereth upon the renewing of our covenant with God,
receiving the Sacrament which is the seal of it, the applying afresh of Gods
gracious promises, the remembrance of his former mercies, and the renewing of
our repentance, especially for our latter slippes and fall. And this Heb. 11.
11. Romans 4. 19.
we see in the example of Sara and Abraham, who after that by faith they had
received Gods promise, were so far foiled with doubting, that they could
think of no means of bringing it to pass, but by sustituting Hagar in her
place. Of Peter who believing in his Lord and Master, so rested upon his word
and power that he walked toward him on the waters, but sunk into the water,
after he had first sunk through doubting and vnbelife, when he saw Mat. 14
30.
a boisterous blast of wind threatening a storm and therefore was reproved for
his doubting. So the father of the possessed child cries out, I believe, Lord
help thou mine unbelief. But most notably does this appear in the example
Job: 3. 1. 3. and 7, 20. and 6. 4.
of those great worthies Job and David; for for the former we shall see him
sometime complaining as a man Iod. 13. 15. and 19 25.
utterly desperate, cursing the day of his nativity, and challenging God as
his enemy, and at another time professing Psalm. 42. 6. and 73 13. 77. 10. and
23 4. 31. 23. 46. 2.
his faith and assurance of salvation, and resolving that though God should
kill him yet he would still trust in him. And for the other we shall see him
in the book of the Psalms one while as it were a man utterly rejected of God
and forsaken, and soon after as it were riding in triumph after victory, and
even glorying in the strength of his faith and confidence in God. Whereby it
appears that there is in every man regenerate a notable conflict between
faith and unbelief, whereof it comes to pass, that Gods dearest children
may oftentimes not only be foiled with diffidence and doubting, but also in
some grievous temptations may fall into some despair of Gods mercy and love
toward them; the which notwithstanding differs from that despair which is
in the wicked and reprobate, in that theirs is total and final, whereas the
faithful lie in it only for a time, whilst the violence of the temptation
pressed upon them by the devil and the flesh last, and is not total, seeing
their faith even in the greatest brunt fights and strives against it, and in
the end gets the upper hand. Contrariwise our faith is sometime assaulted
with presumption, whereby the flesh moves us falsely to apply the promises and
to presume of Gods love and our own salvation, for though these do
potentially belong to all the faithful, yet they cannot actually be applied
unto them, so long as they live and lie securely in some known sins without
repentance, especially those promises which concern temporary benefits which
are present pledges and pawnes of Gods love and favor. But against these also
faith prevails, when as it purifieth our hearts, bringing us to a sight and
sense of our sins, to a loathing and detestation of them, and to a constant
resolution and earnest endeavor to labor and forsake them for the time to
come; and so again afresh applies the promises unto us, as having now just
interrest and right unto them.

Sect, 3. That the conflict between the Flesh and the Spirit is most turbulent
and sensible in the afeections and sensual appetite.
And thus have we seen the conflict between the flesh and the spirit in the
superior faculties: the like may be observed in the inferior seated in the
heart, as the affections passions and sensual appetite; the which though they
be no more corrupted then the other, yet the corruption in them is much more
sensible, and though the conflict be no more dangerous, yet is it much more
turbulent and violent. For as the poison in the brain is as mortal and
pernicious as any other, and not resting there alone but diffusing it self
into all the parts of the body, does benum and dead them, but that which is
received into the stomach is much more raging and painful, sending up
poisonous vapors into the head wherewith it is annoied and mortally affected:
so the poison of corruption having tainted the understanding faculties, does
from thence descend to the heart and affections infecting them with their
malignitie; but that which is infused into them, does cause a more raging and
violent disease, which is more sensible and grievous, and becomes more
dangerous to the soul sick in sin, because these inferior faculties being
corrupted do work also upon the will and understanding, striking up their
poison back again unto them with redoubled violence. For as the outward
objects move and affect the senses, and they the heart and affections, so they
being thus moved do move the will, and the will draws also the judgment and
understanding. But though these sensual faculties are more grossly poisoned,
and therefore seem more desperately incurable; yet the spirit of God working
also upon these parts does purge them from their contagious humors, and
comfort the heart with such spiritual cordials, and strengthens it with
such heavenly antidotes, that spiritual health is in some measure recovered,
but for as much as in this life the poison of corruption is not wholly expelled
and so they are not fully perfected there is a continual conflict between
health and sickness the antidotes and the poison, the heart and affections as
they are renewed and sanctified and as they remain corrupted and unregenerate.
For the hard stone in the heart strives with the soft flesh, rebellion with
obedience, corrup^on with grace, and whilst the spirit draws the heart unto
God, and spiritual and heavenly things, that it may inseparably cleave and
adhaere unto them, the flesh pulls it back and withdraws it from them, and
labors to keep it still fixed and fasted upon earthly and worldly vanities.

. Sect. 4. of the conflict between the affections and passions.
And from the same cause springs that continual conflict which is between
the affections and passions, wherein sometimes the same affections divided (as
it were) between grace and corruption do fight and strive against themselves,
and sometimes being cross matched do mutually oppose and encounter other
affections and passions which are contrary and opposite unto them; the former
combat being exercised in contrary, the latter about the same subjects. Thus
the love of God, and of spiritual and heavenly things is assaulted with
selfe*loue, love of the world, and hatred of those Divines excellencies;
Affiance in God, his providence and promises, with confidence in the creatures,
and diffidence in the all-sufficient creator; zeal of Gods glory with carnal
blind zeal, coldness and lukewarmenesse: the fear of God which is ingenuous
and filial, with fear of men, and that fear of God which is slavish and
servile; Hope in God, with earthly hopes, and also with presumption and
despair; sorrow for sin, with worldly sorrow which causes death and also
with wretchlesnesse and carnal security; joy in the holy Ghost and spiritual
rejoicing in God with carnal joy in the pleasures of sin, and desperate
grief for worldly losses; Alacrity and cheerfulness in Gods service, with
carnal cheerfulness in pursuing our sensual and sinful lusts, and also
with lumpish heaviness dullness, deadness of heart and carnal weariness. In
which conflict though the spirit receive many foyles through the raging
violence of these wild and rebellious passions, and is oftentimes so wounded,
that in outward appearance there seems to be no life remaining, yet it
proves to be but a dangerous sownde out of which recovering with redoubled
valor it renews the conflict and gets the victory. Though it seem but a
small spark remaining of a great fire, almost extinguished with a flood of
passions, and so covered under the ashes of corruptions that it scarce
appears, yet when the spirit of God does blow upon it, it increases in
strength to a great flame; and finally though whilst the storm lasts, like
a ship in a mighty tempest, it is so hid under the waves of sinful
passions, that scarce any show or semblance of grace remains, yet the good
spirit of God asswaging the tempest and becalming these rough and raging Seas,
like the ship which seemed lately suncke, they re appear and show themselves
in their former beauty, and being helped on with that divine breath, they
carry us forward in all Christian courses (as it were) vnderfull sails, with a
prosperous wind and tide.

CHAP. VII. Of the effects which this Conflict between the flesh and the
spirit produces in us.
Sect. 1. That the man regenerate cannot with full consent of will choose or
refuse either good or evil.
We have seen the manner of the conflict between the flesh and the spirit in
our several parts and faculties: now let us briefly consider of the effects
which it produces in us. And these are either in the will and desires, or in
the works and actions. Concerning the former; from this conflict between the
flesh and the spirit, arising from the imperfection of our regeneration this
effect is wrought and caused in the man regenerate, that he cannot with his
whole will and full consent, either choose and embrace, or refuse and reject
either good or evil; because being partly regenerate and partly unregenerate,
his will is divided, and accordingly does at the same time refuse and choose,
both the evil and the good. For when the will as it is regenerate would do
that which is good, or avoid and shun that which is evil, that part which
remains unregenerate struggleth and hinders, and when this would embrace
the evil or refuse the good, the regenerate part resists and opposes. And
this is that Law which the Apostle says he found in himself, namely, that
when he would do good, evil was present with him; and that when he delighted
in the law of God after the inner man; be saw another laws in his Romans 7. 21.
23.
members, warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into the
captivity of the law of sin which was in his members. From whence arises a
notable difference between the sins of the regenerate and the unregenerate,
which though they be all one in respect of the act and deed done, yet not in
respect of the agent and manner of doing. For the regenerate man cannot commit a
known sin with full consent of will, but there is a reluctation and
resisting against the flesh, not only in his conscience, but also in his
heart, will and affection. For being spiritual and regenerate in all the
faculties of his soul, the chief and principal part of his will adhaereth to
the law of righteousness desiring in all things to yield obedience unto it.
And consequently it resists the motions of the flesh, nilling that which it
wills; And if through frailty and weakness it be overcome it hates and
detesteth that sin with which it is taken captive, and makes the Christian
to be much displeased with himself because he has committed it. He
consents to the law of God that it is holy and good, and i^ more delighted
in it, then in the bewitching pleasures of sin. An example whereof we have in
David, who though by his flesh he was drawn, not only in his will to embrace,
but also in his actions to practice some grievous sins, yet he truly says of
himself, that in his heart he hated every false Psalm. 119. 10^. 118.
way, and that he would have respect to Gods statutes continually. But the
unregenerate man though he sometime feels some panges of conscience checking
him for his sins, so as he cannot securely sleep in them without disturbance,
yet he likes and loves them with all his heart, he willingly obeys his
sinful lusts, he pleases and delights himself in them; neither does
any thing trouble him, but the fear of a guilty conscience, apprehending and
expecting deserved punishment; so that he inuerteth the Apostles speech and is
ready to say, the evil I love that do I not, but the good I hate that do I.

Sect. 2. The regenerate man cannot at all times do the evil which the flesh
chooses. Genesis 39. 9.
The effects which arise from this conflict in the actions and works of the
man regenerate are diverse: first that he cannot do the evil at all times
which the flesh chooses and imbraceth; and this Joseph intimates in his
denial of the wicked suite which his mistress made unto him: How can I do
this great wickedness and sin against God? And what restrained him? surely
the fear of God and his holy spirit which would not suffer him to fall into so
great a wickedness. Secondly that he cannot commit sin as the wicked do
with full consent of will; for sin being deposed from it regency, cannot
reign and rule in the whole man as in times past, but is confined unto a part
alone; and so far forth as we are regenerate we cannot sin. According to
that of the Apostle; He that commits sin 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
is of the devil, whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin, for his
seed (that is regeneration or the seed of the spirit) remains in him; and
he cannot sin because he is borne of God. Thirdly that he cannot walk in
the way of sinners, but propounds unto himself to worship and serve the Lord
in holiness and righteousness; in which course though sometime he slippeth
and falls, and sometime erreth out of the right way for a little space, yet
the spirit of God dwelling in him and conuicting him of his sins, and showing
unto him the digressions and errors of his life, exciteth him to rise again
after his falls, and to return into his old and right way by renewing his
repentance. Whereby it appears that they who live and continue in known
sins, and make a daily practice of committing wickedness, have not the work
of regeneration so much as begun in them, though they make never so glorious
a profession, and (like Herod) do many things praiseworthy in the sight of
men.

Sect, 3. By reason of this conflict he cannot do the good he would. Gal. 5.
17. Romans 7. 15. 18. Heb. 12. 1.
Secondly, by reason of this conflict the man regenerate cannot do the good he
would, nor yield that perfect obedience to Gods law which it requires and he
desires. So the Apostle out of his own experience says, that the flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so that we cannot
do the things that we would. And again, what I would that do I not, but what
I hate, that do I. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which
is good I find not. For when he would run the Christian race, the sin that
compasses him does clinge about his neck, and either makes him for
weariness to sit down, or to run forward slowly and with great difficulty.
It gives him such blows and wounds, that he is often foiled and falls in
his course, and when he recouereth himself and rises by repentance, though he
labors and much desires to redeem his lost time with his suture have and
swiftness yet after his wrestling and combat, he goes on his journey but
haltingly, yea and is often times so dazzled and blinded with the deceites of
the flesh, that he erreth and goes astray, and oftentimes is haled with
violence into the by-ways of sin and wickedness. Whereof it is that our
best obedience is imperfect, even after we are regenerate, and our best
actions so stained and defiled by our sinful flesh, that were not their
imperfections covered with Christ's perfect obedience, and their pollutions
washed away in his blood, they would never ble acceptable in the sight of God,
for though they spring from the pure fountain of Gods spirit yet running
through the filthy puddle of our sinful flesh, they are hereby defiled and
loose their native beauty and purity.

It is true, that the flesh in this conflict does not wholly hinder and
withdraw the regenerate man from performing of his duty, nor alienate his mind
and heart from the flesh cannot wholly hinder the spirit from good actions, yet
it interrupteth it in them.
study and embracing of godliness and righteousness but yet it still
endeavors to do it, and though it cannot make him to stand still or turn
back again, yet like a heavy burden it presses him down and hinders him
in his journey; though it cannot make him desist running the Christian race,
yet it casts many blocks in his way, and often trippeth at his heels to make
him stumble and fall, though it cannot quench and extinguish his desire to serve
and please God, yet it much abateth the heat and fervor of his zeal; and
though it cannot quite crush and sincke him; yet it will so shrewdly bow and
buckle him together, that he is ready to complain with David, that he is
crooked Psalm. 38. 6.
and bowed down greatly, and therefore goes mourning all the day long. The
consideration whereof should move every Christian to be humbled in the sight
of his own frailty, wants and imperfections, to deny himself and his own
righteousness, that he may wholly rest upon the perfect and all-sufficient
righteousness and obedience of Jesus Christ for his iust^fication, and to
ascribe unto God the whole glory and praise of his salvation. For the mind,
will, heart and affections, which are the causes and fountains from which all
our works do spring, being in part regenerate, and in part unregenerate,
partly spiritual and Esa. 64. 6.
partly carnal, all our works and actions which proceed and spring from them
must needs be of the like nature. 1. Cor 10. 12. Phil. 2. 12.
So also it should move us to work out our salvation with fear and trembling,
and whilst we stand to take heed of falling; seeing we are so full of
frailty, and are so much weakened unto all good actions through the malignitie
and continual opposition of our sinful flesh. This should make us to keep
a narrow watch over our hearts, that they be not hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, and to Prou. 4. 24. Heb 3. 13. 32. 13.
lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, and to make straight
paths for our feet, least that which is lame be turned out of the way, as the
Apostle exhorts. It should cause us to mourn and groan in the sight and
sense of our carnal corruption, hindering us in all good actions, and leading
us captive unto sin, and to cry out with the Apostle, wretched man that I am
who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Finally it should move us to
pour forth Romans 7. 23.
daily unto God most fervent and effectual prayers, desiring Pro. 4. 23. Heb.
3. 13.
him to annoint our stiff limbs with the oil of his spirit, and to enlarge
our hearts, that we may run more chearefully and swiftly in the way of his
Commandments, to Heb. 12. 13.
strengthen us daily with his might and to send continually into us fresh aids
of his sanctifying graces, whereby we may be enabled to withstand the
continual assaults of the flesh, to subdue and mortify it with the lusts
thereof, that it may not be able to resist the good motions of his spirit, and
hinder our Christian course in the way of godliness; and in his good time
wholly to abolish this our enemy, and to give unto us a full and a final
victory over it in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII. Of the subject of this Conflict between the flesh and the spirit.
Sect. 1. There can be no conflict in them that are perfectly sanctified.
THe next point to be considered in this conflict between the flesh and the
spirit, is the subject of it where and in whom it is fought; The which is such
persons as are regenerate, and the faithful only, whilst they live in the
world: for in them only is the cause of this conflict, which is the
cohabitation of these enemies which assault and resist one another. Neither can
there be any such combat in the glorified Saints, because they are perfectly
sanctified, and have no relics of the flesh or sinful corruption remaining
in them, and consequently no enemy to oppose and resist the spirit. For whereas
it may be objected that there was a conflict in our Savior who was perfectly
holy, when being in his agony he prayed to have the cup pass from him and
then submitted his will to his fathers, Not my will but thine be done; To this
I answer, that this Mat. 26. 42.
was not the conflict berweene the flesh and the spirit; but as the Schoolmen
speak between two wills in Christ, the superior and the inferior, or the
will of reason, and the will of sensuality, the one being the will of the flesh
or natural appetite and concupiscence, the other the will Ioh. 1. 13.
of the man or the reasonable creature, as the Apostle John seems to
distinguish them. Thus the Disciples having long watched, by their inferior
will and sensual appetite desired sleep; But the will of reason should have
ouerruled this, and therefore because it did not, our Savior reproves them,
Could you not watch with me one hour. So Mat. 26. 42.
a man may by his inferior will desire to eat and drink, and in his
superior will may desire rather to abstain, that it may be conformable to
Gods revealed will, requiring that we should humble our selves by fasting and
prayer. So when death approaches a man may in his inferior will and natural
appetite, desire to live, and yet in his reasonable will submit himself to
Gods good pleasure. Yea desire in many respects to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. And thus our Savior being man and in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted, desired that the cup of his passion might pass from him in
his inferior will and natural appetite, which shunneth death and seeks the
preservation of it self; but in his reasonable will considering the end why
he came into the world, which was by his death to glorify God in perfecting
the work of our redemption, he ouerruled the natural appetite and did wholly
submit himself to the will of his father. Neither is the sensual will
sinful and unlawful, when it is subjected to the reasonable, but when it
goes about of a subject to become a Sovereign, and to resist and ouerrule
that unto which it should yield obedience. Even as it is no fault in a subject
to desire that his own will in things lawful or indifferent may be done, so
that when hearing the contrary pleasure of his Prince he do not rebel against
it, but is content willingly to submit himself unto it. Or if we would have
this strife and conflict to be in the same will of Christ, we may say that it
was a combat, not between grace and corruption, but between diverse desires
in the same will, which may lawfully be in a man, if they be grounded on diverse
respects; as a man may at the same time lawfully desire to live, that he may
glorify God, or to dye, that he may cease to sin and be glorified by him;
he may desire to eat, for the refreshing of nature and the repelling of the
pain of hunger, and to fast that he may be fitted the better for some
religious exercise. And so our Savior desired to have the cup pass from
him, having respect to the preservation of his nature, and at the same time was
willing to die, that he might yield obedience to his fathers will, and perfect
the work of our redemption; and yet as one says, Vtrobique Christus
neutrobique peccatum, Christ in both, but sin in neither.

Sect. 2. That this conflict is not in the unregenerate.
Secondly this conflict is not at all in those who are unregenerate and
unsanctified, for in these one of the combatants which is the spirit is
wanting; and they are wholly ruled by the flesh under their chief co^mander
Satan, whose kingdom is not divided in the carnal man, but he quietly
reigns without any resistance, and possesses all in peace. Neither is there
in him any power of opposition, for he is not only sick, but stark dead in
trespasses and sins; and Ephesians. 2. 1.
there is not any spark of spiritual life and grace which is wholly from the
spirit; according to that of the Apostle, to be carnally minded is death, but
to be spiritually minded is 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 2.
life and peace. Satan's throne is set up in them, and he reigns not only
like a King, but also like a God in the children of unbelief, having not only
their bodies and outward man, but even their hearts and souls, their wills and
affections at his command, so as they are neither able nor willing to make any
resistance, but yield unto him cheerful obedience. The flesh as Satan's
Viceroy also rules in them, and they willingly obey it in the lusts thereof.
It reigns in their mortal bodies, as the Apostle speaks; yea in the most
excellent parts of their souls, the mind Romans 6. 12.
and understanding, for their wisdom is earthly, carnal Iam. 3. 15.
and devilish, standing in direct emnitie against God and being in the flesh
they do only mind the things of the flesh. Romans 8. 7
and therefore the Apostle joins* both these together as Ephesians. 2. 3.
being all one; fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. And as
they are wholly flesh so all their actions are fleshly Ioh. 3. 6.
and carnal; for as our Savior says, that which i^ borne of Romans 7. 5.
the flesh is flesh, and as the Apostle tells us; when we were in the flesh,
the motions of sins which were by the law, did Romans 6 17. 19.
work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death and being the servants
of sin, they yielded their members as servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity unto iniquity. And therefore in those who are merely natural and
unregenerate there can be no such conflict, because they are only flesh and no
spirit neither can it rightly be said (as Augustine affirms) August Contra
Julian pelagian. l. 6. cap. 11. Tit. 7. Col. 1136.
that the spirit of any man can lust against his flesh, unless the spirit of
Christ do dwell in him.

Sect. 3. That the conflict that is in the regenerate and that which is in the
unregenerate differ much, and first in their grounds and causes from which they
arise.
Howbeit we are to know, that there is even in the carnal man another fight
and skirmish, which having some seeming show and similitude of the spiritual
conflict, is by worldly and civil men mistaken for it; in which respect it will
not be amiss to distinguish them one from another. First then they differ in
their ground and cause from which they arise; for whereas (as has been
showed) the spiritual conflict arises from the grace of regeneration and
sanctification, whereby the gifts and graces of Gods spirit, being infused into
all our powers and faculties, do make war against our carnal corruptions
and fleshly lusts; the conflict which is in the unregenerate, arises from
those relics of Gods image defaced in us, opposing the image of Satan and
our sinful corruption. For the mind retains some small sparks of the
light of nature, and certain common notions, which receive some little strength
and luster from the view and study in the book of the creatures, and yet a
larger increase of illumination from the word of God, which illighteneth the
mind even of a mere natural man, with speculatiue and litterall knowledge,
whereby he is in some sortenabled to discern between good and evil, truth
and falsehood, right and wrong. With which light of the understanding the
conscience being directed, it retains also a power to excuse us when we do
well, and to accuse, condemn, terrify and torment us when we do evil. So
the Apostle says, that the Gentiles who had not the law, did show the work
of the law Romans 2: 15.
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. The will
likewise retains a kind of freedom, not only about things materially
evil, but also such as are natural, civil and merely moral, though herein
also it be very weak, corrupt and defective. And these relics are common to
all men, and in some are much increased, and rise to a far higher pitch and
degree, by the common gifts of the spirit and mere civil graces, which in a
far greater measure are conferred upon some men, then upon others. But there
being mingled in all these faculties a sea of corruption, with some small
drops of those created relics, joined with a world of wickedness in the
inferior and sensual faculties of the soul; and many of these carnal
corruptions being in their special kinds contrary one to another (although
they generally agree in being all sinful and evil) from hence arises this
war and discord between them, like unto thieves and robbers, who all agree
together in robbing and spoiling of a true man, but fall out among themselves
when they come to divide the prey. Thus the understanding by the light of
nature or common grace discerning in particular actions what is good and to be
embraced and what is evil to be shunned, informs the conscience accordingly,
and leaves it to it^ censure and determination, either to approve us for the
doing of good and forsaking of evil, or to condemn us for the doing of evil
and neglecting of good. Upon which censure sometimes the will is excited and
moved to embrace that which the conscience allows, and to refuse that which
it condemns; sometime being transported by it own sinful corruption, and
sometime ouerswayed with the violence of the inferior will, carnal appetite
and unruly passions, it harkeneth unto them and stops the ears to reason
and conscience. For example, the understanding discerning that it is grounded
on reason and equirie, that we should serve God who created us, and does
continually preserve us, according to that of the Apostle; For we are his Ephesians.
2. 10.
workma^ship created in Christ Jesus, unto good works which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them; propounds this to the conscience, that
by the law of creation, we are all bound to serve him, the which approves us
when we set our selves to serve him, and accuses us when we neglect the duties
of his service. So the understanding discerning Gods excellency, goodness and
perfection, proposes this to the conscience, that God above all is to be
honored and loved, the which light when it has received from the
understanding, it accuses and condemns us when we love or reverence any
thing more then him condemning us as guilty of sin and liable to fearful
punishments; wherewith the heart being affrighted and terrified, it is cast
down with grief and sadness, and oftentimes plunged into utter despair. But
when the understanding and conscience through the light of nature, helped and
increased by the Scriptures, have thus in some poor sort and small degree
performed their duty, the will being perverted with the baits of worldly
vanities, does rise up in open rebellion against the understanding and
conscience, and though it acknowledges the truth of their propositions and
conclusions, yet it comes in with a non obstante, and resolves
notwithstanding they persuade to the contrary, that it will do what it list,
and go on in it own course, though it be convinced to be the worst, because
howsoever it hazardeth the soul for the time to come to the loss of heaven
and the torments of hell, yet it brings the present fruition of earthly
vanities. And no sooner is reason and conscience ready to subdue the rebellion
of the will and to persuade by other arguments unto obedience, but presently a
tumultuous route of unruly affections and raging passions, come to rescue and
strengthen the will in it rebellion by presenting unto it the honors, riches
and pleasures of the world, which it may gain by following wicked courses; and
if the reason and conscience oppose future dangers and would hinder the wills
evil choice by further persuasions, they stop the mouth of reason with
tumultuous rage, and with loud showting and clamorous cries drown the voice of
the conscience, that they are constrained to cease directing and accusing, or
to continue doing it in vain and to no purpose. An example whereof we have in
Laban; for though reason and conscience told him, that he ought to use Jacob
well, and richly to reward his service because God blessed all he had for his
sake, yet his will being corrupted and his heart and affections being wholly
carried away with worldly wealth, he oppresses and wrongeth him with one injury
after another. So though reason and conscience told Pharaoh, that he did
wickedly in disobeying Gods commandments and keeping back his people from
serving of him, which made him sometime, when he was on the rack of some
present judgment, to confess that he had sinned, yet afterward his heart was
hardened, his will rebelled, and his affections being set upon the profit of
their service, did stop his ears to all persuasions, and to the accusations
of his own conscience. Thus Saul in his understanding Exodus 9. 27. 34.
conceived that David was innocent; and therefore his conscience accusing him
that he did wickedly in persuing him, made him to justify him, and to condeme
his own injustice and faultiness; Thou art more righteous then I, 1 Samuel 24.
17.
for thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil; but by and
by his will and affections being wholly set upon worldly honor, and
transported with ambition, he hearkeneth neither to reason nor conscience, but
persecuteth him again with more then wonted rage. Finally, thus then Pilate,
advised by reason and conscience, justified our Savior as innocent and
faultlesse, his will and affections chiefly desiring to continue his esteem
with Casar, and to be applauded by the Priests, Pharisces and vulgar
multitude; he reuerseth the sentence of reason and conscience, and unjustly
condemns the innocent to dye with malefactors.

. Sect. 4. The second difference is in the moving causes of these conflicts.
Secondly the conflict between the flesh and the spirit, differs from that
which is between the reason and will, the conscience and affections in the
moving causes, for the spirit is moved to assault the flesh by the true love of
God, which causes it to make war against carnal lusts, because they are
odious unto him, as being enemies to his grace, and contrary to his holy will;
and by a filial fear of his Majesty which makes the man regenerate loath to
yield unto any motions of sin, least he should hereby offend and displease
him; but the combat between the conscience and affections arises from
self-love and servile fear, which make the man unregenerate to withstand the
motions of sin in the will and affections for fear of those punishments,
which will accompany his sins, as horror of conscience, shame, corporal
pain, eternal death and hellish condemnation, like the slave who dare not
offend his master, not because disliketh the fault, but because he fears the
whip; or the thief who is restrained from robbing, not in obedience to the
law or because he hates sin or loves justice and truth, but because he
fears to be hanged on the gallows. And so likewise they differ in their
ends, for the end at which the regenerate man aymeth in fighting against the
flesh, is that he may glorify God in his victory over his sinful lusts
and be more and more assured of his love and his own salvation; but the end
at which the conscience of the man unregenerate aymeth in opposing his corrupt
will and earnall affections, is that he may the better compass his worldly
desires, either in the obtaining of some earthly good, or the anoyding and
escaping of some imminent evil. In which regard although the same effect be
produced in them both, and both the man unregenerate and regenerate do or
leave undone the same thing, yet the like actions which make a like glorious
show in outward appearance, are far unlike in the judgment of God, because
they arise from contrary causes, and are directed to contrary ends; and
therefore the same actions done by the one are approved and accepted as lawful
and good, and of the other rejected and condemned as evil and wicked.

Sect. 5. A third difference between the conflict in the regenerate and the
unregenerate that this is between diverse faculties, and that in the same.
Thirdly there is a difference between these conflicts in respect of the
combatants; for in the combat between the flesh and the spirit, there is a
conflict between grace and corruption, in the same faculties, knowledge and
ignorance, spiritual wisdom and carnal wisdom, in the same understanding;
willing and nilling good and evil in the same will accusing and excusing for
evil in the same conscience, love of God and love of the world, fear of God
and fear of men, trust in the creator, and trust in the creature in the same
affections; temperance and intemperance in the same appetite. And here all the
powers and faculties of the whole man as they remain unregenerate, do with
united forces fight against the spirit, the reason, mind and conscience not
excepted. But in the combat which is in the unregenerate, the conflict is
between diverse faculties, which are all carnal and corrupted, fighting one of
them against another, as between the reason and the will, the conscience and
the carnal concupiscence, passions Romans 2. 15.
and affections; in which whether soever party prevails still the
unsanctified man is drawn unto sin. And so also they differ in the manner of
the fight, for that which is between the spirit and the flesh is done by
contrary lusting the one against the other in a practical real and effectual
manner; but that which is between the reason and the will, the conscience and
the affections, is maintained by logical disputes, and mental discourses,
whilst the conscience inferres fearful conclusions of punishments and Gods
ensuing judgments upon the wicked choice of the will, and their yielding to
satisfy their carnal affections. For though in the creation the will was in
subjection to reason, and embraced or shunned that which it approved or
disalowed, and though this order be commonly observed between the faculties,
even in this state of corrupion; yet after that man rebelled against his chief
Sovereign, there followed rebellion thereupon in the inferior faculties against
their superior in the little commonwealth of man; and now the will yielding
obedience no further then it likes and lusts, does often resist reason
which is his King, and refuses to follow it directions, and to allow of it
conclusions, but rather embraces the clean contrary. Now whilst reason is
earnest in persuading by arguments, and the will rebellious and violent in
crossing and thawarting it, the conscience being awakened and rowsed up,
comes in to the rescue of reason, restraining the will from embracing that
evil it likes, by the terrors of punishment which it adiudgeth the offender
unto, upon the committing of the sin: wherewith oftentimes when the violence
of the will is abated and the courage thereof cooled, so that it begins to
stagger and faint in its resolution, then enters in a tumultuous troop of
passions and affections, as fresh aids to strengthen the will in rebellion,
which being themselves first hired and corrupted to do service unto Satan in
sinful desires and actions, with the present pay or expected wages of
worldly vanities, do by the same proffers persuade the will to continue stiff
and obdurate in rebellious courses, and with all resolution to oppose it self
against reason and conscience. But yet consider that in all this conflict
between these diverse faculties, there is no enmity and contrariety between
them in their natures, neither is there more grace or less corruption in the
reason and conscience, then in the will and affections, for they as well as
these do like and love sin with the pleasures and profits of it in it own
nature, if they were not deterred with the fearful consequents of Gods
judgments and punishments, which they see will necessarily follow upon such
sinful praemises. Nor is there less emnitie between them and Gods grace
and goodness, for were they out of the gunshot of danger, they would as
willingly embrace the pleasures of sin, as do the affections and will; but
here only is the difference, that they are more pollitique enemies to God and
all goodness, and more wisely loving themselves dare not seek pleasure in
such sinful attempts, as will cause more bitterness and sorrow in the end,
through sense of punishment, then can be counteruailed with the short joy which
they shall take in the fruition of their wicked delights; whereas the other
being more rude and sensual, do only look upon present objects, and
therefore when they see a bayte and booty of sin set out before them, they
run unto it with a headlong violence, not fearing nor caring for the imminent
danger of denounced punishments.

Sect. 6. The conflict between the flesh and the spirit is in the same
saculties.
But it is far otherwise in the conflict between the spirit and the flesh,
which is not between diverse faculties all still remaining and agreeing in
their natural corruption, and only differing one with another, like Souldiars
in the same Camp, and fighting under the same General, upon their diverse
reasons and grounds in the managing of the War, the one being more willing in
running into dangers, the other more wary to avoid and escape them: but it is
between the same faculties, fighting against themselves, reason against
reason, and will against will, not arysing from a syllogisticall discourse upon
outward grounds of ensuing mischiefs, but from a real change of their nature
wrought by Gods spirit, the which because it is but begun and imperfect, the
relics of sinful corruption remaining and dwelling in the same house and
heart with spiritual and renewed graces, these being even in their own nature
as contrary one to another as fire to water, light to darkness, good to evil,
there necessarily follows a continual conflict between them, in which, as
vnreconciable enemies, they seek to destroy one another; not moved hereunto by
discourse of reason, no more then in the fight between the Lion and the
Dragon, the Dog and the Beat, the fire and water, but by the antipathy and
contrariety which is in their natures. Whereof it is that a newborn babe in
Christ who has little learning, and a small degree of knowledge and spiritual
understanding, does with as great resolution withstand the encounters and
motions of sin, and endeauours to please God though he be scarce able to
render a reason of his doings, as those who are grown unto a riper age, and
have attained unto an higher degree of learning and wisdom. An example
whereof we have in many poor, simple and illiterate men, who as conscionably
avoid all sin, and practice the holy duties of a Christian life, as other
Christ ans who are learned and have a greater measure of knowledge and
wisdom; and also in many martyrs, who being unlearned and not able to
maintain the truth of their cause by syllogisticall disputes, did yet as
resolutly oppose themselves against idolatry and popish heresies, and as
willingly and courageously seal the truth with their blood, as others who had
attained to the greatest learning. Which plainly shows that their opposition
to error and falsehood, was not chiefly grounded on mental discourses (for
then those who most excelled in learning and knowledge should have as much
exceeded in their resolution and opposition) but upon that secret change of
nature, made in them by Gods spirit, by which they opposed that which was evil,
not only in their reason and understanding, but also in their will, hearts and
affections, with all other powers and parts of their souls and bodies. By
which it appears that the Christian is no sooner conceived of the seed of
the spirit, and by communication of saving grace, receives spiritual life,
birth and being, but he presently becomes one of Gods souldiars, and as
naturally and voluntarily by virtue of his regeneration, fights against the
flesh, the world and the devil, without any pressing by the conscience, or
inticement and enforcing by the terrors of the law denouncing punishment, if
he go not on this Warfare, only out of his love and obedience toward God
and his owns inclination carrying him against these enemies, as it were by a
natural antipathy and inward contrariety, as the fire strives against the
water, health against sickness or life against death.

Sect. 7. The fourth difference is in their contrary effects.
The fourth difference between the combat of the spirit and the flesh in the
regenerate, and between the reason and will, the conscience and affections in
the unregenerate, is in their contrary effects; for by the conflict between
the flesh and the spirit, our faith is confirmed in the assurance of our
regeneration, seeing the spirit of God, which is one of the combattants
dwells in us; of Gods love and favor, seeing he has chosen us for his
souldiars to fight his battles; and of our own salvation, seeing Gods spirit
fighting in and for us, we are assured of victory (for who can withstand his
power or resist his will) and of the crown of victory, everlasting glory
promised by truth it self to all those who overcome. But contrariwise from
the conflict of conscience in the unregenerate (where in oftentimes the worser
part prevails, arises doubting and incredulity, terrors, fears and utter
despair in the apprehension of Gods wrath and those dreadful punishments
which sin has deserved. Secondly, from the combat of the flesh and spirit,
unsained repentance is begun, or renewed and increased in those who are
regenerate for there is a change in them, principally in their wills, hearts and
affection, whereby in all things they oppose the flesh, hating that which it
loves, and loving that which it hates, willing what it nilleth, and nilling
that which it wills; upon which follows the purifying of the heart and the
purging of it from all sinful corruptions, the hating and forsaking of all
sin, and a hearty desire and earnest endeavor to serve the Lord in holiness
and newnes of life, and not only a reformation in part, but total obedience
in all our affections and actions, in the renouncing of all sin: and the
embracing of al good duties in the whole course of our lives. But there is no
such change following the conflict between the conscience and affections,
reason and will, only there may be some pange of sorrow and shedding of
tears, caused not by the love of God or hatred of sin, but by the
apprehension and expectation of deserved punishments. There may be also some
confession and acknowledgement of sin, whilst they are upon the rack of
conscience, and are terrified with the fear and apprehension, or pinched with
the present sense and smart of punishment; and some promise, or it may be
purposes, of leaving and forsaking their wicked courses, as we see in the
example of Pharaob, who whilst the hand of God was upon himself and his
people, confessed his sin and promised amendment. And finally they may out of
this serude fear, leave the most of their sins and outwardly reform
themselves and conform their practice in many things to Mark. 6. 20.
such obedience, and to the performance of so many good duties, that they may
think themselves and persuade others that they are notable conuerts, as we may
see in the example of Herod; and yet for all this, there is in them no sound
repentance, no change of nature, no purging and removing, but only a temporary
restraining of their corruptions, wrought in them not by grace and the spirit,
but by other corruptions of a different nature, namely servile fear and
terror of conscience. As hereby it plainly appears, in that when as they
are taken from the rack, and secured ^n their conceit from the feeling of
further punishment they return again to their wicked courses, and become more
obdurate and rebellious then they were before, or if there is any show of some
amendment, yet it is not a through reformation, or a purging of the heart from
all the filth of sin, such as follows the conflict of the spirit and the
flesh, but a reducing of the unregenerate man from extreamitie to some
medioctitie, from being a Publican and notorious sinner, to be a Pharisee,
Hypocrite, or at the best a mere civil man, conformable to the politic
laws in the state, and no opposer to outward discipline and order in the
Church. And this also is the work of natural reason which persuades them to
this information for worldly respects: whereas the other is the work of the
spirit, which in love and obedience to God begins and continues this
amendment in them; the fruit and benefit whereof redoundeth chiefly to the
preservation of human society, the good of common wealths, in the
maintayning of external discipline, which could not stand against the rage and
fury of tumultuous passions and affections, were it not that their strength is
abated and their violence restrained by the conflict of conscience; whereas the
fruits of the combat between the spirit and the flesh are much better; namely
the advancement of Gods glory by our worshipping and serving him in spirit and
truth, the strengthening and increasing of our faith, the inward purging and
purifying of the heart and conscience from the hidden and secret corruption of
all sin, humiliation in this life, and glorification in the life to come; for
all that thus fight shall surely overcome, and receive for th^^ reward, the
crown of victory everlasting blessedness. Thirdly the war between the spirit
and the flesh causes unto us the most secure peace, even peace with God, when
as be coming his souldia^s we fight under his standard, against his and out
enemies peace between the faculties of our souls, when as the inferior
faculties are in quiet subjection to the superior, the affections harkening
unto and obeying the conscrence the will yielding voluntary obedience to reason
as Gods viceroy, and all to God as their supreme sovereign. It brings also
with it unspeakable comfort, spiritual rejoicing and joy in the holy Ghost,
because it assures us of Gods love and gracious assistance, of a full and
final victory over all our enemies, and the crown of victory everlasting
glory; but the conflict of conscience in the unregenerate causes continual
garboyles and hot dissension, tyranny in the superior faculties ruling only
by servile fear, and rebellion in the inferior, when as they have power to
break the yoke of government, horror and anguish of mind, disconsolate
sorrow and hellish despair, when the affrighted conscience bears sway; or
the mad and tumultuous joy of frantique men when the wild affections and
disordred passions, by gagging and silencing the conscience, do get the upper
hand, the which oftentimes lasting no longer then a blaze of thorns, does
leave behind it redoubled grief and desperate despair. Finally the conflict
between the spirit and the flesh makes the man regenerate with more care and
diligence to observe his own heart, and more conscionably to watch over all
his ways, that he give no advantage to his sinful flesh; It causes him
studiously to affect and earnestly to endeavor, in the use of all good means,
whereby the spiritual part may be more and more strengthened and the flesh
with all carnal lusts may be mortified and subdued that so it may not rebel
and gather strength to prevail against it, as we see in the example of the
Apostle. But the conflict of conscience 1 Cor. 9. 27
is commonly joined with secure retchlesnesse, whereby the unregenerate man
does car lesly neglct the causes and occasions of this bitter conflict, until
he be overtaken with them, and only auoideth the punishment and not the sin
which causes it, o^ the sin only, when he is sensible of the punishment,
it works in him no care to mortify his sins, unless it be only in
outward fact, and that alone for servile fear of pain and smart, and not in
love and obedience unto God, yea still he loves them as his dearest darlings,
and when he dare not give them place and entertainment in his works and
actions, as it were, in his outward rooms, he secretly lodges them in his
heart, as in his secret closet or private chamber. It does not make him use
any means to subdue his flesh and mortify his corruptions, yea rather it
brings him into a sluggish despair, which makes him to cry out, that there
is a Lion in the street, to starve his soul because he will not take pains
to pluck his hand out of his bosom and put it to his mouth; to stop his ears
against all good counsel, and to harden his heart against all instruction(...)
exhortation, whereby he is taught the way wh(...) may come out of his misery,
or is incited and stirred up to walk in it, complaining that all these means
are unto him vselesse and bootelesse, seeing he is already irrecouerably
plunged into a desperate condition. Or else if he use at all the means of his
recovery, it is only inhypocrisie, not with a desire to profit by them, but
only to stop the cry of conscience, upon this persuasion that God will be
contented with this formal service, notwithstanding that he still goes on in
his wicked courses.

Sect. 8. The first difference is in the subject matter or occasion.
The fifth difference is the subject matter or occasion, about which these
conflicts are made by these diverse enemies; For the Flesh and the Spirit do in
all things oppose against one another; the spirit the flesh in all that is
evil, the flesh the spirit in all that is good. For there is no good action
which the spiritual man performs, but the flesh interposing, hinders and
interrupteth him, as in prayer, hearing the word, receiving the sacrament,
sanctification of the Sabbath, the works of justice and mercy, temperance,
and sobriety, sometime wholly withdrawing him from them, and sometime
distracting and disabling him in them, which makes him to complain with the
Apostle; To will is present with me, but I find not how to perform that which
is good. For I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present Romans
7. 18 21.
with me, the which is to be understood, not only of particular actions, but
also of our whole life and conuersatition. And contrariwise there is no evil
known to the spirit, and done by the flesh, wherein the spirit does not cross
and oppose it, (no not those sins which by carnal men are thought slight
and venial) either hindering and restraining the regenerate man, that he may
not fall into it, or moving him being fallen to rise again by unfeigned
repentance. But the conflict of conscience extends not to the whole course of
life, but only to some particular actions, and yielding unto the will and
affections in lesser, common and ordinary sins, it only con(...)h with them
about the committing of such sins as (...) and outrageous, and especially
those which are against the second Table, not so much regarding or restraining
them in those which are committed against the first.

Sect. 9 The last difference is in respect of time.
The last difference between these diverse conflicts is in respect of time; for
the combat between the flesh and the spirit begins at the time of our
regeneration and conversion, and not before; and being begun it is constant
and continual to the very end of our lives, though it may have some
intermissions in respect of our sense and feeling, as when the spirit through
the thick vapor of corruption raised by the flesh, is cast into a slumber, or
by some mighty blow wounding the conscience, astonishing the senses* and
hardening the heart, is (as it were) cast into a sown, and has no signs of
spiritual life remaining in it, out of which it always recouereth being
excited and reenlyued by Gods quickening spirit. But the combat of conscience
does begin oftentimes long before conversion, even as soon as we have the use
of reason and understanding, receiving common notions from the light of nature;
but it is neither constant and continual, but only by panges and fits, upon
the occasion of some grievous sin already acted, or about to be committed;
nor yet always permanent and lasting to the end of life, seeing oftentimes by
customable sinning the conscience becomes so deadded and seared, that it
takes no notice of sin, nor opposes against the will and affections, but (as
it were) casts the reins in their neck, never at all checking or curbing
them in, but suffering them to run on in an headlong course, unto the
committing of all manner of wickedness.

CHAP. IX. That the Conflict of Conscience is not in all that are unregenerate
nor in them only.
Sect. 1 That no comfort arisetth out of the conflict of conscience.
AND thus we have showed the many differences between the combat of the flesh
and spirit, and of the conscience and affections. Whereby it is plain, that as
the former gives unto us comfortable assurance of our regeneration, adoption
and salvation, so there can no such hope arise from the other. For, as we see,
it may be, and most commonly is in the wicked and reprobate, it has no
reference to God, nor springs from faith, love, filial fear and obedience,
but from carnal self-love, and servile fear of judgment and punishment; not
from any dislike of sin, the which the wicked in the hottest of this conflict
do love with all their heart, but only because they desire to avoid the
punishment, like unto children, whose teeth water when they se^ l^^^rous
meats, but yet dare not touch them for fear of the rod. An example whereof we
have in Balaam, who with all is heart would have sinned in cursing Gods people,
that he might have gained the reward of unrighteousness, but yet durst not
do it for Balaacs kingdom, because he was afraid to be overwhelmed by Gods
is fearful vengeance. And though these combatants fight one with another, ye^
are both corrupt and sinful, and both soldiers in Satan's camp, ioining
together in the common cause, howsoever dissenting in some particular quarrels,
and fighting one against another, like contrary vices, prodigality against
covetousness, presumption against despair, rash foole-hardinesse against basse
cowardice or like Pirates in the same ship who fall together by the ^a^es about
some particular wicked designs; though they all agree to rob the Merchant.

Sect 2. That the conflict of conscience may be in the regenerate.
But howsoever this conflict of conscience be in the wicked and reprobate, yet
we are to know that it is not in them only, nor yet in all. For this combat
may also be in the faithful and regenerate; yet not in the part regenerate, for
the sanctified will and affections do not oppose the sanctified conscience and
reason, but there is a goodly harmony between them, the will and affections
being guided and ruled by the understanding, and it by God our supreme
sovereign, and conscience approving of this holy government and subjection.
But in the vntegenerate part even the faithful themselves do feel this
conflict in them, between conscience accusing for fear of judgment and
punishment, and carnal concupiscence drawing them to sin. The which is more
weak on that side of passion, because their corruption is much abated and
subdued, but stronger on the side of conscience, because it is excited with a
greater illumination discovering more manifestly the odiousness of sin, and
fearfulness of those punishments which it deserves. Howsoever in another
respect the violence of it is abated, namely, as it terrifieth with servile
fear, and denounces against the offender hell and condemnation, from which
those who are in Jesus Christ are freed and delivered. But let us know Romans 8.
1.
that though this fight be in the faithful, yet it brings not (like that of
the spirit and the flesh) any comfort or assurance of Gods love,
sanctification, adoption or salvation, because it is not proper to the godly,
but is also common to the wicked and unregenerate.

Sect. 3. This conflict of conscience is not in those who are extremely
ignorant.
Secondly, this conflict is not in all the unregenerate. For first it is not in
them who are either extremely ignorant or outragiously wicked. The former are
of two sorts* 1. such ^^ are not capable of knowledge, as young children,
idyots, and madmen, who though they have the faculty of reason habitually or
potentially in respect of the use, yet not in the act or exercise of it, and
therefore their conscience receiving no illumination from their understanding,
puts no difference between good and evil, neither accuses them for any
sin, nor at all resists their will and affections. Sect. 3 This conflict of
conscience is not in those who are extremely ignorant.
For though they have conscience in them in respect of the faculty, yet like
those that are in a dead sleep, they have it not in act and operation.
Secondly, such as being capable of knowledge, have through their negligence or
wilfulness suffered those sparks of the light of nature to go out for want of
blowing upon them by use and exercise, or nourishing them with fit means (as
it were) necessary fuel, which is the case of many Ethnicks, and Barbarians,
yea of some who would be called by the names of Christians, who through
affected ignorance, are so far from the illumination of grace, that they have
quite obscured and extinguished the light of nature. Those also who are
outragiously wicked have seldom in them the conflict of conscience, because
the Lord punishes their other sins by giving them over to their own vile
affections and a reprobate mind, whereof it comes to pass, that their
understanding being darkened, and even quite blinded, the common notions and
the light of nature being clean put out and extinguished, their consciences
also are seared and senseless, so as they never check and control them for
any sins, and such a callum and thick skin ouergroweth their hearts, and so
hardens them through their often committing of known wickedness, that
without any feeling or remorse, they commit any manner of sin with delight
and greediness. An example whereof we have in those idolatrous heathens of
whom the Apostle speaks, who not worshipping God according to that light
which they had by nature, and by looking into the book of the creatures, they
became vain in their foolish imaginations and Romans 1. ver. 21. to ver. 31.
had their minds so darkened, as that they gave the glory of God to the basest
of the creatures; where upon God gave them up to uncleanness, to their own
vile affections, and to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not
connenient. So else where he says of them, that they walked in the vanity of
Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19.
their minds, having their understanding darkened, being alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance which was in them, because of the blindness
of their heart, and being past feeling, had given themselves over unto
lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness; And writing to
Timothy he 1 Timothy 4. 2.
speaks of some in these later times, who should have their consciences
seared with an hot iron. Whereby they become so senseless, that they take no
notice of any sin, nor accuse for the committing of any wickedness. For as
the greatest blows which light upon an anuile, do not at all move it, but it
causes the waightiest hammer to rebound back again; and as the deepest
gashes and most griefly wounds, given to a member which is mortified, or to a
part gangrened, are not at all felt; and therefore the party upon whom they
are inflicted never complains nor shrinketh for them: So when the gangrene of
sin has ouerrunne the intellectual faculties, blinding the understanding
and deadding the conscience, though there be deep gashes made in them they
feel them not, and therefore be wray neither fear nor grief, by accusing and
complaining of the causes of their evils.

Sect. 4. The conflict of conscience is seldom in simple people.
And among all these the conscience and affections, the reason and will are at
a secure, senseless and sinful peace. There are diverse other sorts of men in
whom their peace is not so continual and permanent, but yet there is often a
truce between them, which is sometimes of shorter, and sometimes of longer
contniuance according as the occasions be of their agreeing or discording with
one another. The first are ignorant and simple people whose consciences through
defect in knowledge and want of understanding, wanting illumination and
direction, do seldom check them for any thing they do, unless it be so
grossly wicked, that even the light of nature does discover and condemn it.
And here the reason and will, the conscience and and affections, continue
friends and maintain peace, because they are not able to discern those just
causes which are offered of discording from one another; like enemies who lie
quietly in their tents in the dark night, when the adverse party does go a
spoiling and forraiging, because they have no light to discover their attempts.
Opposite unto these are those carnal men who having a great measure of
speculatiue knowledge, art and learning, are able by their paralogismes and
subtle sophistry, their nice distinctions, and cunning shifts, to make black
seem white, darkness light, falsehood truth, and good evil: whereby they
blind the eye of reason, stop the mouth of conscience, and so corrupt and
dazzle the judgment, that they can do what evil they list, and satisfy in
all things their carnal lusts and affections uncontrolled and condemned. Of
these it is truly said, that they have much science and little conscience,
like these Lamie who were sharpesighted when they went abreade, but stark
blind, when they entered into their houses, o^ the Pharisees, who sitting in
Moses chair were able to teach others Mat. 7. 5.
their duties, and to rebuke and control them for their smallest sin, but
were not able to see their own carnal worldliness, hellish pride and
damnable hypocrisy, and as our Savior charge them, could discern a mote in
their neighbors eye* though there were a beam in their own. In these there
is no conflict of conscience because like crafty and skillful Lawyers, they can
with false colors and collusions blind the eyes of the Judge, making their
evil cause seem just and good, or like cunning thieves, they do so subtly
and secretly atchieue their wicked designs, that when they come to be
arraigned they shift off and elude the most pertinent accusations.

Sect 5. That the conflict of conscience is not in proud iusticiaries and
civil worldlings.
Unto these we may adioyne proud iusticiaries who taking away from the law of
God the life and rigor of spiritual sense, do expound it after a gross and
litterall manner that so they may satisfy it with their gross obedience; and
because their obedience cannot reach to the spiritual meaning, therefore they
frame a meaning suitable to their carnal obedience. And so justifying them
selves as though they had done all which the law requires, their consciences
sleep securely in all their sinful courses, and never accuse them for any
sin; of which we have an example in the Luke 16. 15. Mat. 19. 20.
Pharisees, who justified themselves when our Savior most condemned them; in
the young iusticiary who boasted that he had done all which was required, when
as he had done nothing; and in the vainglorious Papists, who far outstrip
them both, affirming that they can fulfill the Law and do more then it
requires; for which indeed they have special helps, seeing they give what
sense they list to every Commandment, and if they can make no sense seem
sensible and probable to their too dimsighted followers, then for more surety
they will quite cancel and blot it out, as they deal with the second
Commandment, condemning their imagery and idolatry, and having made none of
one, they make of one two, by dividing of the tenth, and so filling up the
number, that their theft and falsehood may not be discovered. Like unto these
are our civil worldlings and ignorant Protestants, who placing all Religion in
out ward abstaining from heinous faults as perjury, whoredom, drunkenness and
such like, and in performing formal service to God, according to the Princes
laws, and mortal duties of honesty and justice to one another. do think
that God is thoroughly satisfied when they have attained to this periode of
perfection, which themselves have pitched. And therefore their consciences are
quiet, and suffer them to enjoy a secure peace, though they live in ignorance
and unbelief, in the neglect of spiritual service, swearers, Sabbath
breakers, and in all things follow those courses, which ambition*
covetousness, voluptuousness and self-love will prescribe unto them.

Sect. 6. That the conflict of conscience is seldom in those who are
transported with violent passions.
Finally, we may add unto these such others who are violent and furious in
their affections, who whilst the fit and fever of their passion lasts, can
commit any wicked outrage and never feel any conflict of conscience. Not
because reason is quite blind, and conscience dumb, but because seeing and
speaking, they are not hard and discerned, no more then the speech of a wise
Citizen and Senator in a tumultuous vproare of common people. Not because they
utterly refuse to do their office and make resistance, but because they are so
carried away and hurried with the violence of the throng, that they are not able
to keep their standing or hinder their proceedings. Or if we will we may
here compare reason and conscience in them, to that they are in drunkards,
which are so hindered and disabled with intoxicating fume^, that they are not
able to do their functions, till by natural heat they be spent and
scantered. But in these commonly, when the heat and violence of passion is
somewhat spent and abated, reason, and conscience especially, does recover
strength, and (like a Prince foiled and put to flight by his rebellions
subjects) recovering by force his state and dignity, of a King becomes a
tyrant, and so much the more severely keeps them under, by how much be has
tasted more sensibly of the mischiefs accompanying their rage and disloyalty.
For thus experience teaches us, that when conscience has been foiled and
wounded with rage and passion, their power being spent by their own fury, it
does affresh set upon them, and beating them out of their holds does put into
their place affrighting terrors and astonishing fears, and so terrifieth the
heart with his vehement accusations, that oftentimes it sinketh into the gulf
of despair; the which we see manifest in the example of Caine, Sa^^^, Judas
and many others. And these are the men in whom either a peace or truce is
maintained between the conscience and affections, there being whilst it
lasts no conflict between them. Now if we would know in whom principally
this combat is fought, it is in such unregenerate men as have still remaining
in them some common notions of the light of nature, increased by their study in
the volume of the creatures, and in the book of holy Scripture, and their
observation of the due execution of Gods fearful judgment. In such whose
conscience remains lively and sensibly, soft and vigorous, because it is not
yet cautherized and seared with the often and wilful committing of heinous
sins. Finally in such whose affections are somewhat gentile and moderate, and
whose hearts are not so hardened not wholly taken up with wicked infidelity,
but that they give some credit to Gods fearful threatenings.

CHAP. X. Whether the conflict between the flesh and spirit be in all the
regenerate, and whether if it be, it be in the same manner and measure.
Sect. 1 That this spiritual conflict is in all the regenerate that are of
years.
We have showed that the conflict between the flesh and the spirit is only
in the regenerate, and how it differs from that conflict of conscience, which
is oftentimes in many of the wicked; now let us consider whether that combat
be in all the regenerate. Secondly whether it be in all in the same manner and
measure. Thirdly how we may know whether this conflict be in us or no. And
lastly, if it be when it begins and how long this conflict i^ to continue.
Concerning the first we are to know, that this conflict between the flesh and
spirit is in all the regenerate, who have received spiritual illumination, and
have the use of their reason and understanding, being possessed of Gods
sanctifying graces, not only in their habites but also in their acts and
opperations, not in the faculties alone, but also in their functions and
exercises. For as long as these cursed corruptions (like the Cananite in the
land) do coinhabite with us, they will continually be a^ scourges Iosu. 23. 13.
to our fides, and thorns in our eyes; and still there will be war between
us, whilst they labor to hold their possession, and we endeavor to root
them out. And howsoever our chief Commander may sometime sound a retraite,
and give us some intermissions for the renewing of our forces, and recovery of
our breath, yet utter dismissions we shall not have from this warlicke service,
till having (like our head and Savior) by death overcome all our enemies, we
shall receive the crown of victory, and for ever triumphantly rejoice in the
security of our peace.

Sect 2. What we are to think of Infants and Ideotts.
But whereas I say that this conflict is in all the regenerate who have the use
of reason and understanding, I do from among them exempt such infants and
idiots as want the use of reason and yet belong to Gods election; in whom God
works for their justification, sanctification and salvation, after an
extraordinary, secret and wonderful manner, applying Christ unto them his
righteousness, obedience, and the virtue of his death and resurrection by his
holy spirit, who al-sufficiently supplieth unto them the defect of all
inferior istruments and means, and here by purges and cleanses them from
the guilt, punishment and corruption of all their sins. Now in these there
cannot actually be this conflict between the spirit (...) flesh, because they
have not the acts and operations o^ spiritual graces, but only the seeds of
them, which though they may have their potentiall inclinations to this
conflict, yet no present actual exercise and voluntary employment of them in
this spiritual warrefare. Although it may be, thus much may be granted, that
seeing by their regeneration there is a change in their nature, by which they
are spiritually renewed in all their powers and faculties, there may be in them
all, an auersenesse in their renewed nature to their old corruptions (as it
were) by an holy instinct and disposition, wrought in them by Gods spirit,
although there be no discourse of reason or use of understanding, even as we
see by natural antipathy fire and water, light and darkness contending and
striving against one another though they have no will or reason to stir them
unto the fight. For though (as we have showed) the conflict of conscience
arises out of logical disputes and the discourse of reason and understanding,
and therefore can only be in them who have the use of these, yet this combat
of the spirit springing from another fountain, even the change of an nature
through spiritual regeneration, there may (in that sense which I have showed)
even in children and idiots, be some kind of conflict between the spirit and
the flesh, the seed of grace and of corruption striving against one another.
All which is to be understood not of all infants belonging to Gods Election,
but only of those which dye in their infancy, who having much to be done for
the quick perfecting of that great work of their salvation, whilst they are
going that short passage between the womb and their heavenly inheritance, God
to manifest his infinite wisdom, power and goodness, does thus work in
them after a wonderful and extraordinary manner. And as for these who live to
riper age, and until they have the use of reason and understanding, they have
not this conflict in them before their regeneration and conversion, because
then only the spirit and in sanctifying graces do begin to dwell in them, and
to make war against their carnal corruptions.

Sect. 3 That this conflict is not in all the regenerate in like manner and
measure.
As touching the second point, we are to know, that the conflict between the
spirit and the flesh is not in all the regenerate after the same manner, nor in
the same measure, but diversely as it pleases the Lord to glorify himself in
the manifestation of his wisdom, goodness, and omnipotency, either by
giving unto his servants a great measure of strength and spiritual grace by
which they obtain an easy victory, wherein the bounty of his goodness
clearly shines, or a less and scanter proportion, by which notwithstanding
they are enabled as certainly, though not so speedily to overcome, hereby
magnifying the all-sufficiencie of his power, which more manifestly appears
in our 2 Cor. 12. 9.
greater weakness. For according as the measure of our spiritual strength
and riches of Gods grace, as also of carnal corruption differ in respect of
their diverse proportions, such is the difference in this Christian combat
between one faithful man and another. For some receive but a small measure of
spiritual illumination, the least degrees of faith, confidence, love and other
spiritual graces; and these through their weakness, commonly make weak
assaults against the flesh and fleshly lusts, and as weakly withstand their
encounters, whereof it comes to pass that they stand in the battle with
much faintness and frailetie, and receive many wounds, foyles and falls, before
they obtain the victory. Though the Lord performing even to these his gracious
promises, does not suffer them to be tempted above their power, but either
assisteth them by his own might, or fitteth them with slight tentations,
according to their weakness. Sometimes there is in the regenerate less
reformation of their corrupt natures by the restraining grace of God and the
common gifts of the spirit, by reason whereof the flesh is of greater strength
and the corruptions thereof are much more malignant, raging and violent in all
the faculties of their souls, especially in their wills, passions and
affections. So that though they have a great measure of strength and spiritual
grace, yet they cannot with any ease, or in short time get the upper hand, but
there is much struggling and wrestling, sharp and fierce assaults on both
sides, as is between mighty enemies equally matched, and sometimes the one,
sometimes the other prevails, and wounds and foyleth the adverse party;
like those wars of old between the Romans and Carthaginians, and those
mighty enemies the Turks and Persians in these days. And because both parties
continue in their great strength, hereof it comes to pass, that these sharp
and fierce encounters, do also last even to the end of their lives, until the
Lord by death do put an end to the battle, giving unto the spiritual man
full and final victory over all his enemies, and the crown of victory
everlasting happiness.

Sect. 4. That this conflict is aften weak in strong Christians
Finally the Lord to show the riches of his bounty, does sometimes give unto
his servants such a large measure of spiritual strength, saving grace,
knowledge, faith, love, Christian magnanimity and the rest, that like those
mighty worthies in the time of David, none of their spiritual enemies are
able to withstand them, but in the first encounters after this strength
received, they foil, wound, and vanquish them, either leading them captive
without any great resistance, or else putting them to a shameful flight. So as
they never again gather their scattered forces, nor once dare to enter the
field; only they may perhaps after a treacherous manner lie in ambushment, and
make some attempt upon some great advantage. And in this case the spiritual
sold our gloriously triumphs over his spiritual enemies, and keeping them
under with irresistable power, does enjoy his victory with much peace and
heavenly comfort. But all this while we are to remember that the Christian
Champian, and the Lords great worthy, does not thus prevail by virtue of any
natural strength which he has above others of his fellow soldiers, (but like
Sampson) through the gifts of the spirit, and the power of God communicated
unto him; which because through their pride and self-love they are apt to
forget, and being swollen up in their own conceits, to rob God of his glory,
by arrogating some part of the praise of their spiritual strength and
victories unto themselves; the Lord leaves them by spiritual desertions unto
their own abilities, and lets loose their enemies to assault and encounter
them. In which case they are utterly unable to stand in the least conflict, but
are shamefully foiled, put to flight, and led captive of sin, as we see in
the example of Noah, Lot, Job, David, Peter, and many others. And then being
discouraged and discomfited they complain with Job, that God opposes them as
a mighty enemy, making them his marks, and shooting against them his
enuenomed arrows; With David. that God has forsaken them, will be no Psalm.
22. 1. and 77 7. 8.
more entreated, but has shut up his kindness in displeasure, that his
terrors do fight against them, dry their bones, and drink up their spirits;
And finally with the Church they cry out; O Lord, why have thou made us to err
from thy Esa. 63. 17. and 64. 9.
ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Be not wroth very sore O Lord,
neither remember iniquity for ever. On the other side the flesh all this while
proudly swells in victory, insulteth over the spirit, is this the man that
took God for his hope? Carries away the spoils, and vaunteth it self in a
wicked triumph. But though God has withdrawn himself a little, that the
spiritual man might more carnestly seek him, yet he does not utterly forsake
his soldiers and servants, and those his graces in them, though in respect of
sense motion and outward operation, they seem qu^^e utterly extinguished, yet
in truth they are but in a swound, and (as it were) covered over with the ashes
of corruption, and therefore when the Lord reuiueth them, blows upon them
with his spirit, and cherishes their inward heat, by fresh fuel, and a new
access of saving grace, then Sampsons hair growing cut again, he recouereth
his strength, and the Christian Champion being grieved and ashamed for his
former foyles, gatheteth together his scattered forces, and with more then
wonted valor and resolution encountering his enemies he puts them to
flight, obtains the victory, and for ever after holds them under in more
base subjection.

CHAP. XI. How we may know whether this Conflict be fought in us, that is,
whether the spirit of God dwell in us or no.
Sect. 1. That every faith fall man may and ought to be assured that the spirit
of God dwells in him.
THE third point propounded i^ how a Christian may know, whether there be in
him this conflict between the spirit and the flesh, or no; which is in effect
as much as to know, whether we be sound Christians, whether we be the
children of God, whether we belong to Gods election; and finally whether we
have in us any saving grace yea or no; seeing in all these and these only this
conflict is or will be fought, as soon as they are regenerate and converted unto
God. The which weighty question has already in part been resolved, when as I
showed the differences between the combat of the flesh and spirit, and the
conflict of conscience, and the will and affections; and now comes to be more
fully and directly handled. For the clearing whereof we need not to make any
further search, but only to examine whether the spirit of God accompanied with
his saving graces which is one of the combatants does reside and dwell in us.
For if it do, the^ there is no question but this conflict is in us seeing it
no sooner enters and takes possession of us, but presently it makes war
against our flesh with all the carnal lusts thereof, deposes them from their
regency, gives them deadly wounds, holds them in subjection, and labors
all it may, utterly to desplace and root them out. Now every faithful man
ought to be assured of this, namely, that the spirit of God dwells in him; or
if he have not this assurance as yet, he is never to be at rest, till it be
evident and clear in his own heart and conscience, as being the greatest
question, and the waightiest and most important case of conscience, that can
be propounded or known of us. The which as it may be known, so no Christian
ought to be ignorant of it, as the Apostle implies by that interrogation:
Know ye not that ye are the 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19.
Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? And again, Know
ye not that your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost? And therefore we
must not content our selves with the doubtful opinion of the Papists, nor with
the uncertain and ungrounded hope of carnal gospellers, but labor after
certain assurance that we are the Temples of God, and that his holy Spirit
dwells in us. Which that we may studiously endeavor to attain unto, let us
consider, first that God in his Word reuealeth this truth of the spirits
dwelling in every faithful Christian, by many infallible marks and signs, to
this end and purpose, that we Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
may take notice thereof, and labor to attain to the knowledge and assurance
of it, being a truth so important and comfortable. Secondly, if we do not know
that the Spirit dwells in us, we cannot know that we have any part in Christ;
and consequently, that we are true Christians, seeing the holy Spirit is the
principal bond of the union between him and us, by which he dwells in us,
and we in him. Thirdly, if we do not know that the Spirit dwells in us, we
cannot know that we are justified; for we have nothing to do with Christ's
righteousness in which we stand righteous before God, till by our spiritual
union he is made ours, whereby we have right and interest in all his benefits,
we cannot know that we are adopted the children of God, unless we know that
we have the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry in our hearts. Abba Father.
Romans 8. 15.
Nor that we are sanctified, unless we have the sanctifying spirit which is
the beginner and perfecter of all our holiness; nor that our prayers are heard
of God, seeing of our selves we know not how to pray as we ought, but it is the
spirit of supplication, which helps our infirmities and teaches us to pray
with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed; Romans 8. 26. Iam. 4. 3.
Neither does the Lord hear any prayers but such as the Spirit inspireth,
because such only are according to his will. And when without his help we
pray, We ask and receive not, because we ask amiss, as the Apostle
speaks. Fourthly, unless we know that we have the Spirit, we Ioh. 2. 20.
27. Ioh. 14. 26.
cannot know whether we are in error or truth, or whether our Religion which
we profess, be true or false, because he is the spirit of illumination, who
only inlighteneth us and teaches and leads us in all truth. Now how shall
he show us other things, so as we may know that he shows them, if he do not
show us himself, and make it known unto us that he dwells in us, and
teaches us? Fifthly, if we be not assured that he is in us, we can have no
sound comfort, because he is the only true comforter, from whom all sound
comfort springs, and all other comforts of which he is not the author, are
false, ungrounded and mere delusions. Lastly, we must labor after the
knowledge 2 Cor. 13. 5.
of the fruits of the spirit dwelling in us, as that we have faith, and that
Christ dwells in us, and therefore we must also be assured that we have the
tree and root, for the effect argues his cause as well as the cause his
effect, and not to know that we have the spirit, is not to know that we have
any grace.

Sect. 2. The first infallible sign is the ministry and means by which it
has been wrought in us.
Now we may know whether the spirit of God be in us or no: First by the
ministry and means which it vieth to make entrance, and to take possession
of us the which is the ministry of the Word of God: For when the flesh with
the lusts thereof are somewhat amazed and affrighted with the canon shot of
legal threatenings, making as it were a large breach into the heart and
conscience, and the trumpet of the Gospel sounds offering remission of sin
and eternal salvation to all that believe and repent; then this victorious
captain makes his entrance assaulteth the flesh and drives it into corners,
taking possession of all for Gods use the great Monarch of heaven and earth.
And this the Apostle shows, where he says, that the Galathians Gal. 3. 2.
received the spirit, not by the works of the law, but by the hearing of
faith; that is the doctrine of faith contained in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Whereof it is that the Ministers of the New Testament are by him called the
ministers of the 2 Cor. 3. 6.
spirit; because by their preaching they prepare the way for the spirit, as
John the Baptist for Jesus Christ, and are as it were his harbingers, to take
up a lodging for him in our hearts and souls. So that we may discern the
spirit by the means whereby it enters, which is not, by dreams, and
extraordinary revelations, for this is the fanaticall spirit of Anabaptists,
and Familists; nor by the preaching of the law only; For he comes not in
this great and strong 1 King. 19. 11. 12.
wind, that rents the Mountains, and breaks in pieces the Rocks, nor in
this earthquake which shakes the foundations of man's heart, nor in this fire
which consumes all sinners that come in the way of it. But when these have
gone before (like a peale of Canons that give warning of the coming of this
mighty Prince) then the still voice of the Gospel is uttered by the
Ambassadors and Heralds of the great King, and with it he enters and scateth
himself in our hearts (as it were) upon his royal throne.

Sect. 3 The second sign is the effects and fruits of the spirit* and 1 by the
nature of the gifts in us we may discern the spirit.
Secondly we may know whether the spirit dwells in us, and fights against
the flesh by the effects and fruits of it. And first generally by the nature of
the things wrought in us, and then by their constancy and continuance: For if
the gifts and endowments which we have be but merely natural, or such as may
be attained unto by our own art, industry and endeavors, then are they no
infallible notes of Gods sanctifying spirit or saving graces dwelling in us,
the which are supernatural divine, and sent down as it were from heaven into
us. Whereof it is that the Apostle opposes this spirit of God and that which
is in worldly men, the one against the other. We have received not the spirit
of the world, but the spirit which is of God. And a little after, the natural
man perceives not the things of the Spirit 1 Cor. 2. 12. 14
of God. Again, if they be but the common gifts of the Spirit, as merely
Moral virtues, and restraining graces, which are common to civil worldlings,
and have been also in many Heathens and honest infidels, then cannot we by
them gather any assurance that the sanctifying spirit dwells and warreth in
us against the flesh only there is a fight between conscience and affections,
vice is curbed and ouer-ruled by vice, and one corrupt faculty by an other of
the same kind.

. Sect. 4. The graces of the spirit may be known by their constant and
continual actions and operations.
Secondly the spirit and the saving graces thereof are constant and continual
in their actions and operations daily more and more mortifying and subduing the
flesh and carnal corruptions, and inciting us unto all Christian and holy
duties; like the sun which from the rising shines still more gloriously
until noone day, or a lively fountain which continually springs and sends
forth it clear and sweet streams; but the common gifts of the restraining
spirit do work and show themselves only by fits like flashes of lightning
which suddenly appear and as suddenly vanish, leaving nothing behind them but
gross and palpable darkness; or like standing waters and winter brooks which
swell and over flow upon the fall of rain and descent of land waters, but
soon after fall and are dried up in the time of drought. So the saving graces
of the sanctifying spirit are lasting and permanent, ever continuing with
increase even to the very end of our lives; but all gifts merely natural
endure but for a time, and (like the body) 1 Ioh. 2. 27.
after they are grown to their full strength and ripenes, they decrease, till
by a daily consumption they come to nothing, as we see in natural knowledge
and wisdom, which decays with age, until at last it comes to dotage and
childish ignorance.

Sect 5. Of the particular effects of the spirit, the 1 whereof is spiritual
illightening. John 14. 26.
But let us descend to some particular effects which the spirit works, for
these arguing their cause will plainly show the residence and abiding of this
holy guest in us. And first the spirit of God is the spirit of illumination,
inlightning our blind eyes, revealing unto us the things of God, and leading
us into all truth, according to that of our Savior; But the Comforter which
is the holy Ghost whom 1 Ioh. 2. 20. 27.
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. And that of
the Apostle; But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all
things. And again; But the annoynting which ye have received of him abides
in you; and ye need not Ephesians. 1. 17.
that any man teach you; but as the same annoynting teaches you of all things.
And hence it is, that this holy spirit is called the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of God. Yea but the wicked also may have some
illightening Heb. 6. 4.
of the spirit, as the Apostle shows, and which is more, they may have a taste
of the heavenly gift, be partakers of the holy Ghost, that is of the gifts and
graces of the sanctifying spirit, and have also a taste of the good word of God,
and of the powers of the world to come, yea and hereby they may attain unto a
far greater measure of knowledge then those who are truly regenerate, and
how then can this be a difference, whereby we may discern the one from the
other? To which I answer, that though there be no difference between the
knowledge of the regenerate and unregenerate in the quantity, in which respect
the knowledge of the wicked yea of the devil himself, does oftentime, exceed
the knowledge of the godly and faithful, yet there are many other differences
between them, for first the knowedge of the regenerate is much better
grounded, even upon that infallible foundation of the holy Scriptures, the
which they carefully and conscionably hear, read, study and meditate in them,
that they may be more and more edified and enlightened, grounded and built upon
this sacred authority, as upon the firm and immovable corner stone; whereas
the knowledge of the unregenerate is chiefly founded upon human authorities,
the doctrines and traditions of men, which as they are sometimes true, so
sometimes false and erroneous, and never in themselves certain and infallible.
So also their knowledge is confirmed by the experience which they have of the
things they know in themselves, by a lively and powerful sense and feeling of
the operation of it, in their own hearts and consciences, purging and
purifying them from all sinful corruptions, and renewing them to all
obedience, and inuiting and provoking them to them to the performance of all
Christian duties of holiness and righteousness; which moves the Lord to
reveal unto them his great secrets and the mysteries of his kingdom;
according to that; The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his covenant; and again, his secrets Psalm 25. 14. Pro. 3. 32.
are with the righteous. Whereby they not only know the things themselves
barely uttered, but also Gods secret will and purpose in them. But the
knowledge of the wicked is only in theory and speculation, whereby they are
enabled only to talk and discourse of the things they conceive, and have no
sense, feeling or experience of that powerful working of it for their inward
sanctification or outward reformation, but still lie frozen in the dregs of
their sins, and never co^scionably practice any duties, though they can
learnedly and cloquently discourse of them. In which respect it is said, that
the seed of the word takes no root in them, Mat. 13. 6 7.
because their knowledge is not settled and grounded upon these only true
foundations which never fail. Secondly the knowledge of the regenerate is more
clear distinct, and particular, and therefore sufficient to direct and guide
them, not only after some general manner, but also in all particular duties
and actions; but the knowledge of the unregenerate is more general, confused
and dark, only inabling them to set down general rules of duties, or if
particular, yet rather to others then to themselves, who are so blinded with
their passions and carnal lusts, that their knowledge gives them no
sufficient direction for their own carriage in particular duties. Thirdly the
knowledge of the regenerate still applies the things known to particular use,
bringing the word of God home to their own hearts and consciences; as the
threatenings of the law for their humiliation to drive them to Christ, to
restrain them from sin, when they are ready to fall, and to raise them being
fallen by unfeigned repentance. So Job kept his eyes under covenant, that they
should not glaunce wantonly upon women, Job. 31. 1. 3.
because he knew that destruction was to the wicked, and a strange punishment
to the workers of iniquity. And hereby Joseph was restrained from harkening to
his mistresses wicked suite. How can I do this great wickedness and Genesis 39.
9.
sin against God? And so likewise hereby they are enticed and spurred forward
unto all good duties, when as they feel themselves dull and slow. For so the
Apostle having spoken of Gods fearful judgment he applies this knowledge 2
Cor. 5: 11.
to particular use; knowing therefore (says he) the terror of the Lord we
persuade men, as though he should say, I dare not knowing this terrible
judgment, but persuade you to obedience and dehort you from sin, least
neglecting my duty I also be liable unto it. And thus also knowing the
promises of the Gospel, they apply them for their own consolation; according
to that of the Apostle; Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for Romans 15. 4.
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope. But the wicked by their knowledge apply not or misapply, they either
apply all unto others, or apply falsely unto themselves, arrogating all the
promises of life and salvation, though they do not all belong unto them.
Fourthly, the knowledge of the regenerate draws them nearer unto God, and
unites them more firmly unto him in love and true obedience, first in love of
God and of that truth which he has revealed unto them, for when he has made
known unto them not only his infiniteness in all perfection; but also his
goodness and mercy toward them, then this flame of Gods love kindles in
their cold hearts the fire of love toward God again, which makes them to
think nothing too much or enough which they can do or suffer for his sake;
whereby they are moved to make an holy use of all they know, both for the
avoiding of all which God hates, whom they so love, and the embracing and
practicing of all which he loves and and requires. But the knowledge of the
unregenerate is a light only without hea^e which drives them further from
God, and alienateth their hearts from him, because they cannot apply to their
own use his saving attributes, but rather are terrified with his wisdom,
power and justice, whereby he is able and willing to punish and take vengeance
on all sinners. Neither does it stir them up to any obedience, (unless it
be for servile fear) but rather enableth them to rebel and disobey more
securely, whilst by their great learning, their subtle shifts and nice
destinctions, they can more cunningly untwist the cords of Gods Commandments
which should bind them to their duty, and so wind themselves and slip their
necks out of the yoke of Gods Law, that it cannot hold them, and whilst
thereby they are enabled to defend their sins with their subtle sophistry, and
to preserve themselves from just censures, their names from deserved shame, and
to stop the cry of their consciences, that they may not check and accuse
them for their sins. Finally the knowledge of the regenerate brings them to
true humility, and the better and more clearly they conceive of Gods
goodness, power and glorious majesty and of their own misery, sins and
imperfections, the more they abase themselves and become vile in their own
sight, as we see in the example of Abraham, who when he most nearly and
familiarly conuersed with God, had the meanest conceit of himself,
acknowledging that he was but dust and ashes; in David who having attained unto
a greater measure of spiritual Genesis 18. 27.
knowledge then his teachers, confesses that he was but a worm and no man;
in Job who having come unto psalm. 22. 6.
a more clear knowledge of God by seeing him with Job. 42. 5. 6.
his eyes, abhorred himself in dust and ashes; and in Agar, who being
enlightened with a large measure of heavenly Pro. 30. 2.
wisdom, professes that he was more brutish then any man, and had not the
understanding of a man. But contrariwise the knowledge of the unregenerate
puffs them up with pride, according to that of the Apostle, knowledge puffs
1 Cor. 8. 1.
up, love edifieth; and causes them to vilefie and contemn others in
comparison of themselves, as we see in the example of the Pharisees, who
despised all them who confessed the truth concerning our Savior Christ as
ignorant and simple idiots. But this people who know not the law Ioh. 7. 48. 49
are cursed. And the reason is because their knowledge is only speculatiue,
confused and general, and does not bring them to any sense and feeling of
their sin and misery, or to a lively and experimental apprehension of Gods
saving attributes.

Sect. 6 The second effect of the spirit is to prepare our hearts for faith
and then to work it in us.
A second effect of the spirit whereby we may be assured that it dwells in
us, is the preparing of our hearts to receive the grace of a lively and
justifying faith and the effectual working of it in us being thus prepared, It
prepares them, first by enlightening our minds and by sh^wing unto us our
sin and misery by the law of God, and that in respect of our selves we are
brought into a damnable and desperate condition, out of which we cannot
recover by any means of our own, nor by all the help of men and Angels. And
when her by it has thoroughly humbled us and made us despair of all our own
abilities, then it reuealeth unto us the infinite mercies of God, his free
grace and eternal love in his son, and the all-sufficient merits of Christ,
together with the sweet promises of the Gospel made in him, offering grace and
mercy, for the forgiveness of sin, and the salvation of our souls, to all
that will receive them by the hand of faith, and will turn unto God by
unfeigned repentance: unto which truth of God revealed in the ministry of the
Word, the holy spirit by a secret operation works an assent as being most
infallible, seeing it proceeds from him who is truth it self and cannot
lie, which assent being effectual works in our understandings a perswasirn
that our sins though many and heinous, are yet pardonable; and in our
judgments a most precious esteem of Gods mercies and Christ's merits, from and
by which alone we receive remission. In our hearts also this effectual assent
works an earnest and constant desire that they may be pardoned, and to this
end an hungring and thirsting after Christ and his righteousness; in our
wills a firm resolution to rest upon Christ alone for justification and
salvation; and in our actions a conscionable endeavor in the use of all good
means, whereby we may be more and more assured, that we shall have our part in
the mercies of God and the merits of Christ. And these are the first degrees of
justifying faith which who so want are destitute of it; the which being wrought
in us, the Lord blesses the means of salvation, which the believer
conscionably uses with a desire to profit by them, as the word, Sacraments,
Prayer and the rest, for the increasing of these first degrees in us, until
they grow from a grain of mustardseede to a great tree, from an assent to an
apprehension and application of the promises, with some assurance that Gods
mercy and Christ's merits belong unto us. Unto which degree the most Christians
who labor after it do attain, if death prevent them not and hinder them from
coming from their spiritual infancy to their riper age in Christ. Now this
faith being come to application of Christ and the promises, and some assurance
that they belong to the believer, it grows daily in the careful and diligent
Christian to more strength, by his often feeling and experience of Gods love,
by his acquaintance with him in his holy ordinances, by testifying and
approving of his love toward God again, in his continual fruits of new
obedience, the exercises of a Christian life in good works, and by his
cheerful readiness to suffer any thing which it pleases God to call him unto
for his sake, until at last it come to that plerophory and full persuasion of
Gods unchangeable love, and our Election, Romans 8. 38. 39. 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
Adoption and Salvation which was in the Apostle Paul who was fully persuaded
that nothing in the world was 1. Pet. 1. 8. Romans 5. 3.
able to separate between Gods love and him. And this is accompanied with such
peace of conscience, as passes all understanding. For when we are assured that
we have the remission of our sins, and are quite freed from them both in
respect of their guilt and punishment, then the terrors and fears which did
accompany them are taken away, and both Satan and our own consciences which
did continually accuse us are put to silence, so as they can no longer affright
us nor disturb our peace. From whence springs spiritual joy unspeakable
and glorious, whereby we rejoice not only in the fruition of Gods benefits,
but also in afflictions and tribulations, as the Apostle witnesses, when as we
see our selves freed out of the hands of all our spiritual enemies, the wrath
of God, the curse of the law, death, hell and condemnation, and now brought
into an happy and blessed estate of grace and salvation, in and by Jesus
Christ, and and his benefits apprehended and applied by faith. Which effects
who so find thus wrought in them, they may be assured that they have the
spirit which is the cause and author by which they are wrought; even as the
light brings us the Sun, the streams to the fountain, and the branches
and fruit unto the root from which they flow and spring.

Sect. 7 The differences between a justifying faith and the faith of
presumptuous civil worldlings.
Yea but hypocrites and unregenerate men do boast most of their faith and
assurance of salvation, and therefore they also may have the spirit, or else
this faith is no infallible sign of it. To which I answer that they have no
true faith, but (as it were) in a dream and dotage, they delude themselves by
mistaking their carnal and secure presumption for a lively and justifying
faith. But how shall we discern the one from the other, seeing they seem to
have oftentimes as strong confidence and assurance of their salvation as the
best Christians? I answer that though there be between them some seeming
similitude, yet there is as great difference as between pure gold and a rotten
post gilded over. For first true faith is grounded on the Scriptures and the
word of God, but presumption has no ground but an idle conceit arising cut of
pride and self-love; True faith always follows unfeigned humiliation in the
sight and sense of our sin and misery; whereas the presumptuous man was never
humbled, but has a proud conceit of his own righteousness and worthiness.
Faith follows illumination and knowledge, and first we must know God and his
Christ, before we can truly believe in them; but presumption rises commonly
out of ignorance, and the more destitute the woldly man is of the knowledge of
God and his ways, the more bold and confident he is in his persuasion. True
faith is joined with all other graces, as love zeal of Gods glory, humility,
patience and obedience, manifesting it self by the fruits that it brings
forth in good works. But presumption is severed from them all, and goes
alone without any such company and attendants. True faith is not discerned
before sound conversion, and then it begins in some small and weak degrees;
but presumption is borne and bred with us, and in an instant comes to its
full strength; which makes the secure worldling to brag, that he has
always believed, and is so strong in faith, that he never doubted of his
salvation. True faith is not attained unto without great difficulty, it being
no less a work to believe the Gospel then to fulfill the Law; but
presumption voluntarily creeps into our hearts, and the less pains we take
in the use of Gods holy ordinances, the more easily it enters, and the
stronger it waxes. Faith is always assaulted with doubting, and the one being
a fruit of the spirit, the other of the flesh, there is a great and continual
conflict between them; but presumption is bold and confident, and he who is
possessed of it, professes that he never doubted of his salvation, neither
feels he any conflict in him, because he is wholly carnal, and corruption
warreth not against corruption, but only runs out of one extreme into
another, for when the secure worldling being by some means awakened out of his
lethargy cease to presume, then he begins to despair. Faith purifieth the
heart and works by love, and is never severed from unfeigned repentance; but
presumption nourishes and increases all sinful corruptions, and they who
most presume are most destitute of all true love toward God and their
neighbors. And howsoever they leave some gross sins forworldly respects*
yet they repent of none, there being no charge in their affections, but only
in their actions; yea in this respect also they nourish many sins in their
bosoms which they think most sweet and aduantageable, and will by no means
be persuaded to part with them. Faith unites and applies Christ unto the
believer for all uses for which God gave him, that is as well for
sanctification as for justification and salvation, and applies the virtue of
his precious Romans 12. 1.
blood, for the taking and purging away of the pollution and corruption of
sin, as well as the guilt and punishment; and as it takes hold of Christ to
make him ours, so it gives and offers our souls and bodies unto Christ,
that we may become his, and be wholly devoted and dedicated to his worship and
service: but presumption only apprehends Christ for the remission of sin
and the obtaining of everlasting life, and not for the mortification of sin
by virtue of his death, nor spiritual quickening and renewing by power of his
resurrection; and so also it is only a receiver but no giver, it takes all in
show which Christ offers, but it will in love of thankfulness return
nothing unto him again. Faith finding it own weakness, and the sharp
encounters of doubting and incredulity, labors earnestly in the use of all
good means whereby it may be more and more increased and confirmed, as
hearing the word, receiving the Sacrament, reacing, prayer, meditation and such
like; but presumption finding no such assaults, securely neglects all these
helps, feeling it self then the strongest when it is most destitute of them.
Finally true faith endures in the day of fiery trial and temptation, and even
when God seems to frown, to withdraw outward testimonies of his love, and
in stead of them sends afflictions and crosses, then the believer with
Abraham, hops above hope, and believes against belief, it Romans 4. 18. Job.
13. 15. and 19. 25.
pearceth through all these clouds of discomfort with a lively and spiritual
eye, and beholds the face of alouing father in Christ, even when he still
holds the rod in his hand; yea though it have no sensible comfort, nor
present feeling of Gods favor, yet being the subsistence of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen, it still Heb. 11. 1.
makes the believer to flee unto God, and to rest upon him alone* for freedom
from evil or fruition of good. But the presumptuous man swelled with the wind
of confidence like a bladder, lets out all with the prick of a pin, and
after all his Thrasonicall bragges of strength and fortitude, he faints and
cowardly yields when he is first encountered with crosses and afflictions. His
courage is presently cooled, his confidence turned into distrust his proud
presumption into affrighting terrors and hellish despair; and as it was
chiefly grounded on outward things and worldly prosperity, so when these are
taken away, then it also quaileth, fails and comes to nothing.

Sect. 8. The difference between justifying faith and that which is temporary
and hypocritical. Luke 8. 13. Ioh. 2 24. 1.
But though presumptuous worldlings have no true faith, and consequently have
not the spirit dwelling in them; yet perhaps temporaries and hypocrites may,
seeing in the Difference in preparation unto them.
Scriptures they are said to believe, and therefore they also may have the
spirit. I answer that though this temporary faith be a common gift of the
spirit, yet it differs much from a true justifying faith, and therefore is no
sign that Gods sanctifying spirit does dwell in them that have it. For first
they differ in the preparation whereby men are fitted to receive them. For
before true justifying faith goes sound humiliation, a true sight and sense of
sin, as sin, and not only in regard of punishment, and an earnest desire
to be unburdened of it. But the temporary is never thus thoroughly humbled,
for whilst he sees some sins he winketh at others, he grieueth and groneth,
rather under the punishment, then under the sin; he is willing to part with
some sins which rather pinch his conscience then please his affection, but
esteems others no burden, yea rather his chief delight; and though he
leaves many, yet he truly reputeth of none, because there is only a
surceasing of the action, but no change of the heart and affection.

Sect. 9. Second difference in their nature and parts.
Secondly, they differ in their nature and parts. For true faith highly
esteems Christ, and prefers him and his righteousness before all the
world, counting all things in comparison of them dung and loss; and therefore
is ready to forsake all that it may enjoy him: but temporary faith 1 Cor. 2.
2: Phil. 3. 9. Gal. 6. 14.
prefers the world before Christ, and though it make some account of him in
an inferior place, yet it will rather leave him then leave the world, if the
one of necessity must be parted with. Secondly, true faith effectually
assenteth to the whole Word of God, as being his undoubted truth, and
especially to the promises of the Gospel concerning the remission of sin,
reconciliation with God, and the eternal salvation of all that believe. Whence
arise those desires in the heart, and resolution in the will before spoken off,
whereby the believer hungreth after Christ and his benefits, and casts
himself upon him alone for justification. But temporary faith either
assenteth only to the truth of some part of the word and not to some other, as
to that which will stand with human reason and a man's own experience, but
not to that which is above or contrary unto them; to the promises of the
Gospel, not to the threatenings of the law, or to some of either, and not all
of both; or if to all, yet this assent is not effectual, as appears by the
differences that are in the desires and resolutions of true believers from
those that are in temporaries and hypocrites. For the desires of the true
believer is to be made partaker of Christ and his benefits are exceeding
fervent and earnest, like the desires of ( 2 Cor. 14. 1.
) covetous men after riches, of ( Genesis 30. 1
) Rachel after children; of the ( Cant 2. 5.
) loving bride after her beloved bridegroom, of the ( Psalm. 143. 6.
) dry and chopped ground after pleasant showers, ( Mat. 5. 6.
) of the hungry and thirsty after meat and drink; of the ( Psalm. 119. 20. 40.
) woman with child after desired meats, who so longs that she is ready to
miscarry and perish, if her longing desire be not satisfied: But the desires of
temporary faith are faint and cold, and though they can be content to have the
things belonging to salvation, if they will come with ease and small cost, they
choose rather to be without them, then that they should be over chargeable or
take up too much of their time and labor. Secondly the desires of true faith
are always joined with a careful endeavor in the use of all good means
whereby they may be satisfied, and in avoiding all contrary means whereby they
may be hindered. But the desires of temporary faith are so idle and slothful,
that they neglect all means whereby they might atchieue their desires, as we
see in Balaam, who desired to dye the death o^ the righteous, but could not be
content to imitate them in their lives. Thirdly, the desires of justifying
faith are constant and continual, like David's whose soul breaked, for the
longing that it had to Gods judgments at all times: but the desires of Psalm.
119. 21.
temporary faith are but by fits and flashes, as when they are at a Sermon,
and have their consciences convinced with the powerful ministry of the Word,
when they are in the house of mourning, and have before their eyes spectacles
of their mortality, when they see some notable example of the worlds vanity
and mutabilitie* or of the happiness of those who fear God, and make
conscience of their ways; when they are cast down by some grievous
affliction, and find themselves crossed in all their earthly desires.
Secondly, there is great difference between the resolutions of faith in true
believers and those who are but temporaries and hypocrites. For true justifying
faith resolves to cleave unto Christ alone, and to forsake all rather then to
be severed from him: But the faith of temporaries causes them to cleave unto
Christ so far forth as the world will let them, and if they may share with
him in his benefits, and not be hindered of their worldly desires, they are
willing then to give him entertainment; but if they be put to part with all
that they may have him, this is an hard saying, and they cannot abide it, but
though they came rejoicing to Christ, they will go away with the young man)
sorrowful, and will not buy him and his benefits at so dear a price. Like
herein unto Merchants who like the best wines when they taste them, but leave
and let them go, when as they hear how dear they are prized.

. Sect. 10 The third difference between them is in their properties.
Thirdly, justifying and temporary faith do differ one from another in their
properties and qualities. For true faith is hearty and unfeigned, and therefore
is called by the Apostle (...) faith that is not fained, and if there be any
hypocrisy lurking in the heart, it is an enemy unto 2. Tim. 1. 1. 5.
it, and labors to purge and root it out: but the faith of temporaries is
hypocritical and purposely affects and delights in disguizing and
dissimulation. Again true faith is constant and courageous to endure the fiery
trial. It will come unto God and catch hold on him for mercy, when he
frowneth and seems angry. It applies the promises, when they seem void and
hopeless, and waits Esa. 28. 26. Habac. 2. 3.
Gods leisure, when he deferreth to perform them. For he that believes (as
the Prophet speaks) shall not make have. It cleaves unto the Lord when he
seems to reject and shake us off, and will not leave the profession and
practice of his truth* when it is beaten from it by afflictions and
persecutions. But temporary faith though it make a glorious and golden show in
the time of prosperity, yet it becomes dross in the fiery trial; and
though it comes joyfully to God, when he inuiteth with benefits, yet it will
cowardly run away, when he threatens or corrects. It springs and
sprouteth, when it is watetered with the showers of prosperity, but withers
and sadeth, when the hot sun of persecution arises; and though the
temporary be ready to receive all good from God, yet he is not patient with
Job of receiving evil also.

Sect 11. The fourth difference in respect of their concomitants.
Fourthly, justifying faith differs from the faith of temporaries in respect
of the companions which do accompapanie them. For true faith is joined always
with a great conflict between it and doubting, which makes the poor
Christian to cry out with the father of the possessed child, I believe, Lord
help mine unbelief; and with the Apostles, Save Mark. 9. 24 Mat. 8. 25.
us, Lord, we perish. Neither does it obtain the victory over unbelief, and
get quiet possession of our hearts, without much struggling, striving, and
painful laboring in the use of all good means, whereby it may strengthen it
self, and weaken its enemy. But the faith of temporaries is easily attained
without any great opposition or long labor, for no sooner does he hear the
Word, but presently he receives it with joy, and as soon as the seed is cast
Mat. 13. 20.
into the stony ground, it forthwith springs and shows it self in the
green blade of a glorious profession. It rejoices before it grieueth, and
comfort comes before mourning; It is exalted before there was any
humiliation, and triumphs in victory without any conflict. And the reason
is, because the temporary believer is not much crossed in his presumptuous
conceit by Satan or his own flesh, who are content to let him flatter
himself with a shadow and semblance of faith which is without use or fruit,
that resting in this, he may never labor after such a faith as is sound and
substantial; knowing well enough, that it will nothing profit him, seeing
within a while his inlightning will turn to greater darkness, his believing to
desperate denying or deep despairing, his washing and cleansing, to greater
pollution and defiling, and that he may at pleasure make his re-entrance with
seven spirits worse then himself and so make the last end of this man worse
Heb. 6. 4. 5. 6. Mat. 12. 44. 45. 2 Pet. 2. 20.
then his beginning. Again true faith is joined with all other sanctifying and
saving graces, for from this fire of faith rises the flame of love and zeal;
from this holy root springs the fruit of all new and true obedience; From
this fountain flows affiance in God, fear, hope, humility and the rest;
all which as they are the effects of faith in respect of their birth and being,
so are they companions, props and stays of it after they are wrought in us.
But especially the most known and apparent companion of a lively faith is a
good conscience. For he that assuredly apprehends Gods love in Christ, makes
conscience of all his works and ways, carefully doing those things which may
please him who has so loved him, and whom he so loves, and flying those
things which may offend him. 1 Timothy 1. 5. and 3 9.
Whereof it is that the Apostle joins them together; The end (says he) of
the commandment is charity, out of a pure Heb. 10. 23.
heart, and good conscience, and faith unfeigned. And again, Let us draw near
with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. But the temporary,
as he has only a seeming faith, so has he also but counterfeit and seeming
graces; he has no true love of God and his brethren, but such as springs
from self love and love of the world; no affiance in God longer then he
vnderproppeth it with secundarie means and sensible helps; no hope, longer
then the promises are joined with present performance; no fear of God but
servile and slavish; no zeal, but (like that of Iehu) such as will further his
worldly ends; neither does he make conscience of embracing and practicing all
duties commanded, but some only, which best fit, or least cross* his carnal
affections, nor of mortifying and forsaking all manner of sin, but of such
only as bring least pleasure or profit; and that little which he does, is not
performed in love and obedience toward God, but out of pride and vainglory,
self-love servile fear or worldly respects.

Sect 12. The fifth difference in their effects. 1 True faith purifieth the
heart.
Lastly, justifying faith differs from that which is temporary in their
fruits and effects. For true faith purifyeth the heart from all manner of
sin, especially those inward and secret corruptions which are known only to
God and a man's own conscience, and not only binds the hands to the good
behavior, but renews and changes the affections of the heart, causing it to
hate mortally those vices which it formerly loved, and to resist and subdue
them in their birth and first beginnings. But the faith of temporaries does not
purify the heart, but only seemingly reformeth the outward actions; or if it
purges it from any sins, it is from such as are contrary to natural
appetite, or from those which are less pleasing and profitable: and not from
those whereunto nature chiefly inclines, and wherein the corrupt heart does
especially delight.

Sect. 13 The 2 effect where in they differ is in respect of their operation.
Secondly, justifying faith works by love, and is fruitful in the duties of
holiness and righteousness, and not by fits and starts, but as an holy root
and tree of Gods planting, it bears and brings forth ripe fruits
continually in due time and season; and as a lively fountain of grace and
goodness, it sends forth the pleasant streams Gal. 5. 6. Psalm. 1. 3. Ioh.
4. 14 and 7. 37. 38.
of good works, and virtuous actions. But the faith of temporaries works
seldom and but by fits, and only when they have some pange of devotion
wrought in them by the power of the Word conuincing their consciences, or out
of natural passion moved with some pitiful object. Neither are these true
fruits of holiness and righteousness, because they spring not from a lively
faith, unfeigned love, and true obedience, but from self love, praise of men or
other worldly respects; they are not ripe fruits fit to be reaped and carried
into the barn, but only green blades, semblances and shows which wither
before the time of harvest.

Sect. 14. The third effect respects joy. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Thirdly, true faith causes peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost,
which is no slight nor flitting joy, but as the Apostle calls it,
unspeakable and glorious, the which in the nature of it is spiritual, like
the author which works i^, and most shows it self, when as we are
exercised about spiritual objects and exercises, as hearing the Word, reading
meditation, praying, holy conferences, and such like. But temporary faith
brings no such peace; For there is no peace says my God to the wicked. And
howsoever s^. 57. 21.
they have some joy, yet there is great difference between it, and that which
proceeds from true faith. For Mat. 13. ^^.
the faithful delight in the Word, as being the word, not of man, but of God
himself, and because they find it his 1 These. 2. 13. Romans 1. 17.
strong power (whatsoever the instruments be) to their sanctification and
salvation. But temporaries rejoice in it for novelties sake, and as it is the
word of man, not so much in respect of the spiritual matter, as the manner
how, and the person by whom it is delivered, because they love him as a friend
for worldly respects, or for his natural gifts and parts, because he is
learned, witty and eloquent; the which joy cease and turns oftentimes into
anger and spleen, when as the word comes home to the conscience, and
reproves him sharply for his darling sins. Secondly, the faithful man
rejoices in spiritual things, the assurance of Gods love, the remission of
his sins and his own salvation: and though he takes some joy and comfort
in the things of this life, yet it is but small in comparison of the other. But
the temporary believer contrariwise takes some small joy in spiritual
things, as having some little taste of them; but his chief rejoicing is in
things worldly and earthly, which makes him to neglect the other joy, when as
they cross one another, and will not stand together. Thirdly, the joy of the
faithful, like the cause of it, which is our faith, is small at the first, but
increases by degrees until it come to fullness of joy, like that of David's;
Thou have put gladness in my heart, more Psalm. 4. 7.
then in the time, that their corn and their wine increased: but the joy of
temporaries is greatest at the first entrance, and then decays by little and
little, till at last it be utterly consumed and come to nothing. Finally the
joy of true faith is strong and constant, and not only continues in the
fruition of worldly prosperity, but also in affliction and persecution, as we
see in the example of the holy Apostles, who rejoiced and sung Psalms unto
God, when as they were persecuted for preaching the Gospel. But the joy o^
temporaries, like that of the Grasshoppers, continues (...) whilst the summer
of prosperity lasts, but decays and dies in the winter of afflictions.

Sect 15. The fourth effect respects confession and christian apology. Romans
1^. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Fourthly true faith, as it inwardly in the heart believes unto
righteousness, so outwardly with the mouth it confesses to salvation; and the
true Christian, as he believes in Jesus Christ, so he is always ready to
render a reason of his faith and hope that is in him, when the glory of God or
good of his neighbors requires it, although it be with the hazard and loss
of his goods, lands, liberty and life. And being endued with the spirit of
faith* he is ready to say with the Psalmist and Apostle, I believed, and
therefore have I spoken. But the temporary believer confesses Psalm. 116. 10. 2
Cor. 4. 13.
his faith when as it will stand with his worldly credit or advantage, but
smothereth his profession in time of danger, and utterly denies it, rather
then he will undergo any damage for it.

Sect. 16 The fifth effect respects contentment. 2 Cor. 5. 7. Romans 1. 17.
Heb. 13* 5.
Fifthly, true faith, gives a Christian comfort and contentment in all estates;
for be lives and walks by faith and not by sense, and therefore when he
wants friends or wealth, and such like worldly helps, he rests contented,
because his chief treasure and sufficiency is in Gods never failing
providence, upon which he chiefly relyeth; according to that of the Apostle, I
have learned that in whatsoever estate I am therewith to be content. And
again, Nevertheless Phil. 4. 12. Gal. 2. 20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who has loved me and
given himself for me. But the temporary believer lives by sense and not by
faith, and trusts in God when as he has in his hands the pledges and pawnes
of earthly benefits, but distrusteth in his promises and providence when as
secundary help and inferior means fail, and therefore uses unlawful
means to help himself.

Sect. 17. The 6 effect is the ouercoming of the world. 1 Ioh. 5. 4: 5.
Sixthly, true says overcomes the world, according to that of the Apostle,
Whosoever is borne of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world,
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? And it contemns all
earthly things as vain and worthless, in comparison of spiritual grace and
heavenly glory. But the temporary believer when he is at the best, is but a
mere worldling and a devoted slave, to his worldly lusts and desires after
honors, riches and pleasures. And therefore embraces grace and glory so far
forth only, as they will stand with the fruition of his earthly idols, but
rejects and renounceth his part and interest in them, when as they cross,
and will not stand with his earthly desires.

Sect. 18. The last effect rejoicing to think of christ's coming to judgment.
Lastly, true justifying faith makes us to rejoice, when as we think of the
appearing of our Savior Christ unto judgment, and even to long for this time
as being the day of our full redemption, when both in body and soul we shall
be freed from all sin and misery, and enjoy all glory and endless
happiness, according to that of our Savior; When these things begin to come
to pass, then look up and lift up your heads for your redemption draws
nigh. And so the Apostle says, that we which have received the first fruits
Luke 21. 28. Romans 8. 23.
of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. The which joy in thinking on this
day, and mourning because it is deferred, comes through our assurance of
faith and confidence of hope. For therefore do we desire to leave 2 Cor. 5. 1.
7. Gal. 5. 5.
this world and to be dissolved, because we know, that if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, but eternal in the heavens: and because through the spirit, we
wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. But no such joy or longing
accompanies the faith of temporaries, because they have no such assurance of
this happiness, and are besides so besotted with the love of worldly things,
that they cannot without terror and amazement think of that day, which when
it comes, will wholly deprive them of all their earthly joy.

Sect. 19. The 3 effect is the spirit of adoption.
A third effect of the spirit dwelling in us is to persuade and assure us that
we are the children of God, and to entitle us as heirs to our heavenly
inheritance; the which is a privilege and prerogative that belongs to all
the faithful, and to them alone, according to that of the Evangelist; But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to Ioh. 1. 12.
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. And this is
an undoubted fruit of the spirit, as the apostle witnesses; For ye have not
(says he) received the spirit of bondage, again to fear, but ye have
received the spirit Romans 8. 15. 16. Gal. 4. 6.
of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The spirit it self bears
witness to our spirit, that we are the children of God; and if children then
heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. And again; Because ye
are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts,
crying Abba, Father. In which regard the spirit of God dwelling in us 2 Cor. 5.
5.
is called the spirit of adoption, which does not give unto us a doubtful
testimony of this inestimable privilege, but certainly assures us, that it
does belong unto us. In which regard it is called an earnest which God
therefore Ephesians. 1. 14.
gives us, to put us out of all doubt, that he will make good this heavenly
bargain which he has promised unto us. Which is (says the Apostle) the
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession.
And in the same respect it is called a seal, which by the powerful
impression, that it imprinteth in us, assures us, that God will make good unto
us the promise of grace and salvation in Jesus Christ. So the Apostle says; In
whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise.
And Ephesians. 1. 13. and. 4. 30.
grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. If therefore by this earnest and seal we have attained unto this
assurance of our adoption and right unto our heavenly inheritance, we may be
assured also that the spirit of God dwells in us, for the cause and the
effect cannot be severed, and our assurance of our heavenly bargain does
plainly argue, that we have received this earnest and seal by which alone it
is confirmed unto us. But that we may not be deceived with a false and
counterfeite seal, let us remember, that this seal only is annexed unto the
covenant of grace, which requires on our part the condition of faith and
repentance, and as it is Gods privy seal, according to that, the Lord knows
them that are his, so there is a broad seal joined with it, let every 2 Timothy
2. 19.
one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; and therefore those
who live in their infidelity and impenitency, have not received this seal, for
what have they to do with the seal, to whom the covenant does not appertain?

Sect 20. The fourth effect is the spirit of supplication.
A fourth effect of the spirit is to enable us unto prayer, and to power forth
our souls unto God in such an acceptable manner, as that our suites and
petitions are hard and granted by him; whereof it is called by the Prophet
Zachary, the spirit of grace and supplication, which the Lord promises to
power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants Zach. 12. 10.
of Ierusalam, that is all the true members of the invisible Church militant
here on earth. So the Apostle plainly Romans 8. 26.
tells us, that we know not for what to pray as we ought, but it is the
spirit which helps our infirmities, and makes intercession Iud. ver. 20.
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And therefore the Apostle Jude
knowing our insufficiency in our selves to perform this duty, does exhort us
to pray in the holy Ghost. Whereby it appears, that the spirit of God
dwells in all those, who in the sight and sense of their own spiritual
wants do power forth their hearts and souls unto God in prayer, with faith
and feruency of spirit, which properties I require in that prayer, which
assures us that the spirit dwells in us, and not ability on the sudden upon
every occasion to conceive a prayer, and to utter it in eloquence of words,
choice phrases or a continued ready discourse of speech. For it is not said,
that the spirit teaches us words and fluent phrases, but to pray in the heart
and spirit, with sighs and groans which cannot be uttered, which language
God that searches the heart understands and accepts, as the Apostle
speaks; yea being a spirit and requiring to be worshipped in spirit and Romans
8. 27. Ioh. 4. 24
truth, he esteems not the most eloquent prayers conceived and uttered,
without this sight of our wants, zeal and feruency of spirit; and contrariwise
where these are, he hears and grants our fuites and supplications, though
with Ezechias, we are not able to express them, but chatter like a Crawe or
Swallow, or with Hannah only move our Esa. 38. 14.
lips, yea in truth though we should not so much as move them, so that with
her we speak unto him in our 1 Samuel 1. 13.
hearts. Neither has the Lord promised, that he will hearken unto them, who
can speak eloquently, but that he will satisfy the desires of them that
fear him, hear their cry and Psalm. 145. 18. 19
save them, and that he will be nigh unto them that call upon Exodus 4. 10. 16.
him in truth. Of which we have an example in Moses, who though he were not
cloquent, but so slow of speech that he needed to have Aaron to be his
spokesman, and in stead of a mouth unto him, for the delivery of his embassage
to Pharaoh and the people, yet God gave audience unto his slow and unready
suites, rather then unto Aaron, who exceeded him in cloquence, in so much that
when Moses must pray in the behalf of the people, Aarons office was to stay up
his hands, that he might more fitly continue and persevere in this holy
exercise. Again to conceive a prayer upon every occasion, and to utter it in a
continued and eloquent phrase of speech, is no assured sign, that the spirit
of God dwells in us, because it is neither proper to the faithful, nor
commune to them all. For an hypocrite may attain unto this ability, yea even
excel in it by virtue of his natural endowments, memory, eloquence and
liberty of speech, boldness and such like, especially when as he has had
virtuous education, and has been instructed in the doctrine of godliness,
and also trained up in these Religious duties not only by precepts, but by the
examples of the godly, which he is able to imitate by help of these natural
endowments in the exercise of prayer, as well as in the function of Preaching
and ministry of the word. And so likewise it is not commune to all the
faithful to have this ability, for there are many who have a great measure of
grace, sight of sin, and sense of wants, seruent desires and strong faith,
who are so disabled through natural imperfections, want of memory, boldness, or
slownesse, or vnreadines of speech, that they are not able to perform this
duty, especially when they are in the presence of others. And this I write not
to detract any thing from the excellency of their gifts, who are able upon all
occasions to express the desires and prayers of their heart in good words and
convenient discourse of speech; seeing this is a gift of God, which not only
stirs up our own devotion, but is profitable also for the edification of
others, who can only conceive of holy desires, as they are by utterance made
known of those that have them; but partly to give unto the prayer of the heart
and soul a superior excellency, far above the prayer of the lips, even
then also when it is without it; partly that none should please themselves in
it, though they could ravish others with the admiration of their gifts, if they
be not as earnest, devout and fervent in the desires of their hearts as they
are able and eloquent in the prayers of their mouths, for of these in their
greatest excellency, it may be truly said, that they are in Gods estimate but
mere lip-labor, which will for reward draw upon us that just censure, this
people draws near unto me with their lips, when their hearts are far from
Esa. 29. 13
me. And partly, yea especially, for the comfort of all those, who having holy
desires, through want of natural parts, have no ability to utter them, seeing
if such can but make their suites known unto God by their sighs and groans,
it is an evidence unto them, that the spirit dwells in them, who enableth
them thus to pray, and whose suites and supplications are sure to be heard and
granted. But yet we are not truly capable of this comfort if we do not labor
1 Cor. 14. 1.
after perfection and strive to attain unto the best gifts, much less if we
are disabled for the performance of these holy duties, not through want of
natural gifts but of spiritual grace, and through sloth and negligence which
hinders us from employing and using them. Of which this is an evident sign,
when as we have liberty of speech and plenty of words, to discourse readily
and freely, upon all occasions of worldly and earthly things, but are then
only tongue tied, when we should speak unto God, and can find no fit words
to express our minds in any sensible manner, when as by prayer we should
make our suites known unto him.

CHAP. XII. How we may know that Gods spirit dwells in us by our
sanctification and the qualities and gifts of holiness infused into us.
Sect. 1. The fifth effect of the spirit is the work of sanctification.
A Fifth effect of the spirit, whereby he may be known to dwell in us, is the
work of sanctification, and the qualities of holiness infused into us, which
is so proper and peculiar to the spirit, that none besides him can effect it.
For as impossible it is for any man to give unto himself this spiritual
renewing, as it was at first to be the cause of his own being; as unable are
we to be the causes of our regeneration, as we were to be of our
generation, and therefore as the creature evidently proves that it had a
creator, and the child that it had a father, so alike certainly may we be
assured by our renewing and regeneration, that the spirit of God dwells in us
who has been the sole author of this work. And thus our Savior ascribes
it to his holy spirit, where he says, that unless we be borne of water and
the spirit we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ioh. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 6.
11, Romans 1. 4.
So the Apostle having told the Corinthians that they had been notorious
sinners, says that they were washed and sanctified by the spirit of our God.
And hereof it is that he is called not only the holy spirit, but the spirit of
holiness, the spirit of sanctification or the sanctifying spirit, not only
because he is infinitely holy himself, but also does sanctify and make us
holy who were in our selves corrupt and sinful. The which sanctification he
works by begetting a lively faith in us which purifieth our hearts, and so
applies unto us the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, whereby we are
cleansed from our sinful corruptions and quickened in the inner man to
holiness of life; the which sanctification, mortification and spiritual
quickening always begins at the heart, mind, will and affections, and then
afterward shows it self in our outward actions. And therefore whosoever
find this work of sanctification thus begun in them, they may be assured,
that the spirit of God dwells in them.

Sect. 2. Of the sixth effect of the spirit, which is repentance and of the
preparation there unto.
A sixth effect of the spirit dwelling in us is like unto the former, namely
unfeigned repentance and amendment of life; unto which it makes the same
preparation, that it does for faith. For first by the ministry of the law,
the spirit (as our Savior speaks) conuinceth us of sin, showing unto us both
the heinousness of our sins, together with their multitude, and also the
grievous and endless punishments Ioh. 16. 8.
which they have deserved. And this it does commonly at the first in a more
general and confused manner, amazing and astonishing us with terrors and
fears, horrors of mind, and panges of conscience when as we see the huge
mass or mountain of our manifold and grievous sins, as it were in the whole
lump; and the wrath of God, the curse of the Law, the plagues and punishments
of this life and the life to come, which we have by them deservedly, and (in
respect of our own means) ineuitably drawn upon us; and afterward more
particularly and distinctly it sets our sins in order before us; and
especially presents to our view those sins which we are most guilty off,
and by which we have most dishonored God and wounded our own consciences By
all which it works in us that which we call penitence, contrition, and
humiliation, whereby we are cast down under the heavy weight of our sins
and lie grieuing and groaning under them; as it were under an intolerable
burden, finding no rest or comfort in our selves, or in any worldly things
besides. And thus the spirit by the law (as it were) with an iron hammer,
battereth and bruiseth our hard and stony hearts in pieces, that he may mix
with them, being made contrite, Ier. 4. 3.
the oil of his spiritual graces; and uses it like a plow to break up (as
it were) these clunge, stiff, and fallow grounds, that being thus prepared he
may sow in them these holy seeds. For when he has thus cast us down and
thoroughly humbled us, then he raises us up again, by revealing unto us the
mystery of salvation, the mercies of God, and merits of Christ, offered unto
all who will receive them by says. And then (as has been showed) it works
in us an hungring desire after Christ and his righteousness, and a careful,
earnest and constant endeavor in the use of all good means, as the hearing of
the word, prayer, and the rest, whereby we may be made partakers of them. The
which by his inward and secret operation, he so blesses and sanctifies unto
us, that they become effectual to work in us a lively faith, whereby we lay
hold upon Christ and his benefits, and so are assured of the mercy of God and
the remission and pardon of all our sins, of Gods grace in this life, and
eternal glory in the life to come.

Sect. 3 That faith is the cause and foundation of our repentance.
And thus being possessed by faith of all these inestimable benefits, our
hearts are ravished with the apprehension of the infinite love of God, and our
Savior Christ, and inflamed with unsained love toward them again; which
faith thus working by love does cause a change and alteration which is called
repentance, beginning in the mind and heart, and so proceeding to the outward
parts and actions; and works in us a godly sorrow because by our sins we
have so much offended and displeased so gracious a God and good a father; a
true hatred of those sins and corruptions which we have either formerly
committed, or which yet adhere and cleave unto us, and a settled resolution and
constant purpose to mortify and subdue, leave and forsake them for the time to
come; and to serve the Lord in holiness and newness of life. All which we
do not out of servile fear, but out of child-like love and affection, which
makes us willing and desirous by our new obedience to please and glorify our
heavenly father, not for fear of condemnation, but because through the mercies
of God, and merits of Christ, we are assured that we shall never be condemned.
Where by the way we may note a notable difference between that sorrow for
sin which the spirit works in the regenerate, and that which is in carnal
men: For though these may sorrow and grieve after they have sinned, yet it is
not for sin it self, the remembrance whereof is pleasant unto them, but for
the punishments, which they either presently feel, or fear and expect in time
to come: where as the sorrow of Gods children is a flood or stream that
springs from faith and love, making us to bewail our sins because we have
offended and dishonored so good a God who has freed us from the guilt and
punishment of them by giving his only Son to death as the price of our
redemption.

Sect 4. That the spirit dwelling in us purges us from our natural
corruptions.
So that if the Spirit of God dwell in us, then has it wrought in us, this
work of repentance in all the parts thereof and has made in us an happy and
blessed change, from evil to good, from sin to holiness, and from
corruption to grace. For as in nature corruption goes before generation, the
abolishing of the old form, before the bringing in of the new; so before we
can be spiritually renewed, the old man must be killed and crucified, and
then the new man will be quickened and revived; sin and corruption is purged
away, and then holiness and righteousness is wrought in us. First then in
effecting this work of repentance, the Spirit of God dwelling in us, purges
and purifyeth us from all our sinful corruptions in all the parts of our
souls and bodies, by applying unto us the efficacy and power of Christ Jesus
his death, which mortifith and crucifieth them in us, so as they do no longer
reign in our mortal bodies as in time past. As for example it causes the
scales of ignorance to fall from the eyes of our mind, it freeth in some
measure our judgments from error, our imaginations from vanity, our
consciences from dead works, our hearts from hardness our wills from
perverseness and rebellion, our affections from corruption and disorder, and
all the members of our bodies from the servitude of sin. All which are the
proper and peculiar works of the spirit, and the fruits of our regeneration,
and n^w birth, according to that of the Apostle; Whosoever is borne of God does
not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he
is 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
borne of God.

Sect 6. That the spirit is known to be in us by his quickening of us in the
inner man.
Yea but in the regenerate also there may seem to be some mortification, some
mourning for sin, some leaving and forsaking of it: As we see in Herod who
heard John the Baptist gladly, and did many things according to his
instructions: In Simon Magus who for a time left his forcerie, believed and was
baptized: In Ahab, who humbled himself before God, wearing sackcloth, and
going mournfully: In Judas, Demas, Ananias and Sapphira, with many such like,
and how then may we discern the one from the other? I answer, that though
there be some seeming similitude between them, yet there are many great and
essential differences whereby we may know the one from the other. For the
regenerate man mortifieth and forsakes his sins out of love and obedience to
God, but the unregenerate out of self-love for the obtaining some temporal
good, or the avoiding of some evil. He renounceth all sin, and labors
most in the mortification of those corruptions unto which he is naturally most
inclined, as we may see in the example of David, who showed his uprightness
before God, by keeping himself from all his iniquities, by hating every false
way, and esteeming all Gods precepts. So that his repentance and mortification
is without restraint Ioh. 6. 63.
or limitation, and extends to the subduing and rooting Tit. 3. 5.
out of all sin without exception. But the other in his fained repentance
renounceth onley some sins which Ephesians. 2. 1.
he can best spare, as being least pleasant or profitable; but as for those
which are most aduantageable and delightful, he keeps them like sugar under
his tongue, and will rather part with any thing, even the first borne of his
body, Job. 20. 12* Mic. 6. 6.
as the Prophet speaks; yea loose his own soul, then leave and forsake it;
As we see in Herod and many others. The man regenerate is constant in his
repentance and casts away his sins with detestation like filthy rags, with
a purpose never again to return unto them; but the hypocrite Esa. 58. 5 Heb.
12. 1.
only leaves them for a time, and then returns unto them again, he lays
them aside like his apparel, with a purpose to resume them when he has fit
opportunity, and there is not a through divorce between him and them, but
only a temporary separation (as it were) by mutual consent. He leaves his
sins willingly and chearefully and because they so beset him* and clinge
about his neck, that he cannot in such have fly from them as he desires,
therefore he is content that the Lord should pull him out of this sinful
Sodom with some violence, burn away his dross with the fire of tribulation,
and cut the throat of those which he has esteemed his darling sins, with the
sword or razor of afflictions; but the other unwillingly forsakes his darling
sins, and when he is dragged from them by the fear of Gods approaching
judgments, he does with Lots wise, look back upon them, as being loath to
part with them, unless he were constrained by mere necessity. From whence
another maine difference plainly arises between them. For the sound
Christian by his repentance has his mind and affections changed, and whereas
in the days of his ignorance he allowed and approved, loved and liked his
sins; now he condemns, loatheth and disliketh them; so that he is freed,
not only from the outward act of sin, but also from the inward love, yea
more from the corrupt affection, then from the sinful action, as we see in
the example of the Apostle Paul, who did the evil which he hated, and Romans 7.
15. 23.
was delighted in the law of God in the inner man, when by the Law of his
members he was led captive of sin. But the unregenerate do only leave their
sins in respect of the outward act, when as in the mean while their hearts
and affections do cleave unto it. As we see in the example of Balaam, Number. 23.
20. 26
who rendereth this as the reason why he would not curse the people of Israel,
not because he loved them, as being the Church of God and his peculiar and
chosen people, but because the Lord would not give him leave; whereby he
implies that he would very gladly have done it, that by gratifying Balaacke
he might have received the wages of iniquity, but was restrained by the
terrors of the Almighty, so as he durst not for his life presume to do it.
In which respect it may be truly said, that Paul's sinning through infirmity,
and in some sort unwillingly, was less sinful, then Balaams not committing of
that act of sin in cursing the people, yea then his blessing of them, seeing
all he did was through fear and constraint which made him to bless them whom
he cursed in his heart, as appears by that his cursed counsel which he
gave unto Balaacke, namely that he should by alluring the people to Number. 24.
14. and 24. 1. 2.
commit first carnal, and then spiritual fornication, utterly disarme them of
Gods protection, and leave them naked to their enemies. And the Lord does not
so much regard the hand as the heart, nor the outward action as the mind and
inward affection.

Sect 6. That the spirit is known to be in us by his quickening of us in the
inner man.
Secondly as the spirit mortifieth and crucifieth the old man with the lusts
thereof, so it quickens us in the inner man and renews in us all
sanctifying and saving graces; as it makes us to fly all evil* so to embrace
that which is good; as it causes us to forsake our old sinful works, and
corrupt conversation, so it inableth us by our new obedience to serve the
living God. Thus our Savior ascribes to the spirit this spiritual life and
quickening; It is (says he) the spirit that quickens; And the Apostle
tells us, that John. 6. 63.
God according to his mercy has saud us, by the washing of regeneration and
renewing of the holy Ghost. If therefore the Tit. 3. 5.
Spirit of God dwells in us, then are we, who were dead in trespasses and
sin, quickened with saving grace, and raised Ephesians. 2. 1.
and enabled unto new obedience; our understanding which were darkened with
ignorance, are enlightened with the knowledge of Gods truth, the work of
redemption, and mysteries of godliness. Our judgments are informed so as we
can discern between truth and falsehood, good and evil. Our minds which
only minded earthly vanities, are now set, not on things beneath, but upon
those Col. 3. 2. Heb 9. 14.
that are above; our consciences which were loaded with dead works, do now
serve the living God, performing that duty for which they were created, in
excusing us when we do well, and accusing us when we do evil. Our wills which
were stubborn and rebellious, are now obedient, pliable and subject to the
will of God. Our hearts of stone, are Psalm. 51. 17.
made hearts of flesh, and becoming broken and contrite are fit sacrifices
which God accepts. Our corrupt affections are now sanctified and brought in
order; our love of the world is changed into the love of God, spiritual and
heavenly things, our confidence in the creature into affiance and trust in God.
Our fear of men into a godly fear which restrains us from sin, and
inciteth us to all good duties. Our carnal joy into spiritual rejoicing, our
corrupt anger into godly zeal, which sets it self against all the
impediments of Gods glory, especially our own sins. And finally being freed
from the service of sin, we are now become the servants of righteousness,
setting before us the whole Law of God, as the rule and square of our lives,
and all our actions, and conforming our selves in obedience unto al and every
of the commandments both in the hating and forsaking of whatsoever it
forbids and condemns, and in the embracing and practicing of whatsoever it
commends and inioyeth.

Sect. 7 The differences between the quickening of the spirit in the
regenerate, and that which seems to be in the unregenerate.
But here let us take heed that we do not deceive our selves; for though
those only in whom the spirit dwells are thus truly quickened, yet there
may be a show of it in them that are unregenerate, as we may see in the
example of the Angel of the Church of Sardis, who had a name that he lived,
and yet was dead: and of the Church of Laodicca, who thought himself quick
sighted and rich in all spiritual grace, when as he was wretched and
miserable, poor. blind, and naked. And though all new and true obedience
Apoc. 3. 1 17.
is the fruit of the spirit, yet there is in the unregenerate some resemblance
and shows of it, though it be not in them in truth; even as there are many
things done by beasts, which a man would think did proceed from reason and
understanding; where as in truth they are by instinct of nature, they
propounding no ends unto themselves in all their actions, but are directed unto
them by him that made them; and by fantasy and imagination, reasons Ape which
inableth them to produce such strange effects, that diverse being hereby
deceived, have thought them reasonable. Now that we may not be thus deceived,
let us remember, that he who is led by the spirit, performs simple obedience
unto the law of God because he requires it, but the unregenerate in
dissimulation for worldly and sinister respects he yields total obedience
unto the whole law of God, and with all the powers and faculties of his soul,
and body; but the other only in the outward man and that unto some
commandments alone, making no conscience of the rest. He is constant in his
obedience, because the cause thereof Gods love toward him, and his love toward
God is constant and permanent; and he walks daily and continually in Gods
law, as in his way; but the other is obedient by fits only, going forward and
backward, as he is spurred on, or curbed and rayned in, by worldly respects,
which being mutable and unconstant do make his obedience like unto them. In
which respect the motion of the unregenerate in the ways of godliness may be
said to be dead and accidental, incited and stirred on by outward causes, as
the horse which would not go unless he were compelled by the spur, or like
the wheels in the clock, which no longer move then the waights and poyzes do
hang upon it. But the motion of the regenerate is lively and natural,
proceeding from an inward cause, even the spirit of God dwelling in us, which
quickneth us (as it were) with a new soul of life and power, whereby we are
enabled to go on in the ways of godliness, even as a man naturally moves
and walks by virtue of his soul; 2 Pet. 1. 4.
which quickens and strengthens his body to the performance of those
actions. So that in a true Christian there is the right perpetual motion,
whose cause is not outward, but in himself, making him constantly and
continually to go on in his holy way, as kindly and naturally, by virtue of
that godly nature whereof he is made partaker by the holy spirit, even as the
fountain springs and the river runs. And how soever there may be both in
the regenerate, and the unregenerate an heat of love and zeal which is the
cause of all their motion and actions, yet there is great difference between
them, for the one is like the heat in a bathe, whose cause is natural and in
it self, and is therefore constant and continual, and not abated and lessened
but rather intended and increased by the outward cold of crosses and
afflictions; but the other like the heat of ordinary hot water, which being
naturally cold, and only hot by accident and heat of the fire, is not
constant but though for a time it may be much more hot then the other, yet the
cause being not in it self, but outward and accidental, when this is put out,
the heat continues not, but again returns to more then wonted coldness.
For so the heat in the unregenerate being only caused by outward prosperity
and temporal benefits, they seem fervent in their love toward God whilst
these continue, but if this fuel which nourishes it, be taken away, and they
be compassed about with afflictions and persecutions, they become more cold in
their love and zeal toward God then ever they were before. Or else they may
be resembled to a living body and dead carkase; the one whereof is hot by an
inward cause, even the radical and vital heat which warmeth the blood in all
the veins; but the other howsoever it may be made hot by the heat of the
fire and by much friction and rubbing, yet it continues not any longer then
these means are applied, because it has no inward cause, but they being
removed, it becomes again as cold as a stone, or the earth and clay whereof
it is made.

Sect. 8. The former operations of the sanctifiing spirit signified by diverse
metaphors* as first wine and oil.
And these are the effects respecting our repentance which the spirit works
in us, the which are also employed by diverse metaphors or similitudes, by which
in the Scriptures it is represented unto us. For it is likened unto wind,
because like it (yea much above it) it is mighty and powerful to cast down
all that stands in the way, as proud reason, stubborn will and rebellious
affections; and to make the strong oaks and lofty cedars equal with the lowest
shrubes. Secondly in respect of its secret operation and the unknown liberty
which it takes in working where it lists. Thirdly, because the more it
blows upon Ioh. 3. 8. 2 Cor. 10. 5.
us, the more it causes us to burn and flame out in the fervent zeal of Gods
glory. And fourthly because it has a cleansing and purifying virtue, whereby it
purges us from the contagion and corruption of our sins, even as the wind
purges the wheat and drives away the chafe, 2 Cor. 1. 21.
cleanses the air, and purifieth it from all hurtful and dangerous
infection. Secondly it is likened to oil, and the operation thereof to outward
anointing, in respect of that suppling and softning virtue which it has,
whereby it mollifyeth our hard and stony hearts, and makes them to become
flesh, tender and pliable to Gods will and word, and also because our powers
and parts being spiritually anointed 1 Ioh. 2. 20.
with this holy oil, they are made strong and vigorous, nimble and active to
run in the ways of Gods Commandments; as our limbs anointed with
material oil, are made more agill and fit for any bodily exercise or feats
of actiuity. And finally it is likened to oil because like it, it makes a
cheerful countenance, whilst it comfort and cheareth the heart, brings
peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, and replenisheth our
souls with such inward joy as is unspeakable and inestimable.

Sect. 9. The spirit compared to water. Esa. 44. 3.
Thirdly, it is compared unto water; For I will) says the Lord) power water
upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will power my
spirit upon thy seed and my blessing upon thy offspring; because in many
things it does resemble it, for it clears the eyes of the mind, (as
material water does the eyes of the body) and makes us much more perfectly
to behold the ways of God and mysteries of his kingdom; to which end the
Lord promises his Church that he will power the water of his spirit Joel. 2.
28.
upon all flesh, the effect whereof should be this, that they should prophecy,
their young men see visions, and their old men Esa. 61. 2. 3.
dream dreams. Secondly like water it cools and refreshes us, when we are
scorched with the heat of Gods displeasure, with afflictions and persecutions,
and are ready to faint with weariness, as we are travailing in our journey
toward our heavenly country. Thirdly (like water) it quenches our spiritual
thirst, by applying unto us that wel-spring and fountain ^f living waters,
Jesus Christ his blood, his righteousness and obedience; to which purpose is
that speech of our Savior to the woman of Samaria; Whosoever drinks of the
waters that I shall give him, shall never Ioh. 4. 14. and 7. 37.
thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water
springing unto everlasting life. And that proclaimation which he made at the
feast; If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in
me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water; the which (as the
Evangelist expounds it) he speak of his spirit which they that believed on
him should receive. Fourthly, he is compared to water, because like it he has
a cleansing virtue, to purge us by the application of Christ's merits and
bloodshed from the guilt, punishment and corruption of all our sins. So the
Apostle says to the Corinthians, that they were washed and 1 Cor: 6. 11. Tit.
3. 5. Heb. 10. 22. Zach. 13. 1.
cleansed from their sins, in the name of the Lord Jesus, by the spirit of
God. Lastly like water, it waters our dry and barraine hearts, and makes
them fruitful in holiness and righteousness, for so the Lord having said,
that he would power the water of his spirit upon his Israel, adds in the next
words, and they shall spring up as among the grass, and a^ willowes by the
water courses. And again, Thou shall be Esa. 44. 45.
like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

Sect. 10. The spirit compared to fire. Ioh. 3. 11. Act. 2. 3.
Finally it is compared to fire, according to the Baptists speech of our
Savior Christ, He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire; and so
when he descended upon the Apostles, it is said that there appeared unto them,
cloven tongues like as fire, and it sat upon each of them. The which
similitude is most lively to signify and represent the virtue and operation of
the holy Ghost. For first like fire it gives light, even in the darkest places
and dispelleth and scatters the black and thick fogges of ignorance and
error, so that all things about it which were hidden and secret are
spiritually discerned, in which respect he is called the ( Iam. 1. 17.
) father of lights, which causes the ( Tit. 2. 11. 12*
) light of grace bringing salvation to shine unto us, by which we are ( Luk 1.
79.
) illightned who sat and in darkness, and in the shadow of death, that we
might ( 1 Cor 2. 12. 14
) know the things of God, which cannot otherwise be discerned, and might have
our feet guided into the ways of peace. Secondly as fire burns all things
that are combustible, as straw, wood, chafe and such like; so the spirit of
God burns and consumes in us whatsoever may be consumed, as sin,
corruption, and all manner of fleshly lusts, and so offers up our bodies as
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable and without Romans 12. 1, Mark. 9. 49.
blame, which would not be acceptable unto God, unless like the whole burnt
offering, it were thus salted, seasoned, and purified with this holy fire, as
our Savior speaks. Thirdly, as fire by consuming the rust and dross does
refine and purify the metal, so that the more it is tried the purer it
waxes; So this holy spirit consuming the rust and dross of our sins and
corruptions, does make us pure and refined metals, yea it also (like the
fire) has the virtue of separation, parting asunder our tin and copper; from
right silver and gold, that so we might be a treasure unto God, and as it were
fit vessels for his own table. So the Lord promises; I will turn mine hand
upon thee, and Esa. 1. 25:
will purge away thy dross and take away all thy tin. And a again, Every
one that is written among the living in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, when
the Lord shall have washed away Esa. 1. 25.
the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit of Esa. 4. 4.
judgment, and by the spirit of burning. Fourthly, as it is the property of
fire to turn things into it own nature and to make them like unto it self:
so the spirit does turn and transform us, making us of earthy, natural and
carnal, to become heavenly, supernatural and spiritual. More specially it is
the property of fire, to take from iron it own qualities when it is put into
it, and to communicate unto it such qualities as it self has; and whereas
naturally it is black and hard, cold and heavy, it makes it bright and
shining, soft and liquid; hot and light, so that a man would think that the
iron were transformed and changed into fire it self; So it is the property of
the spirit to communicate the like qualities to the natural man, for whereas
naturally 1 Cor 2. 14 10 Ephesians. 4. 18. Esa. 42. 16. Psalm. 36. 9.
he is darkened in his understanding* through black and palpable ignorance, it
inlightneth his mind with the bright beams of saving knowledge whereby he is
enabled to see and understand the high and deep mysteries of Gods kingdom.
Whereas his heart is so hard and obdurate, 1 King. 22. 19. Act. 2. 37.
that nothing will make it relent, but it will rather break then bow and
incline to any good; the spirit of God makes it to melt like the heart of
Josiah, and so suppleth and softneth ^t, that it becomes flexible to Gods
will, and fit to receive any impression which he is pleased to stamp upon it,
or any form which he will frame it unto; as if it were no more iron, but now
become clay or wax So whereas he is naturally of a more then earthy coldness
Ephesians. 2. 1 Psalm. 34. 38.
and like iron, which makes other things cold with the very touch thereof;
Gods spirit so heateth and inflameth him with fervent love and ardent zeal,
that he has not only lively heat in himself, but even like spiritual fire
he communicates his heat and warmth of holiness and righteousness to all
that are near unto him; making them which were cold and dull, hot and
zealously fervent in all Christian and holy duties* Finally, whereas like iron
he is naturally so lumpish and heavy, that he is wholly fixed and fastened to
the earth, minding only worldly things, and can no more mount up aloft in holy
and heavenly meditations, then iron of it self can ascend into the air, or if
by some outward force his thoughts be raised up to mind those things which are
above, no sooner is the strength of the outward agent spent, but presently like
an iron bullet it falls down again, and even presses into the earth with
more then wonted weight and violence; Contrariwise when as his earthy
massinesse is attenuated with the fire of Gods spirit, he not only becomes
more light, but being thoroughly heated in this holy forge* he sends up the
sparks of spiritual meditations, and now forgetting his old earthy nature,
he does no longer lie groueling on the ground, minding only earthly things,
but being risen with Christ, he seeks, not things beneath, but those things
that are above, and even whilst his body is on earth, Col. 3. 2. Phil. 3. 20
his conversation is in heaven, and though he cannot corporally ascend, yet he
continually sends up the therward the sparkles of holy and heavenly thoughts,
and even takes his chief comfort and delight to spend his spirits in divine
contemplation. Lastly, as fire by the warmth and heat thereof refreshes and
cheareth those creatures which are frozen and benumbed with cold, and
communicates unto them the operations of life, strength and nimblenes. So this
holy fire of the spirit gives spiritual life and quickening unto us who are
dead in trespasses and sins; and by the divine heat of Gods love, it
warmeth, cheareth and refreshes, our icy and benumbed hearts, and inflameth
them with a fervent zeal of his glory, and an ardent love toward him who has
so loved us, and also to our neighbors for his sake; whereby it comes to
pass, that we who were frozen in the dregs of our sins, and so weak and
stiff, that we were not able to stir a limb for the doing of any good
action; are now made by this vital heat, strong and active for all good
duties. So our Savior says, that it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh
profits nothing; and the Apostle tells us, that the spirit gives life. And
Ioh. 6. 63. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Romans 8. 2. 10.
therefore he calls him, the law of the spirit of life; and says, that this
spirit is life because of righteousness.

Sect. 11 That we may know that the spirit dwells in us by the operations
signified by the former metaphors.
If therefore we would know whether the spirit of God dwell in us or no, we
must examine our own hearts, and try our selves, whether there be in us these
operations and effects of the spirit which are resembled by these metaphors and
similitudes, as first if it have like a mighty wind cast down the strong
holds of sin, and (as it were) laid flat on the ground our proud carnal
reason and rebellious will subiecting them to the will of God and the rule of
his word; if it has caused us, not only to burn in love of Gods Majesty, but
even to blaze out in the zeal of his glory, and if it has cleansed us like
pure wheat from the chafe of our corruptions, and from the light corn of
human inventions and ungrounded superstitions. Secondly, let us consider and
try our selves, if like an oil it has suppled and softened our hard and stony
hearts, so as they are pliable to Gods will; if by this spiritual annoyting
we be made more strong, active and nimble to perform holy and Christian
duties, then ever we have been in time past; and finally if it have comforted
and cheared our hearts in the assurance of our reconciliation with God, and
remission of our sins, filling them with spiritual joy, and has brought
peace of conscience which makes us to look with a cheerful countenance,
even whilst the world frowneth upon us. Thirdly, let us examine, if like water
it has cleared the eyes of our minds, and has given unto us a saving,
feeling and experimental knowledge of God, our selves, and his holy truth; if
it has cooled and refreshed us who were scorched with the apprehension of Gods
anger for our sins, or with the heat of troubles and afflictions, and has
quenched our spiritual thirst by applying unto us Christ's righteousness and
blood-shead (as it were) a fountain of living waters; if it has by applying
unto us the virtue of Christ's death, cleansed and purged us, not only from the
guilt and punishment, but also from the corruption of our sins, so as though
they dwell, yet they do not reign in our mortal body; and lastly if it have
watered our hearts, as it were, dry and barraigne grounds, and has made them
like a fertile soil, to bring forth plentiful fruits of holiness and
righteousness. Finally, let us examine and try our selves, if it have been
unto us a spiritual fire, to give unto us light who sat in darkness and in
the shadow of death; if like a fire it have consumed the dross and rust of our
corruptions; and in some measure has refined us and made us vessels of grace,
fit for Gods use, and finally if it has warmed our cold and frozen hearts
with the zeal of Gods glory, and with the love of him and our neighbors, so
as we who were stiff and benumbed are become strong, lively and active in
performing all holy and Christian duties which we owe unto them. And if we
find these effects and operations in us, then may we be assured, that the
spirit of God which is the cause and author of them dwells in us, though
they be not in us in perfection, if they be in sincerity and truth; but if upon
trial we find that they are altogether wanting, then have we not the spirit of
God, which can no more be severed from these effects and signs of it, then
light from the Sun, or those effects before spoken of from the wind and oil,
the water and the fire.

Sect 12. Of special fruits of the spirit whereby we may know that it
dwells in us.
The last effects which are infallible signs of the spirits dwelling in us,
are all the saving and sanctifying gifts and graces which it works in us; as
first a lively faith apprehending the promises, and applying unto us Christ
Jesus and all his benefits, of which I have already spoken. The second fruit
of the spirit is unfeigned love of God, not only for his benefits received or
expected, present prosperity, the confluence of worldly benefits, and
everlasting salvation; but also in his own nature and in respect of his 2 Timothy
1. 7.
goodness, mercy, justice, holiness and all other his saving attributes. In
which the faithful in their love resemble children, who love their parents,
out of natural affection, simply and sincerely, when as they have no other
outward motive, even when they cross them in their desires, and do correct
and chastise them for their amendment. For such is the love of Gods children,
free and generous, (although their love may be increased, and made unto them
much more sensible by temporal benefits and heavenly hopes) in which respect
they are said to have received a free spirit, and so serve God in the liberty
of it. Whereas contrariwise if there be any love toward God in the wicked, it
is only servile and slavish, not for his own sake, or out of their own
disposition and natural affection, but only for the hyre of worldly
prosperity, honors, riches, pleasures, peace, health, ease and such like
temporary benefits; the which when he does at any time take from them, and
inflict upon them the contrary crosses, then the cause of their love ceasing,
their love it self also cease; as we see in the example of Saul, Iehu,
Judas, Demas and many others. Thirdly, the spirit brings with it peace of
conscience, Romans 5. 1. Gal. 5. 17.
which is a fruit of faith that the spirit works in us, assuring us of the
remission of our sins and our reconciliation with God; for so the Apostle
says, that being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ; and therefore he also reckons it among the fruits of the
spirit. Fourthly, by this assurance of faith and inward peace, it also works
in us inward comfort and consolation, which makes us with patience to endure
all afflictions, and to stand against all the temptations of our spiritual
enemies, in which respect our Savior Christ calls Ioh. 15. 26.
the holy spirit, the Comforter, because he is the author and fountain of all
consolation. Fourthly, from this peace and comfort, he raises spiritual joy
and rejoicing in God, our hearts being ravished in the assurance of his mercy,
and the sense and feeling of his love and favor in Jesus Christ, in the
freedom out of the hands of all our spiritual enemies, and our assured hopes
of heavenly happiness the which also is a fruit of the spirit, as the Apostle
reckons Gal. 5. 22.
it in the same place; and is so to be seen in the faithful, not only when
their wine and oil abounds, in which Psalm 4. 6. 7.
the wicked also may rejoice, but also when in the absence of these, the light
of Gods countenance does shine upon them, which causes us to joy and rejoice
even in the midst of crosses and tribulations, as the Apostle tells us.
Romans 5. 3.
Fifthly, from all these arises thankfulness unto God, from whom we have
received all these benefits, the which is showed not with our lips alone, but
by our conscionable care and zealous endeavor to glorify God in all our
thoughts, words and actions; and our earnest desire to approve our selves unto
God in all things, and to retain his love and avoid his displeasure, in
loving and practicing whatsoever he loves and requires, and in hating and
forsaking all that he abhors and forbids.

Sect. 13. Of other special frui^tes of the spirit respecting our neighbors.
Unto which duties immediately respecting God, the Apostle also joins as
fruits of the spirit, diverse others respecting our neighbors and our own
persons. As first, long suffering, when as considering how the Lord has borne
with us, when he might have consumed us with his wrath, we do also bear with
our brethren, and when the wrong and iniure us endure it with patience, or else
at least defer and put off our anger, or restrain and moderate the rage and
heat of it; according to that of the Apostle; Put on as the elect of God holy
and beloved, bowels of mercies. Col. 3. 12.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any:
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. The second is gentleness, whereby
a man carries himself courteously and affably in his words, and friendly and
kindly in all his actions unto all men, mildely to his inferiors, and
reverently and respectively to his superiors. And this the Apostle requires,
that we should be no brawlers, Tit. 3. 2
but gentle showing all kindness unto all men. The third is goodness, whereby
we are ready by all means we can to do good unto our neighbors, both in the
duties of justice and mercy, unto their persons and states, souls, bodies,
and name. And this we are bound unto by Gods commandment, namely, that we
should by love serve one another; Gal. 5. 13.
and also by that bond of the Spirit which unites us together in our body
under one head Christ, which should cause us to demean our selves toward one
another, as it be comes members of the same body. The fourth is faith or
fidelity, whereby in our words we keep all our lawful promises and
covenants, though it be to our own hinderance, and in our actions carry our
selves truly and honestly without falsehood, lying and deceit. The fifth is
meekness, which consists in two things; the first patience in forbearing
Mat. 5.
to revenge by our own private means, wrongs and injuries, from which our
Savior would have us so far, that we should rather offer our selves to
bear new injuries, then revenge the old; and the other lowliness, whereby
laying aside all proud conceit of our own worth and excellency, we think
better of others then of our selves, and in giving honor, strive and labor to
go before them.

2 Sect 14. Of some other special fruits of the spirit respecting our own
persons.
In respect of our own persons the fruits of the spirit are principally two;
the first whereof is temperance, whereby a man rightly orders, rules and
moderateth his appetite in his meat, drink and apparel, pleasures and
recreations according to the rules of Gods Word, hating and forsaking gluttony
and drunkenness, excessive bravery and strange fashions, sinful delights and
unlawful and excessive pastimes. The other is sobriety, which especially
teaches us the right use of all Gods blessings and benefits both temporal and
spiritual. And for the first this soberness of mind makes us contented with
that measure of earthly blessings which we enjoy, as being that portion which
God has allotted unto us; and not so much as to desire any more, but when the
Lord offers it unto us by honest and lawful means. Contrary whereunto are
the desires and endeavors of worldly men, who when they have little, murmr
and repine against Gods providence, and are ready upon all occasions to use
unlawful means for the bettering of their earthly estate, and when they have
much and more then enough, are not contented and satisfied with their
abundance, but still abour after more, carking and caring as though they were
in want, and biting at every bait which promises gain, although the hook of
sin be hid under it. Secondly, from contentation springs thankfulness,
whereby we ascribe all we have received unto God, as being his gifts, and
having nothing else to return, do render unto him praise and thanksgiving*
Whereas contrariwise those who are wicked and unregenerate, howsoever they
rejoice in the fruit o^ of his temporal benefits, yet not in him; for they do
not give unto him the glory of his own gifts, but rather glory in themselves,
and sacrifice (as the Prophet speaks) unto their Hab. 1. 16.
own nets, and kiss their hands, as though by their own wisdom and
providence, industry and painful endeavors, they had made themselves owners
of al these things; whereby they are moved to an high and proud conceit of
their excellency and sufficiency, and in comparison of themselue^ to contemn
all others. So in the second place this sobriety of mind appears in the
right use of spiritual graces; For the spiritual man looking upon them as the
gifts of God, and beholding them as the first fruits of the spirit, which are
not perfect but only begun, and seeing the many faylings defects, wants, and
weaknesses which are in them, and the strong corruptions which are mixed with
them, he rests not contented and satisfied with the portion which he has
received, but like a newborn babe, hungreth and thirsts after the sincere
milk of the word, that 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2.
he may grow up thereby, and still inlargeth his desires, and strives and
indeauoureth in the use of al good means, whereby he may attain unto more and
more perfection, in the mean time waiting upon the Lord with faith and hope,
meekenes and patience for his blessing upon these means, whereby they may
become effectual and profitable for the ends for which they use them. As we
see in David who expected and waited for the Lord more then they who watch for
Psalm. 130. 6.
the mourning; and as the eyes of servants look to the hands of their
masters, and of the maiden unto the hand of her mistress, Psalm. 123. 2.
so his eyes waited upon the Lord his God, until he had mercy upon him. But
yet the faithful do not so look after more increase of spiritual graces, as
that they forget to be thankful unto God for that measure which they have
already received, but considering that they are no natural endowments, but
Gods free and gracious gifts, which of mere love he has granted unto them,
without any their deserts; denying them to many others which are by nature as
good as they; this makes them not only for the present to enjoy the graces
they have received with contentation and much comfort and spiritual rejoicing,
but also to lead and magnify Gods mercy and goodness toward them and to
render unto him all thanks and praise for his gracious gifts.

CHAP. XIII. Of the event and success of the fight between the Flesh and the
Spirit.
Sect. 1 Of the foyles which the spirit receives in this conflict.
THE last thing to be considered in this conflict between the spirit and the
flesh is the event and success of the fight between them, which is twofold;
the first whereof is the repuses and foyles which the spirit receives and
suffers through the malice and fury of the flesh; the second is the victory
and triumph of the spirit over it; the first being temporary and lasting only
for a time; the other permanent and everlasting. Concerning the former, the
spirit is often foiled in this combat, when as by the subtlety or violence of
the flesh, it is hindered in the course of godliness and allured or forcibly
drawn to the committing of sin; Of which the Apostle complains: I see
(says he) another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of Rom 7. 21. 22.
sin which is in my members. And again, I find then a law, that when I
would do good, evil is present with me. The which happens either through
the weakness of the spirit, or want of watchfulness, and spiritual care to
keep the whole armor of God fast buckled unto us. Of which foyles there follow
two notable effects; the first is unfeigned and bitter grief and sorrow for our
slips and falls; the other an earnest and fervent desire to rise again, to be
delivered from the bondage of the flesh, and having regained the victory to
subdue and keep it under for the time to come. Of the former we have an
example in the Church, which finding her failings and falls into sin,
pitifully complains and cries out unto God for help; O Lord, why have thou
made us to err from thy ways? And hardened our heart from thy fear? Return
for thy servants sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. Esa 63. 17
Wherein we may observe an apparent difference, between the falls of the
faithful and the unregenerate. For whereas these being fallen willingly do
live and lie in their sins with pleasure and delight: The godly being
surprised at unawares, or being overcome through their frailetie, and
weakness and the violence of tentation, do mourn and grieve for their
sin, and labor to rise out of it by unfeigned repentance; and whereas they
yield unto it voluntary and cheerful obedience, as unto their lawful King
and sovereign; the other being held under a forcible and tyrannical
subjection, do bewail their thraldom, and are never at rest till they have
found out some means to be delivered out of it.

Sect. 2. That from the foyles of the spirit arise earnest desires to be freed
from the slavery of sin. Romans 7. 24.
And from hence arise vehement and earnest desires to be freed from the slavery
of sin, (like that of the holy Apostles;) O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? And to serve the Lord in the duties of
holiness and righteousness: For as the needle in the dyall which is touched
with a loadstone may by a forcible motion turn and wind too and fro, but will
never stand fixed and steadfast till it bend unto it own proper point; so the
heart of the regenerate touched with Gods holy spirit, howsoever through the
violence of the flesh, and strength of Satan's tentations, it may be auerted
from God, and turn this way and that way, after the vanities of the world, and
the deceitful pleasures of sin, yet it never rests till it be again
returned and inclined toward him from whom it had first motion and being. It
may be whilst the storm of tentation lasts, the spirit may be hid like the
sun under a thick cloud, or a ship covered over with the waves, but
afterward the beams and beauty of it will burst through and dispell these
foggie mists, and like a goodly ship it will again advance it self and
appear under full sails, speedily hasting toward the holy land. And finally
though these carnal lusts (like those cursed Amalekites) may on a sudden make
inroades, waste, spoil, sack, burn, lead captive and carry away a great
booty for some small way, yet the spirit (like David) being excited by Gods
Oracle, will rise up, pursue these enemies, obtain victory, and vindicate and
recover all out of their hands. Where again we have a notable difference
between the regenerate and the unregenerate; For whereas they being ruled by a
free and generous spirit, do after their foyles earnestly desire and labor to
re-gaine their liberty, and repair and increase their strength, that giving a
new on*set, they may put their enemies to flight, and obtain victory; the
other being of a slavish disposition after they are once subdued, do
contentedly live in the bondage of sin, never laboring or endeavoring to
come out of it and better their estate. Or if there be in them any struggling
at all, it is only out of servile fear and terrors of conscience, arising
from expectation of deserved punishment, which (as has been showed) may make
some assaults against the will and affections, and yet neither part be more
sanctified or less corrupted then the other, but (like the good Witch which
undoes that which the bad Witch has done,) they remain both evil and the
limbs of Satan, agreeing well enough in their common designs of wickedness
and impiety.

Sect. 3 Secondly an indeauor in the use of all good means to be preserved
from such foyles for the time to come.
But it is not thus with the man regenerate, who after his foyles received from
the flesh, not only earnestly desires and indeauoureth to recover himself
from the captivity of sin, but having obtained his desire, uses all good
means whereby he may for the time to come be preserved from being again
surprised by the like stratagems and assaults. To which purpose he does first
keep a narrow watch over all his ways, and especially over his own heart,
wherein the flesh hides it chief ambushments, not easily and suddenly
yielding to the satisfying of every desire of profit and delight, but first
trying and examining them by the rule of Gods Word; whether they are to be
lawfully embraced as Gods blessings, or to be rejected seeing they cannot be
compassed without sin. Secondly, he will be most careful to comfort and
strengthen the spiritual part, to keep the armor of God fast buckled on him,
to be always well provided and furnished with weapons and munition before the
time of conflict, or rather because this conflict with the flesh is continual,
he will take care, that he may never be found unprovided. Finally he will show
the like care in weakening and disabling his enemy the flesh, by withdrawing
from it the chief weapons and munition whereby it has formerly prevailed, and
will studiously endeavor to be so furnished at all points, that he may be able
to encounter it in the open field, or to defeat the pollitique stratagems and
escape the secret ambushments which it lays to entrap him. Thirdly, the
regenerate man after his false will more zealously hate his sins, and
especially those wherewith he has been overtaken then ever he did before,
and in this detestation will avoid and flee from it; yea the oftener he has
fallen into it, the more his hatred increases against it, as against his
greatest enemy from whom he has received most wrong and damage. Even as a
man most fears and shunneth that sickness which has most vexed him,
abhors that meat whereon he has dangerously surfetted, and most hates
that serpent the venom and poison of whose sting has most afflicted and
tormented him. Lastly, after his foyles and falls he will carefully perform
all holy duties which are contrary to his former sins, as if he he have
fallen by covetousness, he will being risen exercise himself in bounty and
liberality, if by pride, he will abase himself in all humbleness and
meekenes of spirit, if by surfeiting and excess in meats and drinks, he
will practice moderation in diet, and oftentimes fasting and total abstinence.
Yea the regenerate man after his relapses into the ague fits of sin, will
much increase and thrive in his spiritual stature, being much more fervent
and zealous in all holy and Christian duties then he was before, redeeming
his lost time by future diligence, and running after he is risen up so much
the more swiftly, by how much he finds himself hindered in his spiritual
race by his slippes and falls.

. Sect 4. How far the flesh may prevail against the spirit 1 common graces
may be lost for a time.
But here a weighty question may fitly and seasonably be moved and determined;
namely how far the flesh in this conflict may prevail against the spirit,
and whether it may by the furious assaults thereof, be not only foiled, but
for a time quite overcome, not only cooled but utterly quenched lost and
extinguished. For the resolving of which doubt, we must first distinguish
between the gifts of the spirit and the persons in whom they are. The gifts
may be considered both in their kind and in their quality. Concerning the
former, the gifts and graces of the spirit are either common to the regenerate
and unregenerate, or proper and peculiar to the faithful and elect. The common
graces are especially those Moral virtues of wisdom, civil honesty,
fortitude, temperance, patience and such like, which may not only be lost and
extinguished in worldly civil men, but also in the faithful, because they are
not essential to a Christian, but rather ornaments then parts of the spiritual
man. And this David may be a fool in seeming so, and be spiritually mad
whilst he counterfetteth natural madness; thus he was dishonest in his
dealing with Bethsheba and much more with Vriah his faithful servant; and both
unjust and ungrateful in that unrighteous sentence for Ziba against
Mephibosheth the innocent and distressed son of his dearest Jonathan. Thus
Noah made a temporary for feiture of his temperance, Lot of his chastity,
Jeremy and Jonah Romans 11. 29. Ioh. 10. 18.
of their patience, and many other of Gods best servants of the like graces.
But as for those sanctifying and saving graces, proper and peculiar to the
faithful which are so essential unto a Christian, that without them he
cease to be the child of God a member of Christ and in the state of grace
and salvation, the like judgment is not to be given of them for being once had
they can never be lost, nor be utterly extinguished with all the power and
malice of the Devil and the flesh, seeing the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, and Christ who holds them is stronger then all, neither
is there any power able to pull his sheep out of his hand.

Sect 5. Secondly the shows and semblances of saving graces ^^ temporaries may
perish utterly.
Secondly, the sanctifying and saving gifts and graces of the Spirit may be
considered in their quality; For they are either true, sincere and
substantial, or false, hypocritical, and but in show and semblance only; In
which regard they have their diverse subjects and persons in whom they are; the
former in the faithful and regenerate alone; the latter in hypocrites and
temporaries who continue but only for a time. Now these may loose their
illumination, faith, love and zeal, whether we consider them as common gifts,
or as they are shows and semblances both to themselves and others of saving
graces, because in this sense they are not so in them in truth, simple and
sincere, but hypocritical, counterfeit and only but in show. And thus our
Savior having said, that from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that
which he has, expounds his meaning by another Evangelist; Whosoever has
not from him shall be taken even that which he seems to have, or thinks that
he Mat. 25. 29. Luke 8. 18,
has. As though he should say, do you ask how a man can have that taken
from him which he has not? Why know that there are many men that have no
gifts truly, that yet do seem to have them, and from these shall be truly
taken the gifts that they seem to have, or the show and seeming of their
gifts, that is, even that apish imitation which they have of Gods saving graces
shall be taken away, and so their hypocrisy being discovered it shall plainly
appear that what show so ever they have made, yet they never had them in
sincerity and trurh. For example though the unregenerate may have some
illightning in speculation, which at the first appearance may resemble that
saving, feeling and experimental knowledge, which is in the faithful, yet
indeed there is (as has been showed) many and great differences between
them, and therefore that show and semblance whereby for a time they deceive
themselves and others, will in a while vanish, when as being severed from all
power of godliness and fruits of obedience, it shall be discovered to have been
in respect of the quality of it false and counterfeit. Though they may seem
to have a true and justifying faith, because they give assent to the whole
Word, and especially to the gracious promises of the Gospel, which causes in
them some temporary joy, yet being vneffectual, and neither working in their
will any constant resolution to embrace Christ, and to be ready to forsake the
world and earthly vanities, nor in their hearts any hungring and thirsting
desire after him and his righteousness for their justification, but only as
it may stand with their worldly designs and ends; it continues not in the
time of tentation, but either when they are allured with the baits of
prosperity, or pressed and pinched with crosses and persecution, they fall
away and become apostates from the faith. So though their mortification may
seem to resemble, yea and sometimes to go before that which is sincere and in
truth, yet it is not general and indefinite, but always limited either to
some few sins, or all saving some few; and still the hypocrite and temporary
believer has some darling and beloved sin which he nourishes in his bosom,
and holds (like sweet meats) under his tongue, as we see in Herod, Judas,
Demas, Io^. ^0. 12.
and many other, which as it presently discovers to those that discern it,
that their mortification is but counterfaite, (for if it proceeded from love
and obedience toward God and not from worldly respects, it would as
effectually crucify all their corruptions, as only some of them) so it will
like a fretting canker eat out the heart of their mortification and put a
quick end unto it; seeing those sins retained and nourished, will make way
for all the rest, whilst they harden their heart against Gods fear, and s^are
and dead the conscience (as it were) with an hot iron, whereby they will become
secure and senseless in the committing of any wickedness. In which respect
the Apostle 1 Pet. 2. 22.
fitly compares such as by this counterfaite mortification and fained
repentance cleanse themselves from many sins to the swine, which being washed
does soon after return to wallow again in the same mire, because he was
only cleansed from the outward filth, but not inwardly freed and purged from
his swinish nature; yea because not their quality but only the outward act is
changed, they not only return to their old course, but also become much
worse then they were before, as the Apostle shows, their restraint makes
them more eager in the pursuit of the sins they love, and to run with more
headlong violence when as the bands that tied them being untwisted or broken,
they are now left to their licentious liberty. Finally though there may seem
to be in the unregenerate some renouation and new obedience, some heat of
love and zeal of Gods glory, yet being not in truth, but springing out of
self-love and aiming only at worldly ends; there is no constancy and
continuance in these seeming graces and counterfaite fruits; but when the
cause and foundation of them fails and sinketh, then presently all vanishes,
and all their goodly building comes to utter ruin. But all this proves not,
that the spirit or the saving graces of it, may in the conflict of temptations
receive deadly wounds, dye and perish in those who are truly regenerate;
because those which are but semblances, shows, and apish imitations of them in
the wicked and unregenerate, may be lost utterly, and quite extinguished.

Sect 6. True saving graces in the regenerate may be lost seemingly.
And thus we have showed what graces of the spirit, both in respect of their
kind and quality may be lost and quenced, namely common gifts in all men, and
seeming saving graces in the unregenerate. Now let us consider a little further
of this question, and examine whether in this spiritual conflict, true
sanctifying and saving graces in the elect and regenerate may be utterly
killed, or for a time quenched or no. For the answer whereof we are to know,
first that as seeming graces in the unregenerate may be truly lost, so true
graces in the faithful may be lost seemingly, though not in deed, for our
Savior has promised, that to those that have shall be given, and they shall
Mat. 25. 29. Ioh. 15. 2.
have abundance; and that every branch that bears fruit shall be purged that
it may bring forth more fruit. How be it they may (as I have said) seemingly
loose those graces which they keep in truth. For example they may seemingly
loose their illumination and saving knowledge, when as through the relics of
ignorance remaining in them, they fall sometimes into gross errors, and when
through the subtle sophistry of the world and the flesh, they are already
fallen or ready to fall into Schisms or heresies. They may also seemingly
loose their faith, when as being violently assaulted with the temptations of
their spiritual enemies, it receives grievous foyles, and lies hid and
covered with doubting and incredulity, like fire under the ashes, or the Sun
beams under a dark cloud. So they may seem to have lost the grace of
repentance, when as they are overtaken afresh with their old sins; and when
their corruptions after they have received a deadly wound, do seem to revive
again, and to recover some strength, by exercising their vigor in their
earthly members; especially when as after they are cleansed, they relapse and
fall into the same gross sins, not only ignorantly and through infirmity,
but also wittingly and willingly against their own knowledge and conscience.
Finally, when as they are grown cold or lukewarm in their love and zeal,
and slack and negligent in the performance of all Christian duties, because
they do not stir up Gods graces in them, or do ouerwhelme them with fleshly
cares, or the eager pursuit of wordly vanities. And yet all this while these
saving graces are not lost, but only hid and covered; they are not outright
killed, but only brought into a deadly sownde, the faculties themselves are
not quite perished, but the functions and operations of them only for a time
are hindered and interrupted.

Sect. 7 Other graces springing from those which are fundamental may for a
time be lost. Hab. 2. 4.
Secondly, though the prime and principal, the radical and fundamental
graces which are essential to the life and being of a Christian cannot be
lost, as faith, hope, charity, affiance and the true fear of God, without
which a Christian cease to be a Christ an and of the child of God becomes
the child of the devil, for the just shall ever live by their own faith; yet
other graces which are secundary fruits springing from them, and necessary to
the wel-being of a Christian, as fullness of persuasion, peace of conscience,
zeal of Gods glory, the sense and feeling of Gods love and favor, the
comforts of the spirit, familiar acquaintance with God, and joy in the holy
Ghost, which are the life of our life, may for a time through the assaults of
the flesh and violence of temptations be much blunted and deaded, yea, in
respect of present apprehension, quite lost and extinguished, as we see in the
example of Job, who sometimes conceived of God, as of his enemy, and in David
who complains that he was rejected and forsaken, Psalm. 22. 1. and 88. and
51. 8. 10. 11. 12.
and that the terrors of God did fight against him, and prays that God would
create in him a clean heart and and renew a right spirit in him, that he would
make him to hear joy and gladness, and restore him to the joy of his
salvation. Implying by these phrases that these graces were so utterly lost in
his sense and feeling, that being quite abolished and adnihilated, there needed
not only a renouation and repayring but a new making and creation. Even as a
man by sickness may loose his beauty and complexion, his flesh strength and
the kindly motion of his pulse and vital spirits, his memory and discourse of
understanding, and with them all the pleasure and comfort of his life, and yet
remain a man, because these are not essential to his human nature and being.
And when these are gone for a time the chief principles of nature, the
radical heat and moisture, the breath, life and reasonable soul may still
continue, though much weakened in their functions and operations, and within a
while recover and restore him to all which was lost in as great perfection as
ever they were before. And so a Christian may loose the fruits of his chief
graces, which are the delight and comfort of his life and being, and yet those
essential, radical and fundamental virtues ever remaining, he continues
still a Christian and the child of God; and these preserving his life and
being, will recover and restore the other to their former or greater
perfection, so that when he dies he shall be richer in all spiritual grace,
then he ever was in the whole course of his life. Neither can grace and virtue
more decay in the faithful and regenerate, then sin and corruption in the
wicked and unregenerate, in whom there may be some intermissions or temporary
surceasing in respect of the acts of sin and practice of wickedness, though
they be habitually as corrupt as ever they were, and the more they are for
carnal and worldly respects restrained from the committing of sin, the more in
their longing desires, hearts and affections they adhoore and cleave unto it;
for so also there may be some interruptions in the practice of godliness, and
some surceasing of the acts and operations of Gods saving graces, and yet the
graces themselves do not dye and perish, and in these intermissions the sound
Christian has restless longings after the sense and feeling of renewed
graces, and shows as much feruency of affection and entirenesse of love
toward them by his bitter mourning for their absence, as he formerly did by
his joy and rejoicing in their presence and his comfortable fruition of their
sweet society.

Sect. 8. That saving and fundamental graces may be lost in some degrees at
least in respect of their operations.
Lastly those fundamental graces themselves* howsoever they cannot by the
assaults of the flesh be wholly or finally lost, yet may they, in some sense be
weakened and impaired in respect of their degrees. As for example the strong
faith may be shaken with doubting, the most fervent love may be cooled and
loose the first degrees of heat, the most assured hope and affiance may
somewhat quail and be abated; and so in the rest. The which we see in the
example of Job, David, Peter, the Galathians and the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, who is reproved for having lost his first love; and of Sardis who is
exhorted, to strengthen the things that remained and were ready to dye. Yea
these graces Apoc. 2. 4. Apoc. 3. 2.
may be not only shrewly shaken and sore wounded, but also cast into a dead
sownde in which there will appear, neither to others, nor those that have them,
any motion, breathing or sign of life, so as there shall be little difference
between them whilst this trance lasts, and those carkases which are dead in
sin. But yet as I take it (submitting my judgment herein to the godly
learned) all this is to be understood of the functions, acts, and operations of
these graces, which may decay in their degrees, till they seem perished and
lost; but as for the habits of these graces themselves, they never decay in
Gods children, not so much as in their degrees, but are in a continual growth
until they come to their full stature and perfect age in Christ. In which
regard they are said to be trees of righteousness of Gods own planting,
which are not one Psalm. 1, 3. Esa. 61. 3.
year larger and taller, and the next less and lower, but in continual
growth, till they be transplanted into the heavenly Paradise; and howsoever
they may have sometimes leaves and fruit, and soon after bear neither, yet
in respect of their essential parts as root* body and boughs, they are still
in growing, the root in the winter of affliction, the body and brances, in the
springtime of prosperity. So they are called Gods building, in which after
the foundation Psalm 92. 14.
is laid, the wise builder proceeds to bring them ^o perfection, that they
may be fit Temples for himself to dwell in, and does not one day set up, and
another pull down, a course better befitting Penelopes web, then so
excellent workmanship of such a master builder. They are also the children of
God, who grow till they come to their full stature and to a perfect age in
Christ, as the Apostle Ephesians. 4. 13. 14. 15.
speaks; And we know it to be a monstrous thing in nature, that the same
person should interchangeably be this year of good stature, and the next
year a little dwarf. Finally these graces are fountains of living waters,
which are not like standing pooles, sometimes full and Esa. 58. 11.
sometimes empty, but are continually springing and sending forth their sweet
and pleasant streams. And in this respect the wise man compares the path of
the just to the morning light, which shines more and more unto the perfect
Pro. 4. 18.
day. Again the wicked which are the children of Satan, do still grow in
wickedness until their measure being full, God sweepeth them away with his
judgments, and howsoever their growth is sometimes less and sometimes more,
yet they sin, even whilst they seem to leave sinning, and commit evil
whilst they appear to do good; and whatsoever their particular actions may
be, yet still they grow and go on in their wicked courses, so that it may be
truly said, that his last estate is his worst estate, and the longer he
lives the more he treasureth up wrath against Math. 12. 45. 2 Pet. 2 20. Romans
2. 5.
the day of wrath, daily piling up fuel to maintain the fire of hell, in
which he shall everlastingly be burned. And so in like manner the children of
God do still grow in spiritual grace, and when they do actually evil,
through Gods mercy it tends and turns to the furthering of their growth in
grace and goodness. Finally if there might be a surceasing of their spiritual
growth, and that their graces in part and in some degrees might be lost and
perish; then might they also be wholly abolished seeing the same reason is of
the whole which is of the parts, and if the finger be corruptible, then also is
the whole body, if one drop of water, or the least mote of the Sun, might be
adnihilated, then also might the maine ocean and the whole world.

Sect. 9. Whether David lost any degree of his fundamental graces when he
committed adultery and murder
Yea but did not David loose soome degree of his graces when he committed
those fearful sins of murder and adultery; and the Apostle Peter when he
denied his Master? I answer that there might be a decay, yea an utter
surceasing of them for a time, even till they were renewed by repentance; yet
not in the habits, and (as it were) the essence of their graces, but only in
their actions and operations. So the Sun shines continually in his full
brightness, and yet it is often had from our eyes by the dark clouds or
opacous earth. The fire still retains his natural heat, and may increase it
self in combustible matter when it is covered with ashes, or is so pend in
through the closeness of the place, that it cannot for the present be seen or
felt. The faculties of the soul are not lost or lessened in the time of sleep
or in a dead sownde, although there be a surceasing of the actions and
operations. A child which is growing does not in the fit of an ague loose his
growth, and howsoever the flesh may be abated and strength impaired, yet the
radical moisture and heat being inwardly preserved, well may his growth be a
little while hindered, but when the ague is lost and past, he grows faster
then ever before. So the streams that come from the fountain may be for a
time stopped in their course, but in the very time of the stopping they are
multiplied and increased, until at last they grow so strong, that they beat
down that which hinders their course, or rise so high, that they ouerflow and
run over it. And that I may fit the similitude to our present purpose, a
worthy champion may be so tired in the fight, that he may have no more
strength then a child to perform any valorous enterprise; and yet the act and
operation of his strength is only hindered for a time; and as for the habit
it self it is not impaired, but much increased by this martial exercise, and
will also appear more able for like emploiments after a little rest, and much
more vigorous and strong even in respect of act and operation. And thus it is
with the faithful in this spiritual conflict; their outward foyles do not
impair their inward valor, but rather excite them to unite all their forces
against their enemy, that they may recover their lost honor; and their falls
in the Christian race, do not take away their habitual swiftness, but make
them more earnest after their rising to show it more apparently, whilst they
labor to recover that disadvantage by making better speed then they did
before. Gods graces in them increase in the fountain when they are stopped
from running in the stream; and when this holy fire is kept by some outward
obstacle and (as it were) the Antiperistasis of sinful corruption, so as it
cannot flame out, nor extend the heat far of, then does it increase
inwardly, and when it bursteth out does burn with greater heat then it did
before, when it had full liberty, and was not curbed in with any outward
violence.

Sect. 10. That our spiritual graces in the conflict do not stand in their
own strength.
By all which it appears, that the chief and fundamental virtues by which a
Christian is a Christian and the child of God, are not in respect of their
hahits and essential being, so much as impaired in the least degree in the
spiritual conflict with the flesh, but only in regard of their actions and
operations, which for a time through the strength and violence of corruption
may be hindered, intermitted, yea in outward appearance wholly annihilated and
abolished. But we must take heed that we do not ascribe the permanency and
growth of these saving graces to any property or excellency which they have in
themselves, as though they were able in their own virtue and strength to
withstand all temptations and to continue and increase in their perfection. For
if Adam in the state of innocence could not thus stand in the strength of his
graces, which were far more perfect and excellent, then any mere man ever
since the fall attained unto; then how much less can we, whose graces are
Math. 12. 20. and 17. 20.
mingled with imperfections and stained with corruptions, especially the
weakest of Gods children, whose faith is like the smoking flax and bruised
reed, which in their own nature are soon quenched and easily broken, or like
the grain of mustard-seede, which is (as our Savior speaks) the least of
all other? but yet even of their first and smallest seeds of graces, it may
be as truly said as of the strongest, that they are not, no not in respect
of their degree abated and impaired, for then being already the least degree if
they should fall from that, they should come to nothing, but that in the
midst of the temptations of Satan and their own flesh, they still grow
from one degree to another unto a perfect age in Christ, even as the little
infant thriueth as certainly in the natural growth, notwithstanding his
weakness and all outward lets and impediments, to childhood and youth, as the
youth does to ripe and perfect age. But this our standing and thriuing in the
state of saving graces, is to be ascribed to the power and promises of God, to
our union with Christ, from whom we receive lively sap and juice, by which we
are nourished in all grace and goodness and to the continual and gracious
assistance of our good God, who strengthens and supporteth us against all the
power of hell.

Sect 11. An objection against the former doctrine answered
But some will say, that this doctrine is liable to much abuse, seeing many
will take occasion hereby to become presumptuous and secure, because being (as
they suppose) endued with these graces which are essential to a Christian,
they shall never loose them, no not so much as in some degrees, but even when
they sin their graces are in the spiritual growth unto perfection. To which
I answer, that so is the doctrine of justification through Gods free grace by
faith, yea of Gods mercy, redemption by Christ, and all the promises of the
Gospel; For where as the Apostle taught, that where sin abounded, grace
abounded much more, Romans 3. 7. 8. and 6. 1. Romans 1. 16. 2 Cor. 2. 16.
some were ready to say, Let us sin the^ that grace may abound, and when with
best caution we deliver the truth, we shall find that that which to some will
be the strong power of God to salvation, will be to others a stumbling block
of offense, to others foolishness, and that the same Word of God, will be as to
the elect, the savor of life unto life, so to the wicked and reprobate the
savor of death to their deeper condemnation. But it is not possible that any
sound Christian who is endued with these graces in truth, should thus abuse
that which has been said to security and presumption; for though the spirit
of God fighting in them against the flesh cannot be overcome, yet may it be
shrewdly shaken and foiled in the conflict; though we cannot loose these
fundamental virtues, neither in whole nor in part, yet through our negligence,
unworthiness and corruption, they may be suspended by God from their
functions and operations, and all their sweet fruits and effects, the peace of
conscience, assurance of Gods love, and joy in the holy Ghost, may be taken
from them, which is their chief comfort and the very life of their life,
without which it is but a continual torment, and painful agony of bitter
death; they may loose the sense and feeling of all these graces themselves, and
be brought into such an apolepticall fit, that no life of grace will appear in
them, either to themselves or others. In which estate there can be to them
nothing but horror and vexation of spirit; and out of which they cannot
recover but with great difficulty and appearance of danger. For before they
can purchase their former peace, they must pass through the painful
purgatory of bitter repentance, shed from their eyes many a salt and brinish
tear, if not from their hearts drops of blood, they must send forth many a
deep sigh and bitter groan, have outwardly lean bodies, and pale visages, and
inwardly afflicted minds, and many a pinch and pange in their wounded
conscience; and the longer that they lie securely snorting in their sins
without bringing forth the timely fruit of repentance, the liker it is to be
the Hedgehogs birth, which the longer it is deferred, the more dangerous and
painful it always proves. For if we be presumptuous children, the Lord like
a wise father will make us drink so deep of the cup of his wrath, and feel
the weight of his heavy hand, that after we have tasted of this bitter potion,
we will ever after be more careful of preserving our health, that we may not
be forced again to take such physic, and having felt his strength we will
never willingly neglect any means of maintaining Esa. 27 5.
peace with him, as the Prophet speaks. Which who so well 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Phil. 2. 13.
considers, he will work out his salvation with fear and trembling, and
whilst he thinks that he stands, he will take heed of falling. He will
give kind entertainment to the good spirit of God, avoiding all things which
might vex and grieve it, he will earnestly use all means whereby the graces
thereof may be increased, and diligently avoid the contrary means, whereby
they might be weakened and impaired; he will keep a narrow watch over all
his ways, and buckle close unto him the whole Christian armor whereby he may
be able to stand in the day of tentation; he will labor and strive with all
diligence to make his calling and election sure, and courageously resist all
the encounters of his spiritual enemies; and knowing that he stands more
firmly in the power of Gods promises then in his own strength, he will
oftentimes lay claim and challenge to them by fervent prayer, crying out with
David, O Lord remember the promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have
caused me to trust. Psalm. 419. 49.


Sect. 12. Of the assured victory which the spirit obtains over the flesh in
this conflict.
The second thing to be considered in the success of this conflict, is the
assured victory which the Spirit always obtains over the flesh; for though
it be often weakened and wearied, yet it can never be utterly vanquished, but
still recouereth strength and courage, whereby again it prevails and puts
the flesh to flight; though it receive many wounds, foiles and falls in the
combat, yet the wounds are recured by applying of the precious balsum of
Christ's blood, by the hand of faith, and it recouereth of the soiles and falls
through the power and promises of God apprehended by the same means, and
through the gracious assistance of Gods spirit which supporteth our weakness,
and when we are ready to faint and sink, sends fresh supplies of renewed
graces which re-enforcing our decayed bands, encourages us to give fierce
assaults, against the flesh and the lusts thereof and enableth us to obtain
the victory. Neither is it possible that the flesh or the Devil himself
should finally prevail against the man regenerate, not because he is mightier
then they, or is superior in power or policy, (for herein even the stoutest
champion comes far short of our spiritual enemies) but because God has in
many places of holy scripture promised unto them victory, and that if they
will resist and fight, their enemies shall flee and be discomfited, and
therefore the issue of the battle rests not upon their strength, but upon
the infallible Ephesians 6. 10. 12
truth of God which can never fail. Secondly, because we sight not with our
own weapons, but with the sword of the spirit which nothing can withstand; we
stand in the field not in our own armor, but in the complete armor of God,
which being o^ his making, must needs be high proof, and will not by its
weakness and insufficiency discredit the workman; we go not on warfare in
our own private quarrel, but (like David against Goliath) we go out against
them in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of 1 Samuel 17. 45
the armies of Israel whom they defy, and his battles we fight who is
all-sufficient by his sole word to give us victory, and therefore we are sure
to prevail in so good a quarrel, neither will our Grand-captaine, let his
mightiest enemies destroy the weakest of his soldiers, who bear his colors
and fight under his standard, seeing it is his own cause, and he is able alone
without other help even with a word of his mouth to vanquish them all, and put
them to shameful flight. Thirdly, because it is the spiritual conflict
wherein the spirit of God with the royal army of his graces, fights against
the Devil and his chiefetaine the flesh with the lusts thereof; and therefore
we cannot doubt of victory, unless we should in again, that the holy Spirit
should want power to prevail against the wicked spirit, or having it would in
his wisdom suffer himself to be so much dishonored as to be vanquished in
the conflict. Finally, we are sure of victory, and that the enemies of our
salvation shall never be able to prevail against us, because our victorious
Eleazar Jesus Christ has already ouercom them all, and only puts us to
fight against conquered enemies; yea and that we may receive no mortal hurt
in this conflict, he holds us by the right hand and bids us to fight
without fear, yea himself holds us in his right Esa. 41. 10. 11. 12. and
42. 6.
hand, and as he is powerful to keep us, so he has bound himself by his
gracious promise, that none of our enemies shall pull us from him. Yea which is
most of all, he has inseparably united us unto himself by his holy spirit,
and made us lively members of his body, and therefore being Ioh. 10. 28.
powerful to defend us, he will never suffer us to perish, for so should his
own blessed body receive no mayme.

Sect. 13. An objection against the former truth answered.
Now whereas it may be objected that there are many Christians, who by
themselves and others are reputed members of Christ, that yet quite fall away
from him, and become limbs of Satan; to this I answer that the members of
Christ generally so called are of two sorts: First such lively members as are
inseparably united unto him by his holy spirit and a lively faith, the which
neither the Devil, nor the flesh, nor all the power of hell can pluck away
from him. Secondly such as are improperly called Christ's members, being dead
and fruitless, and only so in their outward profession; the which they making
only for worldly respects, must necessarily fail when they fail, and be
quite severed from Christ, when their outward profession which is the only
bond of their union is taken away; even as a wooden leg which is tied to a
living body with strings and points, must needs fall from it, when they are cut
in sunder; the which separation does not prove that the true members of Christ
may perish, but rather that these who have thus perished, were never the true
members of his body. As for the lively members of Christ's body, they can never
be parted from him in respect of their spiritual union, because the spirit of
God which is the chief band of it can never fail. It is true that there may
be a temporary separation between our bridegroom Christ, and the Christian
soul espoused unto him, but not Hos. 21. 9.
in respect of their spiritual union, for he betrotheth her unto himself for
ever, in righteousness, judgment, loving kindness, mercy and faithfulness,
as the Prophet speaks; and not sin it self can separate them, for it is
one branch of the marriage covenant, that he will forgive her sins and remember
Ier. 31. 34.
them no more; nor death, for they are both immortal: Only they may be parted
for a time in respect of communion, and fellowship, and of that sweet influence
of his spiritual graces, at least in her feeling and apprehension. Even as the
wise and loving husband may for the heinous faults of his wife, cease for a
time to communicate unto her his person in respect of sweet society, and
delightful familiarity, and yet the union of marriage remaining firm, he may
receive her again upon her repentance into his wonted favor, and communicate
unto her himself with all testimonies of his love. But this chaste spouse the
Christian soul can never sleep in security nor rest contented in this estate
but with the Church in the Canticles, she lamenteth the absence of her dearest
love, Cant. 3. 1
she never cease seeking of him in his holy ordinances, and in the exercises
of faith and repentance, till she have found him, and have the sensible
fruition of his sweet society; where by she approves her self to be united
unto Christ in conjugal affection, seeing it is as undoubted a sign of it, to
mourn for the absence of our bridegroom, as to rejoice in his presence and
our fruition of his love.

Sect 14. That there are 2 degrees of the spirits victory. 1 in this life.
Now being thus united unto Christ, the faithful are sure to obtain the
victory; yet not all at once, for there are two principal degrees of it; the
first in this life, in which this conquest over the flesh is but inch cure and
begun, the carnal lusts thereof not being wholly abolished, but only in
part and in some degrees mortified; to which purpose one says, that these
unlawful motions of the flesh can not be taken from us, as long as we carry
this body of flesh about Grego. in 1 Reg lib. 5. Cap. 11.
us, the violence only of moving may be abated. Neither can we wholly hinder
it, but that the law of the flesh will move the members but yet we may take
from the flesh the violence of it motion. By reason whereof the conflict
between these enemies continues (because these cursed Cananites are not quite
rooted out but remain still in the land) not only in our first conversion,
when as we are but babes in Christ, but even throughout the whole course of
our lives. But still for the most part the end and issue of it is the victory
of the spirit over the flesh, although it be obtained with many foyles in the
fight. And how soever the spiritual man may have such mists of ignorance cast
before the eyes, that he sometime erreth; though he may be sometimes allured
with the baytes of worldly vanities to turn aside out of the right path, and
sometimes may be thrust out of it through afflictions, and the violence of
tentations, yet his general course whereof he has resolved, and wherein he
has constantly set himself, is the great Kings highway of holiness and
righteousness, out of which if at any time he has erred he returns into it
again, and trauelleth in it with more then wonted diligence; whereof it is
that the Apostle makes it a sign of these who are in Christ Jesus, that they
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, whereby Romans 8: 1.
is meant that whatsoever their particular slips or errors may be, yet it is an
infallible mark of a sound Christian, that he generally and for the most part
constantly holds on in his Christian course of holiness and righteousness,
notwithstanding all the encounters of his spiritual enemies, and the manifold
blocks which they cast in the way.

Sect. 15 Of the second degree of victory at the hour of death.
But yet whilst we continue in this life the victory is neither gotten nor
held without a conflict, wherein the spirit is often foiled, and so thrust on
with a kind of violence into sinful courses, and interrupted and hindered in
it holy endeavors, that the spiritual man is forced to complain often with
the Apostle, that he omitteth the good he would, and does the evil which he
would not; and that there is a law in his members warring* against the law of
his minds, and bringing him into captivity to the law of sin. But Romans 7.
19. 23.
in the end of this life we shall obtain a full and perfect victory over the
flesh and the lusts thereof, which shall not only be mortified and kept from
reigning, but also wholly abolished and rooted out, so as it shall have no
residence or being in us, for then we shall triumph over all our enemies, and so
trample them under feet, that they shall never be able to rise again, and
disturb our peace; and then there shall be no place or time for fighting, but
for receiving the crown of victory, and the enjoying of everlasting peace, and
with it glory, immortality, and endless happiness in Gods kingdom.
According to that of the Apostle, I have 1 Timothy 4 8.
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day: And the promise of our Savior; To
him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne: even as I also
Apoc. 3. 21.
overcame and am set down with my Father in his Throne.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the reasons which may encourage us to this conflict against
the flesh.
The first reason because it is the will of God that we should fight against it.
AND thus have we showed, both the nature of this enemy the flesh, and of the
conflict between it and the spirit: now we are to speak of the means
whereby we may obtain the victory in this combat; unto which there are two
things required. First a due preparation to the fight; and secondly a wise and
valourous carriage and behavior in the conflict it self. Unto the former also
two things are required. First a serious consideration of those reasons and
arguments which may put courage into us, and make us resolute and valourous in
assaulting this enemy. Secondly a right use of certain means whereby we may
be enabled to overcome. The reasons which may encourage us to set upon this
enemy are many: first because it is the will of our graund Captain, the Lord
of Hosts, that we should encounter this enemy, unto which he does no less
often and earnestly press us to yield our obedience, by his express
commandments, then that we should make daily war against the world and the
devil. As first that we should depose it from the thorn of regency; let not
sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in the lusts Romans 6. 12.
thereof. That we should give it no satisfaction or content walk in the
spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. Yea rather that we
should utterly renounce it; for the grace Gal. 5. 16,
of God which brings salvation teaches us, that we should deny these
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and Tit. 2. 11. 22
righteously, and godly in this present world. So the Apostle Ephesians. 4. 22.
from God requires, that we should put of concerning the former conversation
the old man; which is corrupt according Col. 3. 5.
to the deceitful lusts; yea that we should mortify these earthly members,
and do our best, not only to subdue them, but to put them to death, yea to a
shameful death, crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts, as the
Apostle speaks. Gal. 5. 2^.
The which commandment has a grievous comination and gracious promise
annexed, whereby we are provoked and encouraged to yield our obedience unto
them; namely that if we live after the flesh, we shall dye, but if through the
spirit we do mortify the deeds of this body of sin, we shall live. That
is either dye temporally and eternally, or live the life, of grace here, and
of glory in the life to come. Romans 8. 13.


Sect. 2. The second reason is the necessity of this conflict. Pro. 29. 21.
Secondly, let the necessity of this fight animate and encourage us to enter
into it, seeing we can have no peace or truce with our sinful flesh but upon
most woeful and miserable conditions; if we do not fight against it, it will
fight against and overcome us; if we delicately bring up this slave from his
youth, he will not only be as a son, but as a tyrannous Lord and master at
the length; if we hold it not strictly under in base subjection, it will lead
us captive unto sin, and inthrall both our souls and bodies in most wretched
bondage; so that much better it were for us to be miserable Galley-slaues to
the merciles Turks, then to be held in this cruel bondage, although a
generous and noble death were much to be preferred to either of them. Better
it were with the Prodigal son to become swineheards and feed filthy hogs,
then to become servants and slaves to these sensual and more filthy lusts,
which make us to take delight in nothing but in wallowing in the mire and sink
of sin. Now how unworthy is it our being and breeding, that we who were by
our creation the sons and children of the glorious creator of heaven and
earth, should by yielding our selves to our carnal and sinful lusts, become
slaves to such cruel tyrants; who will make us employ our bodies and minds
which were created for the service of the great God, in the miserable Mayor sum
et ad maiora genitus quam vt mancipium sim mei corporis. Seneca.
bondage of sin and Satan? The heathen man could say that he was more noble
and borne to more excellent ends then that he should become a slave to his own
body; and should not we who far exceed him in spiritual nobility, as having
God for our father, and Jesus Cbrist for our elder brother, fight rather in
this warfare unto blood and death, then to become captives and thrals to a far
worse master, even the body of sin and death which dwells in our members?

But as the flesh is hateful for it base and carnal tyranny; so is it in
respect of the pollution and filthiness thereof most odious and loathsome; for
there is no filthy sincke, no stinking carrion to be compared unto it. Now
which of us (as one says) especially ennobled by birth, and liberally Bernard
lib. de dilig. Deum.
brought up, that being clothed with loathsome rags, spawled on with filthy
spittle, and in most beastly manner defiled with noisome excrements and filth,
that would not exceedingly loath and abhor them, hastily strippe them off*
and with indignation cast them away. And therefore he who finds not his
garment, but himself within under his garment, to be such an one, it
becomes him to grieve so much the more, and to be astonished in his mind,
because he bears, and is feign to carry about with him, that which being much
more near, is also much more loathsome and abominable.

Sect. 3. The 3 reason taken from ^^e manifold evils which a^c^^ent unto us by
the flesh.
Thirdly, let the manifold evils which are done unto us by the flesh, make us
to undertake this combat against this malicious and pestilent enemy with all
courage and resolution. For it is more mischievous unto us then the devil
himself, who (as has been showed) could never hurt us, if we were not first
betrayed by this inbred enemy. Yea it is worse then hell and damnation, as
being the cause of them both, and without it hell were no hell, neither could
condemnation fosten upon us, unless we walked after these carnal lusts. It
is the root of all sin, and the welhead and fountain of all other
wickedness, from which idolatry, blasphemy, murder, adultry and all impiety
and unrighteousness grow and spring. Consequently it is such an enemy as
makes God himself our enemy, exposing us to the hot flames of his fiery
wrath, and would innumerable times cast us headlong into the everlasting
torments of hell fire, if the infinite mercies of God did not stay us in the
way. It is the prouoker and inticer to all wickedness, and all the outrages
and horrible crimes which are committed in the world, may challenge the flesh
as their chief cause and author. From it came Caines murder, Lots incest,
David's adultry, the malice of the Jews and Priests which moved them to
slander, apprehend, accuse, condemn, whip, crown with thorns, and crucify
the Lord of life. It was it that pierced our Saviors hands and feet, that
thrust the spear into his side, that made him to be in that agony and
perplexity in the garden and upon the cross, and which moves men daily to
crucify him afresh, and to trample his precious blood under their filthy
feet, as though it were an unholy thing; and can we find in our hearts to
have any peace or truce with such a malicious enemy to our blessed Savior? And
shall we not rather with implacable anger and constant resolution assault,
pursue, wound and kill it which offered all these indignities to our dearest
Lord? Moreover as it is the cause of all sin, so also of all punishment in
this life, of all our miseries, of sickness and diseases of the body, trouble
of conscience, and terrors of mind, of poverty and penury in estate, loss
of our good names, shame and reproach, and all other the deserved punishments
of sin, and for conclusion of all, of death in the end of our lives and of
everlasting condemnation and destruction in the world to come. For if we live
after the flesh we shall dye, the death of body and soul, and not only be
deprived of Gods favor, of the eternal fruition of his heavenly kingdom, and
those unspeakable joys which shall never have end, but for ever be plunged
into the lake of perdition, whereas is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now what
can justly more incense our anger to take sharp revenge upon such an enemy,
then to consider that it is unto us the author of all mischief, and plungeth
us into all evil both of sin and punishment?

Sect 4. The 4 reason is taken from the assurance of victory.
Lastly, let this encourage us to the fight, in that if we make war against
our flesh and the lusts thereof, we shall be sure to obtain the victory, and
not only overcome them, but with them the world, the devil and all other
enemies of our salvation. To which purpose Augustine Ibi ergo vincuntur
enimicae nobis invisibiles potestates, vbi vincu^tur invisibiles cupiditates.
etc. August. de Agon. Christ lib. cap. 2. Tom. 3. col. 762.
excellently speaks. There (says he) the invisible powers which are at
enmity with us are overcome, where the invisible lusts are conquered and
subdued. And therefore we who overcome the desires of worldly things in our
selves; it is necessary that we should also overcome him who by these desires
reigns in man, etc. For within us we overcome those who assault us without,
whilst we overcome our lusts by which they reign and rule in us; as on the
other side those whom they find like unto themselves, them they draw with them
into the like punishments. For as I have said these outward enemies have no
power to hurt us, but when this secret traitor betraieth us into their hands;
they have no weapons that can pearce and wound us, unless our own corruption
both steel and point them, and also disarme and leave us naked to their malice
and fury; they cannot enter and sack our souls, robbing and spoiling them of
all spiritual treasures, and leading them captive unto all manner of sin,
unless the flesh did open the gates disarme us of Gods protection, and breaking
down the walls of our defense, did expose and lay us open to their merciless
cruelty.

CHAP. XV. Of the means whereby we may be enabled to overcome the Flesh.
Sect. 1 The 1 means that we put on the whole armor of God.
ANd these are the reasons which may encourage us to this fight. Now of the
means whereby we may be enabled to overcome; the which are principally two; the
first that we take unto us and put on the whole spiritual armor of God; the
second that we carefully observe and put in practice diverse rules fit for this
purpose. For the former, the battle is to be maintained against the flesh,
and therefore the weapons of our warfare must not be carnal, seeing they will
rather strengthen and cherish, then wound and mortify fleshly corruptions, but
they must be spiritual, even that whole armor of God described by the
Apostle in the sixth chapter to the Ephesians. For as the Apostle tells us,
though we walk in the flesh, yet we do not war after the flesh; for the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing
which exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into 2 Cor.
10. 3. 4.
captivity every thought to the obodience of Christ. But of this spiritual
armor I shall not need to speak in this treatise, having already entreated of
it in the first part of this Christian warfare. Only let me persuade every
Christian that is willing and desirous to get the victory in this Christian
warfare, that they do with all diligence put it on, not only by peece-meale;
for spiritual death, as well as corporal, can make entrance by one place
unarmed and undefended, as if the whole armor were left off, but we must be
armed at all points, that all being covered none may be indaungered. Otherwise
we shall never be able to maintain this fight with any true valor or hope of
victory. For howsoever a soldier may be even unarmed and without weapons
foole-hardy and desperate, yet he can never be truly valourous, and though
he may be rash in making attempts and rushing into the fight yet can he not
being unarmed and receiving one wound after another, be courageously constant
in holding out unto the end of the conflict, but is fitter by reason of his
lightness to run away, then to maintain such a fight as yields unto him
no hope of victory. And in the second place let us persuade every one who
fights in this Warfare, that they do not trust in their own strength, but
in the power of Gods might, nor in their spiritual armor and weapons which in
themselves are far too weak to bear off the canon-shot of our mighty
enemies, but in the promises of God which assure us of victory, and in his
gracious assistance which we are daily to crave by fervent prayer, whereby, and
by nothing else we shall be enabled to obtain the victory.

Sect. 2. The 2 means is to observe certain rules for the weakening of the
flesh. And 1 that we do not nourish the enemy which we would overcome.
The rules of direction which are to be observed and practiced of those who
desire to get the victory in this spiritual conflict are of two sorts: For
either they tend to the weakening and subduing of the flesh, or to the
nourishing and strengthening of the spirit. The former also are of two kinds.
The first is that we withdraw and withhold from the flesh all means whereby it
may gather strength; the second that we use the contrary means whereby it may
be weakened and disabled. Concerning the former: it is the care of all men that
are to fight against mighty enemies, to deal with them as the Philistims with
Sampson, first curiously searching where their chief strength lies and
wherein it consists, and then in the next place using all means to disable
and deprive them of it; whereby the victory becomes more easy and assured,
and less dangerous and disaduantageable to the conquerours. The which course
must be held also by us in this combat with the flesh, if we desire to overcome
To which purpose let us observe these three rules. The first is, that we do
not nourish and strengthen the enemy which we desire to overcome. As for
example we must not feed our flesh with sinful pleasures and carnal
delights, nor give it ease and contentment by satisfying and glutting it with
all worldly superfluities; we must not cocker and pamper it with ease and
delicacy, with gluttony and drunkenness, with unlawful sports or immoderate use
of honest recreations, with chambering and wantonness, merry meetings and the
voluptuous delights of worldly men. For though this might go for good policy
between nation and nation, to help forward their enemy in their voluptuous
delights, because hereby they are weakened and made effeminate; yet it is not
so in this conflict with the flesh, seeing the more it is effeminated and
pampered with carnal delights, the more it is strengthened against the spirit.
Now what folly is it to victual a mighty enemy which warreth against us, and
to put weapons into their hands whereby they may kill or put us to flight? The
which notwithstanding is daily committed by innumerable Christians, who
profess themselves enemies to the flesh, and yet in the mean time give
themselves over to all voluptuous courses, and take more care to satisfy the
lusts of the flesh, and to nourish and strengthen it with worldly delicacies,
then ever they did for the enabling of the spirit, that it might obtain the
victory against our spiritual enemies. And as we are not to nourish the flesh
by ministering food unto it, so are we not to leave it to it own liberty, and
to make free provision for it self without restraint; which if we do, it will
need no other purueigher to provide victuals enough, for the satisfying of our
carnal lusts. To which end let us remember that it is far unfit that the
flesh should have the liberty of a son and friend, seeing it is a base slave
and bitter enemy: and therefore if we do not put it (as it were) under hatches
and keep it like a gally-slaue in fetters and chains, no sooner shall those
great Pirates Satan and the world set upon us, but it will join with them, and
betray us into their hands. There is no enemy that makes war against
another, when as he has besieged their city, will send them in provision of
victuals, neither yet will they suffer them to use their liberty in going out
and in at their pleasure, to forage in the fields, and to furnish themselves
with all necessaries to maintain them in the time of siedge; but they begirt
the walls on all sides with trenches and bulwarks, and keep a narrow watch and
strong guard to restrain them from all liberty; and thus must we deal with
our enemy the flesh, if ever we mean to get the victory: For if we do not
keep a diligent watch and strong guard over it, but give it liberty to roue
and range at it own pleasure; it will be to small purpose that the spiritual
man does not puruaigh for it, seeing it will make enough provision for the
satisfying and nourishing of our carnal lusts, and for the strengthening of it
self against the spirit. If we lay the reins in the neck, and suffer it to
go which way it will it will quickly carry us out of the narrow path into the
broad way which leads to destruction. If we suffer our deceiptfull hearts
(Dinah-like) to wander about and gaze upon worldly vanities, they will quickly
meet with wicked copes-mates, who will dishonest and allure them to commit
spiritual whoredom. If we give them leave to enjoy their liberties without
restraint, to follow their pleasures, and even to seek after the occasions and
means of evil; it will not be long ere the flesh will prevail, and lead us
captive to the committing of sin. When we with care and diligence keep us
in our ways, we have promises from God of his protection and assistance, and
of our own safety and preservation: but if with Shemei we Psalm. 91. 11.
will for our worldly advantage pass the appointed bounds, and go such ways
as our own hearts can tell us, are full of danger; it is no great wonder if we
be surprised, and pay a dear prise for our presumption, as we see in David's
example, who giving ease and liberty more then ordinary to his flesh, and
keeping no watch over his senses, was easily overtaken, and made a captive and
slave to his filthy lusts. And therefore if we would avoid the like danger,
let us carefully keep our selves within holy limits, and bridle and curb in
the flesh by religious fear, not pleading for unlawful liberty, or esteeming
it too great stricktnesse and preciseness to avoid, not only all sin, but
even the occasions and means which bring unto it; for if we give the least
liberty to the flesh it will draw us on from one degree to another, till at
last it bring us to all manner of licentiousness.

Sect. 3 We must withdraw from the flesh the provision and munition whereby it
is strengthened.
The second rule is that we do not only not give willingly liberty to the flesh
to make it own provision for the satisfying of it carnal lusts, but also when
it would take it whether we will or no, that we forcibly restrain it; and
like those who besiedge their enemies in a city, that we stop all passages by
which it might be victualled, whereby being famished and starued it will be
forced to yield unto the spiritual part. Whereas on the other side if we
suffer it Si carnem nutriatis, et ipsam freque^ti mollieie, ^c iugi deliciarum
fluxu foueatis; in solescet necess^rio aduerins spirit^ et fort or illo
esticitur. Cyril. in Leuit. lib. 9 Col. 129.
to be stored with provision and to be fed unto the full with all carnal
dainties, it will wax stronger then the spirit, despise it forces, and sally
out upon it, committing many cutrages, and doing much damage and mischief unto
the Christian soul. Yea it will wax proud and insolent, foil the regenerate
part, and force it to live in most miserable bondage. To which purpose one
says, that it fares with the flesh and the spirit as with two mortal enemies
in the field; for he that by any means aydeth and strengthens the one, does
thereby make way for the vanquishing of the other. He that Perinde a^que in
acie hinc atque hinc instructa ad conflictum qui alteri partifert suppetias
facit vt alter vincatur. Basil de iei^mio.
joins with the flesh does oppose the spirit, and he that stands on the
spirits side does bring the flesh into bondage and captinitie. If then we would
have the flesh kept under the rule of the spirit; We must use it (as Augustine
speaks) as men are accustomed to use pampered and resty iades, which because
when they are full fed, and ready to kick against their master, to wince and
fling, and either to cast the rider, or getting the bridle between their
teeth, to carry him out of the roads way, August. de Cantico nouo lib. Cap. 3.
T. 9. c 936.
over hedge and ditch, and places of danger; therefore as they are travailing
they keep back the prouender, and give him no more meat then necessity
requires; that so they may tame him with hunger whom they cannot rule with the
bridle and spur. For so must we weaken and tame the unruly flesh with
fasting and abstinence, when it is grown so lusty and insolent, that neither
the bridle of comminations nor the spur of Gods judgments will keep it in
order. And Carnis infirmitas robur spiritui auget et subministr at vires; itae
contratio noueris carnis fortitudinem debilitatem spiritus operari. Bernar.
ser. 29. in cant.
hereby we shall add strength unto the spirit. For as one says; The
weakness of the flesh increases, the strength of the spirit; even as
contrariwise the strength of the flesh does bring weakness to the spirit; and
indeed what great wonder is this, if a man be made stronger by the weakening
of his enemy? But yet we are not to understand this of the natural strength of
the body, as though the weakness of it did give strength to the regenerate
part, or did repress and subdue the unruly passions and sinful lusts of the
flesh, seeing these may remain in their full strength in a lean and weak
body; but of the power and vigor of the body of sin and carnal corruption,
which by the exercises of mortification, fasting and abstinence, are weakened
and held in subjection, because the flesh, by the body, as by an organ and
instrument, does enjoy it sensual delights, and carnal pleasures, whereby it
is strengthened to the committing of sin, by which the spiritual part is
wounded and weakened. In which respect (as Cyrill well says) We give stings
and weapons to the flesh, arming and strengthening it against In leuit. lib. 9.
Col. 129.
the spirit, when as we pamper the body with delicacie, inflame it with wine,
handle it daintily and effeminately, and nourish in it all enticements and
prouocations to lust. Which who so does; what does he else but strengthen his
enemy for his own ruin and overthrow? What does he but cocker a slave, and
famish a son? There are (says one) two by God committed to thy custody, a
noble man and a slave, on this condition that thou should feed the slave
like a captive with bread and water, and entertain the Noble man with all
provision befitting his dignity. But thou contrariwise consumest and killest
the Noble man with hunger, thirst, and many injuries; but nourishest the slave
with all dainties and delicacies; whereby making him insolent, he becomes a
rebel against his Lord, and rising against him in arms, hurts, wounds,
and at last kills him. What then will thou answer unto him, who has
committed both unto thee? Thou have showed thy self cruel, who have not
refreshed the noble man the spirit, with the dainties of virtue, with the fat
and marrow of devotion, but have nourished the contumarious slave delicately,
and pampered the flesh, with gluttony, drunkenness, and the sinful pleasures
of this life. And so it rebelleth against the spirit, wounding, killing and
constraining it to become a servant unto sin.

. Sect 4. We must stop all the passages to keep back provision for the flesh.
But what is the provision of the victuals which must be withheld from this
our enemy? And from what places and parts is it to be kept back that it may
receive no benefit by it? To the later I answer first, that the flesh is
resident in all the parts and faculties of our bodies and souls, and therefore
our care must be generally and particularly to keep it from all and every of
them. Now the provision it self which we are to withhold from it, are all the
means whereby it may be nourished and strengthened, and so enabled to resist
the spirit. As for example, we must use our best endeavor to keep from our
corrupt minds all sinful cogitations, and from our fantasies all vain
imaginations, we must not entertain wicked deliberations, and ungodly
counsels, pernicious errors, and false doctrine, but cut them off, when they
are approaching, or cast them out, as soon as they are entered. And
contrraiwise let us furnish our minds in the regenerate part, with holy
thoughts, and divine meditations, with religious counsels, wholesome
instructions, and pure doctrine, concerning God and his will, according as in
his word he has revealed it unto us; following herein the Apostles counsel,
Set your mind on things above, not on things on the earth. So let us keep out
of our consciences all manner of sin, and Col. 33. Heb. 9. 14.
and purge them daily from all dead works, that we may serve the living God;
Let us as much as in us lies preserve them from the hot searing iron of
known, voluntary and presumptuous sins, from vain excuses of that which is
evil, and false accusations for doing good; from the deep lethargy of carnal
security, and from the tormenting corrasiues of terrors and fears, and let
us labor to keep them pure, peaceable, and tender. Let us keep or blot out of
our Col. 3. 1. Phil. 3. 20.
memory the remembrance of sinful pleasures, unless it be to repent of those
that are past, and to loath and flee from those which are present and to come;
of ribald speeches, Pet. 5. 8. 9.
obscaene lests, injuries received with a purpose of revenge, with all other
lessons of impiety imprinted in them by Satan, the world, or our own
corruption, and let us write and even engraue in them all holy documents which
out of the word have been imparted unto us. Let us preserve our hearts from
all unlawful lusts, wicked desires, unruly passions, and ungodly affections,
especially from covetousness, ambition, and carnal voluptuousnes; and labor to
have them fixed and fastened on spiritual and heavenly things, and to be
wholly taken up and constantly possessed with sanctified affections and holy
desires. Let us keep out from our appetite intemperance, and all desire of
excess, and nourish in it temperance, sobriety, modesty and chastity. Let us
preserve our tongues from all corrupt communication, our cares from ungodly and
dishonest discourses, our eyes from wanton and wicked objects, and finally our
bodies from sloth and idleness, effeminate delicacie, excessive sleep, and
all manner of carnal and sinful pleasures; and contrariwise let us entertain
watchfulnes, sobriety, man-like exercises, befitting our spiritual Warfare,
and when being too well fed it begins to be wanton, let us keep it under
with fasting, watching and painful labors.

Sect. 5. We must take heeed especially of some principal sins which most
strengthen the flesh.
More especially we must take heed of such principal sins as are the
chief provision whereby the flesh is nourished and strengthened against the
spirit, as ignorance of God and his will, whereby the eyes of our understanding
being hood-winckt or quite blinded, we may easily be misled into all the
by-waies of sin, infidelity and unbelief, which nourishes the flesh in all
impiety, whilst neither believing Gods promises nor threatenings, we neither
care to please him having no assurance of reward, nor to offend and displease
him because we do not fear his judgments* security, impenitencie and hardness
of heart, then the which nothing more confirms the flesh in all wickedness,
because hereby it goes quietly on in sin without check or remorse, and
puts the evil day far out of sight. But especially we are to take heed
of the love of the world, and of setting our hearts and affections upon earthly
things. Iam. 4. 4. 1 Ioh. 2. 15.
For this will easily weaken the spirit, and quench all the good motions which
cross and hinder us from the fruition of those moment any and mutable
vanities, honors, 2 Timothy 6. 9. 10.
riches, and pleasures; it will root out of our hearts the love of God from
which springs all true obedience; and and thrust us headlong into noisome
tentations and all manner of sin, which promise unto us the satisfying of our
earthly desires. And therefore he who will be a good 2 Timothy 2. 4.
soldier in this spiritual Warfare, must not entangle himself with the
affairs of this life, but labor chiefly to please and approve himself to
him who has chosen him to be a soldier. He that will have heaven for his
City and country, Phil. 3. 20. Col. 3. 1. 2.
must have his conversation there, even whilst he lives in the world, and if
we be risen with Christ, we must seek and set our affections on things above,
and not on things on the earth. but chiefly let us flee covetousness an^
voluptuousness; 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10.
For they that will be rich fall into tentations, and snares, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For
the love of money is the root of all evil. So also we must take heed of
voluptuous pleasures, as surfeiting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness,
lust and uncleanness, sloth and idleness For the more we pamper the body, the
more we pine and starve the soul; and no more effectual are these means for
the fatning of the natural flesh, then for the strengthening and increasing of
sinful corrupt on, and the weakening and wasting of the spiritual part. And
this we see in the example of Noah, who giving liberty to his voluptuous
appetite, was overtaken with drunkenness; of rightous Lot, who by the same
means became not only drunken but incestuous, and of holy David who
neglecting the duties of his kingly calling, and giving way to drowsy sloth
and idleness, was further foiled by his flesh, and drawn to the committing of
those shameful sins of adultery and murder. And this is the cause why the
Lord so stricktly restrains us from the immoderate use of these fleshly
pleasures, and so much and earnestly urges, temperance and sobriety, fasting
and abstinence, modesty, sobriety and painful labor in our honest
callings, because they are notable means to mortify and subdue our carnal
corruptions, and to strengthen the spirit unto all holy and Christian-duties.
Even as with like earnestness he forbids the contrary because there by the
spirit is weakened and disabled and the flesh nourished and strengthened unto
all manner of wickedness. To this purpose one says, that as the flesh inioying
quiet rest the spirit failteth and fails so contrariwise the Sicut enim c^^ne
quiescente spiritus deficit, ita ea laborante conualescit etc. Gregot. in 7
psalm. paeuiten. expla, 32. psalm.
flesh being sick, the spirit inioyeth health. As soft and delicate things
nourish the flesh, so those which are high and hard do advance the spirit.
That is fed with delights, this strengthened and made more vigorous with bitter
diet. That is cherished with such things as are tender and effeminate, but this
exercised and strengthened with such as are severe and rough. And again, as
harsh usage wounds the flesh, so over tender handling does weaken the
spirit; and as that is wasted and consumed with laborious exercises, so this is
pinched with voluptuous delicacy. And this is the reason why when God sees our
impotency in ruling our sensual appetite he tieth our hands and makes
temperance which is so profitable to become a so necessary by withdrawing from
us that worldly plenty, in which he suffers wicked worldlings to abound and
to fat and pamper themselves to their perdition. Finally, this is the cause
why he teaches us temperance, not only by his word but also by his example;
for being to feed his beloved Prophet, in stead of serving men to attend his
table, he sent him his meat by (...), and surely they were no great dainties
that were of their dressing and providing. And 1 King. 17. 6.
when he would more (...)ely feast him by his own hand that he might go
forward in his journey, with more strength and cheerfulness; he that could
have provided for him all manner of (...), does only set before him 1 King.
19. 6.
a cake baked on the co(...) a po^ of water, not regarding the pleasing of his
appetite, but having respect only to the necessity of nature. And thus when
our Savior Christ would by miracle feast the multitude, he provided only
bread and fish for their (...)* the ground both for their stools and table,
and the grass for their cloth and carpet; whereas he was as able (if he had
seen it as fit) to Mat. 14. 19.
have furnished this feast with all manner of dainties, which either water or
land could have yielded unto him: because he well knew that the satisfying of
our fleshly appetite, does not for the present bring so much pleasure and
contentment to the body, as it does afterward grief and vexation to the
spirit.

Sect. 6. We must moderate our selves in the use of things lawful and
indifferent.
It is not then enough that we restrain the flesh from things wicked and
unlawful, whereby it is nourished and strengthened, but we must also moderate
and diet our selves in the use of those things which in their own nature are
lawful; yea there must not only be a sober and moderate use of meats and
drink and worldly pleasure, but sometimes also as occasion serves total
abstinence, for the better Solus in illicitis non cadit qui se aliquando eta
licitis caute restringit. Gregor in moral.
taming and subduing of the flesh. So one says, that he only falls not in
things unlawful, who sometimes wisely and warily restrains himself from
those which are lawful. And Austine tells us, that the best way to restrain
the flesh from unlawful pleasure, is to refrain sometimes from those which
are lawful delights; for he who abstaineth from no delights Qui enim a nullis
refrenat illicitis vicinus est et illicitis. August. de vtilitate ieiunij
tract. T 9. Col. ^^67.
that are lawful, is in the next neighborhood to those that are unlawful.
Marriage is lawful, and adultery unlawful: and yet temperate men, that they
may be far off from unlawful adultery, do moderate themselves in the use of
lawful marriage. Sufficiency in diet and drinking is lawful, and drunkenness
unlawful; and yet modest m^n, that they may be far of from the beastly
filthiness of drunkenness do somewhat restrain Sed saepe dum incanti
necessitati condescendimus, desidetijs des^ru^mus. Gregor. moral. lib 30. cap.
14.
themselves of the liberty of (...). And this is needful for us to do,
because (as another Father says,) Whilst we give free liberty for our
refreshing, we are often deceived and carried beyond our bounds, and whilst
the mind flattereth it self with a conceit of necessity, it is allured and
deceived with the will and appetite, etc. And whilst we do unwarily In eodem
capite
condiscand to necessity, we become slaves to our lusts and appetite. And
again, we are to know (says he) that voluptuousness does so cloak it
self under necessity, that the most perfect man can scarcely discern it. For
whilst necessity calls upon us to pay our debt to nature, voluptuousness
does satisfy it lust and appetite; and so much the more securely does
gluttony carry us away with headlong violence, by how much the more cunningly
it covers it self with the honest name of supplying necessity. And
oftentimes in the way of eating, pleasure stealingly follows after, and
sometime impudently takes the way and goes before; now it is easy to see
when pleasure goes before necessity; but very hard to discern when in our
eating it follows after.

Sect 7. That we are to avoid the other extreme of hurting our bodies whilst
we go about to tame the flesh.
Yet here we are also to take heed of the contrary extreme, namely that we
do not destroy the body whilst we endeavor to tame the flesh nor kill or
hurt our friend whilst we intend war against our enemy, as when by watching,
fasting and such strict exercises, we so weaken our bodies that they are
disabled unto all good duties. For as we are not so to pamper it, as that it
should become a fit slave for the flesh, so we are not so to afflict and weaken
it, as that it should be made unfit for the service of God. So the same author
says, that sometimes whilst we do immoderately Gregor. moral. lib. 30.
chap. 14.
withstand our natural desires, we thereby increase the miseries of
necessity. And therefore there is a certain kind of art of continency and
temperance to be learned, so as we may not kill the body, but the corruptions
of the flesh. For oftentimes whilst it is restrained more then is fit, it is
weakened and disabled for the exercise of good works* and so a man is made
unfit for praying and preaching and such like duties, whilst with indiscreet
Saepe vero dum ^^^llo hostem insequimur etiam ciuem que^ diligim^s tru^idam^s,
et saepe dum quasi conciui parcimus ad praelium hostem ^^^rimus. Greg moral.
lib. 80. cap. 14.
have he would at once cheake the inticements to vice. For we have our bodies
given us as helpers of our spiritual intentions; and as in them dwell ^he
prouocations to lust and wantonness, so they also are the instruments of
well-doing. But oftentimes whilst in them we pursue an hated enemy, we do
unawares kill a beloved friend, and whilst we spare a friend, we nourish an
enemy to fight against us.

Sect 8. That we must take from the flesh the weapons and armor whereby it
most prevails.
The last rule is, that we spoil our enemy the flesh of it armor, munition
and weapons wherewith it fights against us; imitating herein the policy of
the Philistines, who would not suffer their enemes to have any swords or
spears, nor yet any smethy to forge them in, or smith to make them; and so
shall we get an easy conquest, when as our enemy being disarmed and left
naked, has neither means to defend himself nor offend us. Now these weapons
are those fiery lusts, and those darts and spears of temptations, wherewith
the flesh encountreth us, and forces us as much as in it lies to commit
sin, either in our thoughts, words or actions, of which we are to deprive the
flesh by taking away the matter whereof they are made, and all occasions and
means of them, as near as we can. Or if we cannot prevent their making, yet
if it be possible, we are to wring these weapons out of our enemies hand, and
to turn the point and edge of them against himself, by taking occasion from
these temptations to the committing of sin, of performing some holy duty
contrary unto it. As when it encountreth us with wicked thoughts, to take
occasion thereby of exercising our selves in divine and spiritual meditations;
when it provoke us to corrupt and sinful speech, which either tend to Gods
dishonor, to the disgrace of our neighbor, or wounding of our own souls,
that we take occasion by this temptation, to utter some godly and whole some
discourse, tending to Gods glory and the edification of the hearers. And
finally when it tempts us to any evil actions, to take occasion thereby of
being more forward unto all religious duties, and more zealous of good works.
Or if we have not power enough then to pull these weapons out of our enemies
hand, then must we use all diligence and good means, whereby we may break
the point and blunt the edge of them, that they may not pearce and wound us, or
at least so to arm our selves with the Christian ar(...)r, especially the
shield of Faith and sword of the Spirit, that by the one we may be are of
these fiery darts and cruel blows of temptations, and by the other beat
back our enemies and put him to flight. And being all ways thus well
appointed, let us continually stand upon our fence, watching with a quick and
vigilant eye, on which side or part our enemy strikes at us; whether on the
right side with temptations of prosperity, or on the left side with
temptations of adversity and affliction; whether it assaulteth our head with
errors and heresies, or our hearts with unlawful lusts; our ears with
rotten and corrupt speeches, or our eyes with wanton and wicked objects, that
as soon as we observe to what part the blow is intended, we may instantly
cast the shield of faith between it and us, and (according to the example of
our Savior fighting with the devil) make a contrary thrust or blow against
our enemy, and so not only defend our selves, but also offend him by wounding,
foyling, or putting him to flight. And all these are required by the Apostle in
our 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9.
conflict against our spiritual enemies. As first that we should be sober,
pining and famishing them, by withdrawing all provision of food whereby they
should be nourished, then that having on the whole Christian armor we should
keep watch and ward, that we be not surprised on the sudden, nor receive any
wounds for want of vigilance; and lastly that we should resist them steadfast
in the Iam. 4. 7.
faith, which if we do they will not stand to it, but betake themselves to a
shameful flight.

CHAP. XVI. Of other means whereby the flesh may be subdued and overcome.
Sect. 1 We must keep a narrow watch over our selves and over our enemies
NOw having thus far proceeded in the withdrawing of all means whereby the
flesh is nourished and strengthened, we must not rest here, but in the next
place use all good means whereby it may be subdued and overcome. And first of
all we must keep a narrow and diligent watch over our selves, and over our
enemy, not only to prevent all occasions whereby it may circumuent and
surprise us at unawares, but also that we may take the fittest opportunities,
and best advantages for the killing and crucifying of all our fleshly lusts.
And this careful watch is most necessary, for in this life we get not a full
conquest over the flesh, but after we have gotten the better in many conflicts,
have put it to shameful flight, wounded, weakened it, and brought it in
subjection, as a captive and bondslaue, yet still it is plotting and practicing
new treasons. For the atchiuing whereof it has great advantages; for it not
only lies about our City walls, but even in every secret corner of our
streets, and no sooner do our foreign enemies the devil and the world
beseidge and assault us, but presently this lurkling traitor is ready to open
the gates of our souls, and letting them in, to join with them to work our
overthrow. In which regard who would not appoint a continual centinell, and
keep a very narrow watch? who would give any place to carnal security, and
carelessly sleep in the midst of these dangers? who can walk securely among
serpents and scorpions, and rest quietly in his bed when the envious man
watches about his house with a purpose to fire and burn it? Here in this
world is no place or safety, and therefore let there be no time for security.
We shall be only safe in heaven when as we shall have a full and final
victory over all our enemies; and therefore let us not be retchlesse on earth,
Phil. 2. 12.
but let circumspection and watchfulness accompany us even unto heaven gates,
not only beginning but working out our salvation with fear and trembling.

Sect. 2 That we must keep this watch in all things.
Now this watch as it must be kept at all times, so also in all things; for
even one gate of the City unguarded, is sufficient to let in an whole army of
enemies, though all the rest be carefully watched; and therefore following the
Apostles exhortation unto Timothy, we must watch in all 2 Timothy 4. 5.
things. For it is not enough that we keep this watch about things, simply
and in their own nature evil, that we may avoid them, but even in things
indifferent, that we do not abuse our Christian liberty unto sin; yea in
those actions which are in their own nature good, that we may do them in a
good manner and to a right end, least otherwise they be turned into sin. For
example we must keep this watch over our selves when we hear the word,
according to that of our Savior; Take heed how Luke 8. 18.
you hear; least through our secure retchlesnesse we hear without reverence
and attention, without care to treasure it up in our hearts or to practice it
in our lives. So we must keep this watch over our selves when we pray, least
our minds being carried away with wandering thoughts, we call upon God with
deceiptfull lips, our bodies being present, but our hearts in the mean time
far from him. So likewise our Savior warns us to take heed when we give
alms, because we are in danger to be tainted with pride, and to aim at the
applause and praise of men. Now if there be such need of watchfulness, when
as we Mat. 6. 1. ^
are exercised in the duties of Gods service, and in the best actions which we
perform, then how much more in the use of things indifferent which become
sinful if they be not used with much caution and moderation? how much more
when we intermeddle with worldly affairs and earthly things, which like
birdlime are apt to defile and entrap us, and are commonly used by Satan, the
world and our own corruption, as snares and nets to entangle and catch us, and
as baits to cover the hooks of sin, which will mortally choke us, if we
swallow them down, unless we cast them up again by unfeigned repentance.

Sect. 3. That we must keep this watch over all the faculties and parts of our
souls and bodies.
And as we must keep this watch in all things: so over all the parts and
faculties of our bodies and souls, especially over our senses which being the
gates of our souls, do either let in, or keep out both our friends and
enemies; and therefore these gates must be well watched and strongly guarded,
seeing we have so many foreign enemies who besiedging us, do watch all
opportunities of getting entrance, and so many secret traitors within us, which
are daily and hourly ready to open these gates and to betray us into their
hands. Thus we must watch over our eyes, that they do not wander after wanton
and wicked objects, and with Job keep them under covenant, that they do not by
lustful glances betray us into the hands of our enemies. Job. 31. 1.
And before we walk abroad and look into the world we are to forecast the
dangers which may come by giving them their full liberty to wander after
vanities, that we may prevent them. And because our own providence is not
sufficient without Gods assistance, we are to pray with David, Psall 119. 37.
that he will turn away our eyes from beholding vanities. Neither are we to
take less care in watching over our ears, because they being the instruments
of the most learnedsense, and the conduit pipes to conueigh unto our minds all
notions and instructions, either good or evil, therefore we must take heed
how we hear, and what we hear, whether the language of Canaan for our
edification and instruct on, or the voice of the Serpent, Dragon, or bewitching
Siren, tending to corrupt, poison and destroy us; whether it be sauoury
communication powdered with the salt of spiritual wisdom, which ministers
grace unto the hearers, or wanton iestes, scurrilous speeches, wicked Col. 4.
6.
blasphemies, backbiting and slandering with such 1 Cor. 15. 33.
like evil words, which if we give them admittance, will, as the Apostle
tells us, corrupt good manners. We must having gotten the victory over our
enemies, like the Giliadites take all the passages, and strongly guard them
Iud. 12. 6.
against them, and if those who go by, give us the watch word, we may give
them entrance, and if they speak plainly the language of our spiritual and
heavenly country and pronounce Shibboleth let them pass as friends, but Pro.
23. 2.
if they say Sibboleth and by their lisping language, appear to be our
enemies, let us not only stay them from entering, but wound and slay them. Thus
also must we set a straight watch over our taste and appetite, least giving
liberty unto it, our spiritual enemies prevail against us and draw us to
intemperance and excess in diet. And this counsel the wise man gives us; Put
(says he) a knife to thy throat (sitting to eat with a ruler) if thou be a
man given to appetite; Be not desirous of his dainties, for they are
deceiptfull meat. Which temperance if we use, it will be unto us a wall of
defense to preserve us against the assaults of our spiritual enemies. Whereas
contrariwise, if we do not rule our taste, and bridle our appetite, we shall be
like unto a City, whose walls being broken down is made an easy Pro. 25. 28.
prey, and lies open to the spoil; as the wise man speaks.

Sect. 4 That we must keep a special watch over our tongues.
With no less diligence are we to set a careful watch over our tongues which
the flesh abuses as a notable instrument of all evil, and as a razour and
sharp two edged sword, not only to wound our neighbors, but also our own
souls and consciences. Whereof we have an example in David, who resolved with
himself, to take heed unto his ways, that he might not sin with his
tongue, and to Psalm. 39. 1. psalm. 108. 1.
keep his mouth as with a bridle, that his tongue might not pass it bounds
and take unto it self licentious liberty. Which if David had need to do,
whose tongue and heart were continually prepared to praise the Lord, how much
more had we, who are apt to utter so much vanity and lies? If he found it
necessary, who calls his tongue his glory, because it was such a notable
instrument of glorifying Psalm. 57. 8.
God, why should not we much more, who have just cause to call our tongues our
shame, because they utter so many vain and evil speeches, whereby his holy
name is much dishonored? But that this necessity of keeping a strict and
narrow watch over our tongues may better appear let us further consider, first
that God requires it, and so binds us to this duty upon our allegiance unto
him; according to that of the Psalmist, Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile, where is required not only that we do not speak
evil, but that we keep our Psalm. 34. 13.
tongues under a narrow watch, that we do not speak it. Secondly, consider
that this narrow watch is of great importance in respect of that power and
potency which is in the tongue to draw us to good or evil, life or death,
according to that of the wise man: Death and life are in the power of the
tongue, and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof, In pro. 18. 21. and
13. 3- and Chap. 21. 23
regard where of he says in another place, that he who keeps his mouth
keeps his life: but he that opens wide his lips shall have destruction.
And again, Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from
troubles. Thirdly, the natural maliciousnes of this little member should make
us to watch over it with great care, for as the Psalmist, and the Apostle Paul
describe the effects and fruits of it. It deuiseth mischief and like a sharp
razour works deceiptfully, it speaks deceit, and loves to lie rather then
to speak righteousness; Psalm. 52. 4. Romans 3. 13.
it delights in devouring words, it cutteth as a sword, and the poison of
Aspes is under the lips. So the Apostle James tells us that the tongue as
much needs restraint, as an unruly horse the bridle; and compares it to the
Helm of a ship which being little turns about the Iam. 3. 5 6. 7. 8.
whole body, and to a fire inflamed by hell and setting on fire a whole world
with wickednesses affirming that it defiles the whole man, that it is hardly
tamed being an unruly evil full of deadly poison. Finally, let us consider
that Iam. 3. 2.
Christian perfection consists in well ordering of the tongue; For if any man
offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and is able to bridle the whole
body, Whereas on the other side though we se me never so religious, yet if we
do Iam. 1. 26.
not bridle our tongue, we deceive our own hearts, and our religion is vain;
as the same Apostle pronounces. Now in this our watch we are to keep our
tongues from evil speaking, whether it be such impious words as are directly
darted against Gods own Majesty, by blaspheming his holy name, profaning his
word and ordinances, scorning and abusing his works and creatures; or such
dishonest and unjust words, as are uttered to the prejudice and hurt of our
neighbors, as by infecting and poisoning them with scurrilous jests, ribaldry
and such corrupt and rotten communication, or taking away their goods or good
name by lying and obtrectation, back biting and slandering. The former whereof
the Apostle forbids: Let no corrupt communication (says he) proceed out of
your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace Ephesians. 4. 29. Leuit 19. 16.
unto the hearers; the other in the ninth commandment, and in the nineteenth
of Leuiticus; Thou shall not go up and down as a tale bearer among the people;
like unto a pedlar which carries his pack from house to house, venting here a
little and there a little until at length he has uttered all his wares. And
the Apostle disswadeth it by a weighty argument: Speak not evil (says he)
one of another, brothren: he that speaks evil of his brother, and judges
his brother Iam. 4. 11.
speaks evil of the law and judges the law; namely, by doing that which it
forbids and condemns. Secondly, we must contain them from idle speaking
and consequently from much speaking; for if we speak much, we can hardly keep
our selves from speaking vainly and to little purpose, and by venting
vanities, we shall easily be brought to set our tongues on sale to speak also
that which is wicked and evil. And therefore the wise man tells us, that in
the multitude of words there wants not sin, and that in this respect, he
that refraineth his lips is wise. And again, that Pro. 10. 19.
he who has knowledge, spares his words, where as with a fool is much
babbling. That even a fool when be holds his peace is counted wise, and he
that shuts his lips is esteemed a man of understanding. Now that we may thus
refrain our tongues from much babbling and idle speaking, let us remember that
fearful saying of our Savior, namely that every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof at Mat 12. 36
the day of judgment, and this will make us careful to speak then, when as
our speech is better then silence.

Sect. 5. That above all other parts we must keep this narrow watch over our
hearts. Pro. 4. 23.
But above all other parts we are with greatest care to guard our hearts, and
to set a strickt and strait watch over them, according to the counsel of the
Wise man: Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life. And this is most necessary first because above all other parts it is most
cunning and crafty, according to that of the Prophet: The heart is deceiptfull
and wicked above all things: Who can know it? And therefore as we are careful
Iet. 17. 9.
to keep a vigilant eye when as we have to deal with a cunning couzener, or
deceiptfull thief, and keep a narrow watch over subtle and pollitique
traitors, who are still ready to spy all opportunities to betray and deliver us
into the hands of our malicious enemies that seek our lives and endeavor to
spoil our goods: so must we deal with this couzener, thief and traitor
which does intend nothing more then our utter ruin and destruction. Secondly,
because it is the chief Monarch and commander in this little world of man,
which rules and commands all the other parts; It is their guide and captain
which leads and directs them in all their courses; It is like the primum
mobile which moves all the inferior spheres, and the first and chief wheel
in the clock which sets all the rest on going. It is the spring and
fountain of al our thoughts, words and actions, which being defiled defiles
them, and being purged does communicate unto them its purity and cleanness.
For according to the direction of the heart, the tongue speaks, the hand
works, the eye sees, the foot walks. A good man out of the good treasure
of his heart (says our Savior) brings forth that which is good, and Luke 8.
45.
an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which
is evil: For out of the abundance of his heart his mouth speaks. And again:
Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth the heart, and they
defile the Mat. 15. 18. 19.
man For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adultiries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. And Mat 15. 18. 19.
therefore it nearly concerns us at all times, in all places, and upon all
occasions, in our ^^rth and in our mourning, in our prosperity and in our
affliction, when we are alone, and when we are in company, in our abstinence
and in our eating and drinking, in our painful labors and in our honest
recreations, in our dealings which we have with God, as hearing, reading,
meditating, praying, receiving the sacrament; and in our commerce and affairs
with men, talking, walking, buying, selling, in those actions which we
perform abroad, and those which are done by us in secret in our own houses
and private chambers, that we keep a narrow watch over our hearts, that they
be upright with God, honest, just and merciful toward our neighbors, pure
and holy, sober* and temperate toward our solues, least they be surprised and
overtaken with the tentations of the Devil, the would and our own flesh, and
being corrupted and misted do defile and mis-guide all other powers and parts.
And seeing our own watchfulnes is not sufficient, because they are so wilye
and subtle that we cannot know them, and so stubborn and rebellious that we
cannot rule them, let us continually pray unto the Lord, who alone searches
the heart and reins, and rules and turns even the hearts of Kings like the
rivers of waters, that he will keep a strait watch over them, and taking
them into his hand will rule and guide them, so as they may be always subject
unto his will, that so with themselves they may bring all our other faculties
into this saving subjection; that he will cause them to love that which he
loves, to loath that which he hates, and to flee that which he forbids,
and to do Psalm. 141: 3.
that which he commands. Let us earnestly desire him with the Prophet David,
that he will apply our hearts unto his testimonies and not to covetousness;
that our hearts may Psalm. 119. 36.
be found in his statutes, that so we may not be ashamed; that he will
create in us clean hearts, and renew a right spirit Psalm. 51 10.
within us: and because they are naturally flitting and removing, that he will
knit them fast unto him that we may always psalm. 86. 11.
fear his name.

Sect. 6. That we must keep this watch in our spiritual armor.
And thus you see what is the Christian watch over our enemy the flesh: Now we
are further to consider, that we are not to watch unweaponed and disarmed, but
as we are to have our complete armor on our heads and backs, so especially
the shield of fait* and sword of the spirit in our hands, that we may be ready
to assault the flesh and the lusts thereof, as soon as ever they appear and
approach toward us, sometimes beating them down, wounding and killing them
with the terrible threatings of the law, and sometime piereing and throsting
them through, or beating them back and putting them to flight with the sweet
promises of the Gospel, encouraging us to a godly life, and the remembrance of
Gods love in Christ, and what our sweet Savior has done and suffered, to free
us from our sins. Yea we must not only in some general manner use this sword
of the spirit against the flesh and our sinful corruption (as it were) in the
whole lump, but we must draw it out, and fight with it against every
particular lust, when it sets upon us. As when it withdraws us from the
service of God, to the service of Satan and the world; let us withstand the
tentation, by remembering that we are bound by Gods law to worship and serus
him and no other; and that we are purposely redeemed Exodus 20. 3. Deuteronomy 6. 13.
Mat. 4. 10. Luc. 1. 74.
by him that we should worship and serve him in holiness and righteousness
all the days of our lives. When it moves us to neglect good works, let us
remember, that we are Gods workmanship created unto them; that he has
therefore parged vt, and made us his peculiar people, that we might be zealous
of good works. When it persuades us to defer our repentance, let us
remember, that we are commanded Ephesians. 2. 10.
to remember our Creator in the days of our youth; and that even to day we
must hearken unto Gods voice, and not harden Eccle. 12. 1.
our hearts. When as worldly lusts do set upon us, let us remember; that the
amity of the world is enmity with God, Psalm. 95. 7. 8.
and that whosoever makes himself a friend to the world does Iam. 4. 4.
in the very act, make God his enemy; that we must not love the world nor the
things of the world for if any man love the world, Ioh. 2. 15.
the love of the father is not in him. When the lusts of pride do 1 Pet. 5. 5.
assault us, let us call to mind, that God resists the proud, but gives his
grace to the humble; that a man's pride shall Pro. 29. 23. and 18. 12.
bring him low, but honor shall uphold the humble in spirit; that the heart of
a man is haughty before destruction, and before honor is humility. So when
the lusts of covetousness do 1 Timothy 6. 6. 10.
fight against our souls, let us beat them back and foil them by the sword
of the Spirit, calling to mind, that Godliness with contentment is the
greatest gain, and that the love of money is the root of all evil. That we
have an express charge from God, to have our conversation without
covetousness, Heb. 13. 5.
and that we should be content with such things as we have, having this
gracious promise from him, that he will never leave us nor forsake us if we
still depend upon him. And thus must we with the sword of the Spirit, give
every other special lust, special blows and vvounds, that they may be
foiled and get no strength to prevail against us. Yea not only are we thus
our selves to draw out this spiritual sword, but also in the public
ministry of the Gospel, we are to lay open and naked all our sinful
lusts to those powerful blows and thrusts which Gods Ministers by the Word
shall make against them, suffering meekely the word of exhortation, admonition
and reproof, and by diligent application Esek. 16. 63*
bringing it home to our own hearts and consciences, for the wounding and
killing of all our sinful corruptions.

CHAP. XVII. Of two other rules to be observed of those who would subdue the
flesh.
Sect. 1. The third rule is that we withstand the flesh in all the occasions
and means of sinful lusts.
THE third rule in resisting and assaulting of the flesh is, that we withstand
it in all occasions which it takes, and means which it uses to prevail
against us, and that we do with equal care avoid and shun them, as we
do the sinful lusts themselves, or the wicked actions unto which they do
^ncline a^^ tempt us. To which purpose one says, that this shall be unto us the
occasion of the greatest security, if we will not only carefully slay sins,
but also the Chrysostom. ^d pop. Ant^^t. Hom. 15. T. 5. Col. 141.
means whereby they do supplant us etc. For a^ he who goes upon the edge of
a steep and craggie Rock, though he falls not, yet with fear trembles,
and so falls through his trembling: so he who leaves not, sin aloof and
far off, but approaches close to the brinke of it has just, cause to live in
fear, seeing he is apt often to slip into it. He that fears death, if he be
wise, he w^ll not drink poison, nor thrust himself into needless and
dangerous quarrels, nor expose his person to any other perils, which threaten
his destruction. He that would preserve the riches which he loves, will not
entertain occasions of needless expenses much less will he suffer his
doors to stand wide open in the night, or inuit known thieves to lodge with
him; and he who would not have his house burned will not be so foolish to
bring and leave fire carelessely in the room where is store of flax gunpowder
or such like matter as is combustible. How much greater care therefore
becomes it us to use to vvithstand all means and occasions of sin unto
which our corrupt natures are so much inclined? For if we be so frail and
weak through our corruption, that of our selves we are prone to fall, when as
there is no outward means or occasion to move us thereunto; how much more shall
we be overtaken and foiled with our fleshly lusts, when as their objects do
present themselves, and both time, place and company inuit us to embrace them,
and offer all opportunity of inioying our sinful pleasures. Especially
considering, that by exposing our selves to those needless dangers we do
tempt the Lord, and move him to give us over to our own weakness and to the
malice of our spiritual enemies, that so by our falls and lamentable
experience of our foole-hardinesse, we may for the time to come be more wise
and wary. He therefore who would withstand the flesh tempting him to idolatry,
must avoid the means and occasions which bring unto it, as will worship,
superstition making of images for religious uses company and alliance with
idolaters; for though he were as wise as Solomon himself, yet if he avoid
not these means and occasions he will be overtaken with this sin. He that
will resist the flesh tempting him to murder, must also avoid unjust anger,
reuiling speeches, needless quarrels and desire of revenge, wherewith the
heart being enraged, will excite also the hand to the shedding of blood. He
that will resist the flesh provoking him to commit fornication, adultery or
other uncleanness, must turn away his eyes from beholding vanity, and keep
them under covenant, that they look not with wanton glaunses upon a woman;
Job. 31. 1.. Geni. 39. 10
and shut his ears against filthy communication and obscaene jests, which
wicked men as the bawdes of the devil and the flesh, do use to defile our
hearts and allure us unto sin. And this is the reason why the Apostle having
forbidden Ephesians. 5. 3. 4
fornication and uncleanness, does in the next place forbid the naming of
them, together with filthy and foolish talking, and dishonest and scurrilous
jesting, which are the means and occasions of those sins. For if David
giving himself to ease and sloth and suffering his eyes to gaze on strange
beauty, was over taken and foiled by his sinful flesh, how shall we stand and
get the victory over our fleshly lusts, if we give them the advantage of
means and opportunity? Thus he who would not hearken unto the flesh
soliciting him to theft and sacrilege, must not with Achan cast a lusting eye
upon the wedge of gold and Babilonish garment; nor look upon his neighbors
vineyard with a greedy desire to have it from the owner, though it were upon a
just price; seeing if he cannot thus prevail he is ready in the next place
which Ahab to wrest and wring it from him with wrong and cruelty. In a word if
we would resist the flesh tempting us unto any sin, let us not entertain
the means and occasions of them, when it offers them unto us. But
principally let us avoid the society and company of wicked men, which are the
devils brokers, and the fleshes bawdes to solicit us unto all evil. For
though they do not find us like unto themselves, yet if we consort with them,
they will make us such, like unto those who being tainted with the plague or
leprosy, which are ready with their contagion to infect those who being sound
do keep them company. So the wise man tells us. He that walks with wise
men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. And the Pro.
13. 20.
son of Syrach; He that touches pitch shall be defiled therewith: Eccl. 13.
1.
and he that has fellowship with a proud man shall be like unto him. And
therefore David having resolved to keep Gods law does first banish from him
evil compapany; Psalm. 119. 115.
Away (says he) from me ye wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my
God. And thus the Apostle forbidding the works of darkness, does use this
phrase, that we should have no fellowship with them; implying that if we keep
company with the workers of iniquity, we should hardly restrain our selves
from their works and actions. Now if any shall pretend, that it is a thing of
too great preciseness and stricktnes, yea of difficulty and impossibility to
avoid these means and occasions, or to bridle our appetite and carnal lusts
from seeking after them; let such know that if we cannot restrain them from
these occasions and means, which oftentimes in and for themselves are not much
desirable, much less shall they be able to restrain and curb in their
unruly lusts when as they have once gotten the advantage of these
opportunities, and when being mad and headstrong in themselves, they have these
goads and spurs in their sides to prick them forward.

Sect. 2 The 4 rule that we resist the flesh in the first beginnings of sin.
The fourth rule for the resisting of the flesh is somewhat like the former,
namely that we withstand the first beginnings of sin, and labor to quench our
fiery lusts when they are first kindled in us. As soon as sin appears to
be sin, and makes unto us the least show of evil we must presently flee
from it, according to that of the Apostle; Abstain from all appearance of
evil. For being the 1 These. 5. 2. 2.
spawne of the old wily serpent it resembles the father in subtlety,
pressing first to get in the head, and then easily gliding in with the whole
body. So Hierom. The devil (says he) is a slippery serpent, and if we do not
keep out his head, that Hieron. in Eccles. 9.
is, his first suggestions, it is not to be doubted, but that he will
stealingly slide into the most secret corners of the heart. Hence it is that
the Apostle Jude requires, that we should be so far off from giving
entertainment to this enemy our sinful Iud. 21. 23
corruption, that we should not suffer his weeds abide ni our sight; and so
far from loving the body of sin, that we should hate the garments which are
spotted with it. For if we give sin an inch, it will take angel; it knows
better how not to begin, then having begun to make end; and with more ease
may we keep it from entering into the outmost suburbs of our souls, then
having come thus far, to stay it from going on into the very heart of the
City. At the first perhaps it will seem maidenly and modest, and not come in
before it have knocked at the door of our conscience, but if we give way to it
and do not shut it out with boult and bar, it will quickly grow familiar
and rush suddenly upon us without giving us any warning. To this purpose one
says, that a man though otherwise wicked, before he has committed sin,
comes more slowly to the Chrisost. in mat 4. Hom. 6. T. 2: c, 797.
work of wickedness; but when he has done it, he is afterward more ready
for every sinful work. Herein like unto a beast which though he be
naturally sauadge, yet if he be not provoked will not easily set upon a man;
but having once killed a man or beast, and thereby gotten a taste of his blood,
he is now so fleshed, that no sooner does he see a man but without any delay he
presently flees upon him. Let us therefore take need least we taste of sin,
for though we have now no great stomach to it, yet as it fares with us in our
corporal diet, so here we shall find, that one bit will draw on another,
until at last we even surfeit of sin, and take more pains and grief in
getting it up, then ever we took pleasure in swallowing it down. It is of
the nature of sweet meats to our carnal appetite, which deluding and
bewitching us whilst they please the pallet, do make us to eat too much
before* we ever think that we have enough, and so become loathsomely bitter
in the disgestion, which were but too pleasant in the eating. From which
danger if we could be secure, our best way were not to taste them, for much
more easy is it to abstain altogether, then having eaten a little to
restrain our carnal appetite from eating more; and a much surer course were
it for our spiritual estate, to have no dealing with sin, then to break of
the bargain when as we have received the least earnest. Exhort one another
daily (says the Apostle) while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened through the deceit fullness of Heb. 3. 13.
sin. Implying that the flesh is a wily enemy, which if it be not denied in
the very first motions, will more and more grate upon us, until by often acts
it bring us to a custom of sinning, and allure us to proceed from one degree
to another, till at last we grow to a habit of wickedness, and have our
hearts so hardened and our consciences scared, that we are now fit instruments
for all impiety.

Sect. 3 The longer we defer the fight the more difficult and doubtful we
make the victory.
If then we would get the victory over sinful lusts let us prevent them with
our speed, take them unprovided, and set upon them before they are aware; for
so much the more difficult and doubtful we make the conquest, by how much we
are more slack and slow in setting upon our enemies. If we take them as we
lie scattered, and single out our fleshly lust by one and one as they appear
unto us, we shall easily overcome; but if we give them time to muster their
forces, and to march against us in huge multitudes, like a well ordered army, we
shall never be able to withstand their power. It is our best course here to use
Pharaoh his policy (not fearing in this kind the censure of tyranny and
cruelty) designing our fleshly lusts to be drowned in the waters of
repentance, as soon as they are borne, if we cannot hinder them from being
conceived; for otherwise they will increase upon us and grow too strong for the
native subjects of the spiritual kingdom. If we would imitate wise warriors
we must labor to keep these mighty enemies from setting foot in our
country, or from shooting an arrowe or bullet into our City; But if at
unawares they have approached, planted their ordinance and made a breach in our
walls, we must either countermure against them, or blowethem up when they
make their assault, or stand in the breach and fight valiantly against them;
for more easily shall we repel them and keep them from entrance, then expel
them and drive them out when as they are entered; with less pains and danger
shall we keep them out of the gates or breach of the wall, then being entered
from coming to the marketplace and making themselves masters of the whole
City. we must destroy sin in the first corruption, and choke and smother
corruption in the heart, as it were, in the womb, not suffering it to receive
birth and breath in our words and actions, that so that which bred it may also
entombe it; for if we suffer it to live it will receive growth and strength to
our perdition, seeing (as the Apostle tells Pro. 4. 23.
us) When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished, brings forth death. So that our sinful lusts are a viperous
brood, which if we let them live after they are conceived, will eat out the
belly in which they are bred. They are of the cockatrices kind, which must be
crushed in the shell, seeing if we spare them till Iam. 1. 15.
they be hatched their very sight will be fatal unto us. At least wise if
through our negligence they have had their birth and being yet let us not
suffer them to come to their growth and strength least proving too hard for us,
we be forced to give them lodging, because we want power to thrust them out
of doors. And therefore let us dash this Babilonish brood against the stones
whilst yet being in their swath-clouts they are unable to make resistance. Let
Caput serpentis obserua quod est caput serpentis prima peceau suggestio. August
in psalm. 103. T. 8. cap. 1212.
us observe well (says Austine) the serpents head, that we may give it mortal
wounds or keep it from entering and gliding into our hearts; and what is the
head of the serpent, but the first suggestion and temptation unto sin? we
must deal with the flesh, as Cyprian would have us to deal with the devil,
seeing it is his child and much resembles the wicked father. Withstand (says
he) the devils first alluring suggestions, Diaboli primis titillationibus
ob^^andum est, nec colube^ soueri debet donec in serpentem formetur Cyprian de
Ieiunio.
neither let us cherish the snake, least within a while it grow to a serpent.
The motion of sin is but too too natural, and therefore it is our best
course to stop it at the first, when as it is but slow and weak, whereas the
longer it lasts, the more it increases in strength and violence. It is an
exorbitant and unlimited evil which admiteth of no bounds, if we let it have
full liberty to enlarge it self; and (like Elias cloud,) though at first it
seem so small, that it can scarely be discerned, it will extend it self to
such a largeness, that it will hide from us all our heavenly hopes, and let us
have no warmth nor comfort by the light of Gods countenance.

Sect 4. That if we do not withstand the first assaults of the flesh we are
not so wise as worldlings in their generation.
O then that we were as wise for our souls, as we are wise in our generation
about the things of the earth. For who having fire cast into his bosom, will
not as soon as he discerns it presently cast is out? who is not ready with
all speed to quench it when as it first takes hold of his house? and what
f^lly and madness would we think it, if any should let it alone because the
fire is but new begun, supposing that it may more conveniently be quenched
when it is increased to a great flame? we cause our garments to be mended when
the rent is but small, because it will then be both best and most easily done,
whereas if we let them alone, every thing catches hold, and will by increasing
the rent spoil the vesture. If the waters have made a breach in the banks,
we think it our wisdom presently to mende and make it up, and if we spy a
le^ke in our ship we presently stop it, and do not stay till it be ready to
sink with water. And why should we then suffer our sinful lusts to burn in
our breasts, and not rather cast out this hellish wilde-fire as soon as we
perceive it has enflamed us? why should we not be as careful for our
souls, as we are for our houses, and with all speed extinguish the flames of
carnal concupiscence, as soon as they are kindled, when as we may do it with
more ease and far greater safety and security. The least spark (says one)
growth in time to a great flame; and often times the seed of the Vel exigua
scin, tilla fla^ nam ingentem acceudit et hominem saepe numero vipetae semen
perdidit. etc Nazian. in sent.
viper has destroyed a man. And therefore knowing this; let us flee and shun
the least fault, seeing though it be small, yet it will become greater if we
suffer it to go on. A small error and digression in the beginning of the way,
becomes great in the end of the journey; and whereas when we begin to err
out of the right path into some by-way, we might recover soon our error by
returning back or crossing over to the way whence we so lately digressed; if
we hold on, the longer we travel (like the lines in the circumference drawn
from the center) the further we shall be from the right end of our journey;
and so our error will not be amended without great travel and labor. O why
do we not then presently mende the rents, which sins newly committed have
made in our consciences, seeing being thus torn and tottred, new sins will
more easily catch hold and make them far worse then they were at the first?
why should not we make up the breach when it first appears, but suffer it
still to be more and more increased, until we be ouerflowed and drowned
with a stood of wickedness? and why should we not presently stop the leakes
which sin has made in the ship of our souls, but put it off to the time
of sickness and death, when as being full of all impiety we are ready to
sincke into the gulf of Hell? Excellently speaks Augustine to this purpose;
As soon (says he) as any sins have stolen upon and surprised us, let us
presently take care to cure the wounds of our August. de tempore sermon. 8. 8. T.
10. c. 785.
souls by applying the medicine of unfeigned repentance. The stitching needle
and plaster are fruitfully applied to wounds whilst they are yet warm, and
the sore is soon healed which is not suffered to fester and rancle with
negligent handling. And therefore as often as we offend, let our sins find us
judges and not patrons, accusers and not defenders. Do thou acknowledge and
God will forgive; and how shall God vouchsafe to forgive, if we will not
vouchsafe to acknowledge that we have offended him? For the good of our bodies
we are careful to observe the rules of Physic, meeting and preventing
approaching diseases before they seize upon us, because health is with more
ease and safety preserved whilst we have it, then recovered when it is lost,
or if we have neglected this, yet we are ready to withstand the beginnings of
our diseases by the use of all good means, because we know that the medicine
is prepared too late, when as the sickness has taken fast hold and is
increased to it full strength. Let us then be as wise for our souls: for what
is sin but a spiritual sickness which causes and brings everlasting
death? And therefore our best course is to prevent it, and the next quickly to
cure and remove it. It is the Gangrene of the soul which is cut off with litie
danger Malum nascen^ facilius curatur. Cicuri de offic.
when it first tainteth, and but slightly touches a member; but if it be let
alone, it will creep and spread it self over one part after another until at
last it grow desperate and incurable. It is a spiritual plague which first
insensibly infecteth the ayte, and by it the spirits, and so spreads over the
whole body till it come to the heart; and therefore here if ever the
Physicians rule is good to be observed, Cito, long, tarde, for we cannot flee
from it too speedily, nor go too far from it, and it will be much too soon
and exceeding dangerous, if we do at any time return unto it. Sin is that
evil seed which the wicked one sows in our hearts, which if it be watered
and cherished, will insensibly grow first to a blade, and then to an ear* and
so bring forth a plentiful harvest of all manner of wickedness; and therefore
our best course is to prevent the casting of it into the ground, or if it be
sowed, quickly to weed and pull it up by the roots. It is a plant of the
devils planting, which is easily plucked up when it is new set, but if we let
it grow till it be deeply rooted, we shall not stock it up Vitia corporis
non sunt sinenda coalescere; sed in exordij^ statim enecanda sunt, etc.
Hilarious. e^arrat. in Psalm. 36. p. 594.
without great difficulty, nor cut it down when it is grown to a great tree,
without many blows and much labor. To which purpose one says, that we must
not suffer these fleshly vices to grow and spring, but we must presently kill
them in their first beginnings. For these lusts prove dangerous when they are
grown to their strength, and being come to ripeness they are hardly killed.
And it is much more easy to pull them up when they first spring, to cut them
down when they are young, and to writhe them which way we will when they are
tender and flexible. Carnal corruption is best killed in the root, and
whilst yet it remains hidden in the heart, and has not brought forth fruit
in our words and actions; the which is best done when as we often, yea
continually, loppe this tree off unrighteousness, and as much as in us lies,
never suffer it to bear any fruit. For as the spirit is soonest quenched when
as we smother the flames thereof in the duties of holiness and righteousness
by restraining them from having any vent; And as this tree of Gods planting is
soon killed in the root, if we will not suffer it to bring forth fruit in
his due time and season; and contrariwise if we let it have a free passage,
increases to a great flame, and the more fruit it bears, the more lively
and strong it waxes; the many acts of holiness and righteousness increasing
and strengthening the habits of these graces in us: so fares it also with our
carnal corruption, the more vent we give these fiery lusts in our words and
actions, the more hotly they rage and burn, and the only way to extinguish
and quench them, is by stopping the vent and returning upon them their own
flame and smoke. The more fruit of wickedness these trees of unrighteousness
bear, the more they may bear, and the means to strengthen these lusts is to
fulfill them. For habits are strengthened and intended when as they are
excercised in their acts: and every actual sin adds to our habitual
corruption; leaving behind it a blot and stain in our souls whereby they are
made more apt and active to the committing of more wickedness.

Sect 5. How dangerous it is to give way to the first motions unto sin
showed by examples.
And this will manifestly appear by examples in the Scriptures; because Cain
did not repent of his profaneness and wicked envy, toward his brother he
proceeds to horrible murder. Because Solomon gave way to the excessive use
of lawful pleasures they brought him unto those that were unlawful, and not
repenting of them, he is drawn by carnal whoredom with strange women to
spiritual whoredom with strange Gods. So Jonas not mortifying his privy pride
which made him to respect his own credit more then Gods glory, is moved
thereby to flat disobedience and open rebellion, and giving way to his
impatiencie, he falls to direct chiding with God, and that after he had so
largely tasted of his mercy and goodness in his marvelous deliverance. Thus
Sampson not quenching at the first his fiery lusts, is moved by them to marry
with the enemy of God and the Church, contrary to his commandment. And holy
David giving place to sloth, is drawn first to gaze on a strange woman, then
to lust, then to commit the fact of adultery, and not seasonably repenting of
this sin, to add unto it one more heinous, the murder of his faithful
servant. Thus Herod not repenting of his incest, cutteth of John the Baptist
his head and Judas nourishing his covetousness, grows discontented with
Christ's service, because it yielded no more profit, and then betrayeth and
sells his Lord and Master for thirty pieces of silver, who could not be
valued with many worlds, And therefore let us by these men's harms learn
wisdom, and labor to mortify our corruptions and fleshly lusts in their
first and weakest degrees, seeing if out of our security we neglect this
duty, they will gather more and more strength, and (like carrion crows)
having seized upon us, will call others to join with them, until at last they
grow so strong and numerous, that we shall be utterly unable to withstand or
overcome them.

CHAP. XVIII. Of three other Rules to be observed for the subduing of the
flesh.
Sect. 1. We must think no sin so small as that we may willingly commit it, to
which end consider 1 that by the least sin Gods law is transgressed.
THE fifth Rule to be observed of those who desire to resist and subdue the
flesh is, that we do not esteem any sin so small and venial, as that we
may safely give it entertainment, and continue in it without repentance. But
contrariwise that we judge our selves even for the least sins, and flee from
them with so much the more diligence, by how much we are naturally more apt to
neglect them as slight and of no great importance. For as one says, it is not
the least thing in man's life to neglect such things as seem to Non est minimum
in vita hominum negligere minima. etc. Eusebius. emisse^. ad monach. Hom. 5. Cic.
1. de offic.
be least; and I know not concerning what faults we may be secure seting we
must be judged even for sins of ignorance and give an account of our idle words
and thoughts. And even the Heathen Orator could say, that we are with greater
diligence to avoid those vices which seem so small, that they are not known
of the most to be faults. To this end let us consider that even by the least
sins Gods law is transgressed, his justice violated, and his wrath provoked;
and we must not esteem that to be small which does offend his infinite
Majesty. To this purpose Hierome says well; I do not know how we can Hieron
de ratione pie viuendi ad Celantiam.
esteem that a light sin, which is committed in contempt of God. And he is
most wise who does not so much consider what is commanded, as who he is that
has commanded it, nor the extent and quantity of the government, as the
dignity of him that Ne consideres quod parua sint peccata, sed quod magnus sit
Deus, cui displicent.
governs. And again; Do not consider the smalnesse of thy sins, but the
greatness of thy God who is displeased with them. So Austine: There is no sin
so little which being neglected does not increase, and we must not consider
what we have done, Nullum enim peccatum adeo paruum, quod non creseat
neglectum. Non enim considerandum quid fecerit led quem offenderit. August. de
peniten. vera et falsa cap. 8. T. 4. Col. 1042. Aug. de contrit. cordis Cap. 4.
T. 9. col. 837.
but how great he is whom we have offended. Let us consider further that the
eternal Son of God suffered the bitter death of the cross, as well for the
least, as the greatest sins; and can we think any sin small which could
not otherwise be purged away, but by the precious blood of our Savior Christ?
Perhaps (says Augustine) thou esteemest some sin to be but small; but alas
does not every sin by preuarication dishonor the person of our Lord: how
dare then a sinner call any sin small: when as the Son of God gave his life
for it, above which nothing in the world can be esteemed?

Sect. 2. The great evils which come of the least sins
Secondly, let us consider the great evils which come of the least sins; For
first even our smallest sins defile our persons, and leave such blots and
stains behind them, as make us ugly and loathsome in the sight of God,
especially when as we give unto them voluntary entertainment, and willingly
live in them against knowledge and conscience. Now how ill does it become us
who are the temples of the Holy Ghost to have in us such sluttish corners, and
noisome filth as is odious and abominable to this blessed guest? How ill
beseems it us who are espoused unto Christ, to come into his presence spotted
and blemished with loathsome defilements? We will not (as near as we can)
suffer our faces to be sprinkled with the least speckes of stinking channel
dirt, nor to have our apparel bespotted with noisome excrements; and shall we
make more esteem of our apparel then of our persons, and take more care for
our corruptible faces, then for our immortal souls, to present them to our
bridegroom without spot or wrinckle, holy and unblameable, that he may
present us such to his heavenly Father? Again the least sins do wound, and
being often committed do sear the conscience, even as slight labors being
continual, do brawne and bring an hard thick skin upon the hands, many
little drops do dint the hardest stone, and many small blows cut down the
strongest Oak; and as they sear the conscience, so they harden the forehead,
make the countenance to become impudent, and take away all shame fastness
Chrysostom in Act 19. Homil. 41. T. 3. c. 716.
and blushing. According to that of Chrysostom, by often sinning the soul is
made impudent for every sin when it is committed, and is come to his
perfection, does leave behind it Cum per leui^ delicta deflectimus, vsu cuncta
leuigante, non timemus postea grauiora committere. Gregor in moral. lib. 10.
cap. 14.
a poison in the soul. And so being fleshed in wickedness, we are make more
bold to venture upon the committing of those which are more heinous: For as one
says, when we bend from the right course by lighter faults, we afterward
fear not to commit those which are greater, use and custom smoothing the way
that leads unto it. And the Heathen Satyrist could say; Who has made an end
of sinning when as they have given over their blushing? Of whom have thou Nam
quis peccandi finem posuit sibi quando recepit eiectum semel, attrita de front
ruborem quisnam hominum est quem tu contentum videtis vno flagitio? Iuuenal.
Satyr. 13. in fine.
observed of these men to rest contented with one crime? Furthermore if we
would know how much even those sins which in the world, and according to the
judgment of the flesh are esteemed small, do provoke the Lords wrath against
us, we may easily discern it by those severe and grievous punishments which
he has inflicted on offenders in this kind: Nadab and Abihu because they did
offer strange fire, in stead of that which was continually to have been
preserved in the temple, were presently devoured with fire sent from God.
Because Vzzah put out his hand to stay the Arc in the cart, which he with the
rest of Leuit. 10. 1. 2.
his Brethren should have carried upon his shoulders, was smitten with present
death. Because Achan took of the 2 Samuel 6. 6.
spoil of his enemies a Babylonish garment, a wedge of gold, and two hundred
shekels of silver, which in it self had been lawful enough, had not God
forbidden it, diverse of the people were slain with the sword of their enemies,
Ios. 7.
and he with all his, were stoned to death and burnt with fire. Because the
son of the Israelitish woman in contempt of Gods commandment gathered sticks
on the Sabbath day, he likewise by express order from God was put to death.
Because Ananias and Sapphira in the hypocrisy Act. 5.
of their hearts, kept back part of the price of their own possessions, after
it was dedicated to the common use of the Church, they both dyed for it in a
fearful manner. But above all most dreadful and terrible is the example of
our first parents, who by eating of the forbidden fruit (a sin very light and
small in the estimate of worldly men, although in truth it were not so all
circumstances being rightly considered brought death, the curse, deprivation
of Gods image, and their own happiness, all the miseries and punishments of
this life, and eternal condemnation in the world to come. So that no small
evils and mischiefs do come of those which seem to the world but small sins;
but although our sins when they are repented of become Haec peccata etsi
parua sint per dei misericordiam, fiunt magna peccatoribus negligentia. August.
de paenit. vera et falsa. cap. 8. T. 4. Col. 1042. Mat. 5. 22.
small, venial and nothing through Gods infinite mercy, yet they are made
great unto sinners through their negligence and impenitencie. What lighter
offense, and lighter esteemed, then to be unadvisedly angry with our brother,
and in our heat to call him Racha and Fool, and yet this alone as our Savior
teaches us will in danger us to judgment, and our bodies and souls to be
cast into hell? What seems to the judgment of flesh and blood more slight
and venial then to utter now and then some idle words? and yet even of these
we shall give an account at the day of Mat. 12 36.
judgment; and those that are accountants are sure to be cast into the prison
of utter darkness, if our Savior Christ Si paruum tibi videtur aut modicum
fratri dicere, fa^ue, vel geheona ignis videatu^ tibi magna etc. August. in
psalm. 129. T. 8. c. 1^07.
who has forewarned us of it, do not himself discharge us by paying our
reckoning. If then (as Augustine says well) it seem a small and little thing
unto thee to call thy brother fool; yet let the fire of hell seem great unto
thee. If thou contemnest the least sin,) ^^ be affrighted from it by the
greatness of the punishment.

Sect. 3. (...) sine willingly entertained are no less dangerous then the
greatest.
Thirdly, that we may not give way to the least sins let us consider, that
if we willingly entertain them, they will prove no less dangerous then the
greatest, because they are the continual errors of our loves which are much
more often committed then heinous offenses, and therefore what they want in
weight they have in number; now consider that of many small grains of corn is
made a great heap, that the greatest floods which ouerflowe the country come
of the little drops of rain, that the richest treasures are made by the
multiplying and gathering together many little pieces of gold and silver; and
that the tallest ship may be sunk by the weight of the smallest sands.
Excellently speaks Augustine to this purpose. Thy treasure shall be found
(says he) in the day of wrath; thou did Aug. in psalm 93. T. 8. Col. 1047
lay it up daily by little and little, but afterward thou shall find a mass;
thou did put it into thy treasury by small pieces but thou shall find an
heap. Do not look upon thy daily sins as being small: For great rivers are
filled with small drops. And Aug. in psalm. 129 Ne contemn peccata paru^: etsi
parui faci^^ dum ea ponderas, time saltem quando annumeras.
again: But thou will say, that thy sins are so small, that this life cannot
be without such. Why do but gather the least things together* and they will
make a great heap. For grains of corn are but small; and yet they make a
mass; and drops are small and yet they fill rivers and carry down the stream
things of great weight. And therefore despise not small sins, for though thou
do but lightly esteem them whilst thou do weigh them, yet at least
fear, when thou beginnest to number them, It is true that heinous sins are
more terrible, because they waste and destroy the conscience at once, and cast
men into hell with headlong fury, but little sins are no less dangerous if
they be not repented of, seeing they cause a consumption of piety and bring
men by degrees to eternal condemnation. By them the devil (as it were) with
cables and iron chains draws men to hell, by these as with cartropes, which
though they be not so strong as the other, yet are they of strength
sufficient, if they be not cut and broken off by unfeigned repentance. They (as
Augustine compares them) are like unto sauadge beasts which devour us at one
bit, or like Jonas his Whale which swallowed August. de diuersis sermon. 34. T.
10. c. 1646.
him up at once; these are like those little vermin which with their multitude
plagued Pharaoh and his people, and by little and little devoured proud Herod
and Antiochus. But what speak I of multitudes and heaps of these sins, seeing
the least of them unrepented of is sufficient to condemn us, especially when
being neglected it is often committed. And as one little chinke in a ship if it
be not stopped will in time let in water enough to sink it, as well as a great
leake, or that strange spout spoken on by travelers, which from on high
falls down into it like a great river: so will these little sins drown us
in perditition as well as the greatest, if we carelessely commit them, and
securely continue in them. A Ship (says Augustine) Hoc facit s^ntina neglecta
quod facit fluct. us irrucus, paulatim per sentinam intrat, sed diu intrando,
et non exhauriendo mergit nauem. etc. Aug. in Joan. 5. tract. 12. T. 9. c. 113.
cannot be so close build and well pitched, but that between the ribs and
joints it will let in some small quantity of water, and if the Mariners
should neglect it because it comes in by little at once, and not labor every
day to empty it out by the pumpe, it would as well endanger it as the greatest
floods and waves which ouerflow and dash into it: and so if we do not take
notice of our lesser sins which are daily committed to cast them out of our
souls by unfeigned repentance, they will make us sink into a sea of
destruction.

. Sect. 4. That auoidinge small sins is a notable means to preserve us from
greater.
Fourthly, let us consider that if we be careful to fly the least sins, it
will be a notable means to preserve us from falling into those which are
greater: For example, he that will give no place to the first motions of
covetousness, he is safe from usury and briberie, extorsion and oppression,
theft and robbery. He that keeps his tongue from speaking any thing
irreuerently of God, is hereby easily preserved from cursing and blaspheming;
and he that makes conscience of vain swearing, is in no danger of perjury
and false swearing; he that keeps his eyes under covenant, that he does not
suffer them to look wantonly on a Maid is not subject to the peril of
unlawful lusting, and much less of committing actually whoredom and
uncleanness. It is a good caution (says Hierome) in avoiding sin, to take
heed of the least, as though they were the greatest, for so Satis prodesse ad
cautionem dicimus etiam minima pro marimis cauere. etc. Hieron. ad Celantiam.
de instit. mat^issam.
much the more easily shall we abstain from any offense, by how much the more
we are affraide of committing it. Neither does a man easily proceed to the
greater, who is affraide of doing the less. Where as if we ordinarily swallow
smaller sins, it makes our throats wider to let down those that are great,
and if we once begin to go down the ladder of sin, one step will bring us
to the next, until we come to the bottom of wickedness; according to that of
the son of Syrach; He that contemns small things, shall fall Eccle. 19. 1.
by little and little.

Sect. 5. That even the least sins are the poison of the soul and the lyuerie
of satan.
Fifthly, let us call to mind that sin is that deadly poison which Satan the
great Red Dragon casts out of his mouth, and who would drink that which he
has disgorged from his venomous stomach, who would be allured to swallow
down these poisons which are so mortal because they are delightful to our
carnal appetite? Let us consider, that sin is the livery of Satan which who
so willingly wear, they do acknowledge his sovereignty and their own
servitude; the which is not only true of heinous crimes, but even of the
smallest sins, which (like a badge upon the sleeue) though they be small in
quantity, are sufficient, if we live in them without repentance, to put a
plain difference between the servants of God and the servants of Satan,
although they go in the like liuerie of an outward profession. And although
those who are most perfectly sanctified have still their imperfections and
fraileties, their slips and falls, yet to like and live in the least sins
against knowledge and conscience, and commit them freely with full consent of
will, is an evident sign that we are not come out of the Devils bondage. For as
if the bird be but catched by one foot or toe in the snare, it is as evident a
sign that she is wholly in the power of the the Fowler, as if her whole body
were covered with his net: so if the Devil that subtle Fowler have surely
taken hold of us in any part with the snares of sin, he keeps us as surely
in his cruel bondage, as those that are guilty of many crimes; and therefore
the Apostle John tells us, without any exception of few or small sins, or
limitation unto those which are many in number or heinous in quality, that he
who commits sin is of the Devil, and that whosoever is borne of God does
not commit sin (willingly yielding unto it as a slave with full consent of
will, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. 9.
and living in it with pleasure and delight) because his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God.

Sect. 6. That enemies prove most dangerous when they are most despised.
Sixthly, let us not neglect the least lusts of our sinful flesh, nor
willingly give place unto any sin, because we esteem it small, because
nothing more increases the danger of our conflict, nor makes the issue more
doubtful and hazardous, then when we despise these enemies, because of their
supposed weakness. For hereby we are brought to neglect our watch, to lay
aside our armor and weapons, and to fall into the dead slumber of carnal
security; and what enemy is so weak and contemptible, that is not able to
overcome and to cut the throat of the strongest, when he finds him in a
deep sleep, disarmed, unguarded and suspecting no danger? And therefore (as
Chrysostom exhorts us) when we have sinned a little or have Chrysostom. in 1.
John. 3. Hom. 8. T. 4. c. 387.
been benumbed with sloth in the performance of some good duties, let us not
despise these sins as being but small, because being neglected they will
speedily become great, like a garment that is a little rent, which if it be
neglected will be torn to the bottom; and the roof vntyled, which if it be
not amended, causes Nullum peccatum tam paruu^ est quod contemptum non fiat
m^gnum. August.
the whole building to rot and the house to fall, and therefore reuoluing this
in our minds, let us not countenance any sin as being small, least it be
unto us an occasion of falling into greater,

Sect 7. That if we do not hate small sins as well as great, we hate none with
christian hatred.
Finally let us consider that if we do not hate all sins, small and great,
we do not hate any with christian hatred, for they that abhor sin truly
and spiritually, do it on these grounds; first because it has the devils
stamp and superscription upon it, who is Gods and our greatest enemy, and his
image and title is on all his coin, upon his penny as well as his shilling, his
smallest sins as well as on those which are of a larger size. And therefore
with the^ that hate sin as sin, and the devils press money which he gives
to his servants and soldiers, his least comes are no more current then the
greatest but all are cried down and rejected as base and of no value, both for
the metal and also the masters sake. Secondly, they who pursue sin with a
Christian hatred do therefore hate it, because they love and fear God, and
would not do any thing which might displease him, therefore they abhor and
detest it because it is so odious and abominable in his sight, and so opposite
to his law and contrary to his nature. Now they who truly hate any sin upon
these grounds, they will hate every sin, and in all degrees according to this
measure and portion, as it is more or less odious in the sight of God; and
though they do not equally hate all, because there is an inequality amongst
them, yet are they not in love with any, nor can find in their hearts to give
the least sins willing entertainment. And therefore those who abstain from
heinous crimes, and make no conscience of living in such sins as they esteem
but small, they do it not out of their love and filial fear of God, which
would make sins of all sorts odious unto them, but either for fear of
worldly shame or punishment, or out of a servile fear of Gods judgments, hell
and condemnation, or that they may more quietly sleep in their carnal security
without any trouble of mind or torment of conscience, which they could not
quietly do, if they were awakened and terrified with the guilt of heinous
sins and outrageous crimes.

Sect 8. The sixth rule is that we must neglect no sin, as though we were in n^
danger of falling into it.
The sixth rule to be observed for the resisting and subduing of the flesh, is
that as we are not securely to neglect any sins, though we seem never so
far off from falling into them, because we have in us the seeds of all
sin, and need nothing to the committing of them, but that God should give us
over to our own strength and to be tried with Satan's temptations, in which
regard we are to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and when
we think we stand to take beede of falling: so that we bend our chief study
for the mortifying of those fleshly lusts which are strongest in us and
endeavor most earnestly to withstand and overcome those enemies which have
most prevailed against us, that we keep the narrowest watch, and place the
strongest guard upon that part of the City of our souls, where the wall has
been most battred, and the enemy has given the strongest assaults. For when
they have prevailed, there they are most likely to attempt again, and when
these unruly beasts have broken down the hedge and made a gap, there they
will again seek to enter and come over even after the passage is stopped, and
those sins which have formerly overcome us, will be ready in confidence of
their victory to make new assaults, and are likely again to give us the foil,
unless we keep a more diligent watch, stand stoutly upon our guard, and be
well armed and furnished with spiritual weapons and munition. Even nature
teaches us to be more wise and provident in avoiding those evils which in our
own feeling and experience have been most harmefull, and (as we say) the
burnt child will ever after dread the fire. He that has been bitten with
suert ship and has had his goods attached and his person arrested, and laid
up in prison, will if he have any wit afterward take heed how he strikes
the hand and becomes surety for a stranger. He that has been notably
cousened to his great loss and hindrance, will keep a vigilant eye, upon the
cousener from the time to come, that he be not again deceived especially by
the same wiles; and he that has gotten fore falls by going in slippery
places, will afterward look better to his footing, when he is to come back
in the same way. And therefore let grace teach us the same vigilance and wise
providence in spiritual things, and cause us to double our care in
withstanding those sins wherewith we have been most often surprised, and
bend our whole strength and endeavor for the subduing and mortifying those
carnal corruptions and fleshly lusts which are most strong and raging in us.

Sect. 9 The 7 rule is that we set no stint to our mortification.
The last rule is that we set unto our selves no stint in mortifying and
subduing our fleshly lusts, but that we labor from one degree to attain unto
another, until we attain unto perfection. We must not deal with these
spiritual enemies as Ioash with the Aramites contenting our selves with two or
three victories over them, for then they will again gather head and renewing
their forces afresh assault us, but we must continually make war against
them, until we have given them a final overthrow. We must not deal with
them, as the Israelites with the cursed nations, suffering them quietly to dwell
with us, on condition that they will contribute something to our pleasure or
profit, but we must make war against them according to Gods Commandment,
and never make any peace or truce, until we have utterly rooted them out; or
at the best let us deal with them as Ioshuah with the Gibeonits, if they must
needs dwell with us, let us hold them under as our slaves, and make them to
become droyles and drudges ready to yield obedience to every spiritual
motion. Let us not deal with our carnal lusts as Ahab and Saul with Benhadad
and Agag, get the victory over them and suffer them to live least in Gods just
judgment our life be exchanged for theirs, and they kill us, because we killed
not them. Neither let us with Saul destroy the lowest of the people, and the
vilest of these carnal cattle, reserving alive the chief of our corruptions,
and the fattest of our fleshly lusts, whereby we have most gain and
advantage, most pleasure and delight; Let us not be like unto Herod, who
refrained from many sins, but would not leave his incestuous darling, or like
unto Judas and Demas who having outwardly reformed themselves of many sins,
did still nourish their covetousness and love of the world. For if when we
cast out Satan and the flesh, we suffer any of their spawne or sinful
corruptions to remain in us, they will be pledges and pawnes unto us of their
returning, and when they come back and bring many other wicked spirits Mat 12.
44. 45.
and sinful corruptions with them, these retained and nourished sinful
lusts, will like secret traitors open the door of our hearts, and let them
in, and then taking more strong possession of us, our latter end will be worse
then our beginning.

Sect 10. Our mortification must extend it self to all sinful corruptions and
to all times.
But our mortification must be without stint or restraint, extending it self
in respect of the object unto all our lusts and not unto some only; in
respect of the time also it must be continual even to the very end of our
lives, because (as with Sampson) our enemies will live with us even unto our
death, and then with it we shall destroy more of them then we have done in the
whole course of our lives; yea in truth then, and not before, we shall
destroy them all, so as for ever after they shall never be able to assault us
or disturb our peace: and therefore in the mean time we must never think
that we have long enough fought against our fleshly lusts, and that now we
may make a truce and take our ease, but we must continue fighting till we have
by death gotten a full and final victory, and then ouercomming and continuing
faithful unto death we shall receive the crown of life. Finally in respect
of the degree we must not content our selves to have overcome and Apoc. 2. 10.
mortified all our sinful lusts in some small measure, but we must labor and
strive after perfection, driving our enemies not only out of the heart of our
City, but out of our suburbs also, and the utmost borders and confines of our
country. We must not suffer it to have any footing either in the secret
corners of our hearts by entertaining fleshly lusts, or in our tongues, by
vttring vain, profane and filthy speeches or in our hands by acting wicked,
unjust and dishonest works* but (as the Apostle exhorts us,) we must cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the 2 Cor. 7. 1
flesh and spirit and perfectour holiness in the fear of God; and if we would
approve our selves to be Gods children, we must Mat. 5. 48.
strive after perfection, as our heavenly father is perfect, and because we
cannot effect this great work of our selves, we must desire with the Apostle,
that the God of peace will sanctify us throughout and that our whole spirit,
and soul, and body, 1 These. 5. 23.
may be preserved blameles unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea we
are to desire our Savior himself who has given himself for us; That he will
sanctify and cleanse us with the washing of water by the word, that he may
present us unto himself a glorious people, not having spot or wrinkle or any
Ephesians. 5. 25.
such thing, but that we may be holy and without blemish. In the mean time
we must with Gods work join our own earnest desires and hearty endeauours to
abound more and more, and to increase in the measure of our mortification,
getting daily new victories over all our sinful lusts. For he that thinks in
this kind that he has done enough, has as yet one nothing at all as he ought
to do, he that is come to his stint, and means there to take up his
standing, is ready to turn back and to relapse into all his former
wickedness; and he that continues not still fighting, is near unto foyling,
and being overcome, to be made a slave to his sinful lusts. True grace is
growing grace, and that which grows not is false and counterfeit; and they
who ever made any progress in the ways of godliness with upright hearts and
good consciences, they will never cease traveling till they come to their
iourneyes end; neither is it possible that we should in this way stand at a
stay, but if we go not forward we shall go backward, if we do not row
continually against the tide of our corruptions, they will carry us down the
stream into the dead sea and gulf of perdition.

CHAP. XIX. Of the first means to strengthen the spirit which is to avoid the
means whereby it is weakened.
Sect. 1. That our sins are the chief (...) whereby the spirit is weakened.
WE have showed how necessary it is if we would get the victory against our
spiritual enemies and fleshly lusts, that we should first use our best
endeavor to weaken them, and then set upon them with all our forces: But this
is not enough, but as we are to weaken and disarme our enemy the flesh; so on
the other side we must with like earnestness and diligence, strengthen and
arm the spirit, it being no less necessary for the obtaining of victory, to
nourish our friends, thtn to famish our enemies; and to furnish them with all
provision, armor and munition, then to withdraw and keep back from the
other all these warlike helps. Although in truth in this spiritual war,
both these concur and meet in the same actions, for the famishing of the
flesh, is the nourishing of the spirit, the weakening of the one is the
strengthening of the other, and whilst we disarme and disfurnish our
spiritual enemies of their provision and munition, we furnish our regenerate
part with all necessaries. So Basil says: Look how much thou detractest from
the flesh, and so much thou make thy spiritual part to prosper and flourish
in good health and liking. Quantum carni detrabes tantum facies animam
spiritali bona habitudine relucere. Basil. de ieiunio. Conc. 2.
And therefore I shall be the more brief in this argument, howsoever I think
it fit that something should be added. And first we will consider this point
negatiuely, showing that all means are to be shunned whereby the spirit is
weakened and quenched, and then affirmatively, showing that we are to use all
the means whereby it may be cheared and strengthened. Concerning the former.
The chief means whereby the spirit is weakened and quenched are our sins,
which do vex and grieve the good spirit of God dwelling in us, and make him
weary of his lodging and habitation. For no stinking filth can be so noisome
unto us as sin is unto this holy guest, and therefore he cannot endure to
continue in our bodies and souls as his temples, if they be profaned and
defiled with it. But above other sins we weaken the spirit with sins committed
against knowledge and conscience, wilfully, and presumptuously; for such sins
do most oppositely cross and thwart the good motions of it, and do as
plainly contradict it, as if they should say in plain terms though we take
notice of thy will, we will not do it but the clean contrary. With which
kind of obstinate rebellion the spiritis so wearied and tired, that it will no
longer contend with us to bring us unto goodness, but will leave us to our
own vile lusts, and a reprobate mind to go on in sin with greediness to
our perdition. So the Lord professes that when the old world resisted the
motions of his spirit in the preaching of just Noah, it should no longer Genesis
6. 3.
contend with them, but seeing this pure water of his spirit, would not quench
their fiery lusts, he would quench them by other means, even the universal
flood which drowned the whole earth. Thus he complains, that he was pressed
under Amos. 2. 13.
their sins as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues, and therefore
threatens that he will press them down with his heavy judgments. And thus
because the Gentiles sinned against the common gift and illumination of the
spirit, and so against knowledge and conscience, therefore the Lord gave them
up to their own vile affections and to a reprobate Romans 1.
mind, to commit with greediness all manner of abominable wickedness. And
therefore if we would not have the spirit to be so weakened and wearied, that
it will leave, and forsake us; we must not (as the Apostle exhorts us) 1
These. 5. 19.
quench it, and the good motions thereof by continuing in those sins from
which it disswadeth us; nor by making his lodging loathsome with the noisome
filth of sin, grieve the good spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto the
Ephesians. 4. 30.
day of redemption. To which end let us consider, that if we give good
entertainment to this holy guest, he will sup with us and with his company make
all our cheer comfortable, yea rather he will feast us, and make us a most
pleasant banquet of all spiritual delicacies; he will bear part with us in
all our griefs; and as the Prophet speaks, he will by sympathy and
compassion be afflicted in our afflictions. Yea he will comfort us in all our
sorrows, and therefore let us Esa. 63. 9.
take heed of vexing him; for if grieuing our comforter we make him to leave
us, who shall cheer and refresh us in all our miseries?

Sect. 2 Of some special sins whereby the spirit i^ most weakened.
But howsoever all sins generally wound and weaken the spirit, yet there are
some special sins above the rest which do infeeble it, and quench all the
good motions of it; the first whereof is ignorance and blindness of mind, the
which pulls (as it were) out of the hand of the spirit his chief weapon the
two edged sword of Gods Word whereby it defends it self, and offends his
spiritual enemies, and like a black foggie mist dazeleth and blinds the
eyes of the understanding, so as it cannot discern the sleights and
subtilties, the wiles and strong delusions of our spiritual enemies, nor on
which side they strike us, nor how to ward off their blows, nor withstand the
malice and fury of their tentations. The second is infidelity which disableth
the Spirit, whilst it depriueth it of the chief comforts and encouragements
whereby it is strengthened against the assaults of the flesh, namely Gods sweet
promises of grace in this life and glory in the life to come, to all those who
walk in the spirit, and mortify the flesh with the lusts thereof. Yea it
weakeneth and looseneth the spiritual bond of our union with Christ, which is
our faith, by which alone he is applied, and so stops and hinders the
influences of his graces, and the virtue and vigor, the juice and sap which
from this root of Iesse is derived unto us, by which alone we are strengthened
against the flesh and enabled to withstand all the assaults of our spiritual
enemies. The third is impenitencie the which is most pernicious to the health
and vigor of the spirit, for besides that it hinders all the operations of
our faith, the application of Christ and all the promises made in him, our
communion and sweet fellowship with God, hiding from our sight his fatherly
countenance and the bright beams of his favorable countenance, in the
apprehension whereof the life of our life consists, and depriueth us of the
peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost, by which we are in the
spiritual man made strong and courageous in the day of tentation; after that
we have received wounds of the flesh in the spiritual fight, it hinders
their cure, and causes them to fester and ranckle, and to grow every day more
dangerous and incurable then other. And after we have been allured to drink
the sweet poisons of the fleshes bewitching cup, this impanitencie does cause
us to retain them in the stomach, until working they do make us sick unto
death, where as they would not be hurtful and pernicious, if as soon as they
were swallowed, they were cast up again by unfeigned repentance. The fourth
sin that weakeneth the spirit is carnal security and hardness of heart, whereby
we bless our selves when our estate is dangerous, and have no sense and
feeling, neither of Gods mercy and love, nor of his anger and displeasure, by
the one whereof the spirit is strengthened unto Gods service, and by the other
preserved from sinning against him. So also the strength of the spirit is by
this carnal security much impaired, because it makes us to put the evil day
far from us, and utterly to neglect our spiritual enemies as though we had a
secure peace and all cause of danger were far removed; it causes us to
neglect our Christian watch, and so to lie open to the malicious and secret
assaults of our spiritual enemies, and to neglect the means of our safety and
defense, our spiritual food and provision, our weapons and munition, our
fortifications and all other prepararations which should be any means of
defense in the day of battle; whereby the spiritual part is betrayed and
suddenly surprised before it expects any danger. The last special sin whereby
the spirit is weakened and all the good motions thereof quenched, is the love
of the world, which like birdlime so besmeareth the spiritual part and the
wings of the soul, that it cannot flee aloft, but is entangled and catched,
fixed and fastened to the earth and worldly vanities. More especially the love
of honors and the glory of the world, does make the spiritual man slack and
sluggish in the pursuit of eternal glory and heavenly happiness. The love of
riches hinders him from seeking with all earnestness, spiritual graces, and
those incomparable treasures which are laid up for us in Gods Kingdom; it
choaketh the seed of the Word, so as it cannot take root and bear fruit, and
frustrateth all the good motions of the spirit, so as they cannot take effect,
it exposes us to many tentations and snares, and causes us to fall into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. And
so also the love of earthly pleasures does much enfeeble 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10
the spiritual part in the pursuit of those eternal pleasures, and fullness
of joy which are at Gods right hand for evermore; and as they weaken the body
and effeminate the mind, so as they are made unfit, even for any warlike
employments in the world, so much more do they disable the soul and spirit
for this warfare against the enemies of our salvation. For when the flesh is
pampered with these carnal delights, the soul is starued and pined: when it
is distended and grown fat and gross with gluttony and belly-cheare, the
spirit is made lean and infeebled; when it reuelleth in fleshly joy, the
regenerate part droopeth and mourns, being spoiled and robbed of the joys
of the holy Ghost. When it is filled and even glutted with excess, the spirit
is straitened of room and has no place where it may reside: and therefore the
Apostle requires first emptiness of wine, and then that we should be filled
Ephesians. 5. 18.
with the spirit, to note unto us that fullness of both will not stand together.

Sect. 2. We must not provide for the spirit poison instead of wholesome food
nor carnal weapons instead of spiritual.
A second means of weakening and disabling the spirit, which is to be avoided,
respects our provision which we are to make for the army of Gods graces, as
first that we do not provide for their nourishment poison in stead of
wholesome food: as for example in stead of the pure word of God, the spiritual
Manna, the sincere milk of the Gospel and Sacraments instituted by our
Savior Christ; humane traditions and inventions, will worship and our own
superstitious devotions, which have no ground or warrant out of the scriptures,
nor scarce any resemblance of that holy and wholesome food which is by God
appointed for our nourishment. Of which meat the more liberally we feed, the
more lean and lanke we wax in our spiritual strength and stature, the more
feeble and faint we grow in all saving graces: because howsoever it be sweet
to our natural and carnal appetite, yet it is of a quite contrary quality
to the spirit and the graces and gifts thereof, and it is no better then the
Devils most artificial poisons, which cause them that taste and feed of them
to waste and wear away in a continual consumption of all piety and true
godliness: Secondly, we must beware that we do not provide for this spiritual
Warfare carnal weapons and munition: For as the Apostle says, the weapons of
our warfare 2 Cor. 10. 4.
are not carnal, but suitable unto the Spirit it self, and mighty through God
to the pulling down of strong holds. As for example we must not fight against
the flesh with fleshly anger and carnal revenge; for here especially the
saying Iam. 1. 20.
of the Apostle is verified; The wrath of man works not the righteousness of
God; we must not fight against and endeavor to subdue it with spiritual
watchings as resting in the deed done, and not destinating it to a superior
end, namely in the employing of our time in prayer with it; Watch and pray; and
the watching over our hearts, that we do not sin, rather then over our eyes
that we do not sleep. We must not seek to subdue it by popish fasting which
is nothing else (but like all other their devotions) a bodily exercise,
consisting in their superstitious abstinence from certain meats, contrary to
the Word of God, which calls it a doctrine of Devils, and teaches us that
all the creatures 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3. 1
of God are clean if they be sanctified by the Word and Prayer; and allowing
the use of all the daintiest fish, and delicatest wines and fruits which pamper
the flesh more then the moderate use of ordinary diet. But as occasion
serves, we must use total abstinence, when we would tame the flesh and humble
our selves before God, yet not like them resting in the deed done, much less
esteeming it satisfactorie and meritorious, but only using it as an exercise
of mortification, and as an help for the increasing of our repentance, and for
our better fitting and inabling to call upon God more earnestly by fervent
prayers, whereof it is that these are usually joined together in the Scriptures,
Fast and pray the one being the end, the other the means in abling us
thereunto. Much less must we use those carnal weapons of whippes, to torment
our body, which only offend in yielding themselves as instruments to our
sinful souls; or of popish pennances and pilgrimages which are the mere
inventions of men* and have no warrant out of the Word of God, and being
carnal weapons, do as ill fit the spirit as the armor of Saul did fit David,
and therefore do but cumber and hinder it in the spiritual warfare: Yea (like
Achilles lance) do cure the flesh in stead of killing it, and make it more
strong and full of courage, by filling it with spiritual pride, and a glorious
opinion of our own merits and well deserving.

. Sect 4. We must not remitt any thing of our first zeal in holy duties.
The third means of weakening the spirit which we are to avoid is to remit
any thing of our former zeal in the duties of Gods service, and to give way
unto any declination in grace and Christian duties. For we may much more
firmly stand in the highest pitch of our sincerity (as it were) on the top of
the mountain, then in our declinations and descent, from that measure of
perfection unto which we had attained (as it were) on the side of the hill;
we may, more easily preserve the health and strength of the spirit, whilst it
is in the best plight, then recover it when it is impeached and in some degrees
of declination. We may live much more comfortably and plentifully when our
stock is whole and daily increasing, then when it decays, and is in some
part spent and wasted, we may better defend our selves against our spiritual
enemies when as we are in our complete armor, then when we have put off some
pieces of it. And we shall much more easily discourage them and weaken their
sury by taking away all hope of victory. when we have remitted nothing of our
Christian valor and fortitude, but stand courageously upon hostile terms,
and at open defiance with them, and when we keep them out from entering into
our borders, then when we grow to ^ parley, and yield a little to their
conditions; or when we have suffered them to i^ ^ade some part of our country,
and have received some foyles in the spiritual conflict. Again the more
resolutely we stand in the strength of grace received, the more willing the
Lord is to assist us in fighting his battles; the more careful we are to
increase his spiritual talents, the more ready he is to re-double them,
whereas it is just with our great commander to leave us to our selves, and to
deliver us into the hands of our enemies, when we begin cowardly to leave his
standard, and somewhat to incline to the enemies part by our remissness in
fighting or faintness in yielding; it is a righteous thing with our Lord and
Master, when we waste his rich talents and spend ryotously some part of the
stock, to take that which remains from us, and give it to another, who will be
more careful and faithful in employing of it. Finally, that we may not
decline, no not in the least degrees, let us consider that it is most
dangerous; for who can be assured, if he begin once to slip that he can
preserve himself from catching a fall, or that having begun to run down the
hill, he can stay himself before he come to the bottom? And therefore if we
would stand surely, let us stand in our sincerity; if we would not weaken the
spirit, nor have the gifts thereof to perish in us, let us preserve them, even
in their least degrees, from vvasting and consuming.

Sect. 5. That we must avoid fleshly sloth and negligence.
The last means of weakening the spirit which we are to take heed of, is
fleshly sloth and negligence, when as having received Gods graces and gifts of
the Spirit, we do not employ and exercise them in holy and Christian duties
to the glory of him that gave them, and the edification of our neighbors, for
whose sake also we have received them. For as the strength of the body is much
weakened and impaired, when as we live in sloth and idleness, and never
employ it in any good exercise; so is it also with our spiritual strength. Our
knowledge must be then exercised in the holy practice of that we know, our
faith in good works, our love toward God and our neighbors, in performing
all duties which we owe unto them; our zeal in advancing all means of Gods
glory, and in removing all impediments whereby it is hindered and impeached. And
if we thus employ Gods spiritual graces, which are his talents committed unto
us, then will our Lord and Master increase and multiply them, and we shall have
abundance; but if with the slothful and unprofitable servant, we hide them in
a napkin, never employing our graces received to the glory of our Master, nor
the good of our fellows in the same family, he will take these talents from us,
and cast us into outer darkness. Finally though it were possible, that we could
abound in the graces of the spirit, yet if we did not use them for our own
defense, and discomforting and indamaging of our enemies, we should be never
the nearer the obtaining victory. If we have the sword of the spirit and never
smite with it* nor draw it out, but suffer it to rust in the scabbard, if we
have all the several parts of the Christian Armor, and never put it on, and
girt it to us, but suffer it (as it were) to hang rusting upon the walls
without use; if we have powder and good pieces of Ordnance, but never charge
nor discharge them against the enemy; we shall never overcome and put them to
flight, but notwithstanding our furniture and munition we shall be vanquished in
the first assault, and become an easy prey unto them; but if having these
warlike preparations, we do employ them in the spiritual Warfare with all
care and diligence, we shall be sure to obtain the victory.

CHAP. XX. Of the means for the comforting, choaring and strengthening of the
spirit unto the Conflict.
Sect. 1. Earnest and longing desires after spiritual strength.
THE second thing required is, that we use all means for the comforting and
cheering, the strengthening and inabling of the spirit unto this spiritual
Conflict. And first we must earnestly desire to have the spirit more
strengthened, and the gifts and graces thereof enlarged and and multiplied in
us; For as we have Gods promise, that if wanting the spitit, we do desire and
pray for it, he will give him unto us, so also when having it, we desire to
have it, and Luke 11. 13.
the graces thereof increased in us, the Lord will satisfy our psalm. 145. 19.
desires, and bring this work of grace begun to accomplishment Phil. 1. 6.
and perfection. For therefore does the Lord enlarge our hearts with these
longing desires, that he may satisfy them, therefore does he make us to
hunger after grace, and to find and feel our own emptiness, that he may
fill and replenish us with them. We must not therefore rest contented and
satisfied with that measure of grace which we have received, or that portion
of the spirit wherewith we are already endued, but we must hunger after more
perfection, and grow from grace to grace, from strength to strength, and from
one degree of spiritual stature unto another, until we come unto a perfect
age in Christ. And this is an inseparable and infallible sign and property of
the faithful and regenerate, who are said to be Psalm. 92. 14.
trees of righteousness of Gods own planting, which bring forth more plenty of
fruit in their old age, and are not doted Pro. 4. 18.
and rotten with years, but when they are at the eldest, they are most fat and
flourishing. They are like unto the morning Ephesians. 2. 20.
light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day. They are Gods
building, which is still in framing and setting up until it be fully
finished. They are Gods children who grow from strength to strength, until
they come to perfect stature, neither have they any time of old age, but are
in a continual spring of youth. They are branches ingrafted into the true Vine
Jesus Christ, which bearing fruit in him, ^e purges and pruneth them, that
they may bring forth more fruit. That therefore we may approve our selves to
be in this number* let us not content our selves that we have received some
measure of the spirit, but (as the Apostle exhorts us) let us desire to grow
in grace, and in the knowledge Ephesians. 4. 12. 13. Ioh. 15. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 19.
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: For they who have once tasted of these spiritual
excellencies, are not satisfied with a small pittance, but rather thereby
their desire is enlarged, their appetite sharpened, and their hunger increased
after a more full and perfect allowance.

Sect. 2 The 2 means a careful endeavor in the use of all good mea^es for
the strengthening of it.
Now as we are thus to desire more and more an access of all spiritual grace
unto perfection; so in the second place, we are to endeavor in the use of all
good means appointed by God for the strengthening and increasing of Gal. 3. 2.
them. And first we must be careful and diligent in hearing* reading and
meditating in the word of God, which is the ministry of grace and salvation,
and not only the seed whereby we are regenerate and made newborn babes in
Christ, but also the food whereby we are nourished 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2.
and increased in grace and spiritual strength, until we come unto a full age
in Christ. Milk for our tender infancy, and more strong and perfect
nourishment for our riper age. Now because there may come a dear year, when
as this spiritual food will be very scarce, so as we may wander Amos. 8. 12.
from sea to sea, and run to and fro, from the North even unto the East, to
seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it as he threatens by the
Prophet; therefore we must with Joseph foreseeing this danger in our years of
plenty lay up store against the time of scarcity and penury, that our spirit
do not loose it strength, nor our souls be famished with this spiritual
famine; and not like the foolish Egyptians for want of providence be driven to
seek our food with much inconueniency, when as we should feed upon it. Yea
we are not only to lay up sufficient store for our own provision, but as
Joseph did, for the relief and comfort of all that sue and seek unto us, that
their souls may bless us when as they find themselves refreshed and
comforted with this spiritual nourishment. And this means of comforting and
strengthening the spirit, Cyrill commends unto us. If (says he) coming
often unto the Church thou give ear to the holy Scriptures, and conceiuest
Cyril. in Leuit. lib. 9. Col. 129.
the meaning of these divine precepts; then as the flesh is pampred with
excess of meats and dainty dishes, so the spirit will grow strong, by
feeding on this heavenly Manna, and becoming more powerful then our sensual
desires and carnal lusts, it will bring the flesh into subjection, and make
it to submit it self to be ruled by its laws. Whereas contrariwise if we
withdraw this food from the spirit it will grow so faint and languish in
strength that it will not be able to stand against the assaults of the flesh
in the day of battle. And unto the ministry of the word we must adioyne the
frequent use of the Lords Supper, which is a spiritual feast, purposely
ordained by our Savior Christ, for the confirming and strengthening of our
communion with him by his spirit; and for the filling and replenishing of all
those with his sanctifying and saving graces who come with a good stomach and
an hungring appetite to this holy table; for the strengthening of those that
are weak and faint, the restoring of them who are entered into a spiritual
consumption, and for the confirming of such in their vigor and strength, who
already enjoy desired health. Finally we must use the help of holy
conferences, instructing, exhorting, admonishing, counselling and comforting
one another, Iud. 20.
that we may be further edified in our holy faith; for as sticks scattered
asunder will hardly keep fire, but if they be laid together will quickly
grow to a great flame; so if we single our selves from one another, and admit
no communion by religious conferences, we shall quickly cool and quench the
fire of the spirit: but if we meet together and exercise our selves in holy
conferences, we shall hereby stir up Gods graces in us, we shall like unto
knives whetted one upon another, sharpen our gifts, and set an edge on our
desires to the performance of all good duty; we shall pile up our graces one
on another, and with these bellows of conference, blow upon them until they
grow to a great flame.

Sect. 3. The 3 means is to nourish the good motions of the spirit.
The third means of cherishing and strengthening the spirit is to nourish the
good motions thereof, neither utterly quenching them, nor delaying to put them
in practice, but presently harkning unto them and laboring after the first and
best opportunity of performing those duties which it requires. For it is a
great comfort and encouragement to this spiritual Viceroy, whom God has set
up in his stead to reign and rule in us, when as we yield obedience unto
him, and suffer our selves willingly to be governed by his direction. It much
cheareth and delights this heavenly counselor, when as we hearken to his
counsels and be advised by him in all our courses: whereas there can be no
comfort to any Prince in his government, when as his subjects upon every
occasion stand out in open rebellion, and continually resist him in all his
lawful Commandments, and who would not refuse it, as an irksome office to be
still aduising a man of such a refractory spirit, as will either never follow
his counsel, or make it unseasonable and unprofitable by unnecessary delays?
If therefore we would comfort and cherish the spirit, let us willingly
entertain the good motions which it puts into our minds, and speedily put
them in practice and execution. As for example, when as fit opportunity being
offered, it moves us to call upon God by prayer, either to beg the graces
which we want, or to give him thanks for benefits received, we are not to
tread this motion under foot by utter neglect, nor yet to cool or quench it
by casting upon it the cold water of delays, but we must presently nourish
the motion and not defer to put it in execution, when it moves us to attend
unto the hearing of the word, either on the Lords day when as we are bound to
meet in the holy assemblies, or on the week day, when as our necessary
employments in the works of our callings will give us reasonable opportunity,
we are to take hold of the occasion offered, and not defer it by causeless
delays. And when God presents us with an object of misery, and his spirit
moves us to take the present occasion of doing a work of mercy, as by giving
an alms to the needy, visiting the sick and such as are in prison* helping
the impotent and comforting the comfor^les and afflicted, we must not neglect
these works of charity, nor put them off to another time, but as willingly
and chearefully apprehend the present opportunity, as the husbandman does the
season of sowing, the Merchant of trading, and the Mariner of hoysing up
sails, when as he has gotten a good gale of wind; seeing otherwise God may
justly punish our negligence by never granting us again such seasonable
occasions.

. Sect 4. The fourth means is serious care to maintain our peace with God and
the peace of conscience.
The fourth means of cherishing and strengthening of the spirit is to be
careful of maintaining our peace with God, and our assurance of his love and
favor; the which is best done by preserving peace in our own consciences, and
by keeping them clear of known and voluntary sins, whereby the anger of our
heavenly Father is provoked against us, and we exposed to his heavy judgments.
For if God be offended how shall his spirit be well pleased with us, how
shall he be willing to renew our strength, and to send unto us fresh supplies
of his graces, to aid and assist us against our spiritual enemies? or how
shall the created spirit dwelling in us with courage and comfort fight against
the devil, the world and the flesh, when as it is deprived of the light of
Gods countenance, and has its peace interrupted with him; yea when it
apprehends his wrathful displeasure, and (as it was with Job and David)
conceiueth that God has not only forsaken him, but is also become his enemy?
how shall the streams of Gods graces continue running, when as they are
stopped and cut off from the spring and fountain? or how should our strength
hold out, when the God of our strength does withdraw himself from us? If
therefore we would have the spirit in us strong and uigorous, let us preserve,
as much as in us lies, our intercourse with God, and use all good means to
strengthen our faith in the assurance of his love, and our reconciliation and
peace with him; for if God be with it, the spirit will be so courageous and
magnanimous, that it will not care who opposes against it. Yea our care must
be not only to strengthen our faith in this assurance, that God who has
chosen us will never leave us, and that having begun the good work of
regeneration, he will never give it over, till he has fully finished it,
because he is unchangeable in his love, and his gifts and calling are without
repentance; but if we would have the spirit strong and vigorous, we most not
neglect the feelings of faith, nor the sensible comforts of Gods love, warming
and comforting our hearts, but we must labor to find the virtue and efficacy
of his grace working in us, and have the experimental apprehension of the
comforts of his spirit. We must endeavor to have not only Gods graces
habitually, but to feel their several actions and operations working our
hearts to all good duties. For though the sunshine of Gods favor, once shining
upon us, can never utterly fail, yet the beams thereof may by the
interposition of our sins be ecclypsed from us for a time; though the
fountain of his grace toward us can never be dried up, yet the streams
thereof may be so stopped that we can by present apprehension feel little
comfort by it. And though our faith which is the life of our spirit, cannot be
lost of those who ever had it, yet when the life of our life, the comfortable
seelings of faith, our communion with God, peace of conscience and joy in the
holy Ghost, are taken away, or for a time suspended and hid from us, we are
exceedingly weakened in the spiritual part, and have little comfort or courage
in maintaining the fight against our spiritual enemies. Now these feelings of
faith and comforts of the spirit are best obtained and kept, when as we
preserve our Communion, fellowship and familiar acquaintance with God in the
conscionable and frequent use of his holy ordinances, the hearing of his word*
Prayer, the use of the Sacraments, keeping company with him in his holy
assemblies, where he is present by his spirit; when as with the spouse in the
Canticles we rejoice in his company and with David be ravished with joy and
delight when as we meet him in his holy Temple; and when as with them Psalm.
84. 1. psalm. 42. 1. 2.
we mourn and grieve for his absence, and when he with draws himself do
seek his face and favor, and above all things desire and long after his
comfortable presence. When as we labor daily in the mortification of our
sins, which do make a separation between our God and us, and do exercise our
selves in all holy duties of his service, thereby glorifying his holy name, and
edifying our neighbors by our good example. Which if we do, then shall the
beams of Gods favor, and the streams of his graces, have a clear passage
unto us, with which our spiritual part shall be so cheared, cherished and
increased in strength, that we shall easily withstand all the malice and fury
of our spiritual enemies, and obtain an happy victory in our Christian
warfare.

Sect 5. The 5 means is to preserve our selves pure and clean from all
pellution.
The fifth means to nourish and cherish the spirit in us, is to preserve our
bodies and souls, which are his temples, in their cleanness and purity from
all pollution of sin and wickedness; for as a good air and sweet
habitation does much refresh and strengthen our natural and vital spirits,
and preserve our bodies in health; so no less does it comfort our comforter,
and cheer and cherish the spirit of God in us, if we provide for him a
wholesome and pleasant lodging, cleansed and purged from all noisome filth of
sinful impuritie, and sweetened and adorned with the incense and odours of our
prayers* and the flowers and fruits of our good works and holy obedience.

Sect. 6 The 6 means is to keep the spirit and the graces thereof in
continual exercise.
The sixth means to preserve and strenthen the spirit, and to increase in us
the graces and gifts thereof, is to keep them in continual exercise; and to
cause these habits to show themselves in their functions and operations. For no
more necessary is breathing and moving for the preserving the life of our
bodies, then fruitful working and holy walking in all Christian duties, is for
the preserving and cherishing the life of the spirit; according to that of the
Apostle; If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the Gal. 5. 25.
spirit. And as in natural things, the causes are preserved by producing their
effects, and habits and qualities confirmed and strengthened by their functions
and operations; so is it also in the spirit and spiritual graces. We find by
experience that the sight is bettred by seeing, and much weakened when it is
deprived of fit objects. The habitual memory is much strengthened by the
practical, and made feeble and unfaithful, when as it has no exercise or
employment; the understanding becomes more intelligent by minding and
conceiving, and i^ much impaired when it is not used; the strength of the arm,
hand, leg and the whole body is much strengthened and increased by action and
exercise, and decaieth and is greatly enfeebled by sloth and idleness. And
thus it is also with the spirit and spiritual graces, let us use them and we
shall have them; let these roots of holiness bring forth their boughs and
branches, their leaves of profession and their fruits of practice, and they
will live and prosper, spread inwardly and spring and sproute outwardly, but if
we hinder them from bearing their leaves and roots, and be still cutting and
lopping of their boughs and branches, they will in a while dye and perish. Let
this fire of the spirit have fit vent to send out its flames of holy and
righteous actions, and it will still live, burn and blaze, but if once we
begin to stop this vent, it will presently dye and turn to cold embers. Let
faith exercise it self in apprehending the promises, in waiting for the
performance, in fighting against doubting, and in bearing the fruits of good
works, and from a grain of mustardseede it will grow to a great tree, from
smoking flax to a burning flame, and from a feeble assent to a firm and full
persuasion. So let love be exercised in doing and suffering for Gods sake, in
performing unto him all holy service and Christian duties; and in the works of
mercy and charity toward our neighbors, and of a little spark it will
increase to a great fire, let the shoulders of patience be inured to bearing of
the Cross, and suffering afflictions, in putting up wrongs and ouercomming
evil with good, though they be weak and tender at the first, they will in a
little while become hard and strong, and so it is in all other graces, by
exercise they are increased, by sloth and ease they are weakened and wasted. And
therefore David no sooner thinks of receiving grace and strength from God,
then he resolves to exercise them to the uttermost; I will run (says he)
the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart. And again;
teach me O Lord the way of thy Psalm. 119. 32. 33. 34.
statutes and I will keep them unto the end. Give me understanding and I
shall keep thy law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart.

Sect. 7 The last means is frequent and fervent prayer.
The last and principal means of strengthening and cherishing the spirit, is
earnest and effectual prayer unto God, that he will strengthen our weakness,
and quicken our dullness, and support our faintness, by continual renewing
his spirit in us and sending fresh supplies of his saving graces, to re-enforce
and refresh our decayed bands, that by these new aides we may be enabled to
stand in the day of battle, and to get the victory over all our spiritual
enemies, for it is this holy fire descended from heaven, which kindles this
spiritual fire in us, whereby we offer incense, sacrifices and oblations
acceptable unto God, the smoke whereof drives away the enemies of our
salvation. His eternal spirit is the living fountain of these clear and
cristalline waters, whereby our thirsty souls are refreshed in the spiritual
conflict, and our hands, and eyes, and all other parts when they are wearied
and tired do receive renewed Psalm. 144. 1.
strength; It is he that teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight,
and gives unto us full and final victory over all our enemies, and the crown
of victory everlasting glory. And therefore when we see the battle hot against
us, 1 King. 22.
and ourselves weary and weak to make resistance, let us imitate the good King
Iehosaphat, and cry aloude unto the Lord to succor and strengthen us; when
we see our graces spent and our spiritual strength wasted and weakened in
making resistance, let us call unto him for fresh aides and renewed strength,
whereby we may be enabled to hold o^t and overcome.

Sect. 8. The conclusion of the book.
And thus have I, through Gods mighty and most merciful assistance, finished
also this last part of the Christian Warfare, a work so much the more
difficult, because the flesh which is the enemy against whom I intend it,
holds a strong party in my self, darkening my understanding, that I might
not discover its slights and subtilties, malice and might, nor discern the
best means for the defeating of its policies and subduing of it power. The
Lord make me ever truly thankful unto his holy Majesty for this mercy, and
give me grace always to esteem it as one of his his chiefest benefits in this
life, that he has used me the weakest and unworthiest of many hundreds of my
brethren as his poor instrument in so good an employment, and stir up in his
good time some other of his choysest and chiefest Worthies, for the further
perfecting of that which I in my mediocritie have begun, hitting the mark at
which I have but aimed, and training exactly the Christian Soldier in the
feats of spiritual arms whom I (as I was able) have but in some little
measure acquainted with the knowledge of the Christian Warfare. And the Lord
give his grace unto us all both strongest and weakest, that we may not only
instruct others in this spiritual art of fighting against the enemies of our
salvation, but that we our selves muy put on the spiritual armor, and fight
continually with courage and resolution under the standard of the Lord of
Hoasts; and because we are unskillful and know not how to fight, and exceeding
weak and feeble in our strength, and unable to stand in the encounter and
bear the brunt of the battle, that he will teach our hands, or rather our
hearts, to war, and our fingers, or rather our affections, to fight; and that
he will continually renew our strength and send us daily fresh supplies of his
spiritual and saving graces, whereby we may be enabled with constancy and
perseverance to maintain the fight, until having gotten a full and final
victory, we be like conquerours crowned with glory and immortality; the which
he vouchsafe unto us even for his Christ's sake, the Son of his love, and the
author, continuer, and finisher of our salvation, to whom with the blessed
Father, and holy Spirit, be ascribed of us, and his whole Church, all praise
and glory, power and dominion, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

