CERTAIN TREATISES OF THE LATE REVEREND and Learned Divine, Mr John Down
Rector of the Church of Instow. in Devonshire, Bachelour of Divinity, and
sometimes Fellow of Emanuell College in Cambridge.

Published at the instance of his friends.

Opera eorum sequentur cos.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield for Edward Forest. A.D. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, the Lord Bishop of Exeter his worthy
Diocesan; AS ALSO TO HIS FELLOVV BRETHREN, THE REVEREND DIVINES of that
Diocese, THE PVBLISHER OF THESE ENSUING WORKS makes bold to dedicate them in
the name of his deceased Friend.

The Contents of these treatises.
1 The funeral Sermon on behalf of the author of these ensuing works. 2 A
letter of the Lord Bishop of Exeter concerning the Author of these works. 3 A
treatise concerning the force and efficacy of reading. 4 Christ's prayer for his
Church. 5 A Godly discourse of selfe-denyall. 6 An apology of the justice of
God. 7 An Amulet or preservatiue against the contempt of the Ministry. 8 The
Dowe-like serpent. 9 Subjection to the Higher Powers. 10 A defense of the
lawfulness of Lots in gaming against the arguments of N.N. 11 The real
presence by Transubstantiation unknown to the ancient Fathers. 12 A defense of
the former answer against the reply of N.N.
THE FUNERAL SERMON ON BEHALF OF THE AVTHOR OF THESE ensuing works, PREACHED
BY GEORGE HAKEWILL Dr OF Divinity and Archdeacon of Surrey, a near neighbor
and dear friend unto him.

OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

DAN. 12.3. They that be wise, or So much does the original word bear and
therefore our last translators have set it in the Margent.
teachers shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn
many unto righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever.
WORDS worthy to be drawn out in Capital letters of Gold, to be written
with a beam of the Sun, or (as Chrysostom speaks in another case) with a
quill taken from the wing of a Seraphin: words which (as I am now informed)
this dear and Reverend Brother of ours deceased, the occasion of this present
meeting, above twenty years since made choice of, upon the like occasion, at
the funeral of a worthy divine, M. Smith Preacher at Barstaple.
well known to a great part here present; so that I cannot but herein observe
the special favor of God pointing me as it were with the finger of his
providence to the very same text, which himself made choice of upon the like
occasion; but my doubt is, that neither the straits of time nor my slender
abilities will permit me to handle it as I am assured he did, though I heard
him not.

They are the words of the Lord of hosts, the great Jehovah, sent by an Angel
to the Prophet Daniel highly favored of his God, Ezech. 14.14. and 28 3.
and as highly commended for his singular uprightness and great Wisdom, and
by him as a principal Secretary of the holy Ghost left upon record to
posterity for the Churches use, so that whether we regard the matter of them,
or the Author from whom they are sent, or the Person to whom, we have every
way great reason to afford them our best attention.

Now that we may somewhat the better conceive the sense of them, it shall not
perchance be amiss a little to reflect upon the words going before from the
beginning of the chapter.

Ver. 1.
1 At that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for the
children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that time thy people
shall be delivered every one that shall be found written in the book. V. 2.
And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

Where by Michael (as I take it) mystically at least, if not historically
Christ is meant, he being the great Prince both of his and Daniels people
which is his Church; by his standing up, his coming to judgment, by the time
of trouble, the day of the worlds dissolution, which shall be indeed terrible
and troublesome to the unbelievers and impenitent, but to the righteous a day
of refreshing and deliverance, whose names are written in the book of life.

Then many, that is all, of them that sleep that are dead and buried, and it
may be rotten in the dust of the earth, shall be awaked or raised up by the
power of God, some, that is, the godly to everlasting life, a life of joy and
happiness, and some that is the wicked to everlasting shame and contempt, and
not only so but to everlasting pain and torment; To which very words our
Savior seems to allude, Ioh. 5.28.29.
The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, And shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.

The day of judgment and the resurrection of the dead thus described, then
follow the words of my text, resuming the former branch of the precedent
division. They that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
and they that turn many unto righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.

Which without straining kindly enough and of themselves fall asunder into two
parts, the Persons to be rewarded, and the Reward; In the persons rewardable we
have a gift required, and two acts issuing from this gift: The gift is
wisdom, the first act issueing there from is teaching, the second turning of
men unto righteousness by virtue of teaching: As our wisdom is from God, so
it should be in part referred to the teaching of others, and our teaching be
directed to the converting, or justifying of sinners as the Hebrew has it. In
the Reward we have the condition of it, shining, the different degrees of this
shining resembled by the brightness of the firmament, and that of the stars,
the latter far surpassing the former; and lastly the perpetual duration of
both these degrees for ever and ever: I will begin with the gift to be
rewarded, wisdom.

Wisdom is of all virtues the most eminent and excellent, the most sovereign
and divine, making us most like unto him who is the only wise God, she is the
Mistres, the Lady, the Queen, the crown of them all, and where she is, none
of them can be wanting, Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia,


If they were all compacted into one body, one chain, one ringe, the eye of
this body, the medaile of this chain, the gemme of this ringe could be none
other then wisdom.

The kinds thereof are diverse, being taken in the better sense, I will reduce
them to four heads, Intellectual, Moral, Civil, and Spiritual; whereof the
first consists in the activity of the rational powers of the mind, in the
knowledge of the languages, and the liberal arts and sciences, the second in a
graceful, a comely and discreet carriage of our selves, the third in an
orderly government of corporations and societies committed to our charge, and
withal in a provident and honest care for those, who belong unto us, and
depend upon us; The fourth and last, and chiefest in the knowledge of the true
God, and in the serving of him in a true manner, with a perfect heart and a
willing mind, which is the sum of David's Catechism composed for the use of
his son Solomon. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.


For intellectual wisdom, S. Paul himself was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel a famous Lawyer; that he had well studied the Greek Poets appears by
his quotations of them upon several occasions, and had he been altogether
ignorant of Philosophy, he could not at Athens ( at that time the most renowned
University of the world) have incountred the Philosophers both of the
Epicureans and the Stoics, being sects of contrary opinions but bending and
banding there forces both together against him. The first fruits of the
Gentiles, who by the conduct of a star came from Persia to adore our Savior,
excelled no doubt in this kind of wisdom. Moses was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians, and so we may presume was Daniel in that of the
Caldaeans, once we are sure that Solomon even in this kind of wisdom
out-stripped all the Children of the East, he was perfectly skilled in all the
properties of vegetables, of fowls, of fishes, of beasts and creeping things;
whereas then the Apostle gives the Colossians a caveat and us in them that no
man spoil us through Philosophy, his meaning is not to check true Philosophy
(whereof singular use may no doubt be made in Divinity) but the errors of
Philosophers, or their erroneous application of acknowledged truths; true
Philosophy it self being indeed nothing else but a beam of the divine
wisdom, the dictate of right reason subordinate to supernatural revelation:
which I am confident he never intended to gain say or dissuade.

Of Moral wisdom the same Apostle speaks Ephesians. 5.15. Walk circumspectly
not as fools but as wise; and again, walk in wisdom toward them which are
without Col. 4.5 Of Civil our Savior, Be wise as Serpents, but innocent as
Doves; wise as Serpents for the just defense of your selves, but innocent as
Doves, that you do not justly offend others. Of spiritual the Prophet David,
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, as good understanding have
all they that do thereafter: And as wisdom excels among all other virtues
so does this kind of wisdom among all the other kinds.

Velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
As does the Moon to us when in a clear night she fills her circle, among
the lesser stars; the rest if they serve as dutiful handmaids to her, may
be very useful, but in case they should rebel against her, they may prove
dangerous, hurts rather then helps, as a knife in the hand of a child, or a
sword, of a madman. As then those other kinds of wisdom if rightly applied,
are not to be excluded out of my text, so this kind is it, which without all
doubt is chiefly understood, and which we are chiefly to labor for, and that
we may so labor for it as we come to the end of our desires, the means to
attain are these.

Frequent and fervent prayer to which S. James directs, us, If any lack
wisdom let him ask it of God, without wavering and it shall be given him; A
diligent and serious study of the holy scriptures whereby David professes
himself to have been made wiser then his enemies, his teachers, his ancients,
A conversation comfortable to our knowledge, To him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of the Lord; A good use of
afflictions schola crucis, schola lucis, the school of affliction is the
school of wisdom: And lastly a daily meditation of our mortality, of the
shortness of our lives, and the certain uncertainty of our deaths: Teach us O
Lord to number our days that so we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

And as these are the means to attain it, so the fruits of it are good
works, which our Savior calls oil in our lamps; and thereupon those
Virgins who provided oil in their vessels for the supply of their lamps are
by him termed wise; and S. James more particularly specifies those fruits; The
wisdom says he, which is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality,
without hypocrisy: It is so pure as it is likewise peaceable, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy: And as these be the precious fruits, so the
end of this wisdom is salvation, from a Child thou have known the holy
Scriptures which are able to make thee wise to salvation.

In reference both to the fruits and the end thereof, the wise Solomon has
given us in the third of the Proverbs, a singular description of this kind of
wisdom, yet not single, but accompanied and attended on with the other kinds;
Happy is the man that finds wisdom, ver. 13.
and the man that gets understanding. V. 14.
For the merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver, and the
gain thereof then the fine gold, She is more precious then rubies: V. 15.
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. Length
of days is in her right hand: V. 16.
and in her left hand riches and honor. V. 17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a
tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, V. 18.
and happy is every one that retains her. Happy is the man that finds her
so he beginns, and happy is the man that retains her so he ends; yea thrice
happy shall he be, in his life, in his death and after death; in the course of
his life she shall bring him true contentment, in the hour of death true
comfort, and after death, true happiness.

The first act issueing from wisdom is teaching, which though it be not
expressed in the English text yet is it necessarily employed if not primarily
intended in the original word, and in some translations we have it expressed
in the very body of the text it self, as namely in that of Iunius and
Tremellius, Erudientes teaching or teachers.

Some there are who desire wisdom for their own private contentment only,
this is vain curiosity; some that they may be known to be wise, this is
vain glory; some that they may rise to honor by it, this is vain ambition;
some that by it they may grow rich, this is vain covetousness; some that they
may profit themselves in the way of godliness, this is Christian providence;
and lastly some that they may do good not only to themselves, but to others by
teaching, and this is Christian Charity. This the Angel foretells in the
Chapter here goeing before, They that understand among the people shall
instruct many; and again in the latter part of the verse immediately following
my text, many shall run too and froe and knowledge shall be increased. This
the Apostle exhorts unto, Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, what to do? teaching and admonishing one another; Nay this Solomon
tells us his preacher practiced, The wiser he was the more he taught the people
knowledge.

He that is wise only for himself is a candle his under a bushel, but he who
is wise for others is a candle set in a candlestick, which gives light to all
who are in the house; he who is wise only for himself, is as a box of ointment
shut and closed up, he who is wise for others, as precious spiknard powered out,
which yields a sweet savor to all that are in the room; he who is wise only
for himself, is a curtain or carpet rooled up, he who is wise for others, as
a fair piece of Arras spread abroad and displaid to the veiw of all men. As
God has given us ears to learn from others, so likewise a tongue to teach
others what we have learned: our ears being as the conduite pipes to convey it
to the heart for our own good, and our tongue as the cock to convey it forth
again from the cisterne of the heart, for the good of others; And the tongue
being thus employed is the Glory of a man; Whereas our wisdom being concealed
is as a treasure that is hid; of which Siracides, what profit is there in
either of them? Such wisdom is none other then the talent wrapped up in a
napkin, which was not only taken from the owner of it, but himself cast into
utter darkness.

Neither let us fear that by drawing out our wisdom for the good of others
we shall thereby draw it dry; one candle we see may serve for the lighting of a
thousand and yet loose nothing of its own light; as the Widow of Sarepta at
the Prophets command, drew out of her cruse oil enough for the filling of many
vessels, yet was not that in the cruse at all diminished; nay we are so far
from diminishing the oil or light of our wisdom by this means, that it
rather hereby increases, as the few loaves and fishes which were distributed
among many thousands by Gods blessing multiplied into twelve baskets full; or
as vessels of gold or silver, of brass or peuter, the more they are used, the
sweeter and brighter they are by teaching others we call to mind many things,
which we had either altogether or almost forgotten, and not only so, but
thereby we fix and imprint the deeper in our minds such things as we remember,
and so are upon all occasions more ready to make use of them as well for our
own good, as the good of others.

Now as this office or act of teaching is thus profitable both to our selves
and others: so is it to God most acceptable, as being in sundry places
commanded by him, and commended unto us; Neither is it less honorable in it
self then to him acceptable, whosoever to the doing shall add the teaching of
his commandments, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
Tell me I beseech you what were the Patriarks, the Prophets, the Priests, the
Forerunner of Christ, the Apostles, the Evangelists, the Disciples but
teachers? though David and Solomon were both of them great kings, yet is it
doubtless no less honor to them to have been Teachers then kings; And for
our blessed Savior one special end as we know of his incarnation, why he was
apparrelled with our flesh, was, that he might teach; as he was a king to rule,
and Priest by sacrifice to expiate, so likewise a Prophet to teach his Church;
And surely he taught as never man taught, not as the Pharisees faintly and
formally, but as one having authority, all men wondering at the gracious words
which as from an hony-combe dropped from his lips; in so much that a poor
woman standing among the throng of the multitude, whom he taught could not
hold, but cried out, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the papps that
gave thee suck; When he left the world, the last legacy he bequeathed, was,
Go teach all nations; and being ascended he sends down the Holy Ghost for the
same purpose, not only to be a comforter but a teacher, according to that
promise of his before his ascension, he shall teach you all things; And as
both God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, the second and the third Person in
Trinity are Teachers, so is God the Father to the first Person in the Trinity,
They shall be all taught of God; Ioh. 6.45. Cathedram habet in coelo qui corda
docet; He is Doctor of the chair in heaven, who touches and teaches the heart

Since then this office of teaching is so profitable both to our selves and
others, to God so acceptable, and in it self so honorable, Let him who has
this office wait upon his office, not fleecing but feeding the flock
committed to his charge, not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind, And let men so esteem of us as of Teachers, dispensers
of the mysteries of God; we desire not to be better accounted of, and so we
desire to be accounted, we expect no more from you, neither can you in duty
perform less to us. Philip King of Macedon held it a great part of his son
Alexanders happiness, that he was borne in that age, in which Aristotle might
be his teacher; Alexander again ascribed his being to his father Philip, but
his well being to his master Aristotle; and Aristotle himself writes, that men
can never yield sufficient thanks to the Gods, to their Parents, to their
teachers: which if it be true of intellectual or moral or civil wisdom,
then much more of spiritual. Let them who are taught know that they owe them,
who teach them by laboring in the word and doctrine, a double honor; an
honor of maintenance, and an honor of reverence: He who is taught, should
make him who teaches him partaker of all his goods; and not only so, but the
very feet of them, who preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of
good things, should be not only welcome but beautiful unto us* We should be
ready if occasion so required with Cornelius to kiss the very ground they
tread upon, nay with the Galatians to pluck out our very eyes to do them
service; If they sow unto us spiritual things, let us not think it a great
matter, if they reap our carnal things. 1. Cor. 9.12.

The second act issuing from wisdom but by the interueining of teaching, is
the turning of men unto righteousness; The principal part of our conversion
stands in faith, and faith comes by hearing, now hearing there can not be
without teaching, nor profitable teaching without wisdom; So that wisdom is
as the root, teaching, as the stalk springing from this root, and this kind
of turning as the flower shooting forth from this stalk I deny not but men may
be and sometimes are turned unto righteousness by miracles, by extraordinary
revelations, or the ministry of Angels, or that they who are not wise for
themselves, by teaching may affect it in others, as Noah's carpenters built an
Arc for the saving of others, being drowned themselves, and the brain imparts
sense to the other members, being insensible in it self; I know that a key of
iron may open a lock as well as of silver, and that water may be as
commodiously conuaied through leaden as golden pipes; yet withal I believe,
that Almighty God much rather and more frequently uses the ministry of
those, who are truly wise and are turned themselves, for the making of others
wise and the turning of them to righteousness, as water they say in its
natural course cannot be brought to mount higher then the spring: so neither
can a man well speak to the heart but from the heart.

Our teaching then should not be for the winning of applause from men, or the
gaining of credit to our selves, but for the winning of glory to God, and the
gaining of souls to him; The talents which he has bestowed upon us and
instructed us with, should be put forth upon interest not so much for our own
worldly profit, as our masters best advantage.

Generare sibi simile est perfectissimum opus naturae, says the Prince of
Philosophers, For a natural body to propagate another in the same kind like
it self, is the most perfect work of nature, and so regenerare sibi similem
est per fectissimum opus gratiae, for a regenerate man to be an instrument
under God, or as God himself is content to speak, a fellow-workeman with him
in the regeneration of another, is the most absolute work of grace; There
cannot likely be a more apparent mark of a reprobate mind, then an endeavor
to divert and turn men away from righteousness, a^ the apostate Angels, which
being fallen from God, themselves labor by all means to plunge mankind in
the same gulf of perdition with themselves; neither can there well be a surer
pawn and pledge of a regenerate mind, then a study of drawing men to God, and
of turning many unto righteousness. The fire has in it an inclination of
turning all things it touches into its own nature, and it cannot be, but an
heart truly enflamed with holy zeal as with fire from heaven, should desire to
make all it touches or comes near unto, like it self. The Alchymists they
talk and brag much of turning iron into gold by virtue of the Philosophers
stone, as they call it, but sure it is, that the best Alchymie we can practice
is the turning of men's iron hearts into the gold of righteousness and that by
teaching, the true Philosophers stone ordained by God himself for the
transmutation of such mettalls; by it even whiles we walk in the flesh, but
war not after the flesh, are we made partakers of the divine nature, we are
transformed and metamorphized (as it were) from tares into wheat, from wolves
into lambs, from kites into doves, from briars and thistles into fair and
fruitful trees, to be transplanted into the Paradise of God, which all the
teaching of the Gentiles could never effect; they might perchance turn men to
a seeming kind of righteousness, but to true righteousness they did not, they
could not. But this was it that the Prophet David in his teaching aimed at, and
no doubt accomplished, Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and
sinners shall be converted unto thee; the end of his teaching was the
conversion of sinners, as they through the suggestion of Satan and wicked men
(their own inbred corruption working therewith) had by sin turned themselves
from the Creator to the Creature, so he by teaching endeavors their return
back again from the Creature to the Creator. This was it which S. Paul
proposes to Timothy, and would have Timothy in his teaching propose to
himself. 1. Tim. 4 16.
Take heed to thy self and to Doctrine, continue therein, for in so doing
thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee; Take heed to thy
self, that so thou may save thy self; Take heed to thy Doctrine, to thy
teaching, that thereby thou may save others. And this is it which S. James
seems to commend unto us as a great work indeed; Let him know (says he)
that he who converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul
from death, and hide a multitude of sins; Let him know that he has done a
great, a glorious, a noble and a worthy work, such a work as he has great
reason seriously to rejoice and triumph in, as no doubt S. Peter did in the
conversion of those three thousand which by one Sermon of his were turned unto
righteousness, more then if he had been put into possession of both the
Indies or of all the Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them.

It is worth our observation that in the message of the Angel touching the
Baptist sent to his father Zachary, it is said* that he should have great joy
and gladness and many should rejoice at his birth, and withal that he should
be great in the sight of the Lord; now from whence should this joy arise to his
parents; this comfort to his friends, this greatness to himself? It follows,
many of the Children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God; that is,
he shall by his teaching turn many unto righteousness, here then was matter
indeed of true joy to his Parents, of true comfort to his friends, and of true
greatness to himself; No mary aile then if our Savior accounted this his
meat; if the life of S. Paul was not dear unto him in respect of this, nay if
he were willing to dye in this employment, Phil. 2.15.
Though I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am
glad; Finally he accounted this his hope, his joy, and the crown of his
rejoicing at the coming and in the presence of the Lord Jesus 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.

Then shall Andrew come in with Achaia by him converted to the saving knowledge
of the truth, John with Asia, Thomas with India, Peter with the Jews, and Paul
with the Gentiles; and what shall we then plead for our selves, if being called
to yield an account of our stewardship we cannot bring forth so much as one
soul converted by us in the whole course of our ministry? Surely it is
either because we teach not at all, or our teaching is not grounded upon
wisdom, or it is grounded upon carnal and not upon spiritual wisdom,
revealed to us in the sacred oracles of Gods word: Some there are who so are
aloft in the clouds filling the peoples ears with swelling words, and their
heads with frothy speculations; Others, who feed them with the husks of
unsavory tales and jests: thus whiles the one sort seek to be admired rather
then understood, and the other make themselves ridiculous rather then
venerable, (both sorts so teaching as if neither the teachers themselves, nor
the people taught had souls to be saved) they rather turn men out of the
Church to Rome or Amsterdame, or harden them in their profaneness and
irreligion, then turn them to righteousness; Yet let us not wrong the age
wherein we live, nor slight the graces of God conferred on it: I am confident
we may boldly affirm of it, that God gave the word and great is the company
of the Preachers, never any age before in this kingdom, nor at this present
any kingdom or country in the world, affording so many, so able, so faithful
Teachers; and if many thereby be not turned to righteousness, it is their own
fault, nay it serves to aggravate both their offense and their punishment, it
takes away all color from excuse, and adds weight to their condemnation; And
so I pass from the persons rewardable to the reward it self, the second maine
branch of my Text.

Though it be not lawful to work for the reward, yet is it not unlawful in
our working to cast an eye upon the reward for the better supporting of our
patience, and the cheering up of our faith and hope; Thus our Savior set
before himself the joy to come; his Apostle, the price of the high calling;
and Moses his servant the recompense of the reward. Now in this reward we have,
the condition, the different degrees in that condition, and the perpetuity of
those degrees; first then of the condition which is shining, They shall shine.

The shining light was at leastwise of all the visible creatures the first that
Almighty God made, and among them all it is the most beautiful, the most
cheerful, the most useful. Now it seems requisite and suitable that they
who shine in wisdom here in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
should likewise shine in glory hereafter, that they who are filled with the
light of knowledge, and imparted their light to others in the Church militant,
should themselves be filled with the light of glory in the Church triumphant.

We shall then behold him face to face, who is the light of the world, who
lightneth every man that comes into the world, who is the father of lights,
who is clothed with light as with a garment, and dwells in light that is
inaccessable, which no man can approach or attain unto, and in his light shall
we see light, nay in his light shall we be light. They looked unto him and
were lightened* psalm. 34.5.
Even in this pilgrimage and valley of tears, with open face we behold as in a
glass the glory of God, and thereby are changed into the same image from glory
to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord 2. Cor. 3.18, much more then shall we
be changed into the same image, when we behold him not in a glass, but as he
is. The path of the just says Solomon, Prove. 4.18.
is as the shining light, which shines more and more until it be perfect day
our shining then is begun here in this life but the perfect day, the perfection
of this shining is reserved for the next, here it is that the day star
arises in our hearts, and never leaves us till it turns us into stars; In
which regard the seven Angels, that is the seven Pastors of the seven
Churches are named stars. Rev. 1.16. And the twelve Apostles are represented
by a crown of twelve stars, Rev. 12.1. but this was in regard of the present
condition, the future both of them and all those who by their teaching should
be turned unto righteousness, our Savior himself resembles to the shining of
the Sun, Math. 13.43.
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of my
Father: they shall shine, and that as the Sun; they shall shine forth, as the
Sun when he darts his beams forth in their full strength at high noone.

All the shining, all the glittering pomp and bravery of the great Monarchs
of this world at their highest festiualls or greatest solemnities is noe more
to this future shining of the Saints then is the light of a dim candle to the
brightest star, or the shining of a glowe-worme in the night to that of the
Sun when as a bridegroom he marches forth of his chamber, and rejoices as
a mighty Giant to run his course. When Moses came down from the mount and from
talking with God, his face shoone so bright as the Israelites could not behold
the brightness of it but he was forced to cover it with a veil, that so he
might talk with them; and of S. Stephen it is said, that all who sat in the
counsel where he was conuented and arrained, looking steadfastly on him saw his
face, as it had been the face of an Angel: now if it please God thus to
confer such a wonderful measure of shining glory upon his servants here on
earth, what shall we conceive he has reserved for the glorified Saints in
heaven? at the transfiguration of our Savior, we read that his face did shine
as the Sun, and his very raiment was white as the light, which Saint Peter
standing by and beholding was so ravished as he talked of building tabernacles
for Moses and Elias, not well knowing what he spoke, yet was all this but a
tipe as it were or shadow of that glory and Majesty, with which he was
afterward to be invested and to which we shall be conformed, for when he shall
appear, we shall be like him 1. Ioh 3.2. We shall be then like him for that
he shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body; these
vile bodies of ours sown natural, shall be raised spiritual, sown in
corruption, shall be raised in immortality, sown in weakness, shall be raised
in power, sown in baseness, shall be raised again in glory, in shining glory
answerable to the city in which they shall be placed, whose light is like to a
stone most precious, even to a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal, the streets
thereof of pure gold as tra^sparent glass, the foundations of the wall
garnished with all manner of precious stones, the Saphyr, the Emerald, the
Chrysolite, the Iacinth, the Almethyst, and the like; the 12 gates of 12 entire
pearls, such shall be the shining glory of the place, and that of the
inhabitants thereof every way correspondent thereunto.

Here we dwell God knows in a great deal of darkness, the darkness of error
and ignorance, the darkness of sin, the darkness of misery, but then he who
brought light out of darkness, shall turn our darkness into light, the
darkness of ignorance into the light of knowledge, for then shall we know him
as we are known of him, the darkness of sin into the light of holiness,
resembled by those long white robes spoken of in the 17 of the Reuel^; and
lastly the darkness of misery into the light of happiness. Then shall all
tears be wiped of our eyes, we shall rest from all our labors, and not only
so but enter into our masters joy: it is not said that our masters joy shall
enter into us, but we into it, in regard of the fullness thereof, for in his
presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore: fullness of joy, not drops or showers of joy lightly to bedewe or
besprinkle us, but rivers of joy, floods of joy, even to bath our selves in.
And look as unwilling as a natural man would be, who enioyes the light of the
sun to return back again into his mothers womb, so unwilling would a
glorified Saint be to return from this shining glory and fullness of joy to
the honors and pleasures of this world.

The several and different degrees of this reward are clearly represented
unto us by the difference between the brightness of the firmament and that of
the stars; They that be religiously wise, though they never have the function
nor the gifts to teach, shall shine as the one: but they who have both the
calling and ability to teach, and withal a blessing upon their labors
thereby to turn many unto righteousness, as the other, as the brightest
stars for ever and ever.

I am not ignorant that some learned Divines have not only doubted of this
disparity of glory in the Saints, but have denied it and disputed against it;
yet those very men have confessed it to have been agreed upon by the general
consent of the Fathers, which for mine own part I must profess I am unwilling
to forsake, specially where the Scripture and reasons drawn from thence are so
fair for it, and in the analogy of faith nothing against it.

That there are diversity of gifts, and withal that we are to covet the best
gifts, S. Paul has made it evident, and our Savior that of the seed which
fell in good ground, some brought forth an hundred, some sixty, some thirty
fold; and what they teach we find confirmed by daily experience. That there are
different degrees in grace then, there can be no question, and I think as
little that there shall be in glory, since grace is but a step to glory, and
glory again the crown of grace; He who has told us that in his Fathers house
are many mansions, seems to have intended not only a multitude in number, but
a difference in order, and so did the ancients understand it, Let us hear one
for the^ all, Apud patrem mansiones multae sunt, and tamen evndem denarium
dispares laboratores accipiunt, quia vno cunctis erit beatitudo laetitiae,
quamuis non vna sit omnibus sublimitas vitae, says the great Gregory, in the
last chapter of the fourth book of his Moralls, In my Fathers house are many
mansions, and yet the laborers, who entered the vineyard at different hours,
received every one the same penny, because all shall enjoy the same happiness,
though some be advanced to an higher pitch of glory; As in vessels some are
bigger, some lesser, yet all are full to the very brimme; and of eyes some are
stronger, some weaker, yet all behold the same sun of righteousness, yet
shall not all vessels of glory be capable of the same measure, nor al
gloryfied eyes be fixed upon their blisfull object with the same strength, sed
in eisdem mansionibus (says the same Doctor) erit aliquo modo ipsa diversitas
concors, quia tanta vis amoris in illa pace nos sociat, vt quod in se quisque
non acceperit, hoc se accepisse in alio exuleet; But in these many mansions
there shall be a friendly kind of diversity, because so forceable shall be the
charity of the Saints in that eternal peace, that what every one has not
received in himself, he shall rejoice to have received in and by another.

He that gained two talents to his Master, and he that gained five, they are
both commended for their faithfullnes, and both entered into their masters joy;
yet as their talents were at first bestowed upon them according to their
several abilities, so no doubt but their reward was in some sort
proportionable to their several gains, which partly appears in this, that
the talent which was taken from him who had but one, was conferred upon him who
had gained five, and not upon him who had gained but two. It is by all Divines
freely acknowledged that there shall be different degrees of punishments in
hell, in as much as it shall be easier in the day of judgment for some, then
for others; and some shall be beaten with more, others with fewer stripes; why
not then different rewards, or rather different degrees of the same reward in
heaven? It is true that for the greater terror the degrees of punishments are
thus differenced in Gods justice according to our deserts, yet may it well be
that for our better encouragement likewise in his mercy he has thus
proportioned out these different degrees in our reward, not for any merit of
ours, but partly thereby to quicken us in the way of virtue and godliness, and
partly to show his truth, as in disposing of all things so of his rewards, as a
man that has many sons, and promises to proportion out his Legacies to
them, as they shall shoot nearer or farther off the mark, set up by himself,
conditionally that they hitt the butt, is in a manner bound to bequeath him the
fairest portion who comes nearest the white, not for the merit of the son,
but by reason of his own promise.

Little is the knowledge God knows, very little which we poor worms here
crawling upon the face of the earth, have of things that are in heaven, farther
then in holy Scripture they are revealed unto us yet thus much we know that
those blessed ministering spirits, by their maker called Angels, because they
are his messengers sent forth to minister for their sakes who shall be heirs
of salvation, are not all of equal rank, some being Cherubins and Seraphins,
others thrones and dominations, some of an inferior sort and therefore termed
Angels only, others of a superior and in that regard styled Archangels: which
how to interpret or accord, were they all equal for my own part I must
profess I cannot possibly conceive. Now as in the life to come we shall be
like the Angels free from the use and want of those perishable things which
this life stands in need of, so likewise it is not improbable but the
gloryfied Saints, may some way resemble the different orders in the several
distribution of rewards; and to come somewhat nearer my text, and withal fully
home to the point in hand, There is says the Apostle, one glory of the sun,
another glory of the moon, another glory of the stars, and one star
differs from another in glory; and then presently inferres, so shall it be in
the resurrection, as one star differs from another in motion, in situation,
in color, in influence, in order (the stars in their order fought against
Sisera) so likewise both in bigness and brightness: and so shall it be in the
resurrection.

Behold says our Savior I come quickly and my reward is with me to render
unto every man according as his work shall be, not propter but secundum opera
according to his works; according to the matter of his work so shall be the
substance of his reward, according to the manner of his work, the kind of his
reward, and according to the measure of his work the degree of his reward; As
a man sows, so he shall reap, that is for the kind; and he that sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, he that sows bountifully shall reap
bountifully, that is for the degree. If a cup of cold water shall not pass
without a reward, much less he whose whole study has been to advance Gods
glory in the works of charity and piety.

There is no question but the confessors who for the profession of the truth
patiently endured stripes, banishment, imprisonment, confiscation of the goods
and the like, and much more the holy Martyrs who chearefully sealed it with
their blood, shine more gloriously then ordinary Christians; There is no
question but the Patriarchs, and the Prophets, specially Abraham the father of
the faithful, shine more gloriously then ordinary believers; no doubt but
Lazarus and Abraham were both in glory, yet Abraham's condition was of the two,
the more eminent; There is no question but the blessed virgin the mother of our
Savior, a chosen vessel full of grace, highly favored, blessed among and
above women; shines more gloriously then Mary Magdalen or other women; There
is (...) question but the Apostles of Christ, who not only laid down their
lives for the testimony of the truth, but were in a manner the first founders
of Christian religion, and the Secretaries of the holy Ghost, being specially
inspired for the penning and publishing of those sacred Oracles, which they
recommended to posterity, and are now extant for our salvation, shine more
gloriously then ordinary Professors; in which regard our Savior at his coming
to judgment assigns them twelve thrones, as assessors with himself in a
special manner. Lastly there is no question but those faithful Pastors, who
like sacred lamps spend their oil and consume themselves to ashes to give
others light, and to direct them in the way to heaven by their pens and
tongues, teaching and turning many to righteousness, shall shine more
gloryously then those Disciples who by them are turned, but have neither
faculty nor authority to teach, and by teaching to turn others.

Here then is our comfort and encouragement* that howbeit from men we have many
times very little thanks for our great pains in teaching, yea even from those
we have taught, and endeavored to turn* nay though ^^steed of thanks, the
world frown upon us and raise storms against us, yet our reward is the
contentment of a good conscience, in the discharge of our duty here, and that
shining crown of glory hereafter, laid up and promised to them who are
faithful to the death who have fought the good fight, and have finished their
course; Our trust and assurance is that the less thanks and reward we have on
earth, the greater our reward shall be in heaven, and the more that those whom
we have turned unto righteousness, shall increase in number, in knowledge and
in obedience the greater shall the augmentation of our reward be* and lastly,
if in glory we shall know one another as good Divines probably conjecture, for
that we shall undoubtedly know our Savior in regard of his humane nature, and
the Apostles present at his transfiguration perfectly knew Moses and Elias,
though they had never seen them before; if I say we shall then and there know
one another, it cannot be but a great addition to our happiness to see and
know them in the same state with our selves, of whose conversion under God, we
have been the happy instruments.

The last considerable point in this reward is perpetuity, they shall shine as
the stars for ever and ever; for though the degrees thereof be different yet
are ^^^y all equal and agree in duration, and therefore are they all by the
purchaser of them called mansions, not houses, because they everlastingly
abide, or houses not made with hands but eternal in the heavens; for here we
have no continuing city, but we seek one to come, this world passes away,
with the lust and fashion thereof, but that which is to come is laid upon sure
foundations, whose builder and maker is God, and as is the maker so is the
city, and as the city so the citizens, and as the citizens so the state of
glory, all correspondent, each to other, all everlasting, the shining is for
ever and ever without variation, without diminution, without intermission.

The moon is sometimes waxing and sometimes waining, but with these stars it
is not so, they are always in the full; the sun it self is sometimes
eclipsed by the interposition of the body of the moon between us and it, but
with these stars it is not so, they never loose their light, nay those
visible stars in the firmament which we now behold shining so brightly, shall
one day fall from heaven, but these stars shall never fall, Stella cadens non
est stella cometa fu^t,
if they fall they were never stars, and if they be stars they shall never
fall; Even the ^tarres fixed in the firmament of heaven (which are but shadows
and resemblances of these blessed stars) in that ordinary course of nature
wherein Almighty God has set and settled them, could never of themselves either
fall or fail, according to that of Siracides, 43.20.
At the commandment of the holy one they will stand in their order and never
faint in their watches; Agreeable whereunto is that of the Prophet David
speaking of the kingdom of Christ, His seed shall endure for ever, and his
throne as the sun before me, it shall be establshed for ever as the moon and
as a faithful witness in heaven, 148 36.
and in another Psalm, praise ye him sun and moon praise him all ye
stars of light, He has established them for ever and ever: he has made a
decree which shall not pass. Though then at the dissolution of all things,
Ignea pontum astra petent, these stars we now gaze up on with a delight mixed
with wonder, shall by the extraordinary power of that hand which made them, be
again unmade and cast down from heaven, yet these wise, these teaching, these
iustifijng stars resembled by them shall never faint but shine in the
fullness of their strength for ever and ever, they shall never wander as the
planets, but remain for ever as fixed stars; to them it shall never be said
as to Lucifer, How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning
Esaias. 14.12. Adam might and did fall from paradise, The Angels both might and
did fall from their first habitation; but these stars shall never leave their
stations; If here they be preserved safe in the right hand of him who is Alpha
and Omega the first and the last. Revel. 1.16. much more shall they there be
out of gunshot, out of all doubt or fear or possibility of danger, in this
to they shall be like the elect Angels of God, which are now so confirmed by
Jesus Christ, the head of men and Angels in their blessed estate as they can
never fall either from grace or glory.

what a spur then should this be unto us that our pains in teaching and
turning men to righteousness, as also the difficulties and the affronts which
many times attend them, are for a time only but, our reward eternal; It is a
di^ine saying of Seneca, Dolor sileuts est feramus, non grauis est patientia,
sigrauis est feramus non leuis est gloria; If our burden be light let us endure
it, our patience is not great, if great let us endure it, our glory is not
light; I may add Non breuisest gloria, our glory is not short; 2. Cor. 4.17.
Nay our light afflictions which are but for a moment work for us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory; our light afflictions which are but for
a moment an excellent, a more excellent, a far more excellent and eternal
weight of glory; which is therefore called a crown of life, because this life
in comparison of it is not Vita vitalis, scarce worthy of the name of life;
everlasting life, the very life and soul, the period and perfection of all the
Articles of our faith, being infinite degrees beyond the longest threede of
this present life, or the life of the world it self, should it last many
thousand years longer then yet it has done; There is not so much
disproportion betwixt the life of a gnat and an elephant, or betwixt the life
of a Methusalem and a Child that is carried from the womb to the tomb, as is
betwixt this present life of darkness, and that life of shining for ever and
ever; betwixt two finites, be the one never so long, and the other never so
short there is some proportion; but betwixt a finite and an infinite, be the
finite never so long there can be no proportion, and consequently no
comparison; In which regard as the shining dazels our eyes, so does the
duration thereof infinitely exceed the reach of all mortal understanding and
our deepest thoughts are presently lost and swallowed up therein, as in a
bottomless gulf or endless maze.

Though then the combat perchance be sharp, yet let us remember that our
crown is immarcessible, a crown that withers not, as those crowns or
garlands of oak, of joy, of laurel, of myrtle which by the ancients were
bestowed upon the conquerors in the public games; when the chief sheapheard
shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away. 1.
Pet. 5.4.
Though the race seem tedious and wearisome, yet let us remember that the
crown (the prize of our running) is incorruptible, 1. Cor. 9.25.
Every man that strives for mastery is temperate in all things, now they do
it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible: The crowns of the
greatest Monarchs in the world though they last long, yet are they all but
corruptible crowns subject to wearing, to foyling, to cracking, to stealing,
and sometimes by iuvasion from abroad, or insurrection from at home, they are
violently taken from their heads, or if their crowns be not taken from them,
long it cannot be in the course of nature, before they may and must be taken
from their crowns: but when this incorruptible crown shall once be set upon
our heads by the hand of Almighty God, it shall never, it can never be again
taken from us or we from it; as the figure of a crown is circular, having
neither beginning nor ending, so this crown of immortality though it have a
beginning, yet never shall it nor can it have any ending.

I have now done with my text, and come to the application, though as unwilling
to part from the one, as to undertake the other, but both must be done, and if
I should hold my peace, these stones would speak.

This dear, this reverend, and worthy brother of ours, who has now resigned
up his soul into the hands of his maker, and her presents his earthly
tabernacle, the remainders of his mortality by us to be interred with Christian
burial in assured hope of a joyful resurrection, might justly account it not
the least part of his happiness, that he was brought into the light, during
the reign of that truly noble and renowned Lady, Queen Elizabeth, and by
that means was baptized in the same faith and religion in which he departed
this life. He was descended of an honest, a virtuous, and religious parentage,
brought up in a liberal and free manner, first in the country, and then in the
University, where he received the highest degree that Mother of his could
bestow upon him save one, but in the judgment of all that knew him, deserved
that too better then many who have received it both before him and since him;
so as whether his degrees more honored him, or he them, as well by the
exercise he performed for them, as by his sweet conversation and abilities in
all kind of learning, is not easy to determine: by the divine Providence he
was there incorporated into that seminary, which has yielded many goodly
plants to our Church, and among the rest our right reverend Diocesan, his
contemporarie and ancient acquaintance, He had to Uncle by the Mothers side
that Jewel of Prelates the mirror of our age, for sanctity, Piety, and
Theology all in one, whom he proposed to himself as a pattern for imitation;
He lived to see his Childrens Children, and his Elder sisters Childrens
Childrens Children to his great comfort, and yet by Gods blessing is his
Fathers Brother yet living too, and present at his funeral. Had his means
been answearable to his worth, he had not layen in such obscurity as he did,
but had doubtless moved and shined in a far higher and larger sphere then
he did, yet God so blessed him with competent means, that he lived
contentedly, brought up his Children in a decent manner, furnished himself
with a fair Library, relieved the poor, was not wanting to his kindred that
stood in want of his help, and for hospitality he was constant in it,
entertaining his friends, and such as came to visit him in a cheerful and
plentiful manner; But upon these I will not insist, choosing rather to come to
those which are more proper both to him and my text: his intellectual, his
moral, his civil, his spiritual wisdo^e, his teaching and his turning of many
unto righteousness.

First then for his intellectual wisdom; the sharpness of his wit, the
fastness of his memory, and the soundness of his judgment were in him all
three so rarely mixed as few men attain them single in that degree; His skill
in the languages was extraordinary, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, and
I think Italian; His knowledge in the liberal arts and Sciences was
universal, Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Poetry, History, Philosophy, Music and
the rest of the Mathematickes; in some of which Sciences he so far excelled,
that I dare say in these western parts of the kingdom he has not left his
equal: neither do I speak any thing to amplify by way of Rhetoric, I
speak less then the truth.

His moral wisdom appeared in the checking of his appetite by temperance and
sobriety; free he was in the lawful use of Gods creatures, but never
excessive, nor ever could be drawn to it, either by example or persuasion:
which in a constitution so crazie was no doubt under God a special means for
the drawing out the thread of his life; in his carriage he was grave yet
sociable enough, courteous yet without affectation or vain complement, a sure
friend to the utmost of his power, where he professed it, yet without flattery.

His civil wisdom appeared in the government of his parrish and his family,
in the education of his Children and the Children of his friends upon special
request committed to his charge, in his own matches and the matches of his
daughters; and lastly in the preserving, managing and disposing of that estate
which God lent him, in an orderly manner.

His spiritual or divine wisdom appeared, in his great knowledge in the
sacred scripture, in which with Timothy he was trained up from a Child, and as
another Apollos grew mighty in them; whereunto he added the help of the best
Interpreters both ancient and modern, the serious study of the Fathers, the
schoole-diuines, the Ecclesiastical story, and the controversies of the
present times, as well with the Romanists as among our selves, and that in
matters not only of Doctrine but discipline; in all which he was so well
studied and upon all fitting occasions so willing and ready either by writing
or speech to express himself, as many, and those not unlearned Divines were
content, nay glad to draw water from his well, and to light their candles at
his torch; nay some of his adversaries in his life time, have in open pulpit
since his death, to Gods glory, their own comfort, and his honor confessed as
much. But the highest point of his spiritual wisdom appeared in the practice
of piety, in a due conformity of his actions to his speculation drawing out as
it were a fair copy in the course of his life, of those wholesome lessons
which he found in his books, formed in his brain, and taught to others; And
herein indeed do I take the very marrow and pith of spiritual wisdom to
consist, in the possession and fruition of supernatural truths, according to
that of the great Earl of Mirandula, Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia
inuenit, religio possidet, Philosophy seeks the truth, Divinity finds it, but
religion possesses it; Religion I say, which binds us to the performance of
our duties to God and man.

One maine branch of this duty and effect of this wisdom was his Teaching; He
taught every where and every way, by his example and by his pen, but specially
by his tongue; by his tongue both privately and publicly, publicly by
expounding, by catechizing, by preaching: in which he was so diligent, that
since his entering into the Ministry (which he often professed to be his
greatest honor and comfort in this world) he waded through the whole body of
the Bible, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the revelation. And as
he was thus diligent in teaching, so was he constant in his course as long as
his health and strength would give him leave, and I may truly say beyond his
strength, resolving with that uncle of his no less good then great, that a
General should die in the field, and a Preacher in the pulpit. The manner of
his teaching was not by loud vociferation, or ridiculous gesticulation, or
ostentation of wit, or affectation of words, but in the evident demonstration
of the spirit and power, it was demonstratiue, masculine and mighty, through
God to the pulling down of strong holds, deep it was and yet clear,
rational and yet divine, perspicuous yet punctual, artificial yet profitable,
calm yet peircing, po^derous yet familiar, so as the ablest of his hearers
might always learn somewhat, and yet the simplest understand all: which was a
rare mixture, and in this mixture he ran a middle and moderate course, most
agreeable to the Canons and constitutio^s of that Church in which he was borne
and bred, betwixt the apish superstition of some, and the peevish singularity
of others, betwixt blind devotion and ouerbold presumption, betwixt
unreasonable obedience, and unwarrantable disconformitie, betwixt popish
tyranny grounded upon carnal policy, and popular confusion guided by mere
fancy, the one laboring for an usurped Monarchy, and to turn all the body
into head, the other for a lawless anarchy, and to have a body without a head.

Now though in his teaching he ran this middle course, yet did it always
aim not only at the information of the judgment, but the reformation of the
will, the beating down of impiety, and the convincing of the conscience, to
the drawing of his hearers as from ignorance to knowledge, and from error to
truth, so likewise thereby from rebellion to obedience, from profaneness to
religion; And truly I little doubt but many a good soul now a Saint in heaven
did they understand our actions and desires, and withal could make known
their conceits to us, would soon give us to understand that under* God he was
the instrument for the turning of them to righteousness, and so for the
directing and conducting of them to that place of their bliss; and as little
doubt I but many a good soul who hears me this day, in secret and in silence,
blesses God and the memory of this good man, for that spiritual knowledge and
comfort which they have received by his Ministry; once I am sure that a
virtuous Gentlewoman of good note and rank, has since his death by her
letters written with her own hand to some of his nearest friends testified,
her turning to righteousness to have been first wrought by his means; and
noe question but many others might as justly and truly do the like, were they
so disposed, or occasion required it.

This was the course of his life here, now for the manner of his departure
hence; when his last sickness first seized on him, he accounted himself noe
man of this world; when he was in his best health though as a pilgrim he
walked in it, yet as a soldier he never warred after it, but now being thus
arested and imprisoned he professed to his friends who came to visit him
(holding up his hands to heaven) that though his body was here yet his heart
was above, and consequently his treasure; for where a man's treasure is, there
will his heart be also; He likewise assured us that though he saw death
approaching, yet he feared it not, death being now but a droane, and the sting
thereof taken out; during his sickness he made his household, his congregation,
his chamber, his chapel, and his bed his pulpit, from whence he cast forth
many hloy and heavenly eiaculations, and made a most divine confession of his
faith, not only to the satisfaction and instruction, but admiration of his
hearers; Among the rest two things there were, which he much and often insisted
upon, the one that he hoped only to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ,
the other that he constantly perseuered in the faith and religion professed and
maintained in the Church of England, in which he was borne, baptized and bred:
and this he many times and earnestly protested in a very serious and solemn
manner, pawning his soul upon the truth thereof. His glass being now almost
run, and the hour of his dissolution drawing on (though his memory and
senses no way failed him) he desired to be absolved after the manner prescribed
by our Church, and according to his desire having first made a brief
confession, and thereupon expressing a hearty contrition together with an
assurance of remission by the precious blood of his dear Savior, he received
absolution from the mouth of a lawful minister, and having received it,
professed that he found great ease and comfort therein, and withal that he was
desirous likewise to have received the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, if
the state of his body would have permitted him; and not long after imagining
with himself, that he heard some sweet Music and calling upon Christ, Sweet
Jesus kill me that I may live with thee, he sweetly fell asleep in the Lord,
as did the Protomartyr, who ready to yield up the Ghost prayed and said, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit.

Thus he lived and thus he dyed, near approaching the great climactericall of
his age; And by this time I am sure you find and feel with me that we have all
a great loss in the loss of this one man; His flock has lost a faithful
pastor, his wife a loving husband, his children a tender father, his servants a
good master, his neighbors a freindly neighbor, his friends a trusty friend,
his kindred a dear kinsman, this whole country a great ornament; The king
has lost a loyal subject, the kingdom a true-hearted Englishman, the Clergy
a principal light, the Church a dutiful son, the Arts a zealous Patron, and
religion a stout Champion* we have all lost, only he has gotten by our loss,
he has made a happy exchange; instead of his congregation and singing of
Psalms with them here, he is now joined to the congregation of the first
borne, whose names are written in heaven, with whom he bears a part in the
everlasting Halleluiahs; instead of the Church militant, he is inrooled in the
Church trivmphant, having his palm in his hand in token of victory; instead of
his friends and kinsfolk here, he is become the companion of the blessed
Saints and glorious Angels; instead of his wife and Children, and lands, and
goods, and attendants here, he now enioyes the blisfull vision of the face of
God and the full fruition of Jesus Christ; by means whereof no doubt he shines
as the brightness of the firmament, nay as the brightest star in the
firmament, and ^o shall shine for ever and ever; Sic mihi contingat viuere,
sicque mori;


God grant we may so live, as with him we may dye comfortably, and so dye as
with him we may live again, and shine in glory everlastingly. Who so is wise
will ponder these things, and they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord; Consider then what I have said and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

SACRAE TRINITATI GLORIA.
This Sermon being presented to the veiw of the Right Reverend Father in God,
the Lord Bishop of Exeter, together with the Authors purpose of publishing
these ensuing works of his deceased friend, it pleased his Lordship to return
this following answer, which together with the Sermon, may serve in part to
let the world know his great worth, though in a manner buried in obscurity.
Worthy Mr Dr Hakewill;
I Do heartily congratulate to my dead friend and Colleagian, this your so
just and noble a commemoration; It is much that you have said, but in this
subject no whit more then enough; I can second every word of your praises, and
can hardly restrain my hand from an additionall repetition; How much
ingenuity, how much learning and worth, how much sweetness of conversation,
how much elegance of expression, how much integrity and holiness have we lost
in that man? No man ever knew him but must needs say that one of the brightest
Stars in our West is now set; The excellent parts that were in him, were a
fit instance for that your learnedly defended position of the vigor of this
last age, whereunto he gave his accurate, and witty astipulation. I do much
rejoice, yet, to hear that we shall be beholden to you for some mitigation of
the sorrow of his loss, by preserving alive some of the post-hume issue of
that gracious and exquisite brain, which when the world shall see, they will
marvel that such excellencies could lie so close; and shall confess them as
much past value, as recovery; Besides those skillfull and rare pieces of
Divinity tracts, and Sermons; I hope (for my old love to those studies) we
shall see abroad some excellent monuments of his Latin Poesy; in which
faculty I dare boldly say, few, if any, in our age exceeded him. In his
Polemicall discourses (some whereof I have by me) how easy is it for any
judicious Reader to observe the true Genius of his renowned Uncle, Bishop
Jewel? such smoothness of style, such sharpness of wit, such interspersions
of well-applyed reading, such grave and holy vrbanity: shortly (for I well
foresaw how apt my Pen would be to run after you in this pleasing track of
so well deserved praise) these works shall be as the Cloak, which our Prophet
left behind him in his rapture into heaven; What remains but that we should
look up after him, in a care, and endeavor of readiness for our day; and
earnestly pray to our God, that as he has pleased to fetch him away in the
Chariot of Death, so that he will double his spirit on those he has thought
good to leave yet below: In the mean time I thank you for the favor of this
your grave, seasonable, and worthy Sermon, which I desire may be prefixed as a
meet preface to the published Labors of this happy Author;

Exon Palace Mar. 22. 1631. Farewell from your loving friend and
fellow laborer, Ios. Exon.

TWO TREATISES

1 Concerning the force and efficacy of reading. 2 Christ's prayer for his
Church.
OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

ACT. 15.21. For Moses of old time has in every City them that Preach him
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.
OMitting for the present whatsoever else might profitably be observed out of
these words. I will at this time only inquire these three things. The first
whether preaching in this place be distinguished from Reading. The second
whether Reading be a kind of Preaching. The third, whether reading be an
ordinary means to beget Faith and convert a soul. The truth of which three
questions while I endeavor to resolve not so much with heat and vehemence of
passion, as strength and evidence of reason: let me entreat you all, Right
Worshipful Reverend and beloved Christian brethren, but for the space of one
hour to lay aside all prejudice, and to hear with indifference what I can
say. When I have done, if my resolutions appear to be grounded upon sound and
convincing arguments, I hope you will according to your duties readily yield
unto the truth: if otherwise, every one may still abound in his own sense and
ye have free liberty to carry home the same opinion ye brought hither with
you. In the mean season I beseech the Lord to direct your hearts, and to give
you a right judgment in all things.

The first Quere is, whether preaching in this place be distinguished from
reading. In resolving whereof I will not be so peremptory as some are: only I
will show what I conceive and upon what grounds. This I conceive, that
Preaching here is no other then the public Reading of Moses: and I conceive so
upon these grounds, because there appears nothing in the words to force a
distinction, but rather something importing an identity. That there is nothing
to enforce a distinction appears, if either ye consider the context and
reason of the words, or the text it self and the form of words used therein.
First therefore as touching the Context, It is manifest by this particle For,
that these words are inferred as a reason upon some thing premised. Thus. Some
of the believing Pharisees had taught the brethren at Antioch, Act. 15.5.
that except they were circumcised and together with the faith of Christ
observed the ceremony of Moses they could not be saved. verse. ^.
Whereof after much altercation and dispute the Apostles being advertized,
verse. 4.6.
they summon a counsel at Jerusalem to stint the quarrel. verse. 7. etc.
In it Saint Peter expressly affirms, that salvation is impossible by the law,
and that the grace of Christ is of it self every way sufficient which sentence
Saint James having readily approved, he adds withal, verse. 13.14.15.
that for the settling of the Churches peace, it would not be amiss to write
unto the believing Gentiles, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, verse.
19.20.
from fornication, from things strangled, and from blood. For, says he, Moses
of old time has in every City them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. Now how comes in this For? and what is that
conclusion whereof this is a reason? Here I find difference of opinions: but
among them all three seem to me to be most probable. Of them all take which
you list, and the public Reading of Moses alone will be a sufficient proof
thereof.

The first opinion is Saint Chrysostoms, in whose judgment, Saint James would
prove this conclusion, that it is altogether needless to write unto the
believing Jews touching abstinence from these things. And why is it needless?
Because they perfectly know these things already. But how came they to the
knowledge of them? By hearing Moses publicly read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day: for he in such clear and express terms has delivered the
same, that whosoever hears cannot but take notice thereof, as besides sundry
other places you may see in Number. 25. and Lev. 17. which you may pervse at your
better leisure. Number. 25.1. etc Lev. 17.10.
The second opinion is of the French translators: this. Ye may not think that
by this decree the law of Moses will be vilipended or disesteemed. Why? Because
the Reading of Moses, says the marginall note, will not be discontinued in the
assemblies of the believing Jews, neither will the believing Gentiles make
scruple to assist them therein. The third and last is the common opinion, and
carries with it best likelihood: this. We must for a while condescend to the
believing Jew in observation of the ceremony, least we scandal them, and
cause them to stagger in the faith. The reason, because they know by the
weekly reading of Moses that it is his ordinance: to whom they are so strongly
addicted, that they cannot yet without danger to their faith be weaned from
him. And thus take which of these conclusions you please, and the sole reading
of Moses is a sufficient proof thereof. You will say, so is interpretation
also. I deny it not: only I affirm that from the context or reason of the
words ye cannot force a distinction between Preaching and Reading.

No more can you from the Text, and the form of words used therein. Indeed if
the words were in the original as Hieron. to whom we are referred englishes
them, In Preachers plea.
debellatum esset, the war were ended. For thus he renders them, Moses was
both read and preached, then which a plainer distinction cannot be. Whether so
reading he intended the advantage of his cause, I will not say. Demortuis nil
nisi been: he was while he lived a grave and reverend preacher. Howbeit the
original reads otherwise, (...) he has them that preach him being read. Beza
turns it thus cum legatur, seeing he is read: others thus, in that, or
inasmuch as he is read. Which how it can enforce a distinction I see not:
rather it imports the contrary, that Preaching here is no other then Reading.
So seems the Syriack also to understand it, Moses has Caroze, Haralds, or
Criers in the Synagogues, who read him every Sabbath day. And indeed the word
(...) here used (whence also Caroze as Casauhon thinks fetches its
pettigree) properly imports the art of a Praeco or Crier. In Baron. ^1 16. n.
23.
Duplic. cont. Stapl. l. 1. c. 6.
Now Praeco a crier, as Whitaker observes Recitat edicta non exponit, barely
reads or recites his Princes edicts, does not expound them. If then I should
say, the King has in every town those that preach or publish his
proclamations being openly read by the Towneclarke upon market days: could any
man of sense or understanding distinguish the preaching or publishing of the
proclamation from the public reading thereof? No more can he Preaching from
reading in this place: for the case is exactly the same.

Add hereunto that such Preaching even in the judgment of the adversary is
here meant, as was ever performed in every Synagogue upon every Sabbath day.
Now that Moses of old was read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 13.27.
it is clear in my text. So is it also Act. 13.27. the voices of the Prophets
are read every Sabbath day. But that Moses in every Synagogue every Sabbath day
was interpreted and Sermons made upon him, does not appear, and I think will
hardly be proved. For as for those places where in mention is made of
exhortation after reading, they are to little purpose: inasmuch as they only
show what sometimes and usually, not what was always done. In the Sabbatticall
year upon the feast of Tabernacles, Deuteronomy 33.10.11
the law was commanded to be read: of expounding there is no mention at all.
Nay seeing then the whole law was entirely to be read, it seems very probable
that in such ascantling of time there could be no expounding. In the days of
good King Josiah, the book of the law which Hilkiah had found in the house of
the Lord was read in the ears of all the people: 2 King. 23.2.
but of exposition not a word. N^h. 8.3.
Ezra also the Priest read the law before the congregation from morning till
midday: but that his reading was interrupted by interpretation is not so clear
as you are borne in hand. For first, if any did interpret it was the Levites:
but that Ezra the Priest, and a Scribe so learned should be put to the inferior
and baser office of reading, and the Levites but petty ones, in comparison
advanced unto the higher and worthier of interpreting, seems altogether
improbable. Secondly, where it is said the Levites caused the people to
understand the law: that it seems was done not by way of expounding, but by
causing the people to stand still in their places, and to give due attention.
As for that which follows they gave the sense, and caused them to understand
the reading, it is in the original thus, (...) and may fitly be rendered they
made attention and understood the reading: referring the distinct reading of
the law unto Ezra, making of attention to the Levites and understanding to the
people. And thus do sundry worthy Divines conceive of this place. All which
not withstanding, because diverse other great clerks, and amongst the rest our
late translators are of another mind, I may not be too peremptory herein. Yet
will I be bold to infer, that unless they can prove that sermons were every
Sabbath made in evey Synagogue (which I think they will never prove) Preaching
in this place will be all one with Reading.

So will it be also, unless they can show that whatsoever was read was
expounded: for it seems by the text that whatsoever was read was preached. But
as with us, the Psalms and Lessons and Epistles and Gospells with other
parcells of Scripture read every Lords day in our Churches, are not nor cannot
all at once be expounded, but only some small portion: so the Petaroths or
Sections of the law and the Prophets, Elias Levita.
ordained by Ezra of old to be read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, are as
they are set down by the son of Maimonie so large, Ben. Maimon.
that they could not possibly, at leastwise conveniently be interpreted at one
time. I presume therefore all was not interpreted which was read: yet all was
preached which was read: wherefore Preaching cannot in this place be
interpreted but only Reading.

Besides these reasons, least any should think I stand single, and by my self
alone, it may please you to know that I am backed with the authority of sundry
grave Divines: of whom I will name two only, with either of whom that one to
whom we are referred is no way to be compared. Apol. against T.C.
The one is reverend Whitgift late Archbishop of the Sea of Canterbury, in his
defense against Cartwright: the other is learned and profound Hooker, the
hammer of our Schismatickes, whose books they are afraid to look upon least
they be confounded, Eccles. Polit. l. 5.
in his Ecclesiastical Polity. These both affirm Preaching in this place to
be no other then Reading. Whitgift adds, that all expositors he could meet
withal were of the same mind: so that in effect I am warranted with a cloud of
witnesses. Against all which, besides confident asseveration, I find nothing
opposed save one only passage out of the second tome of Homilies: Hom. 1. p. 1.
wherein say they, our church does principally fasten on this text to prove a
distinction between Preaching and Reading. Whereunto I answer, that the
intent of the Homily is to show the right use of Churches, and that in them
the word of God should be both read and interpreted: and to this end are
alleged sundry passages out of the Acts, together with this text, all which
jointly but not severally conclude what was intended. For Act. 13.5. speaks
only of Preaching, this text only of Reading, and Act. 13.14. of both. But how
soever the Homily understand this place, sure I am both this book and the
Church of England account of Reading as an effectual Preaching, as shall anon
in the due place be demonstrated.

In the mean season I hope I may be bold out of all these premises to infer
this conclusion, that if any have publicly said, that* whosoever collecteth
out of this text Reading to be Preaching is no better then a seducing spirit,
gives the lie to his mother the Church of England, yea to God himself, and is
mad with reason. He himself at that time spoke more out of Passion then
reason. For a seducing Spirit is not every one that erreth and delivers what
he conceiueth to be true: but he who out of the love of error endeavors to
lead others astray from the truth. And o thou glorious Archangell of the Church
of England Whitgift, were thou also a seducing Spirit? Or was it true of our
Church in thy time which the Prophet spoke of his, Doctores tui Seductores tui,
thy teachers are thy seducers? And thou profound Hooker, then whom never any
man spoke with more reason, werst thou also mad with reason? And ye both when
ye undertook the defense of the Polity and government of your Mother, did
you under pretense thereof give the lie unto your Mother, yea even to God your
Father also? What shall I say? The Lord forgive these intemperate speeches. The
best buckler to defend off such venomous arrows is a good conscience and
Christian patience. And thus armed I pass to the second part.

The second Quere is, whether Reading be a kind of Preaching. That Reading
should be called or counted a kind of Preaching there is a generation that at
no hand can endure. Such language they hold to be a foul Solecisme in
divinity: but the doctrine it self a great impeachment unto Preaching. What,
say they, when our Savior commanded his Apostles to go into the World, Mar^.
16.15.
and to preach the Gospel unto all creatures, is it not a sottish thing to
think he means no more then this, go learn to read well, then call the
people together, and read the word unto them? When St Paul says to the Romans,
How can they preach except they be sent, does not this imply that Preaching is
more then bare Reading? 2. Cor. 2.16.
When the Prophet Esaias said, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of
him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, etc. Do you think he
spoke this of one that should come with a book in his pocket and read unto
Sion? Who, says S. Paul, is sufficient for these things? Now if Reading be
Preaching who is not sufficient for these things? 2. Tim. 4.1.2.
Finally, When S. Paul charge Timothy to preach the word, to be instant in
season, and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort withal long suffering
and doctrine: What? means he no more then this, go take a care to read well?
These are their choicest objections out of Scripture: unto all which I briefly
answer thus. (...): I looked that they should punctually conclude, Ergo Reading
is no kind of Preaching, but they instead hereof substitute another conclusion,
Reading is not all that Preaching that is required in a Minister, which who
denies? For we freely confess more is required then ability to Read: except
only then when sufficient Ministers, or there where sufficient maintenance
cannot be had. In such a case better a Reader then none, to publish Gods word,
to baptize children, to administer the Communion, and to perform other
necessary duties, which but by a Minister may not be done. As for the descant
upon this plainsong, what? did Christ command no more then to come with a book
in ones pocket, and to read fairly? from what spirit it proceeds I will not
say: sure I am it is a stale popish jest. Think thou, Defens. eccles.
author. l. 3. c. 7.
says Stapleton unto Whitaker, when Paul preached unto the Gentiles to convert
them, he delivered them the book of the old Testament, or recited and read
the same unto them?

But besides testimony of Scripture they vouch the authority of the book of
Homilies and Canons: whereof the one distinguishes Readers from Preachers,
which were great wrong unto them if they be Preachers. The other forbids
Ministers to preach in private, whereby I may not so much as read a chapter in
my house if Reading be Preaching. This argument I think themselves make as
little reckoning of, as they do of the authority whereon it is grounded. For
it is a plain fallacy of Equivocation, and they must needs be very blind if
they discern it not. For when our Church puts a distinction betwixt Readers
and Preachers, she understands Preaching in the strict and special
signification for one kind of Preaching, namely interpreting or making of
Sermons. And in this sense it is most true Reading is not Preaching: and very
simple must he be that holds bare Reading to be the making of a Sermon. But
when we say Reading is Preaching, we understand Preaching in a more large and
general signification, as by and by you shall hear: whereunto because they
speak not, they speak not to the purpose.

Furthermore, this doctrine, say they, is a maintainer of Idlers, and dumb
dogs, and soul murderers, and what not? Pax mifrater, good words I pray you,
for these are but the evaporations of a hot brain. Far be it from us by any
means to maintain any such kind of Cattle. We wish with all our hearts,
that not only all Ministers, but all the people of God could prophecy.
Howbeit, were there not an idler, nor dumb dog, nor soule-murtherer, as these
men are pleased to term them, in our Church: yet if public Reading
continue, and I hope it will continue so long as the Sun and Moon endures,
Reading will ever be a kind of Preaching. In the mean season I could wish
that they who are so eager against dumb dogs, would sometimes remember to
turn the edge of their tongues against bawling curres also, with whom the
Church of God is as much pestered as the other: those I mean who behave
themselves so audaciously and confidently in the pulpit, yet have neither the
learning nor the wisdom to speak humbly, discreetly, and to the purpose.

One argument yet remains, Preaching was before the word written: but before
writing Reading could not be: Reading therefore cannot be Preaching. Pardon me
my brethren if I call a spade a spade, and in plain English say, this is a
mere Popish argument. For in like manner reasons Charron a French Papist,
Trois verites l. 3. c. 4. par. 3.
to prove that Faith is not taught by Writing or Reading. The Scripture, says
he, came but late into the world: and the world had been without it for the
space of two thousand five hundred years, namely all the time from Adam to
Moses. If then in the mean while the Faith was published to the world and
received by it, it could not be by the word written or read (which then was
not) but only by the word preached and heard. But in the same sort, as Francis
Iunius confronteth Charron, Confront. ibid
so will I answer these men. First, although before Moses no part of the Canon
was written: yet happily there might be other godly and holy books penned, out
of which the true faith might be learned. Secondly, grant that at that time
nothing at all was written: yet the argument follows not, The world was a
long time without Scripture, Ergo neither now is it the purpose of God to teach
by Writing or Reading. For contrarily, seeing it has pleased God of his
goodness at length to commit his word unto writing, it is manifest that he now
intends men should learn the knowledge thereof even by Reading also. Wherefore
I conclude, that as before Writing there was happily but one kind of
preaching, namely speaking to the ear: so now since the time that Gods word
has been written, there are more kinds then one, namely speaking to the eye
too.

Thus having removed these rubs as it were out of our way, let us proceed in
Gods name to maintain the truth propounded, that Reading is a kind of
Preaching: wherein I must entreat you again and again not to mistake me, as
if I held bare Reading to be all that Preaching which is required in a
Minister; or that it is the making of a Sermon, that is, the expounding of a
Text, deducing of doctrines, and particular application of the same by way of
exhortation. Far be such vanity and folly from me. What then? Surely by
Preaching generally I understand the publishing, or notifying, or making known
of Gods word. Which seeing it may be done by sundry ways and means, as
inwardly, outwardly, publicly, privately, by word, by writing, by speaking, by
reading, by Catechizing, by conference, and the like: I boldly affirm that
there are diverse kinds of Preaching, and that Reading is one of them. And
least any man should think I stretch the word Preaching too far: be it
known unto you that I do no more then Martin Bucer sometime Divinity Reader
in Cambridge, as he is cited by D. Whitgift, has long since done before me:
for as he grants that there are sundry sorts of Preaching, so among them he
reckons Reading for one. And whatsoever some punies avouch to the contrary, I
dare engage all the poor skill I have in languages upon it, that the original
words usually translated Preaching, as (...) in the old Testament, (...) in the
new, are not in Scripture, no nor in other writers restrained unto the mouth or
scholying upon a Text, but are of far larger extent and capacity, even such as
we have above delivered. So that (to come to an issue) when we say reading is
a kind of preaching, our plain meaning is, that it is a way or means by
which the word of God is pub^lished and made known.

Which being so, what is it, my brethren, that so much offends and angreth
you? Is it the inconvenience of the terms, or the untruth of the proposition?
For indeed I find you so variable and uncertain that I know not well where to
find you. Is it the language that seems so harsh and jarring to your ears?
It seemed not so unto the ancients, who made no scruple to speak so. Learned
Hooker who carefully inquired into this business, has observed to my hands
diverse passages. The Council of Vaux says, Canon. 4.
If a Presbyter or Minister cannot through infirmity preach by himself, he may
preach by his Deacon reading some Homily of the Fathers. Where note by the way
that if reading an Homily be Preaching, Reading of Gods word is much more. Can
11.
The Council of Toledo also calls the Reading of the Gospel Preaching. So
does Isidor and Rupertus likewise, the reading of a Lesson in the Church. And a
right learned Lawyer of our own country has observed it also in the Law, In
ans. to the Abstract.
Quae Prophetae Vaticinati sunt populis praedicare, id est, legere: to preach,
that is, to read unto the people what the Prophets have foretold. Thus they.
But if it be so inconvenient to say Reading is Preaching, why do you
yourselues call Preaching Reading? For do you not in ordinary speech call your
Preachers Lecturers? And what is that but Readers? And when you would know who
preaches, is it not your manner to ask who reads? And the Sermons of a
Preacher, do you not style them his Lectures or Readings? But to leave
descanting, besides that the Original words, as we have said, include both
Reading and Sermoning: let it in particular be observed that the word (...) is
in Scripture indifferently used for either. As namely in one place of Esaias it
is said, Esa. 29.12.
The book is delivered to him that is not learned saying, (...) Read this I
pray thee: Id. 61.1.2.
but in another place, the Lord has anointed me (...) to preach or proclaim
the acceptable year. Neither is it to be neglected that from the self same
root comes also (...) Scripture. Thus the ancients stick not to call Reading
Preaching.

Neither stick they to call Writing Preaching. Justin Martyr says, Paraen. ad
Gentes l. 17. Strom. l. 1. p. 1.
that the very writings of the Gentiles preach judgment to come. Clemens of
Alexandria, Ambo verbum praedicant, etc. Both preach the word, one by writing,
the other by voice: and the science of Preaching avails both ways, whether
it work by the hand or by the tongue. S. Augustine also, Doct. Christ. Prol.
They who understand these things produnt ea caeteris, notific or preach the
same unto others either by speaking or writing. Unto these ancients our modern
writers agree. Duplex est praedicandi modus Sermo and Scriptio, there is two
sorts of Preaching, Cont. Bellar. contro. 1.
Speech and Writing, says Iunius. Confront. l. 3. c. 4.
And again, who dare say S. Paul preached not when as he wrote unto the
Corinthians, woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. In Rhem. Test To. 1. 15.
Dr Fulke, S. Paul did preach the Gospel also by writing. Dr Whitaker, The
Apostles were commanded (...) to preach or make Disciples, Cont. Bellar. con.
1. q. 6. c. 9.
tum voce tum scripto, both by voice and writing. De Idol. Eccl. To. ep. ded.
Dr John Reynolds, I who now cannot with my voice as heretofore through the
infirmity of my body, evangelizo manu ac scriptione, preach yet with my hand
and writing as well as I can. Advers. Cost. de Script. De S. script.
Gomarus, There are two kinds of Preaching Enuntiation and writing. Zanchie not
only approves it but proves it too, Go teach all nations, says Christ: here
is a duty commanded. Lo I am with you to the end of the world, this is a
promise annexed. With whom is he? with the Apostles. How long? unto the end of
the world. Therefore must they preach to the end of the world. They cannot by
word of mouth, for they must die. By Writing therefore. Finally the book of
Homilies, and the learned Translators of our last Bible affirm the same. The
book of Homilies, in the Law written with his own finger, Against peril of
idol. p. 1.
and that in the first table, and in the beginning thereof, is this doctrine
against Images not briefly touched, but at large set forth and preached. The
Translators, Preface to the Reader.
The seaventie Interpreters, prepared the way for our Savior among the
Gentiles by written Preaching, as S. John Baptist did among the Jews by vocal.
And thus if either ancient or later Divines knew how to speak fitly, it cannot
be inconvenient or scandalous to call Reading or Writing Preaching.

What then? Is there untruth in the proposition? If so, then have all those
worthies, above cited spoken not only inconveniently but untruly also. But I
beseech you my brethren, do you indeed think Reading is no way a publishing
or making known of Gods will? I can hardly believe it. When God first
commanded the law, and afterward the Sermons of the Prophets, and successively
the whole Canon of Faith to be written, the old Testament in the vulgar
language of the Jews, the new in the tongue that then was most generally
understood: what was his intent and purpose therein? Was it not to endoctrinate
his Church, that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have
hope? Romans 15.4.
When the Septuagint by the special providence of God translated the books of
the old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek, and the whole body of Scripture
under Christianity was so carefully turned into all languages: was not the one
done for the information of those Jews that were Hellenists and understood not
Hebrew, and the other for the instruction of such Christians as knew no other
but their mother tongue? Doubtless it was. For translation say our last
learned translators, Preface to the Reader.
is it that opens the window to let in the light, that breaks the shell
that we may eat the kernel, that puts aside the curtain that we may
look into the most holy place, that remoueth away the cover of the well that
we may come by the water. Furthermore, what is the reason that so many grave
and learned men have in all ages published so many excellent books? and that
Preachers also not content to have spoken by word of mouth unto their auditory,
cause their Sermons to be set forth in print unto the world? Is it not that
they who never knew nor heard them may yet reap benefit by their writing?
True it is that neither Original, nor Translation, nor any book whatsoever
can avail, if it be locked up in a chest, Deuteronomy. 13.11. and 17.1. and 6.6.
or laid on a deske, and never be opened or looked into. God therefore
commanded in the old Testament that the law should be read both publicly and
privately: Ioh. 5.39.
and Christ has ordained the same in the new. And S. Paul when he wrote his
Epistles, meant not that they should lie still under seal: Col. 4.16.
but, says he, when this Epistle is read among you, cause that it be read
also in the Church of the Laodiceans: and that ye likewise read the Epistle
from Laeodicea. 1 These. 5.27.
And again, I adjure you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the
holy brethren. According to this commandment has the practice both of the
Jewish and Christian Church ever been, Act. ^.27.15.21.
and is duly continued amongst us to this day. Now all this cui bono? and to
what end such a world of books, but that by reading them we may attain to
knowledge? Surely if we poor scholars were no better furthered in our
studies by Reading then by Sermons: small would be our knowledge, and poor
God wot the entertainment ye were like to receive from us. Our Savior Christ
thought that Reading might instruct, Mat. 24.15.
when he said Qui legit intelligat, Ephesians. 3.4.
let him that reads understand: and Saint Paul when he wrote, By reading ye
may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. But what need we to
multiply arguments, seeing it is not only confessed that Reading is after a
sort a publishing of Gods word, but also such a publishing as prepares way
unto faith, and furthereth it when it is obtained, which cannot be but by
teaching and notifying the truth. I conclude therefore that reading is a means
whereby the will of God is made known, and consequently is Preaching. Which if
any yet again purpose to gainesay, let me entreat them, not to say one thing,
to wit, that Reading is not Preaching, and to mean another, thus, Reading is
not Sermoning, or all the Preaching required: but to speak to the purpose, and
punctually to demonstrate, that reading is not a publishing of Gods word, which
I know they can never do, and I think they will be ashamed to go about. And
so I pass from the second unto the third part.

The third and last Quere is touching the virtue and efficacy of Reading,
whether it be an ordinary means to beget faith and to convert a soul. That it
should have such a faculty is with much confidence denied: Faith and conversion
by all means must be restrained to Sermons and the Preachers mouth. Some
little of their holy water sprinkle are they content to bestow upon reading. It
may pretily fit a man to hear a Sermon, and further him when he has heard: it
may serve to nourish, set forward, and increase faith when it is gotten, but to
begin, to breed, to work faith where it is not, that belongs unto a Preacher,
nothing can effect it but a Sermon. If we say many have been converted by
reading only, as namely St Augustine, Confess. l. 8. c. 12.
if either we may believe himself, or Martyr, Jewel, and others testifying of
him: and Antonie the Eremite, who as Hierom says, was brought to the faith
lectione Evangelica by reading the Gospel: and John Isaac a Jew both by his
birth and religion, Cont. Lind^n
who professes that he became a Christian by reading the 53. of Esaias: In vita
sua.
and Iunius, who if I misremember not imputes his own conversion to the
reading of Saint John's Gospel: and finally many of our forefathers, unless
we will damn them all into the pit of hell, who living in the blind times of
Popery, came to the light of the truth, as Mr Fox says, Acts and Mon.
either by reading themselves, or hearing others read, Preach. plea.
yea, as Hieron himself confesses, by parcels of Scripture, the writings of
good men, conference with others though seldom and secret, nay by knowing
little more then the Lords prayer: these, I say, and sundry others if we object
unto them, their answer is ready, it was Extraordinary, Def. of Admo^.
it was miraculous. For ordinarily reading says T. C. cannot deliver a soul
from famishment, from the wolf from destruction: Preach. plea.
yea, says Hieron, knowledge so gotten is but vain iangling, and swimmeth in
the brain, but converts not the heart. So that had we verbatim written all
those heavenly Sermons which St Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles preached among
them: had we that famous Sermon of St Peter by which three thousand souls at
once were added to the Church: Act. 2.41.
nay had we all the gracious words sanctified by our blessed Saviors own
mouth while he lived here in the flesh: yet could they not beget faith or
convert a soul, but only extraordinarily, and by way of miracle. A strange and
incredible assertion, and they had need to be armed with mighty demonstrations
to persuade it. Let us therefore examine the force of them.

First they urge that of Elihu in the book of Job, Job. 33.23.24
If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand to show
unto man his righteousness: then is he gracious unto him, and says, deliver
him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. Here deliverance is by
a messenger: this messenger is a minister, and that not a Reader but Preacher,
there being in Jobs time no Scripture and consequently no reading. Whereunto I
answer first, that (...) signifies also an Angel, and that thereupon some
interpret it of a good Angel, others of the Angel of the covenant, rendering
the words thus. If there be an Angel speaking for him, and showing for man his
righteousness. If so, as it is very probable, then is the argument of no
force, here being no speech of a Minister but mediator, nor of a Preacher
speaking to man, but of an advocate interceding for man. Secondly, be it that a
Preaching Minister is meant, yet not every one, but one among a thousand. For
to say that not one among a thousand Ministers, but one Minister among a
thousand men is understood, is too slight. Mercer is of another mind; and
Oecolampade conceiues it of a grave, intelligent, and wise teacher, such as is
rarely to be found. And so by this reckoning Faith should be tied very s^ort:
and the Sermons of vulgar and ordinary Preachers should not be able to beget
Faith, Lastly, he that attributes such efficacy to Sermons, does not so doing
deny it unto other means: and who, Contra Char. l. 3. c. 4.
says Iunius, having any Christian sense or zeal dare say that Faith is not
to be advanced by all means? yea, but in Jobs time Reading could not be a
means. True: yet it follows not but now it may be a means. Then it was not
when there was nothing to be read: now it is as we have showed, the whole Canon
being written.

Prove. 29.18.
In the next place they urge that of Solomon, where there is no vision there the
people perish. Here by vision vocal preaching is meant: but without vision no
salvation, Ergo nor without Preaching or Sermons. I answer, (...) or vision
imports not the act of the seer or a Serme^: but the object or thing which he
sees. Otherwise when it is said, the vision which Isaiah saw, we might read it
thus, the Sermon which Isaiah saw: Esaiah. 1.1.
and so to see a vision shall be no other then to make a Sermon, which is
absurd. By vision then are we to understand the law, as it is in the latter
clause of the verse, or the revelation of Gods will: as if the wise man had
said, where God reveals not himself there the people perish; which is
undoubtedly true. And as undoubted is it that God reveals himself by more
ways then by Sermons. Howbeit I deny not but in some sense it may be truly
said where vocal Preaching is not there the people perish: not for that they
want the Ordinary means as long as they have the written word, but because of
their negligence and retchlesnesse who of themselves will not search the
Scripture, nor seek the truth until others bring it home unto them.

Thirdly they object that of the Apostle, It pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching to save them that believe; 1. Cor. 1.21.
where, say they, Faith and Salvation are tied unto Preaching. But first I deny
that Preaching is here the making of a Sermon: for it is not in the Original
(...) but (...). Now (...) imports not the act of Preaching, but the object or
thing preached. Duplic. cont. Stapl l. 2. c. 10
Hence Whitaker expresses it by (...) that which is preached: and Zanchy yet
more manifestly by Doctrina Evangelica, De S. Script.
the doctrine of the Gospel. And this indeed seems foolishnes unto the
natural man, yet being known, by what way soever, it works Faith and is the
power of God to ^alvation. Secondly suppose that preaching of Sermons were here
meant, yet what consequence is this, Sermons breed Faith, ergo Reading does
not? For both may. This is their solemn error they labor to show what virtue
sermons have, but never show that such virtue belongs to Sermons only.

Lastly they object that of S. Paul to the Romans, Romans 10 13.14
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? Here Invocation is chained to Faith, Faith to Hearing, and Hearing to
Preaching. This is their Achilles, and therefore will we endeavor to give it
full satisfaction. First then grant that Faith depends upon such Preaching
as may be heard, yet this lets not but it may be the effect of reading: for
when the word is publicly read, I hope it is heard also. But I answer
secondly, and more roundly to the purpose, that Hearing in this place
betokens not only the outward act, or, as Philosophers call it, passion of
the ear: but whatsoever else is analogicall and proportionable thereunto, as
namely Reading, and Seeing, and the like. And herein, least any should think
me singular, or to maintain a strange Paradoxe, it may please you to know
that I am warranted both by the language of holy Scripture, and the judgment
of our best Divines. In scripture, Ps. 19.1.2.3.
the heavens and the firmament are said to have a speech: and when by seeing
and contemplating them we learn the invisible things of God, Romans 1.20.
we are said to hear their voice? The word written has in like manner a
mouth, Deuteronomy. 17.11. 2. These. 2.8. Act. 13.27. Romans 10.8. Ioh. 19.37. Romans 3.19.
Heb. 12.5. Romans 9.27. Ioh. 5.39. Heb. 4.12. Luc. 16.29. Gal. 4.21.22.
a voice, a speech given unto it, whereby it speaks, it cries, it
testifies: and when we look upon it or read if for our instruction we are
said to hear. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, says
Abraham in the Parable: and S. Paul, Do ye not hear the Law? Scriptum enim
est, for it is written. And if as Cyprian says, When we read God speaks unto
us, how can it be but that in reading we hear the voice of God? When we
receive a letter from our friend, we are said to hear from him: why not from
God also when we read his letter? For so the Fathers style the Scriptures.
Certainly our worthiest Divines conceive of hearing no otherwise in this
place. Confront. l. 3. c. 4.
Learned Iunius, It will be said Faith comes by hearing: the answer is
ready, Hearing is of the word whether it be spoken or written. Ibid.
And again, As the word spoken and written differ only in this, that the one
is sounded in the air, the other is apparelled in white paper, and guarded with
black lines, to the end one may see it, and hold it by the coat, which
pronounced only would fly away: so hearing and seeing in regard of the effect
is all one. Writing to speaking, and seeing the book to Hearing is
analogicall. So Iunius, De verb. scrip.
Zanchie, Legendo Scriptur as audimus, In Reading we hear the Scriptures. In
Rhem. Test. Romans 1.15.
Dr Fulke, S. Paul did preach the Gospel also by writing, and the people did
hear by reading. D. Whitaker, Dupl. contr. Stapl. l. 2. c* 10. De script. q.
5. c. 8. arg. 2.
writing is the imitation of speech, auditur ergo, therefore it is heard. And
the same D. Whitaker interpreting these very words, Faith comes by Hearing
limiteth it not unto the outward ear, but extends it thus, ex auditu, id
est, ex sensu Scripturae recte percepto, by Hearing, that is, by understanding
the right meaning of Scripture, Cont. A.D. c. 9
by what way soever. This exposition Wotton approving, he further adds, that
it is not the Apostles purpose to disable the word Read, but partly to show
that the means of salvation proceed from God alone, partly that no man might
excuse himself by ignorance, God having sent his servants into all the world:
without which sending none might preach either by word or writing, and without
which preaching no man could believe. And thus have you both the true meaning
of this place,, and a full answer unto the objection. Other passages besides
these do they urge: but being either of the same nature, or of less moment, I
will not trouble you with them.

Now it remains breefly to resolve and confirm the truth. Wherein to the end
it may appear, that what I have often maintained in private, I am neither
afraid nor ashamed publicly to profess in pulpit: I here openly proclaim,
and confidently affirm, that Reading is an ordinary means to beget Faith and
convert a soul. Which that I may the more clearly and distinctly demonstrate,
give me leave in few words to open the terms and meaning of the Proposition.
First then by Faith I understand not only that whereby we yield assent unto
Scripture the Principle of Faith that it is Gods word, and to all those
articles of Faith specially fundamental established by this principle, which
we call Historical or Dogmaticall Faith: but that Faith also whereby we are
justified, and by which we accept Christ to be our Mediator, King, Priest, and
Prophet, together with the effects thereof, Repentance from dead works, and
new obedience. All this I comprehend under the name of Faith. Secondly by
Means I understand such middle or secondary causes as come between the first
cause and the effect for the producing of it. And these means if they be
praeter ordinem besides the perpetual order placed in things, there being no
coherence between them and the effect, or no aptnes in them to produce the
effect, then do we call them Extraordinary: and such was the feeding of Elias
by Ravens and the curing of the blind man by dawbing clay upon his eyes. 1.
King. 17.6. Ioh. 19.6.
But if they be secundum ordinem according to the perpetual order established
in things, having in them an aptness and fitness to produce the effect, then
are they called Ordinary: and such is the nourishing and sustaining of man by
bread. Now the sovereign and prime cause of Faith is God. God works it by
his word. The word works as a Doctrinall or Moral instrument by way of
argument and persuasion. Before it can persuade it must be revealed. God
therefore reveals it, and that sometimes without means, by an immediate
impression of light and grace upon the soul, Act. 2.4. Act 9.3. etc. Gal. 1.12.
as he did unto the Apostles on the feast of Pentecost, and to S. Paul in his
journey toward Damascus. But generally and for the most part he reveals it
mediately and by the intervention of means. The Ordinary means is that which
is settled and established to continue in the Church for ever. That is the
Ministry of the Church, whose office is by all means to publish the word,
whether by Writing or by Speaking, and this again whether by Reading or
Interpreting. All which, if they have in them an ability and fitness under God
to convey into our hearts the knowledge of his word, then undoubtedly are they
all Ordinary means to beget faith. And such an ordinary means among the rest
do I affirm Reading to be. Which having thus fully explained the terms, I
now come to demonstrate: and first in that faith whereby we yield assent unto
the Scripture that it is the very word of God.

The last and highest principle whereinto Faith is resolved, and whereupon it
finally stays it self is the Scripture: yet is it not so unto us until we
be persuaded that it is the word of the eternal verity, which can neither err
nor lead into error. But how come we to be. persuaded hereof? By Sermons? I
deny not but Sermons are under God a sufficient means to persuade it. But when
did you ever hear a Preacher treat of this argument, or go about to prove it?
Or if any have done it, did they not persuade you to that whereof you were
already persuaded? Yes questionless. For besides the testimony of the Church,
in the public reading of the Scriptures as the word of God, there shines
forth in them such a Majesty and divinenesse as is not to be found in other
writings: and when by Reading yet take notice of so many oracles, and miracles,
and predictions, and sundry other things far exceeding the power of nature,
Dupl. cont. Stap. l. 2. c. 6.
does not reason it self tell you, says Whitaker, that they must needs be of
God? In the way to the true Chapter
The same says D. John White Many times Pagans and Atheists without the
Ministry come to Faith by only Reading: whence but being convinced by
Scripture it self? If then the very Reading of holy Scripture may bring unto
our knowledge such remonstrances and arguments as convince the mind that it is
the word of God, certainly it is an ordinary means to beget this faith: for
what can be more ordinary then arguments and demonstrations. But the former is
true, as we have proved: therefore the latter also.

If so, then much more is it apt and fit to beget that Faith whereby we yield
assent to those articles which are built upon Scripture: especially if two
things may be granted, first that it is perfect, secondly that it is facile and
easy to be understood. That it is all-sufficient and contains whatsoever is
necessary either to be believed or done unto salvation, none but a Papist will
deny. And surely if it be defective, either it is from God, or from the
penmen. Not from the penmen, for they were but hands, and could not but write
what the head indicted to them. If from God, then either because he could not,
or because he would not perfect it. To say he could not, is to derogate from
his wisdom and power: to say he would not is to detract from his love, and to
tax him of envy. But what need me to spend more time in this point, seeing I
now deal against those who challenge unto it such a perfection, that nothing
may be done, no not to the taking up of a straw, without warrant from it. The
Scripture then is perfect: is it also facile and easy to be understood?
Aristotle says of his Acroamaticks that they were (...), published in that
they were written, not published because of their darkness. In the books of
Heraclitus there was so great obscurity, that he was therefore called (...)
Obscure. May we justly say the same of the Scriptures, and the penmen
thereof? Surely it cannot be denied but that some things are difficult: yet as
there are deep places where the Elephant may swim, so there are shallow where
the Lamb may wade: and as there is harder meat which the strong man may chew,
so there is milk also which the infant may suck. And I boldly affirm that all
fundamental points and duties necessary to salvation are in Scripture so
clearly delivered, that if they were written with a sunbeame they could not
be more clear. In Ps. 26.
God has spoken so, that not a few, but all may understand, Ep. 3.
says Hierom. He speaks to the heart both of learned and unlearned, Dial.
cum Try phon.
says Augustine. Scriptures are so plain as they need not to be expounded, L.
7. in Julian
says Justin Martyr. They exceed no man's capacity, says Cyril of Alexandria.
They are easy, not to the wise only, but women and boys, Hom. 1. in Ioh
says Chrysostom: And again, They are easy to be understood, to the
Servant, to the Countryman, to the widow, to the stripling, De Script q. 2. c.
14. arg. 5.
to him that is very simple. The same say all our Divines against Papist. The
Scripture, says Whitaker, may easily be understood of any if he will. And
Zanchie, De verb. scrip.
will a Father speak obscurely to his children in things concerning their
salvation, that they shall need to seek interpreters? No verily. But God being
wise was able to express himself, and being good he would: and it was
necessary to speak plainly in things so necessary. If then, to come to a
conclusion, Scripture contain all what is necessary, and that in such plain
terms that whosoever reads may easily understand: how can it be but Reading
should be an apt and fit means, and consequently an ordinary means to beget
this Faith? For if once we believe that Scripture is the word of God, we cannot
but yield assent unto those verities that are so plainly delivered therein,
and which we know to be witnessed by the truth it self.

The same do I also affirm of that Faith which we call justifying, and of
the fruits thereof, Repentance and New obedience, that the Reading of Scripture
is an apt and fit means to beget that also. For it presents unto us store of
strong motives to persuade, sweet promises to allure, terrible threatenings to
affright, notable examples to imitate, and the like: then which there cannot be
a better outward means, and there needs no more but the inward concurrence of
Gods spirit to work a perfect conversion. Read among other places the 28 of
the book of Deuteronomie, ^ut. 28.
and then tell me whither the Sermons of any man, nay whither the tongue of
men and Angels be able to persuade more effectually. Sermons you say ordinarily
beget Faith, work Repentance, and breed sanctity and newness of life: not so
Reading. May it please you then to tell us for our better satisfaction, what
such coherence there is betwixt Sermons and Faith, which is not betwixt it and
Reading? And what that intrinsicall and proper quality of Sermons is whereby
Faith is begotten which is not also to be found in Reading. Is it in the
doctrine and matter of Sermons? It is the very same which we read. Is it in
the arguments and motives whereby they persuade? We read either the same, or as
forcible in the Scripture. What then? Is it in the utterance, voice, gesture,
behavior, or credit of the Preacher? Much less: for then should we be
beholding for our Faith to accidents more then substance, Cor. 2.4.
and to the plausible inticements of humane wisdom, rather then the evidence
and demonstration of the spirit. Wherein then lies the virtue? Forsooth in Gods
blessing: for Preaching is the ordinance of God, and he has promised to bless
it. But stay, my brethren, is not Reading Gods ordinance also? And does God,
having imprinted in it such an aptness and fitness ordinarily to beget Faith,
either curse his own ordinance, or suspend the operation of it so, as it shall
never work but only extraordinarily? What shall I say? When they have answered
what they can unto the question, the sum of all, as Hooker observes will be
this, Sermons are and must be the only ordinary means, but why and wherefore
we cannot tell. And so I pass from the first argument, drawn from the
aptness and fitness of Reading to produce all these kinds of Faith.

Now in the second place I dispute ex concessis, from that which is yielded and
granted by the adversary. First it is granted by Hieron, and we have proved it
by the testimony of M. Fox to be true, that many of our forefathers in the
blind time of Popery were converted to the true Faith by reading only. This,
say they, was extraordinary: but I infer that therefore it was ordinary. For if
reading be excluded, and sermons be the only ordinary means, it will follow
that the Church at that time was without the ordinary means: for wholesome
Sermons then were not to be had. But it is a strange point in Divinity that
the Ordinary means should at any time fail in the Church: and I presume when
that fails the Church of God will fail also. If so, then is there some other
ordinary means besides Sermons; and what can that be but the written word and
the Reading thereof?

It is further granted, and that rightly, that whosoever reads the
Scriptures, or hears them read, is thereupon bound to believe. And this is so
clear a truth, that Whitaker could not forbear to charge his adversary
Stapleton with much folly for holding the contrary: Dupl. contr. Stapl. l. 1.
c. 9.
Sic tu plane desipis, says he, Art thou so very a fool as to think that the
word of God has no authority, or binds no man to believe, but then when it
is preached? Certainly if the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles was to be
believed when it was delivered by them in their Sermons: it is as much now to
be believed when it is convayed unto us by way of writing and reading.
Whereupon says Calvin Although the Apostles be dead, yet their doctrine lives
and flourishes, 2. Pet. 1.15.
and it is our duty to profit by their writing as much as if themselves were
now publicly speaking before our eyes. Unless therefore Gods word cease to
be his word when it is read, an obligation in reading is laid upon us, to
yield all credence and obedience unto it. Now God binds not but by a
commandment. He commands therefore to believe by Reading. What? Does he
command us to believe by a means that is utterly unable and unfit to work
belief? And does he daily and hourly tie our Faith unto that which he
means not to bless unto that end, but once as it were in an age and
extraordinarily? Questionless, seeing God has ordained that his holy
Scriptures be ordinarily read both in public and private, and has bound us
all to believe whenever we either read them or hear them read: it cannot be
but that Reading is an ordinary means to beget faith, and that God will
always vouchsafe to bless his own ordinance to the same end.

In the third place I urge the testimony and authority of holy writ. But
happily so doing I may be counted in the number of those vile men, who like
venomous spiders suck poison out of the sweetest flowers. (...), the die is
cast: and angry speeches may not hinder me from maintaining truth by the word
of truth. When all Israel, says Moses, is come to appear before the Lord thy
God in the place which he shall choose: Deuteronomy. 31.11.12.
thou shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing. Gather the
people together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within
thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord
your God, and observe to do all the words of his Law. Here in express terms
the Reading of the law is commanded: and it is particularly commanded to this
end that men may learn thereby. What? the fear of God, and obedience to the
Law. God therefore has appointed Reading to be an Ordinary means of
conversion. It is answered that such Reading is meant as was accompanied with
interpretation. So they dream indeed: but in the text there is no mention of
interpretation. Neither is it likely, seeing now the whole law was to be read
at once, as is above said, and the scantling of time would hardly bear any
exposition. Howsoever, sure I am the holy Ghost ascribes the effect unto
Reading, and I think he both knew and meant what he said. Ier. 36.2. etc.
In the Prophecy of Jeremy God commands the Prophet to write all his
Prophecies in a book, that all the house of Judah might hear them read, for
it may be, says God, that hearing they may return every man from his evil
way, that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. According to this
commandment Jeremy dictates all the Prophecies unto Baruch, Baruch writes
them, and being written reads them in the house of the Lord. Here again
Reading is commanded by God, and to the same end, that the people thereby might
be moved to repentance. To this they answer, first that God speaks after the
manner of men. True, when he says it may be, as if he knew no more then man
what the effect would be. Yet is it plainly intimated that Reading is an
ordinary means of repentance. Secondly, say they, Jeremy had preached the
same before, and so they are Sermons that are commanded to be read. Be it so.
Yet then the very Reading of Sermons may work Repentance, which the Preaching
of them could not. To say nothing that these Sermons written were Gods word
both for matter and manner: so that if the Reading of them might be effectual
to conversion, the like efficacy cannot reasonably be denied unto the Reading
of that written word which now we have. Lastly, say they, this was
extraordinary, for Jeremy was in prison and could not come to preach. It is
untrue that Jeremy was now in prison: for then the Princes would not have said
unto Baruch, V. 19.
Go hide thee thou and Jeremy, and let no man know where ye be. And whereas
Jeremy says, V. 5.
I am shut up I cannot go into the house of the Lord, the best Expositors
understand it of some other impediment, and not imprisonment. But be it that
Jeremy was in prison, yet is the Reading of his prophecies no more
extraordinary then the Reading of any other book of Scripture, nor the
Reading, of these less effectual then of them. To let pass sundry other
passages of Scripture, I urge in the last place that of Saint John, Ioh. 20.31.
These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the
son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name. Here
writing is made the means of believing, as believing is made the means of
life everlasting. But Writing without Reading is void and of no effect: the
meaning thereof is as if he had said, These are written to the end that by
reading them ye may believe. For to restrain it thus, These thing are written
to the end that a Preacher by discoursing or making Sermons upon some parcells
of them may work Faith in you, is too absurd and shameless: although I deny
not that Sermons are an excellent means to beget faith also.

Unto the authority and testimony of Scripture I add the consent of ancient
Fathers: who although they be but little reckoned of by some children of these
times, yet have ever been of great credit with those that are wise and
learned. Cap. 18.
Tertullian in his Apologeticum wishes the Gentiles to search for the Seventies
translation in Ptolemies library: or if they will not take the pains to go
into the Synagogues of the Jews that are among them, there to hear the same
translation read. To what end? that so they may find the true God and believe.
Comment in Psalm. initio.
S^ Basil affirms that the Scriptures are (...), a common Apothecaries shop
as it were, of the soul: and that every one may be a Physician to himself,
and take from thence what he needs according to the nature of his disease. Ser.
35.
St Ambrose says, Sacrarum Scripturaru^ lectio vita est, the reading of the
Holy Scripture is life, according to that of our Savior Jesus Christ, John.
6.63.
verba quae ego loquor spiritus sunt and vita, In Esa. 11.
the words which I speak are spirit and life, Saint Hierome, Frequenter evenit
vt homines saeculares mystica nescientes simplici lectione pascantur: It
oftentimes comes to pass that lay men ignorant of the mysteries of religion,
are fed and nourished by bare reading. St Augustine, Epist. 120.
Ama Ecclesiasticas literas legere, etc. Accustom thy self to read the
letters of the Church, that is, the Scriptures, and thou shall not find many
things to demand of me: but by reading and meditating, if also with pure
affection thou pray unto God the giver of all good things, thou shall learn
all things that are worthy to be known, or certainly the most things rather
by his inspiration then any admonition of men. Finally John Bishop of
Constantinople, the noblest Preacher of all the Fathers, and styled for his
eloquence Chrysostom, that is Golden mouth, and whom for his pregnant speeches
to this purpose I have reserved to the last, says as follows, All things
necessary are in Scripture so manifest and open, In 2. These. Hom. 3.
that we need nor Homilies nor Sermons, were it not (...) through our own
sluggishnesse and negligence. And again, Prol. in Epist. ad Romans
If you will studiously and diligently read, (...) ye shall need no other
thing: for he is true that says, Quaerite and invenietis, seek and ye shall
find. Ad Col. Hom. 9.
And again, Neque moreris alium doctorem, etc. Neither stay thou for other
Doctors: thou have the oracles of God, none can teach thee better then Dr Peter
or Dr Paul. Hom 3. de Lazaro.
And yet again, The Apostles and Prophets as the general Schoolemasters of
the world, have made their writings so plain to all, that every one of
himself only by reading may learn: and ye need nothing else but read. And
yet again lastly, In 2. These. Hom. 3.
why say they should I go to the Church if there be no Sermon there? (right
the language of some of our time) This says he, is it that has corrupted and
overthrown all. For what need is there of a Preacher? This necessity comes
through our own negligence. For what need sermons? All things are clear and
plain in holy Scripture: whatsoever things are necessary are manifest. But
because ye are nice auditors, and seek to have your ears delighted,
therefore do you call for sermons. Thus far Chrysostom: and thus the Fathers.

With whom agree our modern Divines both foreign and domestical, who perhaps
are more gracious with our adversaries then the Fathers. And here I might
allege many passages out of P. Martyr, In loc. clas. 1. cap. 6 In loc. de Sc.
Musculus, Aretius, Zanchie, Piscator, and others, of whom one swears that
whosoever diligently reads shall at length be taken, another affirms that
God would have the Bible read of all thereby to know the truth and to be saved,
De verbo script. Praef. in Math.
and all of them though not in direct, yet in equivalent terms avouch my
conclusion. But I will content my self with these few following. Francis
Cha^ron l. 3. c. 4. In Test. Rhem 2. Pet. 3. parag 1.
Francis Iunius, I believe because I have read, and read it written: and
again, Faith is wrought by hearing and by reading also. Dr Fulke, By reading
of the Scriptures ignorant men may learn to have true knowledge, and wild
wicked fellows to become more staid in their wits. Duplic. contra Stapl. l. 1.
c. 7. Ibid. c. 11.
Dr Whitaker, by the reading and study of Scripture Faith is learned by the
ordinary way to learn faith. Again, Faith is cherished by reading says
Tertullian: now faith is nourished and cherished, ex quibus existit, by the
same means that bred it. Ibid.
And yet again, Reading is the ordinary means of edifying: and God is
effectual by reading, and gives the Holy Ghost thereby. Against A* D. ca. 3.
Wotton. We doubt not many have, we are sure they might and may attain to
the same faith, what if I say to justifying faith too? without any Preaching by
the reading of Scripture. For since it is partly the matter that must argue the
Scripture to be the word of God, partly the majesty which any man may discern
in the manner of writing: unless it can be proved out of the Scripture that
the Holy Ghost will not work by these upon the heart of him that reads, but
only of him that hears a man expound this word unto him, I see no sufficient
reason why faith may not be had by reading, where Gods ordinance of Preaching
is only wanting, and not wilfully neglected. Dr Nowell in his Chatechisme
appointed by authority to be taught in all schools, Nowels Cha^.
By what way or means is the knowledge of Gods will declared in his word to
be attained? By diligent reading and meditating of Gods word, or by attentive
hearing the same read and purely expounded by others. The book of Homilies
affirms, Tom. ^. hom. 1. p. 1.
that the reading of Scripture breeds knowledge, turns, illuminateth,
comfort, incourageth: and again expressly, The ordinary way to attain the
knowledge of God and our selves is with diligence to hear and read the holy
Scripture. Finally, if the judgment of the chief governors of our Church,
and the public authorizing of books for the maintenance hereof be a
sufficient argument, I dare be bold to say that this is the very doctrine of
the Church of England. Sure I am that the reverend father of this Diocese who
best should know it, gave express commandment that it should publicly in
this pulpit be acknowledged, that reading is an ordinary means to beget
Faith, and not Preaching only as they term it. Thus our latter Divines.

I have but one thing more to say in this point, and it is this, that howsoever
these men may differ from Papists in other opinions, yet I see not how they can
clear themselves from Popery in this. For to omit all consequences which
necessarily follow upon it, thus in plain terms say the Jesuits of Rhemes, In
Romans 1.15.
Faith comes ordinarily of preaching and hearing and not of reading and
writing. And Bellarmine, De verbo dei l. 4. c. 12.
Scripture was not given to this end to be a rule of Faith, but to be a
certain profitable commonitory to preserve and nourish that doctrine which is
received by preaching. And Stapleton, Defens. Eccles author.
Reading is not via ordinaria, the ordinary way to Faith: and again, Scripture
binds not a man to believe, neither is Faith to be had by it, but only as it is
preached by the Church. Trois verites l. 3. c. 4.
Lastly Charron, Faith is by the word Preached and pronounced by voice, not
written or read. Ibid.
Again, Thou beleeuest because thou read: thou art no Christian: for the
Christian believes before reading and without. Ibid.
And again, Faith got by Reading is acquisite, humane, studied, not Christian:
and he that has it is no Christian, his Faith must have another name. Iump
almost with that ere while quoted out of Hieron, ordinarily knowledge so gotten
is but vain iangling and swimmeth in the brain but renewes not the heart.
Thus Papists: against whom our men mainely oppose themselves herein.

And thus have I at length resolved the three Questions in the beginning
propounded, and as I trust maintained the truth of God, and that as becomes
the truth with the spirit of meekness and sobriety. Withal as I suppose I
have made a sufficient Apology both for my self and other my reverend
brethren, who in the general understanding of the ordinary auditory of this
place have been publicly censured as Seducing Spirits, for holding that which
I have now maintained. Reason would that he who seemed to lay this scandal
upon us should have made public amends, and either have interpreted himself
if he were misunderstood, or acknowledged his rashness if he did so censure.
But seeing it will not be, and so much charity cannot be found in the heart,
yea over and above, seeing I have since that time been braued to my face, and
as I am credibly informed, often insulted upon behind my back, as if I durst
not publicly show my face in these points: though otherwise I could have been
content to hold my peace for the peace of the Church, yet now I could do no
other then I have done, and pardon me I beseech you, for hereunto have I been
forced and constrained. Sooner perhaps would I have discharged my self of this
burden, if sooner I could have met with so fit an auditory. For who can better
testify of what I say, or are fitter to be judges and vmpires in such a
business, then you my reverend and beloved brethren of the Clergy? To you
therefore and to your grave censure do I refer both my self, and whatsoever
I have said, duly remembering that of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 14.32.
the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets.

And now give me leave to address my speech unto you my beloved brethren of
the Laity, specially you that are the ordinary auditory of this place. Let
me entreat you all not again to mistake me, as if by what I have said I went
about any way to derogate from Sermons. I say mistake me not again, for once
already have I been either ignorantly or wilfully misconstrued. Preaching some
while since in this place on Luc. 20.34.35. and enquiring as my Text occasioned
me, Luc. 20.34.35.
who they were that should be accounted worthy to obtain the next world, and
the resurrection from the dead, I affirmed first in general that it was not
semblance only or show of religion that could make a man worthy, and then in
particular, that a man might be a frequent auditor of Sermons, might go two,
three, four, more miles to hear them, all the while might look the Preacher
stark in the face, afterward return with joy, call to mind, talk, confer
and repeat the same, and yet for all this still be counted unworthy. And
fearing least I should be misunderstood, I then entreated you not to mistake
me, as if I misliked Sermons, or the going to them. Nay I exhorted you to go,
provided you went not with contempt of Divine Service at home, nor departing
from your own Minister how mean a Preacher soever, none I think being so
mean but is able to teach you more then you know: provided also that you
pass not through the Churchyards of as reverend and learned men as these
parts afford any to go a mile further to hear a novice, and when you are
returned, that your repetitions be not vaineglorious, with such a rumble, and
after the manner of a riot, but modest and severally in your own houses, and
lastly that the fruit of your often hearing be not a demure look only and a
prating tongue, but true humility and charity which best conformeth us unto
JESUS CHRIST. These things I then said, and for ought I yet see said not
amiss: yet am I censured as an enemy to Sermons, as one that greeues the
hearts of Gods Saints, and lash the faults of Hypocrites on the backs of Gods
children. Wherefore you see I have reason now to be wary of my self, and to
prevent the like danger that I be not the second time mistaken, as if I spoke
in derogation of Sermons.

Sermons I acknowledge to be the blessed ordinance of God, and as learned
Hooker says, they are the keys to the kingdom of heaven, wings to the soul,
spurs to our good affections, food to them that are sound and healthy, and
unto diseased minds physic. Whatsoever any can truly say in honor of them,
withal our hearts we subscribe unto it. If comparison be made between Reading
and Sermons, we readily yield the precedencie to Sermons. For although it be
the same word which is read and treated upon: yet the manner which is or should
be used in Sermons, by explaining that which is hard, deducing of doctrines,
and applying them home unto the conscience, does more speedily and easily
inform the understanding and beget Faith, as he that is taught by one that is
his crafts master shall sooner attain to knowledge then he that is (...), and
has no other help then his own industry. I add farther that whosoever
neglects or contemns Sermons, neglects and contemns the ordinance of
God, and consequently God himself: neither may such a one look for a blessing
from God upon his Reading or whatsoever other means he uses. So that my
desire is by all means to encourage all, and by no means to disharten any
from the frequent hearing of Sermons.

Howbeit I may not so advance Sermons but that I must give Reading the due
also. Never more need. Among Papists the Stews pass unpunished, but to read
privately in the Bible is death: their public reading is in a tongue unknown,
whereby they make God a Barbarian to the people. Smith a Puritan, a Brownist,
an Anabaptist, a Se-baptist, Mar. 4.17.20.
what not? says that Reading is but a ceremony, and that our Savior read
indeed to fulfill all righteousness, but when he had done shut the book to put
an end to the ceremony. He says farther that Reading is the Ministry of
the letter and so of death; and that it is unlawful in worship to hold a book
before the eye. Our brethren of the faction have not only said it, but also
printed it, that Reading is not feeding, but as evil as playing on a stage,
and worse too. And is it not the manner of many, Admon. to the Parliament.
neglecting public Service and Reading, to send their servants or children to
see whether the Preacher be ready to go into the pulpit? For till then they
list not come, and so according to the Frenchiest, turn all Gods worship into
a mere preachment. To say nothing that they tie your Faith unto the Preachers
mouth, and deny unto Reading all power to beget it: the contrary whereof you
have now heard sufficiently, as I am persuaded, demonstrated unto you.

Behold therefore, blessed brethren, behold the largeness of Gods bounty and
goodness in making the means of your salvation so facile and easy unto you.
He has made every one of you capable of reading: there is none but may learn
to read if he will. It is as easy as to learn to play at tables or cards:
and a little of the time which some spend in Alehouses and idle exercises would
soon make them perfect scholars therein. But were it difficult to read, yet
have you ears, and you may daily hear Gods word both publicly and privately
read unto you in your mother tongue, if so you please. It is hid from none but
those that will not seek it, says Chrysostom: and it is exposed and made
obvious to every one, least any should perish for want of ability to find it.
It is not so high above thee, Deuteronomy. 30 11.12.13.14.
as Moses says, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to heaven and
bring it to us? Neither is it so far from thee, that thou should say, who
shall go over the Sea for us and bring it unto us? But the word is very nigh
thee: if thou will but open thy eyes, thou may read it at thy pleasure, or if
thou will but lend an ear, thou may when thou will hear it read unto thee.
Let no man think himself abandond of God, or destitute of all means, as long
as he has free liberty to read or hear the written word. Neither yet let any
man say unto me, what need Sermons if reading be sufficient? For it is as if
he should say, what need two eyes if a man may see with one? No, my brethren,
God is more bountiful and liberal then so: and as he has provided more kind
of stuffes for our back then one, and more kind of meats for our belly then
one, so has he ordained more means of Faith and Salvation then one. Among
them, if you will, let Sermons be the principal: yet is it not the only
means, but reading is a means also. For as St Hierome says, The Scriptures
of God teach the people not only by the ears, but by the eyes also: and he
that sanctified sounds and words unto the ears, has also sanctified letters
and characters to the eye, and blessed be the name of God for both.

Courage therefore, Christian brethren, courage: buy you bibles, and read them
diligently: and when they are publicly read unto you, listen unto them
carefully. It can not be but so doing ye shall reap wonderful benefit.
Josephus writes of the Jews that they were all generally very skillful in the
text of Scripture. It is reported of Alphonsus the wise and learned King of
Arragon, that he had read over the whole Bible fourteen times, besides the
Gloss and other commentaries upon it. Yea diverse women, as Gorgonia sister to
Gregory Nazianzen, Paula, Eustochium, Salonia, Celantia, with others, by
frequent reading became marvelous ripe in Scripture. And Gregory the great
tells us of a man utterly unlearned, that could not so much as read, who
notwithstanding bought himself a bible, and entertained one in his house to
read unto him, whereby, says he, iuxta modum suum plene didicit Scripturas,
according to his measure he perfectly learned the Scriptures, though otherwise
he were a man altogether unlettered. Courage therefore again Christian
brethren, Ioh. 5.39.
courage: search the Scripture, as our Savior counsels, Psalm. 1.2.
delight in the law of God and meditate therein night and day, with David, and
you shall undoubtedly aspire to the same degree of saving knowledge that they
have done before you. Be you men, be you women, be you learned, be you
unlearned, be you of what trade or condition of life soever: God will deny his
gracious assistance to none of you unless you be defective to your selves.

Only as he that will reap true comfort by the holy communion must come with
due preparation thereunto: so must you also come to the reading of the word in
praeparatione animi, with a ready disposition to love and embrace the truth
when it shall be discovered unto you. 2 These. 2.10.11
For unto those that receive not the love of the truth, God will send strong
delusions, that they shall believe lies. Whereunto if you add your humble and
devout prayers unto God, according to Gregory Nazianzens counsel (...), Pray
and search, and shall say with David Aperi oculos, Lord open mine eyes, and
doce me iustificationes tuas, teach me thy statutes: then will the lamb of the
tribe of Judah come, and open the book that is sealed, and by it give us such
a measure of sanctifying knowledge and grace as may suffice to bring us to the
state of eternal blessedness and glory: which the Lord grant us all for his
Christ's sake.

TESTIMONIES OF SUNDRY modern writers touching the efficacy of Reading,
gathered by the Author since the Preaching of this Sermon.
Babington on the second petition.

TWo extremities there are which of all Gods chosen are to be eschewed: the one
is an estimation of Reading, so great, as that being had we feel no want,
neither think it a want never or seldom to have any Preaching. The other is
so far to extol Preaching as that we utterly contemn Reading, yea exclude
it from all power in the blessing of God to work faith in us or any. The mean
betwixt both which is a right and true conceit both of Reading and Preaching.
Know we therefore that in the word they are both commended, yea commanded and
ordained of the Lord as means to erect this kingdom of his in our hearts, for
which we pray and of which we now speak. And first for reading to name but a
few places of a number, mark what the Lord says in his law laid down for all
his people Deuteronomy. 31.9. Act. 13.15. Luc. 4.16. Ier. 36.6. See and mark both the
warrant of Reading and a profit hoped for by it of the godly. So far were
they ever from either contemning this means, or from denying it power in Gods
blessing to work Faith and repentance in the hearers.

Also a little after:

Let no Harding therefore in the name of all blasphemous Papists call reading
of the Scripture to the people in the Church, a spiritual dumbness and a
thing unprofitable: but let us ever with the chosen of the Lord receive the
good of it, and bless God for our liberty.

Dr Davenant B. of Sarum upon the Epist. to the Coll^ssians page 522.

They err who deny that the reading of the Scriptures does not avail to the
edifying of Christian people in Faith and Charity, unless at the same time
there be joined therewith an enarration or explication of them by a Preacher.
God forbid that we should extenuate the vtility or necessity of preaching: yet
we affirm with the Psalmist touching the word of God studiously and devoutly
read, that the law of God is immaculate converting souls, the testimony of the
Lord is faithful giving wisdom to the simple, Psalm. 19.7.

Dr Fulke against Heskins.

Page 6. The force of Christ's word is as great by his spirit in the Scriptures
which this dog calls the dead letters, as it was in the voice when it was
uttered.

Page 25. This ( to wit, that the people must be taught and learn hard cases
of the Priests.) shall be granted to the uttermost, so that you will allow the
people to Learn such things as are easy not only of the Priests, but also of
their own reading, study, and conference with them that are no Priests.

Dr Googe in his whole armor of God Page 217.

Quest. Whether is the word preached only, or the word read also a means of
working Faith? Ans. It may not be denied but the holy Scriptures themselves,
and good commentaries on them, and printed Sermons or other books laying forth
the true doctrine of the Scripture, being read and understood may by the
blessing of God work faith. But the special ordinary means and most
powerful usual means is the word Preached. This is it which the Scripture
lays down, Romans 10.14. 1. Cor. 1.21.

Mayer on James cap. 1. v. 18. Page 183.

Quest. But is it necessary that the word should be Preached to the
engendring of faith in us, or will it not suffice to read it? Ans. It is not to
be doubted, but a man may be converted by the word read. For Luther by reading
was turned from Popery, and John Husk by reading of Wickliffes books ( And in
the margent he notes, that Saint Augustine says he was converted by reading
Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.) and whatsoever is set forth in Preaching the same is
read also: and the reading of the word in a large sense, as Preaching is put
for publishing Gods will to the hearer, is said to be Preaching, Act. 15.21.
and such as read are pronounced blessed Rev. 1.3. yet notwithstanding when the
word is preached as preaching in a more strict sense signifies expounding
teaching and exhorting out of the word of God, it is more effectual.

Wheatly in his new birth Page 17.

There may be a question made whether the word of God read only may become
effectual to regenerate: or whether it must want this efficacy unless it be
Preached as well as Read? To which question me thinks that this should be a
true answer, that the isntrumental power of regenerating cannot be denied to
the Scriptures barely read, though Preaching be not joined withal. For why?
seeing the doctrine of the Gospel is called the ministration of the spirit,
and it is the doctrine of the Gospel when it is offered to the understanding
by bare reading: therefore it must follow that in such case also it may become
the power of God unto salvation, and the instrument of the spirit unto
regeneration. The same precepts promises and threats are by reading delivered
to the mind of the man that reads or hears the word read. And why then
should we think that the Holy Ghost either cannot or will not work together
with them? Yea doubtless he can do it when he will, and will do it then
whenever he does not (as oftentimes he does not) afford to men a possibility
of enjoying any other help then reading. Unless the not being preached could
make the word not to be the law of God, I see no reason that it should be
thought unable to convert souls without being preached. And a little after.

It will not at all follow that because the word read is able to beget Faith,
either the Ministers may content themselves usually to read it without
preaching, or the people usually content themselves to hear it so, and not be
careful to seek for the preaching of it.

Amies in his Medulla Theologiae lib. 2. cap. 8.

Numb. 5. Hearing therefore in this place is any Perception whatsoever or
comprehension of the words of God whether they be communicated by Preaching or
reading or by any other means.

Numb. 6. This word therefore (of Hearing) is not so narrowly and strictly to
be understood, that either principally or necessarily it should always include
the outward sense of hearing, but that it should denote any perception of the
will of God.

Tilenus in his defense of the Perfection of Scripture

Page 5. Let us see this enthymeme or imperfect argument of Pyrrhonian Logic:
The Apostles first taught by lively voice, Ergo they pretended not to teach by
their writings which succeeded their preaching. The consequence is as good as
who should say, one eats first for to nourish himself, therefore drink
serves nothing to nourishment. A non distributo ad distributum etc. And a
little after.

We know that to preach and to write are things very accordant, and which are
comprehended in one and the same commandment given to the Apostles teach all
nations, which yet to this day they teach by their writings. He which commanded
them the thing which is to teach, commanded also the manners of teaching, which
are to preach with lively voice, and to set forth the doctrine in writing, both
of them being fit for teaching, and this latter most fit for to continue, and
to transfer doctrines and instructions unto posterity.

Daniel Chamier in his Panstratia Tomo. 1.

Lib. 1. c. 21. number. 6. To teach comprehends as well the lively voice as
writing. So Paul preached the Gospel unto the Romans no less by writing an
epistle unto the^, then teaching them by lively voice out of the prison. And it
is the solemn custom of the Fathers when they cite any thing out of the
Apostles writings, to express it in these words, The Apostle teaches: yea and
St Paul ascribes unto the Scriptures that they make a man wise.

Ibid number. 7. All men know that a thing may be related two ways, both by
lively voice and by writing. For as those things which are in the voice are
signs of those things which are in the mind: so those things which are in the
writing are signs of those which are in the voice. And therefore the same is
both ways equally signified or related.

Ibid. cap. 22. number. 2. Because the lively voice is used to no other end, save
to express the meaning of the speaker, and Scripture does evidently express
the meaning of God speaking unto us: therefore in this respect it is false that
the Scriptures are dumb. For we no less understand that a man is justified by
Faith when we read it in Paul, then when Paul himself pronounced it with his
lively voice.

Lib. 6. cap. 5. number. 7. The written word is distinguished from the word
preached by no substantial difference. For they differ neither in specie, nor
in genere, nor in number, but only in accident -- So, for example, that Sermon
which first S. Peter made unto the Jews after the gift of the holy Ghost,
differs, not from that which we read Act. 2. related by S. Luke, save only as
writing is not a lively voice: yet because writing is no other then the image
of a lively voice, so little difference lets not but that I may affirm the
Sermon which I there read to be the same which S. Peter then made. --
Wherefore if it be the same Sermon in number, why may not the same be affirmed
of the same? and I truly avouch it to be read in S. Luke, Having heard these
things they were pricked in heart? These things, I say, which both Peter then
delivered by lively voice, and now S. Luke represents unto us.

Ibid. cap. 18. number. 8. Vergerius an Italian Bishop, who had negotiated many
businesses for the Pope against Luther, undertaking to write a book against
the Apostates of Germany (for so he termed them) and diligently seeking out
their arguments to confute them, was himself so overcome by the strength of
them, that rejecting his Bishopric, and the hope of a Cardinalship, he
utterly renounced all Popish tyranny.

Ibid. lib. 7. cap. 9. number. 17. The meditation of the Scriptures is doubtless
an Ordinary means ordained by God to procure Faith. For, these things are
written that ye might believe. Ioh. 20.

Ibid. lib. 10. cap. 6. number. 11. To preach comprehends not only the lively
voice but also writing: so that those words Preach the Gospel are thus to be
understood, intimate the Gospel unto all nations by what means soever it may
be rightly intimated, whether it be by lively voice or by writing.

D. Davenant B. of Sarumon Coloss. 1.9. page 64.

They are not carried by an Apostolical but Antichristian spirit, who deny
unto Laics, the Ordinary means of begetting wisdom and spiritual
understanding, namely Reading and understanding of Gods word. For the law of
the Lord is immaculate converting souls: the testimony of the Lord is
faithful giving wisdom to the simple, Psalm. 19-7.

Psalm. 119.130. in English meeter. When men first enter into the word,
They find a light most clear:
And very Idiots understand,
When they it read or hear.
Phil: Melancthon Enarrat,
Symboli Niceni.
In conversion these causes concur, the holy Ghost moving the heart by the
Gospel, the voice of the Gospel weighed and considered either when it is
heard, or when it is read, or in godly meditation, and the will of man not
resisting the voice of God, but assenting although with some trepidation.

Ainsworth Counterpoison, p. 116.

The Gospel noted to be the means of our calling. 2. These. 2.14. he makes
known unto his people outwardly by his word, 2. Cor. 5.19. spoken Act. 5.20.
and written Ioh. 20.31, and inwardly by his holy spirit, Neh. 9.20. 1, Cor. 2,
10.12.

FINIS.
IOH. 17.1. etc. These things spoke JESUS, and lift up his eyes to Heaven, and
said, etc.
ALL holy writ simply and in it self considered is of equal worth and
dignity: the Author, the Matter, and the Manner being in every part alike
Divine. Howbeit considered respectively and in relation unto us, one Scripture
without impeachment or derogation may justly be preferred to another. For as
touching the Matter, some Scriptures are more importing us, as containing
doctrines of Absolute necessity to be believed: whereas others are so only in
the Disposition and Preparation of the Mind. And as for the Manner whereas
others are darkly and obscurely delivered, some are so attempered and
proportioned unto the weakness of our capacity, that they are more easy and
available for our instruction and edification. In both these Respects, this
seventeenth Chapter of the Gospel after S. John, seems to me among all other
to be the most eminent. For if you regard the Matter, it contains Doctrines of
highest nature and consequence, as being the very foundation of the Churches
happiness, and the anchor of all her hope. If the For me, it is so heavenly
and divine, so powerful and perswasiue, that he must needs be destitute of all
spiritual sense and taste, whosoever with the naked and bare reading thereof is
not extraordinarily ravished and affected.

The serious and due consideration of all which, together with the unspeakable
benefit that might grow to the people of God by the right dividing and handling
thereof, has at length overcome and persuaded me, to undertake at times the
interpretation of this whole Chapter in this place. That so, if it please God,
before I sing my nunc dimittis, I may with these treasures satisfy some part
of the debt I owe thereunto both for my birth and breeding. And because these
first words now read seem unto me not unfitting the present occasion, or to
succeed what I have already delivered upon the like occasions: I have thought
good at this time to make entrance thereupon, and so as it is in the proverb,
Vna fidelia duos dealbare parietes, to dispatch two businesses at once. For
having heretofore vindicated the Dignity of the Ministry from the Contempt
whereto it is subject, by prescribing a soueraign Remedy and Defensatiue
against it, as also having demonstrated the power and efficacy of Preaching,
even of that which is only by Reading, which is the first office of the
Ministry: method and order would that in the next place I speak of Prayer,
which is the second. And hereunto am I also invited by this Text. For, to
forbear further prefacing, this seventeenth Chapter contains in it a most
heavenly and divine Prayer, which our blessed Savior and Mediator addresseth
unto his Father in behalf of Christ mystical, as the Fathers term it: that
is, the whole Church consisting both of Head and Members. The Parts thereof are
two, a short Preface prefixed by S. John, and the Corpse or body of the Prayer.
The Preface is my Text, wherein relation is made of an Act invested with
certain circumstances. The Act is Prayer. The Circumstances are three, Quis,
Quando, Quomodo. Quis, the Orator who prays: Jesus, These things spoke Jesus
and lift up his eyes. Quando, when he prays, after he had spoken these things:
These things spoke Jesus and then lift up his eyes. Quomodo, after what manner
he prayed. The Manner is external, and stands in two things, in gestu
oculorum, and in Sermon oris. In the Gesture of the Eyes, He lifted up his
eyes unto heaven: in the Speech of his Mouth, He said. Of these things breefely
and plainly, as it shall please God to assist.

Of all duties universally required of all men, Prayer seems to me the most
noble. So noble that by it all the whole worship and service of God, is in
Scripture usually denominated. And although the Houses of God be consecrated to
other uses as well as it: yet are they not called Houses of Preaching, or
Houses of Sacraments, but Oratories or Houses of Prayer. Prayer, as Damascen
expresses it, is (...), the mounting or flying up of the soul unto the throne
of Grace. It is the Sweet incense, that sweet smelling sacrifice, that
savoureth so pleasingly in in the nostrills of our God. It is that strong cord
that draws down all blessings and graces from Heaven upon us. The
importunity whereof of Jacobs makes us Isreal's, wrestlers prevailers with God,
that if we will he cannot go from us, until he has granted us his
blessing. For it has annexed unto it the gracious promise of impetration; Ask
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you. Neither is there any thing so difficult or impossible with man, but
by Prayer it may be obtained. By Prayer Abraham, when he was far stricken in
years, and the womb of his wife Sarah was now dead, obtained a son of God,
even Isaack^. By Prayer Jacob escaped the fury and danger of his brother Esau.
By Prayer the children of Israel were delivered from their cruel servitude
and bondage in Egypt. By Prayer Moses stood in the gap, and pacified the wrath
of God that he destroyed not his people. By Prayer and the lifting up of his
hands, the same Moses overthrew the host of the Amalekites. By Prayer Joshua
stopped the course of the Sun, and God was obedient unto the voice of a man.
By Prayer Sampson revenged himself upon his enemies, and ruined the house of
Dagon upon the Philistines. By Prayer Solomon obtained an incomparable measure
of Wisdom from God. By Prayer Hezekiah being at the point of death, had
fifteen years more added to his life. By Prayer Daniell stopped the mouths of
Lions, the three children quenched the fiery furnace that not a hair of their
head perished, Jonas was discharged out of the whales belly, and the prison
gates opened of their own accord to enlarge St Peter. It is a Panchreston
available for all things. It cures diseases, dispossesseth divils, it
sanctifies the Creatures unto us, vnlocketh the gates of heaven, and procures
the coming of the Holy Ghost. It is seasonable for all times, fit for all
places, necessary to all persons; without it no business whatsoever we
undertake can thrive or prosper. It extends it self far and wide to the
benefit of all: and in that regard excels Faith. For the just man shall
live, not by another, but by his own faith: and therefore we say I believe.
But Prayer is an act of Charity, which seeks not her own, but the good of
others also: and therefore we pray Our Father. Had not St Stephen prayed for
his persecutors, happily St Paul might still have continued in his Pharisaisme.
And had it not been for the continual tears of holy Monica, perhaps her
son Augustine had perished in his Manicheisme. Infinite are the brands that
prayer has pulled out of the fire, unspeakable the benefits it has procured
unto others. But what speak I of men? It makeeth wondrously to the ^^^^ing
forth of Gods glory. Could we of our selves command all good, we would never
become suitors for any thing: but according to the counsel of Seneca, fac te
ipse faelicem, we would make our selves happy. But by making our addresses
unto him, we acknowledge our selves to be Mendicos Dei, Gods beggars, every
way insufficient in our selves, and that we depend for all whatsoever either we
are or have upon his alsufficiency alone: which makes so much to the
advancement of Gods bounty and inexhaustible goodness, as nothing can do
more, you see, beloved brethren, how large a field I have to expatiate in, and
how easy it is to overflow the banks in the commendation of this holy
exercise: but that I remember how my Text limiteth me unto the above named
circumstances. And therefore leaving this generality I come unto them in
particular.

The first circumstance is, Quis, the Orator, who prays, Jesus: These things
spoke Jesus and lifted up his eyes. That Jesus was very frequent in Prayer, all
the Evangelists with one consent testify. Sometimes he went up into a mountain
to pray, sometimes he retires himself into a solitary place to pray, sometimes
he prays by himself alone, at other times he takes some of his Disciples
with him, some times he spends whole nights together in Prayer, when he was
baptized he prayed, and now that the time of his Passi^n is at hand, he is
careful to prepare himself by making this heavenly Intercession to his
Father. In a word, the whole course of his life seems to have been no other
then a continual practice of this duty. This Duty I say: for indeed so it was,
he being a Priest, and it being the office of a Priest to pray. Wherefore he
that bestowed that Honor upon him, even then when he anointed and consecrated
him, charg^^ him therewith. Thou art my son, says he, this day have I
begotten thee. Ask of me. According to which Charge, now being made a Priest
after the order of Melchizedek, In the days of his flesh he offered up prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save
him from death. And although he be now set at the right hand of his father,
crowned with glory and majesty: yet being a Priest for ever, he never cease
in such sort as becomes his glorious estate to make Intercession for us. Yet
this is not all: for it is further to be observed, that Christ is not Priest as
Man only, but as Emanuell on God-man. This the Apostle to the Hebrews
carefully demonstrateth. The law says he, makes men high Priests which have
infirmity: but the w^rd of the Oath which was since the law makes the son
who is consecrated for ever more. And again Christ, says he, by his eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God. And if he were a Priest after the
order of Melchizedecke, as he was without Father or Mother, without genealogy,
having neither beginning of days nor end of life, as also being Vntithed in
the loins of Abraham: it cannot be that he should be Priest as Man only (for
of Man only these things cannot be verified) therefore as God also. If so, then
Prayer being an act of Christ's Priesthood, it follows that it is Emanuel,
God-man that prays, and that his Prayer is a Theandricall action, as Divines
term it, Divinely-humane, or Humanely-divine. This speech happily may sound
harshly in some ears, and there are who stick not to charge it with ^tat
Arrianisme, as if thereby we made Christ inferior to his Father: whereas he
himself thought it no robbery to be equal unto him. Give me leave therefore
to bestow a few words for the clearing of this difficulty: the rather, because
it is, being rightly apprehended, the ground of singular comfort unto us.

It is a Fundamental article of the Christian Faith that in Christ there are
two distinct Natures, his Divinity and his Humanity: and that both these
concur to the constitution of one Person God-man. Whence it follows that
the Agent or Principle which acts all the works of Mediation, is but one by
reason of the Unity of the Person, even Christ God-man: according to that
protrite Maxim, Actiones sunt suppositorum, all actions issue and proceed from
the Subject, or person. Howbeit seeing the Person always works by his
Natures, and they, as we have said, in Christ are two: it follows by reason
of this Dualitie, that there are two distinct Principles by which Christ
works or mediateth, according to that other rule in nature, Natura est
principium motus and quietis, nature is the principle both of rest and motion.
This for further illustration may be exemplified in Humane actions. For as it
is Man, or the Person of Man consisting of Soul and Body, that understands,
reasons, moves, speaks, yet it is the Soul by which he understands and
reasons, the Body by which he moves and speaks: so in the actions of
Mediation, it is Christ God-man that works them all, yet some by his Godhead,
and some by his Manhood. Here therefore are we to distinguish. The works of
Mediation, are either of Sovereignty and Authority, or of Subjection and
Ministry. Of Sovereignty and Authrity, as to send the Holy Ghost, to
illuminate the Mind, to raise from death: of Subjection and Ministry, as to
suffer, to die, to be raised from death. All these things did Christ as he was
God-man both do and suffer: but yet the former by the Principle of his deity,
the latter by the Principle of his humanity. It is further to be observed, that
although both the Natures in Christ remain distinct, and consequently their
several operations also: yet as Leo truly says, Agit v^raque forma cum
communione alterius quod cuiusque proprium est, both Natures do that which is
proper unto them, but with Communion of each with other. This Communion is the
concurrence of both Natures in the same Person by their several proper
actions, to the producing of one Apotelesma or outward effect pertaining to our
Salvation. In which concurrence the Deity is ever the principal, and the
Humanity is the Organ or Instrument of the Deity: so that it never moves to
any thing, but as it is acted and moved by the Deity, and from it receives all
its value, dignity, and efficacy, as in Man the Body does from the Soul. These
things being thus demonstrated, let us in a word apply them to our particular.
This Prayer of Christ is an act of his Priesthood. He^ therefore prays, that
is the Priest. The Priest as we have showed, is Christ God-man. Christ
therefore prays as God-man. But the act is Ministerial not Sovereign. He
prays therefore, not by the Principle of his Deity, but in his Humanity.
Howbeit with Communion of the Deity: the Instrument partaking with the
Principal Agent, and deriuing all its virtue and efficacy from the concurrence
thereof.

Which being so, the more either ignorant or malicious are our adversaries of
the Church of Rome, who slander us as if we held Christ prayed in his Divine
nature. Nay we know Prayer is a work of Ministry, and implies inferiority:
whereas the Word is coequall to his Father. If may be the dream of Jews in
their Talmud, that God prays certain hours every day: or of Turks in their
Alcoran, that he prays for Mahomet. But we know that God has no superior to
whom he should pray: and that his will is omnipotent, and the effectual cause
of all things, so that he needs not pray. But it pleased the son of God to
assume our nature, and in the same to make himself less then his Father, and
to become obedient unto him in all things. So that although it be God-man that
prays, yet praying non qua Deus, sed qua homo, not in the form of the Word
but of a Servant, it can be no impeachment to his Deity.

Now if it be God-man that prays, is it possible he should miss of his suit?
Ioh. 11.41.
Surely he himself says, I know thou hear me always. Heb. 5.7.
And the Apostle affirms that in his Prayers and Supplications he was still
heard. If he be the only Son in whom the Father is well pleased, Mat. 3 17.
will he think you deny him any thing? Ioh 16.23.
Nay if we that are so unworthy are yet heard for his sake: how can he that
is of such infinite worth but be heard when as himself prays? He is
therefore alwais heard. What is it then he here sues for? To himself
Glorification, to his Apostles to know and teach all saving truth, to us that
believe through their word, Sanctification, Union with him, Perseverance in
grace, and the blessed-making vision of his Clory. Doubtless therefore he
himself sits at the right hand of his Father: and swayeth all things both
in Heaven and earth to his Churches good. His Apostles both knew and taught all
the counsels of God: and we may safely build upon the Foundation they have
laid. As for us, all those things shall surely be made good unto us. And
though Satan desire to winnow us, yet Hell gates shall never prevail against
us. For he that never fails to be heard, has prayed for our Faith that it
fail not: then which what surer ground of peace and joy to the conscience can
there be?

As it is the ground of comfort, so is it of Instruction also. For if he that
is both God and man disdained not to pray: it may well become us that are but
dust and ashes to humble our selves to God in Prayer. Christ's actions are our
examples. Often had he by Preaching exhorted unto Prayer. But exhortation
prevails not so much as example, unto precept therefore he adds his own
practice. Hence praying at the grave of Lazarus, Ioh. 11.42.
because, says he, of the people that stand by I said it. Tract. 104. in Ioh.
And St Agustine, Ita se Patri voluit exhibere Precatorem, vt meminisset se
nostrum esse Doctorem: he so exhibited himself an intercessor unto his Father,
Idem in Psalm. 56.
as he remembered himself to be our Doctor. Hear thou then thy Master pray?
Learn thy self to pray. Ad hoc enim oravit vt doceret orare: he prayed to
this end to teach thee to pray. The practice of other Saints should much move
thee: but the example of him who is the sanctifier of the Saints should move
thee much more. But most of all us that are the Priests of God. For as he being
a Priest, makes intercession for his Church unto his Father: so should we unto
God for the people committed unto our charge, and that not privately only, but
publicly also, and in the face of the congregation. A duty now adays too much
slighted of many, and causing in the people a general disesteeme of the
public Prayers and blessings of Gods Ministers. The Lord persuade those that
are in authority betimes both to look unto it and to reform it. And thus much
of the Orator: who prays.

The next circumstance is Quando, when he prays: it was after he had spoken
these things. These things spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes and said. So that
first he spoke these things, and then lifted up his eyes and said. He spoke
these things. What things? If it shall please you to reflect a little upon the
three former Chapters, you shall readily understand what they are Our Savior
having a little before his passion celebrated the Passover with his Disciples,
and immediately upon it instituted the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood,
knowing that the time of his departure was near at hand: out of the abundance
of his love toward them, he holds them together, and in the mean season
delivers unto them matters of wondrous consequence both for their edification
and consolation. For having acquainted them with his departure, as also the
great sorrows and afflictions that would attend them after his ascension: he
tells them that this notwithstanding they ought rather to rejoice then be
dismayed. For he goes to prepare a mansion for them in his Fathers house, that
he will not leave them as Orphans but send the Comforter unto them, who shall
abide with them for ever, that he will leave his Peace with them, and
whatsoever they shall ask the Father in his name shall be granted unto them.
Mean while that they continue in his love, and testify the same by keeping
his commandments, abiding in him, and loving one another. As for him, he will
see them again, and replenish their hearts with everlasting joy. And albeit by
the imminent tempest or tentation, they may for a time be scattered, yet let
them not be overmuch discomforted, for he has overcome the world, and after a
while he will return again, and take them home unto himself for 'evermore.
These things spoke Jesus. Things as you see for the Matter most heavenly and
divine: and you need not doubt but the Manner was every way suitable to the
Matter, full of grace and gravitie.

Whereby we that are the Ambassadors of Christ are exampled both what we are
to speak, and how. Not what we list, or as we list: but these things and thus,
this Matter, and thus for the Manner. But alas, how much we fail too many to
us, either in the one, or in the other or in both. For some of us Nihil agimus,
speak nothing at all, or but very seldom, drowning our abilities in the depth
of silence, and digging our talent into the earth, without any employment
thereof to the advantage of Gods treasury, little remembering that dreadful
sentence of the Apostle St Paul, Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel.
Others again aliud agunt, say indeed somewhat, but not these things; fictions
and dreams of their own brain, frivolous and impertinent matters, perhaps
also Pelagianisme or Popery, or such like stuff, forgetting that other as
fearful sentence of the same Apostle. Though we, Gal. 1.8.
or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Others yet again male agunt,
speak happily some of these things: but not with due gravity and discretion, in
this manner, little regarding that weighty charge of the Apostle St Peter, If
any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God. 1. Pet. 4.11.
Forsome, whether out of affectation, or for want of better breeding I know
not, utterly neglect all care of elocutio^, using a barbarous kind of rudeness
and rusticitie in delivering their minds, and enforcing what they say with no
other then loud clamours and vociferation. That they hope will be counted
plain Preaching, this powerful Preaching: as if there were no distance
between plainness and rudeness, or that Powerfulness lay in such hoobubs and
outcries, and not rather in the strength of arguments and reasons to persuade.
As these by their slovenlinesse defile and deforme the purity and beauty of
Gods words: so there are others who think to set a better grace upon it, then
ever the Holy Ghost himself did. For distasting the language of Canaan
sanctified by Christ and his holy Apostles: they hunt after I know not what
new fangled and quaint phrases, and as they term them, strong lines, as if
the style of the Scripture, and those Primitive Preachers were too low and
mean for their transcendent Divinity: But to what end are these curious webs?
And why in weauing them do they like Spiders thus vnbowell themselves? Is it
to convert a sinner, or to save a soul? No verily: but only to catch an Euge
or a Belle, or some such fly of popular acclamation or applause. If diverse
Patients sick of several diseases, as the Megrim, Pleurisy, Gout, Dropsy,
and the like, should repair unto the Physician for counsel, and the Physician
should forthwith take up a piece of Galen or Hippocrates and read a neat and
curious Lecture unto them, and so dismiss the^, one hanging the head, another
holding his sides, a third halting; and every one with the same disease he
brought with him: spectatum admissi risum ten^atis, could you forbear laughter
at so ridiculous an act? As ridiculous, or rather, because it is in a matter
more serious, more ridiculous is it in a Minister, neglecting his maine end, to
seek his own praise by pleasing the itching ears of vain me^, rather then to
cute their sick souls, and to procure unto them everlasting salvation.

But I beseech you, beloved brethren, tandem hoc agamus, let us at length
attend the business which Christ has charged us withal. What errand he has
put into our mouths, that and no other let us freely deliver. And let us
strive to deliver it in such manner as may make most to our end, that is, the
building up of men in their most holy Faith. This shall we the better do, if
we look unto Christ, and what form he used. A better precedent can we not
possibly follow: for never spoke man as he did. Him did the holy Apostles make
their pattern, and by virtue thereof converted the world unto the Christian
Faith. If we look unto any other, and for the pleasing of them form our
Sermons after the humor of those whose humor we should rectify: neither
shall we please God, nor happily in the end them. A certain Painter having
with all his skill drawn two pictures as like as possibly he could, reserved
the one in his chamber, and set forth the other on his stall to the view and
censure of all that passed by: and whatsoever they misliked he would with his
pencill alter according to their judgment until it was grown every way
deformed. At length setting forth his other picture by it, and the people
commending it as an exquisite piece, and condemning the other as a deformed
monster: yet that, quoth he, I drew according to your judgment, this
according to my own art and skill. Certainly, certainly if we shall attend
the several censures of our auditors, and patch up Sermons according to their
liking, monstrous and enormious must they needs be. Much better were it
therefore by our own art, our art being learned from the example of Christ and
his Apostles, to frame all our Sermons: so shall we gain many souls unto
Christ, and purchase to our selves true praise with God, and in the consciences
of all good men. What though this way we cannot make so much show of learning
and eloquence? Yet therein shall we be like the Apostle S. Paul, whose
preaching was not in the entising words of man's wisdom, 1. Cor. 3.4.
but in demonstration of the spirit. Yea like unto Christ himself, who though
he were rich, yet made himself poor, that he might make many rich. In a
word, 2. Cor. 4.7.
let us duly remember that although we be dispensers of heavenly treasures, yet
is it the pleasure of God, we have them in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God and not of us. But of what Jesus spoke
enough.

After he had spoken these things, then he lift up his eyes and prayed. Not
but that without Prayer he was able to effect what he prayed for. For being
perfect God, and the absolute dispencer of all grace, we cannot without
fearful impiety think, that out of infirmity he seeks that by request
which of himself he could not accomplish. No, but as Ambrose says, though he
were Potestatis author, Lord of power: yet would be Obedientiae Magister, the
teacher of obedience, by due performing his own duty. For, as we have said,
he was a Priest: and the duties of Priesthood are three, Docere, Orare,
Sacrificare, to teach, Ioh. 17.8.
to pray, to sacrifice. As for the first, he has already carefully taught
them, and given them the words which his Father gave him. As touching the
third, he was now ready to offer up himself as a propitiatory sacrifice for
the sins of the world: for so says he by and by, Ib. v. 1.
Father the hour is come. Betwixt these two intercedit intercessio, he makes
humble suit that both the one and the other might be effectual to the eternal
salvation of all those whom his Father had chosen out of the world and given
unto him. And thus as in Christ's Priesthood, so also in his practice, Preaching
and Prayer were usually joined together.

What Christ therefore has conjoined let no man dare to put asunder. Act. 6.4.
The dispensation of the Word and Prayer, are by the joint testimony of all
the Apostles, the two principal offices of the Ministry. Hardly therefore can
they be divorced without maiming or mangling thereof. As in Preaching we are
the mouth of God unto the people: so by Prayer ought we to be the mouth of the
people unto God. By the one we teach them the will of God: by the other we
bless them in the name of God. As we are bound to plant and water by
Preaching: so are we by Prayer to mediate unto God for increase. For that will
affect but coldly, except this quicken and inflame it. It is not the Word or
Prayer severally, ^. Tim* 4.4.5.
but the Word and Prayer jointly, that both sanctifies the Creature unto us,
and the people unto God. Whence it follows also that as the Minister is to
Preach and Pray: so are the People to Hear and Pray. For Preaching is to no
purpose without Hearing: and to what end Praying in the Congregation if none
concur with him? Hear therefore they must, that they may believe: Romans 10.17.
for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And Pray they
must both for their Pastors, faithfully and diligently to dispense the word of
truth amongst them: and for themselves, that God would open the ears of their
hearts also, that what they hear may be even the savor of life unto life unto
them. This condemns all those, who either out of a disrespect of Preaching
are all for Prayer, such as were the ancient Euchetae, and too many also
amongst us now adays: or out of a contempt of Common Prayer, are all for
Preaching, seldom presenting themselves in the Church until the Preacher be
in the Pulpit. No marvel if the Hearing of the one be fruitless, seeing they
despise the Prayers of the Church by which the blessing is obtained: and if the
Prayer of the other be ineffectual, seeing they little regard Preaching by
which it is to be guided.

But here happily it will be demanded, whether of the twain Preaching or
Prayer is the more noble. A question much debated of late, and with too much
faction and vehemence. Whereunto this I have to say, that if the comparison be
intended between Preaching and the Prayer of private men: without doubt
Preaching is the more excellent. For it is public, and therefore more
profitable. A public embassage from God, and therefore more honorable then a
private supplication unto God. To say nothing of the more solemn promise made
unto it, of shining as the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12.3.
and the stars for ever and ever. Yea but Preaching is subordinate to Prayer:
and the end is more worthy then that which is subordinate thereto. Nay but it
is preordinate rather, as the Intelligences are to their orbs, or Prudence unto
virtuous actions. Or if it be subordinate, yet is it in order to the chiefest
good: as the kingly office is unto meaner trades for the public weal, and the
Mediation of Christ to the salvation of man for the glory of Gods grace, which
yet are not therefore inferior. But if the question be of Preaching, and the
public prayer of the Church, God forbid that I should set or foment any such
quarrel between them. By the eager preferring of the one unto the other, both
may easily be vilified. The overmagnifying of Prayer has heretofore shut
Preaching out of the Church: and the oueraduancing of preaching has almost
excluded prayer. And it may be it is Lasinesse that speaks so much for all
praying: and vaineglory that is so earnest for all preaching. But dares any man
thus quarrel the prophecy and Intercession of Christ? I trow no: for they are
both alike infinite in worth and dignity. Preaching and prayer are answerable
unto them: why then should we imagine such an inequality between them? If when
we preach we speak in Gods name unto the people: when we Pray we speak in
Christ's name unto God for the people. They are not subordinate one unto the
other: but both coordinate unto the same maine end. Joined together they are,
as it were, a familiar Dialogue between God and us: wherein God discovers
his will unto us, and we say with S. Augustine, Da quod jubes, and jube quod
vis, give grace to do what thou command, and command what thou will. They
are the Angels of Jacobs ladder: our Prayers are Angels ascending up unto God
for us, and our Sermons are Angels descending down with a blessing from God
upon us. In a word they are both necessary, and of singular use in their place:
and therefore let neither be undervalued, but both have their due honor. So
shall God be glorified in his Ordinances: and we enjoy the benefit intended to
us by them. But of the second circumstance when he prayed, so much.

The third and last is Quomodo, How, and in what Manner he prayed. The Manner
here expressed is only external. Not that this Prayer wanted the internal
Form of truth and sincerity in the Heart. For he was a true Israelite in whom
was no guile. Ye^ he was Truth it self: forso he says, I am the way, the
truth, and the life. And being Truth, he taught others to worship God in Spirit
and Truth: and condemned all those who draw near to God with their lips,
their heart being far off from him. But by this outward comportment, our
blessed Savior expresses his inward affection: and thereby lessoneth us to
take heed that we presume not to appear before God with holy countenances and
hollow hearts. For he is the tryer and searcher of the reins, and judges not
of the heart by the outward appearance, but of the outward appearance by the
heart. Unto these Hypocrites that dissemble both with God and man, and who love
to take religion on them, but not to have it in them: give me leave to say in
the words of S. Chrysostom. O Hypocrite, if it be good to be good, why will thou not be that which thou will seem to be? And if it be evil to be evil,
why will thou be that which thou will not seem to be? If it be good to seem
to be good, it is better to be so: if it be evil to seem to be evil, it is
worse to be so. And therefore either seem as thou art, or be as thou seem
to be. But to return to the Manner, it is, as we have said External, and
double, ingestu O culorum, and Sermon Oris. Of the Eyes first.

He lifted up his eyes to Heaven. Elsewhere he used a contrary gesture, Mat.
26.39.
and prayed groueling upon his face. Neither do we read that the Saints in
their Prayers always used the same situation and posture of body. Act. 7.60.
Steven prayed kneeling, Luke 18.13.
the Publican stood, David watered his couch with his tears lying therein,
Elias making request for himself sat, 1. King. 19.4.
although Tertullian think it utterly unlawful to pray sitting. Ad Simpli^.
l. 2. q. 4.
So that as S. Augustine observes, that the certain site of the body when we
pray is not prescribed in Gods word, so as the mind be present, and perform
its intention to God. The Jews indeed were commanded to look unto the Temple,
and Daniel observed it. Dan. 6.10.
But that was typical, and the date of the Ceremonies is expired. Ioh* 4.21.
Now therefore the best rule is this, In public Prayer, to conform our selves
unto the usual and appointed gesture for avoiding of scandal: in private
deliberate Prayer, to choose such as we think fittest for the present to
affect the mind: in sudden eiaculations (...), that wherein the motion of
Gods spirit shall then find us. But although religion lie not in gestures, and
no one posture of the body be of absolute necessity: yet I know not how, these
three naturally love to accompany our affection in Prayer, the Knee, the Eye,
and the Hand. The bent Knee betokening our humble subjection unto God, and
reverend fear of his presence. The Eye, either dejected and cast down in
token of humiliation for sin, or erected and lifted up to heaven (as here) in
token of our Faith and Hope, that we look confidently to have our desires
granted of God who dwells in Heaven. The hand also lifted up, as ready to
receive, what we hope from above shall be granted unto us. Whether Christ at
this time used all these three gestures, or no, is uncertain: for the Text
says not that he bent his knees, or lifted up his hands, but only that he
lifted up his Eyes. And whether did he lift them? To Heaven. And why thither?
Because there his Father dwells, who is the giver of every good gift. In
regard whereof he taught us also to say, Our Father which art in heaven, Et vbi
pater ibi patria, where his Father dwells, there is his country, and the place
of his everlasting abode where he longs to rest himself. And therefore no
marvel if thither he lift up his Eyes.

A certain Separatist from this Gesture collecteth thus, ye must lift up your
eyes, therefore ye may not pray on a book. Must lift up? what necessity I
pray? Did our Savior forget himself when he fell on his face? Or the Publican
do amiss when he stood aloof off, not daring to lift up his eyes to Heaven?
Certainly which way soever the Eye looks, Sursum Corda; the lifting up of the
heart is the sacrifice which God accepts. But what? is it utterly unlawful
to pray on a book? why then have learned and Godly men compiled so many books
of Prayer to this end? and what uniformity is there like to be if in the
public Liturgy there be not a certain form of Prayer? But God is the God of
order not confusion: and will they nill they, to pray devoutly on a book, is
more pleasing unto God, then their proud and schismatic praying without
book.

From this lifting up of the eyes, we may with better reason learn, when we
make our addresses unto God, to abandon earth, and to entertain nothing but
heavenly cogitations. The natural erection of our countenances intimates, both
where our Hopes should lie, and with what contemplation our minds should
continually be taken up. To bend our eyes toward heaven, and fix our hearts
upon earth, is a fouler solecisme in religion, then that stage player committed
in action, who when he said O heaven, pointed to the earth, and when O earth
pointed unto heaven. Eyes likewise that are unchaste and full of lust, how dare
they look up unto that holy place, or that holy one that dwells therein? As
pure hands, so pure eyes are to be lifted up: else shall our prayer be turned
into sin unto us. Such hands, such eyes we cannot have until the heart be
sanctified. If that be clean, the eyes are clean also, and we may boldly
advance them toward the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.
not wavering or doubting, Jacob. 1.6.
1 Timothy 2.8.
but steadfastly believing we shall obtain what we ask. Man* 11.4.
The same Spirit that persuades us to cry Abba Father, testifies of the
Fathers love, and warranteth us with confidence to repair unto him. Et quid
negabit qui iam dedit filios esse? What will he deny who has already
vouchsafed us the Adoption of Sons? Nay quid negabit qui filium nobis dedit?
Haueing given us his Son, how can he but with him give us all things. Indeed
considering our own vileness, and the glorious Majesty of God: it is reason
we should cast down our eyes, and approach unto him with fear and trembling.
Howbeit as he said, Qui apud te Caesar, audet dicere, maiestatem tuam nescit:
qui non audet, nescit humanitatem: so say I, whosoever dares to present
himself before God, knows not the greatness of his Majesty: but whosoever
knows his facility and loving kindness, needs not fear boldly to lift up
his eyes unto the hills from whence his help comes. And if such confidence may
be used in Private Prayer, how much more in the public congregation of the
Saints? For a threefold cord is stronger then a single, to draw down the
blessings of God from heaven. And so many congregations are so many armies as
it were, offering such violence unto the kingdom of God, and with such
importunatenesse assaulting him, that it is impossible for them to be repulsed.
They therefore are much to be blamed who neglect, I had almost said despise the
assembly of Gods people, preferring their own private devotions unto the
public Liturgy of the Church. Of whom I say no more but this, it is much to be
feared least they that do so, pray with more pride and hypocrisy, then true
devotion when they are at home. But de gestu oculorum, of the gesture of his
eyes so much.

Sermo oris, the speech of his mouth follows, He lifted up his eyes to heaven
and said. The Prayer was vocal, and yet in regard of God voice needed not. 1 Samuel 1 12.13.
The Prayers of Hannah, of Moses, of Nehemiah were Mental only, yet God heard
them. Exodus 12.15.
If he were such a God as Baall of whom the Prophet Elias jestingly said, Neh.
2.4.
Cry aloud, 1 K. 18.27.
for he is a God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a
journey, or peradventure he sleeps and must be awaked: then speech happily
might be necessary. But our God knows what is in man, Ioh. 2.25.
and needs not that any should testify of man. Heb. 4.12.13.
He discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart: and all things are open,
yea he knows thoughts long before they be conceived. Nevertheless this
example of our Savior Christ manifestly shows that Vocal prayer is also
convenient: yea and in some cases necessary. In public Prayer, and when we
pray with others (as now our Savior did with his Disciples) speech is
necessary. Else how shall the rest consent and say Amen thereunto. Expedient
also it is in regard of the Angels both good and evil. The good: for as our
Repentance, so our devout Prayers also do much rejoice them. The evil: for as
a Father says Confitearis Deum apud te, vt Diaboli audiant circa te, and
contremiscant propter te, confess God that the Divils may hear which are
about thee, and tremble because of thee. Neither is it inconvenient in respect
of our selves. And first to discharge the debt we owe unto God, offering unto
him the Calves of our lips. Hos. 14.6.
For the tongue was created to bless God withal. Iac. 3.9.
And as Believing is of the heart: Romans 10.10.
so ought we also to confess with the mouth. Again to stir up the more
devotion in Prayer. For as St Augustine says, Affectus cordis verbis excitatur
orantis, care of speech restraines the wandering of the mind, and the more
vehement and significant the words are, the more is the heart affected. Lastly
because of the redundance of the affections upon the body. For as a vessel
full of new wine, Job. 32.19.
will burst with the working thereof except it be vented: so is it with us in
our strong passions until they be uttered. Psalm. 39.2.3.
While David held his peace he was much troubled: his heart was hot within him
and the fire burned, until he spoke with his tongue. When his heart was
replenished with joy, then his glory, that is, his tongue also reioiced. Psalm.
16.9.
Act. 2.26.
And our Savior Christ in the days of his flesh, Heb. 5.7.
because of his vehement sorrows and fears, offered up Prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears. And thus you see both what
necessity and expedience there is of Vocal prayer. But this is not all: our
blessed Savior had a further aim in it, when he thus prayed. He uttered it by
word of mouth, not only for the present comfort of those that heard him: but,
as I conceive, that it might be registered and recorded as a perpetual Canon of
that glorious Intercession which he makes for his Church in heaven. For
although it were delivered here on earth, yet it pertains to the state of
glory also* and therefore would our Savior have it registered, both that from
hence the Saints might derive sound comfort and consolation unto their souls;
and be furnished of a true pattern of Prayer, with what wisdom, sobriety,
and convenient brevitie they are to speak unto God. So that this Prayer is of
singular use in the Church, and will be throughout all generations for ever
more. But I press this point no further. All which has been said touching
it, I thus apply.

First it makes for the comfort of plain and simple, yet honest minded
people, that although they have but little skill to set words, and formally to
deliver their minds: yet their Mental Prayers and short Eiaculations are
pleasing and acceptable unto God. God forbid it should be otherwise. For in the
approach of death when sickness has sealed up our lips, or in the time of
persecution when tyrants bereave us of our tongues: have we together with the
loss of speech lost also ability to pray? No verily. For though with Moses we
s^y nothing, yet our thoughts may cry so loud in the ears of God, that he may
say unto us as sometimes he did unto Moses, Quid clamas ad me, why do thou
cry unto me? Multi sonant voce, and ^orde muti sunt, many sound aloud, says
St Augustine, with their voice that are dumb in their heart. And the contrary
thereof is as true, Multi sonant cord and voce muti sunt, many are silent with
their lips, yet loud with their affections. The common rhyme, though it be not
very elegant, yet carries good sense with it, Non vox sed votum, non cordula
musica sed cor, non clamans sed amans cantat in aure Dei; not the voice but the
vow, not the harp but the heart, not lowing but loving music for Gods ears.

Secondly it serves for instruction, that although Mental prayer may be
available without vocal: yet is not vocal so without Mental. For as the body
without the soul, so words without concurrence of affection are dead. The
Jews drew near unto God with their mouth, and honored him with their lips:
but the heart being removed far off, Ibid. 64.7.
it is expressly said, they called not upon his name. All Bablers therefore
are here condemned, who hope to be heard for their heathnish battologie. Mat.
6.7.
Such are all they, who pray in a language they know not: like unto Parrats, or
the Cardinals Iay, that could repeat the whole Creed, but understood never a
word thereof. A thing utterly repugnant to nature, to Scripture, and the
practice of all antiquity: and is rather the dotage of a drunken brain, then
the serious exercise of true piety. Such also are all they who understand, but
attend not what they say: suffering their thoughts to range about impertinent
businesses, as if a little lip labor were enough for God. The Schoolmen
have a rule, that a general intention without particular attention is
sufficient. But it is a profane rule: and the Gentiles Hoc age shall rise up in
judgment against it, and condemn all those that practice it.

Lastly it may serve for direction how and in what manner to mould and form
our Praying. For as our Preaching so our Praying also must be conformed to his
example. Now if you please to search into it, you shall find this Prayer, for
the Matter most heavenly, for the Method, most orderly, for the words most
express and significant, and for the length, no way tedious, as wherein is, to
use the words of St Augustine, Non multa locutio, sed multa precatio, not much
talking but much praying. Every thing is carried with deep wisdom and
advisednesse, nothing rashly or tumultuarily. Not a word but breaths forth
perfect holiness and charity; and to be brief, nothing but what every way
may become the son of God himself. Oh that our Prayers might always be
framed according to this pattern! How acceptable would they then be to him to
whom they are addressed? But indeed we imitate it not as we ought. For on the
one side, some of us present unto God, I know not what curious contriuing of
words: as if he were sooner to be taken with the froth of humane wit, then with
Christian gravity and simplicity. Others on the other side, and those God wot
silly ones, though they know neither what to say nor how; yet least they
should seem destitute of the Spirit of Prayer, they presume on the sudden,
without any meditation, to pour out whole floods of words without one drop of
sense, and spinning out their prayers to an enormious length, forgetting that
God being above in heaven, and themselves here on earth, their words should be
both weighty and few. Would a man prefer a petition to his Prince, without
due consideration of all things before hand? But these love to be too homely
and familiar with God: and I cannot better compare them then to little
children, who would feign tell a tale to Father or Mother, not knowing either
what it is, or how to utter it. My advice unto these should be, first that they
would no longer overweene themselves, mistaking the Lips of Calves for the
Calves of the lips. Then, that upon knowledge of their own inability, they
content themselves with short Ejaculations, and such Prayers as grave and
learned men have provided for them. Lastly, that Humility and Charity be their
ordinary Prayers. For besides Mental and Vocal, there is also Vitalis Oration
the Prayer of a godly life: which cries as loud unto God for a blessing, as
Abels murder, or notorious sins do for vengeance. Without which though a man
roar like Stentor, and multiply words as the sand: God turns the deaf ear,
and will not vouchsafe to hear him. But of this, as also of the whole Preface
thus much.

Howbeit before I conclude, I must crave leave to address a few words unto you
also my Lord, who are the Angel of this Diocese. You have heard what foul
abuses there are both of Preaching and Praying: it belongs unto your Lordship
to see them redressed. Some are silent and say nothing: it were good their
mouths were opened. Some instead of Gods truth broach their own perverse
opinions: it were fit their mouths were stopped. Others with their rude
behavior and outcries disgrace Preaching: these might be taught a little more
civility. And others weaken the power of Preaching with too much curiosity:
these might be persuaded to a little more simplicity. As for Public Prayer, it
is too much neglected and despised, and I fear the scandalous lives of
Ministers is in part the cause thereof. For although the efficacy, as of the
Word and Sacraments, so of it also, depend not upon the quality of the
Minister, but Gods ordinance, and the blessing of Balaam though a false Prophet
were availeable, yet the people are not so considerate, but the lewd lives of
Hophni and Phinees may soon bring the Sacrifices of God into contempt with
them. Your Lordship therefore may be pleased to have a special eye unto the
reformation hereof. And seeing the remissness of Heli will not effect it, by
rigor and severity to procure it: that so the lives of your Clergy being
answerable unto their high calling and exemplarie to their flock, the Liturgy
of the Church may recover its ancient credit and dignity, to the glory of God,
the honor of the Ministry, and the building up of Gods people in their most
holy Faith. which the Lord grant for his Christ's sake.

V. 1. Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may
glorify thee.

Having dispatched the Preface, we are now to enter upon the Corpse or Body of
the Prayer, wherein you may be pleased to observe with me other three
particulars, Quem, Pro quibus, Quid, to whom, for whom, and for what he prays.
For unto these three heads as I conceive, the whole prayer may conveniently be
reduced. Of them therefore in order, as it shall please God to assist. And
first of the first, Quem orat, to whom he prays. This appears by the very
first word of the Prayer, Father, the hour is come glorify thy son. It is
his Father to whom he prays, even the first Person in the Trinity. For
although the word Father be oftentimes understood Essentially, that is, for the
whole Godhead subsisting in all the Persons, as namely when it has reference
unto men, or Angels, or the rest of the creatures: yet here being referred
unto the Son, or the second Person, it must needs be understood Personally,
for the Father of that Son, that is the first person in the Trinity. True it
is, the Person of Christ consists of two natures, his Deity and his Humanity;
and this humanity is a Creature as well as that of other men. Yet
notwithstanding seeing the Person is but one, and the Humane nature subsisteth
not of it self, but only in the Son of God, and by his Subsistence: it is the
first Person in the Trinity, and he alone who is the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Howbeit the Natures being not one and the same, but differing, he is
Son unto his Father, not by one only, but by a double Filiation. As he is the
Word, by way of Natural Generation, begotten from all Eternity of the
Substance of his Father. Of his Substance, whereby he is Consubstantiall and
Coessentiall with him, God of God Light of Light, very God of very God as it is
in the Nicene Creed. From all Eternity: for as the Sun cannot be without his
Beam, so neither could the Father ever be without his Word: but as himself is
Eternal, so is his Son Coeternall with him also. Lastly Begotten not made,
as Athanasius says: but how and after what manner is incomprehensible and
unspeakable. It is enough for us to know, says Gregory Nazianzen, that the
Father has begotten to himself a Son: as for the rest (...), let it be
adored with silence. And seeing as Ambrose says, neither Archangells know it,
nor Angels have heard it, nor the world comprehended it, nor the Prophets
understood it, nor the Apostles inquired after it, nor Christ taught it, but
said, no man knows the Son but the Father, nor the Father but the Sun,
and he to whom the Son will reveal it: it is our duty to surcease from
further searching into this deep mystery. It is sufficient for us by Faith
simply to believe that the Manner whereof Reason cannot reach unto. As touching
the Manhood of Christ, he is in regard thereof the Son of the Father also,
yet not by way of Natural generation, or else of Adoption, as all the Saints
of God are: but by Grace of Personal Union: whereby being prevented from
having any Subsistence in it self, it has the very Subsistence of the Word,
or Second Person communicated unto it. So that although as Man, he be not
Generatus filius the Son begotten, yet is he Natus filius Dei, borne the
Son of God: according to that of the Angel Gabriell. That holy thing that
shall be borne of thee shall be called the son of God.

Now the Son prays unto his Father, first to testify that his eternal
Procession and Filiation is from him, and that of him he has received both
that individual Union by which his Humane Nature is hypostatically assumpted
and united unto his Divine, and that oil of gladness or precious Unction of
the Spirit, wherewith he is Habitually graced and anointed far above all
his fellows. Secondly, to manifest his Dispensatiue and voluntary subjection
unto his Father in the form of a Servant: wherein, though he were the Son
and coequall with the Father, yet he learned obedience, as the Apostle to the
Hebrews witnesses. Heb. 5.8.
Lastly, to give us an example of imitation, both to whom, and to whom alone we
are to address our Prayers: namely to God our Father and to none other. Not to
pray unto him is mere Atheism and profanenes: to pray to any besides him is
Idolatry and Superstition. First therefore as Christ to his, so are we to pray
to our Father. Our Father is the holy and blessed Trinity, both by Creation and
Adoption. For being extrinsecall actions they are undivided and common to them
all: and so not the Father only, but the Son and the Holy Ghost together with
him, created and adopted us. To the holy Trinity therefore not excluding any of
the Persons are we to pray. And to this our Savior, as by his example, so by
his Precept also directs us, when he commands us thus to pray, Our Father which
art in Heaven. Shall I spend time to prove that we are to pray unto God our
Father? This were but to light a candle at noone day. Search the Scriptures and
you shall find it every where commanded. Has he not made all? does he not
sustain all? do we not depend upon his goodness for all whatsoever either
we are or have? If the eyes of all things look up unto him, expecting a
supply of all their needs from him: should not our eyes much more be fixed upon
him? The very light of reason dictates the same unto all, and requires this
duty at the hands of all. Even Gentiles and mere naturalists have ever duly
practiced it, in all their needs invoking him whom they supposed to be God, yea
some of the learned among them, Alcibia 2. five (...). Diog. Laert. Dan. 6.7.9.
as Plato and Aristotle, and others also, as Proclus says, have written books
of this argument, and in them given excellent precepts and directions how to
pray. A Giant therefore was he (and we read of no more but he) who commanded
that for the space of thirty days together no man should presume to ask any
thing of any God or man, save only of him self. Atheists and profane wretches
are all those, who in their heart denying either the Being or the Providence of
God refuse to pray unto him. Such as among the Gentiles were the Epicure
Philosophers: and among Christians some few furious Heretics. Godles and
irreligious also are they, who believing and acknowledging both, yet never
privately, and but seldom publicly, and then very slightly and perfunctorily
perform this duty. Hence is it that the prophet David makes the not calling
upon God the special character of a foolish Atheist, Psalm. 14.1.4.
who if not with his mouth, yet in his heart denies God, and despises all
religion. ^am. 4.2.3.
No marvel if they want the true wisdom, seeing they ask it not of him who
is the only donor thereof: or if they ask it that yet they have it not,
because they ask it overly with the lips, and not sincerely from the heart.
But let us, my beloved brethren, follow the president of our blessed savior,
and as he, so let us ever address our prayers unto him that is our Father.
Nothing can be denied us that we ask of him in the name of his son. Ioh.
16.23.
And if evil Fathers give not instead of bread a stone, Mat. 7.9.10.11
or instead of a fish a serpent, or instead of an egg a scorpion unto their
children: Luke 11.11.12 13.
how much more will our Heavenly father give us his spirit, and together with
it all good things, if we ask them of him?

As to our Father, so to our Father only must we pray, if we will keep our
selves to the example of Christ: for to his Father alone does he address
himself, Father, says he, the hour is come. Give me leave to bestow a little
pains in proof hereof. For it is now high time to be at down Popery by all
means, it being of late grown too too impudent, as having been but too much
countenanced. Angels and Saints departed, say Papists, may be called upon. May
be? and why not must be? Forsooth, howsoever they would feign have the vulgar
sort believe it, yet dare not the learned among them affirm it to be
necessary. And they have reason. For were it otherwise, either it must be
because we are so commanded, or for that without it we cannot obtain our end,
namely grace and assistance in all our needs. But commandment we have none. If
we have, let them show it, together with promise of impetration if we call
upon them, or of commination if we neglect it. But this they neither do nor
can show. The fittest place for it, if any such were, had been where our
Savior the best Doctor teaches us how to pray. Yet there he sends us
neither to Saints nor Angels, but only to our Father. Had they had any right
to our prayers, Christ was just and would never have appropriated that unto God
which was due also unto them: and could they have been unto us all a present
help in need, I am sure neither would his love have concealed it from us, nor
his goodness have envied their help unto us. Directing us therefore in this
perfect platform of Prayer unto no other then our Father: it is more then
evident his will is not we should seek unto any other. Now as it is not
necessary in regard of commandment, so neither is it in respect of the end.
For our end, namely impetration, and obtaining our desires may be attained
otherwise. How so? By the intercession and mediation of Christ Jesus. This I
trust they will not deny to be of it self sufficient every way. Certainly
without much derogation from the honor of Christ they cannot. For he has
expressly promised that whatsoever we shall ask the Father in his name shall
be granted unto us. Ioh. 16.23.
So that neither in this respect is such invocation necessary.

How then? Forsooth Pious and Profitable: for so they state it. But if that
only be Pious which is pleasing and acceptable unto God, Conc. Trid. less. 9.2.
Bell. de Beat. Sanct. l. 1. c. 19
and no worship be accepted of him but that which is agreeable to his
commandment: then cannot such invocation be Pious. For as we have showed, it
is no where commanded: and not being commanded it is but a superstitious
Willworship, which the Lord with much indignation rejects, demanding, who
has required these things at your hands? Esa. 1.12.
And if it be not Pious, then neither is it Profitable, but vain and to no
purpose. For so says our Savior, Mat. 15.9.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
But how unprofitable and vnavaileable such Prayers are will more fully
appear, if we duly consider how unfurnished of abilities both Angels and
Souls departed are to help and steed us when we call upon them. For to this
end three things are necessarily requisite, particular knowledge of all our
doings, ready will to help, and power enabling them to help us. First I say
Knowledge, not of the state of the Church militant in general (for such we
deny not unto the Saints departed, much less unto the Angels whom God has
appointed to be the Gardians of his chosen people) but of us all, and all our
actions in particular, yea of the secret cogitations of the heart, and the
inward sincerity thereof. For Prayer is not always Vocal, but sometimes
Mental only, 1 Samuel 13.25.
such as was that of Hannah: Romans 8.25.
and oftentimes consists of such groans and sighs as cannot be uttered.
And when it is uttered and becomes Vocal, speech and whatsoever is external is
but the carcass thereof, the life and soul thereof is the internal truth of
the heart, it being nothing else but a pouring out of the soul or discharging
of the heart before God. Which being so, I would feign learn, Psalm. 2.8.
if God only be (...), as the Scriptures every where teach, 1 King. 8.39.
2 Chronicles. 6.30
and it be a prerogative peculiar to him alone to try and search the heart:
Mat. 6.4.
Romans 8.26.
how either Angels or Spirits deceased come to the knowledge of those Prayers
that are only conceived in the mind, or can discern with what affection they
are delivered? They may perhaps say, This people approaches with their lips,
but whether the heart be near or far off, that is beyond their skill. So is
it also particularly to know the outward state, and to hear the Vocal Prayers
of all men wheresoever throughout the whole world. For they are not as God
present at once every where, but as creatures bounded and measured by time and
place: so that at one time they cannot occupy more then one place, and
consequently cannot take notice of all what is done at the same time in every
place. True it is the blessed Angels of God sometimes attend upon us here on
earth; but ordinarily they wait upon the throne of God in heaven. When they are
sent, with any message they come unto us: and when they have done their errand
they return again. So that as well ascending as descending Jacobs ladder,
Genesis 28.12.
neither do we know when any of them come unto us, or how long they stay with
us, neither do themselves always know in what state we are, or what we pray
for in particular. As for souls departed, as it is no part of their office to
encomber themselves with our businesses: Esa. 63.16.
2 Reg. 22.20.
so if we may believe Scripture they have no particular knowledge of them, Job.
14.21.
yea they are often taken from among us, Eccl. 9.5.
to the end they may not be troubled with them. Psalm. 146.4.
And indeed not knowing of themselves as being absent, if they have any such
knowledge it must needs be by revelation or relation from others. Is it from
the Angels then? But they know not all our needs, as not being always with
us. And what a compass is it, that the Angels come down hither, and then
return back again, to acquaint the Saints with our needs, that they may pray
for us? Is it from Souls newly arrived? Surely they at their departure are
more careful of themselves and their own future state, then inquisitiue after
the state of others. And the knowledge they carry hence with them can be but of
a few things near at hand which they have seen and heard, not which were
far distant, or of all wheresoever and whenever done. Besides, what a
dream is it, that those ancient Saints should then only interceede for us,
when by some of these new comers they are particularly informed of us? whence
is it then? Forsooth from divine revelation? what? special and particular then
when we pray? De beat Sanc. l. 1. c. 20.
Nor so neither, says Bellarmine. For then the Church would not so boldly say
unto the Saints Pray for us, but sometimes remember to beg of God that he
would reveal our prayers unto them. Neither can a reason so readily be yielded
why the Saints before the coming of Christ were not called upon, seeing God
might as well have revealed the Churches prayers unto those then, as to these
now, what revelation then? That whereby in the glass of the Trinity they see
all whatsoever may any way belong unto them. Mor. l. 12. c. 13
Then belike not all things, as Gregory says: else what needed this
restriction? And yet, if all things be Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22.
and whatsoever is Christ's belong unto them as being in Christ: then seeing all
that belongs unto them, they see therein all things which they will none of.
But the truth is, this devise of the glass is but a poor shift. For the
essence of God is most simple and immutable, and varieth not as things here
vary. Neither is it, as Aquinas says a necessary but a voluntary glass,
reflecting not all that it knows, but what it pleases to make known: which
upon the matter is no other revelation then that which Bellarmine himself
reiects. By all which it appears that nor Angels nor Saints have sufficient
means of particular knowledge.

As is their knowledge, so is their desire: for the will follows the direction
of the understanding, wherefore there is no particular knowledge, neither can
there be any particular will. That the Saints who are (...) like unto the
Angels do together with the Angels desire in general and wish for peace on
earth and good will toward men, we no way deny: but that they have a will to
help this man, that man, every man, at all times, in every their several
needs and necessities we can no way grant. For of their Will we are to judge
by their calling, and of their Calling by the Will of God, to which their Will
only is conformed. If therefore it be the will of God that every one of them
should take particular care of all our several affairs, this must appear by
some commandment or promise of God made unto them. But in Scripture, where God
only reveals his will such commandment and promise we find none. True it is
the Angels are Ministering spirits, and as it pleases God are sent forth to
do him service here below. But which of them, and for whom, and about what
business, and when, and where, and how long, and the like, are circumstances
hidden and concealed from us. Neither are they all employed in every business,
but when and where it pleases God. Whence it follows that where they are not
employed they have no particular will to help. As for the Saints departed, we
read not of any commandment they have to attend us or our affairs. Nay we
read they are taken away, to the end they should not be troubled with them. So
that resting from their labors, and having no further vocation thus to be
employed: neither have they any particula^ will to help.

Now wanting both knowledge and will, to what end were ability, had they any?
But indeed sufficient power they want also. For although they be blessed, and
have the beatificall sight of God, yet Gods they are not, which yet they must
needs be* if at one view they could behold all things that are done, or at one
instant hear all the suits that are made unto them by so many thousands, in so
many places, so far a sunder, and at once. For ability to perfome so much
belongs only unto him who knows all, is every where, and to whom nothing is
impossible: and therefore not unto the creature, which being of a finite and
limited nature cannot attend so many, so diverse, and so distant businesses
otherwise then successively. And thus seeing Angels and Saints neither have
particular knowledge of our estates, nor ready will to help, nor sufficient
power enabling them to help: it follows that to pray unto them must needs be
vain and so no way Pious or Profitable.

Perhaps will some say, though it be not Profitable yet neither is it Hurtful.
Yes hurtful, and that in a high degree. For it is most derogatorie to the
glory of God, and the mediation of Christ: and consequently is superstitious,
impious, and sacrilegious. It derogates from the glory of God, in that it
ascribes unto the creature that which belongs only unto him, Esa. 42.8. and 4 ^
11.
and cannot without much wrong be given to another. For he that prays unto
Saints or Angels acknowledges them so doing to be omniscient, omnipresent,
omnipotent, as is above insinuated: which yet are attributes so proper unto
God, that they are utterly incommunicable unto any other. Romans 10.14.
And if as Saint Paul says we can call upon none but him in whom we believe,
and we may believe in none but only in God, not in St Peter, In Ioh. tract.
54. and Ser. 131 de temp.
as Saint Augustine says, because Peter justifies not the wicked, nor in the
Church, because the Church is not God, but the house of God: then whosoever
calls upon the creature, thereby testifies that he places all his Faith and
affiance, and so makes it a God, which is no less the^ high treason against
God. Add yet further, that Prayer is a principal part of that worship which
is due only unto God: Mat. 4.20.
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer to thee shall all flesh come. And indeed so proper
is it unto God, that the ancient Fathers have from it thus argued unto the
Deity of Christ and the blessed Spirit, They are to be called upon, Ergo are
God. which were but a silly consequence, might others also be invoked besides
God. Derogatorie therefore it is unto the honor of God. So is it also unto the
Mediation of Christ. For holy Scripture makes him our only Mediator and
Advocate: and therefore only because he alone has merited and procured our
redemption. So says the Apostle, Christ who died, Romans 8.34.
or rather who is risen again, who also is at the right hand of God, 1 Timothy
2.5.6.
and makes intercession for us. And again, There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Men, the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all.
And Saint John, 1 Ioh 2.1.2.
If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, whosoever therefore
joins fellows with Christ in the office of Intercession (and so do all that
call upon Saints or Angels) notoriously detracteth from him in his Mediation,
and in that honor which he appropriateth to himself, of treading the wine
press alone, Esa 63.3.
without any other to help him: which how sacrilegious it is who sees not?

One thing more I have yet to say before I leave this point: namely that
against the Invocation of Saints we have the prescription of a very long time
on our side. For in the old Testament and during the space of well near four
thousand years we have no warrant at all for it. Praef. de eccl. triumph. and
l. 1. c. 19.
Nay Bellarmine himself (howsoever our adversaries to bleare the eye of the
world make a flourish to the contrary) expressly confesses that the Spirits
of the Patriarchs and Prophets before the coming of Christ were not so
worshipped and called upon, as the Apostles and Martyrs now are, because as yet
they were detained in those infernal prisons where they had not the
beatificall sight of God. Now if the Patriarchs then saw the face of God as
far forth as the Saints do now (as indeed they did) the argument is so much
the stronger, if yet all that while they were never called upon. In the new
testament likewise we find no warrant for it even by their own confession.
And Salmeron the Jesuit renders reasons thereof. For, says he, the Jew that
never had called upon any of the Patriarchs or Prophets would hardly have been
drawn to pray unto those newer Saints: and the Gentiles would have thought
that instead of those many Gods which they had forsaken, a multitude of other
Gods had been put upon them. As for the times after Christ and his Apostles,
it was long before it crept into the Church: and when it entered, it was but the
opinion of some private men, and not the public doctrine of the Church. All
the Fathers which proved the Deity of the Son and of the holy Ghost by this
duty of Invocation, must needs if they will not contradict themselves be
against it. So must they also (and they are not the least or meanest part of
them) who held that the Faithful hence departed are not admitted into heaven,
but continue elsewhere in some secret receptacles without the vision of God
until the day of judgment. For upon that vision, even in the judgment of our
adversaries, their particular knowledge of all things here done on earth
depends, upon this again their Invocation. In a word whenever or howsoever
it began, as it grew on, so was it still opposed, and never gate public
strength until the blind times of superstition overswaied true devotion.

The cafe then standing thus, that Invocation of Saints and Angels is neither
necessary, nor pious, nor profitable, but rather impious and extremely
dangerous, as being derogatory to the glory of God and the honor of Christ's
Mediation, and that no ground or warrant at all can be found for it, either in
the old or new Testament, or in the writings and practice of those holy Fathers
who flourished when the Church was in her primitive purity: the case I say
thus standing, our safest course will be to follow the precedence and direction
of our blessed Savior and with him to address our selves unto our heavenly
Father, and to none other. It is he alone who at all times can both hear and
help. Neither is he more able then ready and willing to grant our requests, if
we come unto him in his sons name. Night and day he stretches out his arms
toward us, he invites us with all louingnesse to come unto him, he charge
and commands us in all our needs and necessities to direct our prayers
immediately unto him. Let us not therefore solicit any other mediators or
spokesmen for us, as if we doubted of his fatherly goodness and affection
toward us: but let us rather come directly with all boldness unto the throne
of grace, Heb 4.16.
to the end we may obtain mercy, and find grace to be helped in due season.
So to do is not Presumption but Faith and Duty. And so much for the first
part of our Saviors prayer Quem orat, to whom he prays. The second is,

Pro quibus orat, for whom he prays. He prays for the Church mystical, as
some term it, or, as it may more fitly be called, for Christ mystical, that
is the whole body consisting both of the Head which is Christ, and all the rest
of his members. That it may more fitly be called Christ mystical, we have the
warrant of S. Paul, who expressly calls it so. As, says he, the body is
one, and has many members, 1. Cor. 12.1^.
and all the members of one body, though they be many, yet are one body: even
so is Christ* Where by Christ nothing can be meant but the whole consisting
both of Head and Members. Had the Church as its distinguished against the Head
been understood, he would have said, as St Austin observes, De piece. mer.
and rem. l. 1. c. 31
ita and Christi, so is Christ's, that is, the body of Christ, or the members of
Christ: but he says, ita and Christus, even so is Christ, vnum Christum
appellans caput and corpus, calling both the head and the body one Christ. The
same does St Austin elsewhere also observe upon those words of the Apostle, He
says not, and to seeds as speaking of many, Gal. 3.16. In Psalm. 142.
but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ. Now, says he, some perhaps
will say, if Christ be the seed of Abraham, are we so also? Remember that
Christ is the seed of Abraham: and if by this we also are the seed of Abraham,
then are we also Christ. Unto this warrant of Scripture add we the reason
thereof: that Christ and his Church being twain and yet constituting but one
mystical body, it is fit the denomination of the whole should be taken from
the better and more worthy part, which is Christ, and not the inferior, which
is the Church. But of this by the way.

For Christ mystical then does our Savior pray: but first for himself, and
then for his members. For himself, from hence unto the ninth verse: for his
members, from thence unto the end of the Chapter. If any demand a reason of
this order, I answer first, Christ is the more worthy person. Col. 1.18.
For he is Emanuel, God-man appointed by his Father to be the Head of the
Church, and in all things to have the pre-eminence. And therefore as he has in
our Creed before the Church, so in this Prayer also he deserves to have
precedencie. Secondly, he knew it could not go well with his Church, unless
first it went well with himself. For under his Father he was to be the
fountain of life and grace, the universal cause of all good unto his Church,
and to this end was he to be anointed of the Spirit without stint or measure.
Ps. 133.2.
So that unless the ointment be poured upon Aarons head, it cannot descend
unto the beard, and from thence unto the skirts of his garment. Ioh. 1.16*
And unless Christ be first replenished himself, we cannot of his fulness
receive either grace for grace or glory for glory. That therefore it might go
well with us he prays first for himself. But then in the next place he makes
suit for his Church, as if without her welfare it could not be well with him.
For as for her he was incarnate, so without her he counts himself imperfect.
For so it must needs be, if as St Paul says, she be (...), the fullness of him
that fills all in all. The reason, because he is her Head. Ephesians. 1.23.
And therefore though he fill all in all, yet without her he wants of his
own fullness, because he is no other then a head without a body. And this you
see for whom he prays, as also in what order, and why in such order he prays
for them. Whence briefly we may observe, first to what height of honor it has
pleased Christ to advance his Church, in that he has made her not only
Christian by virtue of her Spiritual unction, but also Christ by reason of her
mystical union with him: then which what higher dignity? Secondly, that in
all things Christ is to be preferred even to our very lives, yea our souls and
their salvation, as Moses and S. Paul sometime did, because he is of infinite
more worth and desert then all. Thirdly, that Christ is the Principle of all
good, and that the life both of Grace and Glory is to be derived from him
alone. If we seek it from Saints, or Angels, or any other creature, they will
but deceive our hopes in the end, as water torrents that pass away do the
travelers of Temah and Sheba. Ioh. 6.15. etc.
Lastly, that as in hell the rich glutton could not find so much as one drop
of water so out of Christ not a drop of grace is to be had. Carefully therefore
are we to labor that we may be in him. Being in him, we cannot but be
partakers of all goods together with him. Neither need we fear the loss
thereof, Col. 3.3.
for he has received it for us, and our life is hid with Christ in God. And
thus much of the second part Pro quibus, for whom he prays. Come we unto the
third.

Quid orat, what he prays for: and first what to himself then what to his
Church. To himself he prays for Glorification, rendering diverse reasons why it
should be granted unto Him. Of all which we will speak in their order: but
first of the thing demanded, Glorify thy Son. Glory is no other then the
splendour, claritie, brightness, or shining of a thing resulting and rising
from the perfection, eminency, or excellency it has above other things. For
example, the Glory of God is the perfection of his nature and attributes
infinitely surpassing and out-shining the perfection of all creatures. 1. Cor.
15.41.
Among the creatures, the Glory of the Sun, Moon, and Stars is their
incomparable brightness above other lights. Mat. 6.29.
Of Princes, their peerlesse sovereignty and state above the subject. Genesis 49.6.
Of Man, the soul and speech by which he excels the brute and dumb
creature. Psalm. 16.9.
Of the Church, her special privileges above all other societies. Ib. 87.3.
And so in other things. So that Glory is no other then (...), greatness
joined with beauty or goodness. Not every beauty or goodness, but that which
is exochally or eminently so. In regard whereof in Hebrew it is called (...)
Weight, as causing those that behold it, as it were, to sink under the burden
thereof. Whereunto S. Paul, as it seems, alluding, joins an exceeding weight
with Glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.
In the Chaldee it is called (...) Pretiousnesse, as being of greatest worth
and value: in which respect the Apostle joins Riches with Glory. Col. 1.27.
In Greek it is (...), fame, opinion, from the effect thereof: because in the
mind it begets due estimation of it, and in speech honorable mention. In
regard whereof it is defined by some, Clara cum laud notitia, an apprehension
thereof together with praise: by others laus consentiens bonorum, or vox
hominum incorrupte judicantium, praise given by good men, or the report of them
that judge rightly thereof. Of which again by and by. Such is Glory. Now to
Glorify imports two acts, the one of bounty and liberality, the other of
Justice. That whereby Glory is conferred and bestowed where it is not, or is
augmented and increased where it is not in the full measure. And so God is said
to glorify the creature, according to that of the Psalmist, Grace and glory
God will give. This whereby the glory that is is acknowledged and ascribed
unto the thing that is glorious, yea whereby it is made known and manifest to
others to the praise and honor thereof. And so the creature is said to
glorify God. And in this latter sense we find these three words of Praising,
Honoring, and Glorifying in Scripture ordinarily to be used: although in
proper speech each have its several and peculiar notion. For Praising is that
act where by in words we give testimony of the virtue or goodness of a thing.
So the Philosopher, Laus est oration magnitudinem virtutis indicans, praise is a
speech declaring the greatness of virtue. Honoring is an higher degree where
by not in words only, but by outward gestures and signs also we testify of
the excellence and goodness of a thing. Glorifying is the fruit or effect of
both. For in praising by words and honoring by signs we cause the goodness
and excellency of a thing to spread it self unto the knowledge of many.
Whence instead of glorificatio diverse say clarificatio, deriuing gloria from
clarus, as if it were claria, to import the making of a thing illustrious and
to shine abroad. St. Basil therefore defining (...) to glorify by (...), and
S. Augustine by gloriosum dicere, to say a thing is glorious, say something but
not all. For as we have showed, it steps further and includes more within. it.
And thus you see in general both what glory is, and what it is to glorify: by
which as by a thread we may easily be guided to that particular which here our
Savior craves when he says, Father glorify thy Son. For undoubtedly he
prays that his father would bestow upon him what glory he wanted, if he
wanted any: and the manifestation of that glory which already he had, if he
had any, or should have therefore. Wherefore to make all plain, we will
enquire three things. First, What glory he was presently possessed of,
secondly, what glory yet he wanted, and thirdly how he would be glorified. Of
these in order, and first of the first.

That Christ now presently was possessed of glory, though happily not as yet in
the full measure, cannot be denied. For although the Prophet say that he had
neither form, Esa. 53.2.
nor comeliness, nor beauty: yet indeed he was the fairest of all men, Psalm.
45.2.
and full of grace and truth. Outwardly and in the eye of natural men beauty
he had none, Ioh. 1.14.
he seemed a Worm rather then a Man: but inwardly and to them that were
spiritual he both was and appeared glorious, and they beheld his glory, not
as of man, but as of the only begotten of the Father. Omitting therefore this
as granted of all hands, let us rather enquire touching his glory what it was.
It was double, the glory of his Person, and the glory of his Office. The glory
of his Person again is double. For being the word made flesh, and so
consisting of two distinct natures the Word and the Flesh; though the Person be
but one, yet is there a twofold glory thereof, one of the Word, another of the
Flesh. The glory of the Word stands in two things, first that he is the
eternal Son of the eternal Father, begotten after an unspeakable manner of
his own substance: and therefore the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1 3. etc.
and the express image of his Person. A name too excellent for the Angels
themselves. For never did the Father say to any of them Thou art my son this
day have I begotten thee. Secondly that being so begotten he is
consubstantiall and coequall with his Father: neither counts he it robbery to
be equal with him. Phil. 2.6.
For though he be the Son and not the Father, yet being of the same Substance
he is one and the same God with him, and may justly challenge unto himself
the fullness of the Deity as far forth as the Father. A glory infinitely
transcending that of any creature. The glory of his Flesh is likewise double,
of Assumption and Communication. Of Assumption by which it was taken into the
divine nature. For as soon as it began to have being in the womb of the
blessed virgin, it was prevented from subsisting in it self, and was drawn
into the unity of the Person of the Son of God, eternally to subsist
therein. The highest dignity that a creature can aspire unto. That of
Communication is whereby glorious things are communicated unto his humane
nature. And it is either Personal or Habitual. Personal is that whereby as
the nature of man is truly given to the Person of the Son, so the Person of
the Son is truly communicated unto the nature of man. Whereupon because in
the Person of the Son is the fullness of all perfection, and all the
essential attributes of the Deity, as namely Omniscience, omnipotence,
omnipresence, and the rest: therefore do we say that all these attributes and
that fullness of perfection are communicated also unto the Manhood. Howbeit not
Physically and by effusion, as if the same properties which are in God should
formally and subiectiuely be in man, as heat transfused from the fire is
inherent in the water. For that which is infinite cannot be comprehended of
that which is finite. How then? Personally in the son of God. So that by
reason of the hypostaticall union there is such a real communion between
them, that the son of man is truly the Son of God, and consequently also
Omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, and the rest. The want of due
consideration hereof was it that bred that monster of Vbiquitie, and that great
quarrel betwixt us and the Saxon Churches. Ioh. 1.16.
Communication habitual is that whereby the fullness of grace was bestowed
upon him to be subiectiuely and inherently in his Flesh. And this is the glory
of his Unction. Esa. 11.2.
For the spirit of the Lord rested upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord. Psalm. 45.7.
By this Spirit was he anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows,
Ioh. 3.34.
yea he received the spirit without measure or limit both for the essence and
virtue, thereof, intensiuely and extensiuely, to all effects and purposes both
for himself and others. So that in his Will there was perfect justice without
taint or stain: in his Mind perfect wisdom and knowledge, both Beatificall
whereby he saw God far more clearly then any other, as being more nearly
united unto him, and Infused whereby he knew all heavenly and supernatural
verities, which without the revelation of grace cannot be known, yea
Acquisite and Experimental also whereby he knew all whatsoever by the light
of reason and nature might be known. So that he was ignorant of nothing which
he ought to know, or might make to his full happiness. And this was his
Habitual glory. Now the Glory of his Office breefely was to be the Mediator
between God and Man. An office of so high a nature that it could be performed
by none but only him who was both God and Man. For hereunto it was necessary
that he should be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. A Prophet as an Arbiter to
take knowledge of the cause and quarrel depending between them, and as an
Internuntius or legate to propound and expound the conditions of peace that are
to be concluded upon. A Priest* to be an Intercessor, and to make
interpellation for the party offending, and then to be a Fideiussor or Surety,
making satisfaction to the party for him. A King having all power both in
heaven and earth to keep and preserve the Church so reconciled in the state of
grace, and to tread down under his feet all the enemies thereof. Wondrous
Glory, and far above that of any creature. And this is the Glory he was
already possessed of.

Wanted he yet any further Glory? yes verily, and that in regard both of his
Divine and Humane nature. Of his Divine: Phil. 2.7.
for the Word had now emptied himself of his glory. Emptied himself I say,
not simply and absolutely, for he could no more in such sort abdicate his glory
then cease to be himself, it being essential unto him, and his very self:
but oeconomically and dispensatiuely, vailing and covering it under the cloud
of his flesh. Sermon. 12.
For if as St Leo says, the exinanition of the divine Majesty was the
advancement of the servile form unto the highest pitch of honor: then by like
proportion the advancement of the servile form was the exinanition of the
divine Majesty. This Exinanition or Emptying of himself was in his
Incarnation, conception, nativity, obedience, active to the law of nature as
being the son of Adam, and to the law of Moses as being the son of Abraham,
Passive in suffering hunger and cold and weariness, and a thousand sorrows
whereunto the infirmity of his flesh was subject. In this state Christ now
stood, neither had he as yet recovered the Glory whereof he had emptied
himself, nay he was not as yet come to the lowest degree of his humiliation.
For though they were instant and nere at hand, yet his agony, his sweating of
blood, his arraignment, his cross, his death, his emprisonment in the grave
were not yet come. All which did more and more eclipse the glory of his Deity:
so that this Glory of the word as yet he wanted. In regard of his Humane
nature, he had not yet deposed humane infirmities, as hunger, thirst, fear,
sorrow, anguish, and the like. Neither had he obtained incorruption,
impassibility, immortality, nor that glorious purity, strength, agility,
clarity of the body which he expected, together with the fullness of inward
joys and comforts in the Soul. Add hereunto that the actions of his
mediation, namely of his Prophecy, Priesthood and Kingdom, had not, nor could
not be hitherto perform gloriously, but only in such an humble manner as
suited with the state of humiliation in which presently he stood. To make all
plain, though as the School speaks he were Comprehensor and in termino
affectione iustitiae, yet he was viator and extraterminum affectione commodi,
that is, though in regard of holiness and righteousness he were already
pe^^^^y blessed and arrived at his end, yet by reason of the ^pprehension of
those unpleasing and afflictiue evils which now were, and yet were more to be
upon him, the joys and delights of heaven were not imparted to him. So that
the fullness and complement of Glory he had not yet attained.

Which being so, the third and last inquiry, how he would be glorified, may
easily be resolved. For as appears by what we have said, he desires the
dispelling and removing of all those thick mists and clouds which hitherto
eclipsed his Deity: that is the deposition, not of his Humane nature (for that
is now become an essential part of his Person, and shall continue therein unto
all eternity) but of all humane infirmities, and that low condition to which he
had humbled himself, to the end the glory of his Deity might at length appear
and shine forth most perfectly. He desires furthermore that his Father would be
pleased to glorify him by preserving and supporting him in the last act of his
tragedy, I mean his bitter agony and passion, by loosing the sorrows of
death and raising him from the grave, by taking him up into heaven, and setting
him at his right hand crowned with majesty and power, and finally by conferring
upon him all glorious endowments both of soul and body, and joining him unto
himself not only by the affection of perfect justice, but of comfort and
delight also. He desires lastly to be glorified by the full manifestation of
his Glory, both that which already he had, and that which yet he was to have;
that not only Jews but Gentiles also by the mission of his holy spirit, and
the preaching of his Apostles might know him to be the eternal Son of God,
of the same substance with the Father, and no way inferior unto him. Man also,
but such a man as is assumpted (...) the unity of the second person in the
Trinity, sla^^^^ed and condemned yet just and innocent, dead and buried yet
raised up again and living, humbled low yet exalted high, even to the highest
top of all, Phil. 2.9.
as having a name given him above every name: And that these things being
generally known of all, verse. 10.11.
he might be magnified and adored of all: and at the name of Jesus all knees
might bow, both of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, and every tongue might confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the
glory of God the Father. And thus you see how our Savior would be glorified.
The considera^ion of all which may be unto us of singular use and comfort.

For first seeing Christ who cannot be denied what ever he demands has prayed
for his glorification: what vanity is it for any man to think or hope that he
can hinder or obscure it? Let Jews persecute him, put him to death, set a
watch about his sepulcher to keep him down: yet can they not let but he shall
reviue and rise again. Though tyrants by open violence oppose the profession
of his name, and Heretics by Sophistry seek to undermine it, and Antichrist
assault it both ways by violence and sophistry: yet maugre all their cunning
and malice his Father shall surely glorify him. Yea he is God manifested in
the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, and received up into glory. Only now it remains to
expect and pray for his return in glory. Secondly, the Glorification of Christ
is the pledge and earnest of our Glorification. For had not he risen, ascended
and been received up into glory, neither should we. The gates of death had
been bard upon us, and of heaven shut against us, and we should have been
covered with eternal shame and ignominy. But now Christ like another Sampson
has broken through the gates of death, our head is risen and we in him. He
is ascended and gone from us, but gone to prepare a place for us, that where he
is there we may be also, and behold that his glory; and beholding it be made
like unto him, bearing his glorious image. For as now because he is full of
grace we of his fullness receive even grace for grace: so being full of glory,
of his fullness we shall also receive even glory for glory. Memorable is that
saying of Tertullian, De resur. car. c. 51.
As he has left unto us the earnest of his spirit, so he has received from us
the earnest of our flesh, and has carried it into heaven as a pledge that the
whole sum shall one day be reduced thither. Rest therefore secure oh flesh
and blood, ye have livery and seizan of heaven and the kingdom of God already
in Christ. Thirdly Christ so earnestly suing for his Glorification, it is our
duty by all means both to procure and further his Glory, which if we cannot
do in such sort as his Father does, yet are we to perform it in such a sort
as we may. If not gloriosum faciendo, by bestowing glory upon him: yet
gloriosum dicendo, by praising and magnifying his glory. By faith we are to be
assured thereof, by confession to acknowledge it, by our holy Christian life to
testify that the faith of our hearts and the confession of our mouths accord
and agree together, and as much as lies in us to labor that others may
glorify Christ together with us. Fourthly and lastly, as Christ did so are we
warranted by his example to pray for our own Glorification: that God would be
pleased to perfect that glory upon us which here by grace he has begun in
us. Hence is it that the Saints are said not only to love, but also to long for
the second coming of Christ, as knowing that till then it cannot be obtained:
that the Church also so earnestly prays, Turn my beloved and be like the Roe
or young Heart upon the mountains of Bether, Cant. 2.17.
Rev. 22 20.
and again yea come Lord Jesus come quickly. But may we with Christ desire that
the Glory begun in us be manifested unto others? we may. For we are commanded
to provide things honest in the fight of all men, To. 8.17.
Mat. 5.16.
and to let our light so shine before men that they also may see our good
works. Only we must take heed that we affect it not from men principally,
nor make it our maine end (for this would be the foul sin of Vainglory)
but that with Christ we seek it of our Father in the first place, and to the
end that being glorified of him he may be glorified by us. For not he that
commends himself or is commended of others is approved, 1 Cor. 10.18.
but he whom God commends. And so much for Quid, what our Savior craves to
himself.

Now that he may not be denied his request, he presses his Father with sundry
weighty and important reasons: all which God willing we will handle in their
order. The first is drawn from the circumstance of time, thus, The hour is
come, therefore glorify thy Son. What Hour? undoubtedly the hour of his
bitter passion. This appears evidently by that of our Savior, Mat. 26.45.
Lo the hour is at hand, and the son of man is betrayed into the hands of
sinners. That also of Saint John, Ioh. 8.20.
They laid not* hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. And yet more
plainly by that of our Savior, Ioh. 12.23.24.27.
where having said, the hour is come that the Son of man should be
glorified, presently he speaks of his death, and adds, Father save me
from this hour, but therefore came I into this hour. This Hour is here by
way of eminence called (...), the, or that hour, both in regard of the great
work that was to be performed therein, as also for that it was long before
determined by the Father to that work. But now, says Christ, that hour is
come, that is, it is instant and at hand. And so indeed it was. For the same
night that he uttered this prayer he was betrayed, and the next day cruelly
executed. By which it is evide^t that he was not ignorant of the hour, but as
he foreknew it, so he was ready also to enter into it. So that in these two
words these three things come to be considered, the Hour, the work of the
hour, and the knowledge he had both of the Hour and the work thereof. But
before I spoke of any of them, it is reason we should show the force of
Christ's argument, and how it follows, The hour of my Passion is now at hand:
therefore thou ought to glorify me. Some, as namely those of the Church of
Rome, make the reason of the sequel to be the merit of his passion, for that
by it he should deserve his glory. Now true it is that Christ both did and
suffered many things worthy of most large and ample reward. Howbeit for ought
we can find in Scripture, all was for us with neglect of himself. There was no
perfection but either he was already possessed of it, or it was now due unto
him by virtue of the personal union. At the first instant whereof all glory
would have flowen to his Humanity, had it not by special dispensation been
staid until he was come to the lowest bottom of his humiliation. Which being
done, and the stay removed, it could not but naturally flow unto him. So that
how he should merit for himself cannot well be conceived without empeachment
of his glorious Union. Phil. 2.8.9.
As for those texts they allege for proof, Heb. 2.9.
all of them show rather ordinem then meritum, Luc. 24.26.
that his glory succeeded his passion, not that his passion merited his glory.
Heb. 1.9.
For as touching that to the Hebrews, Thou have loved righteousness and hated
iniquity: wherefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows: if it import merit, it must be of Unction and not
of final Glorification, which they will none of, and indeed cannot be. For in
the very first instant of his assumption, and as soon as the Humanity had
being, the ointment was poured upon him, so that it could not possible be
prevented by merit. Merit therefore is not the reason of the sequel. What the^
Surely the Promise of his Father. For it was not the Fathers will that
ignominy should always rest upon the son, or that the sl^^es as it were of
Glory should still be stopped against him. Wherefore he promised, Esa, 53.10.11.
When he should make his soul a sacrifice for sin, he should see his seed,
and prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand,
so that he should see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied. Yea he
swear unto him, Ps. 110.4.
and repented not of it, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck, Heb. 7.21.
that is, who by performing the office of his Priesthood, should pass into his
eternal and glorious kingdom. And upon this ground it is that our Savior
affirms, Luc. 24.26.
Christ ought first to suffer, and then to enter into his glory. And hence also
it is that here he says, The hour is come, glorify thy son: as if he
should say more fully, thou have bound thy self by promise, yea and by oath
too, that when by suffering I shall have finished the work of redemption for
which thou sentest me, thou would fully satisfy me with glory. Now the
hour of my passion is come, and I am ready and willing to undergo it.
Remember therefore thy promise and perform it. For unless thou will fail of
thy word (and fail of thy word thou can not, because thou art truth it
self) thou must needs glorify me. And thus you see both the reason and
necessity of the sequel in this enthymeme.

Whence we are lessoned, first, to imitate Christ, and with him to ground all
our prayers and hopes* upon our Fathers promise. For he is omnipotent and can,
true and will perform. Unto Godliness he has made the promise both of this and
the other life. Live we therefore godlily* and then fear we not boldly to
approach unto the throne of grace, and to charge him with his promise both for
the one and for the other, thou have promised, and therefore glorify me.
Again, as Christ could not have ignominy and shame always to rest upon him,
but that obice remoto the stay and let being removed, Glory would surely flow
unto him by reason of the hypostaticall union: so by virtue of the mystical
union we have with Christ, obice remoto, as soon as the let and stay is done
away, it cannot be but that forthwith from him Glory should be derived unto
us. That let is Sin. Sin being crucified and slain by death, when we are
ready to yield up the ghost, but specially when the day of resurrection is
come, we may say with Christ, Father, the hour is come, glorify thy son.
Lastly, if we will (...) reign with Christ in glory, we must first (...)
suffer with him in humility. He bare the Cross before he could wear the
Crown: and we are predestined to be conformed unto the image of the Son.
Romans 8.29.
And we also in our flesh must fulfill the remainders of the afflictions of
Christ, Col. 1.24.
if we will be glorified with him. But of this enough. Now let us resume the
three particulars above mentioned to be considered. And first of the first.

(...), the or that hour, that is the hour decreed and determined unto the
Passion of Christ. For he that is the creator of time, Act. 1.7.
has ever reserved the disposition thereof in his own power. And as he has
ordained of all that shall come to pass, even to the lighting of a sparrow and
the fall of a hair: so unto every thing has he set a season, Eccl. 3.1
and a time to every purpose under heaven. If to every thing and purpose: then
much more to this work, as being a business of greatest weight and
consequence. And seeing as the Prince of Physicians says, (...), time is that
wherein season is: it may not be doubted but God has ordained such a time for
it as was every way most seasonable. And truly did S. Augustine say, Omnia
proprijs locis and temporibus gessit Saelvator, our Savior acted all things in
their proper times and places. Let us therefore a little more particularly
enquire touching this time and season: and here first in what age of the world,
secondly in what year of his own age, thirdly and lastly in what time of that
year he suffered.

As touching the age of the world, it was not instantly upon the creation
thereof, nor yet soon upon the fall of man, but a long time after, even
toward the end of foure-thousand years, and the beginning of the last age of
the world, Gal. 4.4.
called therefore in Scripture, the fullness of time, and the last days. Heb.
1.2.
This time was of old foretold by the Prophets. For although the incarnation
and suffering of the Messiah was for a while preached indefinitely, without
designation of any certain time, as namely unto Adam and Abraham* yet
afterward it pleased God to reveal it more definitely, Gen 49.10.
as by Jacob, the scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come, and by Daniel, Dan. 9.24. etc
that seauenty weeks after the going forth of the Commandment to restore and
build Jerusalem being well near expired, the most holy should be anointed and
Messiah be cut off. At the end of which time there was a general expectation
of the Messia^ among the Jews, as appears by Scripture. (...) that very time
he came, and suffered in the flesh, as by the same Scripture is purposely
declared. Some that are counted skillful in Chronology* and the computation of
times, place the Passion of Christ in the year of the world three thousand
nine hundred fifty and three. Others I know reckon otherwise, but the numb^^
of years where in they differ is so small, that it is little o^ nothing at all
to be reckoned of. Happily you will demand why it pleased God rather to appoint
this time then any other. I answer because this time was of all other the most
seasonable and fitting. The time before the fall, and while man stood yet in
his integrity could no way be fit. For as our Savior says, He came not to
call the just, and again, the whole need not the Physician. Mat. 9.15.12.
There being therefore as yet no sickness nor wound: neither was there any
need of physic or salve. Had man persisted in his innocence, Christ had
never been incarnate nor had suffered. To have suffered soon after the fall
would also have been very inconvenient. For it was reason that man sinning by
pride should have a time to humble him, to see his misery, to seek help, and
to exercise his faith. The dignity also of our Saviors person was such, and
the work of redemption so important, that so much haste could not well stand
with either. Luc. 18.8.
And if Christ suffering so lately shall at his second coming scarce find
faith on the earth: what a scarcity of faith would there have been, and how
cold would charity have waxed by this time, had he suffered so long ago, and
presently upon the fall? For which cause also it was not to be deferred unto
the last period of the world, least in the interim religion and the knowledge
of God should quite be extinguished. Besides it (...) ^it that some time
should be allowed between the work of our redemption and glorification, to
the end that the power of God our Savior might be praised and spread abroad,
our faith exercised and tried not only in regard of things past and present
but future also, and our thankfulness testified by our faithful and diligent
serving of him. The duest time therefore was by the wisdom of God chosen* and
Christ came and suffered neither too soon nor too late, but in that season
when both Jews and Gentiles were come to their ripeness, the one to be broken
off by reason of their incredulity, the other to be grafted in through Gods
goodness and mercy. For as touching the Jews, they were now grown to such an
height of impiety, that as Josephus says, had the Romans never so little
deferred their desolation, either the earth would have swallowed them, or a
deluge of waters have drowned them, or fire from heaven have consumed them, for
Sodom was never so abominable. As for the Gentiles, their fullness was now come
in, they were grown white and ready for the harvest, and the calling of them
so long delayed was now to be commenced. And so much for the age of the world.

As touching the year of his age wherein he suffered, it was, if we may
believe Irenaeus, about the fiftieth, which he voucheth to be an Apostolical
tradition. But indeed he is fowly mistaken, as is generally agreed upon by all.
Where by the way may be observed what small credit is to be given to Fathers
in point of tradition. The ground of his opinion was that of the Jews, Thou
are not yet fifty, Ioh. 8.57.
and have thou seen Abraham? But they spoke at random, and after the manner
of disputers grant him more then might well be admitted. The common received
opinion is, that he suffered being three and thirty complete, and in the
beginning of his four and thirtieth. Howbeit Scaliger, and that as it seems
not without good reason, adds one year more, and places his Passion in the
beginning of his five and thirtieth. For taking it as granted that at his
Baptism he was full thirty, Luc. 3.23.
between that and his Passion he finds as he supposes five Passeovers. The
first in the second of John, Ver. 13.23.
And the Jews Passover was at hand. Verse. 1.
The second in the first of John, After this there was a feast of the Jews:
which he proves to be Easter by that in the former Chapter, Verse. 35.
Say not ye, there are yet four months and then comes harvest? Verse. 1.
The third in the twelfth of Matthew and the sixth of Luke where his Disciples
walking through the corn fields plucked the ears of corn. Verse. 4.
The fourth in the sixth of John. And the Passover a feast of the Jews was
nigh. The fifth and last was that wherein he was crucified. Which being so, then
Christ being baptized in his thirtieth complete, and dying in the fifth
Passover after, his suffering must of necessity be in the beginning of his
five and thirtieth. But about this I will not contend. The odds of one year
cannot be great. Enquire we rather why he suffered at this age. First,
because it was unfit that old age should creep into that nature which was so
nearly united unto the eternal son of God. Secondly to testify how dearly
he loved us, that was content then to die for us when as yet he was in the very
flower and vigor of his age. Thirdly, mystically to teach us, that as he grew
in age and stature, and then being come to his full consistence and strength
declined not: so we should also grow from faith to faith, from grace to grace
till we come to our full (...) in Christ, never more afterward to feel any
decay. Lastly to show, as St. Augustine probably conjectureth, in what age or
stature we shall rise again, how young or old soever we die: namely in that
wherein Christ himself dyed and rose again. And so much touching the year of
his age.

The time of the year wherein he suffered was the day of the feast of
Passover, even the fifteenth of the month Nisan. For the evening before he
eat the Passover with his Disciples, which by the law of God ought to be done
upon the fourteenth of Nisan: and the next day after he dyed. Here perhaps it
will be objected, that the Jews began not their Passover till after Christ
was crucified, as plainly appears. Ioh. 13.1.^. cap. 19.14. and 18.2^.
Before the feast of Passover, supper being ended, says St John. And again,
It was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour. And yet
again, they themselves went not into the hall of judgment lest they should be
defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. Whereunto I answer, that by
this it seems to me more then manifest, that Christ and the Jews did not
both eat the Passover at once, but our Savior the evening before and the
Jews the evening after he was crucified. What then? Did Christ as Lord of the
Passover prevent the due day prescribed by his Father? So some say, but very
improbably. For Christ came to fulfill the law: and therefore without doubt he
precisely observed it. How then? Surely the Jews failed, not he. For the day
of the Passover and the weekly Sabbath falling immediately this year one after
the other, they according to their old custom, translated the Passover upon
the Sabbath, and observed both on one day. But our Savior preferring his
Fathers order unto humane traditions, took order it should be prepared for him
on that very day (...), in which, Luc. 22.7.8.
as St Luke says, the Passover ought to be sacrificed. So that, as we have
said, the feast day it self was the day of his suffering. Then which no time
could be more co^venient or seasonable. For as by other Leviticall ceremonies,
so was he also typed by the Paschal lamb. And therefore what time more fitting
the sacrifice of the true Lamb, then that which presently followed upon the
slaying of the typical? Whereunto St Paul alluding, for eue^ Christ, ^. Cor.
^.7.
says he, our Passover is sacrificed for us. Add hereunto the assertion of
some, that as Adam (...) the same day he was created sinned: so the same day
after the revolution of some years, man's sin by the death of Christ was done
away, and he again created anew. Which if it could clearly and infallibly
be demonstrated would argue a special providence of God in the dispensation
of this day. Add lastly, that at this time all the Jews wheresoever were to
appear at Jerusalem, and to celebrate this feast before the Lord: and that in
this regard also it was fit he should at this time suffer, that more public
notice might be taken thereof, and it the better be divulged and spread abroad.
And thus also you see in what time and season of the year he suffered.

The consideration of this circumstance of time may serve first to convince the
Jews of obstinate incredulity. For if God have by his eternal decree
determined a set hour unto the coming and suffering of the Messiah, and that
hour be now many hundred of years past: then is Christ already come, or God
fails of his purpose. But that such a precise hour was set, and that God
cannot fail of his purpose, the Jew knows well enough. Obstinate therefore
needs must he be, still denying that the Messiah is come. Secondly it may serve
to confirm and settle our Faith in the truth of the promised seed. For they
that came before or after the appointed hour could not be the true shepherd,
but thieves only and robbers. But Jesus the son of Mary came and suffered in
that very time, and in him were fulfilled all whatsoever was by the Prophets
foretold concerning the Messiah. He therefore is the true Christ, neither are
we to look for another. Thirdly, not whithstanding this appointed time, we
are to remember for our further consolation, that Jesus Christ is yesterday and
to day and evermore. Heb. 13*8*
And therefore as he was virtually the lamb slain from the beginning of the
world* so the virtue of his death and passion reaches down to these times
also, and evermore will be available to the justification of a sinner,
whosoever shall be provided of true Faith thereby to apprehend it. Fourthly,
as unto this particular of Christ's passion, so unto other things also, as
namely our vocation, conversion and repentance, has he appointed a due time.
This is called the acceptable time, and our Hodie to day: which if wilfully we
neglect, we may with Esau, seek the blessing with tears, and never after
recover it. Take we heed therefore while it is called to day, that we harden
not our hearts, but harken unto his voice, and duly obey it that we may be
admitted into his rest. Lastly, as God out of his deep wisdom, so are we in
imitation of God to do all things in due season. For as nothing is contented
out of its proper place, so nothing is welcome or gracious that is done out of
due season. It is not every word how true soever that is like an apple of gold
with pictures of silver, but that only which is Seasonable. Learned is the
tongue of that man that speaks a word of comfort in fit time: and thrice
blessed is he who like a tree planted by the rivers of waters brings forth
his fruit in his proper season. And thus much touching the time when Christ
suffered.

The next point to be considered is the work of that hour, what work will
you say? The bitter passion of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. what Passion?
The suffering of that punishment which was due to sin for the satisfaction of
his Fathers justice. What, was he a sinner and deserved such punishment? No,
by no means. For as touching Original sin, the passage of that was so
stopped up in his conception by the Holy Ghost, that it could no way enter into
him. And for Actual sin there was not so much as guile found in his mouth.
But he was to suffer for our Sins, and to satisfy his Father. We had eaten
sower grapes, and his teeth were set on edge, yea but what justice is this,
that Titius shall sin, and Sempronius be punished? The cause is not alike.
For Christ undertook to be our Surety, and to satisfy all our debts. And to
this end the Word became Flesh, that being otherwise impassible, he might in
it suffer the punishment due unto us. But might not God if he had been so
pleased have used some other means for the appeasing of his wrath? Yes
doubtless, for he had abundance of spirit and wisdom. But he chose this as
the best course for the declaration of his justice and mercy: justice in the
rigorous exacting of satisfaction for sin yea even from his own son, mercy
in the free pardon of sin by the death and passion of his son. Excellently
to this purpose Cameracensis, God in the beginning gave unto man, truth to
instruct him, justice to direct him, mercy to preserve him, and peace to
delight him. But he rebelling against his creator, they all fled from him, and
returned unto God. Where justice called upon him for satisfaction, and truth
required performance of his word: but Peace sought mitigation of wrath, and
mercy sued for pardon. In this difficulty wisdom interposed her self, and
found out a means to content all, namely by the incarnation and suffering of
the son of God. Whereunto the Father yielding all were soon accorded: and so
mercy and truth met together, and justice and peace kissed each other. For
further ratification whereof it pleased the Father solemnly and vnalterably to
decree, that his son should suffer in the flesh. Whereupon our Savior says
it was so determined: and the Scriptures as they foretell it, so they affirm
that thus it must be, and that Christ ought to suffer. Luc. 22.28.
Esa. 53.
Mat. 26.54.
Luc. 24.26.
Act. 2.33.
And according to this determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, when the
hour appointed was come he was delivered and taken and by wicked hands
crucified and slain. Of which great work being now to speak, and to enquire
into the Punishment fore appointed unto him by his Father; because some
extenuate it too much as if he seemed only to suffer, or suffered not what
indeed he did, others again too much aggravate it as if he suffered the very
pains of the damned in hell, we will as warily and as carefully as we can
steer between that Scylla and this Charybdis. And to this end we will
diligently enquire four things, the species or kind of punishment he
suffered, the extention, the intention, and the duration thereof. And of each
of these briefly in a word.

The kind of punishment was that which was due to sin, and every way equivalent
for the expiation thereof: howbeit so far forth and no further then was
convenient for such a person. First, therefore he suffered not that Punishment
of sin which is sin (for God many times and that justly punishes one sin
by another) The reason; for that then he should have been a sinner either by
inherent or actual sin, and so could never have made sufficient satisfaction
for the sins of others. Neither secondly did he suffer the personal
punishment of this or that man, as the gout, the stone, the dropsy, and the
like. For he took not the person but the nature of man into him: and so made
himself subject not to Personal but to Natural infirmities only. To say
nothing that those pains are many of them so contrary and repugnant one unto
another, as they are incompatible in the same person. Nor yet thirdly did he
suffer those punishments which proceed either from the conscience of inherent
sin, or the eternal continuance of sin, such as are Remorse and despair.
For in him was never any sin whether Original or Actual. Only it was
imputed unto him inasmuch as he undertook to satisfy for it. These foreprised
and excepted all other sorts of Punishment were laid upon him. And because in
Sin there is a double act, an Aversion or turning away from God the chiefest
good, and a Conversion or turning unto that which is only a seeming good, and
consequently the desert of a double Punishment, the one of loss to be deprived
of the true good, in regard of the Aversion, the other of sense, to feel smart
both in body and soul in regard of the Conversion: our blessed Lord and
Savior suffered both. The Punishment of Loss, being in regard of present
comfort and joy left unto himself and in a sort forsaken of his Father, of
which again anon in the due place. The punishment of Sense, for he felt during
the while extreme both torment and pain outwardly in the body, and horror and
anguish, inwardly in the Soul.

The Extension whereof was also exceeding general: for he suffered from all
that any way could afflict him, and in all whatsoever belonged unto him. From
his Father therefore he suffered, who for a time abandoned him and delivered
him into the hand of sinners, from the powers of darkness who laid upon him
whatsoever their malice could devise, from the Jews who stumbled at him and
despised him, from the Gentiles who made a game and laughing-stocke of him,
from Magistrates who convented and condemned him, from the people who arrested
and accused him, from the Clergy who charged him with cozinage and blasphemy,
from the Laity who cried out crucify him crucify him, from his enemies who
cruelly persecuted him, from his friends who in his greatest need started aside
from him, from forrainers who disdainfully shook the head at him, from those
of his own household who most treacherously betrayed him, and in a word from
all sorts both of men and women: yea from the Heaven which denied to give him
light, from the air which refused to vouchsafe him breath, from the earth
which would not so much as bear him, and from what not? And as from all, so
he suffered also in all. In his goods, being stripped even of his raiment, and
lots cast thereon, in his good name being esteemed a deceiuer, a blasphemer, a
drunkard, a glutton, a magitian, a traitor to Caesar, in his friends who were
scattered as soon as the shepherd was smitten, in his mother through whose
heart a sword was driven, in his soul by strong fear before his passion, and
extreme sorrow in his passion, in all the parts of his body, his head being
crowned with thorns, his face spit upon, his cheeks buffited, his hands and
feet nailed, his sides peirced, his back and arms, scourged, and the whole
upon the cross barbarously stretched and racked: in all his senses, the touch
by wounds, the taste with myrre and vinegar, the smell with the loathsome savor
of Golgotha, the hearing with shameful taunts and revilings, and the sight
with mowes and disdainefull behavior, finally in the whole person by death,
and the separation of the soul from the body.

The Intension of all which was likewise exceeding vehement, even
proportionable unto the desert of sin, wherefore he sticks not to say, Lam.
1.12.
Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow? And again, the
sorrows of hell compassed me round about. Not that he felt the flames of hell
fire, or the same kind of torment which the damned suffer in hell (far be
such impiety from our thoughts) but that which is equivalent thereunto. Had he
suffered only the death of the cross, and no more, his martyrs might seem to
have endured more bitter pains, and with more patience then he. But this in no
case may be imagined His (...), his fear and consternation, his strong cries,
his agony and bloody sweat, his earnest prayer that if it were possible the
cup might pass from him, and that lamentable expostulation, my God my God
why have thou forsaken me, do all mainely argue that his pangs were high
strained and extraordinary. For although he were not forsaken of his Father
either by breach of personal union, or loss of unction, or diminution of
grace, or despair of protection and deliverance: yet he was abandond and ^eft
destitute of all present comfort, so that his sorrows could not but be above
all other sorrows. And indeed how could it be otherwise? For not to speak of
the pains of the body (which yet some affirm to be more intense then could be
of other men by reason of the perfection and finenesse of his complexion) his
sorrows were not for the sins of one man, but of the whole world, which
could be no less then a world of sorrow. And if his love to us were so
infinite that he was content to suffer all these extremities for us: his sorrow
for the miseries we were in could be no less, but must every way be
answerable unto his love. So must it unto his wisdom also: for by it perfectly
knowing and apprehending all the causes and reasons of sorrow, it cannot be
avoided but that according to this knowledge and apprehension his sorrows
should be strained and intended.

The last point is the Duration of his pains, or how long he suffered them.
They were not eternell, nor might continue upon him for ever. Had they so
continued, he had never conquered death nor hell: and having not freed
himself from them, how could he set us free? They continued therefore upon
him but that hour, the time destined by his Father thereunto: which being once
expired; all his pains and sorrows ceased together therewith. Here it will
surely be objected, the punishment due unto sin is an eternal punishment. If
then the sufferings of Christ were only temporary and not eternal, how has
he suffered and satisfied sufficiently for sin? For time holds no
proportion with eternity. Whereunto I answer first, that in regard of the
dignity of his person, the shortest punishment inflicted upon him is equivalent
to the eternal punishment laid upon others. For he is not a mere man, but
God and man. And as there is not between time and eternity, so neither is
there between God and mere man any proportion at all. I answer secondly,
that eternal punishment is due only to an eternal sin, not to that which is
interrupted and broken off by grace. Sin though the act thereof be
transient, yet it leaves such a stain upon the soul, as continues in it
evermore, if by mercy it be not blotted out, and evermore disposes unto sin.
Now he that is so disposed sins in suo aeterno, and having as much as lies
in him a perpetual purpose of sinning, he shall as he deserves perpetually and
everlastingly be punished. But they for whom Christ died, have their sins
broken off by grace, their souls by little and little cleansed from the
stains of sin in his blood, a hatred and detestation of sin wrought in them,
together with a sincere love and study of holiness, until sin be utterly
destroyed and abolished in them. Christ therefore thus purposing to put a full
end to all their sins, reason would that an end (...) should be set unto his
sufferings, and their sins not being eternal, that neither his sufferings
should be eternal. And thus much for the Duration of his Passion.

The use of all may be this. First, seeing Christ has suffered all these
things and that for us, it is fit that we by all ways and means should study
to come to the full knowledge thereof. It was not for Angels, and yet they
earnestly desired to look into this mystery. Us it concerns only, and nothing
more then it: and can we possibly neglect the learning of it? The Apostle
Saint Paul accounted the knowledge hereof to be of all other the most
excellent, and all other things in comparison of it to be but loss and dung.
Phil 3.^.
1 Cor. 2.2.
Whereupon he protests that among the Corinthians he was resolved not to know
any thing save Christ Jesus and him crucified. Why then should not we be of
the same, Ephesians. 3.18.
and pray with him that we may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is
the breadth and length and depth and height? That knowing what great matters
he has done for us, we may be the more incited to be thankful unto him
for it. Secondly, seeing it pleased the Father thus to decree that his son
should suffer all these things for the satisfaction of his justice, and that
otherwise he would not be appeased for sin: we may thereby learn (...), how
precisely rigorous God is in the punishment of sin, together with the
vileness and odiousness thereof. The due consideration whereof would both
terrify us from the committing of sin, and work in our hearts a loathing
and detestation of sin. For if God will not be pacified without full
satisfaction, how dare we commit it? And if nothing can cleanse the leprosy
thereof but only the blood of the son of God, how can we but abhor it?
Thirdly, seeing he has resolved to appease his wrath, and to rest satisfied
for sin in the sufferings of his son, we may therein as in a crystal
glass clearly behold (...), the great love of God toward man. It was not for
the sinning Angels and their redemption that he gave his son, but for us men
and our salvation. Rather then he would loose the whole race of mankind, he
would spare nothing, no not his best beloved. With whom although he were ever
well pleased, yet he must needs suffer for us, that in him he may be also well
pleased with us. Fear we not therefore nor despair of grace. Though our
sins be never so many and grievous: yet the son of God has satisfied for
them all. Tender we this payment unto his Father, and it cannot but be
accepted. But yet lastly, seeing his sufferings were but a short time, and so
not intended for eternal sins, but those only which were to have an end: it
may give us a cave at to break off our sins be time, least being justly cut
off in them they prove eternal to us, and so we have no benefit in the
sufferings of Christ. For as the Apostle St Paul says, Heb. 10.26 and 29.
if obstinately and wilfully we resolve to sin after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. For this
is to tread under foot the Son of God, to count the blood of the Covenant
wherewith we were sanctified an unholy thing, and to do despite unto the
spirit of grace. But of this second part, the work of the hour enough.

The third and last is the Knowledge he had both of the work and the hour.
The Hour, says he, is come. He knew it therefore, else how could he say it.
And out of this knowledge was it that so often he foretold of both. Of his
Passion. Ioh. 3.14.
As, says he, Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: even so must the
son of man be lifted up. And again, more plainly unto his disciples he
showed, that he must go unto Jerusalem, Mat. 16.21.
and suffer many things of the elders and chief Priests and Scribes, and be
killed. Of the Hour. For sometime says he, Nondum venit hora mea, Ioh. 13.1.
my hour is not yet come. Another time, Jesus knew that his hour was come.
And if Simeon and Anna, and other of the Jews foreknew the time of his coming
in the flesh, and accordingly expected him: should not he much more know the
hour appointed unto his sufferings, and accordingly prepare himself for it?
For, as himself witnesses, for that hour he came into the world. But how
came he to the knowledge hereof? First, by the Scripture, Luc. 24.46*
and the prediction of the Prophets. For, thus, says he, it is written, and
thus it behooved Christ to suffer. But where is it written? Every where almost.
And concerning his Passion, in the Psalms of David especially, and the
prophecy of Esaias. And touching the hour, in the blessing of Judah by Jacob
recorded in Genesis, and that memorable prophecy of seaventy weeks in Daniell,
as is above already specified. All which Scriptures he himself could not but
understand, who opened the minds of others that they might understand them.
Luc. 24.45.
Again, he came to the knowledge hereof by special revelation, as being a
Prophet, yea the greatest of all Prophets. For being in his humane nature
assumpted into the Deity, and to this end assumpted that when the hour was
come in it he might suffer: it could not be that either the hour or the work
of the hour should be concealed from him. The Word undoubtedly knew it, for he
appointed it. As undoubtedly he made it known unto his manhood which he had so
nearly taken unto him, for that the same so mainely concerned it. If this be
so, will some say, why then knowing it did he not avoid it? was it because he
could not? Not so. For he was omnipotent: and he only had power of his life to
lay it down or to take it up, neither could any without his own permission
take it from him. If he would he might have prayed to his Father, and he
would have sent him more then twelve legions of Angels to preserve him. Mat.
26.53.
And if before the hour was come he had so often freed himself from the
hands of his most violent enemies: why should he not in the very hour be as
able to deliver himself? For his power was still the same and never a whit
diminished. He could then, but would not avoid it. And why would he not?
First, because his Father had decreed it, and he would in no case be
disobedient unto him. For he came to do his will, and therefore professed it
was unto him meat and drink to do it. In regard whereof he disclaimes his
own will. Not my will, says he, Heb. 5.8.
but thy will be done. Wherefore though he were the Son, Phil. 2.8.
yet he learned obedience: and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross. Secondly, because of the tender love his Father inspired into him
toward mankind. For it was the love he bare them which made him so willing:
Romans 5.8.
and out of it though we were his enemies, yet he was content to dye for us, 1
Ioh. 3.16.
and to lay down his life though it were so dear unto him. Lastly, had he not
bin willing, neither had he satisfied. His willingness proceeding from such
love was the very form of his sufferings, and made them meritorious. Without
the^ sacrifice is vain and without virtue, according to that misericordiam
volo non sacrificium, I will mercy and not sacrifice, and again, melior est
obedientia quam victimae, obedience is better then sacrifice, But it will be
said, that all this notwithstanding he seemed very unwilling to dye. For did
not he very passionately entreat his Father to be delivered from that hour?
Ioh. 12.27.
And that if it were possible the cup might pass from him? Mat. 26 39.
For satisfaction of which doubt we are to know, that Christ though his manhood
were assumed into the Deity, yet was he not thereby freed from ought that is
humane. Being man therefore, as man he was measured by time, and his
apprehensions could not all be in an instant, but one after another
successively. Wherefore the first apprehension of his Passion was simple as of
a thing evil in it self and afflictiue to his nature, without any further
consideration: for so only Sense and inferior reason at the first presented it
unto him. And thus far it is true he desired to decline it. Neither was it
evil so to do, it being agreeable to that law of nature which in creation was
imposed upon us. But when in the second place it was by superior reason
presented unto him invested with other circumstances, as namely that it was his
Fathers will, that for this end he was sent to the world, and that without it
the world could not be redeemed there being no other means besides to effect
it: forthwith apprehending it in this manner, he yielded most willingly
thereunto, and said unto his Father, not as I will, but as thou will. Just as a
Patient, who considering the potion offered him by the Physician only as bitter
and distasteful loatheth and abhors it: but considering with all the
operation thereof and what good it may do him, he readiy admits and
accepts of it. And thus much touching the knowledge Christ had of his Passion
and the hour thereof, together with his willingness to suffer in obedience to
his Father, and out of the love he bare us.

Whence we may learn, first from his knowledge, that as he knew both what and
when he was to suffer in his own person, so he knows also both what and when
to suffer in his mystical body. This may minister matter of singular comfort
unto us. For if it be so, what harm can at any time betide us? He will not
suffer so much as a hair to fall from our head but as he pleases. For he
has numbered them all, and there is not a tear we shed from our eyes but he
lays it up in his bottle. Many may be the troubles of the Righteous, but as he
foresees them all, so will he support us in them, and one day deliver us from
them all. Secondly from his willingness to suffer for us, to assure our selves
that his free will offering is accepted of his Father, and we may confidently
r^ly thereon as a full satisfaction for all our sins. Withal that we be also
ready and willing to suffer for him. What ever can be laid upon us, is nothing
to that which he endured for us. Oh those glorious Martyrs who so joyfully
suffered such exquisite torments for his names sake! Hitherto we sit quietly
under our vines and fig trees. How soon the days of trial may come who
knows? God grant us to be of like mind whenever it comes. Thirdly, from his
obedience, to yield absolute obedience unto the will of our Father, and denying
our own wills to say unto him, not as I will but as thou will. Away with
hypotheticall and conditional obedience, if it make for my profit and
advantage, or may be without my loss and hinderance. Say we rather with Queen
Hester, Dan. 3.16.17.18.
If I perish I perish, and with the three children, We are not careful o
Nebucadnetsar to answer thee in this matter. Our God whom we serve is both
able and will deliver us. If not, yet know we will not serve thy Gods. Lastly
from his love, the best we can to requite him with love. The debt of love we
owe him is infinite because his love to us was infinite. Which seeing we can
never repay to the full, let us endeavor what we can, and bestow our selves
upon him, even our reasonable service of him. And thus much touching the first
argument whereby he would persuade his Father to glorify him.

The second is drawn from the highest and chiefest end of all things, the
glory of God, in these words, that thy son may glorify thee. And it may be
reduced into this form, That by which I shall glorify thee, and without which
I cannot glorify thee, thou may not deny unto me. But by my Glorification I
shall glorify thee, and without it I cannot glorify thee. Therefore my
glorification thou may not deny unto me. Of the truth of both these
Propositions I am now to speak: Which I shall eftsoons perform, if first we
may know what the Glory of the Father is. For what Glory is in general, and
what it is to Glorify, we have already spoken of at full, and therefore
forbear to speak any further of it. That God the Father is Glorious nothing
is more evident. In Scripture he is called Pater gloriae, Ephesians. 1.17.
Psalm. 24.8.
the Father of glory, Rex gloriae the king of glory, Act. 7.2.
Deus gloriae the God of glory: and so great is his Glory that it is
therefore to be (...) an excellent or magnificent glory. 2 Pet. 1.17.
This glory is the splendour or brightness of his perfection above all other
things. The ground thereof is perfection: that whereby it appears is the
Splendour or brightness thereof. Iam. 1.4.
Perfection is cum nihil deest, when nothing is wanting. Whence in Hebrew it is
called (...) from (...) which signifies All. And it is double, either in suo
genere in its kind, and so the Sun is said to be perfect, because it has the
fullness of light, or absolute, to wit, an interminable, infinite entire
possession of all good, and so God only is perfect. And this Perfection is
again double, Substantial or Personal. The Substantial, is the very Godhead
it self considered in its Nature together with all the essential properties
thereof, as knowledge, wisdom, justice, mercy, power, eternity, and the like.
And this is so the Glory of the Father as it is also the Glory of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost. For as the Creed of Athanasius has, The Godhead of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is one: and so the Glory equal
and the majesty coeternall. This Perfection exceeds that of the creature
infinitely, and that in sundry respects. For first, whereas the Creature has
perfection only in its kind, and one is destitute of that which is bestowed
upon another: the Father has the full possession of all Good whatsoever is or
possibly can be imagined. secondly, whereas other things have their perfection
only suo modo, according their capacity, which because they are creatures can
be but finite: the Father has his modo perfectissimo, after a most eminent
and inconceivable manner, which because he is of infinite capacity must needs
be infinite, And lastly, whereas the creature has his perfection aliunde, from
another without him, not from himself, namely God, according to that of the
Apostle, Quid habes quod non accepisti, what have thou which thou have not
received: the Father has his from himself and of himself, without dependency
or beholdingness unto any other. His Personal perfection is his Fatherhood,
or that whereby he is the Father. And this is proper glory, incommunicable
even to the Son or the Holy Ghost: for neither of them is the Father. And
this glory stands in three things. First, that he is Prima persona, the first
person in order. In order, I say, not in dignity: for so all three are
coequall. The Son is the second, the Holy Ghost is the third: but he neither
is not may be called the second or third, but only the first. Secondly, that he
is the fountain and original of the Deity unto the Son and the Holy Ghost:
unto the Son gignendo, by way of generation, unto the Holy Ghost together
with the Son spirando, by an unspeakable manner of Proceeding. Thirdly and
lastly, that he is (...) unbegotten, and proceeding from none: so that whereas
the Son and the Holy Ghost receive their Personality from him, he receives
his from neither. These privileges are so great, that although the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost exceed not one the other either in essence or dignity,
yet the Father in regard of these is in Scripture by a kind of (...) or
excellency called God. This double perfection of the Father is not without its
Splendour and Brightness by which it shines and appears. Were it without it,
it could scarce be called glory. Now we know that the Father was never without
his glory, no not then when things were not as yet created. Else how could he
be said to manifest his glory? For manifestation is of that which is. Ioh. 17.5.
And does not our Savior likewise desire to be glorified with that glory which
be had with his Father before the world was? The Perfection thereof the Father
by the Splendour and Brightness thereof shines and appears two ways, first
inwardly to the holy and blessed Trinity, and then outwardly unto others.
Inwardly to the Trinity, by intervention of understanding and knowledge. For
shining internally with the fullest clarity unto them it cannot but appear
unto them: and appearing they cannot but contemplate and admire it as the Ocean
and magazin of all good. Outwardly unto others by works conformable unto his
perfection: as namely of Creation, Sustentation, Government, Redemption, and in
the end Restoration of all things. For in these the goodness, Wisdom, Power,
Justice, and Mercy of God do shine and appear to us, whom it has pleased God
to enable with understanding to see and in some measure to comprehend them. But
the shining forth of all perfection, and the appearance thereof in full
strength, is reserved unto that day When the creature shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: Romans
8.21.
and unto Faith whereby we see only as in a mirror, intuitiue beholding of
the face of God by vision shall succeed. And this is the glory of the Father.
Now to glori^ie him cannot be to give or add glory unto him. For, as we have
showed, he is absolutely Perfect and lacks nothing: and his property is to
give unto all, but to receive from none. It is therefore to manifest his glory,
and to make it publicly known throughout the world: as if our Savior had
said, Father unless thou glorify me, the brightness of thy glory will
exceedingly be eclipsed and obscured: but if thou glorify me, then shall the
Glory be greatly manifested by me, and I shall make it known far and near
among the sons of men. This being the meaning of these terms, let us now
examine both the Propositions of the argument above propounded, and try the
truth of them.

The Mayor is That by which I shall glorify thee, and without which I cannot
glorify thee, thou may not deny unto me. An evident and undoubted truth:
else never would Christ have said it, especially in a matter so much concerning
him. For if, as Solomon says, the lip of vanity becomes not a Prince, much
less would it become him who is the wisdom of the Father and very truth it
self. And if nothing can concern him more then his own Glorification: then
certainly to speak slightly and impertinently in a matter of such moment
would have argued much weakness. And indeed it is so apparently true that our
Savior only affirms it without vouchsafing it any confirmation at all, as if
he knew that his Father neither would nor could deny it. Nevertheless the
truth thereof may yet further appear: First by the continual practice of all
the Saints, conformable unto this of Christ. For in all their addresses unto
God they ever urged him with his Glory, as the strongest argument to persuade,
when the Lord had threatened to smite the people of Israel with the pestilence
and to disinherit them because of their murmuring and incredulity, Number. 14.12.
Moses thought nothing would sooner move him to commiseration and pity of
them then the impeachment otherwise of his honor: For, Verse. 15.16.
says he, the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which he swear
unto them, therefore has he slain them in the wilderness. As if he should
say, thou may not do it, because it will discredit both thy truth and power.
Again Daniel when the seauenty years of Iudahs captivity were near at an
end, entreats the Lord to remember them in mercy, and to return the^ back
again into their own country. But what argument uses he to persuade? Dan
9.17.18.19.
For thine own sake, says he, because the city and thy people are called by
thy name. As if he should say, least otherwise thy Glory by failing in
performance of thy promise toward thy people should be called into question:
what Psalm almost is there in which the Prophet David presses not upon God
this reason? Return O Lord, Ps. 6.4.5.
deliver my soul, oh save me for thy mercies sake. For in death there is no
remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee thanks? Ib. 142.7.
Bring my soul out of prison that I may praise thee: the righteous shall
compass me about, for thou shall deal bountifully with me. Quicken me O
Lord for thy names sake: and 143.11.
for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble. It were infinite to
quote particular passages. In a word, did not our Savior when he taught us to
pray direct us ever to conclude with this argument, For thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory? And did not St Paul according to this direction end
his Prayer with ascribing Glory unto God in the Church by Christ Jesus
throughout all ages? Ephesians. 3.21.
If then others have mightily prevailed with God in urging him with his Glory:
shall we think that the Son of God can be less prevalent with his Father
pressing him with the same argument, Father glorify me, for so I shall be
able, else not, to glorify thee.

Secondly, the manifestation of the Fathers Glory, is the architectonicall and
sovereign end of all things. This he himself principally intended in all his
works: this he set up as a mark for all to aim at. Prove. 16.4.
The Lord, says Solomon, made all things for himself, even the wicked for the
day of evil. The predestination also of the Saints, and their adoption to be
children by Jesus Christ, was, as S. Paul testifies, to the praise of the
glory of his grace: Ephesians. 1.5.6.
Romans 11.36.
yea of him and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for
ever, Amen. For to the praise of the glory of his Power all things were
created. To the praise of the glory of his Wisdom all things are ordered and
governed. To the praise of the glory of his Mercy are we ransomed in Christ
from the bondage of misery. And to the praise of the glory of his Justice are
impenitent sinners reprobated and condemned. And reason it should be thus. For
as out of him all things were educed as being the fountain and prime cause of
all: so unto him it was fit all things should be reduced as unto the last and
chiefest end of all. Right even as out of the sea all rivers flow, and then
reflow back again unto it. Neither indeed was it possible to be otherwise. For
God being in himself blessed and all-sufficient, cannot rest in any thing that
is extrinsecall and without himself. In himself therefore he must find it:
and what other can that be then his Glory? His Glory therefore did he
necessarily propound unto himself as the sovereign end of all his actions:
and unto it here does our Savior subordinate his own Glorification. So that
hence also the truth of our Mayor plainly appears, that unless the Father
will be without his Glory (and without his Glory he neither will nor can be) he
must needs grant to his Son that without which he cannot glorify him.

Thirdly and lastly, the glory of the Father is most dear and precious to him.
It is unto him as the apple of his eye, which at no hand may be touched: yea as
his very self, because it is himself. Hence it is that he is so jealous of
his glory: neither can endure that it should be given to any other. And hence
it is also that he threatens never to hold him guiltless whosoever takes his
name in vain: yea that he will most severely be revenged of all those that
any way dishonor him. Romans 1.21.22.23.24.
Because, says S. Paul, when they knew God they glorified him not as God, nor
were thankful, etc. therefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through
the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor their bodies between themselves.
This spiritual punishment is the greatest of all judgments in this life: and
is usually attended with eternal shame and confusion of face in the next. And
reason it is that they who slight that which God holds so dear, should
themselves be slighted of him: and seeing they disdain to glorify him that
he by just vengeance should glorify himself upon them. So dealt he with
Pharaoh, Nabuchadnetzar, Antiochus, Herod, and other proud tyrants: and so will
he one day deal with all those that set so light of his Glory. Is then the
glory of the Father so dear and precious unto him. Is he so jealous and charie
of it that he will not have it in any case touched or blemished? Then surely
that which makes for his Glory, and without which the Son cannot glorify
him, may not be denied him. And so much for the Mayor.

The Minor Proposition is, But by my glorification I shall glorify thee, and
without it I shall not be able to glorify thee. This though it be as true as
the former, yet the truth thereof is not so evident as of that. For it may be
objected, that our Savior now praying for his Glorification, implies therein
that he was not as yet glorified. For we use not to sue for what we are
already possessed of, but only give thanks for it. Yet by and by he says, Ego
glorificauite, I have already glorified thee on earth. Verse. 4.
As he was God he had from all eternity glorified him in heaven. As he was Man
he had here on earth glorified him by his doctrine, life, obedience, miracles.
And if we as yet unglorified do glorify him: how should not the Son much
more be able to do it? Unto all which I thus answer briefly, that glorifying
is double, either Inchoate or Complete. As touching the Inchoate, it is true
that as the Father had in part already glorified him, as in particular by the
raising up of Lazarus: Ioh. 11.4.
so had the Son also in part glorified the Father. But as touching that which
is Complete, neither had the Father as yet so glorified the Son nor the
Son the Father. Wherefore as our Savior is to be understood here to pray for
his perfect Glorification: so are we to conceive it also of the Fathers, as if
he had said more fully, unless the Father perfectly glorify the Son,
neither can the Son perfectly glorify the Father. For as God declared the
glory of his power in delivering Israel out of Egypt by a mighty hand, and with
many signs and wonders, yet had his mercy and truth, yea and his power also
been much impeached, had he not proceeded according to promise to settle them
safely in the land of Canaan: so the Father although he had begun to show his
glory in the incarnation of his Son, and all other his noble acts, yet if he
did not go on to co^summate and perfect his Sons glory, by supporting him in
his last combat, raising him from death, taking him up into heaven, and
setting him at his right hand with all power and authority, the glory of his
goodness, wisdom, mercy, justice, and omnipotence, would be exceedingly
blemished. But when once the Son shall be so glorified, then shall he by
virtue of the power given him, power forth of his spirit upon the sons of
men, subdue the world unto his obedience, trample all his enemies under his
feet, and recover the kingdom unto his Father. Whereby it will manifestly
appear, that he is the eternal Father, very God, the author of life and
salvation, sweet in his goodness, true in his promise, just in retribution,
wise in all his actions, and most powerful also in his executions. And so much
likewise of the Minor.

The use whereof may serve, first, for confutation. For it answers a vain
quarrel of the Arrians against the coequalitie of the Son with the Father.
The Father, say they, must needs be greater then the Son, because the Son
says, Pater clarifica filium, father glorify thy son: and he is greater who
gives then he who receaues glory. De Trinit. l. 2. c. 4.
Whereunto I answer in the words of S. Augustine, Quod si ille qui glorificat,
etc. If he that glorifieth be greater then he whom he does glorify, let them
grant that they are equal who glorify one the other. For it is written that
the Son also glorifieth the Father, Ioh 17, 4.
I, says he, have glorified thee on earth. So also elsewhere, says our
Savior, Ioh. 16.14.
the spirit shall glorify me. And there being in the holy and blessed Trinity
such an (...) or Circuminsession as whereby each Person dwells in other: it
cannot be but each of them should know, and knowing mutually and eternally
glorify one another. Secondly it serves for information, that as Christ our
head referred his own Glorification unto the glory of his Father, so we that
are his members should do the like and in all things seek to glorify our
Father. Nay if Christ to the praise of the glory of his Fathers grace was
content to become sin and a curse for us: how much more are we bound in
every thing to intend his glory of whom he exacteth no such thing. It is the
rule of the Apostle S. Paul, Whether ye eat or drink, or do any thing else,
do all to the praise and glory of God. All whatsoever either we are or have we
have received of him, and it is he who by Christ has redeemed us both bodies
and souls: let us therefore glorify him both in bodies and souls, for they
are his. Thirdly and lastly, seeing our Savior urges his desire to glorify
his Father as a special argument to persuade him to grant his request, it may
serve for singular comfort unto us, that as long as our actions respect Gods
glory and are joined therewith they cannot but be accepted. He will surely
bless them, and give them good success, since his glory cannot be divided from
them. A holy life glorifying God is a vital prayer. Though we hear no speech
from it, yet it cries aloud in the ears of God; and says, Father thou may
not deny to glorify me, for through the whole course of my life I study
nothing more then to glorify thee. And thus much of our Saviors second motive
drawn from the highest and most sovereign end of all, the Glory of his Father.

Verse. 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him.

His third reason is drawn from the Power bestowed upon him by his Father,
thus, Thou have given him power over all flesh to the end he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him: Ergo thou ought to glorify
thy son. The Antecedent of this Enthymeme is delivered in the Text in
express terms. The Consequence is only insinuated and implied. For clearing
whereof it may please you to observe with me, first that the word (...) here
translated as, is not a note of similitude, but imports a reason or cause. In
regard whereof Euthimius expounds it by (...), as if he had said forasmuch or
because. Secondly, that the word Power is in the original not (...) but (...)
betwixt which two there is great difference. For (...) signifies power of
right or authority, and (...) Power of might or ability. Which although they
may and oftentimes do concur in the same person, yet many times they are
divided. For some there are who have right and authority, but want might and
ability; and others there are who have might and ability but want right and
authority. These for want of right do not justly what they can do, and they
for want of might cannot do that which otherwise they might justly do. These
things duly considered, the reason of the Consequence will easily appear. For
if God have given him authority (as indeed he had) he ought withal to give
him ability. For that without this is fectlesse and to no purpose: and it sits
not with the wisdom of God to do things in vain. This were with Herod and
the Jews to set a crown on his head, to put a reed in his hand, to clap a
purple robe on his back, and to make a mock king of him. As therefore he has
given him (...) right and authority: so must he also give him (...) strength
and ability. But Ability he can have none, nor give life to them that are
given him (which is the end propounded unto him) except his Father glorify
him. This appears thus. The glorification which the Son desires, stands
especially in his Resurrection, Ascension, Session at the right hand of his
Father, and Return to judgment. If then he rise not again, we are yet in our
sins as St Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.17.
and have no right either in the first or second resurrection. Death has still
power upon us, yea upon Christ himself, and utterly bars us from eternal
life. Again if he ascend not neither can we. The way unto heaven is not
opened, neither are there any mansions there prepared for us. And what life can
there be, if we be excluded from those joys above. Thirdly, if he sit not at
his Fathers right hand, then can he not gloriously interceed for us with his
Father, nor send his spirit unto us, nor govern us by his spirit, nor subdue
our enemies unto us, without which we cannot be partakers of that life.
Lastly, if he return not again to judge both the quick and the dead, then
can he not (according to promise) return any more to take us home unto
himself, that where he is, there we also may be, to behold that his glory, and
by beholding to be made like unto him, wherein stands our eternal life. And
thus you see the necessity of this Consequence, Thou have given me power,
Therefore must thou glorify me. Come we now to the Antecedent. In which, for
the fuller handling thereof, we may observe these four particulars, Quid, In
quos, A quo, and Quorsum. Quid, what is given him, (...), Power. In quos, over
whom (...), over all flesh. A quo; from whom, from his Father, thou have given.
Quorsum, to what end, that he may give eternal life to all that his Father
gave him. Of these in order.

First, Quid, what has the Father given him? (...) power, that is, as we have
above showed, Right and Authority over all flesh. This is double: for it is
either Essential or Oeconomicall. Essential is that which he has qua (...),
as he is the Word. In regard whereof being God, and coequall with his Father*
look what Power the Father has he has the same also inhering in him, namely
an infinite, unlimited, independent, and sovereign power. And this, because it
is of his very essence, so that he can no more be without it then not be God,
therefore do I call it Essential. And yet, as I take it, this is not here
meant. For the end of the Power here spoken of, is to give eternal life. Now
to purpose an end implies Election and Deliberation, and so an indifference
before choice, so that it is arbitrary not necessary. But this Essential power
of Christ is not arbitrarie but necessary, as proceeding not of choice, but of
the necessity of his nature, and therefore cannot be here meant. The
Oeconomicall Power then is that which he has qua Emanuell, as he is God-man,
and has taken upon him the form of a servant. For the Man Christ Jesus is our
Mediator, and therefore our King, it being one office of his Mediation to be a
King. And hence it is that our Savior affirms that authority is given him to
execute judgment because he is the son of man, Ioh. 5.27.
or as some expound it, quatenus, as he is the son of man. In this nature
also it is said that the government is upon his shoulders, Esa 9.6.
Mat. 2.6.
and that he is made a Governor to rule his people Israel. This Power because
he has not as the former of the necessity of his nature, but only of voluntary
dispensatio^, therefore I call it Oeconomicall. And because it is Oeconomicall
therefore is it not infinite and unlimited as is the Essential, but
Subordinate unto it. True it is the humane nature subsisting in the Word, the
very Word together with all the divine attributes are communicated unto it, so
that it may be said, the man Christ is Omnipotent and has infinite power. But
this must cautelously be understood, not that the Manhood has in it formally
and subiectiuely such infinite power, but only personally and by grace of
Union. Otherwise the humane nature being finite is no more capable of infinite
power then it is to be God, which is impossible. The Power then which the
Manhood of Christ has residing in it, is finite and created: but yet such as
is far greater then of any creature besides. For to which of the creatures
besides is the Subsistence of the son of God communicated? If to none, then
can they not have such power as he that subsisteth in the Deity. Ephesians. 1.21.
Whence the holy Apostle affirms of him, that he is advanced far above all
Principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named
not only in this world, Phil. 2.9.10.11.
but also in that which is to come: and again that God has highly exalted
him; and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth, Heb. 1.4
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord. And yet again
that he is made far greater then the Angels, inasmuch as he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they. Read the rest of that
Chapter, for all makes to this purpose. Now the power here meant not being that
Essential, must needs be this Oeconomicall. For other power he has none, and
this he has received thereby to give eternal life. But let us enquire a
little farther into the nature of this power.

There is a double created Power, the one Secular and Mundane, the other
Heavenly and Spiritual. Is this Power of Christ Secular and Mundane? Surely
such a Power the Jews expected in their Messiah, and the Apostles themselves
were for a while swaied with the like hope concerning Christ. And now also some
Papists there are who for the easier advancement of the Pope thereunto would
feign have it so: Mat. 28.18.
because as here he says Power, so else where our Savior says, De Pont.
Rhom. l. 5. c. 4.
All power is given unto me. But for these, Bellarmine himself may suffice to
confute them. For says he, every kingdom is acquired by one of these ways,
either by Inheritance, or Election, or Conquest, or Donation. But Hereditary
kingdom Christ had none. For although he were descended from David and so was
of the blood royal: yet that he was next of blood unto the crown does not
appear. And besides as touching the kingdom the seed of Iecon David had long
before determined in Ieconiah, Ier. 22.30.
neither was any of his race ever after King. King also by Election he was
none, as appears by that of John, Ioh. 6.15.
that when he perceived they would come, and take him by force to make him a
King, he departed from them into a mountain himself alone. Luke 12.13.14.
And when he was requested to divide the inheritance between two brothers,
Ioh. 12.31.
Col. 2.15.
he refused: 1. Ioh. 3 8. Ioh. 18.36.
for, said he, Man who made me a judge or a divider over you: Neither was he so
by conquest: for he never made war upon any mortal Prince, but only on the
prince of darkness. Nor finally by Donation from God, for my kingdom, says
he, is not of this world, and again, my kingdom is not from hence. as if he
should say, a King I am, but no secular King. Neither did he at any time
exercise any kingly* power, but ^ame rather to minister and to be judged, then
to judge and to be ministered unto. Furthermore, Kingly authority was neither
necessary nor profitable unto him, but superfluous and unprofitable. For the
end of his coming was the redemption of mankind, whereunto temporal power was
not necessary, but only spiritual. And whereas it was his office to persuade
from the love of worldly glory, wealth and pleasures unto the contempt thereof:
temporal power would have been not only unprofitable, but also a great let
and hinderance thereunto. Lastly, all the Prophets foretell only of a
spiritual and eternal kingdom, which should be restored to Israel. But
temporal is not eternal: and how can such a kingdom be said to be restored,
seeing it continued still in the hands of the Romans, until by them they were
rooted out from being a nation upon earth. Secular and worldly power therefore
our Savior had none. What then?

Heavenly and Spiritual. And this appears first by the end of Christ's
coming, and the authority bestowed upon him. For this was Spiritual: namely
to deliver mankind from spiritual Egypt and Babylon, the bondage of Sin and
Satan, and to bring them unto the eternal fruition of God, wherein stands
everlasting life. Secondly, by the means appointed for the atchieving of this
end. For the weapons of his warfare are not carnal but spiritual. Outwardly
he works through the ear by the preaching of the Gospel; inwardly upon the
spirit and conscience by the power of his divine spirit, wherevpo^ says the
Apostle St Paul, Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. In a word, what more frequent in Scripture then to call
this power of Christ the kingdom of Heaven? Which what other does it import
then that it is no way earthly, but altogether heavenly and spiritual. But you
will say, wherein stands this Spiritual authority of Christ? I answer in
two things, whereof the first is (...), the enacting of wisdom and good laws.
For without laws no kingdom or state can stand. And to him alone it belongs
to command laws who is the sovereign. The sovereign in this kingdom is
Christ. He therefore is Legislator, the law maker, Iam. 4.12.
yea, as St James says, Vnus legislator, the only law maker. And by virtue of
this power he prescribes unto the subjects of his kingdom both credenda,
what articles we are by Faith to believe, and facienda what duties we are in
life to perform. All which least any should plead ignorance he has caused
publicly to be proclaimed both by word and writing. And to persuade the
readier obedience to them, after the manner of all lawmakers, he annexeth both
promises and threatenings: promises of rich and plentiful reward to them that
shall be obedient, threatenings of rigorous and severe punishment to all that
shall be rebellious and disobedient. To descend to farther particularity would
be infinite. I forbear therefore, and pass to the other part of his power,
which is (...), righteous judgment. For laws without due execution are vain
and to no purpose duly executed they will not be, unless there be a superior
to look unto it. As therefore Christ is the Lawmaker, so is he also Judge,
ordained by God, according as we believe in the Articles of the Creed, Act.
10.42.
to be the Judge both of quick and dead. A sovereign Judge, from whom lies no
appeal. A righteous Judge who accepts the person or none, but pronounces
sentence precisely according to the work. According I say to the work. For
herein stands his power of judicature: namely in dispencing rewards and
punishments according to the observation of his laws, or the transgression of
them: which ever he does upon due cognizance of the cause, and conviction of
the party. A power far above the reach of any other creature, and incident
only to him who subsisteth in the person of the son, and that by virtue of
such personal union. So that as the Priesthood of Christ is a (...) that which
cannot pass from him unto another: by the same proportion his kingly power is
so proper unto him, as it is uncommunicable to any other whatsoever. And thus
much of the first point Quid what is given.

Whence we may observe first, seeing the Power of Christ as he is man, be
far above all created Powers, yet is not infinite: it makes against all those
who either swallow up the humane nature into the divine, and so turn it into
God, such as were some of the ancient Heretics, and among them the Eutychians:
or who shed and pour out all the divine attributes, and so the omnipotence and
infinite power of God into the humanity, such as are, if yet now adays such
there be, some of the rigider divines in Germany. If there be such I say. For
perhaps all the late quarrel risen betwixt them and us grew only upon
misprision (as some worthy divines have observed) not well distinguishing
between Essence and Subsistence, Zanch. Field.
whereof that is finite this infinite. For Christ's humanity though according to
its essence or Natural being it be not every where, but determined unto one
place: yet in respect of his Subsistence or Personal being it is every where,
and circumscribed in no place. For proper Subsistence of its own and in it
self it has none: only the Subsistence of the Son of God is communicated
unto it, which is infinite and unlimited. Secondly, if this Power of Christ
though finite yet be incommunicable and cannot pass from him to any other:
what presumption, what arrogance is it in him, who not being Christ, yet dares
say with Christ, Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo and in terra, all power
is given me both in heaven and in earth? Who thereupon takes upon him to forge
new Articles of Faith, and to obtrude them upon the Church under pain of
damnation? who also takes authority unto him to make laws equally binding the
conscience with Gods laws, and that without any relation unto divine law at
all? Who finally (for to reckon up all the blasphemies of this sort would be
infinite) pretends a power to dispense with the law of God, to grant
indulgences for sin, and to free men from the punishment inflicted by God upon
them for sin? Certainly whosoever challenges these things to himself can be
no less then Christi aemulus, even Antichrist himself: whose proud
usurpations upon the power of Christ shall one day be recompensed with equal
shame and confusion. The rather because thirdly, whereas the power of Christ is
not secular but spiritual, he claymeth both, and so assumeth to himself more
then ever Christ did. Ecce in potestate nostra imperium vt demus illud cui
volumus, Lo, says Pope Adrian, the empire is in our power to bestow it where
we please. And hence I suppose it is that instead of the old style Vicarius
Christi the Vicar of Christ, they now begin to style him Vicedeum the Vicar of
God* for that by this they may perhaps wrench in his temporal power, which by
the other they could not, inasmuch as Christ never had it. Lastly therefore,
seeing Christ contented himself with his spiritual power only, rejecting that
which is secular, let not us look after outward pomp or state in his kingdom,
nor judge of the Church by such deceitful notes. Rather let us judge of it by
the laws thereof, and by the rule of Faith professed therein. As the power of
Christ is Spiritual, so is his kingdom also, and therefore by spiritual
marks and notes to be discerned. But to proceed.

The second point is, in quos, over whom or how far his authority extends.
It is, says my text, Over all flesh. This word Flesh is diversely used in
Scripture. Among other significations usually it is put for Mankind. As where
it is said, Genesis 6.12.
that God saw all flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, Esa. 40.6.
that is, all men. And again, All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse
thereof is as the flower in the field. And yet again, Mat. 24.22.
Except those days should be shortened, no flesh, that is, no man should be
saved. And so is it to be understood in this place, Christ has power over all
flesh, that is, over all mankind. Now he that says all excepts none. All men
therefore of what age, sex, degree, condition, or quality soever, are under
the power and jurisdiction of Christ. And as touching the Saints, and those
that are members of his mystical body, it is questionless. For to them he is
Caput a head to rule and govern them, a Husband to order and direct them, a
Shepherd to feed and ouersee them. He has bought them with his most precious
blood, he has conquered them out of the hands of Satan and all that hated
them, he rules by the scepter of his word, and guides them by the manuduction
of his blessed spirit. And as he has many ways made himself Lord over them,
and testified his authority and power by his mighty operations in them: so have
they freely and voluntarily submitted and resigned themselves unto him. Power
therefore has he over these, as over his obedient and loving subjects. But
question may be made touching reprobate and wicked men whether he have any
authority and power over them yea or no. For, as the Psalmist says, Ps. 2.2.3.
They band themselves and take counsel together against the Lord, and against
his anointed, saying, let us break their bands asunder and cast their cords
from us. And our Savior in the parable, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos, we
will not have this man reign over us. But notwithstanding all this reluctation
and resistance, yet power and authority has he over them still. Rebellious
subjects they may be, yet subjects they are. Will they, nil they Dominabitur in
medio hostium, he shall reign in the midst of his enemies. If they will not
submit unto the gentle scepter of his word, he has an iron rod in his hand
wherewith to break and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. Psalm. 2.9.
Luc. 19.27.
And those his enemies that would not he should reign over them, bring them
hither will he say, and slay them here before me. Authority then he has though
they acknowledge it not: and ouerrule them he will, resist they never so much.
Overrule them I say, either to their salvation by converting them, or to their
confusion by delivering them up unto their own lusts. In a word, whether they
be good or evil, how high or low soever they be, Rev. 19.6.
he is Lord of them all, Rex regum and dominus dominantium, King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, Romans 14 9.
yea Dominus tum mortuorum tum vivorum, Lord both of quick and dead. But what?
Has he power only of men, and not of other things? Yes questionless. For,
says David, Omnia subiecisti pedibus eius, Psalm. 8.6.
thou have put all things under his feet. And the Apostle applying it unto
Christ adds, In that he put all in subjection under him, Heb. 2.9.
he left nothing that is not put under him. Mat. 11.27.
Ioh. 3.35.
Our Savior Christ also himself affirms that all things are delivered him
of his Father: yea that al power is given him both in heaven and earth. Mat.
28.18.
Particularly in heaven over the blessed Angels. For, says S. Peter, 1. Pet.
3.22.
he is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels and
authorities and powers being made subject unto him. Ephesians. 1.10.21.22.
He is unto them a Head and Mediator, though not of Redemption, as unto man,
yet of Confirmation in the state of grace; and though not to deliver out of
misery, yet to prevent their falling into misery. Hence it is that they are
reckoned in the number of those that pertain unto the Church, Heb. 12.22.
Luc. 22.43.
Heb. 1.14.
that they minister both to the Head thereof and it also, Luc. 15.10.
rejoicing at the conversion of a sinner, 1. Pet. 1.12.
and desiring thoroughly to be made acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel.
In earth also has he power not only over men, as is above declared, but also
as the Psalmist witnesses, Ps. 8.6.7.
over the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, Romans 8.19.20.21.
the fishes of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths thereof.
Whence it is that the creature being sensible of the vanity whereunto it is
now subject, longs and waits for his second coming, in hope then to be
freed from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. Even the devils themselves and whatsoever is under the earth is subject
unto him. While he lived here on earth he cast them out, commanded and
restrained them at pleasure: yea to others also he gave power to cast them out
in his name. It is he that has the keys of hell and death: Mar. 16.17.
Rev. 1.18.
and by force of them he reserueth the sinning Angels in everlasting under
darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Iud. 6.
Finally unto him is put in subjection not only this present world, but that
also, Heb. 2.5.
as S. Paul says, that which is yet to come. If all this be so, will some say,
and Christ's power be so large, why is it here restrained only unto all Flesh,
that is, unto Mankind? I answer, that these words are not to be understood
exclusiuely, as if his power reached no further then unto man, but principally
and especially, and that for two causes. First because he took flesh and
therein suffered not for Angels or any other creature, but only for us men,
according to that in the Nicene Creed, who for us men and our salvation came
down from heaven and was incarnate. Heb. 2.16.
Whereupon says the Apostle, He took not on him the nature of Angels, but
took on him the seed of Abraham. Secondly, for that as all things in the first
creation were made for man, so in the recreation and restoring of man it was
fit that power should be given over all things for man. Whereupon, says the
Apostle, All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

The consideration of this large power of Christ, extending it self not only
over all flesh, but all other things also for our benefit, should teach us in
any ca^e not to rebel against our Liege Lord, but as becomes dutiful and
loyal subjects with all humbleness to submit our selves unto his sovereign
authority. That which he requires at our hands is, according as S. Paul
teaches, first to confess with our tongues that Jesus Christ is the Lord to
the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.10.11.
advancing him above all powers, thrones, and dominations whatsoever: and never
to be afraid or ashamed to profess our selves to be his Christian servants,
notwithstanding any danger might accrue unto us thereby. And secondly to bow
the knee at the name of Jesus, that is in heart to honor, to adore, to worship
him, to love and fear him, to put all our trust and confidence upon him, and
in one word to obey him. And to this end we are to use all possible means to
settle and confirm this faith in us that he is our Lord, and has absolute
power and authority over us: and then diligently to study and enquire what his
laws are, that so we may both know what he commands, and wherein we are to
obey. For the ignorance of the law excuses not: and it is good to see with our
own and not with other menseies. For how do we know whether they will direct
us? But then unto faith and knowledge are we to join practice, yielding unto
him absolute, constant, and cheerful obedience: and that not only actiuely,
but if need be passiuely also, even with the expense of our dearest blood.
Neither need we to make question of doing any thing he commands. Psalm. 45.6.
For his scepter, as David ^aith, is a right scepter, and whatsoever he
commands is just. It is also easy and not hard to be done. Mat. 11.30.
For my yoke, says he, is easy and my burden light: and his commandments,
^aith S. John, 1. Ioh. 5.3.
are not greiuous. The law indeed of works is a rigorous law and insufferable.
Wherefore by S. Paul: it is called a killing letter. But the law of Christ is a
law of grace, requiring only repentance from dead works, belief in him that
has merited forgiveness of sin, and sincere ^ndeauour of new obedience, God
accepting the will for the deed. To this therefore if we willingly submit our
selves, we shall find first Protection from him (and he is the stronger man)
against all our enemies, then provision in all our needs and necessities, and
lastly rest to our souls, by peace of conscience here, and eternal
refreshment in the next world. Nay we our selves also shall have power over the
nations, Rev. 2.26.
and reign with him as kings world without end. But if through
stiffeneckednesse we refuse the yoke, and pull back the shoulder rebelling
against him: know we that he who sits in heaven will laugh us to scorn the
while, and in the end recompense us with weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth. All those that will not bow unto him, with the iron mace in his hand
will he break them to powder: and hew in pieces all such as would not have him
to reign over them. Let us therefore betimes serve the Lord with fear, and
kiss the son least he be angry, and we perish from the way when his anger is
kindled but a little. O how blessed are all they that put their trust in the
Lord. And thus much of the second point in quos over whom he has power.

The third is A quo whence or from whom he has his power. Not of himself, but
from some other: for thou have given, says our Savior. Who is that? He to
whom he speaks. He speaks to his Father, Father glorify thy Son. It is
his Father therefore of whom he received it, and received it by gift. And
indeed the power he has qua (...) as he is the Word, he has received from
his Father, and that by gift, donatione naturali and ab aeterno, by natural
donation and from all eternity. For as he is God of God and light of light,
so is he also Lord of Lord: the Father being the origin, source, and fountain
of the Deity. If so, then the power he has qua Emanuel as he is God-man, must
needs be much more from him, I, says God, Psalm, 2.6.7.
have set my king upon my holy hill of Sion. And that it is the Father speaking
so of his Son appears when by and by he says, Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. Mat. 11.27.
So says our Savior also, Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre, all things are
delivered unto me of my Father. And again, Ioh. 3.35.
The father loves the son and has given all things into his hands. C. 13.3.
And S. John, Jesus knowing that the father had given all things into his
hands. And finally S. Peter, Act. 2.36.
God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ.
Howbeit this power the Father gives not as the former Donatione naturali by
natural donation, sed gratuita by free and voluntary gift. And therefore as
notwithstanding the former he was co-equall with the Father: so in regard of
this he is subject to the Father. Wherefore in this respect he says Pater
major me est, my Father is greater then I: and though he be Lord of all yet the
Father calls him his Servant. And the School in regard of his humane nature
says that he is Subiectus sibi ipsi, subject to his own self. But it will be
objected that Christ obtained his kingdom by conquest, how then could he
receive it from his Father by gift. Whereunto I answer first, that the right
and title he had was from the gift of the Father before he went about to
conquer it: secondly, that the power also whereby he conquered it he received
from the gift of his Father. In regard whereof the Father sticks not to
challenge the conquest unto himself, Psalm. 110.1*
Sit thou, says he unto the Son, on my right hand until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Which yet is thus to be understood, that the Father by
the Son, and the Son under his Father by power received from him has
subdued and mastered all his enemies.

But when received he this power from him, and how long was he to hold it? He
received it then when he received his unction. His Unction he received in the
instant of his Incarnation. For as soon as the Personal union began, so soon
was he anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows, that is
with the fullness of all such graces as were fit for the menaging of so great
power, Esa. 11.6.2.
as wisdom, counsel, zeal of justice, strength, and the like. And no sooner
was he anointed but presently he was a King: Melchizedeck a king of
righteousness, wise to do judgment and justice. It is true he suppressed
this power for a time. For the Word emptied himself of his glory, and his
humane nature was to suffer many things. Whereupon it is said, Mar. 6.5.
He could do no miracle in his own country, nor might not send his Disciples
into the way of the Gentiles. It was as a sword in the sheath, or as David's
authority before Saul's death. At times indeed he showed some tokens thereof, as
in stilling the Sea, commanding spirits, raising the dead, and the like: yet
the execution thereof could not be plenarie till after his resurrection, and
when he was set at the right hand of his Father Licet Christus quantum ad
divinitatem, In Mat. 28.
etc. says Lira, Although Christ according to his divinity had from all
eternity this power in heaven and earth and authoritative by way of authority,
had it he also as man from the first instant of his conception: yet executive
by way of execution he had it not before his resurrection, but would be
subject to possibility for our redemption. But how long was this power to
continue with him? Forever? For as he was a priest; so also was he to be a King
for ever after the order of Melchizedecke. Thy throne o God, Psalm. 4 6.5.
Heb 1.8.
says David, is for ever and ever: Dan 7.14.
a text which Saint Paul to the Hebrews applies unto Christ. And Daniel, His
dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass a way, and his
kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. Luc. 1.33.
And the Angel Gabriell, He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, 1
Cor. 15.24.28.
and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Yea but does not the Apostle say,
that when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power, then
the kingdom shall be delivered up by him to God even the Father, and that then
the son himself shall also be subject unto him? It is true, he says so.
But we are further to know, that the kingdom of Christ contains in it two
things, the mediatory function of his Kingly office, and his Kingly glory. That
he shall lay aside: for then there will be no further necessity nor use
thereof. He shall not need to fight any more with the prince of darkness, nor
to govern his Church as formerly by the word and sacrament. For God as he is
now something in us, so then shall he be all in all unto us. But this he shall
hold for ever, as being by the acts of his mediation justly acquired, and
according to covenant bestowed upon him by his Father. As therefore the Father
even now reigns although he have delivered the kingdom to the Son: even so
then shall the Son also reign, although he deliver up his kingdom unto the
Father. And thus has Christ omnem potestatem, in omnia, and in omnia secula,
all power, over all things, and unto all eternity.

The use of this point briefly may be this. First, seeing Christ usurped not
this power: but received it by lawful donation from his Father, therefore
neither should we presume upon any office or place until we be lawfully
called thereunto. Should we run without sending, we should but incur the
displeasure of God, and be authors of much confusion and mischief in the
Church. Secondly, seeing he received this power together with his Unction, it
may lesson us not to affect any calling till we be anointed with sufficient
gifts for the discharge thereof. Go teach and baptize all nations, says our
Savior to his Apostles: but withal he furnishes them with cloven tongues,
and fills them with the Holy Ghost. To adventure on a business without due
abilities, as it proceeds from abundance of boldness, so will it be
recompensed with equal measure of shame. Lastly, seeing his power continues
for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end, we may take knowledge that it
will be in vain for any to oppose themselves unto it. Hell gates shall never
be able to prevail against it: how much less the policies of mortal men, or
their strongest attempts? For that which is eternal is invincible, and can
never be destroyed. And thus much of the third point A quo from whom.

The fourth and last is Quorsum, to what so great power was given him. For we
may not think that God does use magno conatu nihil agere with much a do to
effect nothing. And if nature which is but the creature of God do nothing in
vain, and wise men ever propound some end unto their actions: much more ought
we to judge so of him who is both the author of nature and wisdom it self. An
end therefore was intended: and that doubtless of highest consequence. For
otherwise what need so great power and glory to atchieue it? If in the creation
dixit and factum est, the word was no sooner said but the thing was done, yet
here not words, no nor so great power without his glorification will not serve
the turn, this it seems is of a higher strain then that. What then may it
be? This, that to as many as are given him of his Father he may give eternal
life. Esa 8.14.
This I say properly and directly: for accidentally he may be unto some a rock
of offense, Romans 9 33.
and the savor of death unto death, 1 Cor. 2.16.
namely to all those that shall presume to rise up against that authority and
power which his Father has given him. For the further unfolding of this point
four things are here to be observed, Quid, Vnde, Quibus, and Quamdiu. Quid,
what the gift is? it is Life. Vnde whence it is, from the Son, that he may
give. Quibus to whom it is given, to as many as thou have given him. Quamdiu
how long the gift lasts, it is eternal life. And of these in order, though
not according to their worth and desert (for who is sufficient for these
things?) yet as it shall please God to enable and assist.

First Quid, what is the gift? It is Life. Life is double, Natural and
Spiritual. Natural is that which things live by power of nature. But this is
not hear meant. For the Father bestows this generally on all men, whereas the
life here intended is to be conferred only on those whom the Father has given
unto the son. The Spiritual is likewise double, Sinful or Holy. Sinful is
that whereby men live unto sin. But because they that so live are dead unto
righteousness, and the wages thereof is nothing but death, neither can this be
here meant. For this is to be counted rather a Death then a Life, whereas the
Life here-spoken of is the end wherefore so great power was given unto Christ,
and so cannot be but a happy and blessed life. The Holy life is therefore here
understood, a life which none can live until he be dead unto sin, and
elevated by grace above nature: even that life which in Scripture is called the
new life, and includes in it both the life of grace and the life of glory. Now
because this Spiritual life is denominated Life from the proportion it holds
with Natural life, Romans 6.4.
especially that of man, unless we first know what this is, distinct knowledge
of that we cannot well have any. This we cannot know but by the direction of
Natural Philosophy. For Natural life is a term properly belonging unto it,
and the rule of Logic teaches that look to what art the terms do belong,
from thence are we to fetch our demonstrations. I must crave pardon therefore
if I search a little into it. Howbeit I resolve to be very brief, and to
trouble you with no more then is necessary for clearing of what is intended.

Life is of some defined by motion and operation. And so seems Aristotle to
define it where he says, Vivere est intelligere, sentire, to live is to
understand, hear, see, touch, and the like. But this definition is more
popular then proper. For life is one thing; and the operations of life another,
and they differ as the cause and the effect. Yet because it is best discerned
by the operations thereof, therefore have they thought good so to describe it.
For those things are said to live which any way move themselves. Move I say,
for those things which move not live not. And move themselves by an internal
principle of their own. For neither do those things live which are acted only
by an extrinsecall and foreign principle: such as was that statue or engine of
which the Poet, Duceris vt nervis alienis mobile signum, and such as are also
clocks and watches and the like devices. The same Philosopher therefore
elsewhere speaking more accurately of this matter, De Anima l. 2. c. 4.
defines life by Being: (...), says he, to live is to be. Which is not yet
Simply to be understood, as if whatsoever had being had also life: but
respectively unto things that live, for their life is their being. And so much
does the Philosopher himself insinuate, saying more fully, (...), life to
things that live is being, But such a Being as naturally moves it self.
Whence it is not unfitly defined by one to be essentia parturiens actiones,
such a being as is in travel with action. This natural life is threefold,
Vegetative, Sensitive, and Intellectual. The Vegetative is in Plants, that
Being whereby they grow and receive nourishment. The Sensitive is of Beasts,
Fowls, and Fishes, that Being whereby they see, hear, touch, taste, smell, and
move from place to place. The Intellectual is of Angels and Spirits, that
Being whereby they understand and will. These all of them are jointly and
together in man. For with plants he has growth and nourishment, with beasts,
fowls, and fishes sense and lation, with Angels and Spirits understanding and
will. Whereupon it is that the Philosopher makes the life of man a rule to all
the rest. And therefore is to be defined. Such a Being as is able to produce
all these operations, but specially those that are Rational, because they are
most properly Humane. To come then to an issue, by all that has been said it
appears that to the constitution of the natural life of man, and generally of
all natural life three things are required, Esse, Posse, Operari, being,
ability, and operation. Being that there may be ability, and ability that
there may be operation. For no life where no operation, no operation where no
ability, no ability where no being. And such is the natural life of man.

Proportionably whereunto, as to me it seems, Spiritual life may thus be
defined, Such a new or spiritual being as enableth to produce spiritual or
supernatural actions. In which definition all those three things necessarily
required unto life are, as you see, comprehended. And first Being, not natural
but spiritual superadded unto nature. Superadded then when we are first
ingrafted and incorporated into Christ. For no sooner do we subsist in him,
but forthwith old things pass away and all things are made new. 2. Cor. 5.17.
Gal. 6.15.
From thence forth become we new creatures, new men, Ephesians. 4.24.
renewed in the inner man, and in the spirit of the mind: Col. 3.10.
having new hearts, new affections, new senses, all new. 2. Cor. 4.16.
Ephesians. 4.25.
In a word, then are we made Spiritual men, not only conformed unto, Psalm.
5.12.
but also transformed into the image of Christ himself. Gal. 6.1.
Romans 8.28.
Secondly, ability. For together with our new being we receive also the Spirit
of power: 2. Cor. 3.18.
whereby as while we were out of Christ we were able to do nothing, 2. Tim.
1.7.
so now being in him we are able to all things. Ioh. 15.5
Phil. 4.13.
For then the holy Ghost is pleased to infuse and imprint on our souls the
gracious habits of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and the rest, and all to
facilitate the performance of spiritual duties. Lastly Operation, without
which ability is but vain. For to what end is power if it be never brought
forth into act? Operate therefore it does and brings forth the fruits of
spirit, Gal. 5.22.23.
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, Tit. 2.12.
faith, meekness, temperance, and the rest. All which S. Paul reduces unto
three, Ephesians. 4.24.
Piety, Sobriety, Righteousness. Yea to two, Righteousness and true
holiness. And if we will proportion them unto the operations of the natural
life, then first answerable unto the Intellectual life there is in the
Understanding a spiritual apprehension and knowledge of the things of God, at
least so far forth as is necessary: and in the Will; a holy pursuit of that
which is good and eschewing of that which is evil. Secondly unto the
Sensitive, a wise direction of all the affections upon the right object, and a
due moderation of them, together with a sanctified use of the senses, as
seeing, hearing, tasting, and the rest, and a right employment of all the
members of the body, no more to be the instruments of iniquity unto sin, but
the weapons of righteousness unto God. Lastly, unto the Vegetative, an earnest
desire of nourishment by the Word and Sacraments, and a continual growing from
grace to grace until we come to our full (...) and consistence in Christ
Jesus. Whereunto when we are once aspired, then begins the life of Glory,
consisting in a glorious being, glorious abilities, and glorious operations.
Not that it is another life differing in substance from the life of grace, but
the same in an higher degree of perfection. For Glory is no other then
consummate and perfect Grace. The excellency whereof as yet we know not: but
this we know that when Christ shall appear we shall be like unto him, for we
shall see him as he is. And of spiritual life what it is so much.

For the donation of this life, power over all flesh and perfect glorification
were, as my text insinuates, necessary unto Christ. It is therefore of great
consequence, and imports us far more then our natural life. For that is but
our Being, this is our Well being: that is nothing but life, this is a happy and
blessed life. Some son of Belial perhaps will deny this, esteeming it a
sullen, sad, and miserable life. What pleasures, say they, what delight
therein? And as for sorrows, besides those the spiritual man as man is
subject unto, as he is spiritual he has his proper and peculiar crosses. For
he is in continual combat not with flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but with Principalities and powers and the rulers of the darkness of this
world and spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places. A traitorous Doeg also
he carries about within him, ever plotting how to betray him. Gen: 25.22.
As the two twins in Rebeccas womb, so in him the flesh and the spirit are
continually warring one against another, Gal: 5.17.
that oftentimes as she Why am I thus, so he with much anguish cries out, Romans
7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! In
a word, the fears and horrors, and inward perplexities of conscience which
times he feels, are intolerable: and outwardly he is scorned, despised,
persecuted, and trodden under foot of all. So that if it be a life, it is but
(...), a liuelesse life, or as it is said of the bow, (...), it may ^eare the
name of life, but in effect it is no other then death. But all this
notwithstanding I affirm that this spiritual life is of all other the most
comfortable and blessed. For true blessedness stands in two things, a
freedom from the true evil, and a possession of the true good. The true evil
is sin, because it is opposite unto the nature and will of God who is the
cheifest good: and therefore is justly attended with another evil, which is
Gods wrath and eternal damnation. Now the natural man that lives not this
spiritual life lies still in sin, and is liable unto the woeful
consequences thereof: and therefore in the mids of all their pleasures must
needs be most miserable. But the spiritual man no sooner receaues his new
being. and with it his new life, but he receaues also pardon of all sins
past, and peccata semel dimissa nunquam redeunt, sins once pardoned never
return again to judgment. It is true if afterward he sin again (as who
sins not) he incurreth the wrath of God and deserves condemnation. Yet
upon a new act of faith and repentance (wherein God out of his mere grace
never fails him) he receaveth actual pardon for them also. So that to them
that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.1.
and live not after the flesh, but after the spirit, there is no condemnation
at all. Yea blessed are they, says David, Psalm. 32.1.
because their iniquity is forgiven, and their sin covered. Now sin being
removed which only seperateth between God and man, the spiritual man is
restored again into the grace and favor of God, wherein stands the true
good. This David saw and therefore said, Psalm. 4.7.
Many say unto me, who will show us any good? But Lord lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us. And because unto the complement of true
blessedness knowledge thereof is necessary (for according to the old Senarie,
Non est beatus esse se qui nesciat, he is not happy who knows not himself to
be happy) therefore has it pleased God to give him the earnest of the spirit,
2. Cor. 5, ^.
by which they may and do know what things God has vouchsafed to give them.
1. Cor. 2.12.
Whence issues and proceeds, first a contentment with our present state be
it never so mean. For being possessed of the true good, the want of these
temporal goods cannot much affect us. Secondly, Christian courage both active
and passive, to adventure upon and undergo any thing, rather then to forgo
the good we are possessed of. Thirdly tranquillity and peace of mind even in
life and death. For knowing that being justified from our sins by Faith we
have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Romans 5.1,
how can we be without that peace of God which passes all understanding?
Lastly, hope that makes not ashamed. For out of the experience of the present
favors of God, we gather assurance that we shall not fail of those eternal
joys promised us in heaven. The expectation whereof sweetens unto us even the
bitterest sorrows of this present life, and replenisheth our souls with
unspeakable comforts. So that howsoever carnal and worldly men deem of it.
the spiritual life is the most cheerful and blessed life, and a very heaven
upon earth.

Out of this definition of spiritual life we may learn, first, that as by
the operations of natural life we easily discern who lives it: so may we as
easily by spiritual actions judge who lives the spiritual life. By their
fruits, says our Savior, ye shall know them. Does any man hear, see, talk,
walk, argue, and the like; he lives. Lies he senseless without breath or
motion? he is dead. In like manner he whose works are only carnal and
sinful, or at the best but civil and moral, is though alive unto sin, yet
spiritually dead. Were he spiritually alive he would proceed further to the
acting of holy and spiritual operations. Which wheresoever they be truly and
sincerely acted, there undoubtedly is spiritual life. If it be in semblance
only and show, yet are we still to judge the best. For as in matters of Faith
we are to think and speak according to Scripture which only is infallible: so
in things concerning charity we are to think and speak according to
probability. Which howsoever it may deceive, yet is it not through any fault,
or with danger of him who thinks better of another then he deserves, but only
of the hypocrite who is far other then he seemed to be. But as touching our
selves, because we are privy to the truth and sincerity of our own hearts, we
may certainly conclude of our selves that we are spiritually alive, and that
by the certainty of Faith. For all conclusions are of Faith which are deduced
though but from one proposition contained in Scripture, if the other be any way
known to be true. He that operateth spiritual actions is spiritually alive, is
a proposition verified by Scripture. But I operate spiritual actions, is a
proposition not contained in Scripture, but testified to me by my conscience.
Ergo I am spiritually alive, is the conclusion issuing from both, and of Faith
because of the Major grounded on Scripture. Secondly it shows how impotent
and incongruous the speech of those is who pretending to live this spiritual
life, yet when they taxed of their infirmities, as suppose too much distemper
in passion, or impatience in wrongs, or the like, presently cry out, they can
do no otherwise, and who can endure it? But stay my brother, if thou be
spiritual thou art not unfurnished of ability. What if I should say of a kind
of Omnipotency? For so the Apostle, through Jesus Christ strengthening me I am
able to do all things. Why then say thou I cannot? To be without
spiritual power, is to be without spiritual life: and they only can do
nothing who are out of Christ. If therefore thou live say no more I cannot.
Nolle in causa est and non posse praetenditur: thou pretendest inability, but
the cause is thou will not. There is a spark within thee: do but quicken that
up, and use thy best endeavor, and through Christ strengthening thee thou shall
be able to master any infirmity. Thirdly and lastly, seeing the spiritual
life is the only happy and truly comfortable life, why study we not above all
things to live this life? With out it, to win the whole world, and to enjoy all
the pleasures thereof, will prove but poor gain. For what is it to the loss
of the soul, which unless it live spiritually must needs die eternally. And
when this life is obtained, strive we by all means to keep and preserve it.
Much power and glory must Christ have before he can give it: and shall we
having by gift received it, be careless and negligent to retain and hold it?
Skin for skin, said he who knew it well, Ioh. 2.4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life. If for his natural life,
how much more precious should his spiritual life be unto him? This rather then
they would loose, the holy Martyrs of God were content to part both with life
and liuehood. Let the same preparation of mind be in us, for it is the very
life of our life. And thus much of the first point, Quid, what the gift is. It
is Life.

The second is Vnde, whence it is. It is from the son, and that by way of
gift. For so says my Text, that he may give. First therefore it is from the
Son. Which yet must not be understood exclusiuely, as if it were not from the
Father and the holy Ghost also. For the holy and blessed Trinity is the author
of all life both natural and spiritual. This appears plainly. For to give
life is an extrinsecall action: and according to the old rule, actiones ad
extra sunt indivisae, such actions as stay not within but issue forth from the
Deity are common to all three persons. Hence touching Natural life it is said,
In him, that is in God, Act. 17.28.
we live and move and have our being. And you know who it was that first
breathed the breath of life into Adam: even the wholly trinity who had said,
Come let us make man. And concerning spiritual life, hence is it that it is
called Vita Dei the life of God: Gen 1 26.
Ephesians. 4.18.
and that Moses says of Israel, Ipse est vita tua, He, to wit God, is thy
life. Dent. 30.20.
Howbeit we are further to know that although God be the fountain of all
good, yet is he to us in regard of spiritual grace until we be in Christ but
fons obsignatus a fountain sealed up. In Christ he is a fountain opened, not
otherwise. For he passes no grace but by a mediator. Him therefore has he
made the Principle of all good: and to this end has he filled him with the
fullness of grace, Ioh. 1.16.
that of his fullness we might all receive even grace for grace. And in this
sense is it that we say Spiritual life is from him. 2 Cor. 4.10.11
Col. 3.3.
Whence also it is called the life of Christ: and Christ himself is called,
the Lord and giver of life, yea and said to be our very life. But how this life
is derived from him unto us let us enquire a little farther. And because out of
natural Philosophy we have hitherto proportioned the spiritual life for the
substance thereof with the Natural: give me leave a little to reflect again
upon the same Science to proportion out the manner of conveying it also. First
therefore unto life a Soul is necessary: for without it nothing can live.
Secondly, it is as necessary that the Soul have life in it self: or else how
can it give life? for nothing gives that which it self has not. Thirdly, the
Soul must not only have life in it, but also a power to quicken and make
alive. For as Aristotle says (...)* the soul is the cause and principle of
life to the living body. Fourthly, notwithstanding this life and quickening
power of the Soul, it is necessary for the conveyance of life unto the body,
that it be first infused and hypostatically united thereunto. For before God
breathed the Soul into Adam, his body though otherwise organized and formed,
lay but as a dead lump breathless and lifelesse. But no sooner was the soul
powered into him, but forthwith he began to live the life of a man. For fifthly,
upon the union of soul and body rises the constitution and being of man. For
neither is the soul nor the body severally and asunder called Man, but the
whole jointly and composed together, upon which constitution and being of Man
resulteth in the sixth place the natural life of man, and continually remains
until the dissolution betwixt Soul and Body. And lastly, upon this natural
life proceed 'those humane and connaturall operations, of which above. Now let
us as briefly apply all this unto our present purpose. First that which in the
conveyance of this spiritual life is answerable unto the soul is Christ the
Mediator: who therefore in six hundred places of Scripture is said to be our
life. And himself says of himself, I am the resurrection and the life: and
again, I am the way, the truth, and the life. Secondly, as the Soul, so has
Christ also life in himself. As the Father, says he, has life in himself,
so has he given unto the Son also to have life in himself. Ioh. 5.26.
Romans 8.2.
and S. Paul says, that the Spirit of life is in the Son. And S. John, This
life is in his Son. And again, 1 Ioh. 5.11.
Ioh. 1.4.
This life was in him, and the life was the light of men. Thirdly, as the soul
has not only life in it but also a quickening power, Ioh. 5.21.
so has Christ also. So S. John, As the Father, 1 Cor. 15.45.
so the Son quickneth whomsoever he will. And S. Paul, The first Adam was
made a living soul, and the second Adam was made a quickening spirit. Fourthly,
as the soul until it be personally united quickneth not so neither does
Christ until he be mystically united. Of this Union I cannot now speak, I
shall hereafter when I come to those words, verse. 22.23.
That they may be one as we are one, I in them, and thou in me. Gal. 2.20.
In the mean season thus S. Paul I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me:
that is, I live by Christ united unto me. 1 Ioh. 5.12.
And S. John, He that has the Son that is, he that is united unto him, has
life: but he that has not the Son, that is, is not united unto him, has not
life. Fifthly, as the Union of soul and body makes and constitutes Man, so upon
our Union with Christ are we made new men, 1 Cor. 12.12.
Christian men, spiritual men, yea, as is above proved, very Christ. So
speaks S. Paul in the place alleged: and elsewhere, ye are of God in
Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30.
that is, by being in Christ ye have received of God a new essence or being.
Sixthly, as from the natural being of man comes natural life, Ioh. 14.19.
so from the spiritual issues spiritual life. Because I live, says our
Savior, ye (to wit who receive of my spirit, and so are spiritual men, ye I
say) shall live. Seventhly and lastly, as from humane life proceed humane
operations: so from the spiritual proceed spiritual actions. This has been
already showed, whereunto I now only add that of S. Paul, If Christ be in you,
the body indeed is dead unto sin, Romans 8.10.
but the spirit is life unto righteousness. And thus you see how and after
what manner spiritual life is conveyed unto us from Christ.

It is further added that this life is not only from Christ, but that he is the
donour and giver thereof. It is from him, but by way of gift. John 6.33.
For so it is said, that he may gi^e. So also elsewhere, The bread of God is he
which comes down from heaven, Romans 6.23.
and gives life unto the world. And S. Paul, the wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Whereupon S. Peter calls it the grace of life. And the scripture every where
imputes the whole work of our salvation from the beginning unto the end
thereof unto mere grace. Now as he says, Gratia non est gratia nisisit
omnimodo gratuita: grace is not grace unless it be every way of free gift. And
certainly if it be not of free gift, it is of merit and due preparation in our
selves. But I beseech you what merit, what preparation of himself was there in
Adam unto life, while as yet he lay like a dead lump of clay before his maker?
What in Lazarus when he had been quatriduanus four days in the grave, and
began to putrify and corrupt? Surely none at all. No more can there be in us,
who before we receive this life, are utterly dead in trespasses and sins. If
the creature disposed not himself unto his creation, nor man unto his
generation, nor the science unto its incition: how can we prepare our selves
either to our renovation, or regeneration, or ingrafting into the mystical
body of Christ? In a word, can sin be a disposition or preparation unto
Grace? I trow no. Yet whatsoever we do before we are new creatures and live
the spiritual life, is at the best but splendidum peccatum, a gay and
glittering sin. For the agent is altogether sinful and carnal: and
whatsoever is of flesh is flesh. Do we gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of
thistles, or good fruit of an evil tree? No verily. For such as the tree is,
such fruit it yields, Good it cannot yield till it be made good. Made good we
are not till we believe. Till we believe therefore can we do no good. If so,
then what is not of Faith, is sin, and pleases not God. And what pleases
not him cannot dispose unto grace. Being then without merit and disposition
unto grace, it must needs follow, that as spiritual life is by Union, so it is
also by way of gift from Christ.

The use of all may be first, to teach us that all they who are not unto Christ
mystically united are spiritually dead: and what actions soever proceed from
them notwithstanding all the specious and goodly show they make, are not living
actions. For being not acted by the spirit of Christ, they are not like unto
bodies animated by a humane soul: but unto such dead bodies rather as are
raised up by magicians, and are stirred and moved only by the spirit of Satan.
These may seem to live, but indeed live not. And if spiritual life be the
only blessed life, then must these needs be in a most ruefull and miserable
case. Secondly it teaches us, that if we desire to live this, we must
endeavor by all means to be united unto Christ. He is come unto us that we
might have life, yea and that we might have it in abundance. Ioh. 10.10.
If we come not to him, it is our fault if we live not. And just cause shall we
give him to complain of us, Ioh. 5.40.
as he did of the Jews, ye will not come to me that ye might have life. Ephesians.
17.
Our coming is by Faith. By it Christ dwells in our hearts: and by it is the
just man said to live. This purges and purifieth our souls, and produces in
us the works of charity, which are the right operations of Spiritual life.
Thirdly, seeing we live by Christ, it is reason we should also live unto him.
For as S. Augustine says, every thing should live to that by which it lives:
as the body because it lives by the Soul ought to live unto the Soul. Hence
therefore is it that S. Paul would have all that are dead unto sin to reckon
themselves alive, Romans 6.11. and 14.7.8.
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Gal. 2.19.
Hence also he affirms that none of us lives to himself, but that we live
unto the Lord: and that himself through the law is dead to the law that he
might live unto God. 2. Cor. 5.14.
But most expressly, thus, says he, we judge that if one died for all, verse. 15.
the^ were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose
again. You will say, how are we to live unto Christ? I answer, as the body
lives unto the Soul. The Body lives unto the Soul when it is serviceable
and obedient thereunto: especially when it follows not the sway of inordinate
passion, but the direction of right reason. In like manner we live unto Christ
when we serve and obey him, not living after the flesh but after the spirit.
For not they that walk after the flesh, Romans 8.1.9.
are in Christ, but they only who are lead by the spirit of Christ. S. Peter
expresses it by living not to the lusts of men, 1 Pet: 4 2.3.6.
but to the will of God. And by and by sets down the Iusts of men to be the
will of the Gentiles, namely lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquetings, abominable idolatries, and the like. Unto all which he
opposes living according to God in the spirit. Fourthly and lastly, hence we
may learn humility to ascribe nothing to our own selves. For what are we in
nature but stinking carcasses? If we live, it is by the mere grace of Christ.
Come unto him of our selves to be quickened by him we could not. It was his
Father that drew us unto him. Not unto us therefore, not unto us, but unto the
Father through Jesus Christ be ascribed the whole praise and glory thereof for
evermore. And thus much of the second point, Vnde, whence this life is.

The third point is Quibus, upon whom it is conferred and bestowed. Upon those,
says my Text, and all those whom his Father has given him. Who are they? For
of them Christ very often speaks. Ioh 6.37.
All, says he, that my father gives me shall come unto me, Ver^. ^39.
And again, This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me I should loose nothing. And yet again, My Father which gave them
me is greater then all. Ioh. 10.29.
And so also sundry times in the sequel of this present Chapter. V. 6.9.11.12.
For clearer understanding hereof therefore we are to know that there is a
double donation by which men are said to be given unto Christ, the one Common,
the other Singular. The Common is that whereby the Father having given unto the
Son all power both in heaven and earth, delivers all things also into his
hand, giving as it were liverie and seizing of them, that from thenceforth he
may dispose of them at his pleasure. And thus all men whatsoever both elect and
reprobate are given unto him. But this is not here meant, as by and by shall
appear. Another donation therefore there is more special and singular whereby
the Father delivers unto the Son some of the creatures as unto a head to be
his members, or (to persist in our present similitude) gives them as a body to
the soul to be acted and quickened by him: that is, to be ruled and ordered not
only by the Scepter of his Power, but of his Grace and sanctifying Spirit: Now
who are these? Surely not all flesh: for all are not united to him, and so live
not by him. Who then? They that are elected and chosen unto life: of whom it is
said Multi vocati, pauci vero electi, many are called, but few are chosen. And
that these are here meant plainly appears by and by where he says, Vers^ 6.
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world:
that is, not to all, but some only selected and culled from the rest. And
again, Thine they were, and thou gave them me. How thine? By free election:
and now mine by special donation. Verse: 9.
And yet again, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given
me, for they are thine. Where you see the world distinguished from them that
are given him, and excluded from being the Fathers together with them. Whence
it follows necessarily, that the donation here meant is not of all, but those
only who in special sort are the Fathers, namely his chosen and peculiar ones.
For the better understanding hereof, and that you may know how and in what
order the Father is pleased to proceed in this gracious work, thus I take it
you are to conceive thereof. First, the Father seeing all mankind by the fall
of Adam to be corrupted and in the state of damnation, out of his mere mercy
and love decreed, not to loose the whole race of man, but to renew and repair
again his image in some of them, to the praise of the glory of his grace:
provided yet always that his justice for sin be fully satisfied. Secondly,
for the satisfaction of his justice, he further decreed to send his son into
the world, that taking our nature upon him, he might therein suffer whatsoever
was due to sin, and so mediate a peace between God and us. Then thirdly, out
of the corrupt Mass of mankind he selecteth and chooses some particulars,
even such as he pleases, with a purpose infallibly to bring them to
everlasting life. And in regard of this act it is that our Savior says tui
erant they were from al eternity thine: and again, tui sunt, by the constant
continuation of the same purpose they are still thine. In the fourth place
those that are thus elected the Father gives unto the Son to accomplish his
purpose upon them, and by virtue of the power and life given him, to quicken
them unto eternal life. Being thus given we are now Christ's. Whereupon also
the Church is bold and says, My well-beloved is mine, Cant. 2.16.
and I am his: and S. Paul directly affirms that we are Christ's. 1. Cor: 3.23.
And being Christ's, fifthly and lastly, he actually enliues and quickens them,
raising them up from the death of sin, and convaying into them the spirit of
life, in such sort as we have formerly declared.

But does Christ bestow life upon all them that are so given him? yea verily,
my text expressly affirms it, that he should give eternal life to as many
as thou have given him. This was the very end wherefore the Father gave them to
him. And shall we think that the Father took not order sufficient for the
attaining of his end? God forbid. For because he would not fail of his end,
therefore did he give so great power unto his Son. Ioh. 10.28.
Such power that nothing, ibid. 10.10.
except he would, could pluck them out of his hands: and so much life, that if
he would he might give it in abundance. Shall we say that the Son though he
has power yet wants will? Far be such blasphemy from us. Ioh. 6.38.
For he testifies of himself that he came down from heaven with this
resolution, Id. 5.30.
not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him: Id. 4.34.
Ioh. 6.39.
and now that he is come, that he seeks not his own will, but the will of
the Father that sent him, yea that it is meat unto him, to do the will of him
that sent him, and to finish his work. Now this is the Fathers will that of
all which he gave him he should loose nothing, but as my text says, give unto
them eternal life. It is therefore the will of the Son also. And because
according to the old rule Qui potest and vult facit, he that both can and will
does, undoubtedly Christ being both able and willing gives unto all the elect
everlasting life. Hence of his Sheep that is of the elect he says, Ioh. 10.28.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. And again* All
that the Father gives me shall come unto me, Id. 6.37.
that is, shall believe in me and live, and him that comes unto me I will in
no wise cast out. If Christ give not eternal life to as many as are given of
his Father, then he loses some of them. For they that live not eternally
perish eternally. But the Son plainly affirms that all that are given him
he keeps in his Fathers name and loses none of the^: Ioh. 17.12. and 18.9.
Heb. 2.13.
so that in the last day he may truly say, Lo here I am and the children which
thou have given me. And thus to them and to all them whom the Father has
given him he gives life. But did the Father intend it, or does the Son
bestow it only on them, excluding all others? To this question because my text
directly answers nothing, I shall have just occasion hereafter fully to
handle it where our Savior denies that he prays for the World: verse 9.
I forbear the resolution of it for the present, and reserve it till then as
the fitter place. In the mean season.

This use may we briefly make hereof, First, it may serve as a cristall mirror
wherein to behold the infinite and unspeakable goodness and love of the Father
toward us. When we were in the same mass of corruption together with all
mankind, it pleased him by free election to single us from the rest, and to
bestow us upon his Son, that he might bring us unto life. Upon what merit?
None at all. For we were as deep in the same condemnation as the rest. But
such was his good will and pleasure: and this is the glory of his grace,
Miserebo^ cuius misertus fuero, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.
Seeing secondly by the gift of the Father we are Christ's, let us know that he
is a good depositary, of such care and faithfulness that he will not neglect
his Fathers pledge, of such strength and ability that nothing is able to wrest
it out of his hands. Were we our own, or were we our own keepers, we should
surely perish. But now Christ is charged with us who is the safest keeper, and
who is resolved to preserve us safe until the time that he is to redeliuer us
back again unto his Father, who thenceforth shall be all in all unto us.
Wherefore thirdly the best course we can take is wholly and absolutely to
resign our selves into his hands. To trust to our selves or to any other, is
to rely on a broken reed. But he is a sure rock upon whom we may securely
build. The Father is wiser then we, and he knew well enough what he did when
he commended us to his Son. And the Son loves us far better then we can
love our selves. When we were his enemies he was content to dye for us: now
we are his friends does he abate of his love toward us? Not a whit. Let us
therefore with all confidence entrest our selves both souls and bodies unto
him to dispose of us at pleasure. So shall we rest safe from all dangers, and
in the end be provided of everlasting salvation. In the mean season let us in
the last place, love, yea and long for his second coming, that being his,
there where he is we may be also. For here though we be safe, yet are we not
without assaults: and those assaults many times shake our Faith, and fill us
full of doubts and fears. This indeed is our weakness: For otherwise in regard
of the Fathers purpose, and the Sons protection we are safe: But when he
shall return again to take us home to himself, then shall all doubts and
fears clean be banished. For we shall no more believe, but see our selves
free from all dangers, and in perfect safety. Wherefore come Lord Jesus come
quickly. And of the third point Quibus, to whom thus much.

The fourth and last in Quamdiu, how long this life continues. It continues not
for a time only as does the natural life, which after a short while suffers
interruption and is broken off by death: but it is an eternal life, as my text
says, and continues for ever more, unto the proof whereof before I descend,
I must crave leave to remove certain rubs out of our way, which otherwise may
let and hinder us in our course. For Spiritual life in regard of the degrees
thereof being double, of grace and of glory: there are who restrain eternity
unto this only excluding that: as if the life of grace sometime attained not
the degree of glory, but the life of glory once attained continued eternally.
Howbeit that the life of Grace is also here meant plainly appears by the
words immediately following, Ioh. 6.47.
where our savior says This is life everlasting to know thee, etc. For to
know God in Christ is an operation of Spiritual life. 1 Ioh. 5.12.13.
So also elsewhere, He that believes has eternal life. And again, He that
has the son has life, life I say eternal: for so it is forthwith
expounded, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. Where you see that
the words are not of the future tense shall have, but of the present has life:
which what other can it be but the life of Grace? And of this it is affirmed
that it is eternal, and so cannot fail of glory. But further when it is said
to be eternal, we are to know that there is a double eternity, the one Simple
and absolute, the other only Respective. Simple eternity is that which is so
both a part ante and a part post having neither beginning nor ending. And so
is God only eternal. The Respective is that which is so only a part post,
having indeed a beginning, but afterward never ending. And so Angels and the
Souls of men are said to be eternal: and in the same sense do we understand
it of Spiritual life, that in regard of the future it is eternal. Yet here
again we are to distinguish. To the constitution of life three things, as we
have said, are required, Being, Power, and Operation. As touching the
Operations of life, we confess they may suffer intermission. For as in an
Epilepsie, or fit of the falling sickness no work of life appears, and yet the
party lives: so in the acting of sin, from which the best men are not
always free, spiritual operations during the while cease, and yet life
continues. As touching Power, that is Gracious habits imprinted upon the soul
and enabling to operate, I distinguish again. For some of them either in
themselves or us argue defect and imperfection, and pertain only to the
condition of this present life, such as are, Faith, Hope, and Repentance, and
the like. Others import perfection and pertain also to the next life, among
which excells Charity. The former in the end of this life cease. For we believe
because we see not, and hope because we possess not, and repent because we
sin. But when we see, possess, and are free from sin, then Faith, Hope,
and Repentance vanish away. As for the latter they never cease, but continue
with us evermore. Yet here again are we once more to distinguish. For these
habits may be considered, either in regard of Substance or Degree. In regard of
degree we confess they may suffer abatement. For Faith may fall from its
Plerophorie o^ fullness to an Oligopistie or lower degree thereof: and Charity
also may remit much of its fervor. So that in this respect a man may be said to
be moribundus, Rev. 3.2.
declining as it were unto death. But in regard of Substance or Being we
confidently affirm in such sort as is above said that they never perish, and
the spiritual man never dies. To wind up all in a word, actus intermitti
potest, and gradus remitti, sed habitus ipse nunquam potest amitti, the act may
suffer intermission for a time, and the degree abatement or remission, but the
habit or life it self never loosing or amission. The question being thus
clearly stated, let us now proceed to proof.

That the life of Grace in all them that are given unto Christ by the Father is
eternal, might be proved by many arguments. All what I have to say shall be
reduced to one. If the life of grace at any time fail, and the elect of God
spiritually dye, either it is through the deficiencie of the Procreant and
Conservant causes of life or the efficiencie and power of the contrary
corrupting causes. But it is neither through the one or the other. Ergo neither
does the life of Grace at any time fail, nor the elect of God die. The Major
proposition needs no proof. For a third cause cannot be named, and therefore
of necessity it must be one of the two if there be any. The Minor therefore I
am by all means to fortify, and to maintain that neither the Procreant and
Conservant causes fail, nor the contrary corrupting causes prevail. The
efficient and preserving causes of spiritual life is as we have showed, the
holy and blessed Trinity, the Father through his Son by the powerful
operation and working of the holy Ghost. These if they fail, either it is
because they cannot or because they will not continue this life. To say they
cannot is no less then blasphemy, and contrary both to Scripture and reason.
For Omnipotence is an essential attribute of the Deity, so that he can no
more cease to be almighty, then cease to be himself and loose his being. In
the Creed is this title ascribed unto the Father: how-be it not exclusiuely.
Ioh. 1.3.
Heb. 1.2.3.
For the Son and the holy Ghost being coessentiall with him, Job: 33.4.
they are coequall also in might and power. Ps. 33.6.
The son by the word of his power created all things together with his
Father, Romans 15.9.13.19.
and by the same word vpholdeth all things. And to the holy Ghost power also is
attributed, even the same power whereby things were created, and wonders above
the reach of nature are wrought. If it be said that the Son by taking our
nature upon him made himself inferior to his Father, I confess it: and
withal that his mediatorie power is less then his Fathers. Nevertheless all
power is given him both in heaven and earth, such a power as no creature
besides is capable of, and which was given to this very end that he might both
give life and continue it unto eternity. Unto which had it not been sufficient
without question greater had been given* for the Father may not fail of his
end. Of the power of God therefore there can be no doubt, Esa* 63.1.
but that he is mighty to save, able to make us stand, able to keep us, Romans
14.4.
so that none unless he will can take us out of his hands. 2. Tim. 1.12.
Ioh. 10.28.
What say we then to his will? For as in him, that is by virtue of the first
life we live: so if either he withdraw himself from us, or suffer others to
withdraw us from him, we cannot subsist. Surely as he is able, so if we may
believe Scripture, 2 Cor. 1.21.
he does stablish us in Christ, we are kept by the power of God to salvation,
1 Pet: 1.^.
Col: 3.3.
and our life is hid with God in Christ. But enquire we a little deeper into
this mystery. And first the will of the Father appears many ways. By
Election unto life: which being absolute not conditional is immutable. 2 Timothy
2 19.
For the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows
who are his. Phil: 4.3.
Act: 13.48.
And the names of all the elect are written in the book of life, out of which
they can never be blotted. For they are ordained unto life, 1 These. 5.9.
and appointed by God to obtain salvation through Christ. By his love also
which is the cause of Election. Ier: 31 3.
I have loved thee, says he, with an eternal love, a love which as it is
without beginning, so shall it likewise be without ending. Nay if the love of a
mother is more to her child when she bears it in her arms then while it was
in her womb: we may not think but the love of the Father continues at least as
great toward us when we are newborn of him, as it was when we were yet but
conceived, as it were, by election. Thirdly by donation of Christ to the elect.
For what greater testimony either of his love, or of his will to save then
this? So God loved the world, says Christ, that he gave his only begotten
son, Ioh. 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
Fourthly by donation of us unto Christ. Ioh. 6.39.
For it is the will of the Father that of those he has given him he should
loose none. And here it is said that he has given unto the Son power over
all flesh, that to as many as he has given him he should give unto them
everlasting life. And lastly by the covenant made with us. It is a covenant o^
salt, an everlasting covenant. And I will betroth thee unto me forever, Ier,
32.40.
Hos. 2.19.
says God. And again, This is my covenant with them, Esa: 59.21,
says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord from hence forth and
forever. And thus you see the Father is willing, what the Son? His
willingness also appears many ways. First by his profession of conformity
and obedience to his Fathers will, whereof we have already spoken
sufficiently. Wherein seeing he fails not, and it is his Fathers will, as we
have showed, that he should give them eternal life, undoubtedly it is his will
also. Secondly, by giving himself for us. For if then he was content with the
expense of his dearest blood to ransom us when we were his enemies: how much
more now is it his will and pleasure to save us, Rom* 5.9:
having of enemies made us friends, and begun the spiritual life in us?
Thirdly, by conioyning us unto himself in so straight a bond of union that we
are of his bone and of his flesh. For it may not be imagined that he hates
his own flesh, but loves all the members of his body so dearly, thas as long
as he is able he will surely preserve them alive. Fourthly, by his mediatory
intercession. For as he prayed for Peter that his faith might not fail, so he
intended the same unto all believers, as appears in the sequel of this
prayer where he says, I pray for them also which shall believe in me through
their word, and requests his Father also to keep them. Which he would never
have done but that he earnestly desired their preservation in life. Fifthly, by
his care and desire that we should every way be conformed to him: that as he
died and rose again and from thenceforth dies no more, so we should first
dye to sin, and then live to righteousness, and afterward spiritually never
dye more. Lastly, by sending unto us the holy Ghost, to lead us into all truth,
to comfort us, and to consecrate us unto him both Souls and Bodies.

FINIS.
A GODLY DISCOVRSE OF SELF-DENIAL.

OXFORD, Printed by I. L. for E. F. 1633.

LVKE. 9.23. And he said to them all, if any will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me.
THese are the words of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and they
contain in them Counsel of singular importance, given unto all those that
purpose to come after him. Upon what occasion it was given is not so fully
recorded by our Evangelist S. Luke: Luke 9.22.
but what is defective in him is perfecty supplied by two other Evangelists, S.
Matthew, Mat. 16.21.22.23.24.
and S. Mark, Mar. 8.31.32.33.34.
by Saint Matthew in his sixteenth Chapter, by S. Mark in his eighth. It was
this. Our Savior had signified unto his Disciples, not obscurely and darkly,
as at other times, but in express and plain terms, that he was ere long, to
go up to Jerusalem, and there to suffer many things of the Elders, chief
Priests, and Scribes, and at length to be put to death by them. Hereupon S.
Peter, being as the Fathers observe of him, (...), more hot and hasty then the
rest of his fellows, presently takes his Master aside, and consulting only
with flesh and blood, begins to school him, Master, pity thy self, this may
not be unto thee But Christ turning about, and looking upon his Disciples,
first in the hearing of them all sharply rebukes him, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art a scandal unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be
of God, but those that are of men: and then addressing his speech, as my Text
says, unto them all, he gives them this wholesome and sovereign Counsel, If
any of you be disposed to come after me, he may not with Peter follow his
own carnal reason, nor presume by his advise and counsel to guide and direct
me, nor finally must he timorously and fearfully shrugge and shrink at the
mention of the Cross: no, he must resolve, to deny his own self, to take up
his Cross daily, and to follow me, otherwise it is but in vain to think of
coming after me. This was the occasion of the Counsel, and this is the
context and coherence of the words in this history.

In them, it may please you further to observe with me these three particulars:
First, the Parties to whom the counsel is given, secondly, the form of words
wherein it is delivered, and lastly, the counsel it self. The Parties, He
said unto them all, the form of words, If any will, let him, the counsel, Let
him deny himself, take up his Cross daily and follow me. In the first ye
have the generality of the Counsel, He said unto them all: in the second, the
Liberty of them that are counseled, if any will, let him: in the last the
conditional necessity of the counsel, if any will come after me, he must of
necessity deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow me. Of these in
order, as God shall assist, and the time permit.

The Parties to whom the Counsel is given are All, He said unto them all. What
All? All his Disciples, as it seems by S. Matthew, Mat. 16.24.
for, says he, Then said Jesus unto his Disciples. Mar. 8.34.
But S. Mark further affirms that he gave it to the multitude also, When,
says he, he had called the people unto him together with his disciples, he
said unto them. And these are St Lukes All, all the Disciples, all the People,
all the present auditory. The present auditorie will some say? The^ it
concerns not us who were none of that auditorie. Yes us as well as them: for
although Christ at that time spoke only to them that were present, yet the holy
Evangelists have written it for us also. Yea it is clear that our Savior
intended it universally unto all men: for that which Matthew and Luke deliver
hypothetically and conditionally, thus, if any will come after me, let him, the
same Saint Mark utters in a Categoricall and simple form, thus, Whosoever
will come after me, as if he should say Every man without exception. So that
as our Savior elsewhere said, What I say unto you I say unto all, Watch: in
like sort is he to be understood here, that what he spoke unto his auditorie
then, was generally meant unto all mankind, Psalm 119 96.
if any whatsoever he be will come after me, he must deny himself, take up
his cross daily, and follow me. I have seen an end of all perfection, says
David in his hundred and nineteenth psalm, but thy word is exceeding broad.
Psalm. 19.3.4.
Broad as in sundry other respects, so especially in this that it stretches
and reaches unto all men. There is no speech nor language, says the same
David in the nineteenth Psalm, v. 6.
where the voice of the Heavens is not heard: their line is gone out throughout
all the earth and their words unto the end of the world. The Sun which God
has placed therein, goes forth from the end of heaven, and compasses about
unto the ends of it, and nothing is hid from the heat thereof. This does the
Apostle Saint Paul in his tenth to the Romans, Romans 10.18.
apply unto the word preached by the Apostles, plainly implying that no man in
the world of what condition soever is privileged from the authority thereof.
When God first gave the law unto Adam; the tenor whereof runs thus Hoc fac
and vives, Do this and thou shall live, he gave it not unto the person of
Adam alone, but unto all those that were in his loins, even to all his
posterity, who had the law printed in their hearts by nature. In like manner
when Christ commanded the Gospel of Faith and repentance to be preached, he
limited it not unto a few, but said unto his Apostles, Go teach all nations,
and go into all the world, Mat. 28.19. Man. 16 15.
and preach the Gospel unto every creature. Neither from the law nor from the
Gospel was any man excepted. God is no accepter of persons: the hand that
swaies a scepter, and that diggeth with the spade are both alike unto him. Idem
ius Titio quod Seio, one rule unto all, whether they be high or low, noble or
base, rich or poor, learned or unlearned, bond or free, young or old, of what
state, age, sex, or condition soever they be. God has not strowed the way to
Heaven with roses for great ones to dance upon, and with thorns for the meaner
sort to tread upon: neither has he appointed a spacious and broad way for
some, and a strait and narrow way for other some to pass unto life everlasting
by. For the ways of the Lord are strait ways: and as between two points
there can be but one strait line drawn, so can there be but one strait way
that leads unto life. Vno quisque modo bonus est, mutisque nefandus: a man
may be wicked many ways, but he can be good only one way. A thousand
by^pathes are there which lead unto destruction, and but one only right path,
Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.
that leads to salvation. For there is but one body, and one spirit, and one
hope in which all are called, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
father of us all: in a word one Blessedness which is the end, and one Religion
which is the way to that end, through which way every man of necessity must
pass, that means to arrive at that end. Now I beseech you all that hear me
this day, of what place soever you be, whether high or low, that you will be
pleased every one to apply this individually and singularly unto himself: and
to take notice that none of you can come after Christ but only by the same way.
Every one must deny himself, every one must take up his cross daily, every
one must follow Christ, or else ye cannot possibly come after him. There is
none of you so mean whom God overseeth or neglects, none so great whom he
priuiledgeth or exempteth. And thus much of the generality of the Counsel.

The Form of words in which the Counsel was delivered is, if any will, let
him, which as we have said imports the liberty of them that are counseled.
For it is as if our Savior should thus have said, Behold I tell you all
plainly, no man can come after me unless he deny himself, take up his
cross daily, and follow me. Now if any will thus come after me, I give him
good leave, let him do so: for my part, I will neither force him from me, nor
after me, if he come he shall come willingly; If any will let him. First
therefore, Christ puts off, and forces no man from him. 1 Timothy 2.4.
For God would have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the
truth: 2 Pet. 3.9.
neither is he willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, Ez. 1^.3^.
says the Lord God: Id. 33.11.
nay he swears as he lives he will not the death of a sinner, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. And certainly seeing man is the creature of
God, and creation is the first emanation and issue as it were of his love, it
cannot be that he should delight in his destruction. He made not death, Sap.
1.13.
as the wise man says: and when he inflicts it, alienum opus facit, he does a
work not so pleasing him, for he had rather show mercy, then execute
judgment. Hence is it that he stands at the door of our heart and knocks;
yea that he continues knocking until his head be filled with dew, Rev. 3.20.
Cant. 5.2.
and his locks with the drops of the night: that he requesteth us so lovingly
to give him entrance, Ibid.
Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, Rev. 3.20.
my undefiled, promising so bountifully that if we shall open unto him, he
will come in unto us, and sup with us and we with him, Mat. 11.28.
and threatening us that as if we come unto him, Heb. 10.38.
we shall find refreshment, so if we draw back his soul shall have no
pleasure in us. Neither let us think but that God means seriously in all
this: for otherwise he should but mock and deceive us, pretending one thing
and intending another, and (which I tremble to speak) playing the hypocrite
and dissembler with us. Besides this, he should make us the ministers of the
Gospel no better then false witnesses unto him, testifying things that are
untrue, and which he never purposed: whereas God being omnipotent needs not
our lie, and being truth it self will not compass his end by a lie. Finally,
if Christ with his hands should push from him those whom by his word he
inviteth to him, then they that come not are the more excusable: for every one
may plead for himself, that he suffered violence, and Christ himself hindered
him, whose force no creature is able to withstand. Christ then forces no man
from him.

If so, whence then is it that many who are invited come not? I answer, the
fault is in themselves, they will not come. Prove. 1.24.25.
I called, says Wisdom, and ye refused, I stretched out my hand and no man
regarded: ye set at naught all my counsels and would none of my reproof.
Esa. 65.12.
And again, I called says God, and ye did not answer, I spoke and ye did
not hear: Osea. 13.9.
but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.
Wherefore he protests by the prophet Osea, Perditio tua ex te Israel, thy
destruction is of thy self oh Israel: and complains by the prophet
Ezechiell, Ez. 18.31.
why will ye dye o house of Israel, as if he should say if ye dye, it is
because ye will needs dye. They refused to harken, says Zachary, Zach.
7.11.12.
and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not
hear, yea they made their hearts as an adamant stone least they should hear
the law. In like manner in the new testament. Mat. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered thy children together as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Mark the words, I would,
therefore Christ forces no man from him: Luc. 7.30.
ye would not, therefore the fault is in our selves. The Pharisees and
Lawyers, says St Luke, rejected the counsel of God against themselves: and
our Savior testifies of the Jews, Io. 5.40.
that they would not come unto him that they might have life: Act. 7.51.
yea St Steven generally vpbraids them, ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost: as your Fathers did so
do ye. All these Scriptures evidently demonstrate, that the cause of not
coming after Christ is not for that Christ forces man from him, but because
man himself refuses to come. Let the blame thereforely where it ought, on man
and not on God: Romans 3.4.
let God be true but every man a liar, as it is written, that thou may be
justified in thy sayings, and overcome when thou art judged.

As Christ forces no man from him, so neither does he force any to come after
him: If any will let him. God offers violence to no man's will: for though he
hate evil and love good, yet neither does he violently draw the will from the
one, nor constrain it unto the other. Good is not good if it be done of
compulsion and not willingly. He that does good by constraint, would not do
it, and ^o does ill: and God shall show great mercy upon him if he do not
punish him. For the sacrifices which God accepts are free will offerings: and
it is the cheerful giver whom he approves. Hence is it that God requires
our election and choice: and election imports liberty. I call heaven and
earth to record this day against you, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
says Moses, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing:
therefore choose life. And Joshua, Ios. 24.15.
choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your fathers
served that were on the other side of the flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in
whose land ye dwell. In a word, all the exhortations, commandments, promises,
and threatenings used in Scripture plainly argue, that it is Gods will that
what we do we should do willingly.

Here happily some will say, what, are you fled into the enemies camp? and are
you also become a Proctor for free will? God forbid: Our coming after Christ,
I ascribe not with Papists unto the freedom of our own will, but unto the
free grace of God: for I confess that if he prevent us not with grace we
cannot will, and being prevented if he pursue us not with his grace we shall
will in vain, according to that of Saint Paul* It is God which works in you
to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13.
If it be so, will you yet say, why does our Savior Christ use this form of
words, if any will let him? and do you not overthrow all what hitherto you
have said, affirming that we can neither will nor do, unless by grace we be
elevated above nature? Hereunto, to express my self more fully, I answer
four things. First, if we were such as we ought to be, we might of our selves
by the means offered unto us come unto Christ. That now we cannot is through
our own default who have disabled our selves. And yet the obligation still
lies upon us, and we are bound to bring with us power, abilility, and fit
dispositions. If we neither do nor can, yet may God justly exact them of us,
as the Creditor may his debt of the unthrift that cannot pay him: neither is he
bound again to enable him by grace, no more then a Creditor is to supply the
wants of his wastfull and prodigal debtor. Secondly, although in things
supernatural and spiritual the act of Willing be not in our power: yet are
there many prerequisites going before which are in our power, as to go to
Church, to hear Gods word preached, to meditate upon it, to seek further
information, etc. without which ordinarily God saves none. God blesses not
our idleness, but our labor* he that will not labor shall not eat, he shall
eat that seeks his bread in the sweat of his brows. He that will not plow
nor sow, shall not reap the crop: and he that will not strive and endeavor
himself shall not obtain grace. Thirdly, if a man having the means of grace
offered him, shall thereunto add his own endeavor, and do whatsoever lies
in his own power: who knows but that God will be gracious to that man? Or
rather to declare my mind freely, I doubt not but that God will be gracious
unto him. And although others wrench and stretch the place too far for their
own advantage, yet will I not be afraid with as grave Divines as this land
affords any to apply it unto this purpose, Mat. 25.28 29.
Habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be given. God forsakes not man until
man forsakes him: neither fayles any until he be defective unto himself.
Then indeed the talent which he would not employ shall be taken from him: but he
that imploies it carefully shall receive more, yea shall have abundance. Being
thus called and affected God will never cease to further our conversion,
unless we our selves stop his course either by careless neglect or wilful
rejection of grace. Lastly, when we have done whatsoever we can do, yet is
conversion out of our power, it is the work of Gods free grace, which grace of
unwilling makes us willing, not by forcing and constraining the will, but
sweetly inclining and bending it. Cant. 1.4.
For albeit God in converting us be said to draw us, Ioh. 6.44.
yet may we not conceive this Drawing to be constraint or violent coaction. He
draws us indeed: what? as stocks and stones? No, but as men: I will draw them,
says God, with the cords of a man, with the bands of love. Ose. 11.4.
Grace so prevails upon the will, as it preserves the liberty thereof. It
cannot will before Grace, grace makes it willing. When we are first converted
by grace, we convert willingly: and whenever we will, we will freely. For
will is not will unless it be free. Grace indeed sets free the will: yet
except we will our conversion freely we can neither be converted nor saved,
according that of Bernard, Nisi sit liberum arbitrium non est quod saluetur,
nisi sit gratia non est vnde saluetur, unless there be free will there is
nothing to be saved, unless there be grace, there is no means whereby to be
saved. And thus much have I thought good to speak touching the form of words,
or the liberty of them that are counseled, partly to clear God from being the
cause why we follow not this counsel, and partly to set an edge upon our
endeavor to follow it.

The Counsel it self is threefold, first, abnegation of our selves, secondly,
bearing of the cross, thirdly, following of Christ. And of every of them there
is a conditional necessity, if we will come after Christ. For howsoever simply
we may choose whether we will deny our selves or not deny our selves, take up
the cross, or not take up the cross, follow Christ, or not follow him: yet
conditionally if we will come after Christ we must of necessity deny our
selves, take up our cross daily, and follow him. So that in every of these
Counsels we are to consider, first the Substance, and then the Necessity of it.
But before we come particularly unto them, we must needs premise a word or two
touching the condition, and enquire what it is to come after Christ. Among
diverse interpretations, two there are which to me seem most likely. The first
is, if any will come after me, that is, if any will be my Disciple. Thus S.
Luke himself seems to expound it, where speaking in a manner to the same
purpose he says, Luc. 14.27.
whosoever bears not his cross and follows me, cannot be my Disciple.
Whereunto reason also agrees, for Scholars use not to go before their
Masters, but to come after them: whence usually they are called Followers, as
the Followers of Plato, the Followers of Aristotle. In this sense then it is as
if our Savior should say, If any will be my scholar. But he means a
scholar not titularlie and in name only, like Apothecaries boxes quorum tituli
habent remedia, pyxides venena, which contain in them poisons having the
titles of remedies: but really and truly, one that is so indeed, and to speak
plain English, a ^rue Christian. The second interpretation is, if any will
come after me, that is, if any will arrive at that end to the which I am
aspiring before him, namely, eternal glory. Neither is this unlikely: for
Christ is the author and finisher of our Faith, Heb. 1^.2.
who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising shame,
and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Heb. 10.19.20.
He by his blood has consecrated a new and living way for us into the holy of
holies, whether he is ascended before us, there to prepare mansions for all
such as will come after him. And in this sense it is as if our Savior should
say, Ioh. 14.2.
if any will come to eternal life and glory after me. Now whether of these two
senses shall we take? I suppose both: for first the circumstances of the Text
admit both, secondly both agree with the analogy of faith, thirdly the safest
rule is, not to straighten but to enlarge the meaning of the holy Ghost as much
as may be: and lastly what God has joined together let no man put asunder. Now
no man can be a Citizen of heaven, unless he be a Disciple of Christ here on
earth. The School of Christ and the kingdom of heaven are contrived like
Marcellus two Temples of Virtue and Honor. For as none could enter into the
Temple of Honor but he must first pass through the Temple of Virtue: so
neither can any man pass into the kingdom of glory but by the school of
grace. He that will be glorious there must first be gracious here. There is no
salvation but only by the Mediation of Christ, his Mediation stands in his
Priesthood, Kingdom, and Prophecy. He is not a Priest to one, a King to
another, and a Prophet to a third, but he is all three unto a man, or he is
none at all unto him: 1 Cor. 1.13.
for Christ is not divided. Whence it follows that whosoever will be saved,
Christ must be a Prophet unto him, and he must be a Disciple unto Christ. The
meaning then of this condition is as if our Savior more fully and plainly had
said, If any will be my Disciple, and by being my Disciple will come unto the
kingdom of heaven after me. Now let us descend in due order unto the counsels,
and consider both the substance and necessity of them. First of the first.

Let him deny himself. What is that? God, says the Apostle, is faithful, he
cannot deny himself, that is, he cannot say and unsay, 2 Timothy 2.13.
for his promises are not Yea and nay, but Yea and Amen: neither can he say
otherwise of himself then he is, for he is truth it self and cannot lie. Must
we thus deny our selves? God forbid. For then how can we resemble our heavenly
Father, and be perfect as he is perfect? for he neither does nor can deny
himself. And seeing Christ is the express image of his Father, Heb. 1.3.
and we are to be conformed unto the image of Christ: it cannot be that he
should advise us to be so unlike either to his Father or himself, as in this
sense to deny our selves. No this we leave to cheating Priests and Jesuits, who
have devised a new doctrine of Equivocation and Mental Reservation. If ye
ask of a Priest, art thou a Priest? He will confidently and boldly deny
himself and say, I am no Priest, reserving in his mind, of Baal, or of
Apollo, which speech and reservation put together, make up, they say, one
entire and true sentence, I am no Priest of Baal or Apollo. And this is the
starting hole which these Foxes have provided for themselves in the time of
danger. But O thou thrice blessed Lord and Savior Christ, and O ye blessed
and holy Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, how simple and ignorant were ye that
ye knew not this doctrine? Had you known it, how easily might you have
avoided those many troubles, vexations, and torments that ye endured? Thou O
Christ being demanded whether thou were the Christ, might readily have
answered, I am not, with this reservation, such as ye look for: and ye
Apostles and Martyrs of Christ being questioned whether ye were Christians,
might easily have replied, we are not, reserving only in your mind, such as ye
slander us to be, devourers of young children, incestuous, and the like. But
the school of Machiavel and Loiola was not yet opened, and Christians hitherto
were trained up only in the school of Christ: all were of the mind of that
Bishop, who as Augustine says, was Firm both in name and deed, who being
demanded by persecutors for a Christian whom he had hidden, answered roundly
and without all Equivocation, neither is it for a Christian to lie, nor for a
Bishop to betray a Christian and therefore I will not tell you. I fear me,
when these Deniers of themselves shall appear before Christ at the last day,
mental reservation will hardly excuse them: and because they would not be
known to be the Priests of Christ (for so they pretend) neither will Christ
know them to be of his flock. But of this enough, being but by the way.

To Deny then in this place, is not literally and properly to be understood,
but thus, to disclaim, to renounce, to reject, to despise, to make no
reckoning and to take no notice of. Mat. 10.33.
When our Savior threatens that he will deny them before his Father in
heaven whosoever shall deny him before men, what means he but this, He will
renounce them, Deuteronomy* 33.19:
and not own them for his? Even as it is said of Levi to his great honor, He
said unto his Father and to his mother I have not seen him, neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own, that is, he regarded them not,
nor took any notice of them. But what must we thus Deny? Our selves. He says
not, Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Wife, children, Friends, Honor, Wealth,
Pleasure, and yet these things must be denied too: but he says, Let him deny
himself. Himself? What means he by that? 1. Cor. 2.14.15
There are two sorts of men: for as S. Paul distinguishes, there is a
Spiritual and there is a Natural man. The Spiritual man is he who is borne a
new of water and the holy Ghost, and by grace is become a new creature, a new
man, transformed into the image of Christ. The natural man is he that is as
yet unregenerate, and has nothing in him but nature and the corruption
thereof, bearing only the image of the old Adam. Must the spiritual man deny
himself? No verily, so far forth as he is spiritual: for so doing, he
should disclaim and disesteeme the very grace of God by which he is
whatsoever he is. It is the Natural man then that must be denied. Now in the
Natural man there is, first Nature, and then the corruption of nature. By
Nature I understand, the powers and faculties of the soul, such as are the
Understanding and the light of reason, whose office is to discern truth from
falsehood: and the Will (under which also I comprehend Passions and Affections)
whose duty is to pursue that which is good, and to shun that which is evil.
The corruption of nature, is that which in Scripture is called flesh and
concupiscence, and is commonly known in the Church by the name of Original
sin, because it is traduced unto us from our parents, and we are polluted
therewith in every part both of soul and body from our very conception and
birth. Now which of these two must be denied? I answer both: yet not both
alike, but the corruption of Nature simply and absolutely, and Nature it self
only in some respect.

First then Nature it self must be denied. What simply and absolutely as the
corruption of Nature? No, by no means* ^o^ it is the good creature of God, and
without it, neither are we capable of blessedness, nor can be scholars in
the school of Christ. Nature is not opposite but subordinate unto Grace: and
Grace destroys not nor abolisheth, but heals and perfecteth Nature. Neither
is it without cause that God spoiling man of his supernaturals for sin, only
wounded him in his naturals, and left unto him both a light in his
Understanding, and a liberty in his Will. Romans 1.18.
By the light of reason, the invisible things of God, Psalm. 19.1.
even his eternal Power and Godhead are clearly scene: and there is no nation
so barbarous, but partly by inbred principles, partly by the book of the
creatures know him. By the same light of reason do we in part also know the
will of God: Romans 2.14.15.
for the law moral is written in our hearts by nature, and how many excellent
precepts of morality do we find in the writings of mere natural men?
Finally, even in the matter of the Gospel, reason sees thus far, that it is
not impossible if God will: and upon this ground, Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Arnobius, Lactantius, Athenagoras, Augustine anciently, and Aquinas, Vives,
Mornay of late, have attempted to prove by reason, the trueness of Christian
religion. As for the Will, it is yielded of all hands, that in matters morally
good, it has free liberty, and may of it self either choose it or refuse it at
pleasure. So that hitherto Nature and the power thereof is no way to be denied
or disclaimed. Wherein then? Surely in things merely supernatural. For that
which is above reason cannot be comprehended by reason: and that which passes
the reach of nature cannot be attained only by the power of nature. The
natural man, says S. Paul, perceaueth not the things of God, nor can know
them, 1. Cor. 2*14.
because they are spiritually discerned. In these things reason is stark
blind, and sees nothing. Search the writings of the subtilest and sharpest
Naturalist, and ye shall find in them of Christ and his Gospel nor palm nor
footstep. Here therefore reason must be denied, and as a woman may not speak
in the Church, so must reason also be silent in things supernatural. In things
not revealed, it must be contented not to know: and docta ignorantia est, it is
a learned ignorance. In things revealed, it must believe without and above
reason: reason must be captived unto the obedience of faith. And as where the
natural Philosopher ends there the Physician begins: so where natural
reason stops divine Faith must come in place. Otherwise if reason will needs
be prying into God's ark, and search into those mysteries that are above the
reach thereof: it is the corruption of reason, and no marvel if it become
vain and foolish in her imaginations. Yea when men in their curiosity think
themselves most wise, then are they most infatuated. And as Ixion, in the
fable, embraceing a cloud instead of Juno begat Centaures thereon: so they
entertaining their own fancies instead of divine verity bring forth nothing
but monsters of errors and strange opinions. What I say of reason must be
understood of the will also: in spiritual matters the one wants light to
see, and the other strength to do: It is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that shows mercy: for (as we have already
demonstrated) neither can we will of our selves without preventing grace, nor
do when we have willed without pursuing grace. So that if a man will be no
more then the scholar of Nature, he cannot be the scholar of Christ. For as
nature is unable both to know the mysteries which Christ teaches and to do
the duties which he requires: so does Christ command us to renounce our
natural abilities, and to come as infants unto the kingdom of heaven.

But if Nature it self must be denied, much more the Corruption of Nature. For
as the Scripture says Corruption cannot inherit uncorruption: and without
holiness it is impossible to see God. Now the leprosy of Original Corruption
not only infects the inferior part of the soul as Papists dream, but spreads
it self to every part, even the superior also. For as for the mind, it is not
only blind and ignorant, but Corrupt also and full of vanity: it savoureth not
the things of God, 2 Timothy 3.
but they seem unto it mere folly. As for the will it is not only unable to
perform spiritual duties, Ephesians. 4.17.18.
Rom 8.
1 Cor. 2
but full of hardness also and perverseness and vntowardensse unto any thing
that is good. Finally the inferior part is but a shop of all turpitude and
outragiousnesse, full of nothing else but tempestuous, tumultuous, unruly, and
sinful lusts. These all as the Scripture says, must be crucified, must be
mortified, must be killed, that is must utterly be renounced and denied if we
will be the followers of Christ. And reason. For the flesh lusts and
fights against the spirit: by reason whereof the good we would do we cannot
do; and the evil we would not do we do. They that walk after the flesh,
says St Paul, are not in Christ, but they that walk after the spirit. And,
they that live after the flesh shall die: neither can any man live, unless by
the spirit he mortify the deeds of the body. In a word, to this end has the
grace of God appeared unto all men, Tit. 2.11.12.
and instructed us, that we denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, might
live soberly, justly, and godly, in this present world. By all which it is
clear, that all our corrupt lusts and affections must be denied if we will be
disciples in the school of Grace, yet is it further to be observed, that when
the Apost. says, we must deny all worldly lusts, he means fleshly lusts, as
they have reference unto the world, and to the profits and pleasures of this
present life. So that in comparison of Christ, and when they let and hinder us
from coming after him, whatsoever in the world is most dear and precious unto
us, must be despised and trod^n under foot. We must with the holy Apostles be
content to forsake all and to follow him. Mat. 19*27. Mat* 10.37.
If we love father or mother or son or daughter more then him, Luc. 14.26.
we are unworthy of him. Nay if any come unto him and hate not his father and
mother, and wife and Children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life
also (or as some think it may not unfitly be translated, his own soul) he
cannot be my Disciple. Wherefore as Hierom says, if Father or Mother shall lie
in the way to hinder thee from coming after Christ, be not afraid to tread
upon the gray beard of thy Father, and to trample upon the belly of her that
bare thee, rather then to be barred from coming unto him. As therefore, to
conclude this point, a young man in the judgment of Aristotle is an unfit
auditor of Moral Philosophy: even so the mere Animal man by the verdict of
Jesus Christ, is utterly unmeet to be scholar in Christian Philosophy. If he
will make himself meet for Christ's school, he must of necessity deny
himself, which is the first Counsel.

The second is, let him take up his cross daily. The Cross properly is a tree
or engine of wood framed into such a form, where upon malefactors were wont to
be executed and put to death. The manner was either with cords to bind them,
or which was more usual with nails to fasten them hand and foot unto it, and
there to suffer them to languish and pine away unto death: in regard whereof
they were wont aunciently to call it vltimum supplicium, the extremest and
greatest punishment: and because the basest sort of people only, and such as
were servants or slaves were in this manner executed, therefore was it also
termed servile supplicium a servile punishment. This cruel and slavish death
did our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ suffer, to free us from eternal death,
and to procure unto us everlasting life. Whereupon those pressures,
tribulations, afflictions, persecutions that do befall a man, not for his
wickedness but for righteousness sake, and for the profession of the Gospel
of Christ, are in the language of Canaan called the Cross, because they are
the remainders of the afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24.
which he in his body, that is the Church, does yet still suffer. And this is
the Cross which is here meant. But it is further said, His cross. Not that
Cross which a man frames unto his own self, or rashly pulls upon
himself, as sundry Martyrs in the primitive Church seemed to do, whom yet I
dare not censure, because I know not with what spirit they did it. For we may
not like Coecias draw storms and clouds upon our own heads: and our Savior
himself advizeth us, when they persecute us in one City, to fly into another.
Then only are we bound to bear the cross, when without denying the truth we
cannot avoid it. Our Cross then is that which is imposed upon us by God,
whether it be poverty, or ignominy, or imprisonment, or banishment, or
whipping, or racking, or torment, or death of what kind soever. For God lays
not the same cross on all, but one Cross on one, and another on another, as
he in his wisdom thinks best. But whatsoever the cross is which God
appoints unto a man, that is his cross. And this cross says Christ must be
taken up. It was the manner that he that was cruciarius to be crucified, was
to bear his cross or some part thereof unto the place of execution. So did
Christ, until meeting with Simon of Cyrene, they compelled him to bear his
cross. But malefactors bear it against their wills, our Savior willingly,
which was the very form of his suffering: and he requires all those that will
come after him to do so too. For to take up the cross imports not only a
patient bearing of it when it is laid upon us, but also a ready and voluntary
undergoing of it. And this also says our Savior, must be done daily, that
is, at all times, and continually. Not but that the Church has sometimes her
lucida intervalla, her good days: for the rod of the wicked rests not
always upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125.3.
and after storms and tempests God sends calm and Halcionian times. How
then? Thus. Whenever God sends the cross unto any, he must actually take
it up: in the time of peace, and when there is no cross, though actually he
cannot, yet must he take it up in the preparation and disposition of the mind.
And this is the substance of the second Counsel, Let him take up his cross
daily.

The Necessity of it if we will come after Christ is easy to be demonstrated.
What more manifest in the Scripture then this that the Cross is an inseperable
companion of the Church? The Church is Lilium inter spinas, a lilie among
thorns. Christ without his cross is but a Chimoera, and so is the Church also
without afflictions, Psalm. 34.19.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, says David, In the world ye shall
have tribulations, Ioh. 16.33.
says our Savior Christ. Through much tribulation must we enter into the
kingdom of God, Act. 14.2.
says Saint Paul: 2 Timothy 3.12.
and again, All that will live Godly in Jesus Christ shall suffer persecution.
Search the records of all times from the beginning of the world down to this
present, and you shall find that Persecution has ever attended upon the
Church. Not to speak of particular persons, the bondage of Egypt, the
captivity of Babylon, the tyranny of Antiochus, the ten bloody persecutions of
heathen Emperors, the barbarous cruelties of Antichrist, finally the fire, the
sword, the massacres of this last age wherein our Fathers lived, and we our
selves yet live, do make it more then manifest. And indeed as long as Satan
continues to be malicious against us, how can it be otherwise? Knowing
himself to be eternally rejected, and without redemption, he bears an
eternal hatred against God. And because he cannot wreake his teene upon him,
being out of his reach: he turns his malice against mankind, and among them
those principally who by Christ are conquered out of his hands. For as the
Panther raging upon the picture of a man bewrayes the hatred he bears unto
him: so the divill to testify how much he hates God himself, spends all his
fury upon him that bears the image of God. Rev. 12.13.15.17.
Hence is it that he is so wroth with the woman: and from this Wrath is it that
he still, persecutes her, casts out floods of water to overwhelme her, and
makes war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. As Satan so Satanicall and wicked
men are deadly enemies unto the Saints and holy members of Christ. Qui male
agit odit lucem, 1 Ioh. 5.19.
he that does evil hates the light. Now the whole world lies in wickedness,
and therefore cannot endure the light either of Christ's truth or their life.
Ioh. 15.19.
If they were of the world the world would love his own, but because they are
not of the World, but chosen out of the world, therefore the world hates them.
^ Pet. 4.4.
They think it strange that the Saints run not into the same excess of riot
with them. What marvel then if hating them, and being separated in life and
conversation from them, they continually stir up persecutions against them?
But it will be said, why does not God hinder them, being able? Does he not
love his Church? yes he loves her as the apple of his eye: and because her,
therefore he permits them. For as our Savior says. Rev. 3.19.
As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: and the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb.
12.6.
whom the Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives. Whereby it appears also that God not only permits, but has a
hand in the afflictions of his children, himself delivering them over unto
their adversaries to correct them. Yea the Apostle S. Paul yet farther says, 1
These. 3.3.
that we are appointed to afflictions, To. 8.29.18.
and predestined to be conformed unto the image of the son of God, as in
other things, so also to suffer with him that we may be glorified together. The
ends which God propounded to himself herein are, partly his own glory, partly
our good. His own glory in the manifestation of his justice, power, and
wisdom. Justice, in that he beginnneth judgment at his own house, 1. Pet
4.17.
not sparing them whom he loves most dearly: nor suffering them to recover
paradise so easily, who had abandond it so wilfully. Parvo parari tanta res non
debuit it was not fit that such a piece should be won without striking any
stroke: His power, in preserving such earthen vessels notwithstanding all the
knocks and blows laid upon them, not suffering the bush to consume though
flaming and all on fire, yea multiplying his Church the more they are slain,
and making the blood of his Martyrs the seed of his Gospel and finally in her
greatest distresses and extremities delivering her most miraculously. His
Wisdom, in proportioning the body to the head: for it was not fit that Christ
should wear a crown of thorns, Luc. 16.19.
and we be clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day,
but as he entered into glory by the cross, so should we aspire to the same end
by the same way. As God in the afflictions of his Church respected his own
glory, so also he intended our good and benefit. Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me, says David that I have been afflicted. Heb. 12.10.
He chastneth us for our benefit, says the Apostle to the Hebrews. First by
the cross he fanneth away from the church, palea^ levis fidei, the chafe of
those that are unstable in the faith. Mat. 13.20.21.
For the seed that falls in the stony ground that is, he that has no root
in himself, dureth but for a while, and when tribulation or persecution
arises because of the word, by and by he is offended. And so the chafe flying
away, the heap of corn remains more clean in the garner of God, as
Tertullian speaks. Again, by it are we much bettered: for as a Corrosiue it
frets away our rank flesh, and as a fire it purges away the dross of
corruption and refines us. It works repentance of sins past, it preventeh
future sins, it quickneth the spirit of grace within us, and makes us more
careful to observe Gods commandments. Psalm. 119 71.
Thirdly, it honors us greatly by making our virtues known unto the world.
For as the valor of a soldier is best seen in the battle, and the skill of a
pilote in a tempest: so is the fortitude and patience of a Christian best
discerned in tribulation. Spices brayed yield the sweetest smell^ and as the
broaching of heresies tries how much we know of God so the fire of persecution
discovers how much we love the truth of God. Fourthly it weaneth us from the
love of this world, and works in us a longing to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which otherwise we would hardly do: even as children would hardly
forbear sucking, unless the teat be stricken with wormwood or some other
bitter and distasteful juice. Lastly, si compatimur etiam conregnabimus, 2 Timothy
2.12.
if we suffer with Christ, Mat 5.12.
we shall also reign with him. Exceeding great shall be our reward in heaven,
Heb. 12.11.
says Christ. Here on earth shall we reap the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, and in heaven an exceeding weight of glory, Romans 8.18.
wherewith our sufferings are no way to be compared. Thus by Scripture,
experience, malice of adversaries, and divine ordinance it plainly appears,
that every one that will come after Christ must of necessity bear his cross.

I add farther, he must not only bear it, but he must take it up also and
that Daily. He must not only endure it with patience, but also willingly,
joyfully, thankfully. Willingly, for so did Christ, who foreseeing it, and
having power to avoid it, yet would not. Nothing that is forced pleases God,
but only that which is voluntary. Joyfully, so did the Apostles, Act. 5 41.
rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the name of
Christ: and our Savior commanded us, Mat. 5.11.12.
in the midst of persecutions to rejoice and be exceeding glad. Heb. 12.11.
Nor but that affliction is in it self and for the present greevous not
joyous, but inasmuch as it is for Christ's sake, and to give testimony unto the
truth. Thankfully, in regard of the benefit and reward we reap thereby. Heb.
11.26.
So did Moses esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures
of Egypt. And it is reason we should thank the Surgeon that cures us, as
well for his Corrosiues as his Lenitiues. Neither must we only take up the
cross willingly, joyfully, thankfully, but also daily, that is with constancy
and perseverance. He fights not the good fight, that finisheth not his
course. It is not sufficient to bear out a brunt or two, Ephesians. 6.13.
unless having done all we stand. God regards not so much the beginning as
the end. Finis coronat opus, it is the end that crowns the work. The reward
is promised, non pugnanti sed vincenti not to him that fights, but to him
that overcomes. In a word he that continues to the end shall be saved, and no
other. Ye see, brethren, what a large field I have to expatiate in: but the
time forces me to be brief. In other Churches upon whom the Cross now lies
heavily this theme perhaps requires a larger handling: yet is it not
unseasonable in this our peace to touch it in a few words in regard of the
hopes of our enemies, and our own fears, if need be to prepare us for the
Cross. And thus much of the second counsel.

The third and last is, let him follow me. This many happily would think, and
many indeed do think to be all one with coming after Christ: for what is it
to follow but to come after? Were it so, then were I here to make an end. But I
suppose there is a farther matter intended in it: and therefore let me intreat^
your patience to add a word or twain concerning it. We are to follow Christ,
non pedibus sed affectibus, not with our feet but with our hearts and
affections: and we are to follow him Docentem and Ducentem, both teaching and
leading us. For it might be demanded, if we must deny our own selves, that is,
our reason and wills with all their ability and power, who then shall direct
us, who shall guide us? For our minds being blind we cannot of our selves see
the way, and our wills being in bondage unto sin, we cannot walk in the way.
Whereunto Christ readily returns this plain answer, Follow me: I will be
your Teacher, I will be your Leader. First then Christ is our Teacher, even he
who is every way most sufficient to teach. He is the eternal word of his
eternal Father, Ioh 1.1
the very Truth it self, and the substantial Wisdom of God. Ioh. 14.6.
He is made of God the grand Counselor of the Church, Prove. 8.22.
the Angel of the covenant, Esa. 9.6.
the Apostle of our profession, Mal. 3.1.
the only Prophet and Doctor of the Church. Heb 3 1.
He came out of the bosom of the Father and knows all his counsels: Mat
3^.8.
Ioh. 1 18.
in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3.
and he has received the Spirit without measure. Ioh. 3 34.
Being therefore such a Teacher, him are we to follow, and we are to follow his
teaching Audiendo and credendo, by hearing and believing whatsoever he says.
The divine oracle from heaven expressly commands us to hear him. Mat*
17.5.10.10.27. verse: 8.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased hear ye him. And our
Savior affirms that whosoever are his sheep hear his voice, and will not
hear the voice of any other, implying that whatsoever hears him not is none
of his sheep. But it is not sufficient to hear unless we also Believe, that
is assent to all that he says, assuring our selves that whatsoever he
affirms is true, and whatsoever he commands is just. To believe is the first
ground of Christianity. He that believes not cannot understand the mysteries
thereof. O portet discentem credere, he that will be a scholar must believe
his Master; if he will not he deserves to be turned out of school. Christ
will not be argued with: be it above reason, or seem it against reason, yet
will he be absolutely believed. And reason; for being God who neither can
deceive nor be deceived, his bare word is more certain then a thousand
demonstrations. Certainly, they are none of Christ's sheep that do not
Believe: and without Faith it is impossible to please God, to be justified in
his sight, or to obtain life everlasting. Therefore whosoever will come after
Christ must thus follow him docentem teaching.

So must he also Ducentem follow him Leading. He leads and guides us two
ways Spiritu, Exemplo, inwardly by his Spirit, outwardly by his example. By
his Spirit first. For as Saint Paul says, As many as are lead by the spirit of
God are the sons of God: Romans 8.14. verse: 9.
but if any have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. Now as the word of
Christ sounds outwardly to the ear, so does the Spirit of Christ speak
inwardly to the heart. He helps our infirmities, and after a secret and
inconceivable manner suggesteth and puts good motions into our minds, Rom:
8.26:
exhorting and persuading us to the practice of all holy and good duties. Which
direction of the spirit we are to follow, Obediendo, by obedience. Not to obey
the good motions of the Spirit is to resist him, to grieve him, and to quench
him: but to cherish the spark that he has kindled in us, and to yield
obedience unto his holy inspirations and persuasions, this is indeed to follow
him. Which if we do not we are yet in the flesh and if we be in the flesh
we are not in Christ Jesus: for they only are in Christ who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. Rom: 8.1:
As Christ leads by his Spirit, so does he also go before us by his
Example. Longum iter per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla, the way of
precept is long and tedious, but of example short and effectual. But whose
example are we to follow? Man's? It is not safe: for be he never so good, yet
may he err himself and mislead us. Gods? That indeed is safe, because he
cannot err nor misguide us: but he is invisible and cannot be seen. Therefore
he became man, that being visible in the flesh he might give us example. Which
we are to follow imitando by imitation. Civ: lib: 8: c: 27
For as Augustine says, Summa religionis est imitari quem colis, It is a
chief point of religion to imitate him whom we worship. But wherein are we to
imitate him? In creation of the world? in redeeming mankind? in meriting for
others? In working miracles, and the like? as it is reported of that mad
Salmoneus, Virg. Aen. 6.
Qui nimbos and non imitabile fulmen Aere and cornipedum cursu simularat
equorum, who would needs counterfeit Jupiters thundering, and lightning by
driving his chariot over a copper bridge, and darting torches at the faces of
men. No, if we would burst our selves with pride, we cannot imitate God in
these things. Potestas subiectionem, maiestas exigit admirationem, neutra
imitationem, says Bernard, the power of God requires subjection, his majesty
admiration, neither imitation. How then? Appareat Domine bonitas tua cui possit
homo quia ad imaginem tuam creatus est conformari, let thy goodness o Lord
appear whereunto man being created after thine own image may be conformed. To
be brief, we are to imitate Christ in all those holy duties which he
commands and whereof he has made himself an example. They are all summed up
in one word Obedience: this he commanded, this he practiced. And he practiced
it both actiuely and passiuely: and in both is he to be imitated. He obeyed the
law of his father: the Moral law as being the son of Adam, the Ceremonial
as being the son of Abraham. And this actiuely, exampling us to walk even as
he walked in all duties by God enjoined us. 1 Ioh 2.6.
It would be too long to particularize in all those actions wherein we are to
imitate him: I would therefore commend unto you these three especially. Io.
1.14.
His truth, his humility, his charity. He was full of grace and truth, he loved
it, he spoke it, never was guile found either in his heart or mouth. So humble
was he, that being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be
equal with God, Phil. 2.6.7.8.
he made himself of no reputation, took upon him the shape of a Servant, and
humbled himself unto the death of the cross. Romans 5.8.
Lastly such was his Charity, that he was content to shed his most precious
blood for us even when we were his enemies, the^ which, greater love cannot be.
This is the pattern, this is the precedent which we must follow. He charge
us to know the truth, to love the truth, to speak the truth, to keep the
Feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 2 Cor. 5.8.
He commands us to learn of him that he is meek and lowly in heart; Mat.
11.29.
and to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called in all lowliness
and meekness. Ephesians. 4 2.
Finally he straightly enioyneth us to love one another, Ioh. 15.17.
yea even our very enemies. Mat. 5.44:
Certainly whosoever resembles not Christ in these things is not Christ's
disciple. All other marks of Christianity deceive, if these fail. Seem we
never so desirous of knowledge, and make we never so fair a show, yet if we
love not truth, if we be proud and arrogant, if we be uncharitable censorious
of others we are no true Christians. But Christ obeyed Passiuely also, for he
was obedient unto death, Phil. 2.8.
even the death of the Cross. And, 1 Pe^. 2.21.
he suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.
He was crucified, so must we be crucified to the world. He died and we must
dye unto sin. He was buried, and we must still continue dead unto sin. He
bore his cross, and we must take up our cross also. Of which at large
already. And thus have I at length finished all the three counsels of Christ.
It remains to add a word or two by way of application and use.

Is it so that whosoever will come after Christ, that is, be his scholar and
obtain everlasting life must deny himself, take up his cross daily and
follow him? O then the difficulty! o the paucity! the difficulty of
christianity and salvation, the paucity of good christians and them that shall
be saved. Is it an easy thing think you for a man to deny himself, that is,
to pull out the eyes as it were of his own head, and then to give his hand to
another to lead him which way soever he pleases? to renounce his own will,
and to yield blind obedience unto the will and pleasure of another? Is it so
easy a matter to take up the cross daily, that is, to forsake, to abandon, to
loathe, and detest the delights and comforts of this life, and whatsoever is
dearest unto us, and in the mean season to be hated, contemned, and trodden
under foot of all? yea in the midst of the cruellest persecutions and torments,
to rejoice as if we were bathing in the greatest pleasures, and to give thanks
as if we had received some inestimable benefit? Finally, is it so easy to
follow Christ, that is, to disclaim our own lusts and desires, and leaving
the broad and beaten way which all men almost walk in, finding therein great
contentment, to imitate Christ in a strict and severe course of life, so
irksome to the flesh and so odious to the World? They are deceived then who
think to dance on roses, or to be carried to heaven on a featherbed. No,
Christianity is not Libertinisme nor Epicurisme. Vta arcta est, the way is
narrow, and Faith, the cross, and Strictness of life, three necessary
conditions thereof make it so. O the difficulty!

O the paucity also? How few good Christians are there? how few are there that
shall be saved? Every one would willingly attain the end, everlasting life:
but they are loath to endure the roughness of the way which leads unto the
end. They would with Zebedees children sit at the right or at the left hand of
Christ's throne if his kingdom: But to drink of the same cup that he drank of
and to be baptized with his baptism, that can they not abide If we should as
Diogenes is said to have done, search with a candle every corner of
Christendom for a man that denies himself, that takes up his cross daily,
that follows Christ in such sort as we have declared: questionless we
should hardly find him. Such men are nowadaies very thin sown. On the
contrary side, those that give themselves over to their own lusts, that
wallow in sensuality and fleshly pleasure, that imitate, not Christ in sanctity
and newness of life, but the Divill in all kind of intemperance, iniquity and
impiety, these I say abound and swarm every where. O the multitude! O the
Paucitie! the multitude of titular Christians, who have the name of what they
are not: the Paucitie of true Christians who are so indeed not only called so.
No marvel therefore that our Savior affirms both, that the gate is strait
and the way narrow and that very few do find it. Mat. 6* 14:


But although it be so hard thus to come after Christ, yet is it not
impossible: and although but few do thus come, yet is it not in Christ that
more come not, but in themselves. Let us therefore in the name of God quicken
up our dull spirits, and strive what we can to overcome all difficulties. On
our part nothing is required but Willingness and Endeavor: the rest God of
his grace will supply. To work in us a Willingness, I suppose it will not be
amiss seriously to consider, first, as touching the Denial of our selves,
what we are by nature, and thence to learn Humility: that in us there is no
good at all, that of our selves we cannot so much as think a good thought,
much less perform any action pleasing and acceptable unto God. Our mind is
blind, our will is unable, and as our Savior says, without him we can do
nothing. Why should we then proudly and vainly stand upon our selves? Nay
rather why should we not in all humility utterly deny our selves? Secondly, as
touching the Cross and the taking up of it, that although it be in it self
bitter and greevous, yet the end is sweet and glorious, even an incorruptible
crown of glory. So we may attain eternal blessedness, what mattereth it
though we pass through rough and tempestuous seas unto it? Were it not far
better for us with Lazarus to suffer affliction for a short season here, and
after to receive eternal comfort in heaven: then with the rich glutton to
enjoy the pleasures of this present life and afterward to be everlastingly
tormented in hell? If we suffer for Christ, he will be in the fiery furnace
with us, and refresh us with the sweet comforts of his blessed spirit. He has
willingly borne the Cross for us: and why should not we willingly take up our
Cross for him. As touching the last, which is our Following of Christ know we
it is our safest course absolutely to resign our selves into his hands. He is
far wiser then we are, as being the very wisdom of his Father: and therefore
knows both what is best for us, and how to provide for us better then we our
selves. Again, his love is far greater then ours either is or can be toward
us. The heathen Poet even by the light of nature could say Charior est illis
homo quam sibi, Man is more dear to God then to himself: but the light of
revelation demonstrateth it more fully in that out of his infinite love he gave
his only son for us. His love then being such, it cannot be but that he is
most willing to do us the best good he can. Now what his wisdom and love
resolve concerning us, his power is able to effect: for he is omnipotent, and
nothing is impossible unto him. What then should let but that it is our safest
course to make a perfect surrender of our selves unto him? If we be left unto
our own selves, we are ever in danger, and in the end shall surely perish,
but being Christ's and following him, we can never miscarry nor do amiss. All
these things being duly weighed and considered are sufficient to make us
willing: willing I say to deny our selves, to take up our cross daily, and to
follow Christ. Unto which Willingness if we further add our own Endeavor,
doing what lies in our power, confecta res est, we shall surely come after
Christ, that is, be his scholars here, and reign with him for ever
hereafter. Without travel and labor, nothing can be had in this world: much
less will the kingdom of heaven be obtained with sitting still and doing
nothing. No it must suffer violence, and violent men must take it by force:
which whosoever shall do, he shall never fail of it. Christ will instruct him
by his word, guide him by his spirit, protect him with his providence, guard him
with his Angels, and ever pursue him with his grace until he have brought him
unto the end of his hopes, even the eternal salvation of his soul. Unto the
which the Lord bring us all for his Christ's sake. AMEN.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY OF THE JUSTICE OF GOD.

OXFORD, Printed by I. L for E. F. 1633.

GENESIS 18.25. Be it far from thee from doing this thing, to slay the righteous
with the wicked, and that the righteous should be even as the wicked, be it
far from thee: should not the judge of the whole world do right?
ALthough the good in regard of Gods knowledge and their own affection are
chosen out of the world and separated from the wicked: yet are they not removed
out of the world, but still remain therein, mixed with them in place and
conversation. So that the Church of God while it is militant here on earth is
no other then a floor wherein is both chafe and wheat, a field both of corn
and cockle, a net containing both good and bad fishes, a flock consisting both
of sheep and goats: and shall so continue until the fanning time come, until
the harvest be cut, until the net be drawn to the shore, until the high
shepherd survey his flock, but they shall eternally then be divided one from
another, and be ranged into several places, the one into a place of
refreshment and everlasting joy, the other into a place of torment and
everlasting woe. In the mean season both good and bad being embarked as it
were together in the same vessel, how can the good escape the common
shipwreck of humane calamity? Or being enwrapt in the same punishment, with
the wicked, how is God just? Abraham the father of the faithful, and a man of
deep understanding in the mysteries of Gods providence, yet stood astonished
hereat in Sodoms case: where righteous Lot, and for ought he knew diverse other
holy men dwelling, he marvelled how it might stand with the justice of God in
the destruction thereof to involue both righteous and wicked together, and
therefore says according to my Text, Be it far from thee from doing this
thing. A point, as you see, of great importance, and as will evidently appear
by the sequel, every way worthy our present consideration, which was the cause
why I made choice thereof at this time. God grant unto us the assistance of his
blessed spirit that we may handle it as it deserves, and that it may be unto
us as profitable as it is pertinent.

All that I have now to say touching these words may be reduced unto these
three heads, Gods action, Abraham's affection, Abraham's argument. Gods action,
how he deals with these mixed societies consisting both of good and bad.
Abraham's affection how he stands affected toward them. Abraham's argument,
which so much swayed his own affection, and whereby he would persuade God
also to be of his mind. Gods action is intimated and implied generally,
through the whole Text, in the words going before it in the twentieth and one
and twentieth verses, wherein God acquainted Abraham how he meant to proceed
with Sodom and Gomorrha. Abraham's affection is plainly declared in the
Deprecation he makes unto God for them. His argument is expressly set down in
these words, Shall not the judge of the whole world do right? Which being a
question propounded negatiuely, is to be understood as an affirmative
proposition, thus, The judge of the whole world must needs do right. Of these
things briefly and in order.

The actions of God in this case are not always one and the same, but as his
Wisdom is (to use the Apostles word) (...) full of variety, so are his actions
also manifold yet always just. For justice is unto God, not accidental as it
is unto man, but essential and inseparable, so that he can no more do that
which is unjust, then cease to be that which eternally and necessarily he is,
namely God. First then, so great love bears God unto his dear Saints and
children, that the wicked among whom they live oftentimes fare the better for
them, and their temporal prosperity and deliverance from dangers is to be
imputed unto them. Was not wicked Cham preserved in the Arc from that deluge
which overwhelmed the whole earth for his good father Noah's sake? Were not the
sinful Sodomites reskued out of the hands of their enemies by the sword of
Abraham for righteous Lots sake? If fifty, if forty, if thirty, if twenty,
nay if but ten just men might have been found in Sodom, had they not escaped
that fearful storm of fire and brimstone which after fell from heaven upon
them, even for tennes sake? What speak I of ten? Ps. 106.23.
One Moses standing in the breach before God, turned away his wrath, so that he
did not destroy his people Israel. And God himself by the Prophet Jeremy
says thus, Ier. 5.1.
Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now and know, and
inquire in the open places thereof if ye can find a man, or if there be any
that executes judgment and seeks the truth and I will spare it. According
whereunto as it is recorded by S. Luke, all those that sailed with S. Paul
being in number two hundred seaventy and six souls, Act. 27.24.34.37.
were given unto him, that not one of them in that exceeding dangerous tempest
lost so much as a hair from his head. When Augustus the Emperor had conquered
Mark Antonie, Plut. Ant.
and taken the City of Alexandria, and the Citizens looked for nothing but
extremity, the Emperor in the hearing of them all freely pardoned them for
Arius sake, a Philosopher of that City, one whom he honored much for his
learning, and loved for his virtue. If the heathen who know not God can for
one friends sake remit the offenses of many: shall not God do much more for
their sakes whom he calls and counts his friends? Certainly he will.
Egypt shall fare the better for Joseph, and the very remembrance of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob shall move God to persist in doing good to their rebellious
posterity. The charity of the Saints toward the wicked is very great, and the
prayers they make unto God for them are many, and so available are they that by
them oftentimes the arm of God is held from striking them, oftentimes his hand
is opened to bless them. And thus sometimes God prospers evil men for a few
good men's sakes that live among them,

Sometimes again he deals otherwise with these mixed companies, and when he
punishes a wicked nation, nor will be persuaded to spare them, he preserves
the godly that they taste not of the common calamity. For sometime he
preventeth them by death, and takes them into his rest before the misery come.
Thus all the Fathers died before the flood came upon the world* and good
Josiah, 2. King. 22.18.19.20.
according to the prediction of Huldah the prophetess, was gathered to his
fathers and laid in his grave in peace that his eyes might not behold all the
evil which God resolved to bring upon his kingdom. For as it is in the book
of Wisdom, Sap 4.14.16.19.
Because the Lord loves the soul of the righteous, therefore he hastneth to
take them away from the wicked: and, the righteous that is dead condemns the
unjust man that is living, for God will shake his foundations and lay him
utterly wast, they shall be in sorrow and their memorial perish. So that as it
is a great sign that God intends to continue his mercies to a nation while as
good men remain among them, according to that of old. Althes in the Poet: Non
tamen omnino Teucros del^re paratis, Virg. Aen. l. 9.
Cum tales animos iuvenum and tam certa tulistis Pectora, I see God has not
determined utterly to destroy the Trojans, seeing such valiant hearts and brave
spirits still rise up among them: so is it as great a token of imminent
destruction when the good are taken away, and as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
74.9.
their signs are no longer to be seen among them. Now as* sometimes he
preventeth the righteous by death that they partake not in the punishment of
the wicked: so sometimes he prolongeth their life to see it, but withal
sends them strange and miraculous deliverance that they feel it not. Thus
was Noah delivered by an Arc when all the rest of the world were drowned. Lot
and his family by a guard of Angels, when Sodom and the neighbor Cities were
consumed, Israel by a special protection when the Egyptians were many ways
plagued, Rahab by a cord of red thread when all the rest of the soul in Ierico
were put to the sword, the Christians by oracle at Pella, in the general
vastity and desolation of Judea. So that God knows well how to separate
between the precious and the vile, and in the greatest perplexities if he
please can find an issue and enlargement for all such as he loves.

Howbeit almighty God does not always thus deliver his Saints, but sometimes
involueth both good and bad in the same calamity. And even as the evil because
they are mingled with the good partake with them of temporal benefits as the
shining of the Sun, and the showers of rain: so the good also because they are
mingled with the evil partake with them in temporal afflictions. Aliquid mali
propter vicinum malum, the neighborhood of evil cannot but work them some
evil. Both good and bad are one common flesh, and common flesh as Cyprian
says is subject to the same common inconveniences, and ever will be until
corruption be swallowed up of incorruption. Hence is it that in the time of
famine or pestilence there is a common mortality, in hostile impressions and
conquests a common captivity, in shipwreck at sea a common drowning. If then
the Sodomites loose the day and be made prisoners unto Chedor-laomer, so is
Lot also: if Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon lead away the Jews into captivity,
Daniel and Ezechiell, and the three children are lead away also. If Totilas
overflow Europe with his barbarous troops, Christians are not freer then
Gentiles. Behold, Ezekiel. 21.3.
says the Lord by the prophet Ezechiell, I come against thee, and will draw my
sword out of his sheath, and cut off from thee both the righteous and the
wicked. Also by Saint John he straightly charge his people to depart out of
Babylon least they be partakers in her plagues. Rev. 18.4.
Nay if one Achan only trespass in the execrable thing, Ios. 7.1. etc.
he alone perishes not, but wrath falls on the whole congregation, which
the heathen poet also observing said (...), Hesiod.
many times a whole city smarts for the offense of one. But this specially if
any public man commit some notorious wickedness: for as when the head aches or
is distempered, the arm vain many times is opened, so for the offense of
Kings and Princes, the people oftentimes are punished, as appears in David's
case for whose sin in numbering the people seaventy thousand of his subjects
perished. 2 Samuel 24.
That all these were wicked men, and that none of them feared God, it is both
unreasonable and uncharitable to imagine: and therefore not doubting but that
good and bad pell mell were cut off in that pestilence, I conclude this point
with that aphorism of the Rabbis, When once the sentence of punishment is
pronounced and resolved by God, and power is given to the destroyer to execute
the same, he from thence respects the person of no man, nor puts
difference between the just and the unjust. And thus ye see how diversely God
deals with these mixed societies: let us before we proceed unto the next
point, make some use of what has been delivered.

First then do the wicked fare the better for the godly that live among them?
and are their prosperities and deliverances to be imputed unto them? Oh then
the extreme folly, Oh the monstrous ingratitude of wicked men: folly in
imputing all the crosses and evils that befall them unto the godly, as in old
time the gentiles did to the Christians, and nowadaies Papists do to
Protestants: ingratitude, in requiting the much good they enjoy by them with
nothing else but hatred and persecution. Well does Solomon confound Fools and
Wicked: for were not wicked men mere fools they would never thus malice their
best friends, nor seek to destroy them by whom themselves are preserved from
destruction. For certainly will they nill they sapiens est stulti redemptio, De
sacrif. Abel. and Cain.
the wise man is the fools ransom, as says Philo, and just men are the
pillars of the house, the brazen walls of a country, the charets and horsemen
of a nation, without whom the world is but a stage of vanity, and a cage of
unclean birds, and cannot long subsist. Wherefore although to our grief we
see wicked men too thick sown among us, yet because so many good men are
mingled with them, let us rejoice and be glad and give God hearty thanks for
them, hoping that while they continue with us, Gods blessing shall continue
upon us also. And when it shall please him to translate any of them from hence,
let us solicit him with our devoutest prayers, vt vno avulso suppullulet alter
Aureus and simili frondescat virga metallo, Virg. Aen. 6.
the one branch being plucked off, another golden one may grow up in the place
thereof for the perpetuation of his favors toward us.

Secondly, does God in executing judgment distinguish between good and bad,
sparing the one and punishing the other? here is a right precedent for you my
Lords and other judges, and rulers of the land to imitate. Ye are in scripture
styled Gods, and in this principally are ye to resemble God. Ye are carefully
to separate betwixt the precious and the vile, not so as to justify the
wicked, and to condemn the innocent, for both are an abomination to the Lord,
says Solomon: but to punish the evil doers, and to praise them that do well,
for to this end are ye sent, as St Peter says. 1 Pet. 2.14.
There is no greater cause either of apostasy in the Church or of sedition in
the commonwealth, then when they that deserve well of both are vilipended or
neglected, and lewd unworthy men are honored with the reward due unto virtue.
Oh therefore let virtuous worthy men find grace in your eyes, let them in the
name of God be cherished and countenanced by you, ever remembering that they are
the means of much good unto the place where they live. As for wicked men, bend
your brows upon them, and as they deserve it let them feel the edge of your
sword. Pinguior victima mactari Deo non potest quam homo sceleratus: Sen.
a fatter sacrifice can ye not kill unto God then a wicked man. If ye spare
him ye spare not your own selves: judex ipse damnatur cum nocens absolvitur,
the judge himself is condemned when the guilty person is absolved. And seeing
so many Amorites yet remaining in the land, and they now begin to prick sorer
in our sides then heretofore, hoping for a linsey wolsey Church at least ere
long: it is high time for you to look carefully hereunto. Tranquillitas est
vbi solus Petrus navigat, tempestas vbi Judas adiungitur, says Ambrose, if
Peter sail alone all is calm, if Judas sail with him naught but storm and
tempest. If we cannot utterly be rid of them, let them be hewers of wood and
drawers of water with the Gibeonits: Ios. 9 27.
God forbid they should steer at the helm, and be proud commanders.

Thirdly and lastly, does God sometimes enwrap both good and bad in the same
punishment? This my Lords, is a mystery inimitable, and far above your
reach: and to follow God in such actions were to make your selves as ridiculous
as little children, who will needs put upon them their fathers coats though
they be no way proportionable unto them. Theodosius the Emperor for the fault
of one man at Thessalonica involved many innocents into the same punishment,
but he was feign to do penance for it before he could be received into the
Church by Saint Ambrose. If Politicians think they see reason of state in it,
yet policy must yield to religion, the rule whereof is Fiat iustitia and ruant
coeli, evil may not be done that good may come of it. For the least evil of
fault is greater then the greatest evil of punishment, that being evil in
nature, this only to sense, otherwise an act of justice it self.
Nevertheless, albeit this act of God be not to be imitated by us, yet seeing
the wicked by reason of their mixture with the Godly draw down common plagues
upon them both: it ought to be our wisdom first to labor for their
conversion, and if it may be, to work them into Gods favor: then, if this
cannot be effected, either to separate them from us by the hand of justice, or
to separate our selves from them at least wise in dislike and affection. Prove.
13.20.
For as Solomon says, He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a
companion of fools shall be afflicted. And thus much of the first part, which
is Gods action: now of the second which is Abraham's affection.

How Abraham stands affected in this particular case of Sodom is clear and
evident by his words, Be it far says he, from thee to do this thing, to
stay the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be even as
the wicked: be it far from thee. He utterly mislikes that the righteous
should perish together with the wicked: and desires rather that God would be
pleased either to spare the wicked Sodomites for those righteous ones which
happily were among them, or else to deliver the righteous from the destruction
of the wicked. In a word he seems to be solicitous for them all, both for the
Sodomites whether good or evil in general, and in particular for his brother
Lot who dwelt among them. But here it will happily be said, what? does Abraham
prescribe unto God and impose a law upon him? Is God to be ruled by man, and
divine actions to be directed by humane affections? Far be such temerity,
Verse. 27.
far be such presumption from the Father of the faithful. No, he knows and
confesses himself to be but dust and ashes, and that God is not only
Liberrimus agens one that freely does whatsoever he will both in heaven and
earth, but also Sapientissimus needing no counselor to advise him, but knowing
best himself what is to be done. He does, not therefore presume to order the
actions of God, but only proposes his humble suit unto God; neither does he
take upon him to direct him, but to deprecate for others.

It will peradventure yet farther be said, that God had already signified his
purpose unto Abraham, and what he meant to do. Which being so, it had been
his duty to laid his hand upon his mouth, and to have rested in his will,
without farther contradiction or opposition. And here caeca obedientia, blind
and absolute obedience is as necessary and commendable, as in Friars to their
superiors it is foolish and unreasonable. To this I answer, that God indeed
had intimated his purpose unto Abraham, but yet in this form of words, Verse.
20 21.
Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is
exceeding grievous. I will go down now and see whether they have done
altogether according to that cry which is come unto me, and if not that I may
know. In these words you see he does not say that he would destroy the godly
with the wicked, and by the deliverance of Lot it plainly appears he never
intended so to do: and therefore it could be no arrogance in Abraham to make
such a charitable deprecation for them. Neither does that appear by the words
that God had past an absolute and peremptory sentence against the wicked
Sodomites: for if ten righteous men had been found amongst them they had been
spared: and the threatenings of God ordinarily are to be understood with a
condition annexed unto them, if men repent not, yea although it be not in
plain terms expressed, as in that against Niniveh, yet forty days and
Niniveh shall be destroyed, for this notwithstanding upon their repentance they
were not destroyed. So that this condition being here also understood, what
presumption could it be in Abraham to desire favor for the Sodomites, at least
upon their repentance. Finally had God absolutely threatened, and without
condition, yet ought not man so much to attend what God intends to do
agreeable unto his own will and justice, as what he himself is to do
agreeable to the law of God, and nature: and then shall he find that God in
denouncing and executing judgment wills two things, both that they perish and
that he grieve. God had laid Judea wast and sent away the inhabitants thereof
into captivity, yet Jeremy lamented for it. Christ knew well that God had
absolutely determined to destroy Jerusalem, yet he wept over it: a son may
know by evident symptoms that his Father cannot live, and yet desire the
prolonging of his life, and all without sin. In like manner might Abraham
without offense wish all good unto the Sodomites notwithstanding Gods will unto
the contrary.

Now this affection of this holy Patriarch is justifiable both by the law of
God and nature, having a three fold foundation to support it, Humanity,
Consanguinitie, Piety. First Humanity* for what heart of flint or adamant would
not melt to behold so many thousands so fearfully to perish? It is reported of
Xerxes a king of Persia that leading into Greece a huge host of about a leaven
hundred thousand men, and being desirous on a time to take a view of them from
the top of a hill, while he beheld the^ he burst forth into weeping and shed
many tears: and being demanded the reason, because, quoth he, within one age
not one of all these will be left. If Xerxes were so affected at the
consideration of the natural death of so many: should not Abraham be much more
moved at the destruction of the Sodomites, so sudden, so violent so terrible?
for the manner of death is far more fearful then death it self. Nay if God
himself pitied the great City of Niniveh in which were sixscore thousand
persons that could not discern between the right and the left hand* why
should not Abraham also commiserate these five cities, in which without
question were many thousands of young tender babes and infants who never
partaked in their parents transgressions? Above all. If ye consider that this
temporal plague of fire and brimstone from heaven was praeludium aeterni, a
fore runner of eternal misery in hell: what man is he that has but a spark
of humanity in him, but would wish it to be otherwise and prevent it if he
could? For one man not to sympathize and compassionate with another in his
miseries is mere inhumanity.

Another ground of this affection in Abraham was Blood and Consanguinity: Genesis
11.27.
for there lived among the Sodomites, Lot, his children and family. Now Abraham
was uncle unto Lot, Lot being Harans son, which Haran was brother unto
Abraham, and this is so great a neerenesse in blood that by the very law of
nature marriage between uncle and niece, aunt and nephew is interdicted, and
uncles are accounted as fathers to their nephews. Between these therefore
there must needs pass a natural (...) and affection, more then between them
and others, inasmuch as there is a nearer union and conjunction between them.
Others may be glewed together by friendship or alliance: but these are of the
same piece, naturally one, bone of bone and flesh of flesh. Here there ought to
be no difference at all, let there be no strife between me and thee, Genesis
13.8.
says Abraham to Lot, for we are brethren: yea extraordinary love and amity,
Psalm. 3.145.
I behaved my self, says David, as to my friend or to my brother: and the
more the love is, the more earnest and vehement will the desire be for the
prevention of such evils as do threaten them.

The third and last ground of Abraham's affection was Religion and Piety. For
where there is a profession of the same true religion there is a straiter bond
then that of blood, being members of the same mystical body in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.
having one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one body, one spirit, one hope, one
God and Father of all, which is above all through all, and in all. And out of
this Union issues that holy communion of Saints mentioned in the articles of
our Creed, in regard whereof we are bound to love the Saints far above other
men, according to that of St Paul, while we have time let us do good unto all,
specially unto those that are of the household of faith. Gal. 6.20.
Of this family was Lot and his household, and many others for ought Abraham
knew, and therefore unless he would be not only without natural affection,
but also without religious sympathy and compassion, he must needs stand thus
affected toward this mixed company in Sodom, and beseech God either to spare
the wicked for the godlies sake, or to preserve the Godly in the destruction of
the wicked that it may not every way be (...) as to the one so to the other.
And thus you see the affection of Abraham both what it is, and by what grounds
it is justified and warranted. Let us apply this before we proceed farther.

As we all profess our selves to be the children of Abraham according to the
faith, so is it our duty also to be his children in affection. And first, even
toward the wicked ought we to be tenderly affected, and to pity them more
then they pity themselves. Thus does Abraham in this place: thus did David a
true son of Abraham, when they were sick, Psalm. 35.13.
says he, I clothed my self with sack cloth, and humbled my soul with
fasting. Thus did Christ a true son both of David and Abraham, he wept for
the miseries which he foresaw would fall upon them, and for preventing of them,
often would he have gathered them under his wings as the hen does her chickens,
but they would not: he, I say, would, and they would not. Oh the bowels, oh the
compassion, oh the perfection of Christianity! wicked men are hard hearted
toward us, our bowels yearn and melt toward the^, they curse us, we bless
them, they afflict and persecute us, and we desire to keep off all trouble and
sorrow from them, except that sorrow which will work unto them such joy as
shall never be taken from them. This is a hard lesson to flesh and blood, yet
hitherto must we come or we pass not beyond Scribes and Pharisees: and except
our righteousness exceed theirs, we cannot possibly enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Again, as no man, no not the wicked ought to be strangers unto our
affection, so least of all those that are of the same faith with us. We should
be like Hippo^ra^es twins weeping together and laughing together. In the body
of man if but a finger ache all the rest of the members are sensible of it: and
can we be members of the mystical body of Christ and have no feeling of the
miseries of our brethren? If any man offer to strike at our head, the arm
presently lifts it self to ward of the blow: and shall not we, if God shake
the sword of his heavy displeasure against any of his children, speedily lift
up our hands unto him, and by the importunity of our prayers turn away the
plague that it light not upon them? Certainly they that are not touched with
compassion in the dangers of Gods Saints are not the true Children of Abraham:
and because they refused to be advocates for them in the day of need, neither
shall themselves find an advocate that will open his mouth to speak for them
in the day of their extremity.

Lastly, seeing Abraham's desire is rather that evil men be spared then the
good destroyed, and his heart inclines so much unto pity, it lessons you, my
Lords, also, that although through hope of impunity ye may not give liberty to
sin, yet should you rather incline to too much mildness then severity. In
doubtful matters it is not only more just but more safe also to follow the
favourablest construction: and more Christian like is it in such a case to let
the guilty escape then to condemn the innocent. It is much safer for a man to
render account of his mercifulness then of his cruelty. Nero in his five first
good years when he was to subscribe to the condemnation or execution of any,
was wont to say Qu^m Vellem nescire literas, would to God I could not write a
letter. Nay God himself says, Why will ye die, o ye house of Israel: and
as I live I will not the death of a sinner. And therefore it should be your
delight also suffundere potius quam effundere sanguinem, rather to bring blood
into the face then to shed it out of the body. Cuncta prius tentanda: sed
immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum ect, ne pars sincera trahatur, all other
ways must first be tried, but if the wound grow incurable, it is better to cut
off a part then to hazard that which is ^ound too. And so much for the second
part which is Abraham's affection.

The third and last part is the Argument whereby he would both warrant his
own affection, and persuade God to be of his mind, and is laid down in these
words Should not the judge of the whole world do right? that is as we have
showed, the judge of the whole world must needs do right. The reason stands
thus, To enwrap the good together with the wicked in the same punishment seems
not to be just, and therefore neither may thou do it, for thou art the
judge of the whole world and must do right. Surely if so to enwrap good and
bad were unjust, God may not do it and the argument follows necessarily. But
is it unjust so to do? Abraham seems to make no doubt of it, for he goes not
about to prove it, and yet we have in the first part clearly demonstrated that
God oftentimes does so. What then? is there any injustice with God? God forbid:
yea let him be just in all his sayings and clear when he is judged. In rebus
divinis magna caligo, said Cato, in many of Gods actions there is so much
obscurity that we see not the reasons of them; yet this is certain, Occulta
esse causa potest, iniusta esse non potest, the reason of them may be secret,
but unjust it cannot be. For he is essentially just, even justice it self, and
in rebus divinis ratio facti est voluntas facientis, in divine actions the will
of the doer is sufficient to justify the deed. For the will of God is the prime
rule of justice, and to seek higher is to seek a former then the first, which
is mere folly, whereas therefore I find a reason I will praise him, where I
find none I will admire him, and acknowledge my self that am but a bubble,
but a shadow, but the dream of a shadow rather to fail in understanding then
God in justice. Howbeit in this point we have sufficient reason to clear the
justice of God. For which of the Saints of God is without sin? And which of
them has not deserved by sin to be severely punished? Suppose they live
vnblamably in the sight of men, yet the eye of God that tries even the heart
and raines beholds much folly and iniquity in them. Do they not together
with the wicked too much love temporal things? Too much I say, though happily
not so much? Do they not live too familiarly with them, never rebuking them
nor showing any dislike of their wicked courses? Questionless they do, and
therefore no marvel if partaking in the same sin, they partake also in the
same punishment, et amara sentiant quia amari esse noluerunt, drink with them
of the same bitter cup, because for their amendment they would not be sharp
and bitter unto them.

The action of God being thus cleared from injustice, what shall we say of
Abraham and his assertion? I might dispatch him in a word and say let God be
true and every man a lier: save that I desire to dismiss him with all
reverence, and as far as I can to free him from blame also. Shall I say then
with some, that he speaks in the opinion of infidels who think it a high
point of injustice so to involue both good and bad together? I cannot: for it
becomes not the father of the faithful to press upon God the arguments of
unbelievers. Shall I say his meaning is, that it cannot every way and in all
respects be alike to both without injustice? This indeed I confess would be
great injustice: but God never suffers it to be so. Sub vno igni aurum rutilat,
palea ^umat, in the same fire gold glifters and chafe smokes: pari m^tu
exagitatum et exhalat horribiliter coenum et suaviter fragrat vnguentum, with
the same agitation and stirring, mire sends forth a loathsome stench, and
ointment a sweet savor. In like manner, the same afflictions are unto the
wicked, arguments of Gods wrath, an act of revenge, the satisfaction of
justice, an earnest penie of eternal torment, and if they take away life a
fiery thunderbolt driving them down into hell: but unto the Godly the
chastisements of a loving father, corrosiues unto the flesh, exercises of their
virtue, wormwood unto the teat to weane them from the pleasures of this world,
and if they bring death with them, a fiery chariot transporting them up into
heaven. So that in the same punishment neither is the same end intended, nor
the same effect wrought: tantum interest non qualia sed qualisquisque patiatur,
so material is it not what the pains are, as what the party is which
^uffereth. What shall we say then. This, that Abraham's argument is rather
passionate then demonstratiue, yet such as holy men oftentimes use in their
devotions to God, and that without sin. Cast me not off from thee, says
David. Why not? Because I am the workmanship of thy own hands. The reason
follows not, for many such have been cast off. True: yet is it a motive of
affection; for what pity is it for one to cast away his own workmanship. So
in this case, Oh, says Abraham, destroy not the righteous with the wicked:
rather preserve the wicked for the righteous sake. Why so? Because the judge of
the whole World should do righteously. It follows not as we have showed.
True, not necessarily: yet pitying the Sodomites, and having no better plea
for so bad a people, he used it to stir affection, alas that the righteous
should be consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven together with the
wicked, and that by him who is the judge of the whole world, and should do
right. But whatsoever become of the Consequence and whethersoever it were
either defect of judgment or abundance of passion that framed it: sure I am
the Antecedent which he lays for his foundation is sound and good The judge of
the whole world should do right, and of this briefly and in a word.

In all states and commonwealths for the better ordering of them, and that vice
may be suppressed, and virtue maintained, and every man peaceably and quietly
enjoy his own, Judges are in several places ordained, to hear all causes,
and according to justice and equity to determine them. Among these there is one
who is sovereign and above all unto whom appeal from all other may be made,
from whom no appeal unto any under heaven may be made. But how many villainies
are there committed in the world which never come to the knowledge of the
magistrate, and so escape without punishment? How many noble and virtuous
actions are there done whereof no notice is taken, or if it be, yet the authors
neither are nor will be known and so pass unrewarded? Judges themselves do
they not oftentimes either upon error and mistaking as men, or for fee and
favor as corrupt men pervert justice? If appeal be made unto the supreme
power, what redress? many times none at all, they being the worst of all men,
witness Sardanapalus, Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, and the like. All which
considered, it cannot be imagined but that there must needs be an universal
judge over the whole world, to call all men of what degree soever to account,
and to render unto every one according to his works, reward to whom reward,
and punishment to whom punishment is due. This judge whosoever it be, must
needs be of infinite knowledge, of infinite wisdom, of infinite power. Of
infinite knowledge, to take notice of all the actions of all men whenever and
wheresoever. Of infinite wisdom, to discern the sincerity or hypocrisy of
every action, and according to the degree of good or evil in them so to
proportion judgment. Of infinite power, to see the sentence notwithstanding
the greatness of any yet to be duly executed. Of this knowledge, this wisdom,
this power who is there in the world but only God? and therefore who can be
this universal judge of the whole world but only he? He it is whom Abraham
understands here when he says, Should not the judge of the whole world do
right? as appears by that of Saint Paul alluding hereunto, Else how shall God
judge the world? and this is so clear a point in Christian religion that he is
no less then an infidel that believes it not.

As clear a point is it that this judge in all things does right. I or, as we
have showed, he is essentially just, and whatsoever he does of the necessity of
his nature must needs be so. So that as the Sun cannot possibly be the cause
of darkness, nor the fire of coldness, nor a sweet fountain send forth
bitter streams: no more can be who is justice it self do any thing that is
unjust. Hence is it that in scripture he is styled the righteous Judge: and
that Saint Paul says, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Absit, Rom 9.14.
Far be it from us to say there is unrighteousness with God. This
notwithstanding, some Atheist happily who thinks the Intelligence that moves
the wheels of this nether world to be not Divine Providence but Blind
Fortune only, will object and say, If there be such a general judge of the
whole world, and he so just a judge, how comes it to pass that so many wicked
men live and die without punishment? As for example that bloody and
sacrilegious tyrant of Sicilie Dionysius. Not Deor.
Him, as Cicero says, never did Jupiter dart with his thunderbolt, nor
Aesculapius kill with a miserable and lingering sickness, but he died quietly
in his bed, and in triumphant manner was brought into his grave, and the power
which by horrible wickedness he had gotten, he left to his son as a just
and lawful inheritance. To this I answer, first if men could see the secret
stripes and lashes which a guilty conscience inwardly gives the soul of the
wicked, they would never think that they escaped without punishment. For
certainly Qui pecc^t paenam meruit, qui meruit expectat, qui expectat iam
dedit, he that sins deserves punishment, he that deserves it looks for it, and
whosoever looks for it already feels it. Secondly, if God here in this world
publicly should reward the good and punish the wicked, men would think there
were no other happiness nor misery then that of this life. As therefore God
sometimes holds his Sessions here on earth, judging the wicked, and causing
public execution to be done upon them that men may know there is a God that
judges the earth: so sometimes he reserueth them unto the general affizes of
the last day, to teach us that besides temporal there is an eternal reward
and punishment to be expected after this life, the dispenser whereof is this
great judge of the whole world who nor can nor will do otherwise then right.
In that day, says the Scripture, 1 These. 4.16.
shall the Lord himself come down from heaven with a shout, Dan 7.9.10.
and, a throne shall be set in the clouds, and the ancient of days shall sit
thereon, whose garment is white as snow, and the hair of his head like the
pure wool, his throne is like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire:
a fiery stream shall issue and come forth before him, thousand thousands shall
minister unto him, and ten thousand thousands stand before him, the judgment
shall be set and the books opened. Mat. 24.31.
Then shall the Archangells trumpet sound, 1 Cor. 15.52.
and the dead shall rise, 2 These. 4.16.
and the Angels shall go forth and gather both good and bad together, Mat.
13.41.24.31.
and we all must appear before the tribunal of Christ, that every man may
receive the things done in the body, 2 Cor 5.10.
according to that he has done, Mat. 25.46.
whether it be good or evil, and the wicked shall go into everlasting pain,
and the righteous into life eternal.

Go too now ye Epicures, Act. 17.18.32.
ye Stoics, ye Philosophers that are so wise in your own conceit, and
account the preachers of judgment no better then Bablers: go too ye mockers
and scoffers of this last time, 2 Pet. 3.3.4.
who say where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers died all
things continue alike from the beginning of the Creation: Manil. l 1.
non alium videre paeres aliumue nepotes, the world which our ancestors saw of
old, is the same which we their posterity see now: Go to I say, eat, drink,
make you merry, crown your heads with rose buds before they be withered,
delight your selves in the tab^et, and harp, enjoy the pleasures that are
present, let not the flower of life pass by, Eccl. 11.9.
walk in the ways of your own heart, and in the sight of your own eyes: but
yet know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. I remember
that a gallant of this stamp some time said unto a reverend Prelate, what if
there be no judgment to come, are you not then a very fool to bar your
self from the pleasure of this present life? to whom the Prelate, and what if
there be a judgment to come, are not you then a very fool for the short
pleasures of this present life to bar yourselfe from those eternal joys of
the life to come? Thou vain man, art thou infallibly certain thou shall not
come to judgment? is there no scruple, no doubting remaining in thee to the
contrary? I know thou would feign have it so that thou may sin withal
impunity: howbeit I am sure thy Conscience does so counterchecke thee, that
thou can not but doubt thereof. In a case so doubtful unto thee what folly,
nay what madness is it for time to hazard eternity? and for a few fading
pleasures to adventure thy self upon endless woe and misery? The wise heathen
could say, Longum illudtempus cum non ero, magis me movet quam hoc tam exiguum,
the long time which shall be after this life does more affect me then this
short life. If it be possible let it affect thee also: if not, sit still in
the chair of scorners, scoff on thy fill, and seeing thou will not believe
that fire is hot until it burn thee, thou shall one day be convinced that
there is a judgment when thou shall feel the intolerable torments of those
flames that never shall be quenched.

In the mean season let us who have better learned Christ and know the terror
of the Lord, let us I say prepare our selves against this great and dreadful
day of the Lord, giving all diligence that we may be found of him in peace
without spot and blameless. 2 Pet. 3.14.
And to this end let us always have it in mind, and with Saint Hierom ever be
meditating thereupon. Quoties diem illum considero, says he, toto corpore
contremisco: sieve enim comedo, sieve bibo, sieve aliud facio, semper videtur tuba
illa terribilis sonare in auribus meis, Surgite mortui et venite ad iudicium:
as often as I think of that day I tremble every limb, for whether I eat or
drink or do any thing, me thinks I hear that terrible trumpet sounding in
mine ears, arise ye dead and come to judgment. If any thing in the world
will make a man sober and keep him within his banks, it is the consideration
hereof. Think of this I beseech you, and think of it seriously all ye that
hear me this day. Ye Judges of the land be ye wise and learned, Psa^.
^0.2.11.12 Ps. 2^ 3.4.
serve the Lord, and kiss the son, do right to the poor and fatherless,
deliver the poor and needy, and save them from the hand of the wicked, do
nothing unjustly, accept no man's person, execute justice without bribery and
partiality, for your selves must come unto judgment, and as you judge so shall
ye be judged. Ye lawyers and advocates, see that ye entertain none but good
causes, sell not breath only for your fees, spin not matters out at such a
length for your own advantage, in every cause deal conscionably and honestly,
for your selves shall need an advocate in that day to speak for you, quando
plus valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba, when a good heart shall far more
avail then cunning and plausible words. Ye Priests and Levites of the Lord,
feed ye diligently the flock whereof the Holy Ghost has made you overseers,
Ez 34.4.
strengthen the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken, bring again that
which was driven away, seek that which is lost, be instant in season, out of
season: thrice happy are you if your Lord when he comes, find you so doing,
for you shall stand in judgment, and having justified many, ye shall shine as
the stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.
And ye the rest of my brethren whatsoever whether gentle or ungentle, rich or
poor, take heed to your selves also, and for these outward vanities of birth
and wealth, see that ye neither despise nor envy one another. In that day not
the first but the second birth will be regarded, and a good conscience will be
more esteemed then a full purse. Watch therefore and be sober, 1 Timothy
5.11.18.19.
flee ungodliness and worldly l^sts, and follow after righteousness, piety,
faith, love, patience, meekness, do good, and be rich in good works, laying
up in store a good foundation for your selves against the time to come, that ye
may obtain eternal life. Then shall ye not need with guilty reprobates to
hang down your countenances, and to request the hills to cover you from the
wrath of the terrible judge: for ye shall earnestly long for his speedy
coming, and at his appearance shall ye lift up your heads for joy, Luc. 21.28.
knowing that your redemption draws near, and that now is to be pronounced
that more then joyful sentence, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world: unto the which kingdom the Lord bring us all for
his Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.
AN AMVLET OR PRESERVATIVE against the contempt of the MINISTRY.

OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

TIT. 2 15. See that no man despise thee.
BEing in regard of the present opportunity to address my speech at this time
unto you principally, reverend Fathers, and beloved brethren of the Clergy: I
have by the direction I trust of Gods blessed spirit made special choice of
this Text, as affording matter both of great importance, and every way
concerning you. That the office and calling of the Ministry is of all other
the most honorable and worthy, every one of us presumes. That of all other it
is generally most obnoxious and subject to contempt, we all by lamentable
experience feel. How it may be freed from this contempt, and again recover
its ancient dignity, is a point of high nature, and well worth the hearing.
And this is the very purpose and intent of this Apostolical charge. For as St
Paul's care that Titus be not despised implies the honor of his calling, and
his fear least he be despised argues it is subject thereunto: so his charge
unto Titus to look unto it that he be not despised, evidently shows both
where the cause of this contempt mostly lies, and how our selves if we list
may prevent it. So that this Text may not unfitly be called An Amulet or
Preservatiue against the contempt of the Ministry. And it offers as you see
unto our medi^ation these three particulars, first the dignity of the Ministry:
secondly, the contempt of the Ministry: thirdly, the redress of this contempt.
Of which while I discourse unto you plainly, according to my poor ability,
and breefly in regard of the businesses to succeed: lend me I beseech you
blessed brethren both the assistance of your prayers, and the encouragement of
your favorable attention.

And first as touching the Dignity of the Ministry, cui non dictus his Hylas?
Virg. Georg. 3.
What tongue or pen almost has not travailed in this argument? Or what can
herein be said which has not been already said? And to say all that may be
said in this short scantling of time is impossible. Heb. 5.4.
I omit therefore that Scripture expressly calls Priesthood an Honor, 1 Timothy
5.17.
and affirms Elders to be worthy of double honor, 1 These. 5.13.
charging all to have them not only in honor, but also in singular
reputation. Neither will I stand to reckon up all those titles wherewith
Ministers are honored, 1. Cor. 4.1.
as Stewards, Fathers, Rulers, Men of God, Gods Ambassadors, Tit. 1.7.
the light of the world, the salt of the earth, 2 King 2.12.
Saviors, 1 Cor. 4.15.
Stars, Angels. Nor lastly will I spend time in mustering up all those
honorable personages, Heb. 13.17.
who have borne this office, 2 Timothy 3 17.
as the First borne of every family before the Law, 2 Cor. 5.20.
under the Law the house of Aaron in both mighty Kings as Melchizedeck and
Solomon, Mat. 5.13.14.
1 Timothy 4.16.
and finally under the Gospel Christ himself the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. Rev. 1.20.
Ex. 2^.1.
These things I say, Genesis 14.18.
and sundry other of like nature, Eccl. 1.1.
although demonstratiuely proving the Dignity of the Ministry, Heb. 6.29.
yet of purpose I pass by as obvious and vulgarly urged. Rev. 19.16.
Only at this time these three points as the choicest among the rest would I
command unto your serious consideration. First the excellency of the science we
profess; secondly, the efficacy and powerful operation of our Ministry;
thirdly, the authority and jurisdiction annexed thereunto. For if the Science
we profess be architectonicall, if the execution of our Ministry be most
energeticall, if our authority and jurisdiction be the amplest and greatest:
then is our Calling of all other the most noble and worthy. Let us therefore
enquire if these things be so: and first the excellency of the science we
profess.

As the wise man says of a virtuous woman, Pro: 31 29.
Many daughters have done worthily, but thou surmountest them all: so say I,
all Arts and Disciplines in their kind are good, as issuing from God, the
fountain of all goodness: but Divinity is transcendent, and as Gregory
calls it ars artium, the science of sciences. For whereas the preeminence of
one science before another stands in two things, either that it is more
worthy in it self, in regard of the matter it teaches, or more certain and
infallible in regard of the manner of knowing: this Divine science far
excels in both. For as touching the matter, the very gleaning of Ephraim is
better then the vintage of Abiezer: Iud. 8* 2.
the meanest part of this heavenly knowledge is greater and nobler then all
whatsoever is comprehended within the whole circle of humane Sciences. For
these, taken at the highest, aspire not above Nature, contemplating only such
Verities, and directing unto such goods as are connaturall unto us, and being
natural are also finite, and so cannot satisfy the vast and infinite desire
either of the mind or will. But the object of this Divine science is merely
supernatural: the speculatiue part whereof contemplateth the first and highest
verity even God himself, ^^e infinite beauty and glory of his nature, the
incomprehensible Trinity of Persons, his wonderful works and operations,
creating all things of nothing, sustaining all he created by his mighty word,
ordering and governing all by his most wise providence, but specially redeeming
mankind from Sin, death, and hell, into the glorious liberty of sons by
the incarnation and passion of the Son of God. 1 Cor 2.14.
A mystery so profound that not only the natural man knows it not, 1 Pet. 1
12.
but even the blessed Angels longed to be acquainted therewith, and knowing
stand amazed and ravished with admiration thereof. Neither is the Practical
part any way inferior unto the speculatiue: for that also directs unto the
first and highest Good, even Good, in vision and fruition of whom stands our
eternal blessedness, showing also what the way is which leads unto this
sovereign End, namely Repentance from dead works, Justification by Faith in
Christ, Regeneration by water and the Holy Ghost, unfeigned study and practice
of new obedience, in Piety toward God, Justice toward all men, and
temperance toward our own selves. Thus the subject and matter of our science
so far surpasses that of other Disciplines, as supernatural excels
natural; heaven, earth; eternity, time; the boundless wisdom of God, the
narrow compass of man's reason: and they are unto it but as Hagar unto Sarah,
hand-maides unto their Lady and Mistress.

As is the matter, so is the manner of knowing also: that of highest price and
value, this most certain and infallible. Unto the truths of other sciences we
yield assent, either induced by authority of humane testimony, or inclined by
probability and likelihood of reason, or convinced by the light and evidence of
demonstration. The two former breed but a moral or coniecturall certitude,
both obscure, nor excluding all doubt, nor securing us of the truth. The third
though it have greater evidence and clearnes, yet has it no more the^ the
natural light of humane reason can afford: which what a glow-worme it is, and
how subject to mistaking who sees not? Aristotle, whose eyes were as sharp
sighted and peircing into these matters as ever any man's, yet confesses, we
are but owly-eyed in them: and the Pyrrhonian Philosophers saw so much
uncertainty in most things, that they grew to maintain an impossibility of
knowing any thing. Romans 1.21.2^.
So vain is man in his imaginations, and so full of darkness is his foolish
heart, that when they profess themselves to be most wise, they become the
starkest fools. But the truths of this divine science being supernatural have
their certainty from a supernatural light, even the revelation of Gods spirit,
which can neither deceive nor be deceived: according to that of our Savior,
Mat: 16.17.
Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. This is the light shining in the dark until the day dawne, 2 Pet:
1.19.
the day star rising in our hearts, the Certitude of Faith which is simply
and absolutely so, because no falsehood can possibly be under it, De fide Ann^.
and being as Chrysostom says, more firm then all Demonstration, as standing
not in the enticeing speech of man's wisdom, 1 Cor: 2.4.
but in plain evidence of the spirit and of Power. True it is that this our
Science sometime receives from humane wisdom, yet not because she needs it,
but because we need it: nor for any defect or uncertainty in it, but for the
weakness of our understanding, which, by those things that are known, to
natural reason is more easily brought to understand those things which are
above reason. For otherwise she is so far from receiving her Principles from
any other Science, that she either allows or controls all their rules and
maxims, as being their sovereign Queen and Mistress. And thus much of the
excellency of the Science of Divinity: now of the Efficacy of the Ministry.

Iud. 8 21.
As is the man, so is his strength says the Proverb: in like manner, as is
our science, so is our Ministry, that the most noble, and therefore this the
most powerful. That is most powerful which works most effectually to
atchieue 'its end: and the more difficult the end is to be attained, the
greater is the power that attaineth it. Now what is the end of the Ministry? It
is as Saint Paul says to build up the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12.
to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them, which are sanctified by faith in Christ: that
is in a word, to make men partakers both of the state of grace in this life,
and of eternal glory in the life to come. An employment as of highest
consequence, so of greatest difficulty, that Saint Paul wondreth, who might be
sufficient for it, 2. Cor. 2.16.
and Chrysostom says, that the Angels themselves would tremble to undergo
the burden. Yet has it pleased the wisdom of God in earthly vessels to
convey unto us these heavenly treasures: 2 Cor. 4.7.
and to make the Ministry of weak mortal men mighty in operation, Heb. 4.12.
able to pull down strong holds, 2. Cor. 10.4.5.
and to cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and to captive every thought to the obedience of
Christ. Hence is it that Esaias calls the word of God, Esa 53.1.
the arm of the Lord: and Saint Paul the preaching of the Gospel, Rom 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation. Esa. 55 11.^.2
Hence that God himself affirms, that his word shall never return unto him
void, but shall accomplish that which he will, Id. 11.47.8.9
and prosper in the thing whereto he sends it. Is it is not strange that the
wolf should dwell with the lamb, and the leopard with the kid, and calfe and
the lion and the fat beast lie together, and a little child lead them? That the
cow and the bear should feed together, and their young ones lie down
together, and the Lion eat straw like the Ox? That the sucking child should
play on the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child put his hand on the
Cockatrices den, and all without either hurt or danger? Yet all this is done
through the knowledge of the Lord, and by the power of our Ministry. This is it
that fills up every valley, Luc. 3.5.6.
and levelleth every mountain and hill: that makes the crooked straight, and
the rough ways smooth, that all flesh may see the salvation of God. The
meaning of which allegorical speech I cannot better express then in the words
of Lactantius, Inst l. 3. c. 26.
give me the man that is choleric, a railer, unruly, and with a few words of
God, I will make him as meek as a lamb. Give me him that is greedy,
covetous, gripple, and I will make him liberal and give bountifully with his
own hands: give me him that is fearful of pain and death, eftsoons shall
he contemn his gibbets, fires, and Phalaris bull: Give me the lecher, the
adulterer, the tavern haunter, and by and by shall thou see him sober, chaste
and continent. Give me the cruel and blood thirsty man, and his fury shall
soon be turned into clemency. Finally, give me the unjust man, the fool, the
sinner, and forthwith he shall be just, and wise, and innocent. Such and so
great is the power of this divine wisdom, that it quickly changes a man, and
transformes him into another shape, so as ye can hardly know him to be the
same. Neither let any man think that these are but words: no they have
ordinarily been and are daily done. Ion. 3.6 7.
Did not Jonas with one sermon humble the pride of the King of Niniveh and all
that mighty city into sackcloth and ashes? Act. 2 37.41.
Did not Peter, at his first preaching to the Jews, prick them to the heart,
and at once add about three thousand souls unto the Church? Ib. 24.25.
Did not Paul, discoursing of justice and temperance, and judgment to come,
make Felix the governor although a heathen yet to tremble? But what speak I
of particulars which are infinite? Never did Alexander or Caesar with their huge
hosts of armed men, win so great victories, or erect such troops of honor to
themselves, as did the holy Apostles unto the name of Christ. They were in
number but twelve, for the most part poor fishermen, and unlettered, and
despised in the eye of the world: and yet within a few years, armed only with
the sword of the mouth, and the power of this Ministry, they conquered the
whole world, and subdued it to the obedience of Christ. And whom they subdued
they so settled in the Faith, that rather then they would renounce it, they were
content to endure most exquisite torments, and to loose a thousand lives. In
like manner has the Ministry hitherto prevailed, and shall successively unto
the worlds end. How many families of Philosophers have heretofore failed
without successor? Senec. cou^^.
How many sects of Heretics are vanished and melted away as dew before the
sun? But the Church of Christ, and his religion shall never fail. The
heavens shall sooner loose their influence, and the stars their light, then
the Ministry of the Church be without its strength and virtue. Neither the open
violence of tyrants, nor the secret underminings of Antichrist, nor hell it
self, shall ever be able to let or hinder it. And thus much of the Efficacy
and Operative power of the Ministry.

The authority and jurisdiction annexed thereunto is exceeding great and ample.
I stand astonished at the consideration thereof: for among the sons of men
there is none comparable to it. Among the sons of men, say I: Nay among the
Angels of God, De Sacerd. l. 3. c. 5.
says Chrysostom. For neither to them, nor to Kings or Princes, but only to
the Ministers of the Gospel, are the keys of the kingdom of heaven given.
These only have power to open the kingdom of heaven to all that believe, and
to shut the gates against those that continue in incredulity. These have
authority to bind and loose, to remit and retain sins, to enter men by
baptism into the visible Church, to admit them or withold them from the holy
communion, to cut off notorious sinners from the body of the Church by
excommunication, to deliver them over to Satan, and if they prove incorrigible,
by anathema maranatha to separate them from the Church until the Lord come.
Add hereunto that whatsoever they do here on earth by virtue of the keys,
the same is eftsoons ratified by God in heaven: according to that of our
Savior, Ioh. 20.^3.
whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins soever ye
retain, they are retained: Mat. 18.18.
and again, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Now as the
Jurisdiction of the Ministry is wondrous great: so is the extent thereof
exceeding large. For it stretches it self without exception of condition or
degree unto all men. If I should say Angels also, perhaps I should not say much
amiss. Else what means that of the Apostle, Ephesians 3.10.
unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly places is made known by the Church
the manifold wisdom of God. For seeing the Church makes nothing known but by
the Ministry, and the Angels come to the knowledge of the manifold wisdom of
God by the Church: it seems that they also are in some things informed by the
Ministry. And thus at length to sum up all that has been said, you have
clearly demonstrated, not only that the Science we profess is of all other
the most transcendent, and operation of our Ministry, the most effectual: but
also that the authority and jurisdiction thereunto annexed is of all other the
greatest and largest. Out of all which I hope I may be bold to infer the
conclusion principally intended, that our calling is therefore of all other the
most worthy.

And is it so indeed, that the Ministry is of all callings the most noble and
honorable? Then belike they that are advanced thereunto are accordingly to be
esteemed. Without question they are. Reason tells us it ought to be so: and
God commands that it be so. The more strange it seems that whereas all other
sorts of men are regarded answerably unto their places, Ministers only are
vilipended and least set by. For that so it has ever been, the monuments of
former ages sufficiently testify. Genesis 19.9.14.
Number. 16 3.
Noah was mocked of the old world, 2 Samuel 6.16.20
Lot of the Sodomites, Aaron of Korah, 1 King. 22.8.24.
Dathan, and Abiron, David of Michol, Micaiah of Ahab and his false Prophets,
Elizeus of the children and Iehus captains, 2 King. 2.23. and 9.11.
and generally all the Messengers and Prophets of the Lord by the Jews. 2 Chronicles: 36.16.
In the new Testament Christ himself was set at naught, Luc. 23.11.
Act. 2.13.
the Apostles when they were filled with the extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost were flouted at as full of new wine, St. Paul when he discoursed most
profoundly before the Athenians of the mysteries of Christian religion, was
counted of them but a vain Babbler, Act. 17.18.
and universally all the Apostles every where were no better reckoned of then
(...), 1 Cor. 4 13.
the offals and off scourings, of the world, and do not we Ministers now a
days drink of the same cup? or are we not baptized with the same baptism,
wherewith Christ and his Apostles were? yes verily. Contempt pursues us also,
and perhaps the more the more inferior we are unto them. Give me leave to show
it in particular, if for no other cause, yet to confound the hypocrisy of
these times, wherein men love not to be, but to seem to be, and to take
religion on them rather then into them: howbeit briefly, for what pleasure can
either you take in hearing, or I in discoursing of so sad a theme?

The Honor due unto the Ministry is double; Internal, External. Internal in
the Mind, in the Affection. In the Mind honorable estimation: in the
Affection, Love. External in Word, in Gesture, in Deed. In Word, honorable
mention, in Gesture, reverent behavior, in deed, liberal and bountiful
maintenance. All these Honors do we justly claim as due unto us, yet are
they all most shamefully denied us. For as touching the first, it is as clear
as the sun at noonday by what has been already said, that the Calling of
the Ministry is in it self and above all other the most honorable. Express
testimony of Scripture, and unanswerable arguments deduced from it, have
sufficiently manifested the same. Now we know that reason would that every
thing be valued according to the worth thereof: and very simple do we count
him that sets no better price upon silver then lead, upon gold then copper,
upon emerauds and diamonds then pibble stones. Which being so, it follows
that the Ministry of the Gospel being indeed so precious a jewel, as in the
judgment of all accordingly to be esteemed: and very foolish or froward must
he needs be, that disesteemeth or vndervalueth so invaluable a treasure. And
yet how many are there in these days who despise this sacred function, and set
it at naught? some happily through ignorance, not knowing the worth thereof:
but others out of profaneness, preferring a mess of pottage before a
birthright. An evident sign and token whereof this may be among others, that
those of the better rank either for wealth or gentility count themselves too
good for the Ministry, and hold it a foul disparagement to bestow their
children that way. No, that is an employment fit for poor men's children only.
Or if at any time they vouchsafe to design their sons thereunto, they are
but of the younger sort, ard such as they find altogether unapt for any other
calling: for otherwise, the law, or merchandise, or some trade of more
advantage, swaies them, and carries them clean away. Nay even those that are
of good parentage, and equal unto others, if once they enter into the
Ministry, they hold them abased thereby: and the very name of a Priest shall
be cast into their teeth, as a notable blemish and stain unto their blood. So
that that which God accounts the greatest honor, is accounted by man a great
impeachment of honor, and seldom finds in the mind due estimation.

As little love finds it also in the affection. Saint Paul earnestly charge
all men to love those men that are set over them in the Lord, 1 These. 5.12.13.
that is, their Ministers, yea to bestow upon them, not some small measure, but
abundance of love. And why? for their works sake, says he: as if he had said
more fully, because by the pains they take for you they deserve much love: so
that if you will not amorem impendere, freely vouchsafe them your love, yet are
you bound amorem rependere, to requite their labors with love. Alexander the
Great was wont to say he was more beholding to his Master Aristotle then his
Father Philip, for that he had his being only from the one, and his well-being
from the other. And surely if we owe love unto our natural parents as authors
of our temporal life: how much more is due unto our spiritual parents, who
have begotten us by the immortal seed of the word unto a blessed and eternal
life? Deuteronomy. 33.8
Moses blessing Levi, calls him the man of Gods mercies: Cod. l. 1. tit. 3.
de episcop. and cler. 43.44.
and anciently the Ministers of the Gospel were styled the beloved of God.
Does God set his mercies, and his love upon them, and dares man deny his unto
them? What dares not sinful man do? He denied it. There is one Micaiah, says
Ahab, the son of Imlah, 1. King 22.8.
by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him, for he does not prophecy
good concerning me, but evil. Our Savior Christ in the charge he gives his
twelve Apostles, Mat. 10.22.
foretells them that they shall be hated of all men for his names sake. What
he foretold them, they by experience found true, being every where persecuted
even to the death. The reason, because they were the light of the world, Mat.
5.14.
and the whole world lies in evil, and every one that does evil hates the
light, 1. Ioh. 5.19. Ioh. 3.20*
because it discovers and reproves his deeds. Cic. de ami^.
Verit as odium, truth begets hatred, Gal. 4.16.
according to that of St Paul, Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell
you the truth? Unless we so pillowes under men's elbowes we cannot please
them: if we please them not, neither can we have their love. Et hinc illae
lachrymae, hence the bitter cold that nips us every where. But how little we
are either esteemed or loved, will yet more appear by the outward fruits. For
as is the internal honor of the mind and affection: so is the external
also, in Word, in Gesture, in Deed.

Honor in Word is honorable mention, whereby we speak nothing but honor of
a man. And this also we justly challenge to our selves: for it is written, Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Exodus 22.27.
True it is, Ministers are not Angels, Act 23.5.
but being made of the same mouldes with other men, are subject to the same
infirmities. Nevertheless he plays but Chams part, Genesis 9.22, 23.
that laughs at his fathers nakedness: Shem and Iaphet will not see it, but
go backward and cover it. The exorbitancies of a Minister, says Constantine
the great, ought not to be known unto the people: he for his part would
rather cover them with his purple robe. For as the Council of Chalcedon says,
Delicta Sacerdotum communis est turpitudo, the sins of the Priests are the
common shame of the Church. True Charity would cover a multitude of them: but
to blaze and divulge them is to spread abroad the infamy of our Mother. And
yet this is the ordinary practice of these days: the Ministry is the common
butt against which they shoot the venomous arrows of their tongues. In all
meetings, at all tables, the Minister usually is the subject of their talk:
and it is counted among many a special mark of true religion and zeal with
open mouth to publish the faults, shall I say of inferior Ministers? Nay of
the cheifest fathers of the Church. Wherein also like butchers flies they
lightly pass over the whole and sound places, and seize only upon gals and
sores: that is, if they meet with an infirmity, that they are always buzzing
about, as for their graces and virtues, they are wrapped up in deep silence.
Physicians if they do but one good cure, grow famous thereby though they kill
twenty besides: we how many good things soever be in us, yet one lean Cow
swallows up the seven fat, and the least weakness is sufficient to disgrace
all. Weakness say I? Nay that which is counted weakness in others, is
traduced as wickedness in us: our frailties are furies, and every molehill is
made a mountain. So ready are they to speak the worst of us, and so loath to
say any thing that may credit our Calling.

If they will scarce vouchsafe us a good word, is it likely they will afford us
any Reverence in Gesture? 1. King. 18.7.
Act. 10.25.
Yet Obadiah the governor of king Ahabs house, meeting with the Prophet Eliah
fell on his face before him. Cornelius the Centurion upon S. Peter's coming to
him fell down at his feet. 1. Sam 28.14.
Even king Saul before him whom he conceaved to be Samuel, stooped with his
face to the ground and bowed himself. And Alexander the great when he saw
Iaddua the high Priest, Joseph. antiq. l. 11. c. 8.
alighted from his horse, and humbled himself with much reverence unto him.
But Constantine a greater then he when he entered into the Synod of Nice, bowed
himself very low unto the Bishops there assembled, and sat not down until
they desired him. Yea the very Gentiles themselves stood in such awe of their
Priests, that they durst not utter an obscene word, much less misbehaue
themselves in their presence. What think you? Shall not these one day rise up
in judgment against us Christians to condemn us? For now adays every petty
Gentleman looks for much duty from us, and takes it indignely if we stand not
bare before him, and worship him with cap and knee. If we expect the like
again, forsooth we are grown too proud: it is honor enough for us, if they
do but look upon us. Precedencie is any man's rather then the Ministers: every
Mammonist, every younger brother, every vpstart of the first head must have the
place from us. To the gay clothing every one says, Sit here in the best
room: but unto us, Stand thou there, Iam. 2.3.
or, Esa 3 5.
sit here under my footstool. Thus children behave themselves proudly against
the ancient, and the base against the honorable.

The last honor we claim, is bountiful and liberal maintenance. Mat 10.10.
For the labourer is worthy of his hire: and the mouth of the Ox, 1. Cor.
9.7.9.
that treads out the corn, must not be muzled. No man warreth at his own
charges: and he that feeds a flock, Genesis 47.22.
lives by it. Even the Egyptians and other Gentiles provided for their
Priests. God himself appointed Triths unto Levi (the morality of which I
dispute not at this time) besides Cities with their territories and sundry
other things of great value. The Ministry of the Gospel is more excellent
then that of the Law: less therefore cannot be allowed us. Tithe is too
little, says S. Augustine: else how do we exceed the Pharisees who tithed
all* If we minister spiritual things, reason will, Gal. 6.6.
that we receive of your temporalls. The law of the Gospel requires him that
is taught to impart to him that teaches of all his good. Philem. 19.
And reason, For as S. Paul says to Philemon, you owe your selves unto us. And
unless you under value too much the eternal salvation of your souls, ye can
never sufficiently recompense the benefit ye receive of us. It is manifest
then that an honorable salarie is due unto us. But how I beseech you are we
paid our due? Poorly God wot: witness the multitude of impropriations, the
selling of benefices, the detention of tithes, or the false and repining
payment of them, with the like. 1 Samuel 9.7.
It was once said, Psalm. 83.12.
What shall we give the man of God: Ex. 36 5.6.
but now every one says, Come let us take the houses of God in possession.
When Moses built the tabernacle, he was feign to stay the people from giving,
they were so forward: but now would God, we could stay their hands from
robbing the tabernacle. Many there are who call for a learned Ministry in every
parish: yet keep to themselves that which should maintain the Minister. A
strange perverseness, to desire no benefice may be without a cure, and yet to
require a cure without a benefice. Yea but they are content to allow a
Competencie. True. But if they may be our ^arvers, I presume it will be after
the rate of Cratis in his Ephemeris, La^ret. vit. crat. Theb.
ten pound to the Cook, a groat to the Physician, ten talents to the Parasite,
one to the Curtizan, and to the Philosopher three halfepence. For every little
is too much for us: and but enough is superfluity. Mat. 26.8.
Et quorsum perditio haec, what need all this wastes. The poverty of the
Apostles they often remember: but the bounty of Christians then they utterly
forget. If they will have us follow the one, why refuse they to imitate the
other? Act. 4, 3^ 35.
Let them sell all they have, and lay down the prizes at our feet, and then
have with them whenever they please.

But I press these points of Honor no farther: for me thinks I hear some
say, these words would have sounded better in some advocates mouth, in ours
they may seem to proceed of ambition or covetousness. Whereunto I answer,
first (...), if we speak not for our selves, who will? and if we do, alas
what are we? All other sorts of men are allowed to defend themselves: and must
we alone suffer wrong and say naught? Secondly, so to censure is a spice of
the contempt we speak of: for indeed we seek herein not so much our own
honor and advantage, as Gods glory and benefit. Gods glory, whose ordinance,
nay who himself by contemning us is contemn^d. 1 Samuel 8.7.
They have not rejected thee but me, Mal. 3.8.
says God to Samuel. Ye have robbed me in tithes and offerings, says he by
Malachie. He that despises you, Luc. 10.16.
despises me, says Christ. And lastly, He that despises, 1 These. 4.8.
despises not man but God. Your benefit. For to deny submission to those who
rule over you and watch for your souls, Heb 13.17.
is unprofitable for you, says the Apostle. For first as Barnard says, Ser^.
in die Pasch.
Cuius vita despicitur, restat vt praedicatio contemnatur: if once our persons
grow despicable, little will our preaching avail. If our preaching avail not,
neither can you believe, nor be saved. Secondly, to contemn a Minister is a
fearful sin: otherwise Hoseas would never have used this aggravation, Hos.
4.4.
the people were as they that contended with the Priest. 2 Chro. 36 16
Lastly, God punishes it accordingly: with temporal punishment, as upon the
Jew, with seaventy years captivity: Esa 6.9.
with spiritual, that hearing they shall hear, and seeing see, Act. 28.26.
yet neither perceive nor understand: and unless they repent, with eternal
also both in body and soul. But of the contempt of the Ministry enough: let us
now inquire the redress thereof.

See that no man despise thee, says my text. A strange speech. For do we
steer at the helm of other men's affections? Or have we the command of their
actions? Why then does he charge us to look to it that we be not despised?
Surely because we our selves are mostly the causes thereof, and for that it
lies much in our own hands both to prevent and redress it. To make this
appear, observe with me the words immediately going before my text, These
things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority: see that no man
despise thee. Observe with me again what Saint Paul says to Timothy, 1 Timothy
4.11.12.
These things command and teach: let no man despise thy youth, but be an
example unto believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in
faith, in purity. Which two places being duly pondered and considered, it is
manifest that the Apostles meaning here is no other then this, if we will not
be contemned, we must not carry our selves contemptibly, and that to avoid
this contempt, two things are necessary, first that we be Good ministers,
secondly that we be Good men: for if we fail in either, it cannot possibly
be avoided but we must be despised.

To avoid Contempt then, first we must be Good Ministers: and to this end two
things are requisite, first a talent, secondly due employment of the talent. By
talent I understand fitness and ability. And that this is necessary, appears
first by the act of God: for he never designeth any to a calling but he
furnishes him before hand with sufficient gifts. If Moses must be the chief
governor and lawgiuer of Israel, he shall be learned, yea even in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22.
aend mighty both in words and deeds. Exodus 31.2.3.4.5.6.
If Bezaleel and Aholiab must build the Tabernacle, he will fill them with his
spirit in wisdom, in understanding, in knowledge, in all manner of
workmanship, in gold, silver, brass, stone, timber, and what ever else was
needful. Esa. 9 67.8.
Esaias being to do an errand for the Lord, has his lips first touched with a
cole from the altar. Jesus the son of Mary being ordained to be the Messiah
of the world, Ps. 45.7.
is anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows, Act. 3.4.
and receives the spirit without measure. Finally the twelve Apostles being to
carry the name of Christ through the world, Ioh. 3.34.
were first baptized with fiery tongues and replenished with the holy Ghost at
Jerusalem. The same appears also by the ordinance of God in his Church. Mal.
2.7.
For the Priests lips (says Malachie) should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. 1 Timothy 3.2.
Saint Paul also says, that a Bishop must be (...) apt to teach: Tit. 1 9.
and able by sound doctrine both to exhort, and convince gainesaiers. And
seeing no work can well go forward without fit instruments, and the end of
the Ministry is to publish the Gospel, and to build up the body of Christ:
reason it self tells us, a Minister must have his aptness and fitness
thereunto. Aptness and fitness I say, though not exact and in the highest
measure, for then might we cry out with Saint Paul, (...), who is sufficient
for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.
Yet at least competent and in some tolerable measure, that they exceed the
ordinary sort of men, as the Sicle of the sanctuary does the common Sicle in
value.

This fitness if a Minister altogether want, how can he escape contempt? God
himself in contempt calls them Idol sheapherds, Esa. 56 10.
dumb dogs, blind watchmen, brute beasts. Ier. 10 21.
And indeed what are they but clouds without water, heads without brain, bells
without clapper, nurses without milk. Justly may they say with the prophet,
Ah, ah, Domine non possum loqui quia puer sum, Ier. 1.6.
ah Lord I cannot speak for I am a child. If a man that cannot read, should
take upon him to be professor in Greek or Hebrew, spectatum admissi risum
teneatis, could you abstain from laughter? Far more ridiculous is he who
being ignorant of all humanity, takes upon him to be a teacher in divinity.
Yet among these ignorants there are too many (...), Rev. 3.17.
proud beggars: Laodiceans who count themselves rich and of good wealth, 1 Timothy
1.7.
yet are wretched, and miserable, and poor. Who feign would be esteemed
Doctors of the law, yet understand neither what they say nor whereof they
affirm. Oratores novi, stulti, adolescentuli, vpstart, foolish, boy preachers:
of whom a man may truly say as he said of the nightingale, vox sunt praeterea
nihil they are nothing else but voice, right like unto Cameleons, all lungs and
no heart. Thus while some of them have mouths yet cannot speak, others speak
but nothing to the purpose: both make themselves ridiculous to the world, and
draw contempt upon their own heads. He that will be honored must have his
talent.

So must he also duly employ it. For the end of the talent is employment: and
he that has an office is bound to act and execute the duties thereof. When the
Lord of the family, Mat. 25.14.
as it is in the parable, dispensed his talents among his servants, to one five
to another two, to a third one: his intent was to receive his onwe again with
advantage. And S. Paul knowing that God had bestowed a great gift upon Timothy,
1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
charge him that he neglect it not: yea that he do (...), quicken up the
gift of God which is in him. 2. Tim. 4.5.
If Timothy be an Evangelist, he must do the work of an Evangelist, Romans
12.6.7.
and fulfill his Ministry. For the gift is given to enable a man in his
function: that every one may minister according to the grace given him. And
this he must not do slightly or profunctorily, but faithfully, painefully,
gravely. In preaching the word he must be instant in season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
out of season, reproving rebukeing, exhorting with all long suffering and
doctrine. So shall he prove himself a good Minister of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4
6. 2 Timothy 2.15.
and a workman that needs not to be ashamed. Honor shall crown his head:
and a good name shall he purchase among the Saints. But shame and contempt
shall surely pursue all those, Who having received their talent, aut nihil
agunt, aut non satis agunt, aut satagunt, either do nothing, or not enough, or
ever do the task. First those that do nothing: for the servant that dug
his talent in the earth, and employed it not, was censured by his Master for
wicked and slothful, Mat. 25 26.28 30.
had his talent taken from him. and for his unprofitableness was commanded
into utter darkness. 1 Timothy 5.17.
It is the Elder that rules well, and labors in the word and doctrine that is
worthy of double honor: the idler deserves none at all, no not so much as
single. He that will not labor must not eat: and he that will not work in
the vine-yeard must not look for his penny. Yea but they are so much employed
other ways that they have no leisure. What? No leisure to be Ministers? why
are they Ministers then? To feed upon the flock and not to feed it, is
little better then sacrilege: and argues a base, sordid, and contemptible
mind. Secondly that do something, but not enough: such as once perhaps in a
quarter shower down some short collation upon their people, and then suffer
them, a long time after to live like shellfish suo ^ibi succo, upon their own
liquor. Such also as are more frequent, but negligent withal: not caring what
they say, so they hold out their hour. If Fericles was careful not to speak
an idle word before the people, and Demosthenes wished his words before he
uttered them might be not only (...) written, but (...) graven: how much more
ought a Minister to be advised, before he open his mouth in the congregation?
What thou do, do with all thy might, Eccles. 5 1.
says the wise man: and cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, says the Prophet. If every one must look to his feet when he
goes to the house of God: much more must a Preacher to his tongue before he
enter into the pulpit. Otherwise he shall but offer up the sacrifice of
fools, and get contempt for his labor. Lastly, those who over do, or do
more then enough: such I mean as affect nothing else but quaint and curious
phrases, or are unmeasurable in their allegations out of all authors both
Ecclesiastical and profane, or sone aloft in unnecessary speculations far
above the capacity of their auditors. These over do, and magno conat^ magnas
nugas, take great pains, and eviscerate themselves, as it were, to weaue a
web, which when it is ended, is fit for no other use, but only as an
unprofitable thing to be swept away.

But here some happily will say, what? Are you an enemy to eloquent and learned
preaching? Or do you think it unlawful in Sermons to allege the sayings of
ancient Fathers and other writers? God forbid. For as touching eloquence,
although truth may be taught without it, yet as Lactantius says, magis
treditur ^r^^t ^ veritati, the more decently it is trimmed, the more readily is
it embraced. Neither can I well speak against it, but I must withal deny unto
Moses, David, Solomon, Esaias, Paul, and the rest of that holy order, apt
elocution, and the tongue of the learned. As for allegations, Saint P^^l
himself vouched the testimonies of Aratus, Menander, Epimenides. All truths
are Gods whosoever utter them, says Ambrose. If Philosophers have delivered
things that are true, we may challenge them from them as from unjust
possessors? Says Augustine. The captive woman's head being shaven, and nails
pared, we may take her to wife, says Hierome. Tyrians may help to build the
Temple: and David may behead Golias with his own sword. And as for humane
learning, it is not only lawful, but in some cases necessary. For as Logic
teaches (...), no man can demonstrate passing from one kind unto another: but
look to what science the terms of the question belong, from thence only are
proofs to be drawn. Which being so, how can I handle the question of Freedom
of will without natural Philosophy, whereunto that term belongs? And how
can I better demonstrate that the law Moral is written naturally in the heart,
then by the testimony of those men who were never by grace elevated above
nature? Wherefore if there be any who condemn the use of humane learning in
Sermons: it is says Gregory Nazianzene, because them selves are ignorant, and
would not have their ignorance espied. If this be your mind, will some yet say,
what is it then your dislike? First I dislike that that should be called
eloquence which is not so, as being neither approved by the precepts of those
who have written of Oratory, nor exampled by the practice of those who have bin
esteemed the most famous Orators. When holy Spiridion heard Triphyllius call
that (...) which our Savior called (...), though both words signified the same
thing, yet be sharply rebuked him saying, do thou think thou can speak
better then Christ himself? What would he have said, think you, if he had
heard Coton the French Jesuit preach of the Escalados of virtue, and the
Barricados of greedy desire, and call Jesus Christ the Dolphin of heaven?
Surely it is the language not of Babylon but of Canaan which the holy Ghost
has sanctified for the preaching of the Gospel. Secondly I mislike that
frothie conceits,, and witty vanities should be counted learning. For true
learning is substantial and real, bettering the understanding, and making the
heart wise: but these toys stand only in seeming, tickling the ear, and
making the head giddy, but never feeding the soul. Learning you may call it if
you please, 1. Tim. 6.20.
howbeit, as Saint Paul says, it is but (...), science falsely so called,
which he would have his Timothy carefully to avoid. Thirdly and lastly, it
displeases me, that herein they propound to themselves, not Gods glory, or the
edification of the Church, but their own praise and applause. To what end else
this vain ostentation, of wit, eloquence, reading, and all variety of
learning? Wherein first they prevaricate with Christ, pretending to woo the
souls of men unto Christ, but indeed intending to win reputation to
themselves. Secondly they fail the hope and expectation of their brethren, who
repairing to them for instruction, receive no more benefit by their Sermons,
then Caligulas guests did by his golden banquet, which only delighted the eye,
but neither pleased the palate, nor satisfied the stomach. Wise and wholesome
is the counsel of S. Hierome, when thou teach in the Church, non clamor
populi sed gemitus suscitetur, stir you up not the applause but the groans of
the people, lachrymae auditorum lauds tuae sint, let the tears of the
auditory be thy praises. If thou can with Peter prick the people at the
heart, Act. 2.37. Act. 24.25.
and make them say, Men and brethren what shall we do? If by discoursing of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, thou can make Felix
tremble, thou shall both glorify God, and procure honor unto thy self. But
if neglecting the glory of God, thou aim at nothing but thine own praise and
commendation: God will surely pour down contempt upon thee. For his mouth
has spoken it, 13. Sam. 2.0.
Them that honor me will I honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. Thus to avoid contempt, it is necessary we be good Ministers.

It is necessary also that we be Good men. Although intruth I see not how a man
can be a Good Minister, unless withal he be a Good man. For if he defined
rightly who said that an Orator is vir bonus dicendi peritus, a good man
skillful in pleading: what should let but I may as truly say, a Good Minister
is vir bonus docendi peritus, a good man well able to teach. And if the
Goodness of a man be principally discerned in the honest discharge of the
duties of his Calling: hardly can that Minister be a Good man, who does not
faithfully execute the office of his Ministry. Nevertheless to speak
distinctly of them, it is necessary, as we have said, for the avoiding of
Contempt, not only to be Good Ministers, but also Good Men, practicing in our
selves what we teach unto others, and framing our lives answerable to our
doctrine. This was typed by Aarons Vrim and Thummim which he was to carry in
the breast plate upon his heart: Exodus 28.30.
for the one betokened light and verity of doctrine, the other uprightness and
integrity of life. The same was also signified by the golden bells and
pomegranates hanging round about upon the hemme of his priestly vestment? b.
Ib. 33.34.
for the bells are no other then the sound of wholesome preaching, and the
pomegranats, then the fruits of good living. As it was typed in the old
Testament, so is it expressly commanded in the new. St Paul instructing Timothy
and Titus how a Bishop should be qualified, requires of him that be be not
only (...), apt to teach, but also (...), blameless and faultlesse. 2. Tim. 3
2.3.
Neither so only, Tit 1.7.8.
but that in all things he show himself also a pattern of good works. Id.
2.7.
And with him agrees St Peter, who charge those that are Elders that they be
(...), 1. Pet. 5.3.
Samplers unto their Flock. And whenever in Scripture a Minister is commanded
to teach or feed the people of God, it is intended, if we may believe ancient
Fathers, that they do it by all means: and therefore not only by preaching
sound doctrine, but also by leading an exemplarie life. If all the faithful
must shine with good works as lights in the world: Phil. 2.15.
Mat. 5.14.
how much more they who by office are the very lights of the world? He was a
wise natural man who said Longum iter per praecepta, breue and efficax per
exempla: the course by precept is long and tedious, but short and effectual by
example. And he was no fool that said, he had rather see one Calanus willingly
put himself into the fire, then hear a Philosopher read a hundred Lectures of
patience. For indeed, as St Bernard says, validior est vox operis quam oris,
works persuade more powerfully then words. Tetrastich.
And therefore with Gregory Nazianzen do I say to thee, o Minister, whatsoever
thou be, (...), Either teach me not at all, or let thy holy life teach me: why
drawest thou me thus with one hand, and put me off with the other? They
iested anciently at those who were Philosophers (...), in their sayings, but
not in their doings. And the Poet could say, Odi homines ignaua opera and
philosopha sententia, I detest those men whose mouths are full of the rules of
Morality, yet practice none of them. But in a Minister of the Gospel it is yet
a fouler incongruity if their words and works disagree. When Demades saw king
Philip dancing, I wonder o Philip, quoth he, seeing thou bear the person of
a King, that thou do the works of Thersites. Much more rightly may I say of
these, I marvel that having taken upon them the office of Phinees, with what
face they can act the part of Zimri. Impudent beyond measure must they needs
be, who being guilty (none more) of drunkenness, adultery, blasphemy, and the
like, yet lift up their voices like trumpets, and presume in open pulpit
bitterly to inveigh against the same sins in others. Every one will say to
such a one, Medice cura teipsum, Physician heal thy self: (...), you take
upon you to cure others being your selves full of boyles and ulcers. It is
altogether preposterous for a strumpet to take upon her the reformation of the
stews. Manus quae sordes abluit munda esse debet, says Gregory: the hand had
need to be clean that cleanses other things. The Spartans when an evil man
gave them good counsel, caused an honest man to say the same, and then
embraced it. Ps. 50.16.17.
What speak I of Spartans? God cannot abide that a wicked man hating to be
reformed, should once take his covenant in his mouth. A more dangerous
pestilence then a lewd Minister there cannot be: the contagion of his life
quickly infecteth, every one thinks it not only lawful, but safe also to
follow his guide. And thus I fear do they many times reason, the Preacher
indeed earnestly disswades from sin, and persuades unto sanctity of life,
threatening hell unto the one, and promising heaven unto the other: but if he
believed verily that there is a heaven or a hell, do you think he would live
such a deboisht and dissolute life as he does? He knows well enough what he
does, none better: let us do as he does, eat and drink and be merry, for to
morrow we shall die. And thus Hophni and Phinees behauing themselves like the
sons of Belial, are the very causes of Atheism and profaneness in the
world, and by this means draw contempt not only on themselves, but also upon
the sacrifices and religion of God. But contrarily, whosoever, says our
Savior Christ, Mat. 5.19.
shall do the commandments of God himself, and teach others to do them too,
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven: Of such a one it will be
reported that God is in him of a truth. 2 Cor. 14.25.
The Saints will receive him as an Angel of God, Gal. 4.14.15.
even as Christ Jesus, and be ready to pluck out their eyes to give them to
him. As for others, he cannot but find approuement in their consciences: for
as the wise heathen said, Sen.
Adeo gratiosa est virtus, vt insitum etiam malis sit, probare meliora, so
gracious a thing is virtue, that even wicked men by the instinct of nature
allow and commend that which is good. And thus much of the third and last part,
the redress of our contempt. Now it remains before I dismiss you, briefly to
make some particular application.

And here, though I well might, yet will I not extend my exhortation farther
then our Apostle does his: he restrains his to Titus, that is to the
Minister, so will I mine. First therefore, if according to our hopes and
desires we might now have enjoyed the presence of the reverend Father of this
Diocese, I would humbly have entreated him to See that Titus be not despised.
That to this end he would have special care whom he admits into this holy
order: for Non ex quolibet ligno fit Mercurius, every man is not fit to make a
Minister. Far be it from so reverend a Bishop, 1 King. 12 31.
either with Jeroboam to make Priests of the basest of the people, Sue^. Calig.
c. 55.
or with Caligula to destinate his horse Incitatus to the Consulship. That also
he would be pleased to bear an eye upon those that are already admitted, to
countenance those that walk worthy of their places, and severely to censure
such as either by their idleness or misliuing scandalize their profession. But
I repress my self, and from him that is absent turn my speech unto you that
are present and have delegate power and authority from him. You, and those that
depend upon you; do I earnestly beseech, to see to it also, that Titus be not
despised. Good reason have I thus to beseech you: for your exorbitations and
abuses redound to the dishonor of your Lord, though he neither act them nor
approve them, and from him descend to the skirts of his clothing, us his
inferior Ministers. Shall I tell you a story? Erasm. de rat. concionandi l. 1.
David son to Philip the good Duke of Burgundy, being Bishop of Vtrecht,
would needs one day, not by his Poser but by himself, make trial of those
that offered themselves to holy orders: and finding them insufficient rejected
all but three. His officers therewith offended said, it would be a foul shame
to the Church, if of three hundred three only should be admitted. To whom the
Bishop, it would be a fouler shame, if instead of men asses might be admitted.
Yea but, say they, this age breeds not Paul's and Hieroms, you must take such as
it affords. I require not such quoth the Bishop, but asses will I not admit.
Then must you increase our wages, say they, for by such asses do we live.
Thus you see that inferior officers sometime commit errors which the superiors
know not of, wherewith notwithstanding he is charged: and that they seek more
their own advantage, then the dignity either of the Church or the Churches
Ministry. Ser. 7^.
It was the complaint of Saint Bernard in his time that Church officers studied
more how to empty men's purses, then to reform their vices. I fear these times
are little better, and that our money is rather visited then our manners: so the
fees come in roundly, no matter how irregularly men live. O that your
principal aim were to redress abuses, and to remove scandalls out of the
Church* how precious would your name be among the Saints? and what honor
might you gain both to Church and Churchmen? What shall I farther say? No more
but this. Your Courts are called Christian: God grant your carriage may be so
Christian in them, that they may ever truly be as they are called.

My last address shall be to you my brethren and fellows in the Ministry,
whom I adjure in the name of Jesus Christ, Act. 20.2^.
carefully to see that no man despise you. And to this end, Hoc agite, Take
heed both to your selves, and the flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you overseers. To your selves, that you may prove Good men; to your flocks,
Mat. 19.6.
that you may approve your selves Good Ministers. Either by it self will not
serve the turn: what God has joined together, may not be put asunder: Live
you never so uprightly, yet if either you want a talent, or having one you
employ it not, it profits you nothing. Again have you never so rich a
talent, and employ it never so diligently, yet if your life answer not your
doctrine, it avails you nothing. Either through your inability, or idleness,
or wickedness, you murder the souls of men: Mat. 13.1^.
and God will require their blood at your hands. What he has given you he will
surely take from you: and when it is gone you cannot but grow worse and worse;
until you rise to the height to impiety, and plunge your selves into the
bottomless pit of everlasting perdition. It is a fearful speech of Saint
Chrysostom, Quis vnquam Clericum lapsum paenitentem vidit? Who ever saw a
Minister recover himself after his fall by repentance? And indeed it is but
seldom seen. For the sins that are single in others being double in him, and
an idle word in an others mouth being as it were blasphemy 'in his: Barn.
God punishes him more rigorously then he does others. When once he gives
over the conscience of his calling, the spirit of God departs from him as he
did from Saul: 1 Samuel 16.14.
and then look what degree of excellency he held before, into the same degree
of baseness he degenerates afterward. The strongest wine turns into the
sharpest vinegar: and the noblest Angels sinning became the vgliest Devils.
Mat. 5.13.
In like manner is it with us. And if we who are the Salt of the earth, once
loose our savor, wherewithal shall we be seasoned? Luc 14.35.
We are thenceforth good for nothing, neither for the land nor the dunghill,
but only to be cast out, and trodden under foot of men. Take we heed therefore
that we dishonor not God, least he dishonor us: Exodus 20.5.
for our God is a jealous God, and his honor is as dear unto him as the apple
of his eye. If we bear both Vrim and Thummim in our breastplates, and carry
our selves in his sight both as Good Ministers, and Good men: neither shall we
any way dishonor him, neither shall we be causes of contempt upon our selves,
but shall exactly and perfectly observe this Apostolical charge, See that no
man despise thee. Yea but will some say, when ye have done all ye can do,
and have performed the will of God on earth, as the Angels do in heaven, yet
can you not escape contempt from all, but some will still despise you. Grant
it. Yet for all this Ne pudeat Evangelij, Romans 1 16.
let us not be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. for it is the power of God
unto salvation. If it proceed of Ignorance, because they know not the worth of
the Ministry: let us say with our Savior Christ. Father forgive them for they
know not what they do. Luke 23.34.
If parents bear much with froward children, and Physicians with their
frantic patients: why should not we pardon much more unto those, whose
souls we hope by the grace of God to save? If it be of wilfulness, then let
us put on the greater mind, and with the Emperor Severus, While we are
careful of doing our duties, little care what others say of us. Let them spit
against Heaven as long as they list, it will surely fall down in their own
faces again. Their perverse judgments are to be neglected, and ad honesta
vadenti contemnendus est hic contemptus, Sen.
of all them that aim at a Crown of Glory this contempt must be contemned. If
wicked and sinful men should honor us, we had reason to suspect our selves,
least all were not well with us: but if they despise us, we have cause to
think the more honorably of our selves. God cease not to be good though it
seem not so unto some: Neither is the Sun dark because blind eyes see not
the light thereof. Let ignorant and lewd wretches think as they please, yet
maugre them all, our calling is of all other the most honorable: and we our
selves if we be both Good Ministers and Good Men deserve of all double honor.
Which if we cannot obtain of some, Mat. 11.19.
yet shall wisdom still be justified of her own children. Our own
consciences, the Saints of God, his blessed Angels shall honor us: yea, as
the Prophet speaks, Esa. 49.5.
we shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and our God shall be our
strength, v. 4.
with him is our reward. He will make us rulers over many things here, Mat.
25.2^.
and in the next world enter us into eternal Joy. For as Daniel says, with
whose comfortable words I conclude this exercise, They that be wise shall shine
as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
as the stars for ever and ever.

FINIS.
THE DOVE-LIKE SERPENT.

OXFORD* Printed by I. L. for E. F. 1633.

MAT. 10.16. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents and innocent as Doves.
FOR the better guiding and ordering of our actions in regard of those offices
which we are to perform each unto other, our Savior in the Gospel has given
this exact and perfect rule, Do as you would be done unto. Which rule the
Emperor Alexander Severus though a Heathen so approved and admired, that he
caused it to be engraven in his Palaces and all public buildings, and in
public executions, also the Crier was commanded to proclaim, Quod tibi fieri
non vis alteri ne feceris: do not to another what ye would not have done to
your selves. Breefly, so much was this sentence applauded and esteemed, that at
length it was related as a maxim or principle into the Civil law. But here
happily some will say, that it would not be amiss to practice this rule
toward all, if a man might find the like measure of charity from others
again: but if others offer wrongs, and indignities unto me, may not I return
like for like? For the better direction of our affections in such cases, our
Savior here prescribes another most excellent and absolute rule, Be ye wise
as Serpents and innocent as Doves: a sentence worthy to be engraven not only in
Princes Palaces and places of public judgment, but even in the hearts and
consciences of all true Christians. For it is as if he should say in regard of
the evils ye may otherwise suffer. Be ye wise as Serpents, but in regard of
your own practice, be ye innocent as Doves. And of this Text at this time,
it being as I suppose both seasonable and profitable: yet breefly considering
the many and important businesses to succeed.

All I have to say touching these words may be reduced to two heads, first
Christ's counsel, secondly the limitation of the practice of it. Christ's
counsel is, Be wise: the limitation, Be innocent: both expressed by way of
allegory or Similitude, the Counsel, be wise as serpents, the limitation, Be
innocent as Doves. The meaning of all ye shall the better conceive, if ye
give me leave in the person of Christ thus to paraphrase it, I do indeed
advise you for avoiding of danger and securing of your selves to be as wise
and wari^ as serpents: but least ye should mistake me, know that I permit
not unto you an unlimited wisdom to compass your designs by what means
soever. No, I would have you so to be serpents as ye cease not to be Doves, so
to be wise as ye remain also innocent. Be you Serpent-like Doves and
Doue-like Serpents, wisely innocent, and innocently-wise. Now of the parts in
order, if first by your patience I premise a word or twain of the ground of
this Oracle, occasioned thereunto by the illatiue practice Therefore, Be ye
therefore wise as Serpents.

This illatiue argues the sentence to be a conclusion inferred upon some
premises. That which Christ has premised is this, I send you as sheep among
wolves. What is that? It is interpreted in the next verse following my Text,
Beware of men. Before they were (...), Wolves, now (...) Men, which if ye
join together it makes (...), Men-wolues, that is men of a wolvish nature and
disposition. For although no man would wish unto himself the body of a beast:
yet too too many are contented to assume unto themselves the qualities of
beasts, and in the shape of men to carry about with them wolvish natures, in
ravin, savageness, cruelty and preying upon poor innocent sheep. Seeing
therefore ye are to live among such Wolves, Be wise as serpents.

True it is that in the golden age, as Poets feign, or rather in the state of
innocence and integrity without all fiction the old proverb was true, Homo
homini Deus, one man was a God unto another. For before man ambitiously
affected to be a God, he was like unto God, and as the coin of God bare his
image and superscription. And therefore as God being essentially good,
according to the nature of good communicated of his goodness unto all
creatures, and specially unto man so man partaking of Gods goodness was not
envious of it, but freely imparted it unto others. (...), neitther does the
fountain say drink not, not the autumn gather not: and man being made a
fountain as it were and autumn of Gods blessing denied not the use and
benefit of them unto others. But that gold soon degenerated into hard iron,
and man as soon ceased to be as God. For the Serpent stung him to the heart,
and transfused into every vein of his soul a most deadly venom and poison
whereby his spiritual life was utterly killed: and then instead of the old
proverb Homo homini Deus, one man is a God unto another, began a new proverb,
one man is a wolf unto another, Homo hominilupus, as appears by that woluish
fact of Cain even in the infancy of the world murdering his own brother. And
although about the time of the flood the world were yet in its minority* yet as
the scripture affirms men were waxen Giants in cruelty and inhumanity.
Neither may we think that as the world grew elder it waxed better, for
experience has found it too true, Aetas parentum pejor avis cu^it Nos
nequiores mox daturos Progeniem viti^siorem, the time of our parents is worse
then that of our grandfathers, we are worse then our parents, and we shall
leave behind us a posterity worse then our selves.

The Prophet indeed says that in the latter days, The Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid, Es. 11.6.7.8.
and the Lion with the Calfe, and the Bear with the Cow, etc. as if men then
should put off their wolvish natures and become innocent Lambs or Doves: But
this is not to be understood universally of all, but only of those Wolves and
ravenous beasts which are tamed by the spirit of God, and dwell in the
mountain of his holiness, among whom is the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace* Ephesians. 4.3.
although even in these also, as the Poet speaks, Pauca quide^ superant
pristae vestigia fraudis, some relics of the old leven still remain. For
being but in part regenerate, no marvel if from the principle of flesh
inhabiting in them some inordinate and inconsiderate actions at times proceed.
Otherwise we find the prophecy of the holy Apostle duly fulfilled, who
foretold, that in the last days men should be without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, in temperate, fierce, despisers of them that
are good, 2. Tim. 3.3.4.
traitors, heady, high-minded. And does not this fullness of iayles, this
abundance of law-quarrels, these tyrannies and oppressions of the poor
plainly argue, that although wolves are long ago banished out of this Island,
yet of Men-wolues there still remains too great store and plenty.

Now yet happier were it for the poor sheep if these Wolves did show
themselves only in their own cases: but so it is many times they put on the
sheep fell. And therefore if it be true which one says, Perierat innocentia
si prudens esset nequitia, innocence had perished long ago if wickedness had
been cunning, the greater danger to poor innocents. A hard thing is it to
escape Ioabs stab when his salutation shall be, how do thou my Brother, or
Judas treason when it is smoothed over with a kiss and an all hail, or Herod's
butchery when he pretends to worship the Infant. So that is most true which
Solomon says that Daily we walk in the midst of snares, and that as our
Savior says, We are sent abroad as so many sheep among wolves. Now then in
regard of these manifold and great dangers what course are we to take? Must we
be simple as asses to bear all wrongs? Or make our selves as butts for every
one to shoot the arrows of his injuries against us? Not so: for so doing we
should but invite men to lay more load upon us then in the end we should be
able to bear. and if thieves, as the Poet speaks, rise up at midnight to rob
and kill men, vt teipsum serves non expergisceris? should not we speedily
shift us of our beds to save and preserve our selves? The best rule then that
we can follow is this of our Saniours, Be ye therefore wise as Serpents: for
now I come to the first part which is the counsel.

And here it were easy for me to play the Physiologer in discoursing at large
of the nature of a Serpent, and the Moral Philosopher in reading unto you a
lecture of Prudence. But so doing I should much forget the place where I
stand, namely the chair of Divinity, transgressing that maxim and principle
that Parables and Allegories are no farther to be urged then the author
himself intended to extend them. And therefore although it be no difficult
matter to find out many witty resemblances betwixt the nature of a Serpent and
a wise Christian, yet I leave them all to such as love such witty
impertinences, and will keep my self to the plain meaning of Christ. In
every similitude, are contained either expressly or inclusiuely two
propositions, which Artificers call (...) and (...) Proposition and Reddition.
In this similitude the Proposition is this, As serpents are wise, the
Reddition, so ought ye also to be wise. So that first I am to speak of the
one, and then in the second place of the other.

That Serpents are naturally wise and subtle, Moses witnesses saying that the
Serpent was the subtilest beast of the field: Genesis 3.1.
and the act of the Devil also argues as much in that he made special choice
of the Serpent, as the fittest instrument to beguile the Woman. Whereupon in
some languages they use to say by way of proverb, He is wiser then a Serpent.
Now the wisdom of the Serpent is double either Offensive or Defensive.
Offensive whereby he is cunning to hurt man. For there being a natural
Antipathy betwixt the Serpent and Man, and the Serpent knowing well that Man
bears him a deadly hatred, he seeks all opportunities, and lies in ambush
as it were to take his advantage to sting him by the heel. This appears by
the sentence of God passed upon them both, He shall break thy head and thou
shall bruise his heel: Genesis 3.15.
as also by that of old Jacob. Genesis 49.17.
Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder by the path, biting the horse
heels, so that the rider shall fall backward: Eccl. 10.11.
and finally that of Solomon, If the serpent bite when he is not charmed no
better is a babbler. His Defensive wisdom is whereby he is cunning to defend
and preserve himself. For first, if he sees a Man whom he knows to be his
enemy, forthwith he hastneth away into his hole to safeguard himself.
Secondly, if he cannot so escape, he foldeth all his train about his head, to
preserve it as wherein his life principally consists. Lastly, if enchanters
go about to charm him, he lays one of his ears close to the ground, and
stops the other with his tail, to the end he may not hear their charms
and callings, in regard whereof says David, they are like the deaf adder that
stops his ear, which hears not the voice of the inchanter though he be
most expert in charming. These and other such things show his Defensive
wisdom: so that the Serpent both offensiuely and defensiuely is very wise
which is the Protasis or Proposition.

The Reddition is, Be ye also as wise. What Offensiuely as wise? I know many
that are of vindictiue and revengefull spirits would be glad to be warranted
in their humor by Christ's counsel. But such wisdom cannot be here meant,
inasmuch as it cannot stand with that which our Savior presently adds Be
innocent as Doves. What is it then? Saint Augustine elegantly thus expresses
it, Esto^e astuti non studio nocendi fed noc^n^^s cavend^* be ye wise not to
do hurt, but to avoid those that would do hurt. So that the maine doctrine
and rule is this, That it is lawful, yea expedient and requisite in dangers
and troubles prudently and warily to decline and avoid them.

Need I to spend time in proving of this? does not the very instinct of nature
command it unto all creatures? We see how the hound flies before the hound, and
uses many natural sleights and stratagems to escape the danger: so does the
Partridge also to avoid the talons of the Falcon. Yea even in senseless
creatures may we observe the same: The fire flees from the air upward to
preserve it self in its element, and heavy things fall downward as knowing
they are not well till they are in their proper place. But in man it is much
more seen: for even in sudden perils when a man has no leisure to think of
avoiding them, if a blow be reached at him, the hand naturally and of it
self, will put it self forth or lift it self up to guard him. And indeed to
this end has nature instilled into man a love toward his own self: for as
the Philosopher says (...), every man naturally is a friend to himself.
Whereupon the schoolmen say Charitas incipit a seipso, charity ever begins at
a man's own self: and where this self-love is, it must needs breed a natural
desire to preserve himself. Besides this love nature has put into him fear
also, fear of whatsoever evil would either hurt or destroy him. Now fear as
the same Philosopher teaches is (...) a preserver: whereupon the woman because
she is ordained to keep and preserve things at home, is made more fearful
then the man. And for this cause also has God put his fear into the heart of
all his Saints to preserve them from that horrible and dangerous sin of
Apostasy and falling away from him, as the Prophet says. So that Fear is as
it were the sentinel of the heart, because danger makes it vigilant, and the
nature thereof is contrary to security. Lastly besides this love and fear,
there is in man an understanding also and a memory, out of which is bred
Experience, and from experience proceeds the moral habit of Prudence, by which
man is enabled against dangers both to foresee them and to prevent them. For
Prudence, as Cicero says, is ars vivendi vt medicina valetudinis, the art of
living as physic is of health. And what does all this argue but that it is
man's duty to preserve himself? For as men have been most provident and
circumspect this way, so have they ever been counted and esteemed most Prudent.

Unto this instinct of nature, may we add the warrant of the Gospel. For
Grace takes not away nature, but subordinates nature unto it self: and
according to the rule of Logicians, subordinata non pugnant, things subordinate
one unto another, do not destroy one the other. Now that the Gospel of grace
allows it as well as the law of nature is manifest: for does not Christ
himself allow it nere when he says be wise as serpents? Does he not say when
they persecute you in one city fly into another? verse. 23.
Does not Saint Paul also give us this caveat, beware of dogs, beware of
concision? And advize us elsewhere to walk wisely, to walk warily, to walk
circumspectly: and again, Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much evil, 2 Timothy 4.14.15
of whom also do thou beware. Many counsels to this effect have were in the
Proverbs of Solomon, among the rest let this one serve for all, Prove. 17.1^.
A prudent man sees the plague and hides himself, but the foolish man goes
on still and is punished. Conformable unto these rules, has the practice of
the Saints of God ever been. Noah to avoid the danger of the flood builds an
arc and puts himself into it. Joseph in Egypt lays up store of corn against
the dear years to avoid famishing. Joseph and Mary with their young babe,
retire into Egypt to avoid the fury of Herod. David wisely provideth for
himself to escape all the snares and plots of Saul. Christ himself carefully
seeks to deliver himself from the treacherous designs of his malicious
enemies. And memorable is the policy of Saint Paul, who by professing himself
to be a Pharisee, set the Pharisees and Saducees by the ears that himself
the while might escape them both who both else would have set against him.

But some man perhaps will say, what need so many words to prove so clear a
case? give us rather some direction how we may keep our selves (...) without
gunshot. Hic labor, hoc opus est, this indeed is the point of difficulty, and
if I should attempt it in this wise auditory, happily some one or other would
tax me to be as wise as Phormio, who presumed to discourse of military service
in the presence of Hannibal the expertest captain of that time. Neither dare I
therefore nor will I adventure upon this argument farther then my text leads
me, and that briefly, pointing only with my finger to the fountains. Be wise,
says our Savior Christ as Serpents. How is that? First the Serpent by
natural instinct knows man to be his mortal enemy, and that principally he
aims at the breaking of his head, and therefore carefully provides for it. So
should we wisely seek out who are ill affected toward us, and which way they
purpose to assault us: that we may be the more able to prevent them. Sagitta
praevisa facilius evitatur, the arrow foreseen is easily declined, and it is
easy to countermine when we know which way the mine is carried. Watchfulness
then and observation is here required. Again, the Serpent, as we have showed,
stops his ears because he will not hear the enchanters charm. So should we
also turn the deaf ear unto the crafty insinuations of false and treacherous
Sinons. Blessed is he that fears always says Solomon: for distrust is the
sinews of wisdom says the Poet, and bonum est timere omnia vt nihil
timeamus, it is good to fear all things that we may fear nothing. Credulity
is the bane of honest hearts, but it is wisdom timere Danaos and dona
ferentes, to fear an enemy speak he never so fair. Charity you will say is
not suspicious: true, without a cause. But when there is cause, wisdom
requires us to be Diffident and Distrustful. Lastly the Serpent being
assaulted uses the best shift he can either by covering his head, or by
flight to save himself. So should we also in all dangers use such lawful
means as are offered us to free our selves. It is not sufficient to say Dij
prohibebunt haec, God will help all: nunquam propter te de coelo descendent,
tibi dent mentem oportet vt prohibeas, if thou sit idle he will never come
down from heaven to help thee, thou must have a mind to help thy self. To
pray unto God for averting dangers without using the means is to tempt God,
and to enwrap our selves farther into danger. But I will proceed no farther in
this point, nor read a lecture of wisdom unto those that are far wiser then
my self: and it may be some are liker to go too far then to come too short
in these matters. I will therefore pass from hence unto the second part, which
is the Limitation, if first I may by your patience briefly apply this.

This doctrine condemns the great foolishness of those who care not to use
caution in any thing, nor toward off any thrust whatsoever is aimed at them.
Such was the error of Tertullian in ancient times, who held it unlawful to fly
in time of persecution: and such is the peevishness of Anabaptists in these
days, who think it unchristian to defend themselves from wrongs and injuries,
making themselves outlawes both to God and man, and refusing the benefit of any
law. But stark frantic and mad are they who like Caecias love to draw clouds
and tempests on their own heads: right Ishmaels whose hands being against all
men, draw all men's hands against themselves, provoking and exasperating
oftentimes those that are too mighty for them until they be crushed for their
labor. More wisdom certainly were it to follow the wise counsel of our
Savior Christ to be wise as Serpents, and to make friends even of the wicked
Mammon, if for no other cause yet for a Ne noceat that they do us no hurt.

And as this wisdom is to be practiced in regard of temporal dangers and
such as concern the body, so much more in regard of spiritual dangers and
such as concern the soul. Nam pretium pars haec corpore maius habet, the
soul is of greater value then the body: for if the body dye, yet does the
soul live, and the body shall be reunited to it, happily to live with it
eternally: but if the soul perish, the body cannot live but must dye with it
for evermore. Oh then, my brethren, seeing our poor souls are every hour in
danger, the flesh see^ing to betray us, the world to entrap us, the Devil to
devour us, seeing so many wolvish Jesuits and Seminaries walk about in
ship-skins using all art and cunning to deceive us, and to draw us from the
faith of Christ, unto the service of Antichrist: let us that are the children
of light labor to be as wise in our generation as they are in theirs, and as
they are astuti Serpents studio nocendi, c^afty serpents to hurt, so let us be
prudentes sicut Serpents studio nocentes cavendi, wise as serpents in keeping
our selves from being hurt by them. Let us not be in alijs rebus cauti in
maximis negligentes, wary in petty matters, and retchles in the greatest, least
we be found too much to prize this present life, and quae vera vita sit
ignorare, and to be ignorant of the true life.

But specially ought this wisdom to be practiced by public persons, and such
as have the managing of state businesses, because public evils are ever more
dangerous then private. In his moderat Ans. and Mitig.
Father Parsons, a deep politician forsooth, in the judgment of Papists,
would not have statesmen go about to prevent ensuing dangers because they are
only Contingent and nothing else but a May, to the end I think that their
trecheries, and intended treasons might not be looked into nor discovered. But
whatsoever this cheating Mountebanke affirm, it behooves all public persons
carefully to prevent future mischiefs, and to take heed that the commonwealth
incur no danger. The neglect of this wisdom is a certain forerunner of
destruction. Vell Pater^.
Cuiuscunque fortunam mutare constituit Deus consilia corrumpit: whose state
God means to change, their wisdom he first takes away. God grant therefore
unto his Majesty, and to his council, and all that are in public place under
him to be wise as serpents for the prevention of all such evils as threaten
our state. The late divelish powdertreason assures us that the endless malice
of Hell and Rome will ever be working against us: and that therefore we ought
with all providence to stop and countermine them. And so much for the first
part which is Christ's counsel. Be wise as Serpents.

The next is the limitation of this wisdom for it is not boundless and
infinite, but as unto the sea, so unto it also terms are set which it may not
pass. Pone modum Prudentiae, set a measure to thy wisdom, Prove. 23.4.
says Solomon. (...), be not wise above that thou ought to be wise, says
Saint Paul. And the Philosopher makes it an extreme of Wisdom (...), to be
wise above measure. What then is the measure, what is the limit of wisdom? Be
Serpents, says our Savior, yet Doves, be wise yet innocent: Be ye wise as
Serpents and innocent as Doves. Be innocent, (...), a word derived from the
privatiue particle ae, and the verb (...), and signifying simple without
mixture: or from the same (...), and (...) a horn signifying Harmless or
Hurtlesse. The Syrian translation turns it (...) perfect, entire, upright,
Tota innocentia, says Augustine, ad vnum verbum Iustitiae redigitur, innocence
is nothing else but justice: and elsewhere. Innocentia est quae nemini nocet
nec nocere velit, innocence is that which neither does nor will hurt any. Be
innocent then, and innocent as doves. Not as serpents in the winter time, which
though they sting nor then being benumbed with cold, yet are full of venom but
as Doves which are utterly void of malice, and have no desire to hurt. For the
nature of the Dove is described in this one Distich, Est sine fell, gemit,
rostro non laedit, and vngues Possidet innocuos, puraque grana legit, she is
without gall, mourns, hurts not with her bill, has harmless claws, and
feeds on pure grain. So that all these things considered, Doue-like innocence
consists in these three things, first to do no hurt, secondly to do all
good, thirdly to do both with all sincerity. To do no hurt that we be not
vicious, to do all good or else we are not virtuous, and to season all with
sincerity or else it is counterfeit virtue and so double iniquity. And these
duties are to be performed not only to those that are of the household of
faith by reason of that mystical union that is betwixt us and them in Christ,
but generally also unto all men being made of the same moulds, and united into
the brotherhood of the same blood. So then Innocence is unto Wisdom as
Hercules pillars beyond which it may not pass, and our Savior allows men to
be wise with Innocence and for Innocence but not against it.

But what if by Innocence I cannot escape the danger, must I still persist in
mine Innocence? If Jobs wife may be judge she will say, Do thou still
continue in thine uprightness? Blaspheame God and dye. Job. 2.9.
But Job tells her in so saying she is but a foolish woman. verse. 10.
For the law of God is eternal, immutable, inflexible, and the breach thereof
is sin, and the least sin is greater then the greatest of other evils, as
being most repugnant unto the nature of God, and therefore most odious unto
him. In regard whereof the true Saints of God would not for a million of lives
forgo their Innocence. David though he had both opportunity and power, yet
would he not to secure himself lay hands on Saul: 1 Samuel 24.14.
according to the ancient proverb, says he, let wickedness proceed from the
wicked, but my hand shall not be upon him. Though he kill me, yet will I trust
in him, says Job. If I perish I perish says Hester, when she was to do a
necessary but dangerous duty. We are not careful to answer thee in this
matter, neither will we worship thy Idols, say the three children though
threatened otherwise to be cast into a fiery furnace. And the prince of Conde
being commanded of three things to choose one, either perpetual imprisonment,
or death, or to go to Mass, Mass quoth he, I never will, the other two I
leave to the Princes pleasure. But what speak I of Saints? Even heathen men
acknowledge that Innocence is to be held notwithstanding all outward evils.
It is better says Socrates, to suffer then to do wrong. There are some
things, says Aristotle, to which a good man must never suffer himself to be
constrained, but rather endure all extremities, yea death it self. Whereupon
Socrates, I would rather dye a thousand times then forsake my station. And
another, the veriest coward in the world am I to do evil: and yet another, it
is not the part of a virtuous man to say, this I will not suffer, but this I
will not do. And Fabritius obtained that honorable testimony of his enemy
Pyrrhus, that the Sun would sooner go out of his course, then he stray out
of the way of honesty. So that by the testimony both of nature and grace, the
law of innocence is no Lesbian rule, flexible to all occasions: but according
to the old saying Fiat justitia and ruant caeli, justice must be done though
upon doing the same heaven and earth come together.

If this be so, will some men say, how then can we be both wise and innocent
at once? Very well, for as Ambrose says, individuum justitiae and prudentiae
contubernium, wisdom and innocence are inseparable companions. For first a man
cannot be truly innocent except he be wise. For in all virtuous actions
Prudence of necessity must be the director, seeing it is the eye of the soul,
without which nothing can be done cum electione and modo upon choice and in
measure. Whereupon says Aristotle, (...), it is impossible to be good without
wisdom. Secondly, neither can a man be wise without innocence. For although
there be a wisdom equivocally so called by reason of the resemblance it has
with the true wisdom, being able both to find out and to menage convenient
means unto worldly and evil ends: yet this Saint Paul calls the wisdom of
the flesh, and Saint James, an earthly, sensual, and divelish wisdom. But the
true wisdom is from above, and therefore pure, peaceable, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without judging, and without
hypocrisy, that is in one word innocent. Hence is it that the Scripture
terms Sinners Fools because they are not innocent: and the fear of the
Lord (...) the top of wisdom because it is Innocent. Hence also it is that
Moses tells the Israelites their wisdom consisted in observing the
commandments of God: and that David says, by them he became wiser then his
teachers, wiser then the ancients. And the same David having advised Princes
and Judges to be wise and learned, adds presently kiss the son,
intimating thereby that wisdom cannot be without religious innocence. So that
as innocence cannot be without wisdom, so neither can a man be wise without
innocence. And here in the very light of nature accords also with scripture.
(...), says Aristotle, it is impossible for a man to be wise and not good, and
Cicero says that dishonest men may be callidi and ve^ suti subtle and crafty,
but Prudentes wise they can never be. The reason is evident, because
whatsoever is not just is not profitable, nay nothing is more unprofitable then
to be hurtfully wise: insomuch as Socrates seems to have just cause when he
cursed him who first distinguished between profitable and honest. Now to be
wise without innocence is very hurtful unto public states, for it overthrowes
the society of man, if one man may advantage himself by the harm of another.
For as in the fable of Menenius Agrippa the whole body soon perished when the
rest of the members to ease themselves wronged the belly: so the whole
commonwealth will quickly be dissolved if men may be wise for themselves only
and hurtful unto others. Neither is such wisdom hurtful only to the public,
but also to a man's own self. For sin being the only evil that can hurt a
man, he hurts himself most who to decline a little evil of pain, or loss,
or disgrace, commits an evil against his own soul. Whereby first he loses
the peace of his conscience, which is the happiness of a man, yea his heaven
upon earth. For the just man is as bold as a lion, and a good conscience is a
continual feast, says Solomon. Nay Epicurus himself who places the chiefest
blessedness of a man in pleasure, confesses that a man cannot live
comfortably unless he live innocently. For as oil preserves the light of the
lamp, so does innocence maintain peace and joy in the conscience. Again, as
by sin the peace of conscience is lost, so it works confusion of face in
the day of judgment, when men shall be judged not by their worldly wisdom,
but according to their innocence. Oh how many will there at that day cry out
with Cicero, O me nunquam sapientem, and aliquando id quod non eram falso
existimatum, aye me that indeed was never wise, but falsely thought to be what
I was not? And with those in the book of Wisdom, C. 5. v. 4.5.
We fools thought his life madness, and his end without honor: How is he
counted among the children of God, and his portion is among the Saints? But the
innocent heart shall then lift up a cheerful countenance, as knowing that
though here it were despised, yet there it shall be justified and rewarded with
a crown of glory.

O innocence, innocence, had I the tongue both of men and Angels yet were I
not able sufficiently to extol thee. The man that possesses thee nothing can
hurt, he is every where secure. If he be tempted, it makes for his advantage,
if he be humbled it is for his advancement, if he fight he conquereth, if he
be slain he is crowned. In bondage he is free, in danger safe, in
tribulation joyful: the righteous love him, the unrighteous in their
conscience cannot but approve him, and God himself highly esteems of him.
Alas, alas that among men innocence should so little be regarded. Every man
desires to have all other things good, a good house, good land, a good wife,
good apparel, a good horse, every thing good: but a good and an innocent soul
who desires to have? I cannot but wonder wherein man has so highly offended
his own self, that he should thus wish all the things about him to be good,
and himself only to be evil Perhaps thou will say, if I may be wise for my
self no farther then innocence will give me leave, I shall be a right
innocent indeed, living but a poor life, and nothing set by of any. Naught
set by of any? What not of God, not of his holy angels, not of his blessed
Saints and children? For as for wicked men their honoring does but avile and
abase us. And what talkest thou of a poor life? Is not innocence it self
great riches? If thy chest be full of treasure thou countest thy self rich:
and can thou be poor if thy heart be full of innocence? Have thieves, and
robbers, and evil men store of wealth, and has he no riches in store for
thee? Yes he has already bestowed upon thee the treasures of sanctifying
graces, and reserueth for thee immortality and glory, and eternal life. O the
blessedness of that man who is both wise and innocent!

But where shall a man find such a Serpent-Doue, such a wise innocent? If a
man should light a candle with Diogenes, and narrowly search every corner of
the World for him, I think he should hardly find any: but must be feign to
cry out with the Prophet David, Help Lord for there is not a good man left. Of
wise and deep Machiavillians. I suppose he may readily find more then a good
many, such as subordinate religion unto policy, holding that rule in Seneca,
Pietas, honestas, pudor privata bona sunt Reges qua licet eant, piety, honesty,
modesty are the virtues of private men, Princes may do what they list: vbi
tantum honesta dominantilicent Precario regnatur, he is not an absolute King
but reigns at another pleasure who may do nothing but what is honest: and
that of Lewis the 11. Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnane, he has not the
feat of governing that cannot discemble. These how wise soever they seem in
their own conceits, are the veriest fools in the world: they say that all
state policy is built upon pretense of religion, and yet saying it is but a
pretense they confess they build but on a sandy foundation. The scripture
brandeth them for very fools Dixit insipiens, etc. he is but a fool that
says in his heart there is no good. O miseros homines says Saint Augustine,
qui cum voluntesse mali, nolnut esse veritatem qua damnantur mali! Wretched men
who resolving to be evil, would not there should be a truth to condemn the
evil. Among these great pollititians, who having no religion in them yet
carefully take it on them, our superpoliticke Jesuits may bear the bell. Who
more pious in show? Who more mischievous in practice? Even in their doctrine
under the title of Catholic faith they teach Treasons, and murders, and
lying, and periuring equivocations: making way to the fulfilling of Christ's
prophecy that in the latter time nor faith nor truth should be found on earth.
Unto these wise hypocrites, and all others who care more for semblance then
substance in religion, give me leave to say with S^ Chrysostom, O hypocrite,
if it be good to be good, why will thou seem to be that which thou will not
be? If it be evil to be evil, why will thou be that which thou will not
seem to be? If it be good to seem to be good it is better to be so: if it be
evil to seem to be evil it is worse to be so: wherefore either seem as thou
art, or be as thou seem to be. But let us come home to our selves and apply
this doctrine a little more closely and particularly.

That you, my Lords, are wise as Serpents all the world knows: that ye are
also innocent as Doves we hope well. If ye should be wise and not innocent, in
what danger were we poor sheep whose lives and liuelodes after a sort are in
your hands? Respect of persons, and the weight of gifts would make our right to
be too much slighted, and we should be but as a prey unto Wolves. Oh therefore
let that holy Dove which sometime descended upon that Innocent Christ Jesus,
inspire you also with Doue-like innocence, that ye may have both pure hearts
and pure hands. In the scripture ye are called Gods: be ye then as Gods and
resemble him. And as he neither takes bribes, nor accepts the persons of
men, so neither do you: and seeing be has not chosen the noble or mighty of
this world, let them not sway you against the righteous cause of the poor. Be
you wise as Serpents to discern where the right lies, and innocent as Doves
in doing every man right.

Ye Lawyers and advocates, that are so learned in the Law, even as wise as
Serpents, are ye innocent as Doves also? I cannot speak upon knowledge having
ever lived a monastical, as it were, and retired life: but the general voice
of the world is, No cause so good that you will entertain without a fee, no
cause so bad but for your fee you will entertain, selling your tongues to
defend injustice, laboring with your best skill to deceive the Judge by
niceties and tricks, to oppress the just cause, and to overcome truth for
falsehood. How many are there who after they have spent most of their thrift,
and that in just suits, complain as the Comicall Poet did My Comedy was the
better, but my adversaries had the better Actors? And thus ye wax in wealth
though ye wane in conscience, not caring how much ye loose within, so ye may
abound in riches. For as the world judges, your end is not to discharge a good
conscience by helping your brother to his right, but how you may prevail in
your cause be it right or wrong for the filling of your purses. So that
Serpents ye may be, but Doves ye are not, and hardly shall a man find among
you one that is both wise and innocent.

Ye Nobles and Gentles of the land that look upon your poor brethren like
Anakims as if they were but Grasshoppers in comparison of you, are you both Wise
and Innocent or neither? It may be some are both, perhaps so many as the gates
of Thebes, or the mouths of Nilus. But as Samuel said unto Saul standing upon
his innocence, What means then the bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and
the lowing of the Oxen? So may I say unto you, what means the exclamation of
the country upon cruel oppressions, intolerable fines, racking of rents, and
the like? How wise you are I know not, but sure I am these are not the fruits
of innocence, and so you are not both wise innocent. But how many among you
are neither, nor wise, nor innocent? Learning and knowledge ye disdain to
have your selves, and ye despise them that have it^ swaggering, swearing,
smoking of Tobacco, carowsing, hunting, hawking, are almost become essential
to a Gentleman: so that perhaps he defined not much amiss who said, A
Gentleman was a beast riding upon a beast with a beast on his fist, having
beasts following him and himself following beasts. And yet forsooth this
Gentleman that is nil nisi Cecropides, nothing but descended of Trojan blood,
otherwise having not one commendable quality in him, will not stick to
outbraue the best, and bear him self as far better then other men. So did a
horse some time, I am better then thou, for I come of a better fire, I feed on
better provander, I have richer furniture then thou: but quoth another horse
unto him, if thou he better then I, come and run with me: in like manner say
I, if ye boast your selves to be the better men, let it appear in the virtues
of a man Wisdom and Innocence.

Sed lingua quo vadis, whither strayest thou o my tongue? I will say no more
least I transgress against the first part of my Text not being so wise as a
serpent: and yet have I been bold to say thus much because I would practice
the second part and discharging my duty be as innocent as a Dove? To conclude
therefore all in a word, I could wish that what Christ has joined together, no
man would put asunder: and that as Righteousness and Truth, so Wisdom and
Innocence may kiss each other, to the end that being Wise as Serpents our
Innocence may be safe, and being Innocent as Doves our Wisdom may be saving.
Nevertheless of the two it is better to be Innocent without Wisdom, then to
be Wise without Innocence: less Wise so that more honest. For as Tertullian
says, Praestat minus sapere quam peius, errare quam fallere, better is it to
be less wise then sinfully wise, and to stray our selves then to lead others
out of the way. The holy Ghost in Scripture is resembled to a Dove and appeared
in the shape thereof, the devil is compared to a serpent and used it for his
instrument. Illa a primordio divinae pacis praeco, the Dove in the beginning
brought an Olive branch in her mouth and preached peace unto the world: ille a
primordio divinae imaginis praedo, the serpent in the beginning played the
thief and robbed mankind of the image of God. The Serpent is accursed of God
to creep upon his belly, and to lick the dust of the earth, all his portion
is in this life: but the Dove has wings given unto her, even the wings of
innocence, covered with silver, and whose feathers are like unto the yellow
gold, whereby as David says she may fly away from hence and be at rest. For
when she has traveled over the world, and by reason of the deluge of
vanities wherewith it is overwhelmed can find no resting place here below,
then may she betake her to her wings, and mount up aloft into heaven, where
our Noe even Jesus Christ our blessed Savior and redeemer will be ready to
stretch forth his hand and to receive her into the arc of eternal glory and
blessedness. Unto which the Lord bring us for his Christ's sake.

FINIS.
SVBIECTION To the HIGHER POWERS.

OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

ROMANS 13.5. Ye must needs be subject not only for Wrath, but also for
conscience.
ALthough I doubt not but a grave and learned Divine may without presumption
take upon him to inform and advise and civil Magistrate in the duties of his
calling, the science he professes being architectonical and all other
sciences, even that of government being subordinate thereunto: yet is it not my
meaning at this time to adventure so high. I know mine own insufficiency,
and you my Lords are as Angels of God. My purpose rather is to address my
speech unto those of inferior place, and to advise them unto that which to me
seems more necessary, Subjection and Obedience. More necessary I say for
notwithstanding the negligence and corruption of Magistrates, common wealths
have a long time subsisted and continued: but without Subjection and Obedience
they cannot. And wisely was it answered by a certain Lacedemonian unto
Theopompus, imputing the long continuance and flourishing of the Spartan state
unto the skillful government of the Magistrates, that it was rather to be
ascribed unto the ready and willing Obedience of the people. Howsoever, it is
evident I am sure in experience that it is most necessary, and my Text in
express terms avoucheth it, Ye must needs be subject not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience.

For the better husbanding of the time, and that I be not prevented thereby, I
will not spend any part thereof in depending my Text upon the former words of
this Chapter, but will consider it as a perfect and entire sentence in it
self. Therein may it please you to observe with me two parts, A duty, and the
Necessity of the same. The Duty is Subjection* ye must be subject. Which
being a word of Relation, I must needs consider with it both the correlatiues,
that is to say, 1o. the Object or to whom Subjection is to be yielded. 2o. The
Subject, or by whom it is to be yielded. 3o. the Relation or Duty it self,
subjection. As for the Necessity, it is expressly affirmed, Ye must needs be
subject: and that for two causes, first because of Wrath, secondly because of
Conscience. And these are the limits within which I mean to bound my self at
this time, not enlarging my speech in any part as easily I might, but only in
regard of the weighty businesses succeeding summa sequens fastigia rerum. First
therefore of the Duty, and therein also first of the Object to whom subjection
is to be yielded.

Who that is our Apostle plainly resolves in the first verse of this Chapter,
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: as also in his Epistle to
Titus, Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, and to
obey Magistrates. Tit. 3.1.
ye must then be subject to the higher powers, ye must be subject to
Magistrates. What Powers? What Magistrates? the Ecclesiastical or Civil, or
both? Surely unto the Ecclesiastical Magistrate subjection is due, for as S.
Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.17.
the Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, specially they that
labor in the word and doctrine. And again, Heb* 3.17.
Obey them that have rule over you, and submit your selves for they watch for
your souls. Howbeit in this place not he, V. 4.
but the Civil magistrate only is understood: for he only bears the sword,
forcing to obedience, executes vengeance on him that does evil, V. 6.
and receaveth tribute and custom, as it is in the fourth and sixth verses,
which are things no way belonging unto the spiritual power. Peter must not
strike with this sword, Peter must pay this tribute money. Ye must needs then
be subject to the Civil Magistrate.

But what Civil Magistrate? For he is either supreme, or subordinate. The
supreme (to say nothing of other states and polities) in a Monarchy is the
King, in whom the Majesty and sovereign authority primarily and originally
resides, even as the light is radically in the sun: being, as Tertullian
speaks, Homo solo Deo minor, only inferior unto God, a Deo secundus, post
eum primus, ante omnes, and super omnes, second unto God, after him the first,
before all and above all, independent upon any other, subject to the control
of no superior power. Subordinate Magistrates are they who derive their
authority from the sovereign, as stars do their light from the sun. For it
being too heavy a burden for one man by him self alone to govern so great a
multitude: sovereigns have been forced to devolue some part of their charge
upon others, and to honor them with some part of their authority for the
discharge thereof: Exodus 18.13. etc.
Moses the soueraign judge of the Israelites sitting alone from morning to
evening to judge the people. Iethro his father in law told him plainly, the
thing thou do is not well, advising him to authorize under him certain men
that were of courage, feared God, loved true dealing and hated covetousness,
to be rulers over the people. This counsel Moses followed, and God approved,
and upon the same ground in all nations ever has been practiced. Now then if
question be demanded, to whether Magistrate, Subjection is to be yielded, the
Sovereign or the Subordinate? I answer, to both. Ver. 1.
Let every soul, says Saint Paul, be subject to the higher powers: he
speaks indefinitely without exception of any. But Saint Peter expressly
speaks of both and for both, 1 Pet. 2.13.14.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whither to
the King as supreme, or unto governors as unto them that are sent by him. Yet
here is it to be observed, that although Subjection be due to both, yet not
alike to both: but to the Sovereign first and in the highest degree, because
the fullness of power originally rests in him, and unto the Subordinate next
and in inferior degree, because they have it but in part and at the second
hand. And these again because they are not all stars of the same magnitude,
but one differs from another in glory, and Moses has appointed some to be
rulers of thousands, some of hundreds, some of fifties, some of tens: to every
one subjection is due, not in the same measure, but according to their several
places, and the power which they have received. And so much for the Object.

The Subject by whom Subjection is to be yielded, is whosoever relatiuely is
opposed to the Higher Powers. Now to the Supreme and highest power every man
without exception is opposed, even Subordinate Magistrates themselves. For as
in Logic that Genus which they call Subalterne, though it be a Genus in
respect of those Species that are under it, yet in regard of the Genus above it
is but a Species: even so Subordinate Magistrates what place soever they hold
in relation to their inferior, in respect to the Sovereign or King they are
but mere subjects and owe subjection as far forth as any other. And as when
the sun appears all other stars are eclipsed and loose their light, and
rivers when they fall into the sea forgo their names: so in the presence of
the Prince all inferior power and authority is swallowed up and vanishes into
nothing. But both unto the Prince, and to his Substitutes all private men to
whom the Sovereign has committed no part of his power are so opposed, and
therefore must be subject unto them. There is no exemptio^ of any: Let every
soul, says the Apostle, be subject, speaking universally. Neither means he
by (...) every soul, Psychicos only, that is animal and laymen, as some
Papists expound it: but all men indifferently, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Monks, as Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, and Oecumenius affirm. Nay the
Pope himself is not exempted from this generality, says Bernard. And. God
has made Kings rulers not only over Soldiers, but over Priests also, says
Pope Gregory. In the old Testament Aaron was subject unto Moses, and Priests
and Levites to the Prince: in the new Testament Christ himself submitted
himself unto the secular power, and St Paul appealed unto Caesar, at whose
judgment seat, he says, he ought to be judged. In a word, the law of nature
requires Subjection of all, the law of Moses requires the same, so does the
Gospel too, and therefore let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.
And so much also of the Subject.

As touching the Relation or Duty, that, from the higher Powers to the inferior
is Rule and Government, of which neither was it my purpose, neither does my
Text occasion me now to speak: but from the inferior to the superior it is
(...) Subjection. Ye must be subject. This Subjection is not a point, but
has latitude, and includes within it sundry duties, all which notwithstanding
(as I conceive) may be reduced unto three, answerable unto those three
eminencies and excellencies that are in the Magis^rate. For there is in the
Magistrate, first the eminency of person and degree, then the excellency of
power and authority, and lastly, the dignity of his work and operation: and
every one of these deserves accordingly to be requited with a several duty.

First then there is in the superior powers an eminency above others in regard
of their persons, as being the vicegerent and lieutenants of the King of heaven
and earth, and not as other men, but after a peculiar manner in majesty and
dominion bearing the image of God; the God of heaven, as Daniel says, Dan. 2.
having given unto them a Kingdom, power, strength, and glory. In which
respect they are styled in Scripture Principalities and Powers, Dominations and
Dignities, the Lords anointed, yea Gods, Dixi, Dij estis, I have said ye are
Gods. This eminency and excellency in the Magistrate is to be answered with
Honor and Reverence from us. Prove. 24.21.
My son, fear the Lord and the King, says Solomon. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, honor the King, says Peter. Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
says the fifth commandment; not those natural parents only which have
begotten us, but Patres patriae, the fathers of the country also. This Honor
and Reverence (as I understand) includes within it a triple act, first of the
mind in a due estimation and valuing of their place and dignity, secondly of
the will in an humble inclination thereof unto them because of their
excellency, thirdly of the body in outward behavior and carriage toward them,
as rising up in their presence, baring the head, bowing the knee, reverent
speaking unto them, and such like, according to the manner of the country where
we live. Nevertheless of these three the second is the principal and most
proper act of Honor: for a man may know the worth of a thing, and yet be no
whit affected toward it, Romans 1.
as the Gentiles knew God, yet glorified him not as God: and outward demeanure
and comporement what show of reverence soever it have, yet may proceed of
scorn and derision, as was that of the Jews toward Christ. But if upon
apprehension of the Magistrates worth and excellency, the heart be inclined and
duly affected therewith, all external acts of reverence will surely follow of
themselves. Such a one will ever set the best construction on all their
actions, interpreting nothing sinisterly, he will conceal their errors and
infirmities and with Sem and Iaphet going backward cover them, he will not
suffer them either in their persons or actions to be traduced or dishonored,
but will carefully defend or excuse them. In a word, he will not so much as
entertain an evil thought against them, so far is he from saying or doing
ought that may detract from them. And so much of the first duty Honor and
Reverence.

The second eminency in the magistrate is the excellency of Power and
Authority: whereby he enacteth and ordains laws for the well government of
the commonwealth, commanding that which is good, forbidding that which is
evil, advanceing the well deserving, and punishing those that either
transgress or neglect his commandments: briefly having the greatest power
that can be on earth, ius vitae atque necis, power of life and death. Now unto
authority who sees not that Obedience is due? Put them in mind, Tit. 3.1.
says Saint Paul, to obey Magistrates: and indeed to what end is authority
and power to command, if every man notwithstanding might refuse to obey and do
what he list? But here we are to be advertized, that as the Magistrates
authority is not infinite, so there are bounds set unto our Obedience. Princes
though they be sovereigns in regard of their subjects, yet are they viceroyes
in regard of God. Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in ipsos imperium
est Iovis: Kings command their people, and God them. Omne sub Regno graviore
Regnum est: every Kingdom is under a greater Kingdom. If then they command
under God we must obey, if against God, we must say with the Apostle, it is
better to obey God then man. Hand over head to yield a Monkish and blind
obedience unto them, is to advance man into the throne of God, and to give unto
another the glory only due to him, and withal to incur^e the fearful curse
threatened unto Israel for observing the wicked statutes of Ahab and Omri. Mic.
6.16.
True it is we must give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and so must
we give unto God the things that are Gods. If any ask quis prohibet, who
forbids in such cases to obey? Say mayor potestas a greater power. If they
threaten, answer with Saint Augustine, Da veniam, tu carcerem, ille gehennam
minatur, thou threatnest the body with imprisonment, he both body and soul
with hell fire. Only take heed, first that thou be not lead by fancies and
imaginations, but be sure that they command against God, secondly that denying
obedience thou do it in all humility without scandal or contempt, lastly that
yet thou be content to obey passiuely, and whatsoever they shall command within
the sphere of their activity, and not against God, that thou be ready also to
obey actiuely. And so much of the second duty, Obedience.

The third and last eminency in the magistrate is the dignity and excellency of
his work, which is exceeding great. Ver 4.6.
For he is the Minister of God for our wealth, says Saint Paul and thereunto
he applies himself. He is custos vtrivsque tabulae, the guardian and keeper
of both the tables of the law, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that under him we may lead a godly and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Were it not for him every one would do what seemed good in his own
eyes, and men like wolves would pray one upon another: but now by him every man
enioyes his own, violence is repressed, justice is executed, religion is
maintained, and humane society preserved. To procure these things, and to
attend the public good, as it is a worthy, so it is also a difficult work.
Hom.
(...), he may not sleep all night that has taken charge of a commonwealth:
and they that have worn it, have both felt and confessed that a Diadem is no
small burden: so that it is not without cause that in the holy tongue the same
word signifies both an honor and a burden. For this worthy work so difficult
unto the Magistrate, so profitable unto us, what duty are we to return? Even
hearty thankfulness, and all possible requital. Verbal thanks are due, yet
are they alone too slight a reward for so great a work, we are farther to
requite him in our liuelodes with tribute and custom, as the Apostle charge,
and that not niggardly, and only to supply his necessities, but bountifully and
proportionably unto his state and dignity. Nay because otherwise we can never
make him full satisfaction, and were owe even our very selves unto him, even
our selves must we bestow upon him, and be ready to do him service with the
expense not only of liuelode, but of life also. Dignus est operarius mercede
sua, the labourer is worthy of his hire. But above all we must ever remember
to make our addresses and prayers unto God for our Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2.
and all that are in authority under them, that God would give them (to use the
words of Tertullian) vitam prolixam, Apol. c. 30.
imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum
probum, orbem quietum: a long life, a secure reign, safety at home, valiant
armies abroad, faithful counselors, good subjects, and a peaceable World. And
thus have I finished the first part of my text, which is the Duty, Subjection.

The next part follows which is the necessity thereof: for it is not an
arbitrary duty, nor left indifferent unto our choice whether we will be
subject yea or no, but necessity is laid upon us, ye must needs be subject,
says our Apostle, or as it is in the original, (...) of necessity ye must be
subject. But what? May not a man refuse to be subject if he list? Doubtless he
may. How then is it necessary as you say, not arbitrary? For clearing of this
point it may please you to remember that there is a double Necessity, the one
Absolute, and Simple, the other Hypotheticall and Conditional. Simple
Necessity is that which cannot otherwise be, being infallibly and immutably
determined unto one: and such necessity of subjection is not here meant, for it
is manifest by experience, and the more is the pity, that too many too often
refuse to be subject. Conditional necessity is that which Simply considered
may be otherwise, but such or such things being supposed cannot be otherwise*
and this Necessity is here understood as appears by the very text, ye must
needs be subject not only for wrath but also for conscience, as if he should
say, if either ye will avoid wrath, or else will keep a good conscience, of
necessity ye must be subject. So that we are bound to Subjection by a double
tie, the first is Humane, the second is Divine; the Humane is the Wrath of the
Magistrate, ye must needs be subject because of wrath, the Divine is
Conscience toward God, ye must be subject also because of conscience. And of
these two briefly.

Wrath is a passion seated in the Invading part of the soul of man, whereby
he desires to keep off, or to remove whatsoever is nociue and hurtful unto
him, and that by way of invading and assaulting him who either would do, or
has done us hurt. For as man naturally desires to preserve and keep that
good whereof he is possessed, and to obtain that farther good, which he sees
to be convenient for him: so if any go about to bereave him of the one or to
bar him from the other, presently the blood begins to boil about the heart,
and anger so inflames him, that he cannot let him alone, but must needs resist
him and set against him with all his might. Hence is it that the philosopher
calls anger cotem fortitudinis, the whe^stone of courage, and diverse define it
to be appetitum vindictae, desire of revenge. How truly and philosophically I
despute not, sure I am revenge usually waits upon wrath, and our Apostle
ioynes them both together, Ver. 4.
a revenger, says he, to execute wrath. Now the Magistrates duty is to procure
the public good, and videre nequid respub. detrimenti capiat, to provide that
the common suffer no detriment or harm. If therefore any shall hinder the
public good, or shall work any disadvantage or damage unto the state, the
wrath of the Magistrate ought to burn against such a man. And as God when his
laws are broken, or himself any way dishonored waxes angry with man: so
these Gods on earth, these vicegods, when men by contemning their authority,
and denying them due subjection go about to disturb and set combustion in the
state, have just cause to be angry and to seek revenge upon them.

But Wrath and desire of revenge in him that wants power is vain and foolish
according to that of the Poet Quid stulti proprium? Auson.
non posse and velle nocere, it is the property of a fool wanting ability to
desire to do hurt: but in him who has not only will, but strength and power
also to be revenged, it is dangerous and terrible. Fulmen est vbi cum potestate
habitat iracundia, it is no less then thunder and lightning when anger and
power meet together. And such is the wrath of the Magistrate, Prou. 16.
the wrath of a Prince is as the roaring of a lion, and the anger of a King is
as messengers of death, Pro^. 18.
says Solomon. For laws have ever been backed with severe penalties, as
mults, imprisonment, banishment, dismembring, torments, death, yea cruel
kinds of death, as appears by the laws of all other nations, and those of
Moses also whereof God was author. The reason is because men are wild beasts,
and would desperately break through all laws, were they not so curbed and
restrained. and bona est ars terrere ne pecces, it is great wisdom to terrify
to the end that men sin not. But what are laws unless they be duly
executed? Surely but scarcrows and bugbeares: and therefore unto the Magistrate
is the due execution of them committed, and into his hand is the sword of
Justice put, not to let it ly rusting in the sheath, but to draw it forth
against offenders, and that first for the satisfaction of justice that the
party delinquent may receive condign punishment, and then for the example of
others, that Israel may see and fear. Deuteronomy 13.1.
For although paena ad vnum, the penalty light but on one, yet metus ad omnes,
it is intended for the terror of all, not to walk in those ways which lead
unto so fearful ends. And indeed to what end has God put into the heart of
man this passion of fear, but to decline and avoid all such evils as would
destroy him or afflict him? Take away fear, and men will (...) despise all
danger, and run headlong into all mischief: but fear is (...), of a
preserving nature, as says the philosopher, inclining and persuading man
carefully to keep himself from dangers. If then to come to an issue, ye will
not work mischief unnaturally unto your own selves, if ye will avoid the
Magistrates fury, if ye will not incur the rigor of the law, nor fall upon
the edge of the sword of justice, ye must needs be subject.

But what need, will some man say, so much to fear the Wrath of the
Magistrate? May not a man hide his counsels so deep, and carry his actions so
cunningly that nor witness nor Judge shall know them? If they come to light
and be discovered, does not greatness break through laws as wasps do
through cobwebs? May not judges, jury, witnesses, by friends, favor, bribes be
corrupted? Are pardons impossible to be obtained from Princes? Nay suppose the
worst, that the penalty of the law can by no means be escaped, what care they
for fines and amercements who are content to beggar themselves to enjoy their
pleasures? What for shame and ignominy, who are grown impudent in all
wickedness? What for death, who count it worse then death not to live as they
list, and to be barred from their desires? For there have been who have said
moriar modo regnet, let me dye so he may be King, and, aut Caesar aut nihil,
an Emperor or nothing. To all this I answer briefly, first trust not unto
secrecy, but remember what wise Solomon says, Eccl. 10.20.
Curse not the King no not in thy thought, neither the great one in thy
bedchamber, for the foul of the Heaven will carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall declare the matter. Secondly, hope not for impunity: many as
great, as gracious, as wealthy as thou have failed thereof: and how know
thou but one time or other thou may meet with one who will accept nor thy
person, nor thy fee, but will say unto thee with Saint Peter, thy money perish
with thee. Lastly, if any have so far put off natural affection as not to
fear Wrath, choosing rather to fall into the hands of justice then to be
restrained from his wickedness: let such a one know, that what Wrath cannot,
yet Conscience should work in him. For here it must freely be confessed that
Wrath of it self is not sufficient: it strikes at the branches, not the
root, and endeavors to reform outward actions, but reaches not unto the
cause which is inward corruption. Which remaining in us, Wrath happily may make
us more wary in offending, but cannot work in us a love of goodness, and a
desire not to offend at all. Wherefore God in his deep wisdom has thought it
good to bind us unto subjection not by a single but double tie* and unto Wrath
to add Conscience, Ye must needs be subject not only for wrath but also for
conscience.

Conscience is that faculty or power of the Practical understanding in man,
whereby he is privy to all his actions whether they be immanent and conceived
within, as thoughts, or emanant and issuing forth, as his words and works.
This Conscience is then said to be bound, when by him who has power and
authority over it, it is charged to perform its duty, that is to bear
witness of all our actions unto God, and according to the quality of them to
excuse or accuse us: for that these are the duties of conscience plainly
appears by that of S. Paul, Romans 2.15.
their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing.
This charge is then laid upon the Conscience, after that by the same authority
man himself is bound: for man being free, Conscience also is free, but man
being bound by a law, Conscience stands bound also. But who is the binder of
the conscience? God without question. He is the Lawgiver, Iam. 4.12.
says S. James, that can both save and destroy: and he, as S. John says, is
greater then the conscience. But can the Magistrate also by his laws bind the
conscience? Papists attribute unto us the Negative, that they cannot:
themselves hold the Affirmative, that they can, and warrant it by this my Text,
Ye must be subject for conscience. Upon this plain song sundry of them
descant very pleasantly, but none plays the wanton more then Doctor Kellison,
who inferres that we despoile Princes of authority and superiority, and give
subjects good leave to rebel and revolt, that we bring Judges, and Tribunal
seats, and all laws into contempt, that no Prince can rely on his subjects, no
subjects on their Prince or fellow subjects, in a word, that we take away all
society and civil conversation. To all which I answer breefly. First suppose
the maine ground were true, yet neither can they prove it out of my Text, nor
do such absurdities follow thereupon. Out of my Text they cannot prove it, for
that only affirms that the Conscience is bound, but determines not that man's
laws binds it. Neither do such absurdities follow, for alb^it we should
deny man to be the binder, yet do we freely profess that the Conscience is
bound, which is enough.

But we answer farther that they much abuse us: for we deny not rem, that they
bind, only we differ from them in modo, maintaining that they bind not in
such manner as they teach. They hold that men's laws bind non minus guam lex
divina, Bellarm.
equally with Gods laws, so that were there not any law of God binding to
Subjection yet man's law of it self and of its own power would bind. This we
deny, teaching contrarily that humane laws bind the Conscience not immediately
but mediatly, not primarily but secundarily, not in themselves and of their
own power, but in the force and virtue of Divine law: Divine law, I say,
whether that which is imprinted in the heart by nature, or that which is
revealed unto us by Scripture, both which command Subjection. This truth in f^w
words thus I demonstrate. First, if man's law immediately bind the Conscience,
then is every transgression thereof without farther respect unto Gods law a
mortal sin. But so it is not, for according to St John's definition (...),
sin is a transgression of the law, meaning not man's but Gods law only: in
regard whereof St Augustine says more expressly, Sin is dictum, factum,
concupitum, any saying, doing, or coveting against Gods law. Besides if man of
himself without respect unto Gods law can bind the conscience, then either is
he Lord of the conscience, and may himself convent it, examine it, take its
testimony, and accordingly proceed to sentence either of life or death both
upon body and soul: or he has power to command God to sit in judgment upon
the Conscience, and to be the executioner of his laws: or finally he binds
the Conscience in vain and to no purpose. To say that man is in such sort Lord
of the Conscience is unreasonable because his knowledge and power reach no
farther then the outward man. To say that man may command God, is sacrilegious,
advancing man above God. Lastly, to say that he binds in vain and to no
purpose, is withal to say that their opinion is vain, and that man has no
such power at all. To shut up all in a word, unless a man may with as much
security obey man as God, man who is subject to error and injustice, as God who
is free from both; unless we be all as deeply bound to study the laws of men
and to know them, as we are Gods, and to subject our selves as absolutely unto
them, it is altogether vnconceauable how humane laws can bind the Conscience
equally with divine.

This point being thus cleared it is evident that by conscience in this place
we are with St Peter to understand Conscientiam Dei, 1. Pet. 2.29.
conscience toward God; and to interpret this of St Paul, Very 13.
ye must be subject for conscience, by that of the same St Peter, Submit your
selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, as if he should say,
because God has bound you to be subject. For God has laid this obligation
upon man, appears by the very institution of Magistracy. For although St
Peter call it (...) a humane creature, yet his meaning is not that it is not
from man, but for man and his benefit: otherwise S. Paul expressly affirms
that it is the ordinance of God, and Solomon that by him kings reign. Ver. 2.
The reason moving God to institute the same was, partly his sovereign
Lordship over man by right of creation, by which he may order and dispose of
him at pleasure, partly the great love he bears unto humane society, which
his infinite wisdom saw could not so well be maintained, if every man should
be left to himself, and orderly government were not settled among them.
Hereupon he ordained some to be in authority, some to live in subjection:
commanding the one to rule according to justice and equity, the other to
submit themselves with all lowliness and humility, as (I mean touching
subjection) has in the first part (which is the Duty) been sufficiently
declared.

Now man being thus by the commandment and ordinance of God bound, Conscience
cannot be free: but as man shall either subject or not subject himself, so is
Conscience bound to testify for or against him, and to excuse or to accuse
him. If then ye break the commandment of God, and refuse to be subject,
there is one who will surely accuse you and will not spare, a witness whose
testimony is omni exceptio ne majus better then a thousand witnesses that will
testify against you, even your Conscience. But to whom will it accuse? Unto
that great and dreadful Judge of the whole world, whose wisdom can not be
deceived, whose justice cannot be corrupted, and the execution of whose
sentence cannot be avoided. And what will the sentence be? Perpetual
imprisonment in the bottomless dungeon of hell, and therein eternal torments
both of body and soul: which although it be not presently executed upon you,
yet the worm of conscience instantly will begin to gnaw upon your souls, and
fill you so full of unspeakable horror and anguish that your life shall be but
a death, and this world a hell unto you. But if on the contrary side ye shall
for the Lords sake, and in obedience to his ordinance yield subjectio^ unto the
higher powers, and under them live dutifully in all godliness and honesty:
then shall your consciences testify nothing but good of you, and excuse you
unto God, he shall justify and acquit you, your soul shall be replenished
with unspeakable peace and comfort, so as ye shall have a heaven upon earth,
and in heaven it self in due time such joys as nor eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor ever entered into the thought of man. To conclude and sum up all,
if either we will keep a good conscience, that we may both here and ever be
blessed, or will avoid the sting of an evil conscience, and the miseries that
attend upon it, we must of necessity be subject. Ye must needs be subject not
only for wrath, but also for conscience. And thus have I finished the second
part also, which is the Necesstie of the duty. It only remains now to add a
word or two by way of use and application.

There is a generation of whom both St Peter and St Jude speak, 2. Pet. 2.10.
that despises all government, Iud. 8.
and speaks evil of Dignities, clean contrary unto the doctrine of my Text,
which commands all to be subject, and to honor and obey the Magistrate. But
these are not all of the same kind: for some despise it out of an erroneous
judgment, others out of an evil habit and custom. They that despise it upon
error, are either Anabaptists or Papists. The Anabaptists a fanatical and
fantastical sect, utterly mislike all government and subjection among
Christians. It is not without cause that S. Jude calls such kind of people
Dreamers, Ver. 8.
for so indeed they are, and their dream is this, that Sin is the cause of
Subjection: and although it were ordained and allowed to the Jews because they
were but infants, yet fits it not us Christians that are in the state of
perfection. Shall I dispute against this dotage and show that even among those
blessed spirits that are free from sin and still persist in the truth there
are Thrones, Dominations, Powers, Principalities, Angels, and Archangels? That
if man had continued in his integrity, yet government should have been*
inasmuch as man naturally is sociable and disciplinable, the moral law
commands to honor father and mother, the end of government is Peace with
Piety and Honesty, and one man even then should have stood in need of
another? That finally there is now as great a necessity thereof as was among
the Jews, and that the new Testament would never have commanded Subjection, or
to pray for Magistrates if it were a sin for a Christian to be a Magistrate?
But I will not vouchsafe them the honor to dispute with them: let it suffice
in this honorable auditory barely to affirm, first that a Christian safely
may be a Magistrate: secondly, that none is fitter then he, because no man
better knows the duty of a Magistrate then he: Lastly that no man can so
completely and perfectly perform the office of a Magistrate but he, because
no man understands the true religion which he is to maintain, and by which he
is to govern, but he.

As for Papists, although they do not thus reject all government, yet do they
many ways both in doctrine and practice avile and abase it. For first they
give unto the Pope a supremacy over Princes, even unto Deposition, and
depresse them so far, as to hold the basin and ewer to him, to serve in the
first dish at his table, to hold his stirrup, to lead his horse, yea to be his
horses too and to carry him on their shoulders. All this I marvel by what
right. Aaron advanced not himself above Moses, Christ denied his kingdom to
be of this world, Peter claimed no such power, ancient Popes acknowledged Kings
and Emperors to be their good Lords and Masters. The first that usurped it was
a mushrom of the last night, that brand of hell Hildebrand, whom therefore
Baronius makes the pattern of a perfect Pope, as Machiavel does that monster
Caesar Borgia of a perfect Prince. Secondly, as they subject all Monarchs to
the Bishop of Rome, so he exempteth all Clerks from their jurisdiction, etiam
vnctos culinae, their cooks and skullions too, erecting to himself a
Monarchy in every state, possessing a third part in them, affirming that Kings
may not punish his Clerks because they are not their subjects, threatening the^
with a thunderbolt from the Vatican if they shall presume so to do. This also
I marvel by what law. Divine? we have demonstrated the contrary. Humane?
Princes cannot grant such privileges as derogate from their sovereignty. But
since the Church of Rome is turned into a Court, no marvel if Christian
liberty also be changed into temporal franchises and immunities. Finally they
teach that if a Prince become a tyrant, or be an heretic, or excommunicate,
it is lawful then to arm against him, to set upon him with dags, knives,
poisons, yea if need be to undermine and blow up whole Parliaments with
gunpouder: and if any of them for such practices be convented before the
Magistrate, they may elude their examinations with equivocations and mental
reservations, as they term it in their canting language, but in true and
plain speech hellish lying and perjury. Certainly for these traitorous and
more then heathenish doctrines, ye may be sure in scripture they have neither
precept nor example: out of the Scripture the only presidents they can have,
are the ancient Pharisees whom Josephus reports to have been great enemies
unto kings, and Mahumetan Assasins, whose profession it was to murder
Christian Princes: and for cogging and cheating the Priscillian heretics,
whose rule was Iura, perjura, secretum prodere noli, swear, forswear, and
bewray not in any case the mysteries of our sect and profession.

But besides Anabaptists, and Papists, there are others whose doctrines are
sound and good, yet out of an evil habit and custom yield not unto
Magistrates their due honor. And are there not among us too many of this
kind? What muttering, what whispering, what censuring, what sinister
construction set upon every action, what discovering, what blazing of
infirmities, what so high but we will reach at, what so deep but we will be
sounding the bottom of? Is this the honor, is this the obedience, is this the
thankfulness wherewith we requite our governors? You will say they are unjust,
tyrants, oppressors, bribers, God forbid: yet suppose it were so. What if
parents wrong their children, and husbands be froward to their wives: shall
children therefore dishonor their parents, and wives their husbands? As we
delight in fair weather, so must we also patiently endure storms and
tempests when they come. Hard Rehoboam must have subjection as well as David:
and servants must be subject not only to good and courteous, 1. Pet. 2.
but also to froward Masters. Happily our sins have deserved such chastisement,
and then in wrath God sends evil Magistrates. A certain holy man, they say,
expostulated on a time, with God why he had permitted Phocas, being so cruel a
man to be Emperor: to whom a voice answered, that if a worse man could have
been found he should have been set over them, the wickedness of the world
requiring it. In these cases the only weapons of Christians are preces and
lachrymae, fasting and prayer: and whatsoever Magistrates be, st^^l we must
needs be subject. We must be subject for fear of wrath, for there is no
mocking with princes. Durum est scribere contra cos qui possunt proscribere, it
is dangerous to contest with them that can outlaw us and turn us out of all
we have, and to jest with those that can gladio (...), return the jest back
again with the sword. But to be subject for Wrath only is no pleasing
sacrifice unto God: nimis angusta est innocentia ad legem tantum bonum esse, it
is but a poor innocence that is forced by law. No we must be subject for
Conscience, for the Lords sake. If the heathen man being damned, what he had
learned by the study of Philosophy, could answer to do that willingly which
others do by compulsion: should not a Christian be ashamed not to learn so
much by Christian religion? The first lesson that Christian religion teaches
is humility: if this be once learned, Conscionable subjection will soon
follow. For where pride reigns Omnes dominari, nemo servire vult, every one
will be a King, none will be subject: but Humility is a virtue that fits us
Obedience and to do the commandments of others.

As for you, my Lords, to whom according to your place subjection is due, give
me leave to address my speech unto you in the words of the Apostle to Titus,
See that no man despise you. Neither let the speech seem strange unto you, for
if you be despised, it proceeds mostly from your own default, either you are
not such men or such Magistrates as you should be. It is a great incongruity to
look for honor while your actions are dishonorable, and to be called and
counted Lords being servants unto base lusts and affections. First then if you
will have others to be subject unto you, be you subject unto God, kiss the
son, honor and obey him and God will honor you. While man lived in
subjection unto God all the rest of the creatures stood in awe of him: but when
once he rebelled against God by eating of the forbidden fruit, they rebelled
against him also. In like manner will it be with you: if ye honor him, men
shall honor you, if otherwise, he knows how to pour contempt upon princes
also. Next, it behooves you to carry yourselues in your places as becomes
you, that is, as Judges not as merchants: not as merchants to buy and sell men's
rights, but as just Judges to give unto every man his right. And to this end it
may please you to remember that the Scripture calls you Gods, and therefore
that ye should be like unto God, not accepting the persons of any, nor
suffering your selves to be corrupted by any means, but in every thing to
give righteous judgment. Remember I beseech you also that God stands in the
congregation of Gods, Psalm. 82.1
and although in places of judicature an empty throne be not now set for him as
it was among the Ethiopians, yet be assured that he is always present with
you, and will certainly judge you as he sees you judge others. Remember farther
that they are men whose causes ye judge, made of the same stuff, bearing the
same image of God, redeemed by the same precious blood of Christ, quickened by
the same spirit, heirs of the same Kingdom with you. Oh then tender them as
your own bowels, and let their blood and right be dear and precious in your
eyes. Remember lastly, that though ye be Gods, yet ye are men also, and shall
dye as men. In Nabucadnezars image the head was gold, the breast and arm
silver, the belly and thighs brass, the legs iron, but all ^^od on feet of
clay. Oh then when you are in your ^^^^unalls think sometime of these feet,
that when they ^^all fail you, conscience of doing justice may support you.
Judge ye therefore now, as your selves would be judged in the last day, weigh
every cause in even balance, let nothing but right sway you. Draw forth the
sword of your authority, and strike at wickedness courageously. Never more
need: the sins of this land are crying and spreading: among the rest the
pestilence of Drunkenness infecteth every where. There was a street in Rome
called Vicus sobrius, the sober street: but is there a village in England that
may be called Villa sobria, the sober village? Every house almost is now become
an alehouse, and they are the very schools of all rogery and villainy, yet by
our country Magistrates are too much winked at and favored. Against these and
the like enormities, my Lords, there is need of your greatest severity. Qui
non vetat peccare cum potest iubet: he bids men sin who (...)? power forbids
them not. Let not your remissness eith^^ harden the wicked or dishearten the
good: but rise up (...) with David, Ps. 101.
to destroy all the wicked of the land. Justice requires it at your hands,
wisdom requires it: justice, that offenders may be cut off, wisdom that
others may be preserved from contagion, and the state from Gods vengeance,
which otherwise will light upon it if ye purge it not from such pollutions.
But your honors are wise, and unto the wise one word had been sufficient.

Yet before I conclude, I cannot but entreat my brethren of the clergy also
(seeing them here so frequent) to have care that Magistracy be not despised. As
we are desirous to be assisted by the^, so let us in our places assist them.
Let the sword of God and Gedeon, the sword of the mouth and the mouth of the
sword go together: and while they labor (...) make men subject for wrath, let
us endeavor to make them subject for Conscience. Wrath belongs unto the
Magistrate, but Conscience is the task of the Minister. Oh the^ let us apply
our selves diligently unto this task, and speak home unto the conscience,
first by our holy life and conversation, and then by our powerful and
effectual preaching. Let our end and aim be in all our Sermons not so much
to please as to profit, nor to tickle the ear with quaint phrases as to
establish the heart with grace: that the mind being enlightened, the spirit
fortified, and flesh repressed, vice may be loathed and detested, and the way
of virtue facilitated and sweetened. So shall we make good subjects indeed,
such as if there were no wrath to terrify them, yet merely for conscience
would submit themselves. Yea so shall we prepare both them and our selves also
to be meet subjects for that glorious Kingdom, whose King is Trinity, whose
law Charity, whose reward perfect blessedness, whose measure Eternity.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE LAVVFVLNESSE OF LOTS IN GAMING AGAINST THE Arguments of N. N.

OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

A DEFENSE OF THE LAWFVLNESSE OF LOTS IN GAMING.
NOT that I hope to purchase any great reputation to my self by confuting so
slight a Pamphlet, nor yet that I desire to afford the least countenance to
those irregular Gamesters, who love not to keep due compass in their play:
but for sundry other important and weighty reasons, have I undertaken this
Defense of Lotgames. Among the rest, first to clear the truth, and rightly to
inform the understanding, that what we do, or leave undone in this case be
not sin unto us. For practice without knowledge is little better then
Presumption: and abstinence upon error is little less then Superstition.
Secondly to arm and settle weak and tender Consciences, least happily some
honest and religiously affected hearts, who have at times without scruple used
these Games, receive some wound from these Arguments, and be brought into a
needless labyrinth and perplexity, unless they be provided of some buckler
against them, or thread to disintangle them. Thirdly and lastly to reform the
affection, and to work those that are contrary minded to a little more
Charity: that seeing upon how slender and sandy a ground they have wronged the
people of God in their Christian liberty, tying them far shorter and straiter
then God himself does, they may be moved hereafter, not to censure their
brethren with so much superciliousnesse, and to hold a better correspondence
with them. These are the cheifest ends I aim at, and for which I have chosen
rather to adventure my self into these lists, then out of I know not what
imaginary fear of encouraging, idle and immoderate Gamesters, to forbear.
True it is, debausht and lewd companions are not to be humoured in their
vanities: howbeit it is a very preposterous course because of the abuse to
condemn the lawful use, and to labor the redressing of a misdemeanure in
life, either by breeding or fomenting an error in judgment. An error in
judgment will you say? That is not yet demonstrated: neither will it be
accounted so, until the contrary Arguments be sufficiently answered. Let us
therefore in Gods name try and examine the force and strength of them.

N. N. Mere Lots unlawful in light matters, as at play with Cards and Dice,
and the like exercises.


DEFENSE. A Lot is nothing else but a casualty or casual event purposely
applied to the determination of some doubtful thing. Of Lots some are Mere,
some are Mixed. Mere Lots are those wherein there is nothing else but a Lot,
or, wherein there is nothing applied to determine the doubt but only mere
casualty. Mixed Lots are those wherein something else besides casualtie is
applied to determine the doubt, as namely wit, skill, industry, and the like.
These terms being thus cleared, I answer, first that by the tenor of your
words you seem to allow Mixed Lots in Gaming, and only disallow Mere Lots.
Whereas notwithstanding you dispute anon against the use of all Lots in light
matters. So that you have not expressed your self distinctly enough, and thereby
give just occasion to suspect that you apprehend of this matter but confusedly.
Secondly, I deny this Proposition, affirming the Lots both Mixed and Mere are
lawful even in the lightest matters: and consequently that cards and dice, and
tables, and all other Games of the like nature, are lawful, and may be used
for recreation.


N. N. I propose two things to be decided, first, whether it be a Mere lot to
game or play at Cards or Dice. Secondly, whether Lots may be used in such light
matters or not.


DEFENSE. Both these Questions you resolve, the former affirmatively, the
latter negatiuely: and out of both you would infer the unlawfulness of Cards
and Dice and the like exercises, on this manner. To use mere Lots in light
matters is unlawful: But to play at cards or dice or the like is to use mere
lots in light matters: Ergo, to play at cards or dice or the like is unlawful.
Of this Syllogism I deny both the Propositions: the Major absolutely, as in
the former Section, and the Minor in part. In part I say: for first, I confess
that there is a Lot in all these Games. Secondly I grant that in dice, and some
Games upon the cards and tables there is a mere Lot. But thirdly, I deny all
Games at cards and tables to be mere Lots, forasmuch as in many of them besides
the chance there is wit and skill, and both of them concur to the determining
of the victory. Nevertheless you will prove both major and minor, and hysteron
proteron, the minor first by a double testimony, one of Men, the other of God*
the major next by seven, as you suppose, irrefragable demonstrations. Al which
we will by Gods help encounter in the same order as you have marshald them.


N. N. And first that this is a Mere Lot, Mr Perkins in his Cases of Conscience
testifies it.


DEFENSE. To prove cards and dice and the like Games to be mere Lots, you vouch
the authority of Mr Perkins and Mr Yates. Which Argument drawn from Humane
testimony, how infirm and weak it is you cannot be ignorant: for in the
closing up of it your self confess that men's testimonies may err. And
certainly as long as that saying of Scripture stands vncanceld, All men are
liars, the witness of man will never prove Demonstratiue and infallible. Yet
this I say not any way to empeach the credit either of these or any other
reverend authors, but only to discover the weakness of your Argument. Let us
therefore examine both the testimonies, and first that of Master Perkins.

Mr Perkins, say you, testifies in his Cases of conscience, that dice and
cards are mere Lots. Who? Mr Perkins? and that in his Cases of conscience?
Pardon me, good sir, I can hardly believe it. For in that very place intended
by you, dividing Games into three sorts, Games of wit, or industry, Games of
hazard, and a mixture of both: howsoe^er he affirm dicing, and some Games at
cards and tables to be mere hazard, and therefore in his opinion unlawful, yet
he holds withal that some Games at cards and tables are mixed, standing
partly of hazard, and partly of wit, hazard beginning the Game, and skill
getting the victory. And these as he commends not, so neither does he
condemn: and so far is he from affirming them to be mere Lots, that because
of the art and skill used in them he utterly denies them to be Lots. Wherein
although for good reasons, as shall appear hereafter, I cannot yield unto him:
yet can I not but wonder at the boldness of your forehead, in fathering that
upon so reverend a man, which himself so publicly before all the world
disclaimes. But perhaps you see farther into Mr Perkins his meaning then I do:
or at unawares he has let slip some words which may make for your advantage.
Let us therefore see what you allege out of him.


N. N. Who says that a Lot is a casual act applied to the determination of
some particular evens, wherein we confess God to be the only determiner. Now
such is the Lot of Cards and Dice. It is casual, or else it is couzning. For
such as can cogge or shift in shufling are base and vile in the eyes of all
men. It is applied to a particular event, namely who shall have these Cards or
that Money. Again in this act we must confess God to be the only determiner
or disposer.


DEFENSE. Here is much ado to make M. Perkins contradict himself: but in
vain, and to little purpose. Dice I confess, and some Games both at cards and
tables he acknowledges to be mere Lots: but that all Games at cards and tables
are so also in his judgment. I marvel much out of what words you can show it.
Is it because there is in them a casualtie? So in there is many things besides,
which yet are not Lots. For as for that you say, it is casual, or else it is
couzning, it is idle, and shall be answered in the next Section. Is it because
in them the chance is applied to the determining of some thing in doubt? This
indeed argues them to be Lots, but not to be mere Lots. What then? Is it
because in them we confess God to be the only determiner? Nor so neither: for
in M. Perkins no such words are to be found. He says indeed that in a Lot God
is confessed to be a sovereign judge to end and determine things that can no
other way be determined. But withal he denies many of these Games to be Lots,
and therefore denies it, because in mixed games the determination of the
uncertain victory is not from the chance, but from the wit and skill, at least
from the will of the players. Whereupon it follows necessarily, that in such
Games he holds not God to be the only determiner. Yea but whatsoever Master
Perkins holds or not holds, in this act we must confess God to be the only
determiner and disposer. Must? Upon what necessity I pray? you will tell us:
for thus you reason.


N. N. For it is God, or we, or Fortune that disposes it. Now to say it were
Fortune, it were so heathenish that I hope none will dare say it. To say it is
we that dispose of it, is flat couzning if it be true, and would lose all
credit with Gamesters. It is God therefore that disposes of it.


DEFENSE. It is God, or We, or Fortune? And why not rather God, and We, and
Fortune? For in these mixed games all three concur together. What Fortune?
Fie, that were heathenish, and who dares say so? Verily no sound Christian, if
by Fortune you understand that blind Idol which the Gentiles worshipped as a
Goddess, and to whose inconstant wheel they ascribed that which was due to
divine Providence. But if thereby nothing be meant but only chance or the
casual event of things: I see not why it should be counted heathenish to say
Fortune or chance has a hand in the disposing of such things. S. Augustine
indeed in his Retractions repents him that in other of his writings he had so
often used the word Fortune: Lib. 1. c. 1.
not that he denies the chanceablenesse of things, but because the word had
been so ordinarily abused. For otherwise he plainly affirms that no
religion forbids to say, Forte, forsan, forsitan, fortuito, that is,
perhaps, perchance, peradventure. Why should it, seeing the holy Ghost him
self is not afraid to use it? Eccl. 9.11.
Time and chance, says the wise man, Luc. 10.31.
happens unto all. And our Savior Christ, By chance there came down a
certain Priest that way, 1. Cor. 14.10.15 37.16.6.
And the Apostle Paul three times in the same Epistle uses a word so near a
kin to (...), Fortune, that it is both derived from the same root, and usually
opposed to Forecast and Providence. For want whereof in man seeing there is
unto man a Fortune or chance: I hope it is not heathenish to say that in regard
of us, Fortune or chance has a finger in some things. In regard of us I say,
for unto God who foreseeth and orders all things, nothing can be casual.

If Fortune, why not We much more? For in these mixed games betwixt the hazard
and the victory, comes our skill and industry directing the hazard unto
victory. And although it be true that God by his Providence disposes therein,
yet it is as true that man also by his counsel disposes under God. This
notwithstanding you tell us plainly, that to say it is we that dispose it is
flat couzning if it be true, and will loose all credit with gamesters. I see
you are a merry Gentleman, and would feign be reputed ignorant in the course of
these games. Otherwise you would not but know, that to cast the die or to
shuffle the Cards is one thing, and to order them after they be so cast or
shufled is another. To use cunning in the former is indeed couzning and foul
play: but after the Lot is cast to order the same cunningly for our best
advantage was never esteemed a matter of discredit amongst gamesters. The sum
of all is, seeing that from these mixed games neither We nor Fortune are
excluded: it follows that both We and Fortune are determiners under God, and
so God is not the sole determiner.


N. N. I conclude therefore that the use of Cards and Dice as it is used by
Gamesters is mere Lottery.


DEFENSE. And I conclude the contrary, that forasmuch as Master Perkins in
express terms denies mixed games to be Lots, and it cannot any way be
inferred out of his words that they are mere Lots: therefore in M. Perkins
judgment they are not mere Lots. What mystery there may lie in that
Parenthesis, as it is used by gamesters, neither know I nor care I, seeing it
nothing belongs unto the question. And so leaving it vnkith vnkist, I pass
unto the second testimony.


N. N. Again M. Yates in his Model of Divinity page 165. does thus define a
Lot, It is a Divine testimony given by God in the resolution of some doubt.


DEFENSE. This book of M. Yates neither have I lying by me, neither is it
much material what he holds in this point. For certainly if this be his
Definition it is a very unsound one. For according to the rules of Logic,
every good Definition must be reciprocal with the Definite: as in this for
example, Every man is a reasonable creature, and, Every reasonable creature is
a man. But in this it is not so: for although every Lot may be such a Divine
testimony, yet every such testimony is not by and by a Lot. Were it so, then
Vrim and Thummim, and Prophecies, and Miracles, and Scripture, and such like
should all be Lots: for they are Divine testimonies, and given to resolve
doubts.

Howbeit I grant that Lots are Divine testimonies, though not all after the
same sort. To clear which I thus distinguish. Lots are either Ordinary, or
Extraordinary. Extraordinary are those wherein God by his immediate and
special Providence inevitably conducteth the Lot to that end whereunto it was
intended. Ordinary are those wherein God by his general influence and
providence supporting the natural abilities of the Creature, suffers it to
work according to that power wherewith it is enabled. Of these Lots, the
former are testimonies of what God himself does and approves being done: the
latter not so, but only of what he permits or suffers to be done. The
reason, because in those God himself extraordinarily works unto the end: but
in these gives the Creature leave to work at pleasure. This point being thus
cleared, let us see how you argue from hence.


N. N. Such a thing is practiced by gamesters. First it is a Divine testimony:
for it is all one for God to speak from heaven, and to dispose of it who shall
have these Cards or that Money, as it is for him by his immediate hand of
Providence to turn the Dice thus, or dispose the Cards so. For every one will
confess that this is his hand, as well as he would confess that that were
his tongue. And what difference is there between the tongue speaking and the
hand writing in regard of testimony? Saving that the hand is the more better
and the more excellent, at least amongst men. Vox audita perit, littera scripta
manet.


DEFENSE. Thus you argue, Where there is a divine testimony to resolve doubts
there is a mere Lottery: But in Cards and Dice there is a divine testimony to
resolve a doubt, namely who shall have these cards or that money: Ergo in Cards
and Dice there is a mere Lottery. The Mayor or former Proposition of this
Syllogism is not true: for as is showed in the former section, every Divine
testimony resolving a doubt is not by and by a lot, much less a mere lot.
Witness your own example of Gods immediate speaking from Heaven, which yet I
presume you will not say is a lot. I deny it therefore putting you to prove
it: which as here you endeavor not to do, leaving it naked to the mercy of
the world, so you will not in have effect.

The Minor or second Proposition I grant: for as in all Ordinary lots, so in
Cards and Dice, when the Chance has disposed, it is a plain testimony that
God so permitted. Neither needed you to spend words in proof of that which is
not denied, or you should have brought stronger proof. For whereas you reason
thus, God by his immediate hand of Providence turns the Dice thus and
disposes the Cards so: Ergo it is a Divine testimony: though the consequence
be good, yet the Antecedent is manifestly false. For although in Extraordinary
lots God work by his immediate and special Providence: yet in Ordinary lots,
and consequently in Cards and Dice it is not so, God in them not restraining
the power of the creature, but giving it leave to work at liberty. And verily
if in every lot there were, as here you seem to hold, an immediate hand of
Providence, then is it in man's power to set God a working and that immediately
when he lists, which is absurd to imagine. Then also may all trialls of
right, of fact, of fitness to an office, and what not, be referred to a lot,
as which cannot err, if Gods immediate hand which cannot do unjustly direct
it. Whereas notwithstanding nothing is more uncertain then a lot, and wise men
refuse to commit matters of such consequence unto the hazard thereof.

As for that you add, What difference between the toungue speaking and the
hand writing in regard of testimony, saving that handwriting is the better and
more excellent? I con you hearty thanks for it. For if Divine testimony be the
ground and reason of Faith, and the word written be Divine testimony as well,
nay better, as you say, and more excellent then the word spoken by mouth: it
follows that the word written may beget Faith and convert a soul as well as
the word by mouth preached. Whether you would willingly be of this opinion or
no I cannot say: sure I am you must of force, if you will hold to your own
Premises. This by the way.


N. N. If it were in doubt or a thing in controversy, who should have the money
that I possess, If I should hear a voice in the air commanding me to dispose
of it to such a person, I should still doubt, and justly might, whose voice it
were, whether Gods or Satan's. But if it were once put to a Lot, and disposed
of to such a person, I could never doubt afterward but that it was done by
Gods immediate appointment.


DEFENSE. No could? Why I pray you? For may not Satan as well have a hand in a
Lot, as in a voice in the air? What? is not sorcery or divination by Lots a
Satanicall invention? and may not Satan be a worker in his own art? If he may,
how am I certain that the Casual event is rather of Gods appointment, then of
Satan's* The maine error is, a conceit you have, that in all Casualties God
works by his immediate and special Providence, which is utterly untrue, as
we have already showed. And I am strongly persuaded, that this very opinion
was the principal root out of which sorcery and sundry other heathnish
soothsayings first grew: and by which among simple and superstitious Christians
they are yet still maintained and continued.

But to put you from this conceit, let me entreat you seriously to consider
the Lot that Haman cast from day to day, Hest. 3 7. and 9.24
and from month to month, to know what month or day were fittest for the
general massacring of the Jews. The Lot must needs fall on one day or other,
and it fell as it seems on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month which is
Adar. Ca. 3.13.
What? Must we now needs say that the hand of God, yea the immediate hand of
God had appointed that day to that end I trow no: for the very same day Haman
his whole family with many thousands of the enemies of God were destroyed by
the Jews, Ca. 9.1 etc.
and the Jews themselves were delivered. Does not Solomon also speak of
thieves who share their pillages, Prove. 1.14.
and robbers amongst themselves by Lot? And did not the Roman soldiers agree
to cast Lots who should have our Saviors seamlesse coat? Mat. 27, 33.
Yet by your opinion when the Lot has disposed to every one his portion:
neither the thieves nor the soldiers needed afterward to doubt but that God
by his immediate hand assigned it unto them, and testified by his special
Providence that he would have it so. A strange and fearful assertion,
directly reversing that law of justice which requires restitution of
whatsoever is wrongfully gotten. But to what end all this? Forsooth to persuade
that a Lot declares will of God as well, if not better then his own voice from
heaven. Whereunto I answer no more, and I can answer no less, Iud. v. 9.
then the Angel did unto Satan, Increpet te Dominus, the Lord rebuke thee, for
what you say is no less then flat blasphemy.


N. N. Again it is for the resolution of a doubt, namely who shall have these
Cards or that Money. Hence I conclude again that the use of Cards and Dice, as
it is now used by our Gamesters is a mere Lottery.


DEFENSE. That in Cards and Dice there is intended the resolution of a doubt is
already granted, neither is it denied that they are Lots, but that they are all
Mere Lots. (...), to drive out one nail with another, I conclude against your
Conclusion, that you have not yet, not never will be able to prove, that all
Games at Cards and Tables and the like are Mere Lottery.


N. N. But I leave men's testimony which may err, and will try it by Scriptures
that never err. Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is of the Lord. Prove. 10.18. The Lot causes contentions to
cease. Such a thing is practiced by Gamesters. There is a Lot cast: what else
means the shufling of the Cards, and the shakeing of the Dice, which I hear
Gamesters call for so earnestly? The whole disposition therefore is of God. If
I pack the Cards, or cogge the Dice, and not shufle the Cards or shake the
Dice like honest dishonest Gamesters, thou would refuse my company at play.


DEFENSE. To let pass that both unsavory and uncharitable jest of honest
dishonest gamesters, yet doing you to wit, that there are diverse in this land
of far greater learning then your self, and of singular both piety and
gravity, who refuse not at times to recreate themselves at Cards after their
more serious studies: to let pass I say this pure vnpure jest, thus I think
out of these two passages you would conclude. That Lot the whole disposition
whereof is of God is a mere Lot: But Cards and Dice are such Lots the whole
disposition whereof is of God: Ergo Cards and Dice are mere Lots. The Mayor
you take for granted, for you go not about to prove it. The Minor you confirm
by two sentences of Solomon, and the former part that cards and dice are Lots
by the latter, because they stint controversies: the latter that the whole
disposition of them is of God, by the former because in every Lot the whole
disposition is of the Lord. This as I take it is or should be the right frame
of your argument. Which I now come to answer.

The knot of all lies in the right understanding of the former passage: wherein
some are of opinion that Extraordinary Lots only, or to use their own words
Singular, Miraculous, Divine, not Civil Lots are meant. And then the
Assumption is false: for all Lots, and among the rest cards and dice are not
such Lots. Others stand precisely upon these words in the Original (...) But
every judgment of it is of Cod: Prove. 2 31. and 29.26.
and comparing it with the like places, affirm that it imports no more but
this, that in all things, yea even the most unlikely, such as are Casual
Events and Lots, there is a Divine Providence, and hand of God. Which
exposition no way confirms your Mayor: For every Lot wherein God has a hand,
is not presently a Mere lot. But to answer yet more plainly and fully, it is
to be observed that the wise man says not, God disposes all immediately, but
only thus, All the disposition is of God, by which words the use of means is
no way excluded. For whether it please God to work by means or without
means, his Providence ever orders and disposes all. Cen. 45.5. and 50.20.
The selling of Joseph, the spoiling of Job, Job. 1.21.
the railing of Semei, the incest of Absolon, the crucifying of Christ, 2 Samuel
16.12.
and the like sins, though they were committed by men, Ib. 12.11.12.
and through the temptation of Satan: Act. 4.27.28.
yet God chalengeth the doing of all to himself. Not that he wrought all by an
immediate hand of Providence, for this were to make him the author, yea the
only author of Sin, then which there cannot be a greater blasphemy: but
because of the concourse of his Providence with the means, permitting,
directing, and determining all. So that to come to an issue, although it be
granted that in all lots the whole disposition is of God: yet it follows not
but in some lots, as namely some Games at Cards and Tables, wit, skill,
industry, may be used under God for obtaining the victory. Whence also it
follows necessarily that all lots so disposed of by God are not therefore
mere lots. But you will not let this pass so.


N. N. Its of Gods disposing, or of thine, or of Fortunes disposing: choose
which thou will I care not. If it be of Gods disposing, it is that I would have,
its that the Scripture will have. If it be of thy disposing, I know thy
dishonesty. If it be of Fortunes disposing, then there were fortune: Which if
thou will doubt of, I leave God to confute thee.


DEFENSE. These are now the second seething of these cole-worts, and you do
not well to cloy our stomakes so soon again with them. To avoid tautologie
therefore I refer you for answer to what is already said: where I have
showed that in sundry Games both at Cards and Tables, not only God, but man
also disposes, and that without Dishonesty, yea and Fortune too, if you will
not quarrel with the word, but understand thereby a Casual accident or Chance
not ordered by man's forecast or providence.

Where you say you will leave them, who doubt if there be fortune, to Gods
confu^ing, it may please you to remember that God ordinarily reformes men's
errors, not by his own immediate Magistry, but by the Ministry which he has
ordained. And therefore you much forget your self to neglect the performance
of your Ministerial duty, and to leave us poor souls unto Gods extraordinary
instruction.


N. N. It does cause contentions to cease, for it disposes the thing in
controversy whether it be money or victory whose it shall be. Let no profane
Iester vent his wit here or blaspheame the word of God by saying that there
Gaming does rather cause contentions, such as are braulings, oaths, curses,
blasphemies, and the like, and therefore does not cease contentions, but cause
contentions: it is not the Lot, but their unlawful, unholy use of it that
causes this.


DEFENSE. That a Lot stinteth contentions or controversies, is not denied: for
the applying of a casual event, for the determining of a doubt is the very
form of a lot. Nevertheless, in diverse Games, as is already said, both at
Cards and Tables, it is not the Lot only, but it and art also that disposes
whose the money or the victory shall be.

As for the objection, if it be not a Chimera of your own brain, some merry
Gentleman I think made it, to dally with you, and to sport himself withal.
Whereunto your answer is no less pleasant, that not the lot, but the
unlawful unholy use causes Contention, meaning thereby as I conceive it, the
using of it in Games, which is a mere begging of the thing in question, that
it is unlawful to use lots in gaming. Besides, you are to know the lots in
gaming are not in themselves causes either of Peace or of Contention. Not of
Peace, for this proceeds from a farther compact made between those who
refer themselves to a lot. Otherwise, howsoever the lots fall, if such
mutual obligation be wanting the quarrel is not stinted. Not of contention,
for those outrages you speak of rise only from the corruption of them that
play as either their ambition that they cannot endure to be beaten, or their
covetousness that vexes them when they loose their wealth or the like. Take
these corruptions away, and let moderate and temperate men only play, and you
shall have neither Braulings, nor Oths, nor Curses, nor Blasphemies, nor the
like furious behavior amongst them. And thus much in answer to those reasons
whereby you would prove Cards and Dice to be mere lots.


N. N. I come now to prove that it is unlawful to use Lots in Gaming, or light
matters. My reasons for it are these. First Gods servants have never used it
but it urgent, great, and weighty matters. As for example in the choice of
Kings and Priests. 1. Sam. 10. in the division of lands. Josh. 14. To know who
was in fault that Israel fell before their enemies Ios. 17. to know whether
Ioses or Mathias were to succeed Judas. Act, 1.


DEFENSE. Unto this assertion I oppose the contrary, affirming that it is
lawful to use Lots in gaming or light matters: nay farther that the most
serious businesses are lest fit for lots, and the lightest most fit. For what
thing is there in the world more uncertain then a mere Chance? What that less
regards right or wrong, true or false, good or bad, fit or unfit? What matter
soever be to be decided, the Lot is indifferent to either side, and cares not
which way it fall. And hence it is that by lot neither does the Church try the
fitness of her Ministers, nor the Lawyer the right of his Clients cause, nor
the Physician the state of his patient. Neither is it the manner of wise men to
refer any thing unto a lot, until by their wisdom and providence they have
so disposed of all things as it is not much material which way the lot fall.
Were the question referred to a lot of any great consequence, of great
consequence also must the fall of the lot be, and if it fall amiss great
inconveniences must needs ensue thereof. But if wise men so order and cast
their businesses as it is indifferent unto the^ howsoever the lot fall, that
cannot be of any great moment which they refer unto a lot. But I forget that
I stand rather in the place of an Answerer then Replier, and therefore I come
directly to your Arguments.

Your Argument stands thus. That which the Servants of God never used but in
urgent great and weighty matters is not to be used in gaming or light
matters: But the Servants of God never used Lots but in urgent great and
weighty matters: Ergo Lots are not to be used in gaming or light matters. The
Major it seems you take for granted: for you go not about to prove it. The
Minor you endeavor to confirm by certain examples out of holy writ, which we
will by and by examine. In the mean season I answer by distinguishing of that
term, the Servants of God. For by it you may understand either all those holy
men of God who have been since the creation down unto this present instant,
or only those few Saints of God whom the Scripture makes mention of. If you
take it in the former sense, the Assumption is manifestly false, that none of
the Servants of God used lots in gaming at any time, but only in weighty
matters. For I think there is no man so uncharitable as to say that all those
who have or do sometime play at Cards and Tables are unregenerate and no
servants of God. If you take it in the latter sense, then is the Major false,
that what those few mentioned in scripture never did, we may not do. For as
their actions without a precept bind us not to imitation: so their omissions
without a prohibition lay not upon us an obligation of forbearance. If they
did, then might we not play at Chesse, or the Philosophers game, or bowls, or
the like, because those Servants of God for ought we know never used any of
them. But let us see how you prove that Gods Servants never used lots but in
serious matters.

Thus you prove it, They used lots in serious matters, Ergo, they used them
only in serious matters. A silly Consequence, and near a kin to that protrite
Enthymeme, The sun shines in heaven, Ergo, the staff stands in the bench
corner. But to satisfy the reader more fully I answer three things. First,
where to prove your Antecedent you affirm among other things, that Priests
were chosen by lot, you are foully mistaken. For Aaron and his posterity without
intervention of a lot by the immediate voice of God, were perpetually appointed
to the Priesthood. Secondly, these lots here mentioned were all of them
Extraordinary: whence if your reason be good it would follow that none but
Extraordinary lots may be used, or rather that now adays no lots at all may be
used, considering that God having not promised the like Extraordinary
assistance, it would be but tempting of God to expect an Extraordinary working
from him in a lot. Thirdly and lastly it follows not, We read not in
scripture that the Saints used lots in light matters, Ergo, they used them only
in weighty. For it is a mere Fallacy, to dispute from authority negatiuely
in a case of Fact. In a question of Faith the sequel is good, We read it not
in scripture, Ergo, it is not a matter of Faith: the reason, because scripture
contains all matters of Faith. But in questions of Fact it is not so, because
it was not the purpose of the holy Ghost to register down in the Scripture all
whatsoever his Servants had done, much less their sports and recreations. Had
it been his purpose so to do, he would never have said so often in the book
of Kings, The rest of the acts of such or such a King, are they not written in
the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? For to understand these
words of those two books of Chronicles written, as it is thought, 1. King.
11.41.
so long time after by Ezra, were in the judgment of learned Iunius very
ridiculous.


N. N. But it may be objected, some matters of small moment have been
determined by Lots, as for example who should be door keepers of the Temple of
Jerusalem. I answer that was no light matter. First it was Gods command
expressly in his word which is never light or mean to Gods servants. Secondly,
David belike had a reverend respect of this office when he said that he had
rather be a dore-keeper in the house of God then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness. And is it nothing to be one of the King of Englands Porters? Many
a man if it should be tried had rather have that office then twenty pounds by
the year, and that is a matter if it were of much less weight in which we may
lawfully use a Lot. Now much more might the dore-keepers of Gods house be
warranted from reason (suppose they had no special command) to cast Lots, or
to have Lots cast upon them to determine who should supply that worthy office.


DEFENSE. As a pound compared to a scruple is weighty, but light compared to a
talent: so the Porters office in regard of the Nethinims hewers of wood and
drawers of water, might be of some reckning, but very mean in respect of the
Priesthood. So that a man may safely say the Porters office was but a low
place, and the lots were used in no very high matter. But whether high or low
it is not greatly material, seeing the sinews of your Argument are cut
already. Yet let us hear what you say. First, it was Gods command, and his
command is never light. True, yet this lets not but God may give command
touching light things: as he did when he took order for every petty and small
matter that the hearing and determining of them should be referred unto the
inferior officers. Exodus 18.26.
And if his Providence reach even to the smallest matters, what impeachment can
it be to his honor to give commandment touching them also? The Pins of the
Tabernacle, and the beesoms of the Temple were no great matters, yet God
disdained not to give order for them. And as in a building, (...). the great
stones can never be well laid without the less: so also in the government of
the world for the better ordering of the greatest things, God takes care of the
smallest also.

Secondly, say you, David so honored the Office that he had rather be a
dore-keeper in the house of God then to dwell in the tents of wickedness. But
what if David in that place spoke not of Dore-keepers? What then is become of
your argument? The words in the Original are (...) I could wish rather to
threshold it. Iunius translates it limen frequent are, often to pass over the
threshold of Gods house and to be conversant in the Church: which may belong
unto any other of the people of God as well as the Porters. But be it that he
mean them, inasmuch as the Psalm is inscribed to the Korhites who were
Dore-keepers, yet does it not argue such dignity in the office. If a man
should say, I had rather be a Sexten or Dog-whipper in the poorest parish in
England, then the great Caliph of Egypt, or Pope of Rome: would any thereupon
say he spoke reverendly of a Sextens or Dog-whippers place? Nay verily, but
that he does the more abase the Caliphat or Popedom. Even so David preferring
a Porters place unto the tents of wickedness, does not so much intend to
honor that as to avile these. And hence is it that the Septuagint renders it
by (...), to be laid as an abject at the threshold: and the vulgar translation,
Elegi abjectus esse in domo deimei. I have chosen to be an abject in the house
of my God: and Calvin, Ad locum communem and ignobilem reijci, to be rejected
unto a common and base place.

Lastly, say you, it is something to be the King of Englands Porter, for the
place may be worth better then twenty pounds by the year: much more to be a
Porter in Gods house. Well then now I see that twenty pounds by the year is
something: and I never thought till now that a Portership yearly worth so much
had been such a worshipful preferment. But is it weighty enough for a lot?
Yea marry is it, and so is a matter of much less weight too. If so, then games
and recreations are not unfit for it neither: for there are many Gentlemen of
good fashion who value their play in a far greater sum then that comes
unto. Howbeit I must do you to wit, that it was not determined by lots who
should be Porters, as you say, but only who should attend at what gate,
Eastward, Westward, Northward, or Southward, which could be no great matter.


N. N. Secondly, there is no necessity of Lots in light matters: Which being
so, it may also be otherwise determined. And me thinks it is too much boldness
to presume to trouble the King with every vain business when there be so many
petty Courts and Officers to censure in matters of less moment.


DEFENSE. A doughtie Argument. That whereof there is no necessity may not be
used: But there is no necessity of Lots in light matters: Ergo, in light
matters Lots may not be used. The Minor which you knew no man would deny you
prove, because such matters may otherwise be determined: but the Mayor which is
palpably false you prove not at all, and I marvel with what forhead a man of
understanding can affirm it. What? Nothing to be done but that is necessary?
What then shall become of things indifferent? May not they be used neither? For
necessary I am sure they are not. Why then do you eat flesh? For you may be
otherwise fed. Why wear you linen, seeing you may be otherwise clothed? And
why play you at Chesse, at the Philosophers game, at Bowls, seeing you have
Ouranomachie, Metromachie, and the long Bow where with to recreate you?

Yea but it is Presumption to trouble the King with every vain business. What
of that? Forsooth it is more so to trouble the King of Kings. But how do we
trouble him? By soliciting his Providence. What Providence? That which is
Immediate and Extraordinary? Indeed so to do would be too presumptious. But
we do not so, for we consult not with God, nor look we for any Extraordinary
work from him. Our business is not such as needs so special a presence and
assistance of God: a casual event is sufficient to determine it. We inquire
not what it is that God would have to be done or not to be done: that without
special command or instinct were Sorcerie or Divination by Lots. But we do
that which God under himself has enabled us to do, expecting no issue from
him save only by Ordinary means: which as in other our actions so in this I
hope we may do with out troubling the king, as you imagine. In a word, the
maine error is, you fancy in all lots an immediate and extraordinary
providence, which is ever denied, and neither is nor even can be proved by you.


N. N. Thirdly there is no warrant from Gods word to meddle with Lots in
slight matters, neither from express command nor from any approved example,
nor from any reasonable consequence from any part of Gods word. And whatsoever
is done not by virtue of one of these warrants is sin. Romans 14.23.


DEFENSE. This argument is thus to be formed. That which is not warranted from
Gods word may not be meddled withal: Lots in slight matters are not so
warranted: Ergo, Lots in slight matters are not to be meddled withal. The
Mayor you confirm by that of S. Paul, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: The
Minor, for that it is not warranted, nor by express command, nor approved
example, nor reasonable consequence. To all which I answer, and first to the
mayor, by denying it, and withal affirming that S. Paul's words prove it not.
For by Faith he means nothing but Plerophorie, or certain assuredness that
what we go about is lawful to be done. Now this Assurance in many things may
be gotten not only by the supernatural light of revelation contained in the
Scriptures, but also by the natural light of reason imprinted in our hearts.
For the Moral law is natural unto us, and was by the finger of God written in
our minds, before it was graven in tables of stone. And the rule of this law is
a sufficient warrant of our actions, as for example, of honoring our parents,
and doing the works of justice by giving unto every one his due, although we
never knew the Scriptures. Neither need we to seek any farther proof hereof
then from our own Consciences, which naturally check and control us,
whenever we swerve and decline from it, and also clear us when we yield
obedience thereunto.

The Minor also I deny, for lots in slight matters, and consequently in Gaming
are warranted not only by the law of Nature, but also by Scripture. How so,
will you say? By express commandment? Not so, for then they should be
necessary: and if nothing should be lawful but that which is so commanded,
neither should any thing be indifferent and left unto us free and arbitrary. By
any approved example then? Nor so, for the Scriptures were not written to
record the games and plays of men, but to a more serious end. How then? By
just consequence, thus. That which in Scripture is neither commanded nor
forbidden is indifferent, and consequently lawful. But lots in light matters
as namely in games are neither commanded nor forbidden. Ergo they are
indifferent and consequently lawful.


N. N. Fourthly, we have no example that ever any good man used the Lot about
any thing in which it was not lawful to pray God to direct and dispose of it.
Now no man will say or think that it is lawful or convenient to pray to God
so or so to direct or dispose of the Cards or Dice that such a man may have
such a Card, or such a one throw such a cast at Dice, it being a matter at the
best hand but of Recreation. For albeit there be warrant to recreate our
selves, yet we have neither command nor warrant to pray God to direct us in
the determination of any thing about our Recreations by Lot.


DEFENSE. Your fourth Argument stands thus, That lot wherein it is not
lawful nor convenient to pray God to direct it is unlawful: but in light
matters, as Cards and Dice it is unlawful and inconvenient to pray God to
direct the Lot: Ergo a lot in such matters is unlawful. The Mayor you prove
because we read not of any good man that used the lot in any thing wherein he
might not pray for direction of it: the Minor, because at the best hand Games
are but matters of Recreation. I answer, and first to the Mayor negatiuely.
For although in Extraordinary lots wherein there is an expectation of Gods
immediate providence for direction, it is fit by prayer to crave the same of
God: yet in those Ordinary lots wherein it is not material which way they
fall, and no notable inconvenience can ensue thereof, it is not necessary so to
do. The confirmation which you bring for your Mayor, is authority negatiuely
in point of Fact, which is a mere Sophistical Elench, and of no validity.
Wherein also you take for granted that which cannot be yielded without much
folly, nor demanded without much impudence, namely that whatsoever the Saints
did, is recorded in Scripture, which we have showed to be far otherwise.

Unto the Minor, and the proof thereof I say no more but this, that as all
other our actions, so our Gaming also is sanctified unto us by Prayer. Not that
at the commencement of every act a man is bound to put himself on his knees,
and to make his particular addresses unto God: for the morning sacrifice
through the acceptance of God is sufficient to that end, and stretches it
self to all the days actions. Although I deny not, but as at our meals, so
also in the beginning and closing up of our play, we may with short
eiaculations both crave a blessing upon our recreation, and praise him for the
same. But as touching the fall of the lot in our games, because it is like
herb John in a pot of broth doing neither good nor harm, I hold it as
inconvenient to pray for it as it is to pray for good success at a match of
bowls. For as for those who adventure at play more then they can well spare
without disabling themselves, they pass beyond their bounds, and offend
against the rule of moderation in play. Yet if such a one finding his
rashness, and sincerely resolving not to commit such an error again, shall
in his heart entreat God to free him from the present danger, I think such
prayer should not be unlawful to him.


N. N. Fifthly, a Lot is a thing that belongs to the art of Divinity, and can be
defined no where but there, nor handled by any other way. We may as I think
sport our selves with any thing that belongs to any other art, or recreate our
selves in jest by any rules of any other art. But thus we must not do with
any thing or rule that belongs to Divinity, we may not meddle with Divine
things in light matters, the Majesty of God and them requires more respect at
the hands of Creatures. The King nor any of his Laws may not be dallied with
by the Subject: how much more is the Creature being but sinful dust and ashes
bound to his Creator being a consuming fire: which wicked men make light of,
yea make sport with oaths, vows, prayer, the Sabbath, the Sacraments, and the
Word of God. For they will swear, vow, pray, without serious consideration;
they will for their pleasures sake break the holy day of the Sabbath, they use
the Sacraments as a matter of custom and fashion, not of Conscience, else the
Dog would not so soon turn again to his vomit. And as for the Word of God,
he is commended for the best wit that can break the most savory jests in the
repeting of some phrase of Scripture. We say it is no jesting with edgtooles,
and all say, non est bonum ludere cum Sanctis: yet what is wicked men's practice
else with any Divine thing? To follow whose example is far unbeseeming the
humility and gravity of Gods professed servants.


DEFENSE. Your reason is to be reduced into this form or syllogism, That
which belongs to the art of Divinity, and can no otherwhere be defined or
handled, may not be sported withal, or meddled with in light matters: But a
lot belongs to the art of Divinity, and can no otherwhere be handled or
defined: Ergo, it may not be sported withal, or meddled with in light matters.
In the proof of the Mayor you enlarge your self very much, discoursing of the
Majesty of God, and divine things, and what respect is due to them from the
creatures. Then with many words you inveigh against all those wicked ones who
make a Game of Oaths, Vows, Prayer, Sacraments, Sabbath, Scripture, and what
not? In all which I readily join with you, and had you pressed it, much farther
and with more vehemence you could never have offended me. The only thing that
I dislike is, that you bestow so much pains in maintaining that which no man
denies, and spare it there where it greatly needed, I mean upon the
confirmation of your Minor. What? Did you think you should be taken for
another Pythagoras? Or that your own bare (...) would be of sufficient
authority? Verily, either it was great dimnesse of sight if you foresaw not the
Assumption would be denied: or if you foresaw it, extreme negligence or
weakness that you endeavored not to prove it.

Your Assumption therefore I deny, That a Lot belongs to the art of Divinity
and is there to be defined and handled. If you ask a reason of the denial,
you may know I am not bound to render it: your place is not to ask questions,
but to prove what you affirm. Nevertheless the reason is this, because the
terms of the definition belong not unto Divinity. Not the Genus which is a
Chance or Casual event, for that belongs unto the Metaphysics, as also does
Necessity. Not the Form, which is the applying of the chance to resolve a
doubt, for that belongs unto Policy or Morality. If you foist any other thing
into the Definition, whatsoever it be it is superfluous and impertinent. But
why should any man think that it pertaines to a Divine to define a lot? Is it
because there is in them a Divine providence? So is there also in Chesse, and
Bowls and all other things whether serious or lusory: yet are they not
therefore Theological. Is it because there is in them an immediate providence?
So indeed you dream, but we have already clearly demonstrated the contrary.
Is it then because they have been used in holy and religious businesses? So is
bread, and wine, and water also used: yet I hope you will not say that the
Definition of these things is proper to Divinity, or that we may not play with
them, and use them in light matters. Every applying of a creature unto a holy
end, is not by and by an appropriating thereof unto that end: neither does God
by his Extraordinary using of a thing, bar us ever after from the Ordinary
and natural use thereof. And thus you see, that as good reason may be rendered
to the contrary, so just reason for it you can render none, why the defining of
a lot should be so confined to Divinity.

Yet one word more with you ere I leave this point. For I must entreat leave to
pluck you by the ear, and to admonish you of Contradictions, which seem to
have slipped from you at unawares. Tell me I beseech you how these sayings hang
together, We may sport our selves with things that belong to any art but
Divinity, and The King and his laws may not be dallied withal? For if Kings
and laws belong unto Policy and not Divinity, then may they be played withal:
but if they may not be played with, then is your rule false, and we may not
sport our selves with all those things that belong to other arts.


N. N. Wicked men are bold to cast Lots with wicked or vain minds, in wicked
things, to wicked ends, without respect of Gods disposition at all. For if they
did but think that God were so powerful as from heaven to dispose, and so to
show his special presence in a Lot, or so wise as to understand what they go
about, with what intents, for what ends, and after what manner, they durst not
be so bold, as the wicked soldiers were to cast Lots upon Christ's coat Mat.
27.5. nor as the Jews were in as inconsiderate dealing. Joel. 3.3. Obad. 11.
nor as our foolish and filthy Gamesters who must have Games with Lots to make
themselves sport and recreation. For mine own part I had rather hear of
downeright blasphemy, then to hear wise wicked men justify lusorious Lots.


DEFENSE. To what end all this Deolamation against wicked men, with wicked
minds, in wicked things, to wicked ends ferueth, I see not. Nor yet whether
you esteem all those that use and allow these Lotgames to be foolish and
filthy Gamesters, and wise wicked men: for certainly your words seem to
incline that way, and I fear when you wrote this, you gave too much way to
your passion. Be it known unto you that as learned, and reverend, and
religious Divines as this Church yields, and this Church yields as many as
any Church in Christendom besides, both use and approve these Games* whom
therefore to censure as foolish and wicked men, argues no less then extremity
of arrogance and fury. But where are those wicked men who doubt whether God can
dispose from heaven, and show his special presence in a Lo^* For that God can
do so, not Scripture only, but the light of reason also teaches, and few I
think are grown to that height of impudence to deny it. It may be you are
angry with some, who will not believe upon your bare word that God works
immediately in every lot, and therefore you lay such imputation upon them. But
it is one thing what God does, another thing what God can do: and me thinks
you should be ashamed with so much confidence to maintain a special presence
and hand of God in every casualty, and never to make the least show of an
argument to persuade it. He^e lies the knot of all, demonstrate this, (...),
the victory is yours.

As for the lot which the soldiers cast upon our Saviors coat, it was a
Divisory lot, and that I trow you do not disallow. It seems as with us, so
amongst them, the garment was the executioners fee, and Christ's being
seamlesse, they would not part it with the rest, but draw cuts who should have
the whole. In regard whereof if Christ had been a malefactor the lot had
been lawful: but being an innocent it was no better then robbery. Those lots
mentioned in Joel and Obadiah were not, as you mistake it, cast by the Jews,
but by the enemies of God, and the Edomits upon the Jews: and it was unlawful
because they were wrong doers. Had the people of God in a just war cast the
lot upon the Edomits and other of Gods enemies, the case had been altered, and
the Lot had been lawful. That last clause wherein you profess you had rather
hear of downeright blasphemy, then wise wicked men justify Lusorious lots,
argues more have then advisedn^sse, and is not the speech of a sober
Protestant, but of one fraied out of his wits. For no man in his right mind
will say that that which so many worthies approve and allow, is no better then
downeright blasphemy which all Christian hearts detest and abhor. Dij mentem
tibi dent tuam Philaeni.


N. N. Sixthly, the Lot is one of Gods names by which he is known. The Kings
wisdom, power, and justice, and so his name is made famous by the wise and
just determination of business in which others want both justice, wisdom and
discretion. Hence Mr Perkins on the 3d Commandment speaking of Gods name
says, we ought not to use the Lot but with great reverence in that the
disposition of them is only of the Lord, and their proper use is to decide
controversies and to make partitions in great matters.


DEFENSE. Thus you reason, To profane Gods name is unlawful: To use lots in
light matters is to profane Gods name: Ergo, to use lots in light matters is
unlawful. The Mayor I grant. The Minor you prove first by reason, then by
authority. By reason for that a lot is one of Gods names. I deny it, for then
might we say, God is a casualtie applied to decide a doubt. Yea but your
meaning is that in a lot Gods name is made famous. So is it also in every
creature from the highest Seraphin to the smallest gnat: yet some of the^ I
hope without profaning of Gods name be used in light matters. That
insinuation of Gods just and wise determining businesses in a lot, shall anon
in due place be answered: in the mean season thus I argue ab absurdo. Nothing
wherein Gods name appears may be used in light matters: In every creature Gods
name appears: Ergo, no creature may be used in light matters. But this
conclusion is false: Ergo, one of the Propositions. Not the Minor, for in every
creature Gods name appears, Ergo, the Mayor, that nothing wherein Gods name
appears may be used in light matter:

The authority you press upon us is of M. Perkins, who I confess was a very
reverend and worthy Divine, yet being a party in this question, little reason
have you to urge his authority, and I less to be swaied by it. Your self
reject it in mixed Games at Cards and Tables: pardon me therefore if I admit not
of it here. Forcti sanatique idem jus, you have no better privilege for the one
then I have for the other. Other authors of as great note are of another mind,
and what in the passage by you quoted he affirms is already confuted.


N. N. Seventhly, we argue against lusorious Lots from the dignity and worth
of a Lot. A Lot does equal an Oath in any thing: a Lot excells an Oath in many
things. It equals an Oath thus. An Oath is of Gods ordaining, so is a Lot. An
Oath is a means to decide controversies, so is a Lot. An Oath taken settles
contentment amongst men, for a man will say, if such a man will swear it, let
him take it: so it is or should be in a Lot, for God does it. An Oath calls God
to witness, so does a Lot. An Oath must be in truth, righteousness and
judgment, so it is in the Lot being disposed by him that is thus qualified.
Thus and many another way it equals an Oath.


DEFENSE. The form of your Argument is this, That which equals an Oath in any
thing and excels it in many things may not be used in light matters: A lot
equals an Oath in any thing and excels it in many things: Ergo, a lot may not be
used in light matters. The Mayor I readily yield unto: but the Minor, pardon me
if I speak plain English and call a spade a spade, is little less then
blasphemy. For in an Oath there is a solemn appeal made unto God, both by
attestation of his Omniscience, and obligation of our selves unto the severest
censure of his justice if we should swear falsely. But in Ordinary lots no
such appeal is made unto him, but only to a Casual event merely considered
as it is Casual* which being so petty a matter in regard of so sacred an
Ordinance, I cannot but wonder how you durst so to compare them. But let us
hear your reasons, and first wherein they are equal.

An Oath, you say, is of Gods ordaining, and so is a lot. Nay so is not a lot.
God indeed permits it, allows it, and if you will, advises it too: but
commands it not, as he does an Oath. All the power now it has is only from
humane institution and agreement. Again, an Oath, say you, is a means to
decide controversies, so is a lot. True, but not such a means, nor of such
Controversies. Not such a means, for an Oath is ordained by God to this very
end: but a Lot howsoever it may be used to the same end, yet is it so by man's
Ordinance not Gods. And an Oath straightly binds to pronounce rightly: whereas a
Lot is careless, as being but a Casualtie. Nor of such controversies, for an
Oath determines questions of right and fact, which a Lot cannot: and they that
are wise never refer matters of so high a nature to so incompetent a judge.
Thirdly, say you, an oath taken settles contentment among men, so it is or
should be in a lot, for God does it. It does, but an Oath by virtue of that
obligation wherein man stands bound unto God to speak nothing but truth: and a
Lot only by reason of some compact formerly made between men. Neither does God
do it as you say, but without restraining the natural power of the Creature
suffers him to work and do as him lists. Fourthly, an oath, you say, calls
God to witness, so does a lot. Nay so does not a Lot: for he that casts the
Lot, respects not Providence but Casualtie, and to expect Gods immediate hand
therein is no better then tempting of him. But what if the Lot fall amiss, as
it may do, shall God be a false witness? God forbid. Yet so it must needs be
if in every Lot God be called to witness. Lastly, say you, an Oath must be in
truth, righteousness, and judgment, so it is in the Lot being disposed by him
that is thus qualified. As touching an Oath I grant, but how it may be done in
a Lot, I for my part understand not. For a Lot is but a Chance, and Chance
regards nor truth nor righteousness nor judgment. But he that disposes the
lot should be thus qualified. Who is that? God? The word qualified fits not
him that is nothing but substance: and to God nothing is casual, and so no
Lot. Man? That were to contradict your own self: for you have confidently
affirmed again and again that God alone disposes in a Lot, and man has no
hand therein. Sed magna est veritas and praevalet, error has but a bad
memory, and truth at one time or other will surely break forth. Many other
ways there are, you say, wherein a lot equals an Oath: but what they are
neither do you tell us, neither will I trouble my self to enquire. I come
therefore to examine wherein a Lot excels an Oath


N. N. Now it excels an Oath in these and other particulars. A Lot decides that
which an Oath cannot. Its unlawful to use. a Lot if witness or Oath can decide
it. It was an order in Israel that if the under-officers could not decide a
controversy, they should bring it to the chief Judge or high Priest to be
determined. So fares it in this, which argues the hand of it. When all means
used by us by prayer, inquiry, witness and oath, are not able to decide a
controversy, bring it to me, says God, the Lot shall do it, he will do it
by a Lot.


DEFENSE. Indeed there are some causes, wherein by reason of their indifference
either way, an Oath is not fit to determine. For example, when things are as
equally parted as man's wisdom can devise, and the question is who shall have
which part, what can Oath or testimony do in this case? Nothing at all. But a
Lot can, you will say. True, yet this advances not a Lot above an Oath, but
rather abaseth it. For Oths may not be taken but in weighty matters; and this
is so small that an idiot or child may as easily determine it as a Lot. In
matters of importance, such as concern right and fact, deposition of witnesses
is of great force. What a Lot? Of none at all. For example, a murder is
committed, Titius is arraigned for it, Sejus and Sempronius testify upon their
Oath that Titius is the man: it suffices to convict him. Now suppose witnesses
fail and cannot be produced: what can a Lot do? Can it infallibly find out
the guilty person? If no, as indeed it cannot, how is it that you say, bring it
to a Lot, and that shall decide it?

For, if I mistake not your comparison, you make prayer, inquiry, witness,
oath, and other means to be as the under officers in Israel: but a Lot as the
chief judge, or High Priest, to whom was referred what else could not be
determined, and from whom there might be no appeal. But good sir, you know
that comparisons prove not, and I deny that a Lot is Gods highest tribunal, or
that his immediate Providence works therein. Were it so, I demand why
questions of right and fact may not be tried thereby? For I presume no man
knows what is to be done better then God, and he is not partial to accept
the persons of any. If you say they may, then I demand farther, whether the Lot
will always fall out right? If yea, then would the fall of the Lot be
unalterable although it were cast a thousand times. But experience tells us
that every several cast varieth and alters the Chance: and how then can we
excuse God from mutabilitie and inconstancy? If no, then must God pronounce an
unrighteous sentence, and how then shall the judge of the whole world pass
unblameable, or not stained in his honor with foul injustice? To avoid all
which inconveniences I would advise you to put on Christian ingenuity, and to
acknowledge your error herein, that God may be justified in all his sayings,
and clear when he is judged.


N. N. Again, its possible, we wish it were not common that malice, ignorance,
or bribes corrupt the Swearers sometimes so that we see it directly many times
that in an Oath or by the Oath of an ungodly person great sin and great wrong
is committed. But now in the Lot man's wit and will are so curbed, the whole
disposition of it being of God, it being Gods only pure act without any
commixtion of any power, will, skill, or motion of any creature, I say man is
so curbed that the most wicked and the most ignorant must needs say that it is
of God. The very heathen that did vilify Gods Providence and erected Fortune
instead of it, they made a Goddess of Fortune being forced of their own
Conscience to confess that there was a Divine thing in every Chance they met
withal.


DEFENSE. By an Oath, say you, great sin and great wrong is committed, but never
by a Lot: Ergo, a Lot excells an Oath. I deny the consequence, and affirm that
the contrary Conclusion would follow much better, Ergo, an Oath excels a Lot.
For it is certain that the higher degree of perfection a thing naturally
holds, the more dangerous is the corruption thereof when it degenerateth: as
for example, Wine the more generous it is, when it waxes eager, it turns
into the sharper vinegar. Were not Angels in their primitive state more noble
and excellent then man, and Man again then the brute creature? Yet Man when
he sinned grew thereby more detestable and mischeevous then the brute
creature, and Angels again then man. Is not Divinity Architectonicall, and
sovereign mistress of all other Sciences? Yet being perverted and abused no
other can do the like mischief. In like manner the Oath of an ungodly person
may work more villainy and wickedness then a Lot can: yet is it not therefore
inferior to it in the right use thereof, but rather superior.

But what? is a Lot so privileged that there is no place for corruption
therein? Whence comes it then that the Dutch by way of Proverb use to say, In
Lotterie is Boverie, that is to say, couznage and knauerie? And that all
Historians report of so much juggling and false play used in them? Those Lycian,
Delian, Praenestine, Antiatine Lots, and those of ^ura in Achaia, and of Elis,
and sundry others, were they not all Magical and of Satan's invention? And
being so, do you think that the Devil never played the Devil by them? If
every Lot be, as you say, Gods pure act, without any commixtion of any power,
will, skill, or motion of any Creature, why are not these esteemed the Oracles
of God? And why do all Divines both ancient and modern ever in their writings
call them the Oracles of the Devil? But how prove you that Lottery is Gods
pure act? Forsooth it is enough for you to say it, and then what man so wicked
or ignorant that dare gainsay it? Marry sir, many a one neither wicked nor
ignorant but far more learned and religious then your self. Neither will
they be of other mind until you convince the^ with stronger arguments then
confident asseveration. For I assure you, you have not yet gotten such
authority among wise and understanding men, that all your words should pass
for Oracles. How often have you now affirmed that God works immediately in
every Lot? yet hitherto have you never gone about to prove it as you ought to
do, it being the maine foundation of all your building.

That the Gentiles in deifying of Fortune acknowledged a Divine thing in every
Chance, is but your own private Mythologie. You might as well say they found I
know not what divine thing in the hinges of a door, in the every, in lechery
and bawdery, and the like, when they canonized for Gods and Goddesses Carna,
and Laverna, and Cotytto, and Priapus, and others of that stamp more then a
good many. Assuredly whosoever seeks or hopes to find divine things in all
the Idolatry of the Heathen, either knows not, or remembers not, how much God
in his just judgment infatuated them: that when they thought themselves most
wise they proved the starkest fools, doing things clean contrary not only to
the rules of Divinity, but of right reason also. For when they abused the very
light of reason to the dishonor of God, he blew out the candle as it were,
and cast upon their understanding such a palpable darkness, as they neither
knew or whether they went or what they did. Had they been wise, and
acknowledge a Providence, they would never have consecrated Fortune for a
Goddess. Even the heathen Poet witnesses as much where he says, Iuven. Sat.
10.
Nullum numen abest si sitprudentia, sed te nos facimus Fortuna Deam, as if he
should say, It is our ignorance and folly that makes Fortune a Goddess: for
were we as wise and virtuous as we ought to be, we would never acknowledge
any Deity or divine power at all to be in her.


N. N. Again, it excels an Oath in this particular, God would not have one
oath, or one man's oath to put any man to death, there must be two swear. But
the Lot once cast must determine it. There never was an order from God, nor a
practice amongst Gods people to cast the Lot twice for the determination of the
most weightiest matters, that ever were either of life, or of lands, or of
office.


DEFENSE. The life of man indeed is in all law, Divine, Natural, Civil, of so
precious account, that it will by no means hazard it upon the bare testimony
of one man. Hence the proverb, vnus testis, nullus testis, one witness is as
good as none. For one man may easily be mistaken, not so many: and therefore in
ore duorum aut trium testium, 2. Cor. 15.1.
in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. But
what? Can a Lot once cast determine it, and suffice to put a man to death? It
cannot, if you mean an Ordinary lot, no not though it were cast ten thousand
times. And where is the state I pray you in which capital questions are divided
by Lot? No where I think, unless happily in Vtopia. For seeing God has not
promised it, neither do men believe that such a Lot can discover the truth. If
you understand an Extraordinary Lot, I confess it is sufficient, but you
dispute not to the purpose: for they are now out of use, and to argue from
Extraordinary unto Ordinary is very ridiculous.

You add, there never was an order from God, nor practice amongst Gods people
to cast the lot twice. What of that? Ergo the lot may not be cast twice about
one thing? It is no difficult matter to allege many examples, wherein the
first fall of the Lot has been controled not by a second casting only, but by
suffrages also. But you will say you find them not in Scripture. I answer
therefore that neither all the actions of Gods people are recorded in the
Bible, neither Lots of Divine but humane institution: so that they may be cast
again and again, and either be of force or frustrate as men shall agree.


N. N. Now I appeal to thy Conscience though never so much corrupted by Satan,
whether thou can think that a Lot so honorable and excellent an ordinance
of God, that it equals an Oath, yea excels it diverse ways, that this was
ordained by God to make men sport withal, or that any man has any spark of
grace, (I had almost said) of wit, who must have lusory lots for his
recreation. None of us can abide a Blaspheamer who makes himself sport by
swearing, why should we not abhor a Gamester more, especially if he be a
professor of religion, when he will have Cards and Dice used to sport withal.


DEFENSE. And now I appeal also unto thy Conscience whosoever art author of
this Pamphlet, how confident soever thou be in thine opinion, whether thou
can think that a Lot being so petty and slight a thing, not of Gods but
man's ordaining, so far inferior to an Oath that it is not fit to determine
questions of right or fact or the like importance, but such as a child or idiot
might decide. Whether I say thou can yet think that a Lot may not be used in
light matters. All the arguments you have produced to the contrary are now
thoroughly ^ifted and answered, that which you took for granted and never
endeavored to prove, namely that a Lot is Gods pure act, and that his
immediate hand works and disposes all, plainly appears to be but a
Paradoxe: wherefore unless you be resolved with him in the Comedy, Aristoph.
Plut
not to be persuaded although you be persuaded, I hope you will not hold it any
disparagement to forgo your conclusion, and to yield to the truth not
discovered unto you.

But to answer a little more particularly, where you damaund, if a Lot were
ordained by God to make men sport withal? I answer, no. It is not so much as
ordained by him, much less to such an end. How then? It is permitted as a
thing indifferent. Again, has he any spark of grace or of wit, who must
have lusorious lots for his recreation? I answer, that many grave and worthy
Divines (to say nothing of other men) whose books you are not worthy to bear
after them, use at times Lu^orious lots for their recreation: whom yet if you
have any spark either of wit or grace, you cannot but acknowledge to be full
both of grace and wisdom. Lastly, where you say, a Gamester when he will have
Cards and Dice used to sport withal, is more to be abhorred then a blaspeamer
who makes himself sport by swearing: it is the speech of a frantic rather
then sober man, and argues that you can swallow camels and strain at gnats.
Had you had but the least dram of true wisdom or discretion, you would never
have suffered such an unsavory and ungodly word to escape your tongue. And
farther answer then this I vouchsafe it not.


N. N. Any of the forenamed arguments, much more all of them must needs breed
doubt in every man's Conscience, whether this kind of the use of Lots be lawful
or not, and so by Consequence it is Sin to him to use them, since he that
doubts is condemned if he do otherwise. Romans 14. vlt.


DEFENSE. I had thought these arguments had been canon shot at least, and able
to throw down whatsoever should lift it self up against you. But now I
perceive they are no better then popguns charged only with paper to stagger and
affright the Conscience. Which effect if they have wrought on any, who formerly
were otherwise persuaded; as I can but pity such wavering and unsettledness of
judgment, so I cannot but condemn you of much uncharitableness for giving
the occasion, and thus perplexing them with your doubtful disputations. But
now I hope these arguments being all of them fully satisfied and assoiled,
their Conscience will no longer hang in suspense, but rest thoroughly resolved.
Howbeit if any out of weakness still doubt, let him in Gods name abstain
least it be sin unto him. In the mean season, according to the counsel of
Saint Paul, Romans 14.3.
Let not him that uses his liberty despise him that uses it not, neither let
him that uses it not censure him that uses it: for God has received him.


N. N. I confess that vain men may count it vain to be so strict and
curious in so small matters: yet the truth of God is, by how much it is less
of moment wherein God is offended, by so much the greater is the Contempt and
sin. Let no man think that I esteem this a small matter, which I have
proved to be of such special worth and weight.


DEFENSE. Est modus in rebus, Horat.
there is a golden mean to be held in all things: which if either you exceed,
or fall short of, you err and are out of the way. To stretch a man's liberty
even to those things which are evil and forbidd^n by God, is to fault in the
excess, and to turn the grace of God into wantonness. To condemn that which
God has made indifferent, and to restrain either our selves or others from
the lawful use thereof, is to offend in the defect through too much
strictness and austerity. Happy is the man that knows the right bounds of
his liberty, and walks soberly and inoffensiuely within the compass thereof.
Now if to use Lots in Games or light matters were an offense though never so
small, he should be I confess a vain man that should tax you for overmuch
strictness herein. And it is true which you say, the smaller the matter, the
greater the contempt: which aggravates the contumacy of those precise ones, who
refuse to conform themselves unto the orders of the Church. But in the use of
Lot-games there is no fault at all committed nor small nor great, as is now
plainly demonstrated: and therefore it cannot be avoided but the imputation of
too much strictness and rigorousnesse must needs light upon you. Would to God
men would at length leave off to affect a name of religion by their nice and
scrupulous forbearing of such trifles: and seek it rather in the works of
true humility and charity, which best conform unto the image of the Son of
God, and therefore best beseem a true Christian.


N. N. I say therefore to thee, as God sometimes said unto Peter in another
cause, Count not thou that common or unclean which God has cleansed: so I
say, Count not thou that slight or vain that God esteems so much, and has
ordained to such honorable ends and uses.


DEFENSE. I grant, that what God much esteems of and has ordained to
honorable ends and uses, is not to be slighted or counted vain. But that God
so much esteems of Lots, or has ordained them to such ends and uses is not
yet proved. And therefore you must give me leave to retort the same words back
again upon you, that which God has cleansed and given thee free liberty to
use or not to use as thou shall think good, count not thou that common or
unclean, that is sinful or unlawful, if at any time thou use it. Tit. 1 15.
For as the holy Apostle says, unto the pure are all things pure: whereas unto
them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their mind and
conscience is defiled.


N. N. He that is ignorant let him be ignorant still.


DEFENSE. This is the Epiphonema wherewith you close up this your Pamphlet. And
it is the saying of Saint Paul, concerning which St Chrysostom has this
observation, that when he speaks of gross and greevous sins, then he says,
ye are fallen from grace, Christ shall profit you nothing, they that do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, and for these things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of unbelief: but not, says he, because it
seems not to be so great a crime, if a man be ignorant that God commands a
woman to be silent in the Church, therefore he rebukes those that are
otherwise minded after a more gentle manner saying, He that is ignorant, let
him be ignorant. Which observation of his if it be of any weight, the^ have you
not well applied this text unto your purpose. For the use of Lots in Gaming and
light matters being in your judgment so heinous and enormious a sin, that it
is more to be detested and abhorred then downeright blasphemy and sporting
with Oaths: you should rather have concluded with some terrible sentence
threatening fire and brimstone, then with this gentle memento, He that is
ignorant let him be ignorant still.

But Theodore Beza, as I conceive, best expresses the meaning of this saying
thus, as if the Apostle had said, he that is endued with understanding amongst
you, let him acknowledge that these things which I say proceed from the spirit
of God, and so diligently observe these our precepts. But he that is ignorant
let him be ignorant, that is, let him acknowledge this his ignorance, nor
trouble the Church, but rest in the judgment of those that are more skillful;
or rather, let him be contemned as one pleasing himself in his ignorance. For
whence are troubles for the most part but from this, that ignorant men will not
be ignorant, but take up the place of those that are more skillful. Thus he.
Now if you had either the spirit or authority of Saint Paul, or had by solid
and unanswerable arguments out of Gods word demonstrated your intended
Conclusion: no man could justly have excepted against you, but that you might
freely take up these words of the Apostle, and oppose them against all
gainsaiers, He that is ignorant let him be ignorant still. For they that affect
ignorance, and will not see the truth, how clear or evident soever it be made,
deserve no other but to be neglected and contemned. But by your leave, sir,
neither have you the one, nor have you sufficiently performed the other: and
therefore I must entreat you yet a while to forbear this saying, until you
have added more strength unto your arguments, and have made them good against
this Answer. For to build castles in the air, and to despise the well
grounded judgment of others, argues much arrogance and overweening of our
selves.

One thing more have I to say before I leave you, and that by way of caution.
Hora^.
For as the Poet speaks, Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt:
because I speak against the too much strictness and nicety of those who
refrain these Lot-games as unlawful, it may be some will not stick to charge
me as if I allowed the licentiousness of our loose Gamesters therein. But let
these men know, that although I allow the Games themselves, notwithstanding the
Lot used in them: yet I condemn and detest as much as they all those foul
enormities wherewith they are abused. Lavishly to wast and consume that wealth
wherewith our families should be maintained, and time which is far more
precious then wealth, to blaspheme the sacred name of God, with horrible oaths,
imprecations, and execrations, and upon every cross chance to fall out of our
wits as it were, and to become outrageous in our passions, are fearful sins,
odious and abominable both before God and man. But these are the faults of the
Gamesters, not of the Games: and through the profaneness of man's heart may
befall any other Game as well as these. They that are not Masters of their own
affections, and cannot temper themselves: let them in Gods name abstain, least
they entangle themselves in the snares of the Devil. But they who have the
discretion to use them moderatly, seasonably, and peaceably, why should the
distemper and irregularity of others prejudice them in the free use of their
liberty? In a word, I allow the right use, and condemn the abuse, neither
through too much strictness barring Gods people from the one, nor through too
much remissness giving way unto the other. And so I conclude with that
prudent saying of the wise Preacher, Eccles. 7. 16 Be not just over much,
neither make thy self over wise: for why should thou be desolate?

17 Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: for why should thou dye
not in thy time?




FINIS.
THE REAL PRESENCE BY Transubstantiation unknown to the Ancient Fathers.

OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

TRANSVBSTANTIATION unknown to the ancient Fathers.
SIR, the distance and disproportion between you and me being such as it is, I
a professed scholar and Minister of Christ's Gospel, you a mere Laick and
knowing little farther then your mother tongue can direct you: I see not how it
could be any either disparagement to my person, or disadvantage to the truth
of God, if I vouchsafed no answer at all unto the Schedule you sent me. For
as in Duellos and single combats they say a man may without empeachment of
honor refuse the Challenge, unless he that made it be in some sort his Peer:
so I presume in controversies of Faith also, a man may without touch of
reputation forbear the encounter, except he that provokes be in some measure
equal. Nevertheless, this disparity perhaps might otherwise easily have been
dispended withal, were it not for the proud brags and insolences of your
Priests and Jesuits: with whom it is usual in their Pamphlets to trumpet out
aloud, that even their ordinary Catholics are able, if not to gravel, yet to
grapple with the better sort of our Divines. As if forsooth all Papists were
Gedeons, Judge. 8.20.21.
and never a I^ther among them: or that not only their Anakims and Goliasses,
but even their armor bearers and pages also were such redoubted and terrible
warriers. Which intolerable arrogance and vanity of theirs, as we have little
reason by descending so far beneath our selves to cherish in any of you; so
have we great cause to answer it even as it deserves, with no other then equal
disdain and contempt. For it has abundantly been manifested to the world,
that as in the goodness of our cause we are every way superior unto you: so
in all kind of learning both Humane and Divine we are no way inferior to the
best of you. Howbeit, seeing I am put in good hope by some of your best
friends, that you carry a mind prepared to embrace the truth if at any time it
shall be discovered unto you, and your self have freely professed unto me,
that your meaning is not any way to contest with me, but only to be instructed
by me: I am content laying aside all advantages whatsoever, to enter the lists
with you, and by framing up a short, yet full answer, to endeavor your best
satisfaction. God grant that as it is intended, so it may redound, first to his
glory, and then to the reducing of your straying soul from the servitude of
Babylon into the liberty of Jerusalem which is from above, and the right Mother
of all true Believers.

N. N. Catholic grounds for the Article of the Real Presence.


I. D. This title prefixed unto your Writing intimates that you crave
resolution in the article, as you term it, of the Real Presence, and the
Grounds thereof. For the better performance whereof, and to clear the way of
all rubs before us, you may be pleased to know that we deny not either the
Presence, or the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Not the Presence.
For seeing therein his Body is delivered, received, eaten, as the Scriptures
testify, and that can no way be delivered, received, eaten which is every way
absent: we cannot but believe with the heart and confess with the mouth that
Christ is present. Nor the Real presence. Ephesians 4.16. and 5.30
For seeing Eating betokens our Union and Incorporation with Christ, whereby
we are so closely joined and joynted unto him, that we are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones: certainly unless we will question
either the power of Faith, or whether God be able to work such an effect, we
cannot well doubt but that the Presence is True and Real, not Imaginary and
Fained. Hom. 6. ad pop. Ant.
According hereunto S. Chrysostom, Christ offers himself unto us in these
Mysteries not only to be seen, Tract. 1. in Ioh.
but also to be touched and felt. And S. Augustine, We cannot with our hand
feel Christ sitting in heaven, but by Faith we may touch him. Agreeing
therefore in the Thing that there is a Real Presence, wherein lies the
difference betwixt us? It lies partly in the Manner of Presence, and partly in
the kind of Change whereby the Presence is wrought. As touching the Manner of
Presence, we acknowledge it to be double, the one Sacramental, the other
Spiritual. The sacramental is a Relative Presence of the thing signified unto
the signs, partly for that they are significatiue and represent Christ unto
us, even as the word spoken unto the ear represents the thing signified
thereby unto the mind: and partly because they are Exhibitiue, God in them
offering us his Son upon condition of Faith. And in regard hereof it may also
well be called a Pactionall presence. The spiritual is a presence of Christ
unto the Faith of the Receauer, or (which is all one) unto the Receauer by
Faith, whereby we seek him, not here on earth, in, with, or under the
Accidents of bread, but aloft in heaven, where he sits at the right hand of
his father. For where the carcass is, Mat 24.28.
thither, says Christ, will the Eagles resort. Hom. 24 in 1. Cor. 10.
Whence S. Chrysostom, He must climb up on high, Tract. 50. in. Ioh.
whosoever comes to this Body. And S. Augustine, How shall I convay my hand
into heaven that I may hold him sitting there? Send thy faith thither and thou
hold him. Now if any farther demand how this sacramental and spiritual
presence is wrought: I answer, it is done by a Change in the Elements of Bread
and Wine. By a change I say, yet not of their Nature and Substance, but of
their Use and Virtue. For they are now no longer common but consecrated Bread
and Wine, ordained by Christ to be effectual symbols and Pledges of our Union
and Communion with his Flesh and Blood. Dial. 2.
So says Theodoret, The visible symbols has he honored with the name of his
Body and Blood, not changing their nature, but adding grace unto nature. And so
the rest of the Fathers.

But all this little contents you, except withal we yield you a Corporal and
Local Presence of Christ under the Accidents of Bread and Wine, and that by
way of Transubstantiation. Transubstantiation a term, as lately devised, so
also inconvenient. Lately devised: for it is but four hundred years old, or
thereabouts, b^ing forged in the Lateran council under Innocent the third.
Inconvenient: for properly it imports a Productiue kind of Conversion, by
which one Substance is produced out of another, or whereby one Substance is
turned into another, such as was the turning of Water into Wine by the power of
Christ at Cana in Galilee. But you understand thereby an Adductiue kind of
Conversion, by which as Bellarmine defines it, De Euchar. l. 3. c. 18.
the Body of Christ which before was only in heaven, is now also under the
Accidents of Bread. So that more fitly it might have been termed Cession or
Succession, or Substitution, or Translocation, or some such like rather then
Transubstantiation: the meaning you give unto it being no other then a
succeeding of Christ's Body into the room of Bread upon the abolishing of the
Substance thereof. Yet is it not so much the Newness and Inconvenience of the
term, as the Impiety of the Doctrine intended thereby which we condemn. For
it crosses the truth of Scripture, ouerturneth the Articles of Faith,
destroys the Nature of a Sacrament, gainesayeth the perpetual consent of
antiquity, and implies in it innumerable contradictions: all which God willing
shall in due place be demonstrated. In the mean season having thus briefly
stated the Question, I come now to examine the particulars of your Writing: and
whether the passages you quote in such abundance reach home to that Corporal
and Local Presence which you hold, or pass no farther then that Sacramental
and Spiritual Presence which we maintain.


N. N. The first ground that Catholic men have for these and all their
mysteries of Christian Faith that are above the reach of common sense and
reason, is the Authority of the Catholic Church, by which they were taught the
same as Points of Faith revealed from God.


I. D. If by the first Ground you understand the first introduction unto Faith,
I grant the Authority of the Catholic Church to be the first ground, and that
by it we are taught the same. But if thereby you mean, as undoubtedly you
do, that highest Principle into which all the Mysteries of Faith are finally
resolved, and by which the Mind is stayed and freed from farther doubting, I
deny the Catholic Church so to be the first ground. (...) 2.2. q. 1. a. 2.
ad^^. 1.
For as Bellarmine truly writes, Faith begins from the preaching of the
Church as touching the Proposition of things to be believed, but not as the
reason of believing. For they who propound the doctrine of Faith, withal
admonish that that doctrine is revealed from God, and that God not themselves
is to be believed. And what? Is not the holy Catholic Church it self an
Article of the Creed? If it be, why should the rest of the Articles need to be
sustained by an higher Principle, more then it? For if you may be bold to
question any of them until it be resolved by the Churches authority: I hope I
may be as bold to question the Churches authority, until it be warranted by
some farther Principle. I demand therefore why you believe the Church? Because
forsooth her authority is infallible. And how know you that it is infallible?
Here of necessity you must either vouch her own testimony, or betake you to
some other thing. To stick upon her testimony without farther inquiry is
absurd. For seeing her voice is not the first verity, that being the
Prerogative of him only who is from all eternity: her veracity must needs be
as doubtful as her infallible authority. And indeed this, as a very learned
Divine exemplifieth it, Field Chapter l. 4. c. 2.
were as if one whose authority is questioned, taking upon him to be a
lawgiver, should first make a law, and thereby give himself power, and
afterward by virtue of that power exercise authority over others. But if to
establish the Churches authority, you seek out of her to some other thing, as
suppose the Scriptures, for so I remember you answered me being demanded the
same Question: then have I obtained what I would, namely that the Church is not
the first ground of Faith, because by your own confession there is a former,
to wit the Scripture.

Neither is it true that Catholic men hold the Churches authority to be the
first Ground. For although some pretended Catholics, those I mean who call
themselves Roman catholics, may so conceive of their Church, understanding by
the Church the Roman church: yet neither are they true Catholics, neither is
the Roman church the Catholic church, neither do any true Catholics ground
their Faith so. True catholics they are not because they hold a new Faith, not
that which Catholikely has been held in all ages: as appears by those
twelve new Articles lately added to the Creed, unknown unto the purer times of
the Primitive church. Neither is the Roman church the Catholic Church. Not in
regard of time; for Christ had his Church when Rome was not yet Christian. Nor
in respect of place: for Catholic is Universal, Roman Particular, that the
Church of the whole world, this of one City or Diocese only. Nor lastly in
regard of her authority over al other Churches: for that which she challenges
is but usurped, the Church of Africa in a Council of two hundred and
seventeen Bishops, of whom S. Augustine was a principal, with much
indignation rejected it, and the Greek church hitherto could never be drawn
to acknowledge it. And as for those that are true Catholics, they build not
their Faith upon so weak a Ground: but rest both it, and the Church her self
upon the Scriptures. The Apostle S. Paul builds the whole Household of God
upon no other foundation then that of the Prophets and Apostles. Ephesians. 2.19 20.
Know thou, In Cantic. hom. 3.
says Origin, that Christ always appears on the mountains and hills, to
teach thee that thou seek him no where but in the mountains of the Law and
Prophets. And the Auhor of the imperfect work on Matthew, Hom. 49.
The Lord knowing the confusion of things that would happen in the latter
days, commands that such Christians as will receive assurance of faith, f^ie
to no other thing but the Scripture. And Tertullian, Take from Heretics that
which they have common with the heathen, Cont. Marc. l. 4.
that they be content to stint all questions by the scriptures only, and they
cannot stand. And S. Hierom, In Mich. l. 1. c. 1.
The church of Christ has for her cities, the Law, the Prophets, the Gospel,
and Apostles: she passes not beyond her limits, that is the holy scriptures.
and S. Augustine, in the scriptures we learn Christ, Epist. 66.
in the scriptures we learn the Church. Cont. lit. Pet l. 3. c. 6.
And again, I say not if we, but if an Angel from heaven shall deliver any
thing of Christ, or his Church, or of faith and manners besides that which ye
have received in the Scriptures of the Law, and Gospel, let him be accursed.
And again he affirms that the Church is to be proved by the Canonical books
of Scripure and nothing else: De un. Ecc. c. 16.
and that they only are the Demonstration of our cause, the very foundation and
ground plot whereon we are to build.


N. N. For proof of this ground, Saint Augustine handles this matter in a
special book to his friend Honoratus deceived by the Manichees, as himself
also sometimes had bin, and he entituleth his book De vtilitate credendi. His
discourse is this. Cap. 7.
Suppose that we now first of all did seek unto what Religion we should
commit our souls to be purged and rectified: Without all doubt we must begin
with the Catholic Church, for that she is the most eminent now in the world,
there being more Christians in her this day, then in any other Church of Jews
and Gentiles put together. And albeit among these Christians there be Sects and
Heresies, and all of them would seem to be Catholics, and do call others
besides themselves Heretics: yet all grant that if we consider the whole Body
of the World, there is one Church among them more eminent then all other, and
more plentiful in number, and as they which know her do affirm, more sincere
also in the truth. But as concerning truth we shall dispute more afterward:
now it is sufficient for them that desire to learn, that there is a Catholic
Church, which is one in it self, whereunto diverse Heretics do feign and
devise diverse names, whereas they and their Sects are called by peculiar names,
which themselves cannot deny. Whereby all men that are indifferent and not
let by passion may understand unto what Church the name Catholic which all
parts desire and pretend is to be given. Thus St Augustine, etc.


I. D. So maine a point as is the last resolution of faith, ought to have been
better warranted, then by the single authority of one Father: who how eminent
soever he was in his time, yet is not his sole word of strength enough to
bear up such a weight. Why did you not vouch the testimony of Saint Paul or
Saint Peter, or some other of the holy penmen of Gods book which cannot
deceive you; then Saint Augustine or any other of the ancient Fathers, who both
have erred themselves and may mislead you. But thus it is with Papists, the
more the shame, the bare name of a Father swayes them more, then the clearest
passage of holy writ. Howbeit this I say not as if we feared the trial of the
Fathers, for be it known unto you, we have more cause to be confident upon
them then your selves* but only to vindicate the honor and dignity of the
Scriptures, which of your side are too basely slighted and neglected. And as
touching this particular place of Saint Augustine, notwithstanding all the
flourish you make therewith, yet shall you never be able to prove what you
intend thereby, as I come now to demonstrate.

This book de vtilitate credendi, I have now twice for your sake thoroughly
read over, and with the best attention I could. In it I find the authority of
the Catholic Church made the first motive or means unto Faith, by which we do
believe: but not the first principle and reason of faith, for which we do
believe. The occasion of writing it was this. Cap. 1.
Saint Augustine having lately through Gods grace, Con. ep. fund l. 10.
escaped out of the toiles of the Manichean Heretics, in which for the space of
nine years he had been entangled: is very desirous to recover from them his
friend Honoratus also, as yet continuing in his error, and held fast by them.
This he doubts not, through the same grace of God, soon to effect, may he
but find him duly prepared and disposed. For until he be wrought from his
heretical pertinacy and stiffness, unto a more Christian moderation and
equability: he shall with all his arguments but wash a brick, as they say, and
spend his oil and labor to little purpose. That which made him so untoward
and hard to be wrought upon was, the fair and plausible insinuation of the
Manichees, Cap 1.
that they pressed no man to believe until they had first cleared and
manifested the truth: whereas others terrified men with superstition, and
commanded Faith before they tendered any reason unto them. Wherefore to remove
this prejudice, and to frame him unto a more indifferent temper, he employeth
in this book all his strength and skill: laboring to demonstrate the Vtility
of believing, Ibid*
and how requisite it is to yield to authority, before with pure minds we can
discern the truth. And this is the only drift and scope he aims at in this
book, neither medleth he therein with any of the Manichean heresies, Cap. 5.
Retract. l. 1. c. 14.
but reserueth the confutation and conviction of them until some other time,
as appears by the very closing up thereof: where he wills Honoratus to
remember, Cap. vlt.
that he has not yet begun to refute the Manichees, nor to se^ himself
against those toies, nor has opened any great matter touching Catholic
Doctrine. Whence thus I argue. If S. Augustine in this book dispute against
Honoratus from the Churches authority as the last resolution of Faith: then
has he opened therein the greatest point of Christian religion, and confuted
thereby the Manichean heresy, inasmuch as the Catholic Church utterly
condemned it. But S. Augustine in express words affirms, that he has not so
much as begun to refute the Manichees, nor opened any great matter touching
Catholic doctrine. Therefore he disputes not from the Churches authority, as
the last resolution of Faith.

True it is he is much in commending authority, and setting forth the benefit
of believing it. But what authority? What believing that authority which is
grounded upon the General opinion, Cap. 14. Cap. 1.
fame, and consent of people and nations: and that Believing which is Moral,
and only prepares the mind to divine illumination. If so then certainly cannot
St Augustins authority be the last Principle of Faith. For this is
infallibile, and absolutely necessary as well to the wise as unwise: that but
an uncertain step or staire to raise us up unto God, Cap. 16.
and not necessary to them that are wise. What then is it in S. Augustins
judgment? Surely the first inducement or Introduction to the search of divine
Mysteries. Ibid.
For, says he, it is authority only which moves fools to hasten unto
wisdom. And again, to a man that is not able to discern the truth, that he
may be made fit for it, and suffer himself to be purged, authority is at hand.
Had he thought it to be more then so, he would never have considered it
without certainty of truth. Yet so does he even in the passage by you
alleged, They, says he, that know the Church affirm her to be more sincere
in truth then other sects: but touching her truth is another question. In a
word, as in other arts and sciences, He that will learn must believe his
teachers: so in these heavenly mysteries also would Saint Augustine have all
those that are not initiated, such as his friend Honoratus was, to begin with
Authority. Not that it is a sufficient warranty for whatsoever we learn: but
for that it is the readiest and likeliest way to bring us unto learning.


N. N. Thus Saint Augustine, teaching his friend how he might both know and
believe the Catholic Church, and all that she taught simply and without asking
reason or proof. And as for knowing or discerning her from all other Churches
that may pretend to be Catholic, we hear his marks, that she is more
eminent, universal, greater in number, and in possession of the name
Catholic. The second that she may be believed securely, and cannot deceive
nor be deceived in matters of Faith, he proves elsewhere, concluding finally
in this place; If thou do seem to thy self now, says Augustine, Cap. ^.
to have been sufficiently tossed up and down among Sectaries, and would
put an end to these labors and turmoiles: follow the way of Catholic
discipline which has flowne down unto us from Christ by his Apostles, and is
to flow from us to our posterity.


I. D. Out of that passage of St Augustine you observe two things, first what
be the Marks by which the Catholic Church may be discerned: secondly that she
may be believed securely, as one that can neither deceive nor he deceived. As
touching the former, you say Saint Augustines Marks are these four, Eminence,
Universality, Multitude, and Possession of the name Catholic. Whereunto I
answer, first that Saint Augustine makes none of these things Notes of the
Church. For three of them, namely Eminency, Universality and Possession of the
name Catholic he does not at all mention. Eminency I confess is foisted into
your translation, but no where appears in the Original. Of the fourth, to wit
Multitude, all that he affirms is this, that in his time there were more
Christians then of any other religion: and that among all Sects of Christians
there was one Church consisting of a greater number then all the rest: which is
not enough to establish it for a mark of the Church. Where, by the way give me
leave to demand, why whereas Saint Augustine says Christians are more then
Jews and worshippers of Images put together, you render it, the Jews and
Gentiles put together? For what the reason should be I cannot conceive,
unless it be the same for which you raze out of your Catechismes the second
Commandment. But I answer secondly, that as St Augustine makes none of them
Marks, so neither are they Marks: for Proper they are not nor Perpetual, and
the Church may be without them. So was it for some while after Christ's
Ascension: for then neither was the Christian Church so Eminent as that of the
Jews, nor was it Universal as being confined within Judea, nor great in
number as consisting but of a very few, nor in Possession of the name
Catholic, it being a word of a latter date, and such as could not well be
given it until it was grown Catholic. So will it be also, if we may believe
your own writers, Aquin. in Apoc. 9. Rhem. in 2. These. 2. Peter in Dan. l. 15.
in the time of Antichrist. For then the Church shall be darkened, all
external communion with it shall cease, there shall be no Sacrament in public
places, all the glory and dignity of Ecclesiastical order shall lie buried,
none shall come unto the solemnity of the Lamb, an innumerable multitude shall
clea^e unto Antichrist, Acost. de ^em. nov. l. 2. c. 15. Riber. in Apoc. 13.3.
and 7.
even all besides the elect, and those whose names are written in the book of
life. But lastly whether these things be Marks or no is not now much
material: for it makes little to the purpose, and we have sufficiently proved
that the Church is not the last Resolution of Faith.

As touching the second point, that the Church may be believed securely, for
that she can neither deceive nor be deceived: I demand what you mean by the
Church? If the company of all true Believers that now are, and heretofore have
been, including the holy Apostles together with them: then I grant it. For
these were so lead by the Spirit into all truth that they could not possibly
err in any matter of Faith that was either to be taught by them or known by
us. But if you mean the Present Church in every age successively after the
Apostles, as here Saint Austin does, referring his friend Honoratus thereunto:
then I distinguish. Either you must understand thereby the whole number of true
believers who for the present life in the world: or the Society and Fellowship
of those that in their time rule and sway most in the Church. If you take it in
the former sense, I grant what you say to be true in Fundamental points, but
not in such as are not absolutely necessary, nor prejudice the Foundation of
Faith. If in the latter, then I affirm that the Church may both deceive and be
deceived, even in Doctrines of highest consequence, neither can with such
security be believed. Witness the time when the whole world groaned under
Arianisme, and the greatest part of the Prelates, together with Liberius Bishop
of Rome subscribed thereunto. Neither does the passage you allege out of Saint
Austin infer the contrary. For although the surest course to put an end to
all labors and turmoiles be, to follow the way of Catholic discipline, which
has flowne down to us from Christ by his Apostles: yet the Authority that
swayeth most in the Present Church does not always either follow this way her
self, or direct others unto it, as for example it did not in the time above
mentioned of the Arian heresy. And thus much in answer unto your general
ground.


N. N. Now I will show first out of the old Testament how it was prefigured and
prophesied, and in the new both promised again, exhibited and confirmed, by
the intendment, and interpretation of the gravest and most ancient Fathers that
have lived in the Church of God from age to age, who understand so the said
Figures, and foreshewing of the old Testament. As for example, the Bread and
Wine mysteriously offered unto almighty God by Melchizedek King and Priest who
bare the type of our Savior. Genesis 14.
Psalm. 109.
The shewbread among the Jews that only could be eaten of them that were
sanctified. Heb. 7.
Exodus 40.
1 Reg. 21.
And the Bread sent miraculously by an Angel to Elias, whereby he was so
strengthened as he traveled forty days by virtue only of that Bread. These
three sorts of bread to have been express Figures of this Sacrament and of
the true flesh of Christ therein contained do testify by one consent the
ancient Fathers, L. 2. ep. 3. Strom l. 4. De Sacram l. 4. c. 3.
as Cyprian, ^lemens Alexandrinus, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom Augustine,
Cyrill, Arnobius, Eusebius. and many others, as my author fet^eh down. In Tit. 1.
Hom. 35. in Genesis
Three other figures not expressed in the form of Bread, but other things more
excellent then Bread, as the Paschal Lamb, Con. Petil. l. 2. c. 37.
the blood of the testament described in Exodus and to the Hebrews, Cat. Mist.
4. Ex. 24.
and fulfilled by Christ when he said, This cup is the new testament in my
blood, and again this is my blood of the new testament. Heb. 9.
The Manna also sent by God from heaven was an express figure of this
Sacrament, Ex. 12.
Lev. 24.
Luc. 22.
as appears by the words of our Savior and of the Apostle. Mat. 26.
Ioh. 6.
1 Cor. 10.



I. D. This Argument seems to be of great esteem among you: for who almost
urges it not, and that with great confidence? It stands thus, Melchizedecks
Bread and Wine, the Shewbread, Elias his Bread, the Paschal-Lambe, the Blood
of the Testament, and Manna, be Figure^ of our Sacrament: Ergo Christ is
corporally and locally present therein by way of Transubstantiation. The
consequence you maintain in the next Section, the Antecedent in this.
Whereunto I answer first, that the Legal sacraments and ceremonies, if we may
believe Scripture* directly respected Christ, Col. 2.17.
So says S. Paul, They are a shadow of things to come, Heb. 10.5.
but the Body is of Christ. And again Sacrifice and offerings thou would
not, but a Body have thou prepared me. And hence is it that he doubts not to
call Christ our Passover, 1. Cor. 5.7. and 10.4.
or (...) Lamb^: and to affirm that the Rock whereof the Israelites drank in
the ^^ldernesse was Christ. Yea our Savior himself plainly professes that
the Brazen serpent did prefigure him: Ioh. 3.14. and 6.50.
and that he was the Bread or Manna that came down from heaven. But that those
Sacraments and Ceremonies are Types and Figures of ours, otherwise then by
representing the same Substance together with ours, I suppose if you searched
every corner of Scripture never so narrowly, you should never find it therein.
Add hereunto that our Sacraments are themselves Figures, Con. Max. Arr. l. 3
c. 22.
being, as S* Augustine says, one thing, and signifying another. Whence it
would follow that the old Sacraments being Figures of the New, they should be
Figures of Figures and Sacraments of Sacraments, which stands not greatly
with reason. For thus the Circumcision of the fore^kinne should figure the
Water of Baptism, and water Christ: and curious heads might run on
infinitely, Con. haer. l. 4. c. 32.
and as Irenaeus sometime objected unto the Heretics of his time, might ever
be devising of types upon types, and figures upon figures. Lastly, if the
Sacraments of the old Testament were but Signs of ours, it would follow that
they were ordained rather for the benefit of the Christian then the Jewish
Church, which is absurd. For of our Sacraments, which you say is the thing
signified by theirs, benefit they never reaped any, as never being partakers of
them: and to leave unto them no more but bare signs, that is empty shells
without the kernel, how it might avail them I cannot conceive. Certainly all
Sacraments without Christ are unprofitable, neither can they be fruitful at
any time but only in Christ, who alone is the Substance and Foundation of them
all. Whereupon I conclude, that those ancient Sacraments of the Jews directly
looked unto Christ's and prefigured him, but were not properly Figures of ours.

No were? What say you then to the Fathers who affirm they were? I say two
things, first that their Authority is not a sufficient ground to build our
Faith upon, as we have elsewhere showed at large. Sum. p. 1. q. ^.^.8. ad 2.
For it is but Humane testimony, and argues, as your own Thomas says, not
necessarily, but only probably. Neither is it reason, seeing your selves so
often slight and reject it, even in those points wherein many times they
consent: that you should so peremptorily urge it upon us, and bind us
absolutely to believe all they say. I say secondly, that the Fathers calling
the Sacraments of the old Law Figures of ours, mean not that they were bare
and naked signs without the truth, but that in them the thing signified was
more darkly and implicitly shadowed then in ours. Or rather, that they were
Figures corresponding unto ours: in the same sense that the Apostle S. Peter
intends it, when he calls Baptism the Antitype of Noah's Arc. 1. Pet.
^.20.21
For understanding whereof you are to know, that Types or Figures are
sometimes compared with that truth or thing whereof they are Samplars: Heb.
9.14.
as where the Holy place of the Tabernacle is said to be the Antitype of
Heaven figured thereby. Sometime with some other Secondary samplar and Figure
of the same thing: as in this place of Peter, where Baptism is made the
Antitype of that deliverance which befell the Church by the Arc, in the
general deluge of waters. So that the Arc properly was not ordained to be a
Figure of Baptism: but both it and Baptism represent unto us our Salvation
from the danger both of sin and death by Christ Jesus, therein mutually
respecting and answering one the other. The same may you also say of the Cloud
and the Passing through the Red sea, of Manna, and the Rock, and all the rest.
And that thus the Fathers, hear one for all, who, to use your own words spoke
in the sense of them all. This Bread, says S. Augustine, Tract in. Ioh. 26.
which came down from heaven Manna signified, this Bread the Altar of God
signified. They were Sacraments, diverse in signs, but in the thing signified
alike. Hear the Apostle, I would not, says he, have you ignorant Brethren,
that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and
all were baptized by Moses in the ^loud and in the sea, and all eat the same
spiritual meat. The same spiritual I say, but another corporal, because they
Manna, We another thing. But the same spiritual that we: yet our Fathers not
their Fathers, to whom we are like, not to whom they were like. And he
adds, And they all drank the same spiritual drink. They one thing, we
another, as touching the visible nature: yet the self same in the signifying
spiritual virtue. For how the same drink? They drank, says he, of the
spiritual Rock following them, and the Rock was Christ. Thence the Bread,
thence the drink. The Rock Christ in the sign, true Christ in the Word and
Flesh. Thus S. Augustine.

But if the Fathers serve not your turn, you have the Fathers of the Fathers,
even Christ himself, and his holy Apostle S. Paul* who both affirm that Manna
was an express figure of this Sacrament. And if Manna, why not by the same
proportion other Sacraments also? Indeed now you dispute not Topically, but
Apodictically; and you cannot but prevail, if it be true that you say. But
what are the words I pray you wherein this may appear? Certainly none at all.
For neither the one nor the other either expressly or implicitly make it a
Figure of this Sacrament, but of Christ himself and his Flesh. For as for the
sixth of John, it is clear that our Savior speaks not therein of the
Eucharist or of Sacramental Manducation: but only of the Spiritual eating of
his Flesh by Faith. Ioh. 6.35.
I, says he, am the Bread of life: he that comes unto me shall not hunger,
and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Where although to continue the
Allegory, he might have said, He that eats me shall not hunger, and he that
drinks me shall not thirst: yet he chose rather to use the words of Coming
and Believing, to teach us that he speaks not of an Oral eating and drinking
by the Mouth, but only of a Spiritual by Faith. And this is so plain, that
Bellarmine himself confesses these words Properly not to belong unto the
Sacrament, but to the faith of the Incarnation. De Euchar. l. 1. c 7.
Again, that Eating is meant without which there is no life: Ver. 53.
Except, says he, ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
Blood, there is no life in you. But without Sacramental eating a man may have
life in him. Lect. 84. in Can Miss. Epist. 7. ad Bohem.
Spiritual eating therefore is meant. And thus also do sundry of your own
Rabbis understand this place, as namely Gabriel, Cusan, Cajetan, Tapper,
Hesselius, Iansenius. and others. In p. 3* q 80. art. u^t.
As for that place of S. Paul, it is evident that the Apostle puts no
difference between the old Sacraments and the New, A^t. 15. Lova. De comm. s^b
un a specie. Concord. c. 59.
save only in regard of the external signs: for otherwise he affirms the
same thing to be Signified and Exhibited in both, to wit Christ. And so does S.
Augustine understand it. They did eat the same spiritual meat, De vtil. Paen.
c. 1.
says he, it had sufficed to have said, they did eat a spiritual meat, but he
says the same. I cannot find how we should understand the same, but the same
that we do eat. And again, Whosoever in Manna understand Christ, Cap. 2.
did eat the same spiritual food that we do. But whosoever sought only to fill
their bellies of Manna, which were the Fathers of the unfaithful, they have
eaten and are dead: so also the same drink, for the Rock was Christ. Therefore
they drank the same drink that we do, but spiritual drink: that is, which was
received by Faith, not which was drawn in with the Body. If happily you stand
upon those words, These things are types unto us, 1. Cor. 10.6.
you may know that he says not, they were types of our Sacraments, but
Examples to us that we sin not as they did. For as they perished in the
wilderness, notwithstanding their Sacraments: so may we, doing as they did,
notwithstanding ours. Which argument, if that you say be true, would be of no
force at all. For the Corinthians might thus have replied, though their
Sacraments availed not them, yet ours may us: because ours are Substance,
theirs but Shadows. But enough of the Antecedent.

Yet before I proceed to the Consequence, some of your By-speeches are also to
be examined. First you say that Bread and Wine was mysteriously offered to
Almighty God by Melchizedeck. Session. 3. can. 2.
But both the Original and your Vulgar translation,, made authentical by the
Council of Trent, say that he brought forth Bread and Wine, and not to God, as
an Oblation, but to Abraham for his refection. If he had offered up Bread and
Wine as a Sacrifice to God, how comes it to pass that the Apostle comparing
the Priesthood of Christ and Melchizedeck so particularly, Heb. 7.
makes no mention at all thereof? For certainly the point being so material,
and the place so fit, it must needs be great ignorance or negligence to omit
it. To say nothing that if your own reason be good, the Sacrifice of
Melchizedeck shall be inferior to that of Aaron: Bread and Wine being of less
value, and not so evidently representing the death of Christ as the slaying of
Beasts does. Secondly you say, that the true Flesh of Christ is contained in
this Sacrament, and that the ancient Fathers with one consent testify the
same: which in your sense and meaning is utterly false. For neither is the
Flesh of Christ under the Accidents of Bread by Transubstantiation, neither
does any of the ancient Fathers testify it, as in the sequel (God willing)
shall more plainly appear. Thirdly, where you say, and many others as my
Author sets down, it seems that in this point you believe but by an
Attornie, pinning your Faith unto the credit of I know not whom. The true
flesh of Christ, say you, is contained in the Sacrament. How know you that? By
the joint consent of Fathers. And how know you they consent therein? My Author
tells me so. And what may he be? Peter or Paul, or one of them upon whom cloven
tongues descended? I trow no, but some equivocating Priest or Jesuit. A sure
rock I promise you to stay your faith upon. You say lastly, that the Blood of
the Testament described, Exodus 24. and Heb. 9. was fulfilled when Christ said,
This cup is the new Testament in my Blood. False. For then he did but
institute the Sacrament of his death: and fulfilled it the day following, when
really he suffered death upon the Cross. And what reason have you to think
it was performed in a Commemoratiue sacrifice, wherein your selves confess
there is no effusion of Blood: rather then in the true Sacrifice upon the
Cross, wherein the precious blood of the son of God was plentifully shed?


N. N. Out of all which Figures is inferred, that for so much as there must be
great difference betwixt the Figure and the thing prefigured, no less if we
believe S. Paul, then between the Shadow and the Body, whose Shadow it is: it
cannot be imagined by any probability, that this Sacrament exhibited by Christ
in performance of the Figures, should be only creatures of Bread and Wine as
Sacramentaries do imagine, for then should the Figure be either equal or more
excellent then the thing prefigured it self. For who will not confess, but
that Elias his Bread made by the Angel, that gave him strength to walk forty
days upon the virtue thereof, was equal to our English Communion Bread, and
that the Manna was much better?


I. D. The Antecedent being, as we have showed, untrue, it is no matter what
Consequence soever you deduce from it. Nevertheless let us for the present
suppose it to be true: What infer you thereupon? The Real Presence and
Transubstantiation. How so I pray you? Because otherwise the Figure would be
either equal or more excellent then the thing prefigured: which is absurd, and
contrary to the rule of S. Paul. This indeed I confess would be absurd: but
how do you show it to be so in this particular? By a double instance of Elias
his bread and Manna, whereof you say the one was equal, the other more
excellent then our English Communion Bread. But still I deny the consequence;
the weakness whereof if you see not in this, I hope you will in the like
Argument. The Cloud, the Red sea, and Circumcision, were all as you say Figures
of Baptism: and the Figure is ever inferior to the thing Figured. If
therefore Baptism be only Water, and suffer no Transubstantiation at all, the
Figure is equal or more excellent then the thing Figured. For the Water of the
Cloud, and the Red sea was equal to the Water of Baptism: and the Foreskin in
Circumcision is much better as being part of the Flesh of man. What say you
now? Does this Argument follow yea or no? If yea, then have we a Real Presence
also in Baptism by Transubstantiation of Water, which I suppose you will not
admit. If no, then neither does it follow in the Eucharist, for the reason is
exactly the same in both.

Would you yet more plainly see your error? It is this, your Disjunction is
not sufficient: either there is a Real Presence, or the Jewish Figures equal
our Sacraments. For there are diverse other ways wherein our Sacraments excel
theirs although there be no such Presence at all. What ways will you say?
Verily not in the worth or value of the outward Elements, for therein they may
be exceeded: nor in the thing signified, for it is one and the same in both,
even Christ Jesus. Wherein then? Even in these particulars. First their
Sacraments respected Christ yet to be exhibited in the flesh: our Christ already
exhibited. Now as the Faith of things future is ever more languid and faint
then of things past: so is the adumbration and shadowing of them unto Faith
more obscure also. Secondly, although Flesh may perhaps seem better to
express Christ's body then Bread, and the killing of the sacrifice his death
then the breaking of Bread: yet in regard of the word annexed unto ours,
plainly declaring what they are, to what end instituted, and what proportion
there is between the sign and the thing signified, ours must needs be more
evident and clear then theirs. Even as a Picture (to use S. Chysostomes
similitude) when it is perfected and set forth with lively colors, Hom. in 1.
Cor 10. Nolite ignora^e.
better represents the person of the Prince, then when no more but the first
lineaments thereof are drawn, or it is yet but darkly colored. Thirdly in the
Eucharist are figured two things, the Death of Christ; and our Communion with
him. That without this availes no more to our souls health, then the sight of
meat without touching it to the nourishment of our bodies. That is shadowed by
the breaking of Bread and pouring out of Wine. Not so expressly, will you say,
as by the Leviticall sacrifices. Suppose it: though in regard of the
Sacramental words, and the clear knowledge we have of this mystery it is far
otherwise. Yet this, I mean our Communion with Christ, is as exactly
represented by the Eating of Bread and Drinking of Wine, as nothing can be
more. Finally seei^g the Jews were strictly commanded to abstain from Blood,
and we on the other side are charged Sacramentally in the Wine to drink Blood,
and in the Bread to eat Flesh: our Sacrament even in regard of the external
ceremony is to be preferred to the Jewish. And thus you see wherein our
Sacraments excel theirs.

Now where you affirm, that Sacramentaries imagine this Sacrament to be only
the creatures of Bread and Wine: I would feign know whom you understand by
these Sacramentaries. If the Church of England: it is a loud untruth. For we
acknowledge that the Sacrament consists of two things, Cont. Haer. l. 4. c.
34.
the one Earthly, the other Heavenly, as Irenaeus speaks: that is of the
outward Elements and the Lords Body. If there be any other who imagine as you
say: spare them not, let them hardly be called Sacramentaries. But know withal
that we detest both them and you: them for retaining no more then the signs,
you for excluding them, and establishing nothing but Shows and Accidents
instead of them. In regard whereof they may justly requite you with the name of
Accidentaries.


N. N. And if Protestants will say for an evasion as they do, that their Bread
is not Common Bread, but such Bread; and being eaten and received by Faith,
works the effect of Christ's Body in them, and brings them his Grace:
Catholics answer that so did the Figures and Sacraments also of the old
Testament being received by Faith in Christ to come, as the ancient Fathers and
Preachers received the^. And forasmuch as Protestants do farther hold that
there is no difference between the virtue and efficacy of those old
Sacraments and ours (which Catholics deny) it must needs follow that both
Catholics and Protestants agree that the Fathers of the old Testament believed
in the same Christ to come that we do now being come, their Figures and
Shadows must be as good as our truth in the Sacrament that was prefigured, if
it remain Bread still after Christ's institution and Consecration.


I. D. Here least we should escape your hands by some one Evasion or other:
you endeavor very diligently to block up the passage against us. For whereas
your Argument was, that unless Christ be really present in the Sacrament, the
Jewish Figures are as good as our truth: you bring us in answering thereto,
that our Bread is not Common Bread but such as being eaten by Faith works the
Effect of Christ's Body, and brings Grace. Indeed we say that our Sacramental
Bread is not Common Bread: and we farther confess* that whosoever receaueth
the same worthily, eats withal the Body of Christ and receaueth Grace. But
we never say it in answer to your Objectio^: neither ca^ we with any reason.
For we are not ignorant that the signs also in the old Sacraments were not
Common or Profane things, but sanctified and set apart to holy uses: and that
being received by Faith, they were thereby partakers of Christ and all his
benefits as well as we. The right answer we give is, by denying the
consequence: our Sacraments, as we have showed, many ways excelling those of
the old Testament, though there be no Transubstantiation at all. So that this
is not an Evasion, as you say of ours, but rather a fiction and device of
yours* to the end you may seem to prevail in something, being not able to
gainesay the true Answer.

But Catholics, you say, deny the old Sacraments that Virtue and efficacy
which they grant to the new. I know they do. For they hold that the new
Sacraments justify, and confer Grace by the very work done, without any
respect to the merit or Faith of the receauer, which the old Sacraments did
not. But hereby you utterly overthrow your own Argument. For how does this
follow, unless there be a Real Presence, our sacraments excel not: seeing in
your own opinion they are far more Virtuous and Effectual then those of the
old Covenant. Howbeit this Tenent of yours is too palpably absurd: for it
gives unto the creature a divine virtue of percing into the soul, and
cleansing the sins thereof, which is proper unto God. And if the word
preached profit us nothing, unless it be mingled with Faith, no nor the Flesh
of Christ it self, except it be eaten by Faith: how can it be imagined that
Water, or Bread, or any other Sacramental Element should avail unto
Justification, without any respect unto Faith at all? In Esa 4.
Hereunto agree the Fathers. S. Hierom, Man only applies water, but God the
holy spirit: by whom ou^ filthiness is cleansed, and the sins of blood are
purged. And S. Augustine, Quaest. in Lev. q. 84.
Without this sanctification of invisible grace, what do the visible
sacraments avail? That visible Baptism which wanted invisible sanctification
nothing profited Simon Magus. Tract. in Ioh. 80.
And again, Water cleanses the heart, the word effecting it, not because it is
spoken but believed. But of this enough.


N. N. But Catholic Fathers did understand the matters far otherwise. And to
allege one for all for that he spoke in the sense of all in those days, S.
Hierom talking of one of those foresaid Figures, to wit of the Shewbread, and
comparing it with the thing figured and by Christ exhibited, says thus. There
is so much difference between the Shewbread and the body of Christ prefigured
thereby, as there is difference between the shadow and the Body whose shadow
it is, and between an image and the truth which the image represents, and
between certain shapes of things to come and the things themselves prefigured
by those shapes. And thus of Figures and presignifications of the old Testament.


I. D. To what end this passage of St Hierom? To prove our Sacraments to be of
greater virtue and efficacy then those of old? This indeed should be your
conclusion: but St Hieroms words infer it not. For he compares the
Shewbread not with the bread in the Eucharist, but with Christ's body: betwixt
which I confess there is as maine a difference, as there is betwixt the
Shadow and the Body. But I beseech you, is there not as great a difference
between water in Baptism and the Blood of Christ, or bread in the Eucharist
and the Body of Christ? Doubtless there is: for they are all but figures of
the same Verity* namely Christ. Whereas therefore you argue thus, Hierom
prefers the body of Christ unto Shewbread as far as the substance
exceeds the shadow: Ergo our Sacraments are more virtuous then those of old,
or if you will (for indeed I know not well what you would conclude) Ergo the
body of Christ is really present by transubstantiation: it is a miserable non
sequitur, and without either rhyme or reason. For upon the same ground I may
as well infer the contrary, thus, Christ's body excells Eucharisticall Bread as
much as the substance does the shadow: Ergo Shewbread and the old Sacraments
are more virtuous then ours. The maine error is, that you tie the Body of
Christ unto our new Sacraments, if not unto the Eucharist only: whereas indeed
he is the Truth of all Sacraments both old and new, and therefore is alike
present and powerful in them all, to all that believe, as contrarily to the
incredulous and unbelievers his Grace is alike ineffectual. And thus much of
your first Argument.


N. N. The opinion of the ancient Fathers grounded upon the Scriptures, as upon
those speeches of our Savior, This is my body that shall be given for you, My
flesh is truly meat, and my blood is truly drink, the bread that I shall give
you is my flesh for the life of the world, and other like sentences of our
Savio^r.


I. D. Your second Argument is drawn from the opinion of the ancient Fathers
grounded upon the Scriptures. An invincible and irrefragable Argument if you
be able to make it good. For who is he that dares withstand so great
Authority as is that of the Fathers, backed with Scripture? But brag is a good
dog, as they say: and it behooves you to crack and boast of much, least
otherwise you be thought to be destitute of all. For I will be bold to affirm,
that neither you nor your author shall ever be able to prove any one of the
ancient Fathers whether with Scripture or without to be of your side in this
present point. Those that you pretend to make for you, we shall examine as
they offer themselves in order. And as for grounding their opinion upon
Scripture, neither could they do so, seeing they never dreamed of your Real
presence, neither do the particular places by you vouched import any such
thing. The first place, This is my body, shall hereafter at large be unfolded:
the rest, as is already demonstrated, speak not a word of the Sacrament, but
only of Spiritual eating. If the Fathers either in their Homilies or
Commentaries allege these words discoursing of the Eucharist, it makes
nothing against us. For seeing Christ is Spiritually eaten not only out of the
Sacrament but in it also, and Spiritual eating cannot well be expressed but by
terms borrowed from Bodily eating: no marvel if the ancient Fathers speaking
of the Sacrament, accomodate these words, and the rest in the sixth of John
thereunto.


N. N. The Fathers do not only urge all the circumstances here specified or
signified, to prove it to be the true natural Body of Christ, as that it was
to be given for us the next day after Christ's words were spoken, that it was to
be given for the life of the whole world, and that it was truly meat, and
truly Christ's flesh: but do add also diverse other circumstances of much
efficacy to confirm the same, affirming the same more in particular, that it
is the very Body, which was borne of the blessed Virgin, the very same Body
that suffered on the Cross. Hom. 4. in 1. Cor.
The selfsame body, says St Chrysostom that was nailed, beaten, crucified,
blouded, wounded with a spear, is received by us in a Sacrament. Whereunto St
Augustine adds this particularity, that it is the selfsame that walked here
among us upon earth. As he walked here in earth, says he, among us, In Ps. 98.
so the very selfsame flesh does he give to be eaten: and therefore no man
eats that flesh but first adoreth it. In Levit. c. ^^*
And Hesychius adds, that he gave the selfsame Body whereof the Angel
Gabriel said to the Virgin Mary, that it should be conceived of the Holy Ghost.
And yet farther, It is the same body says St Chrysostom, that the Major or
learned men did adore in the manger: but thou do see him, says he, not in
the manger but on the Altar, not in the arms of a woman, but in the hands of a
Priest. In Ps. 33.
The very selfsame flesh, says St Augustine again, that ^ate at the table
in the last supper, and washed his Disciples feet, the very same I say did
Christ give with his own hands to his Disciples when he said, Take eat, this
is my body, etc. and so did he bear himself in his own hands, which was
prophesied of David, but fulfilled only by Christ in that supper. These are the
particularities used by the Fathers to declare what Body they mean: and can
there be any more effectual Speeches then these?


I. D. Pliny in one of his Epistles advises him that would be a Writer,
oftentimes to look back unto the title of his Book, and to consider what his
drift and purpose is: least ere he be aware he step aside and fall upon things
impertinent. Which wise and prudent counsel of his had you duly regarded, I
persuade my self you would not have spoken so little to the purpose, as in
this section you have done. For out of all these sayings of the Fathers you
conclude no more but this, that the true natural flesh of Christ, which was
borne of the blessed virgin, conversed among us here on earth, and suffered on
the cross, etc. is present in the Sacrament: which who denies? Certainly none
of our side: for we all freely confess the same together with you. So that
the difference betwixt you and us lies not in the thing it self, but in the
Manner: nor whether Christ be present, but how and in what sort he is present.
Two ways, say we, he is present, Sacramentally, Spiritually, as is above
already declared. And this Presence we affirm to be so strait and near, that
we are thereby bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. But the Presence that
you maintain is a Corporalland Local Presence of the Flesh of Christ under
the Accidents of Bread and Wine, and that by way of Transubstantiation. And
this is the point which you have undertaken to prove out of the Fathers, and to
which you ought to speak: but in this place you perform it not. For how does
this follow? The Fathers say that true Christ is present: Ergo they say he is
present Corporally, Locally, and by way of Transubstantiation. Certainly not at
all: for he may otherwise be Present, namely Sacramentally, as we hold, and
Spiritually. Neither shall your Author with all his wit and skill ever be able
to make good this or the like consequence from the thing to the manner. And
thus much for answer in general.

Particularly, St Chrysostom says, the selfsame Body which was crucified,
etc. is received by us. But how? In a Sacrament: that is Sacramentally, and by
Faith. Even as in Baptism we are made partakers of the Blood of Christ and the
power of the Holy Ghost; not by a Real presence, or Transubstantiation of
Water into them, but only, as St Chrysostom here speaks, in a Sacrament. The
which comparison I use the rather, because it is the Fathers own who elsewhere
says, Ad pop Ant. hom 60.
that it is in the Lords supper as it is in Baptism: wherein by the sensible
element of water the gift is bestowed, In Mat. hom. 23.
and that which is intelligible, to wit regeneration and renovation is
performed. The Reddition whereof must needs be this, that in like manner by the
sensible creatures of Bread and Wine the gift is given, and we are made
partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ to the Spiritual nourishment of our
souls. By which proportion it seems that as the one is effected without
Transubstantiation, so is the other also.

Your next Author is Saint Augustine, who says, that the same Flesh which
walked here among us does he give to be eaten. True: but to be eaten by Faith,
not by the mouth. For so does Saint Augustine expound himself elsewhere, Tract
in Ioh. 25.
Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? Believe and thou have eaten.
Whereunto St Cyprian also accords, calling the blessed Body of Christ, the
food of the mind and not of the belly. But St Augustine farther adds, No man
eats that flesh but first adoreth it. Adoreth I grant that flesh which is
hypostatically and inseparably united to the Deity, but not the mystical
signs in the Sacrament: for that were foul idolatry. Now if to eat the flesh
of Christ be to believe in him, as the fame St Augustine oftentimes affirms,
Tract. in Ioh. 26.
and none adoreth but he that believes: it necessarily follows that neither
Judas nor any other Hypocrite partaking of the Sacrament, eat the flesh of
Christ because they neither believe in him, nor adore him, which makes
strongly against Transubstantiation.

The third Author you allege is Hesychius, who says no more but this, that he
gave the selfsame body which should be conceived of the Holy Ghost: which we
readily yield unto you. For the selfsame Flesh is in the Sacrament truly
offered and given unto our Faith. But that Hesychius never dreamed of your
Real Presence may appear by these words, In Levit. l. 1 c. 2
His flesh, says he, which before his passion was unfit to be eaten (for who
desires to eat the Lords flesh?) has he after his passion made fit for meat.
For if he had not been crucified, we had not eaten the sacrifice of his body:
but now we eat that meat, receiving it in memory of his Passion.

From Hesychius you return unto Saint Chrysostom again, where he says that
Christ is seen on the altar and in the hands of a Priest. What literally, and
with the eye of the body? I trow no. For though Transubstantiation were granted
you, yet is it not the Body of Christ, but the Accidents only of Bread and Wine
which we see. How then. Biblioth l. 6. am. 152.
Surely, as your own Sixtus Senensis observes, Saint Chrysostom is full of
hyperbolicall speeches: which if they be rigorously interpreted cannot possibly
be true. Such is this here, Ad pop. Ant. hom. 61.
and such are those other of touching Christ, and feeling him with the hand, of
fastening our teeth in his flesh, Hom. 83. in. Mat.
of making our tongues red with his blood, that we receive not the body of God
from a man, Ser. in Encaen. de Eucha^.
but from the Seraphims themselves taking up fire with their tongues, such as
Esaias saw, and the like. All which Phrases how they are to be understood,
Saint Chrysostom himself teaches us, oftentimes adding an as it were unto
them. As having said The spiritual blood flows on the table: within a few
lines after he says, Think that the saving blood issues as it were out of
the divine and unpolluted side, and that thou do as it were suck it from
his side. In like manner does Theophilact his Abridger interpret him. Tract in
Ioh. 25.
For whereas Chrysostom says, We are in this Sacrament mingled with Christ:
In Ioh. 6.
Theophylact for explanation adds, after a certain manner. Whereby it is
manifest that the meanin of your author in this passage also is, as if he had
said, Thou see him as it were on the Altar, and as it were in the hands of
the Priest, that is Sacramentally, and by Faith* for with other eyes then those
of the spirit he is not there to be discerned. Orat. de B. Philogon.
But if we come with faith, according to that which elsewhere he says,
Without doubt we shall see him lying in the cratch: for this table is unto us
instead of the cratch.

Lastly you vouch Saint Augustine the second time where he says, that Christ
in his last supper bare himself in his own hands. Whereunto I might answer
that Saint Augustine whether misled by a wrong translation, or upon some other
mistake, was much overseene to allege that for Scripture, and to make it his
ground, which is no where to be found in Scripture. 1 Samuel 21.14.
For the text intended by him has it far otherwise then so. The vulgar Bible
says, He fell down, or reeled between their hands: Saint Basil, In Ps. 33.
He was carried by the hands of the servants: The Original, He played the fool
or madman in their hand, or while he was in their power. All which is much
differing from that of Saint Augustine, He was carried in his own hands. And
no marvel if a fained text which he understood not, drew from him such a
violent interpretation. To say nothing how careless he is of the letter in
his Enarrations upon the Psalms and how hardly it bears his Mystical
constructions. But this notwithstanding Saint Augustine, you will say, plainly
delivers his judgment touching the Sacrament, when he says* Christ therein
was carried in his own hands. Not so plainly for your purpose, if Saint
Augustine who knew his own meaning best may be his own interpreter. For thus
does he expound himself. In Ps 33. conc. 2.
How was he carried in his own hands? Because when he commended his very Body
and blood, he took into his hands that which the faithful know, and after a
sort carried himself when he said, This is my Body. He says not Really, or
Substantially, or Corporally, but after a sort: even as elsewhere also, The
Sacrament of the body of Christ, Ep. 23. ad Boni^ac.
is after a certain manner the body of Christ, that is to say, Sacramentally
and Significatiuely. For if he had meant properly and literally, he would
never have said after a sort: but speaking in that manner, it is evident he
meant improperly and figuratively, He carried himself, that is, the Sacrament
or Symbol of himself*


N. N. But yet farther, Thou must know and hold for most certain, Catech. 4.
mystag.
says S. Cyril, that this which seems to be Bread, is not Bread but Christ's
body, though the taste does judge it Bread. And again in the same Father, Under
the form or show of Bread is given to thee the Body of Christ, and under the
form or shape of Wine is given to thee the Blood of Christ. Hom. 60. ad pop.
Ant.
And S. Chrysostom to the same effect, We must not believe our senses easy to
be beguiled, etc. We must simply and without all ambiguitie believe the words
of Christ, This is my Body, etc. How many say now always, I would see him, I
would behold his visage, his vestments, etc. But he does more then this, for
he gives himself, not only to be seen, but to be touched also, handled, and
eaten by thee.


I. D. First, what if I should except against this Cyril as an insufficient
witness? For perhaps he deserves it, and so doing I shall not at all wrong
him. That there was an ancient Father of that name Bishop of Jerusalem I
confess: and that he wrote Catechismes is testified by S. Hierom: Cat. script.
Eccles.
but withal that he wrote them in his youth, and long before he was Bishop,
which much elevateth the weight of his testimony. Howbeit you are father to
know that those Catecheticall books now entitled unto him, are but of a very
late edition. Con. Iuel. a 10. Parag. 6.
For your own Harding acknowledges that in his time, namely about sixty
years since, they were only manuscript and known but to a few learned men.
Since which time they have been published in print: and perhaps to win more
authority unto them mis-fathered upon Cyril of Jerusalem. For if we may
believe Gesner, Bibl. Con. Molinaeum.
or Simler, or your own Gretzer a Jesuit, sundry written copies entitle them
to John Bishop of Jerusalem, one who lived well near eight hundred years
after Christ, Vignier. Ec. hist. ann. 767.
even then when the quarrel about Images and relics was on foot. Whence
happily proceeded that overlashing speech, Cat. 4. and. 10.
that the wood of the Cross was so multiplied as the whole world was now full
of it. Howsoever, seeing they are come to our hands from no better places then
Trent, the Popes Vatican, and Cardinal Perrons Library: you cannot blame us if
we vehemently suspect that they have passed through Purgatory, and suffered
much addition and substraction. For we are not ignorant of your Pious frauds,
and holy couznages in purging of books: not permitting them to speak what
their Authors wrote, but what makes most for your own advantage.

But let it be supposed for the present that your author is the right Cyril of
Jerusalem, and free from all corruption, and if you will also, that he wrote
his Catechismes in his elder years: what then is the testimony that begiueth
for Transubstantiation? Forsooth, that which seems to be Bread is not Bread
but Christ's body, though the taste judge it Bread. And again, Under the show of
bread and Wine, the Body and Blood of Christ is given. Whereunto I answer, and
first to the former, that the common Latin Translation reads it otherwise,
thus, This bread which we see is not bread: so denying it to be Bread, that
yet he affirms we see Bread. Which seeming contradiction is easily accorded
by Cyril himself, where he says, it is not simple, Cat. mist. 3. and. 4.
or naked, or common bread: as if he should say, Bread it is, yet not only
bread, but something else besides. Even as when we deny Christ to be mere man,
we mean not that he is no man, but that he is Man, and besides that God also.
It is not then bread, that is, Profane, or Unsanctified bread: but the Body of
Christ, that is, bread sanctified to be a Type or Sacrament of Christ's Body.
And although our taste judge it to be no more then bread: yet Faith teaches us
not to stay on bread, but to mount higher even unto the Body of Christ. I
beseech you, when Pachymeres says, In Dionys. E^ hier. c. 4.
The holy oil is no longer called oil, for the oil is Christ, does he mean,
it has lost its nature and is transubstantiated into Christ? I trow no. In
like manner might Cyril say, The bread we see is not bread but Christ's body,
and yet never dream of your Real Presence. For in his opinion there is the
like reason of both. Cat. mist. 3.
Even as, says he, the bread of the Eucharist after the invocation of the holy
Ghost is no more common bread but the body of Christ* so also this holy
ointment is no more bare or common ointment after it is now consecrated, but a
grace which works the Presence of Christ and the holy Ghost.

To the second passage I answer, that your Author, whosoever he be, has
rendered it captiously, under the form, or show, or shape of Bread and Wine, as
if he had meant your Accidents without substance: whereas indeed Cyrils own
words are, in the Type or Figure of Bread and Wine. And this we acknowledge to
be most true. For in the receiving of the Bread and Wine which typically are
the body and blood of Christ, we truly and really after a spiritual manner
receive his very body and blood also. In regard whereof as he calls bread and
winetypes: so he makes the body and blood of Christ their Anti-types. They are
commanded, Cat. mist. 5.
says he, to taste, not of bread and wine, but of the Antitype, the body and
blood of Christ. The body therefore and the blood is in the bread and in the
wine, as the Antitype is the type, or the thing figured in the figure: which I
hope may be done without any Transubstantiation. Certainly if wheresoever you
read of Forms, shows, or shapes, you by and by conceive of nothing but
Accidents without substance: it cannot be avoided but you must needs fall into
dangerous errors. When Saint Paul says, Phil. 2.9.7.8.
that Christ being in the form of God counted it no rapine to be equal with
God: Nevertheless emptied himself taking the form of a servant, made after
the similitude of men, and being found in figure as a man humbled himself,
etc. What will you conclude hence, that Christ is only show without substance,
and neither true God nor true Man? I know you will not. And seeing you dare
not do it in this: I would advise you to beware how you conclude so in the
like.

As for the testimony of S. Chrysostom, I answer unto it breefly. We must
not believe our senses, says he. True, for they discern nothing else but bare
bread and Wine, and are not capable of the mystery signified and exhibited by
them. To apprehend that belongs unto Faith, and not sense. Yet is not sense
every way to be discredited: for we believe it is Whiteness which we see, and
savor which we taste, yea we may safely believe it is bread which we take and
eat. Wherein then may we not believe sense? That it is mere bread. For it
perceaueth not that it is sanctified and sacramental bread. But of this more
hereafter. Again, We must, says he, simply and without all ambiguity believe
the words of Christ, saying, This is my body. Questionless we must: and he
that believes them not is an infidel. But seeing, as your selves confess,
bread in proper signification is not the body of Christ: neither was it Christ's
meaning we should believe it to be so. To believe Christ's words then is to
believe them in Christ's meaning: which because it is not literal, as we have
said, it must needs be Figurative, thus, This bread sacramentally is my body.
But of this also more hereafter. Lastly, says he, He gives himself not only
to be seen, but also to be touched, handled, and eaten. This is sufficiently
answered already: whether to avoid tautologie I refer my self. Only I add,
that if properly we see, touch, taste Christ, the^ may we believe our senses,
contrary to that which Chrysostom says. But if we may not believe them, then
neither do we see, nor touch, nor taste him properly, but, as himself
interprets himself, after a manner, that is, in a sacrament, spiritually and
by Faith: which imports not your Real Presence.


N. N. Nor only do the Fathers affirm so asseverantly that it is the true
natural Body of Christ, though it appear to be Bread in form and shape, and
that we must not believe our Sen^es herein, but do deny expressly that it is
Bread after the words of Consecration, De Sacram: l 4. c. 4. and l. de Imetand.
as appears out of S. Ambrose, in his book de Sacramentis and Imetandis.
Before the words of consecration it is bread, says he, but after consecration
of bread it is made the flesh of Christ. And again, before the words of Christ
be uttered (in the consecration) the Chalice is full of Wine and Water, but
when the words of Christ have wrought their effect, there is made the blood
that redeemed the People.


I. D. Whether those books of the Sacraments here cited by you under the name
of Ambrose be his or no, is not agreed upon by all. Possevine the Jesuit
affirming that all almost together with Cardinal Bellarmine hold them to be
legitimate, plainly insinuates by the word almost that some are of another
mind. Their reasons are, first because the style much differs from that of
Ambrose; his being clear, Sixth. Sen. bibl. l. 4:
perspicuous, florid, and elaborate, this oftentimes negligent, harsh, rude,
and savouring of Monkish barbarism. Secondly, Lib. 1. c. 6. and l. 3.2.
because no writer before Lanfrank and Guitmund, who lived six hundred years
after Ambrose, quote them: which were strange if they be his, especially
considering the matter of these books, and how commonly the rest of his
writings were alleged. Lastly, because repeating the Lords Prayer, he
delivers the sixth Petition in these words, And suffer us not to be led into
temptation; Lib. 6. c. 5.
whereas the words of Christ are, And lead us not into temptation, which it is
not to be thought that S. Ambrose either was ignorant of, or meant to amend.
As touching the other book de Imitandis (you should say de mysterijs
initiandis) the same judgment have they as of the former.

But if you will, let them be Saint Ambroses: For I mean not to be peremptory
herein. What would you conclude out of him? That he denies it expressly to be
bread after consecration. Certainly in express terms he does not. All he
says is, that after consecration bread is made flesh, and wine blood: out of
which it follows not that it cease to be bread and wine: for S. Ambrose
himself affirms that this notwithstanding they still remain what they were.
De Sacram. l 4 c 4
If, says he, there be so great power in the word of the Lord Jesus, that
they should begin to be that which they were not: how much more effectual
is it, that they be what they were, and yet be changed into another thing. But
how may this be will you say, that it should remain bread and yet be made
flesh? Let S. Chrysostom resolve you. The grace of God, says he, sanctifying
the bread, it is freed from the name of bread, and counted worthy of the name
of the Lords body. Yea and S. Ambrose himself also. The Lord Jesus himself,
De mist. init. c. 9.
says he, cries, this is my body. Before the blessing of the heavenly words,
it is named another kind: after consecration the body of Christ is signified.
He says, his Blood. Before consecration it is called another thing: after
consecration it is called blood. Where by the way I cannot but marvel at the
forehead of your Cardinal Bellarmine, De. Euchar. l, 4. c. 13.
who vouching this place, changes that clause, the body of Christ is
signified, into this, it is the body of Christ. Happily he did not brook the
word signify, because it clears this point of the Real Presence more then
willingly he would. But hereby it is evident how bread may be made flesh, and
yet still remain bread: namely, because it is made so only typically and in a
signifying mystery.


N. N. Whereas Christ has said of the Bread, This is my Body, who will dare to
doubt thereof? Cyrill. Hier. cat. Mist. 4.
And whereas he has said of the Wine, This is my Blood, who will doubt or
say, it is not his Blood? He once turned Water into Wine in Cana of Galilee by
his own will, which Wine is like unto Blood. And shall we not think him
worthy to be believed when he says he has changed Wine into his Blood? Our
Lord Jesus Christ does testify unto us that we received his Body and Blood:
Ambr. l. 4. de Sacerd. c. 4
and may we doubt of his credit or testimony? Those things that are written
let us read, Hilar. de Trin. cont. Arr. l. 4.
and what we read let us understand: so shall we perfectly perform the duty of
Faith: for that these points which we affirm of the natural verity of
Christ's being in us, except we learn the^ of Christ himself, we affirm them
wickedly and foolishly, etc. Wherefore whereas he says, My Flesh is truly
Meat, and my blood truly drink, there is no place left to us of doubting
concerning the truth of Christ's body and blood, for that both by the
affirmation of Christ himself and our own belief there is ( in the
Sacrament) the flesh truly and the blood truly of our Savior. Emis hom. 5. de
Pasch.
Eusebius brings in Christ our Savior speaking in these words, For so much
as my flesh is truly meat, and my Blood truly drink, let all doubtfulnesse of
infidelity depart, for so much as he who is the author of the gift is witness
also of the truth thereof. Ser. 8. de. ^eiun. 7. mensis
And Saint Leo to the same effect, Nothing at all is to be doubted of the truth
of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament: and those do in vain answer Amen
(when they receive it) if they dispute against that which is affirmed. In
Auchorato
And finally St Epiphanius concludes thus, He that believes it not to be
the very Body of Christ in the Sacrament, is fallen from grace and Salvation.


I. D. Your Argument, Christ says, This is my Body, This is my Blood. True, no
man denies it. The Fathers say, He is worthy to be believed, and we may not
doubt of his testimony. True also: and he is an infidel whosoever questioneth
any thing he says. What then? Ergo by the judgment of the Fathers, the flesh
of Christ is Really and by way of Transubstantiation present in the Sacrament?
It follows not. For Christ says not so: and his Flesh without
Transubstantiation may be present Sacramentally and Spiritually. Saint Paul
expressly says, 1 Cor. 10.4.
The rock was Christ: and he is worthy to be believed, neither may we doubt
of his credit. Yet I hope you will not infer thereupon, Ergo in S. Paul's
judgment the Rock was transubstantiated into Christ. No more can you conclude
the like Change out of Christ's words: for the case is exactly the same. In a
word, to argue from the Thing to the Manner, It is, Ergo it is so, or so, is
merely ridiculous. With this general answer might I at once quit all your
authorities: but to three of them I have somewhat more to say in particular.

Christ, says Cyril, has said of the bread, This is my Body: and who will
dare to doubt thereof? Verily no true believer. De Cos. did. 2. Parag. pani^
est in altari. Gloss. ib.
Yet Papists dare. For that Bread should be Christ's Body tropically and
figuratively, they jest and flout at: and that it should be so literally and
properly they flatly deny. De Euchar. l. 1. c. 1.
It is impossible, says your law, that Bread should be the Body of Christ. And
Bellarmine, which sentence, this is my body, either must be understood
tropically that bread is the body of Christ significatiuely, or it is
altogether absurd and impossible: for it cannot be that bread should be the
body of Christ. Now if bread neither tropically nor literally be Christ's Body,
then do not Papists believe Christ, who according to Cyril says of the bread,
This is my body. Yea but Cyril farther says Christ has changed wine into his
blood. I grant: but every change is not Transubstantiation. Whatsoever the holy
Ghost touches is sanctified and changed, Cat. mist. 5.
says Cyril. So is Water in Baptism changed: and so is Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist, yet neither by substraction of substance, but addition of Grace, as
says Theodoret. Dial. 1.


To Saint Hilary I answer, that in the place by you quoted he speaks not of
the Eucharist. and that therefore those words: in the Sacrament, inserted by
way of Parenthesis into the text, are but a Gloss not expounding but
corrupting it. Had he meant it of the Sacrament, he would never have said, De
Trin. l. 8.
No man shall be in him, but he only in whom himself is, having only taken his
flesh into him who has taken his. What? No man to be in him, but he only in
whom himself is by the Sacrament? God forbid: for then all are out of Christ
that receive not the Eucharist, and your selves hold not such an absolute
necessity thereof. Of the Mystical Union therefore between Christ and us does
he speak, as also of the Spiritual eating of his Flesh and Drinking of his
Blood whereby it is wrought: and which, as you know, is as well done out of the
Sacrament as in it.

Lastly to your Eusebius Emissenus I answer, that if it be that ancient Bishop
of Emesa in Syria, mentioned by Saint Hierom in his Catalogue, Catal. Scrip.
Eccl.
he who flourished under the Emperor Constantius, and wrote many short
Homilies upon the Gospels: then is his authority of no value. For your own
Bellarmine and Possevin have observed out of Hierom, Recognit. p. 64.
that he was a ringleader of the Arian faction. But indeed it is not the same
Emissenus, Appar. to. 1. tit. Ens. Emis. De Euchar. l. 2. c. 30.
as the foresaid Bellarmine and Possevin together with Baronius and Canisius
testify. Ibid.
For the one wrote in Greek, the other in Latin: Anno. 341. Sect. 10.11. and
441. Sect. 5.6.7.8.
the one died a good time before the Pelagian heresy sprang up, the other
writes against it. If it be not he, who is it then: It is uncertain, says
Bellarmine. Some Latin writer, Chronolog. in 500.
says Sixtus Senensis, who stitched these Rapsodies together out of the Latin
Fathers, Biblioth. l. 4.
and whose style savoureth of Bid or Rabanus, or some one like unto them. A
Frenchman, says Canisius and Possevin, and others: yet can they not find
either in France, or any part of Europe, a place whence he should be? called
Emissenus. One suspecteth him to be Faustus Rhegiensis, another Caesaries
Bishop of Arles, a third ascribes some of his Homilies to Eucherius, some to
Maximus, and some to others. Friar Walden cites this very Homily here by you
quoted under three several names, Isidore, Eusebius Emisenus, and Anselme. All
which are but mere conjectures, and there is no certainty either of his name,
or the time when he lived. So that for ought we know, he may be some Monk or
Friar, who finding Emissenus to be an ancient writer, thought good for the
gracing of his doings to set them forth in his name: a practice not unusual
among them. Howbeit, be he never so Orthodox, never so ancient, that which he
says is little to your purpose. For all he says is but this, we may not
doubt that Christ's flesh is truly meat, and his blood truly drink forasmuch as
himself affirms it. So says Ambrose, so Leo, so Epiphanius: and it is
already answered in the general to which I refer you.


N. N. And the Fathers farther affirming, that not by Faith only, or in figure,
or image, or spiritually alone the flesh of Christ is to be eaten by us, but
really, substantially, and corporally. Hom. 87 in Mat. 21.
Not only by Faith, says Chrysostom, but in very deed he makes us his Body,
reduceing us as it were into one mass or substance with himself. And Saint
Cyril, In Ioh. 17. l. 10.
not only by faith and Charity be we spiritually conjoined unto Christ (by his
Flesh in the Sacrament) but corporally also by communication of the same flesh.
And Saint Chrysostom again, Not only by love, but in very deed are we
converted into his flesh by eating the same. And Saint Cyril again, we
receiving in the Sacrament corporally and substantially the Son of God united
naturally unto his Father, we are clarified and glorified thereby, and made
partakers of his supreme nature. Thus they.


I. D. That which you would or should prove is that Christ's body is in the
Sacrament after a corporal manner; and by way of Transubstantiation. That
where by you endeavor to prove it is the testimony of those Fathers, who
affirm that Christ's flesh is really, substantially, and corporally conjoined
unto us by the Sacrament. But between these two there is great distance:
neither does that any way follow upon this. ^ Cor. 12.13.
We all, says the Apostle S. Paul, are by one spirit baptized into one body.
Whereupon Saint Augustine, baptism avails to this, that they which are
baptized be incorporated into Christ. De Passio. Ser. 14.
And Leo, he that is received of Christ and receaueth Christ, is not the same
after washing that he was before baptism: but the body of the regenerate man
is made the flesh of him that was crucified. In regard whereof the foresaid
Apostle sticks not to say we are Christ. 1 Cor. 12.12. Tract. in Ioh. 21.
And accordingly Saint Augustine, Let us rejoice and give thanks that we are
made not only Christians, but Christ. By all which it is evident that we are as
really, substantially, and corporally united unto Christ in Baptism, as we are
in the Lords Supper. And yet I hope you will not thereupon infer a Real
presence in Baptism. If not, why should you presume to do it in the Lords
Supper? For there is no more reason for the one Sacrament then for the other.
Certainly, if the only way of uniting us really unto Christ be by receiving
this Sacrament: then woe unto all those who being Baptized dyed before they
could receive it. For it is impossible for any man to be saved by Christ,
unless first he be really made one with him. But let us breefely examine your
witnesses.

Saint Chrysostom says, Not by faith only, but indeed he makes us his body:
and Not only by love, but indeed are we converted into his flesh. What?
literally, and in proper signification, so as we are reduced into one mass or
lump with him? Or that by receiving the Communion we are really,
substantially, and corporally transubstantiated into the very Body of Christ? I
know you cannot conceive so rudely and grossly of him: and least you should, he
himself qualifieth and tempereth the vehemence of his speech with an as it
were, reducing us as it were into one mass. 1. Cor. 10.17. In 1 Cor. hom 4.
In which words alluding to that of the Apostle, we are one loaf, and one
body, and explicating the same, What speak I, says he of communication? we
are that selfsame body. For what is bread? The body of Christ. And what are
they made that receive it? The body of Christ: not many Bodies, but one Body.
Whence I argue, as we by receiving the Sacrament are made Christ's Body, so is
the Bread.* But we are not made his Body corporally by way of
Transubstantiation. Ergo neither is the Bread: nay much less is the Bread. But
Saint Chrysostom says, Not by faith only, but in very deed. True. Yet not as
if he that is joined to Christ by Faith were not indeed joined: for as Saint
Augustine says, Ephesians. 3.17.
The Apostle deceives us not, who says that Christ dwells in our hearts by
faith. De verb. Ap. Ser. 16.
He is in thee, because faith is in thee. Nor as if he would exclude Faith, and
that a man might be united unto Christ by some other means without Faith. How
then? His meaning plainly is this, that we are joined unto Christ by Faith,
and by charity: and that this conjunction is not only imaginary, as some may
foolishly conceive, by the apprehension of the mind and phantasy, or by
participation of the spiritual gifts and graces of Christ, but true and Real
by communication of his very Flesh unto us. Of which more in the next testimony.

Saint Cyril says, that we are conjoined unto Christ corporally by
communication of his flesh: and again that in the Sacrament we corporally and
substantially receive the Son of God. Whereunto I answer that Saint Cyril
disputes against a certain Heretic who held that we are one with Christ by
Faith in his Deity, and not by coniuction with his Flesh: and to this purpose
wrested that saying of our Savior, wherein he calls himself a Vine, Ioh.
15.1.
us the branches, and his Father the Husbandman. To refute this he endeavors
to show that we are joined unto him not only by that Faith whereby we believe
him to be the Son of God, and that Charity whereby we love him and
spiritually embrace him, but also in our Flesh to his very Flesh: and that
therefore Christ not only in regard of Deity is the Vine and we his Branches,
but also in respect of his Body. May it not, says he, conveniently be said,
that his humanity is the vine and we the Branches by reason of the identity of
nature? And to prove this he draws his argument from this Sacrament, for that
by it not only the gifts and graces of his Deity, but also his true real Body
is after an inscrutable and unspeakable manner communicated unto us. True it is
he uses the word corporally: but he says also by the participation of the
same flesh. Whereby he insinuates that he intends not by that word to
express the Manner how we are united, but the Thing whereunto we are united
after a Bodily manner, but unto the Body. Else this absurdity will follow that
we by the Sacrament are after a Bodily manner in Christ as well as Christ is
in us: for Saint Cyril affirms both, that we are corporally in Christ, and
Christ corporally in us. Whereas therefore Cyril says, not only by Faith and
charity, but also corporally, he does not exclude the one but admits both:
as appears by that he says both spiritually and corporally are we the
Branches and Christ the Vine. And the plain meaning is, that not only in
regard of the Spirit or Deity of Christ, and our faith and charity, but also in
respect of his very Flesh are we truly joined unto him. More briefly, we are
united not to his Divinity or Humanity alone, but unto both.


N. N. In cap. 10. Marc.
Whereunto for more explication adds Theophilact, When Christ said this is my
Body, he showed that it was his very Body indeed, and not any Figure
correspondent thereunto: for he said not, This is the figure of my body, but
this is my body. By which words the bread is transformed by an unspeakable
operation, though to us it seem still bread. In cap. 6. Ioh.
And again in another place. Behold that the Bread which is eaten by us in the
mysteries is not only a figuration of Christ's flesh, but the very flesh indeed,
for that the Bread is transformed by secret words into the flesh. Arcanus verba.
And another Father more ancient then he above twelve hundred years past,
Magnes l. 3. ad Theostmen.
handled these words of Christ, This is my Body, says. It is not the figure of
Christ's Body and Blood as some blockish minds have trifled, but it is truly the
Body and Blood of our Savior indeed.


I. D. The testimonies of Theophilact I might safely if I would pass over in
silence, for that he lived some nine hundred years after Christ: and
therefore is too young to be reckoned among the ancient Fathers. Nevertheless
let us hear what he brings. Christ says not, This is the figure of my body,
but this is my body. True: neither was it fit to speak otherwise. Genesis 17.10.11
For in the institution of a Sacrament what form can be more fit then that
which is proper to a Sacrament? Ex. 12.11.
That form is to give unto the sign the name of that whereof it is a sign.
Mar. 26.18.
Romans 6.4.
Hence is circumcision called the covenant, Col. 2.12.
and the Lamb the Passover, and Baptism our Death and Burial with Christ.
Ep. 23. ad Bonifac.
The reason, because of the resemblance that is between the Sacraments, and
those things whereof they are Sacraments as Saint Augustine says. As also to
raise our thoughts from settling on that which is earthly and elementall in
them, Dial. 1.
to the contemplation of that heavenly grace which is signified and exhibited
by them, as Theodoret says. But of this what does he collect? That it is his
very body indeed and not any figure thereof. Not any Figure? Those that are
both his ancestors and betters say otherwise. Con. Marc. l. 4.
Tertullian, The bread that was taken and given to the Disciples Christ made
his body saying, Con. Adim. c. 12.
This is my body, that is, the Figure of my body. Augustine, The Lord did not
stick to say This is my body, Enarr. in Ps. 3.
when he gave the sign of his body. And again, The Lord at his supper
commended and delivered to his Disciples the figure of his body and blood. De
Sacram. l. 4. c. 5.
Amhrose, The new Testament is confirmed by blood, In Marc. c. 14.
in a Figure of which (blood) we receive the mystical cup. Hierom, Jesus
took bread, and giving thanks brake it, transfiguring his body into the
bread. Finally (for it would be infinite to allege all) what more frequent in
the writings of the Fathers, then Signs, Sacraments, Figures, Symbols, Types,
Anti-types, Mysteries, Samplars, Images, Similitudes, Remembrances, and the
like? Against all whose yea Theophilacts Nay is not worth a straw. Yet for all
this, if you will give him leave to interpret himself, I see not but his Nay
may easily be reconciled to their Yea. For in the next passage by you vouched
he faith It is not only a Figuration: as if he should say, A figure it is, but
it is not only so, not a bare and naked Figure, but a Figure endued from on
high with the efficacy of the Spirit, according to that of St Cyprian. The
truth is present to the sign and the spirit to the Sacrament. As for the
Transformation of Bread into Flesh, which he speaks of, though still it seem
Bread, it is plain he means not that of Transubstantiation: for in this
Bread cease to be, but in that he confesses it still to remain, and that it
is Bread, which is eaten by us in the Mysteries. Which yet he more plainly
expresses where he says, God in mercy condescending to our infirmity, In
Marc. c. 14
preserves the Species or Nature of Bread and wine: but trans-elementeth or
changes it into the virtue of his flesh and blood. where it is farther to be
observed that he says not into flesh and blood, but into the virtue thereof:
intimating a Change, not of Substance, but of Operation and Efficacy.

Your next witness is Magnetes, an author to me utterly unknown, save that
Gesner in his Bibliotheca reports that he was very ancient, and that about
thirteen hundred years since he wrote in the Greek tongue certain books
in defense of the Gospel unto Theosthenes against the Gentiles that flandered
it, and that he is quoted by Fr. Turrian. By which words it seems that he
never yet saw the Press, and what is alleged out of him is warranted only by
Turrians testimony. But Turrian is one that deserves no credit at our hands, as
being a Jesuit, and known to have played many foul tricks this way. Yet if to
make your author agree with the rest of the Fathers, you will give the same
construction to his words, that above is given unto Theophilact, you may
Otherwise his authority is as easily rejected as alleged.


N. N. De Trin. l. 9.
St Hilary uses this kind of argument, If the word of God were truly made
flesh, then do we truly receive his flesh in the Lords supper, Lib. 11. in
Ioh. 6.26.
and thereby he is to be esteemed to dwell in us naturally. St Cyril proves
not only a Spiritual but also a Natural and Bodily union to be between us
and Christ by eating his flesh in the Sacrament.


I. D. That Hilary speaks of the Lords Supper, or of our Conjunction with
Christ by Eating thereof I think it will hardly be proved. Had he so meant,
how comes it to pass that he never alledgeh those words of the Sacrament,
This is my body, which would have made more for his purpose: but ever voucheth
the sixth of John which makes little to the Sacrament? Howbeit if you will
needs understand him so, I will not strive. Know then that in those books St
Hilary disputes against the Arians. To them he objected that saying The Father
and the Son are one. One, answered they, as we are with Christ, by Will, not
by Nature. whereunto he replied, that we are even by Nature one with Christ.
And this he proves, first because both in Christ and us there is the same
Humane nature by the Incarnation of the Son of God, which he calls the
Sacrament of perfect union. Secondly, because the Faithful are joined unto him
by his Spirit dwelling in them, which regenerateth, quickneth, sanctifies
them: and not only conformeth them unto him, but also transformeth them into
him. And for proofs hereof he alleges diverse passages of St John's Gospel,
Ioh. 6.56.14.20.17.11.21.
such as your selves confess, no way to belong unto the Sacrament. Thirdly,
for that by Baptism we are joined unto Christ, and that not only by consent of
will but naturally, according to that of Saint Paul, As many as are baptized
into Christ have put on Christ. Whereunto lastly, if you please, you may add,
for that also in the Lords Supper we are united unto him by Eating his Flesh
and Drinking his Blood. All these ways, says Hilary, are we Naturally joined
unto Christ. If so, then not only by the Eucharist. And if for the establishing
of the other means there needs no Transubstantiation at all, as of the Son
of God into Man, of Faith into the Spirit of Christ, or of Baptismall water
into the Blood of Christ: neither is it necessary for this that bread be
Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ. Or if to bring Christ into us and
our mouth, you will needs transubstantiate the bread into his body: I wonder
what Transubstantiation you will devise to bring us into him and his mouth? For
Hilary affirms that by the same Mystical conjunction not only is Christ in
us, but also we are Naturally in him.

The same Answer may serve for Cyril also, whereunto for farther explication
of the word Naturally and Natural so often used both by Cyril and Hilary, I
add, that in them Naturally signifies Truly, and Natural True, if we may
believe him who best knew their meaning even Cyril himself. In Apolog. Anath 3.
For thus he, Not according to natural unity, that is true unity. By nature
we are the children of wrath: where by nature we are to understand truth. So
that Natural union is true union, and naturally to be united is truly to be
united, which I hope may be without Transubstantiation.


N. N. Dial. 2. in confut.
Theodoret does prove that Christ took Flesh of the blessed virgin and ascended
up with the same, and holds the same there, by that he gives to us his true
flesh in the Sacrament: for that otherwise he could not give us his true Flesh
to eat, if his own flesh were not true, seeing that he gave the same that he
carried up and retains in heaven.


I. D. I marvel much, not one of the Fathers being more express against
Transubstantiation then Theodoret, that yet you durst to praise him in the
maintenance thereof. Eve^ for this cause does the Preface to the Roman Edition
go about to weaken his authority: and Gregory of Valentia flatly condemns
him. Lib. 2. de. Transub. c. 7.
It is no wonder, says he, if one, or two, or more of the Ancients have
thought or written of this matter not so considerately and rightly. Add
hereunto that Theodoret was noted by the Council of Ephesus for some other
errors besides. But how much Theodoret makes against Transubstantiation you
shall hear hereafter. Now you may be pleased to know that in the place by you
cited he disputes against an Eutychian Heretic, who held that the Humanity
of Christ was abolished and absorpted by his Deity. This he would prove by
the Eucharist, that as the Symbols before Consecration are one thing, but after
it, are changed and become another: even so the Body of Christ after the
Assumption thereof is changed into the Divine Substance. Now if Theodoret had
been Transubstantiator he had been finely taken: for Transubstantiation
abolisheth the substance of Bread, and turns it into the substance of Christ's
Body. But he takes the Heretic in his own nets, affirming the Mystical
signs after their sanctification do not depart from their nature: and that
therefore Christ after the Assumption thereof retains his Humanity still.
Whereby you may see, that although it be yielded that Christ gives us his true
Flesh in the Sacrament, yet in the judgment of Theodoret he so gives it, that
the Mystical signs retain their Nature still: which utterly overturnes your
Transubstantiation.


N. N. Cont. haer. l. 4 c. 3.
S. Irenaeus, S. Justin, and S. Chrysostom, do prove not only this, Apol. ad
Anton. Pium Imp.
but the Resurrection also of our Bodies by the truth of Christ's Flesh in the
Sacrament; for that our Flesh joining with his Flesh which is immortal shall
be immortal also. Hom. 60. and. 61 ad pop Ant.



I. D. The truth of Christ's Flesh in the Sacrament, and the Conjunction of our
Flesh with his Flesh, neither is nor ever was by us denied. And therefore to
heap up Fathers for the proof thereof is but to spend your labor to no
purpose. That you should prove, is, the Presence of Christ by
Transubstantiation: Which hitherto you have but little aimed at. In the
Sacrament, say these Fathers, our Flesh is joined to Christ's Flesh, Ergo our
Flesh shall rise again. The Antecedent is true, and the sequel is good. But
what joining do they mean? The taking of Christ's flesh into the mouth. They
never dreamt of it. And if it were so, it would follow that all they that eat
Christ Sacramentally (among whom how many Reprobates are there?) shall rise
again unto life everlasting. For I hope you will not say that the sacred Flesh
of Christ does quicken any unto everlasting death. How then is it? By eating
him not only Sacramentally, but also spiritually and by Faith. For by this
means Christ becomes the food of our souls, which redounding upon the Flesh
by making it the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and an instrument of righteousness,
fitteth and prepares it to a glorious Resurrection. Hence our Savior, Ioh.
6.54.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Romans 8.10.11.
And the Apostle S. Paul, If Christ be in you, the Body indeed is dead because
of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the spirit
of him that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead dwell in you* he that raised
up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit
that dwells in you. And that this is the meaning of the Fathers appears by
that they say, Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
Our bodies come not into corruption but partake of life by being nourished
with the body and blood of the Lord. For that our bodies in litterall sense
should be nourished with Christ's body, De Euchar. l. 2. c. 4.
is to make it the food of the belly not of the mind, then which, says
Bellarmine, nothing can be devised more absurd. And what I pray you is
Nourishment properly? Only to take meat into the mouth? No, but the alteration
and conversion of the substance thereof into the substance of that which is
nourished: which to affirm of the Body of Christ is horrible impiety. Of force
therefore must the Fathers be understood to speak of such a Nourishment by the
body of Christ as is spiritual. Now if the Nourishment be spiritual, such is
the Eating also: and it is as absurd to say that the soul is nourished by
bodily eating as that the body is nourished by spiritual eating. Will you have
all in a word? The things that we eat with our mouth in the Sacrament are not
the causes, but the pledges of our Resurrection. So says the great Council of
Nice, We must believe these things to be the symbols or pledges of our
Resurrection. Conc. Nic. 1.



N. N. And the same S. Irenaeus does prove farther that the great God of the
old Testament Creator of heaven and earth was Christ's Father. For proof
whereof he alleges this reason, that Christ in the Sacrament did fulfill the
Figures of the old Testament, and that in particular wherein bread was a figure
of his Flesh, which he fulfilled, says Irenaeus, making it his Flesh indeed.


I. D. Lib. 1* 28.
The Marcionites, whom Irenaeus confuteth, taught that the God of the old
Testament was not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that the Creator was
known, but the Father of Christ was unknown. Against this he endeavors to
prove that the Father of our Lord was he who created the world. That this he
intends manifestly appears by those words where he says, Others saying
that another besides the creator is his Father, and offering unto him those
creatures that are here amongst us, show that he is greedy and covetous of that
which is another. And among other arguments this he uses for one, Bread and
Wine are the creatures of the Creator of the world, which creatures Jesus
Christ uses in the Sacrament, the one to be his Body, and the other to be his
Blood, and therein are they offered to his Father: Lib. 4. c. 57.
Ergo the Creator is his Father. Were he not his Father, he would never have
taken that which belongs unto another, or whereunto he had no right, and convert
it to his own use. So that here your Author has notably deceived you. For
Irenaeus proves Christ to be the son of the Creator, not by his omnipotence
in turning Bread and Wine into his Flesh and Blood (a thing that never came
into his thought) but from his right and title to the Creatures, which makes
nothing for Transubstantiation. Touching the Figures of the old Testament, and
how they prefigured our Sacraments, we have spoken enough already.


N. N. What is so sacrilegious, Con. Don. l.
says Optatus Milevitanus, as to break down, scrape, and remove the altars
of God on which your selves have sometimes offered, and the members of Christ
have been borne. etc. What is an altar but the Seat of the Body and Blood of
Christ? And this monstrous villainy of yours is doubled, Iren. cont. haer. l. 6.
for that you have broken also the chalice which did bear the Blood of Christ
himself. When the mixed chalice and the Bread broken takes the word of God,
the Eucharist of the blood and body of Christ is made. Id. l. 3. c. 34.
Bread receiving the calling of God is not now common bread but the Eucharist
consisting of two things one earthly, another heavenly: the earthly thing is
the old form of bread, the heavenly is the body of Christ newly made under
that form. Id. l. 5. c. 32.
Let us now consider also the persons to whom this Commandment was given: they
were those twelve Apostles whom Christ at his last Supper taught the new
Oblation of the new Testament, giving them authority by this precept to
consecrate, to make present, and to offer to God his body and blood.


I. D. Where little or nothing is objected the answer is soon made. Optatus
says, that the altar is the seat of Christ's body and blood, and that the
chalice bears his blood. Irenaeus says, that after consecration the
Eucharist of the body and blood is made, that in it there is a heavenly thing,
and the Apostles had authority to make present the body of Christ. Ergo the
body and blood of Christ is really, corporally, locally, and by way of
Transubstantiation present in the Sacrament, A poor and silly consequence,
which all the wity our author has, will never be able to make good. For those
words of the Fathers may be salued and verified if Christ be Present any other
way. And Present he is Sacramentally to the signs, and spiritually to the
Faith of the worthy receauer. Neither are the Fathers always literally to be
understood, when they use the names of the Body and Blood of Christ. For it is
the common practice of them all writing of the Sacraments, specially of the
Lords Supper, to call the sign by the name of the thing signified: following
therein the custom of Scripture, and the example of our Savior, who as
Theodoret says, changed the names, Dial. 8.
and called the sign by the name of his Body. So that when they say, the Body
is on the altar, the Blood is in the Chalice, and so of the rest: the meaning
by this rule is, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood is there, or the Body and
Blood is there Sacramentally.

But in vouching Irenaeus what is the reason you curtal one place, and add
unto another? Meant you to play the Giant Procrustes, and to shorten the one
because it was too long for your bed, and to stretch out the other because it
was too short? For whereas to those words, the Eucharist of the Blood and Body
of Christ is made, Irenaeus adds immediately, by which the substance of our
flesh is augmented and consists: this you thought good to omit because it
makes directly against you. For it is not the natural Flesh and Blood of
Christ, whereby our Bodies are nourished and increased. Yet in the Sacrament by
his Body and Blood they wax and grow. Ergo by his Symbolicall Body and Blood,
the Bread and Wine still remaining. Again whereas Irenaeus says, The
Eucharist consists of two things, one earthly, another heavenly: you add,
the earthly thing is the old form of bread, the heavenly is the body of Christ
newly made under that form. But this is your own Gloss, and no part of the
Text: and such a Gloss as corrupts the Text. For Irenaeus never dreamt of
your Forms and Accidents without substance: and his plain meaning is, that
whereas before Consecration there was but one thing, and that earthly, namely
Bread, now it is made the Eucharist consisting of two things, the one Earthly,
namely Bread, the other Heavenly, to wit, the Body of Christ.


N. N. For we do not take these as common Bread and Wine, Justin. Apol. 2.
but like as Jesus Christ our Savior incarnated by the word of God had Flesh
and Blood for our salvation, eve^ so we be taught that the food wherewith our
Flesh and Blood be nourished by alteration, when it is consecrated by the
prayer of his word, to be the Flesh and Blood of the same Jesus Christ
incarnated.


I. D. It is not common bread says Justin. What of that? For he that denies
it to be common bread, does not deny it to be bread: nay he confesses it to be
so, though not only so, by virtue of the addition of Grace unto it. If every
thing that cease to be common loose its nature, and cease to be what it was;
then whosoever comes to Rome must not believe his eyes, but think he is in
Fairy land, where things are not what they seem to be. For there doubtless
all things are hallowed, nothing Common. Justin says farther, As the word
became flesh, so is bread made the body. What after the same manner? Then
farewell Transubstantiation. For the Word became Flesh by uniting it unto
himself hypostatically, not by Transubstantiating himself into it. In like
manner therefore is bread made Body, not by a substantial change of Bread into
body, but by a Sacramental union of the body with bread. Nay says he, but
the same powerful Word that wrought the one, works also the other. Yet this
enforces no Transubstantiation. For no power is able to make a Sacrament, and
by earthly creatures to convay unto us heavenly Graces, save only that which is
Divine.

But would you see a pretty trick of legerdemaine, and how your author juggles
with you. The words of Justin run not in the same order as they are set
down, but thus, Even so are we taught that the food blessed by the prayer of
the word of God, whereby our flesh by conversion is changed, etc. Then which
nothing makes more against that which you intend. For the consecrated Food as
Justin says, nourishes our Flesh and Blood. But the Body of Christ,
nourishes them not, neither to that end is converted into our substance.
Wherefore of necessity it must be Bread: and if bread after Consecration, what
is become of your new found Transubstantiation?


N. N. Hieron ad Hedib. 2.
Neither has Moses given us the true Bread, but our Lord Jesus Christ,
himself the Feaster and the Feast, himself the Eater and he that is eaten.


I. D. Christ indeed is the Feast, and is eaten: but eaten as he is the Feast
not of the Body but the Soul: eaten therefore is he by the mouth of the Soul
not of the body. For a Spiritual meat must spiritually be received. And more
then this Saint Hierom understands not. For as for that he says Manna was not
the true bread, it cannot be denied. For our Savior affirms it, and in it
self it was no more then the food of the belly. Yet was it made a Sacrament
both Significatiue and Exhibitiue of Christ: though generally to the Jews it
was fruitless, because they considered it carnally, and understood not the
mystery thereof. Enarr. in Ps. 39.
So all the Fathers. Hear one Augus^^^ for them all. The ancients, says he,
while as yet the true sacrifice which the faithful know, was foreshewed in
Figures, did celebrate the figures of the thing figured, some of them with
knowledge, De V^i^. Paen. c. 1.
but more ignorantly. And again, Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness
and are dead: for they understood not that* which they did eat. Therefore not
understanding they received nothing else but corporal meat. And yet again,
The same meat and the same drink, Ibid.
but to them that understand and believe: but to those that understand not,
only Manna, only water. Neither can we conceive of this otherwise, unless we
will leave Christ and Saint Paul at variance; the one denying that Moses
giving Manna gave the true bread, the other affirm^^g that they all ate the
same spiritual meat. Which being so, it seems strange to me how you can
hammer your Real Presence from hence. For to reason thus is very ridiculous,
Moses gave not the body of Christ: Ergo bread in the Eucharist is
transubstantiated into Christ's body. Yet this is all I can see, and until you
show me better reason, farther answer you may not look from me.


N. N. Damasc de orthod. fid. l. 4. c. 14
If you ask how it is made, it is enough for thee to hear, that it is made by
the Holy Ghost, even as our Lord made for himself a Body out of the Virgin
mother of God: and we know no more but that the word of God is true,
strengthfull and almighty. And again, Not as the Body of Christ came down
from heaven, but because the Bread and Wine is changed into the Body and Blood
of Christ.


I. D. An. 740.
This Damascen lived upward of seven hundred years after Christ, and has not
years enough to be numbered among the ancient Fathers. In regard whereof, as
also because of those many shameful errors, and fabulous narrations every
where appearing in his writings, he is one of little or no authority in the
Church of God. He was the first that removed the bounds of the ancient Doctors
in this matter, bringing in sundry new and strange terms never heard of in
former times: the misunderstanding of which by little and little prepared a way
to that deformed monster of Transubstantiation. Nevertheless it is certain,
that howsoever many of his speeches may seem harsh and inconvenient, and great
advantage has been taken of them that way: yet himself was clean of another
mind. Let us therefore hear what he says, It is made says he, by the Holy
Ghost, even as our Lord made for himself a body out of the Virgin mother. If
so, then is it not made by Transubstantiation: for Christ assuming a body
turned not his Deity into it. Yet was the work of the Holy Ghost necessary:
for he alone is able to sanctify the Natural element, and to invest them with
Supernatural graces. Lib. 4. c. 14.
The same says he of Baptism. He has joined the Grace of the Holy Ghost to
oil and water, and has made it the washing of Regeneration. And Leo yet more
fully, De nativ. Ser. 4.
using the selfsame comparison, Christ gave unto water that which he gave
unto his mother; for the power of the most high, and over shaddowing of the
holy Ghost which made that Mary brought forth the Savior, has made water to
regenerate the believer. Whereby you see that the same power of Gods Spirit, by
which the blessed Virgin conceived, may be employed in a Sacrament, without
that change and conversion that you imagine of. And that Damascen, though he
aknowledged a change of the Bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ,
yet was not acquainted with your change, may appear by these words, Lib. 4. c.
14.
Because it is the manner of men to eat bread, and to drink wine with water,
he has conjoined his divinity with them, and made them his body and blood,
that by usual things and which are according to nature, we might be settled in
these things that are above nature. Here you see he conioyneth the Divinity
with bread and wine. Now conjunction is only of those things that are, and have
a being. Bread and Wine therefore still are. If they be, then are they not
abolished. And if they be not abolished, then is Transubstantiation gone. Add
hereunto, that Accidents without Substance are, not Usual things, nor
according to Nature: and therefore not they, but true bread and true Wine are
the things which in Damascens judgment raise us up to those things that are
above Nature. But of him enough.


N. N. Ignat. ep. ad Romans
The perishing meat and pleasures of this world please me not. I long for Gods
Bread, the heavenly Bread, the bread of life, which thing is the flesh of
Christ the Son of God.


I. D. That Ignatius wrote an Epistle to the Romans, both Eusebius and Hierom
testify: Hist. l. 3. c. 30. Hieron. in Catal.
and that this which now passes under that title may be the right Epistle I
deny not. Howbeit it is confessed of all that those Epistles which are granted
to be his, are not come unto our hands perfect. For some passages are cited out
of them by some of the ancients, as Hierom, Theodoret, and others, which now
are not found in them: and some are manifestly corrupted and depraved as
appears. So that if Baronius and Bellarmine might challenge them of
corruption in those places which make for Saint Paul's marriage and against
half Communions: Ad ann. 57 Sect. 54.
De Euchar. l. 4. c. 26.
I hope I have as much liberty to challenge the place by you alleged, if it
made any thing against us. But it needs not: for Ignatius speaks not there of
the Sacrament, and therefore it makes nothing to the purpose. Neither does it
follow, The bread is flesh, Ergo by Transubstantiation.


N. N. Leo Ser de ieiun. me^sis 7.
We ought so to communicate with our Lords table, that we doubt nothing of the
verity of his Body and Blood, seeing he said, Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of man, etc.


I. D. Leo disputes in this place against the Eutychians who denied the truth
of Christ's body: and thus he argues, The Eucharist is a symboll of the body of
Christ, Ergo Christ has a true body, and whosoever will rightly communicate,
must nothing doubt thereof. Dia. 2.
So reasons also Theodoret. For Orthodoxus demanding, whether Bread and Wine
were Symbols of the true body and blood of Christ, or no, and being answered
yea: he thus concludes, If the divine mysteries be samplars of the true body,
then the body of the Lord is now also true, and not changed into the nature of
the Divinity. Hence may you see the weakness of your Argument, Communicants
may not doubt that Christ has a true body, or if you will, that the true body
of Christ is in the Eucharist: Ergo bread is transubstantiated into body.
Ridiculous.


N. N. As therefore our Baptism is made by real washing with water, Euth. in
panopl. l. 3. hom. 21.
and real renewing of the Holy Ghost: so now in the Supper of Christ it
behooves we be really fed with the fruit of the tree of life which is none
other thing besides the flesh of Christ.


I. D. If we yielded Euthymius unto you the matter were not great. An. 1180.
For he lived upward of eleven hundred years after Christ: and your own
Chronologers place him after Gratian and Peter Lombard. Yet what says he? It
behooves that in the supper we be really fed with the flesh of Christ. Really
fed? Who doubts of it? But you are to know that Real does not necessarily
import your Carnal manner. For Spiritual is also Real: unless you will say
a spirit is no thing.


N. N. It is a remembrance of Christ's death by the presence of the body which
died. Niceph. l. 1. c. 18.
It is the Body and Blood of Christ covered from our eyes, revealed to our
Faith, feeding presently our body and soul to everlasting life.


I. D. This Nicephorus also lived eleauen hundred years after Christ, and
therefore is none of the Fathers, nor of any great authority. Neither does that
which he says conclude your purpose. For Christ's Body may be and is present
Sacramentally and to our faith, and presently feed both souls and bodies to
everlasting life, and yet Bread and Wine remain still in the Sacrament. Else
where he calls the outward Elements symbolls and signs of the Passion of
Christ. Lib. 7. c. 40.
If symbolls and signs, then not the Body it self.


N. N. They receive not the fruit of Salvation in the eating of the healthful
sacrifice. Greg. in 1. Reg. l. 2. c. 1.
They eat the healthful Sacrifice which surely is nothing else but the
natural body of Christ, but the fruit they receive not. As many men take an
healthful medicine, but because their bodies be evil affected it proves not
healthful to them.


I. D. Thus you reason, The healthful Sacrifice is the natural body of
Christ, Ergo Bread by Transubstantiation is made the body of Christ. How these
things hang together for my part I cannot see. Would to God your self had
taken the pains to show it. But this is your solemn fault, you quote the
sayings of the Fathers, and leave me to gather your Conclusions: I may well
think, because you saw no great force or strength in them. And whether Gregory
did favor Transubstantiation or no, let it be tried by these words. De consecr.
did. 2. c 73.
As the Divinity of the word of God is one which fills all the world: so
although that body be consecrated in many places and at innumerable times, yet
are there not many bodies of Christ, nor many cups, but one body of Christ, and
one blood with that which he took in the womb of the Virgin and which he gave
to the Apostles. For the Divinity of the word fills that which is every
where, and conioyneth and makes that as it is one, so it be joined to the
body of Christ, and his body be in truth one. Here according to Gregory the
body of Christ does not succeed and fill up the room of bread, after the
substance thereof is abolished: but the fullness and virtue of the Divinity
which fills the bread, makes it ^o pass into the body of Christ: and so to
be one body of Christ. Which how it can stand with your Transubstantiation
judge you.


N. N. These Heretics admit not the Eucharists and oblations, Dial. 3.
because they will not confess that the Eucharist is the Flesh of our Savior
Jesus Christ, which has suffered for our sins, which the Father has raised up
again by his goodness. These words alleged by Theodoret are reported by him
to be the words of St. Ignatius the Apostles scholar written in an Epistle ad
Smyrnenses, and therefore of greater antiquity.


I. D. These words are not found in that Epistle ad Smyrnenses which is now
extant. Whereby you may perceive it is true that I said, the Epistles of
Ignatius are not come perfect to our hands. Lib. 3. c. 30. Dial. con Pelag. l.
3.
Of this Epistle says Eusebius, Ignatius when he wrote to them of Smyrna, used
words I know not whence taken. And Hierome; If you use not his testimonies for
authority, at least use them for antiquity. And the Abbot of Spanhe^m reckons
it not among the rest of his Epistles as being doubtful. Yet for all this the
credit of this Epistle shall not be questioned by me. I answer therefore, the
Heretics which Ignatius means were Menander and the Disciples of Simon. These
denied that Christ was come in the Flesh, and consequently that he had Flesh.
Whereupon they rejected the Eucharist also, least thereby they should be
constrained to confess that he had true Flesh. For granting the sign of a
body, you must also grant a true body* Figure and Truth being Correlatiues,
whose Relation is to figure and to be figured. And thus they added aloes unto
wormwood, one error unto another: first denying the truth of Christ's body, and
then that the Eucharist was the Sacrament of his body, or that it was
Sacramentally his body. More then this cannot be meant. For I presume
Theodoret would not allege this to cross himself; who holds that Bread and
Wine still remain* and argues from them for the verity of Christ's body,
because they are symbols of his body, as is above declared.


N. N. Does not the Evangelist John say in the Apocalypse, If any man shall add
unto these things, Rupert. in Ioh. Apoc. 22.16,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: and if any
man shall minish of these words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City, and the
things which are written in this book. Is this malediction or curse less to
be feared here, that we diminish not, or put any thing to the words of him that
said, This is my body which shall be delivered for you, this is my blood of the
New Testament which shall be shed for many in the remission of sins. For when
he says, This is my body, we shall put to an understanding, saying a
Figurative Body, or that it is spoken by a similitude, when I say he says,
this is my Body, we shall say, this signifies my Body, is it not much that we
put to his words, or by an evil change take from them, and make a sense which
so great an author, God and man in no place has spoken, nor at any time did
ascend into his heart. This man especially with many of the rest answers M.
Down and all Protestants fully.


I. D. In this Authority I cannot but greatly pity you, to see how miserably
you are gulled and beguiled by your Author. For what was this Rupertus, but a
man of yesterday? one that lived toward twelve hundred after Christ and a very
Heretic in this point of the Sacrament. Ann. 1140.
For he maintained that the Eucharisticall Bread is hypostatically assumed by
the Word, just after the same manner that the humane nature was assumed by the
same Word. This he expresses in words as clear as the noone day. For
expounding that of our Savior, The Bread which I will give, is my Flesh, he
says, That the eternal word by incarnation was made man, Lib. 6. in Ioh.
not destroying or changing, but personally assuming the humanity: and after
the same manner by consecration of the Eucharist, the same word is made Bread,
not destroying or changing, but personally assuming Bread. This he declares
elsewhere very largely, De offic. divin. l. 2. c. 2.
showing that Bread is made the Body of Christ, not by turning it into his
Flesh, but because it is assumed by the Word. Whence it follows that Bread is
the Body of Christ, yet not his Humane or Carnal but Bready Body, much
differing from that which he took of the Virgin. That yet these two bodies may
be said to be One, because the Person is but one, or Christ is one who assumed
them both. so that the same Christ above, that is in heaven is in the Flesh,
and beneath that is on the Altar is in Bread. De Sacram. l. 1. c. 6.
This gross error Algerus, who lived in the same time with Rupertus,
confu^ed, calling it as it justly deserved, a new and most absurd heresy. What
say you now to this, good sir? Is this the man who especially among the rest
fully answers Mr^ Down and all Protestants? Does he not as fully answer you
Papists, who clean contrary to his Tenet destroy and change the bread to make
it Christ's body? Yea but we add unto the Text, understanding it to be a
Figurative body. That is a shameless slander: for we place no Figure in the
word body, but literally interpret it of Christ's natural body. At least we
say bread signifies his body. So we say indeed: and so say the Fathers also.
And to give the true sense unto a Text, is not to add unto it. Neither can I
conceive why it should be counted addition in us to say This is my body
Sacramentally, or by way of signification, more then in you to say it is so by
way of Transubstantiation, or in Rupertus himself by way of Impanation.


N. N. Let us therefore believe God always and not repine against him,
Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. 83.
although that which he says seems absurd to our sense and understanding.
Let his words surmount and pass both our sense and reason, which thing we
ought to do in all things, but chiefly in the myst^ries, having more regard
unto his words, then to things which lie before us. For his words are
infallible, but our sense may very easily be deceived: they cannot possibly be
false, but this sense of ours is many and sundry times beguiled. Seeing
therefore he said, This is my Body, let us have no doubt, but believe and
behold it with the eyes of our understanding.


I. D. Whatsoever Christ says must be believed, although to our sense and
reason it seem never so unlikely. This I grant: for he is truth it self, and
can neither deceive nor be deceived. But Christ says This is my body. And this
also I grant: for they are part of the words of Institution, Ergo these words
must be believed. And let them be esteemed as Gentiles and Publicans that
believe them not. But what means he when he says, Let us behold it with the
eyes of our understanding? In the words immediately following he declares it
thus, Christ delivered no sensible thing unto us, but by sensible things things
intelligible. And this he illustrats by the Sacrament of baptism. So also in
baptism, says he, by water a thing sensible the gift is given. but that
which is wrought namely Regeneration and Renovation is intelligible. By all
which you may easily see what St Chrysostom intends, namely to draw our eyes
from the sensible Object unto the spiritual and Intelligible Grace exhibited
to our understanding by it: as knowing that Water and bread are now become
instruments in the hand of Christ of the spiritual Renovation and Refection of
our souls. Which as it is effected in Baptism without the Transubstantiation
of Water: so for ought St Chrysostom says it may be done in the Lords supper
also without Transubstantiation of bread.


N. N. Id. ad pop. Ant. ho. 2.
What will you say then if I show you that so many of us as be partakers of the
holy mysteries, do receive a thing far greater then that which Elias gave.
For Elias left unto his Disciples his cloak, but the son of God ascending
into heaven left with us his Flesh. And again, Elias went himself without his
cloak: but Christ left his flesh with us, and ascended having with him the
selfsame Flesh.


I. D. Here Christ ascending into heaven, and carrying his true flesh with him,
is compared to Elias who also ascended and carried his flesh thither with him.
But the flesh that he left here with us, is compared to Elias cloak which he
left with Elizeus. And the comparison stands thus, that as the Cloak which
Elias left was a symbol of the spirit and Virtue which fell from him upon
Elizeus: so the mystical elements in the Sacrament are pledges and tokens unto
us of the true flesh of Christ in the Church. Thus therefore is St Chrysostom
to be understood, as if he had said, Christ ascending carried his true flesh
with him corporally into heaven: and left his mystical flesh here unto us
spiritually in the Sacrament.


N. N. The supper then being prepared, Cypr. de coen. Dom.
both old and new ordinances met together at the Sacramental and mystical
delicates: and the Lamb being consumed which the old tradition did set forth,
our Master sets before his Disciples a meat which cannot be consumed.
Neither is the people invited now to sumptuous, costly and artificial
banquets, but the food of immortality is given, which differs from common
meats, keeping the outward form of the corporal substance, but proving and
declaring that there is present by an invisible and secret working the presence
of a divine power.


I. D. The book of the Cardinal works of Christ, divided into twelve Tracts,
among which this De coena Domini is one, is none of Cyprians that was Bishop of
Carthage. Pamelius staggers. For although the Words and phrases, and figures,
Annot. in Praef^t.
and the like, seem unto him to make for Cyprian: yet he professes that of
certainety he has nothing to say. Apparat. Biblioth. l. 4. De omisl. great. l.
6. c. 2. and de script. Eccl. in Cyp.
But Possevine is peremptory that it is falsely fathered on Cyprian. So is
Sixtus Senensis also: and Cardinal Bellarmine. And they render reasons. For
that Cyprian never refused to set his name to his books which this Author
does. Neither would he have called his writings Childish toys: or have said
that the sublimitie of Cornelius ought to be delighted with his stammering
tongue. Nor finally would he have used so many barbarismes: nor have written
things contrary to himself. As for this particular Tract de coena Domini,
Bellar. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 9.
Bellarmin ingeniously acknowledges, that not Cyprian, but some one later then
he wrote it. Howbeit they all conclude that the Author of these Tracts is
ancient. Annot. in Praefat.
How ancient? It is clear, says Pamelius, that this book was written in the
time of Cornelius and Cyprian, and therefore deserves the same authority with
Cyprian. De Amiss. Great l 6. c. 2.
Nay not so, says Bellarmine, for the Author thereof is later then Cyprian,
yea without doubt later then S. Augustine, that is, a hundred and fifty years
younger then Cyprian at least. And who certainly knows but he may yet be much
younger then so? James de spuriis sub Patro^ nomine scrip. ^ag. 12.
In the Library of All Souls College in Oxford there is a Manuscript, very
ancient of all these Tracts under the name of Arnoldus Bonavillacensis,
dedicated not to Cornelius (as it is now falsely inscribed) but to Hadrian the
fourth, the which Arnoldus lived not much less the^ twelve hundred years
after Christ. An. 1150.
Which inscription if it be true, as it is not unlikely, then is not this
author the man you took him for, namely that grave Father and Martyr, as in
the next Section you term him, to wit St Cyprian. If false, yet because it is
uncertain who he is, and in what age he lived, his authority cannot be of of
any great value. Nevertheless whatsoever he be, let us in a word or two
examine his testimony.

And first be it observed, that all the Presence he speaks of in these words
is but the Presence of divine virtue, or power: which falls short of that
Real Presence of the natural Body of Christ which you intend. But after the
Lamb, says Cyprian, was consumed, our Lord set before his Disciples an
inconsumptible meat, which cannot be Bread. Indeed it cannot: and who says it
is? For the meat that cannot be consumed is the Body of Christ offered and
exhibited in the Sacrament together with Bread. And this is also that food of
immortality which he speaks of, represented and figured unto us by Bread:
it being so truly, Bread sacramentally. But it follows, differing from common
meats, and keeping the form of bodily substance: and these happily are the
words which you think strikes all dead. What? for Transubstantiation? Suppose
then your Author had said, The water in Baptism differs from common water,
and retaining the form of bodily substance, by invisible working proves the
Presence of Gods power to be there: would you from hence conclude
Transubstantiation? I know you would not. No more can you from this. And
indeed the word species which you translate. Form, yea and outward Form too,
though the word outward be not in the text, does not signify show without
substance, or Accident without subject; but in the writings of the Fathers
usually it signifies the truth, De Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
nature, or kind of a thing. So Ambrose, I see not speciem the truth of blood,
speaking of the Lords Cup, but it has the resemblance: Ib. l. 6. c. 1.
which afterward repeating, I see the resemblance, says he, but I see not
veritate^ the truth of blood. Again, the word of Christ changes the species of
the Elements. Id. de mist. init. c. 9.
What is that? The Forms or Accidents of the Elements? No: for they you say,
remain. What then but the Elements or things themselves? Enar. in Ps. 77
And St Augustine, Their meat was the same with ours, but the same in
signification, not in specie, that is, in kind. So that when your Author
says, it keeps the species of bodily substance, it is not necessary to
render it by Form, that is Accident, or Show void of substance: for you may as
well turn it thus, it still retains the nature or truth of its bodily
substance.


N. N. This grave Father and Martyr does plainly show, how Mr Down has
wrested Pope Gelasius. For the Popes and the Doctors of the Church did agree
always in matters of Faith, notwithstanding the great show M. Down has made
to the contrary. For here S. Cyprian shows you that this food of immortality
keeps the outward form of the Bodily Substance, but proving that there is
present a divine power, which is confessed by Gelasius. And therefore when
Gelasius says, the nature of Bread and Wine cease not to be, his meaning is,
the outward form of the corporal Substance. And with this agree many of the
Fathers, which are also wrested from their true meaning, as appears
manifestly by the manifold plain places of the Fathers by me here set down.


I. D. If to neglect the Premises, and to contradict the Conclusion by the
right way of answering arguments, then have you taken the right course, and
made up my mouth for ever replying upon you. For whereas M. Down, as you say,
has made a great show, to prove that the Fathers disagree among themselves in
some points: you passing by all the proofs, think it sufficient to affirm
the contrary, that the Popes and Doctors of the Church do agree. Whereupon you
farther infer that M. Down has wrested Pope Gelasius. For although he have
proved by the express words of Gelasius, that the Bread is not
transubstantiated because the substance thereof still remains: yet is the
conclusion false. For Popes and Doctors, Gelasius and Cyprian must needs agree.
But questionless if Cyprian (for for the present we will suppose him to be
the right Cyprian) do by Form of bodily substance understand nothing else but
show without Substance: it is impossible to make him agree with Gelasius. For
Gelasius says, The Substance or nature of Bread and wine cease not to be: and
Substance cannot possibly be show without substance. So to interpret is to
expound white by black, and light by darkness: and would argue extreme
either stubbornness against the truth, or brutishness. But Cyprian by Form
understands not, as we have showed, Accidents miraculously subsisting
without Subject: but them together with the Subject, or the verity and truth of
the thing. And so he perfectly agrees with Gelasius, and the rest of the
Fathers, and all of them against Transubstantiation. For as for those manifold
plain places by you here set down, I hope by this time they appear not so
plain unto you: but are all of them fully answered, and that without wresting
any one of them, from his true meaning.


N. N. Therefore though the Fathers do sometimes call the Sacrament a Figure
or Sign, Representation or Similitude of Christ's Body, death, passion, and
blood, they are to be understood in the like sense as those places of St Paul
are, wherein Christ is called by him a Figure, the substance of the Father, and
again an image of God, and farther yet appearing in the likeness of man: all
which places as they do not take away from Christ that he was the true
substance of his Father, or true God, or true man indeed ( though out of every
one of those places some heresies have been framed by ancient heretics against
his Divinity or Humanity) so do not the foresaid Phrases sometime used by the
ancient Fathers, calling the Sacrament a Sign, Figure, Representation or
Similitude of Christ's Body exclude the truth or Reality thereof.


I. D. That the Sacraments by the Fathers are called Signs, Figures,
Representations, Similitudes, and the like, is so clear that you cannot deny
it: and I fear it greeueth you much to read it in them, because it makes so
directly against you. Wherefore to salve all, some pretty shift or color must
be devised: and those terms must be understood as St Paul means, when he
says Christ is the Figure of his Father, the Image of God, and appeared in the
likeness of man. For as here they deny not either the Godhead or Manhood of
Christ: so neither in the Fathers do they exclude the Body or Blood of Christ
from the Sacrament. And do they not indeed? Why then when Cyprian ere while
said, Retaining the form of Corporal Substance, did you so hastily exclud
Substance, and fancy to your self shows subsisting of themselves without it?
But let us examine this a little farther. In Dionys. A^eop.
A Symbol, says Maximus, is some sensible thing assumed instead of that which
is intelligible, as Bread and Wine for immateriall and divine nourishment and
refection. And again, These are Symbols not the truth. Con. Maximin. l 3. c.
22. In Gen ho. 35
Sacraments, says Augustine, are signs of things, being one thing and
signifying another. It were no figure, says Chrysostom, if all things
incident to the truth were found in it. Epist. 23. ad Bonif.
And Saint Augustine again, If Sacraments have not a resemblance or Similitude
of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they are not Sacraments. These
sayings of the Fathers plainly show, that in Sacraments they never conceived
the Figure and the Truth to be one and the same thing: but that the sign is
one thing, and the thing signified clean another. And hereupon in express
terms they affirm that they are two not one. Lib. 4. c. 34. De cons. did. 2.
parag. hoc est.
The Eucharist, says Irenaeus, consists of two things, an earthly and an
heavenly. And Saint Augustine, The sacrifice of the Church is made of two and
consists of two things, the sacrament or sacred sign, and the thing of the
Sacrament. And it is to be noted that they speak generally of all Sacraments:
so as in the Lords Supper the Figure is no more the same with the Truth, then
it is in Baptism. And indeed, unless you can make Sensible and Insensible,
Corporal and Spiritual, Earthly and Heavenly, Corruptible and Immortal to
be all one: neither shall you ever be able to make the sign and the Thing
signified in any Sacrament to be the same. Add hereunto that the Fathers not
only say that Bread is a Figure of Christ's body: but also that when we are
commanded to eat his Body or drink his Blood, the speech is Figurative. De
doct. Chr. l. 3. c. 16.
For as Saint Augustine says, He seems to command an evil and wicked act:
it is a figure therefore, instructing us to communicate with his passion, etc.
Now to understand a Figurative speech literally is very dangerous: for the
letter kills, Id. ib. l. 3. c. 5.
and it is the Death of the soul. If therefore Figurative and Proper cannot
be the same, and in Sacraments when the thing signified is affirmed of the
sign, the speech be Sacramental, that is Figurative: it follows necessarily
that the sign and the thing signified are not the same. And if not the same,
then have you wronged the Fathers, saying they are so to be understood, as if
they were the same.


N. N. I will now conclude with two authorities more. The first Counsel of
Nice, Ti^. de divin. men's. vlt edit.
one of the four Counsels allowed by Protestants for sound. The words of the
Counsel are these. Let us faithfully believe with an exalted mind that there
lies on the holy table the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world, which is sacrificed by the Priests.


I. D. This Canon here by you alleged came but very lately to light: for it is
found neither in Ruffin, nor in Balsamon, nor any of the Tomes of the Counsels
heretofore published, except those of the newest impression. And in them it is
set forth in a different letter, signifying that it was but newly found, and
that in the Popes Vatican Library, under the name of one Gelasius Cyzicenus.
All which cannot but breed great suspicion, and much weaken the authority
thereof. But what says the Canon? There lies on the Table the Lamb of God.
What? Corporally and Really? No, but Symbolically and Sacramentally. Neither
does it say as you translate, Let us faithfully believe with an exalted mind
that the Lamb of God lies on the table: But thus, Let us not basely attend the
Bread and the Cup set before us, but lifting up our mind, by Faith understand
the Lamb of God upon the table. which rather makes against Transubstantiation
then for it. For first he plainly tells us, it is Bread that is there: then
secondly it commands us to lift up our mind, which needed not if Christ
himself were there Really on the table (where observe by the way that it is a
table, not an altar) And thirdly, that we are to conceive Christ Sacramentally
to be on the table, though Really he be there whether we are to advance our
thoughts. The last clause of the passage is cut off by the wast, and mangled by
you: I think to intimate that the Mass is a Sacrifice truly and properly so
called. But the words at full are these, which is sacrificed by the Priests
without being sacrificed: manifestly insinuating that it is not Properly a
Sacrifice, but Representiuely, and by way of commemoration. Not much unlike to
these words, is that of Saint Chrysostom, which may serve instead of a
commentary unto them, and teach you that all which the Fathers say speaking of
this Sacrament, is not always literally to be understood. Sermon. de Euchar.
What do thou o man, says he, at the hour of the mystical table? Did
thou not promise to the Priest who said, lift up your hearts, saying, we lift
them up unto the Lord? And fear thou not nor blushest that in that very
hour thou art found a Liar? The table is furnished with mysteries, and the
Lamb of God is sacrificed for thee, the Priest is troubled for thee, a
spiritual fire flows from the sacred table, the Seraphins stand by covering
their faces with six wings, all the incorporeall virtues together with the
Priest, make intercession for thee, a spiritual fire comes down from Heaven,
the Blood in the cup is drawn out of the immaculate side for thy purification.
Thus he.


N. N. Saint Cyril says that in this mystery we should not so much as ask
how it can be done: Lib. 4. in. c. 13.53.
for it is a Jewish word, and cause of everlasting torment. From which good
Lord deliver us.


I. D. In this mystery we may not inquire How. What of that? Ergo Christ is
present by Transubstantiation? Indeed, if the doubt had been how Bread might
be made the body of Christ, or how the substance of bread might be turned into
substance of his body, and then resolving that it is so, Cyril had advised in
any case not to inquire How, as being derogatory to Gods omnipotence: here you
had a pregnant testimony for Transubstantiation. But Cyril handling those
words. The bread which I will give is my Flesh, exagitateth the Jews for
demanding How he could give his flesh to eat. For seeing Christ by his
miracles had demonstrated himself to be God: it was their duty simply to
believe his words, and to know that he who had spoken them, was able to find a
means by which to make them good, and that without such immanity and
anthropophagy as they imagined. Now if in these Mysteries we may not be so
saucy and malapert as to demand How* how comes it about that your selves take
upon you so magistrally to define it, that it is done after an Orall manner,
and by way of Transubstantiation? Your Cutbert Tonstall says, De Euchar. l. 1.
Perhaps it had been better, as touching the manner how it is done, to have
left every one that would be curious to his own conjecture, even as it was
free before the counsel of Laterane. Yet I must do you to wit that the
Question how, is not always evil and forbidden. The blessed virgin her self
demanded of the Angel, Luc. 1.34.
How may this be seeing I know not man? And Saint Ambrose, De Sacram. l. 4. c.
4. Sermon. ad Inf.
This therefore we say, How can that which is bread be Christ's body? and Saint
Augustine, some may think with himself, how is bread his body? Neither did
they offend in asking How, because firmly believing the thing, it was only out
of admiration or desire of learning that they moved that Question. That How*
Which is forbidden is that which is demanded ou^ of Incredulity. Such as was
this of the Jews, who believed not Christ, but rejected his saying as
requiring some savage or inhumane thing to be done. In John. l. 4. c. 14.
Hence Cyril, It had been meet that they had first set the roots of Faith in
their minds, and then to have enquired those things that are to be ^uquired:
but they before they believed enquired out of season. For this cause our Lord
did not expound how that thing might be brought to pass, but exhorts that it
be sought by faith. By all which you may perceive that these words of Cyril are
objected to little purpose. For your words are not Christ's words, neither has
he taught us any such Real Presence by Transubstantiation. His words we
steadfastly believe: and ask not How, as if we doubted of the truth of them.
Nay we constantly adhere unto them though we think it impossible to know the
manner How. But your words unless you demonstrate them we are not bound to
believe: and we may without offense, as I think, demand How that may be which
you affirm, yea and reject it too if we find it repugnant to the rule of
Faith, or of right reason.


N. N. I forgot to set down this place of Saint Paul in his due place, 1 Cor.
11.
which is a clear confirmation of S. Paul, who for resolving doubts as it
seemed had conference with Christ himself, after his ascension (for before he
could not being no Christian when Christ ascended) the matter will be more
evident. His words are these to the Corinthians. For I have received from our
Lord himself that which I have delivered unto you about the Sacrament. And do
you note the word, For, importing a reason why he ought specially to be
believed in this affair, for as much as he had received resolution of the
doubt from Christ himself: and then he sets down the very same words
again of the institution of this Sacrament, that were used by Christ before
his Passion without alteration or new exposition, which is morally most
certain that he would have added for clearing all doubts, if there had been
any other sense to have been gathered of them, then the plain words
themselves do bear.


I. D. Omitting your amplifications, of Paul's conference with Christ, of his
learning thereby to resolve all doubts, of rendering it as a reason why he is to
be believed in this matter of the Sacrament (although I for my part know of no
such conference as you speak of, but only of an immediate inspiration into him
by the Spirit of Christ of all truths wherein he was to inform the Church,
which why you should call a Conference I cannot guess) Omitting I say all
these Circumstances, and by talks, the substance of your argument is this, If
the words had had any other sense then the plain words themselves do bear,
then certainly S. Paul would have cleared it. But this he endeavors not:
for he does but repeat the words of institution, and that without alteration or
exposition. Ergo the words have no other sense then the plain words themselves
do bear. I answer, the plain words are, This, namely This bread is my body.
Which Proposition taken precisely and according to the letter cannot possibly
be true. The best of your own side, as has already and shall again be
showed, confess so much. Why therefore did not S. Paul more plainly expound
it? He needed not: for it was a Sacramental speech. And whosoever knew the
nature of a Sacrament could not but understand it Sacrame^^ally, thus, This is
the Sacrament of my Body. But where you say St Paul added nothing for clearing
of doubts, you are much deceived. For the sixth, seventh, and eight and twenty
verses are added to that end. In which among other things, three times he
calls that Bread which we eat in the Lords Supper. And if that which we
eat, then that which is consecrated. And if that which is consecrated, then
Bread remains after consecration, which utterly overthrows your
Transubstantiation* And it is farther to be noted that Saint Paul coming after
our Savior Christ, it is to be presumed that he meant rather to clear and
enlighten his words, then to obscure and darken them. Yet he darkens them if
that which we eat ^ee truly and properly Christ's Body and not Bread. Ye^ he
enti^eth people into error and diggeth a pit for them to fall into. For it
appearing Bread unto the Sense, and man naturally yielding credit to the report
thereof^ he should rather have called it as it is, Flesh if it be Flesh, and
not feed us in error by calling it so often Bread. But to this you reply as
follows.


N. N. I was the more willing to set down those words of S. Paul although not
in their due place, because M. Down i^ his writing seems to take so much
^old of S. Paul's words in calling it Bread in diverse plac^s wherein S. Paul
mean^ no other Bread then that Christ declared it to be (...) his l^st Supper,
and as one of the Fathers before cited calls it, the heavenly Bread, the
Bread of life.


I. D. What hold soever M. Down took of S. Paul's words, this answer is not
able to remove it. By Bread say you the Body of Christ is meant. If so, then
have we found that which hitherto you could not endure to hear of, a
Figurative speech in the Sacrament: for Christ's body properly is not Bread. But
why does he call it Bread? Because before consecration it was Bread, as some
say? No^ so, for it was never Bread. Or because it seems to be Bread, as
others say? No^ so, for Christ's body nor is nor seems Bread. Why then?
because in Scripture all nourishment is called Bread? Nor so, for in that sense
under Bread Drink is comprehended, whereas our Apostle distinguishes them as
diverse things: 1. Cor. 11.28.
Let him eat, says he, of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Is it lastly
because Christ's body lies hid under the shows of bread? Absurd, for by the
same reason you may call the Casket by the name of a Diamond, because it
contains it. The truth is, S. Paul understands by bread, not Christ's body, but
that which in proper speech is so. For Christ's true body cannot be broke, but
this bread even after consecration is broken. For so he says, 1. Cor. 10.16.
The bread which we break is it not the Communion of the body of Christ?


N. N. All which laid together, and the uniform consent of expositions
throughout the whole Christian world concurring in the selfsame sense and
meaning of all these Scriptures about the Real Presence of Christ's true Body in
the Sacrament, you may imagine what motive it is end ought to be to a Catholic
man who desires to believe and not to strive and contend. Besides this
Protestants have not one authority, nor can produce any one at this day that
expressly says that Christ's Real Body is not in the Sacrament, (...) only a
Figure, Sign, or token thereof, though diverse impertinent pieces of some
Fathers speeches they will now and then pretend to allege. So on the contrary
side the Catholics do behold for their comfort, the whole ^^nke of ancient
Fathers throughout every age standing with them in this undoubted truth.


I. D. Indeed if you have the Uniform consent of expositions throughout the
whole Christian world concurring with you and the whole rank of Fathers
throughout every age standing with you in this (as you suppose) undoubted
truth: I must needs confess it both is and ought to be a sufficient Motive
unto you, to persuade assent unto the truth thereof. But if upon due
examination you find that not one of them all does so expound as you do, and
that your Author has presented you with a list of names only, instead of the
Whole rank of Fathers bearing witness and giving evidence for you: I hope as
it ought so it will prove a sufficient Retentiue against your Motive. This that
it may yet more plainly appear, give me leave before I conclude, to
recapitulate what has been said, and as it were in a brief Synopsis to lay
before your eyes the weakness and impertinence of all your allegations. First
you vouch the authority of some who are vehemently suspected even by your own
Rabbis not to be the men whose names they bear, and therefore cannot be
very authentical. Such are Ignatius, Cyril of Jerusalem in his Catechismes,
Ambrose de Sacramentis and my sterijs initiandis, Eusebius Emissenus, Cyprian
de coena Domini, the Canon of the Council of Nice, and Magnetes. Again, some
you allege, who by reason of their nonage deserve not to be reckoned in the
number of the Fathers, and so are too young to bear witness in these
businesses. Such are Damascen, Theophylact, Euthymius, Nicephorus, and
Rupertus, who besides his minority, was also in this point little better then
an Heretic. Thirdly, among the true Fathers some affirm the Sacraments of the
old Testament to be Figures of ours. Yet thereby they acknowledge no more
Transubstantiation of bread into the Eucharist then of Water in Baptism.
Fourthly, others affirm that Christ's true body is in the Sacrament: and we
affirm the same also. But that he is there corporally in such sort as you
imagine, they affirm not. Fifthly, they say that the bread is changed and made
the body of Christ: and we say the same with them. But that it is done by a
substantial change of bread into body they say not. Sixthly, they forbid us to
doubt of Christ's words, and to enquire the manner How. We doubt not of them,
and think the manner to be inexplicable. But they say not that to reject your
gross and Capernaiticall manner is to doubt of Christ's truth. Seauenthly, some
of them say it is not common Bread, nor only a Figuration of Christ's body: and
we readily yield unto it. But they say not that whatsoever is sanctified, and
more then figureth, is therefore transubstantiated. Lastly, some say that the
Union and Conjunction between Christ and us is real, natural, and bodily. We
hold the same, that we are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. But they
say not we are so united by receaving Christ's flesh into our mouths, nor deny
but that it may be done by Faith without ever partaking of the Sacrament. And
this is the full sum of all whatsoever your witnesses testify for you:
besides which they say nothing at all. Whereby you may now easily perceive how
slight and impertinent your Motives are, and how little cause of comfort your
Catholics have in beholding them. Rather you have great cause to be ashamed
and confounded that have suffered your self thus to be deluded by your
Author: who to prove the subsistence of Accidents without subject, has brought
you nothing else but mere Shows without substance.

But alas, we poor Protestants are so far from having the consent of all
expositions, and the whole rank of Fathers standing by us, that we have not
so much as one authority, nor can produce any one at this day that expressly
says that Christ's Real body is not in the sacrament, or that it is only a
Figure, Sign, or Token thereof. I beseech you Sir, and can you Papists produce
any one of the Fathers that expressly says Bread is transubstantiated into
Christ's body? If you cannot, and yet think it sufficient to vouch that which
you conceive to be equivalent: why do you so urge the word Expressly upon
us, and do not leave us that liberty which you assume unto your selves? But to
leave this advantage, we freely confess we cannot produce any one Father who
either expressly or by consequence says so. Nay we farther say that they
affirm the clean contrary, namely that Christ's Real body is in the Sacrament,
and that it is not only a Figure, Sign, or Token thereof. But be it known
unto you that we affirm the same together with them, and it is but your
dream to imagine otherwise. For as oftentimes you have heard, we deny not the
Presence of Christ's Body, but that manner of Presence which you obtrude unto
us. Neither do we say that it is only a Figure: for besides signification,
we acknowledge that it also exhibiteth Christ Jesus himself, and seals up
all his Promises unto us. As for those impertinent pieces of some Fathers
speeches, which, you say, we now and then pretend to allege, I hope you shall
by and by find them so pertinent and direct, that your Author who ever he be,
with all his learning and skill, shall never be able to satisfy them. For now
having fully answered and dispatched all what you have said for your self in
behalf of Transubstantiation: it remains that I perform the promise made
you in the beginning, and demonstrate that this Doctrine of yours, first
crosses the truth of Scripture, secondly overturneth the Articles of Faith,
thirdly destroys the nature of a Sacrament, fourthly gainesayeth the
perpetual consent of antiquity, and lastly implies in it infinite
contradictions. I will finish all in as few words as I can.

First it crosses the truth of Scripture. I instance only in the words of
institution which you so often urge against us, This is my body. Wherein I
demand what that is whereunto the article This has reference? For it must
either be something or nothing. 2 De consecr. can. Timo^^.
If nothing, as some of you say, then is the Proposition thus to be supplied,
Nothing is my Body, then which what can be more palpably absurd? Bell. de Euch.
l. 1. c. 10.
If something, I demand what? Your common sort of Catholics answer, that which
is contained under this. But so the speech would be Tropicall, the Continent
being put for that which is contained, which hitherto you could never endure.
And I think neither in Scripture, nor in any other writer whether sacred or
profane, shall you be able to show the like example, where This is put for
that which is under This. Yet he it so. Then I again demand, what that is
which is under this? If you know it not, then neither do you know what it is
that is turned into Christ's Body. If you know it, let me entreat you to
express it. Certainly it must either be Christ's Body or Bread. Christ's Body
it is not: for that is not made until the last syllable of those words be
spoken, and therefore not as soon as the word This is uttered. To say nothing
that then the Proposition would be very ridiculous, This is my Body, that is,
My body is my body. It is bread therefore: and though your side for the most
part will not have it so, yet will they nill they the meaning is and must be
this, This Bread is my Body, for they cannot name at hird. This may yet farther
be demonstrated by the circumstances of the Text. For it is said in express
words that he took Bread, and what he took he blessed, and what he blessed he
brake, and what he brake he ga^e to his Disciples, and what he gave he bid them
take and eat, and of what they took and eat he said This is my body. Of bread
therefore he said it, there being nothing before spoken of, nor nothing else
present whereof it could be spoken but only Bread. And if our Savior himself
made no scruple at all to call his Body bread: why should you think it strange
if he vouchsafe also to call bread by the name of his body. Add hereunto the
testimony of the Fathers. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, We be taught that the sanctified food which nourishes our
flesh and blood (and what is that but Bread?) is the flesh and blood of that
Jesus. Lib. 4. c. 34.
Irenaeus, How shall it appear to them that the bread on which they give
thanks is the body of their Lord, and the cup his blood if they grant not
Christ to be the son of the Creator of the world? Advers. Iudae.
Tertullian, So Christ taught us calling bread his body. Con. Marc. l. 3. c. 19.
And again, Why does Christ there call bread his body? Lib. 1. ep. 6.
Cyprian, Christ called bread made of many grains his body, and Wine pressed out
of many grapes his blood. Ad Hedib. q. 2.
Hierom, Let us learn that the bread which the Lord brake and gave to his
Disciples is the Lords body, himself saying to them, Take ye eat ye, this is
my body. In 1. Cor. ^ 11 In Anco^ato.
Athanasius, or the Comment under his name, What is the bread? The body of
Christ. Epiphanius, Of that which is oblong or roll figure, and senseless in
power, the Lord would say by grace, Cat. mist. 4.
this is my body. Cyril, Christ thus avoucheth and says of bread, Di^l. 1.
this is my body. Theodoret, In the very giving of the mysteries he called
bread his body. Thus the Fathers. To whom I may add some of your own men
also: Con. Floret. l 4.
as Gerson. We must say that the article This does demonstrate the substance
of bread. And Stephen Gardener, Con. diabol. Sophist. Did. 2 de Consecr.
Christ manifestly says* This is my body, demonstrating bread. And the Canon,
Qui manducat, bread is the body of Christ. This being so, I assume, but bread
properly and without Figure is not Christ's body. The reason, because Disparates
cannot be so predicated or affirmed one of another. An egg is not a stone,
nor a stone an egg. Besides if Bread properly be Christ's body, then is it of
the seed of David, conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the blessed
Virgin: then was it also crucified, and died, it was buried and descended into
hell, it rose again and ascended into heaven, and now sits at the right
hand of God: for all these things are truly affirmed of Christ. The gross
absurdity, or rather horrible impiety whereof your men well perceauing, De
consecr. did. 2. pani^ est in altati. S^m: p 3. q. 75 ^. 8.
they are driven of force to grant us our Assumption. For says your Canon Law,
It is impossible that bread should be the body of Christ. Thomas of Aquin, It
cannot properly be said that of bread the body of Christ is made. De Euchar. l.
1. c. 1.
And Bellarmine. It is altogether absurd and impossible: for it cannot be that
bread should be the Body of Christ. Out of which Premises thus I argue, That
which Christ says is undoubtedly true, But Christ says Bread is his body, as
we have showed, Ergo it is undoubtedly true. But it is not literally and in
proper signification true, as we have also demonstrated. Ergo after some other
manner. What manner? Let Bellarmine himself tell you. Ibid.
Either says he, it is to be understood tropically, that Bread is the Body of
Christ significatiuely, or it is altogether absurd and impossible. Now
certainly it is absurd and impossible that bread literally should be Christ's
body; Ergo it is so Tropically and Significatiuely. And this may yet farther
appear by that which Christ immediately added, 1 Cor. 11.^4.
This is my body which is broken for you. Whence I thus reason, As Christ's body
is broken in the Sacrament, so is bread his body: But Christ's body is broken
therein Sacramentally not literally, Ergo so is bread Christ's body. It is
farther added, Do this in remembrance of me. If the Breaking of Bread be the
Remembrance of Christ and of his Death, then is not bread properly Christ
himself: for nothing is the Remembrance of it self. Figuratively therefore.
Hereunto the Fathers agree, Tertullian, Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome, as is
already declared. With whom I could easily join many others, but that it is
needless, seeing your self confess that the Fathers call the Sacrament a
Figure, Sign, Representation, Similitude of Christ's Body. If any yet demand,
why our Savior then did not rather choose to say, This signifies my body, I
answer two things. First the language in which he spoke knows not the word
Signify, but always instead of it uses the word is, as appears by these
places, Gen 41.26.27.
The seven fat kine and the seven full ears of corn are seven years of
plenty: The seven lean kine and the seven empty ears are seven years of
Famine. Ez. 37.11.
These bones are the whole house of Israel. It is thou o King that art the
head of Gold. Dan. 2.38.4.20.22.7.17.24 8.20.21.
The tree which thou saw is thou o King. The four great beasts are four
Kings. The ten horns are ten Kings. The Ram with two horns are the Kings of
Media and Persia. The goat is the King of Grecia. The like Hebraisins have we
also in the new Testament. 1 Cor. 10.4.
The Rock was Christ. Agar and Sara are two Covenants. Gal. 4 22.24.
Ap. 17.9.18.
The seven Heads are seven hills. The woman is the great city. Secondly
being about to institute a Sacrament, Sacramental speech was best: in which it
is usual to call the sign by the name of the thing signified, as is above
declared. To sum up all, the Article This either demonstrateth bread, or does
not. If not, then can you not hence prove Transubstantiation thereof: for that
only is Transubstantiated whereof he spoke. If yea, then is the speech
Figurative, and Bread remains. For if it be Sacramentally Christ's body, then
it is: and being, it is not abolished by Transubstantiation. I conclude with
the determination of your own law. De consecr. d. 2. can. hoc est. Gloss.
The Heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is called
his Body, but improperly, not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying
mystery.

Secondly, it overturneth the Articles of Faith: particularly the verity of
Christ's Humanity. A point so material and Fundamental, that the razing
thereof draws with it the ruin of the whole Christian Religion. For this is
the only ground of that great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the
flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16.
And if Christ be not as well true Man as true God, then has he not suffered
for us, nor redeemed us, then are we yet in our sins, and stand liable unto
the eternal wrath of his Father. Wherefore according to the counsel of Saint
Augustine, Ad Dard. ep. 57.
We must carefully beware that we do not so maintain the Divinity of the
man Christ, as to take from him the truth of his Body. And we are steadfastly
to believe, that the Humane nature was so assumpted by the Deity, that although
they both constitute but one Person, yet they still remain two distinct
Natures, and each of them retains its Essential Properties. Heb 2.17.4.15.
If then, as the Apostle says, Christ be made like unto us in all things,
sin only excepted, and our Bodies cannot be without Dimension of length,
breadth, and depth, together with circumscription, proportion, and Distinction
of parts one from the other, and the like: then neither can the Manhood of
Christ be without them. Nevertheless, you fancy unto Christ in the Eucharist
such a Body as is utterly deprived of them all. For thus says your Angelical
Doctor, and what he says is the general Tenent of the Church of Rome, Sum. p.
3. q. 76. v. 30.
In the Body of Christ in the Sacrament there is no distance of one part from
another, as of the eye from the eye, or the head from the feet, as it is in
other organicall bodies. For such distance of parts is in the true Body of
Christ, but not as it is in the Sacrament, for so it has not dimensiue
quantity. O miserable Christ that art driven into such narrow straits, that the
whole bulk of thy Body should be emprisond and as it were frapt together in
every little crum and point of the host! And more true and seasonable may the
complaint now be then it was of old, that the Son of man has not so much as
a place wherein to rest his head. But seeing as Thomas says, The true body of
Christ has distance of parts, and the Body of Christ in the Sacrament has not
distance of parts: I marvel what should let but that I may boldly infer the
conclusion, Ergo the Body of Christ in the Sacrament is not his true body.
Again it is an Article of the Faith, that Christ being ascended into Heaven,
has quitted the earth, and now sits at the right hand of his Father. This
the Scriptures testify. Ioh. 12.8.
The poor, says Christ, ye shall have always with you, Ib. 16.28.
but me ye shall not always have. And I leuae the world and go unto the
Father. E^ 17.11.
And again, Now am I no more in the world, but these are in the world and I
come unto thee. Act. 3.21.
Hence says St Peter, The heavens must contain him until the time that all
things be restored. And then as the Angel said, Ib. 1.11.
This Jesus that is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come again as you
have seen him go into Heaven. Tract. in Mat. 33.
The Fathers says the same Origin, According to his divine nature he is not
absent from us, but he is absent according to the dispensation of the Body
which he took. As man shall he be absent from us, who is every where in his
divine nature. For it is not the manhood of Christ that is there wheresoever
two or three be gathered together in his name, neither is it his manhood that
is with us at all times to the end of the world, nor is his manhood present in
every congregation of the faithful, but the Divine virtue that was in Jesus.
De resur. carnis.
Tertullian, In the very palace of Heaven to this day sits Jesus at the
right hand of his Father, Man though also God, flesh and blood though purer
then ours, nevertheless the same in substance and form wherein he ascended,
In Luc. 24. l. 10.
Ambrose, Neither on the earth, nor in the earth, nor after the flesh are we
to seek thee if we will find thee. Tract. 50. in Ioh.
Augustine, Me shall you not always have. He spoke this of the presence of
his Body. For touching his Majesty, providence, unspeakable and invisible
grace, it is true that he said, I am always with you to the end of the world.
But as for the flesh which the word took, which was borne of the virgin,
fastened to the cross, laid in the grave, you shall not always have me with
you. And why? Because he is ascended into heaven and is not here: there he
sits at the right hand of the father. In Ioh. l. 11. c. 3.
Cyril of Alexandria, He could not be conversant with his Apostles in the
Flesh, after he was once ascended to his Father. Ib. c. 22.
And, Notwitstanding he be absent in the flesh, yet by that only means (the
power of his Godhead) he is able to save his. In Evang. c. 30.
Finally Gregory the Great, The word incarnate both remains and departs; he
departeh in Body, and remains in his divinity. Thus the Fathers. And hence is
it that so often in their writings they exhort us not to settle our thoughts
here on earth, but to send up our Faith into heaven, and thither to follow him
in heart, whither we believe him to be ascen^^d in body. Now, what you? The
clean contrary: that the Body of Christ is still present with us here on
earth, and as ordinarily as he is above in heaven. Nay more then so. For there
he is confined and circumscribed to one place, as also he was here in the days
of his Flesh, when he lived among the Jews: but now by your Doctrine he may be
and is in more then a thousand places at once, even when and where you will.
For you have power to reproduce him as often as you list, and then to keep him
with you as long as you please, at least until the mouse devour him, or he
begin to corrupt and putrify. But is it impossible, will you say, for the
Manhood of Christ to be present in many places at once? Impossible if we may
believe the Fathers: neither can you produce any one of them that says the
contrary. If the argument of the Fathers above quoted be good, He is in
heaven, Ergo he is not in earth: then can he not at one time be both here and
there too. And does not St Cyril expressly say, In Ioh l. 11. c. 3.
he could not be co^versant with his disciples in the Flesh after he was once
ascended to his Father? St Augustine likewise, Christ according to his bodily
presence could not be at once in the Sun and in the Moon and on the cross.
Con Faust. Man. l. 20. c. 11
And again. Tract in Ioh. 30.
The Body of Christ in which he rose again can be but in one place, but his
truth is every where diffused. Vigilius a blessed Martyr and Bishop of Trent,
Con Eurych. l. 4. c. 4.
The flesh of Christ when it was in the earth was not in Heaven, and now
because it is in haven, certainly it is not in earth. And by and by. For So Much
as the word is every where, and the flesh of Christ is not every where, it is
clear that one and the same Christ is of both natures, that is, every where
according to the nature of his divinity, and contained in a place according to
the nature of his humanity. Finally Fulgentius. One and the same son of God,
Ad Tarasymund. l. 2. c. 5.
having in ^^m the truth of the divine and humane nature, lost not the
properties of the true Godhead, and took also the properties of the true
Manhood, one and the self same, local by that he took of Man, and infinite
by that he had of his Father: one and the very same, according to his humane
substance absent from heaven when he was in earth, and forsaking the earth when
he ascended to heaven. And a little after, how could he ascend but as a local
and true man: evidently employing that he cannot be a true man, who is not
Local and circumscribed in one place. And indeed if the Body of Christ be
above in Heaven, and in many places here on earth at one time, as at London,
Paris, Rome, elsewhere, and not in the several spaces between: either it
will follow that there are as many distinct bodies of Christ, as there are
places wherein it is, or that his Body is many hundred miles off and separated
from it self, either of which is most unreasonable and absurd. 1 Cor. 8 6.
For as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 4.5.
there is but one Lord, and heaven and earth are many miles asunder. Besides it
would follow that the Body of Christ is out of that which contains it, and
consequently that that which contains it contains it not, which is a mere
contradiction. Nay if that Mathematical principle be true, as undoubtedly it
is, that those bodies which touch the same point do also touch one the other:
it will necessarily follow that the Priests fingers which touch the Body of
Christ in London; must needs at the same time touch his fingers who holds the
same in Rome. And so shall not only the Body of Christ be in diverse places at
once, but by virtue thereof those things also that are many hundred leagues a
sunder shall actually touch one the other. Unto these and the like absurdities,
for the saluing of them you have nothing to oppose save only the Omnipotence of
God, to whom nothing is impossible. But withal you forget that this has been
the ordinary refuge of the heretics, Adversus Prax.
who, as Tertullian says, feign what they list of God, as if he had done it
because he could do it: whereas we should not because he can do all things
therefore believe he has done it, but rather, search whether he have done it
or no. De Ciuit. Dei l. 5. c 10.
True it is God is omnipotent: but by doing what he will, as Augustine says,
not by suffering what he will not. Whence also some things he therefore cannot
do because he is omnipotent. 2 Timothy 3021...
He cannot deny himself, says Saint Paul, Heb. 8.
and it is impossible that he should lie. Lib. 6. ep. 37.
And This impossibility, says Ambrose, is not of infirmity but of majesty:
because his truth admits not a lie, nor his power the note of inconstancy.
So that whatsoever is repugnant to the Nature and Truth of God, because he is
Almighty he cannot do. And such are all contradictions, both the parts whereof
cannot possibly be true at once: but if the one be true, the other must needs
be false. Hence it is held for an undoubted Maxim in Schools, that God cannot
do those things that imply contradiction: the reason, because so he should be
false himself. Now this Doctrine of yours implies in it innumerable
contradictions, as by and by shall be demonstrated: among the rest this, that
the same Body at the same time shall in heaven have shape, quantity,
distinction of parts, circumscription, and all other essential properties of a
Body, and yet in the Sacrament shall be destitute of them all. Both of which if
upon presumption of Gods Omnipotence you will needs still believe, I must
plainly tell you, that to build on his Power with impeachment of his Truth is
not Faith but Infidelity.

Thirdly it destroys the Nature of a Sacrament. For proof whereof I will use
no other grounds then those which your own men, and Bellarmine in particular
have laid for me. To the constitution of a Sacrament of the new Testament,
three things among sundry other, says he, De Sacram. in gen l. 1. c. 9.
are necessarily required. First there must be a Sign, that is, De Doctri.
Christ. l. 2. c 1.
as Saint Augustine defines it, a thing which besides that shape or kind that
it offers unto our senses of it self causes some other thing to come into
our mind. Whence it follows both that the Sign is something known, and
that it is a thing differing from that which it signifies, or whereof it is a
sign. Secondly that this sign must be sensible or visible. For a Sacrament is
intrinsecally and essentially a ceremony of Religion: and a Ceremony is an
external act. Wherefore the Fathers everywhere teach, Dionys. ^c. hier. c. 1.
that Sacraments are certain Footsteps or Manuductions unto things spiritual
and Invisible. Aug. cont. Faust. l. 19. c. 16.
Thirdly, that the sign must hold due analogy and proportion with the thing
signified: Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. 83.
according to that of S. Augustine; If Sacraments had not a certain similitude
of those things whereof they are Sacraments, Ad bonifac. ep. 23.
they were altogether no Sacraments. And hence is it that the Fathers call them
Anti-types, that is, things of like Form, and lively expressing that which
they present. These things being thus granted, out of them I frame this
argument. That which destroys the sign in the sacrament by confounding it
with the thing signified, making it invisible and insensible, and holding no
analogy or proportion with that whereof it is a sign, destroys the nature
of a Sacrament: But your doctrine of the Real Presence by Transubstantiation
does all this: Ergo it also destroys the nature of the Sacrament. The Major
or first Proposition is by you, as we have now showed, yielded unto us, and
cannot be denied. The Minor or second Proposition I thus prove in every
particular. And first that it destroys the sign. For if any remain, either
it is bread, or the Accidents of bread, or the body of Christ: for there is not
a fourth. But bread it cannot be: for the Element is not a sign until it be
consecrated, and bread is no sooner consecrated but forthwith it cease to be.
And if it be not, then neither is it a sign: for of that which is not, nothing
can be affirmed. Again, the Accidents of bread, as Color, Savours, measure,
and the like, are not it. For besides that it is impossible, that Accidents
should have any subsistence without their subject, the Being of an Accident
being to be in its subject: it is very strange and vnconceauable, if they
could, how the mere Accidents of bread should represent and signify the body
of Christ. The rather, because the sign was ordained by Christ to be a help
unto our Faith, and to lead us as it were by the hand unto the thing signified.
Whereas the Accidents of bread without the substance thereof are rather lets
and hindrances unto us, and with no more reason can be called signs of
Christ's body, then a dark cloud that keeps off the light of the Sun from
our eyes, may be called a sign or Representation of the Sun. Add hereunto
that such a sign is required as is material and elementall: according to that
of S. Augustine, Tract 80. in. Ioh.
The word being added to the element it is made a Sacrament. Lib. 1. p. 9. c, 2.
So Hugh, De Sacr. in Genesis l. 11.
so Bellarmin, so the rest. Now to call Accidents by name of Elements is a new
strain of Philologie, uncouth and unheard of until this time, and example
whereof you cannot find in any writer. Neither finally is the body of Christ
it. For that is the thing signified: and by your rule the sign and the thing
signified must be two differing and distinct things, not the same. Which also
perfectly agrees with right reason. For seeing nothing is opposite unto it
self, and the sign and the thing signified are opposed one unto another by
way of Relation, they being Relative terms: it cannot be that the thing
signified should be one and the same with the sign, and consequently that
Christ's body should be a sign of it self. The conclusion of all is, that if
neither bread, nor the Accidents of bread, nor the body of Christ be the sign
in the Eucharist, then there is no sign at all therein: and if no sign, then
is the Nature of the Sacrament destroyed, a sign being necessary to the
constitution thereof. Secondly, the sign, as you say, ought to be visible and
sensible: which is very true. For the Sacrament being a Representation of the
Death of Christ: it can no more be expressed by Insensible signs, then a
Picture be drawn with Invisible colors. But in the Eucharist there is no
sensible sign. Not the bread: for ceasing to be, it cease also to be
visible. Not the Accidents of bread: for though they be visible, yet are they
not signs, as we have showed, but only of their proper subject. Nor the body
of Christ: for that being covered from our sight under the Accidents of bread,
cannot be seen of us. What Seraphicall and piercing eyes some of your
Illuminates may have I known not: but sure I am ordinary men see it not, and
what they see seems to them rather bread then flesh. Your own men confess so
much: and therefore the more shame against their own rule to make it a sign,
that I say which is Invisible and cannot be seen, so that which is visible and
may be seen. Thirdly and lastly, you acknowledge that in every Sacrament there
ought to be a Proportion and agreement between the sign and the 2 signified 1
thing. But in the Eucharist, as you order it, there is no such Proportion. For
there is nothing that resembles unto us either the Passion of Christ, or the
nourishment of our souls by his Flesh and Blood, or our mutual Union and
Conjunction in his mystical body. Wherein the Analogy and agreement
principally stands. Bread indeed would every way be answerable thereunto, if
according to Christ's institution you would suffer it to be there. 1. Cor.
16.16.17.
For the Breaking of the one resembles the Suffering of the other, and the
nourishing of our bodies by the one the nourishment of our Souls by the other,
and our Participation of one Bread our Union and Communion in the same
mystical body. But you have banished it out of the Sacrament, and therefore
this Analogy also together with it. Besides it there remains nothing but
Christ's body and the Accidents of bread. Christ's body is one and the same: for
he assumed not more Bodies. And to seek a similitude in an Identitie, or
between the same thing and it own self is mere phrenzie. It rests
therefore to make up the Proportion that the Accidents be broken, that they be
composed of diverse grains and grapes, and that they are able to feed and
nourish our Bodies: or else neither is Christ's passion, nor our mystical
conjunction, nor the spiritual nourishment of our souls by his body resembled
by them. But this is a foul heresy in Philosophy: and whosoever affirms it,
deserves to have his brain purged with a good quantity of Hellebore. For if
Accidents nourish, then are they turned into our substance: and if so, then
have we here a stranger Transubstantiation then of bread into Christ's body,
for that is of one substance into another, this of Accidents into substance. If
your Monks for trial hereof might for a while be fed with nothing else but
Accidents, I think the swaging of their fat paunches would soon put an end to
the controversy, and force them to confess that nothing but substance can
keep them from staruing. It may be you will say, though the Accidents of bread
feed not, yet they seem to feed, which is sufficient. Whereunto I answer,
that God uses not to mock his Church with vain shows and illusions: but as
he truly and really feeds our souls with the body and blood of his Son, so
has he ordained true and real Symbols and resemblances thereof. Thus have
we learned Christ and no otherwise.

Fourthly, it gainesayeth the perpetual consent of Antiquity. And here to
avoid tautology, I omit all those passages of the Fathers already quoted,
wherein is affirmed either that bread is the body of Christ, or that it is the
Figure of his Body. Out of both which as we have showed, it necessarily
follows that bread remains, and that the words of Institution, This is my
body, are to be understood, not literally, but tropically. Neither will I
allege such frivolous, broken, and impertinent sentences, as your Author
furnished you with for your Real Presence, and Transubstantiation. But among
many I will select a few choice ones, such as shall be pregnant and direct to
the purpose. For I desire to be brief, and to bear you down, not so much
with the number as the weight of them. Apol. 2.2^ Ant. Pium.
Justin Martyr affirms that by the sanctified food of the Eucharist our
Flesh and blood is nourished by the change thereof: L. 5. c. 2.
and Irenaeus that the substance of our flesh is nourished and augmented
thereby. It is bread therefore: for the true bread of Cstrist neither
nourishes our bodies, L. 3. c. 33.
nor is converted into them. The same Irenaeus says that the Eucharist
consists of two things, the one earthly the other heavenly. Take away bread,
and there remains no Earthly thing therein: unless you will say that the
Accidents are Earthly. Paed. l. 2. c. 2.
Clemens of Alexandria proves against the Encratites, who abhorred wine, that
our Savior himself drank it, because he drank of the blessed cup. But the
argument follows not if there were only blood in the cup and no Wine. Con.
Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
Tertullian, What then he would have bread to signify he sufficiently declared
calling bread his body. If bread signifies his body then is it not his body. In
Mat. c. 1^.
Origin, That meat which is sanctified by the word of God and Prayer, as
touching the material part thereof goes into the belly, and is cast forth
into the draught. This cannot possibly be understood of the Accidents, for they
are not material, nor of the Body of Christ, for that were too unworthy: of
bread therefore, which in the same place he calls the Typical and
Symbolicall Body of Christ distinguishing it from his true Body. Lib 2 ep. 3.
Cyprian, The Lord offered Bread and the cup mixed with Wine. That which is
offered is Consecrated: Ergo after Consecration it is Bread and Wine. Ibid.
Again, We find it was a mixed cup which the Lord did offer, Ibid.
and that it was wine which he called his blood. What words can be more
plain? And yet again, the Blood of Christ cannot seem to be in the cup when
wine is wanting to the cup, whereby the blood of Christ is declared. Ser. in
illud Quicunque diverit verbum.
Athanasius, He distinguished the spirit from the flesh, that we might learn
that the things he spoke are not carnal but Spiritual. For how many men
would his Body have sufficed, that it might be the food of the whole world? But
therefore he made mention of his ascension into heaven, that he might draw
them from corporal understanding, and then might understand his flesh whereof
he spoke to be meat from above, the Heavenly and spiritual food which he
would give. Here expressly he rejects the Corporal eating of Christ's Body,
and acknowledges none other but that which is spiritual. De demonst. Euang l.
5. c. 3.
Eusebius Bishop of Cesa^ia, Our Savior and Lord first, and then all the
Priests that have followed in all nations celebrating the spiritual divine
service according to the ordinances of the Church, signify unto us by the
Bread and Wine the mysteries of his body and blood. If they signify them, they
are not the same. Hom. 27.
Macarius, They knew not that in the Church Bread and Wine was to be offered as
the antitype of his flesh and blood, and that those who partake of the visible
bread spiritually eat the flesh of the Lord. A knot of arguments. Bread and
Wine are offered, they are Anti-types of Christ's Flesh and Blood, Cat. Mystag.
3.
they are received of us, and the eating of Christ's flesh is spiritual. Your
Cyril of Jerusalem, As the Bread of the Eucharist after the invocation of the
Holy Ghost is no more common bread but the body of Christ: so this holy
ointment is no more bare and common ointment after it is consecrated, but the
gift of Christ. Not common bread, says he, yet bread* and the body as the
Ointment is the Grace of Christ. But Grace it is, not by conversion into it,
for it remains ointment still, De Mist. init. c. 9.
but by accession of Grace unto it. Ambrose, speaking of the miracles of the
Prophets who changed the Nature of things, and comparing therewith that which
is done in the Sacrament as being nothing less, at length concludes, It is no
less to give new natures unto things then to change their natures: plainly
intimating that in the Sacrament Nature is not changed, but some thing is added
above Neture. Wherefore else where he says in express terms, De Sacram. l.
4. c. 4.
If there be so great force in the word of the Lord, that they should begin
to be what they were not: how much more operative are they that they be what
they were, and yet be changed into another thing. Lo bread and Wine are
changed, yet remain what they were: changed therefore not in substance, but in
use and signification. Saint Basil in his Liturgy, In Liturg. seu a^aphora.
for him you make the author thereof, He ascended into heaven, and sits at
the right hand of thy Majesty on high, who shall also come to render unto every
one according to his works. But he has left these Memorialls or monuments of
his healthful passion, which we set forth according to his commandment. He
is gone, and has left us Memorialls of himself: Ergo himself is not here.
For remembrance is of things past, not present. Orat. de Pasch. 2.
Gregory Nazianzen, Now we shall be partakers of the Passover, but as yet in
a figure, though more clear then in the old Law: for the passover of the Law
(I will not be a fraid to say it) was but a more obscure figure of a figure.
The Passover therefore in proper speech is not a figure of the Lords Supper:
but both of them are Figures of the death of Christ. Orat de sanct. B^p^.
Gregory Nyssen, declaring the change of Water in Baptism, expresses it by
three similitudes, of an Altar which being dedicated unto Gods Worship, of a
common stone is made a holy table, of Bread in the Eucharist which by
Consecration is no longer common bread but the Body of Christ, and of a Priest
who of a vulgar and ordinary man, is by the blessing made a teacher and Prelate
of divine mysteries. Bread therefore is no more transubstantiated, then Water
in Baptism, the stone of the Altar, or the Priest. Cyril of Alexandria, Do
thou say that our Sacrament is the eating of a man? In expos. 11. anath.
and do thou Urge our mind unto the gross thoughts that believed so? and
do thou attempt with humane thoughts to handle those things which cannot be
received but only with a pure and exquisite faith? The Flesh of Christ
therefore is not eaten with the mouth, for that were to eat a man: but only
with a pure Faith. Epiphanius, After he had given thanks he said, In Anchorato
This of me is that and we see that it is not equal nor like neither to the
incarnate image, nor the invisible Deity, nor to the lineaments of his members.
For this is oblong or of roll fashion, senseless as concerning power. If it
be unequal to Christ and void of Sense, Epist. ad Caesar.
then is it not Christ. Saint Chrysostom, before consecration we call it
bread, but Divine grace through the ministry of the Priest sanctifying it, it
is freed from the name of bread, and counted worthy of the appellation of the
Lords body, although the nature of bread continue in it. Behold the nature of
bread remains after Consecration, and yet it is called the Body of Christ.
And again, If therefore it be dangerous to convert unto private uses these
sanctified vessels, In mat. 5. hom. 12.
in which the true body of Christ is not, but the mystery of Christ's body is
contained: how much more the vessels of our body which God has prepared to be
an habitation for himself, ought we not to give way unto the Devil to do in
the^ what he pleases? Not the Body but the mysteries are contained in the
vessels: and if so, In Esa. 66. and Ier. 22.
what becomes of your Real presence. Hierom, The wicked nor eat the flesh of
Jesus, nor drink his blood. But they eat and drink the Eucharist: Ergo it is
not the Flesh and Blood of Christ. Deer. did. 2. de Consecr. Can. De hac.
Again, We may eat of that Sacrifice which is wonderfully made in
commemoration of Christ: but of that which Christ offered upon the Altar of the
Cross no man may eat. The Sacrifice then of the Sacrament is not that of the
Cross: and the Body offered on the Cross is not eaten in the Sacrament.
Tract. 59. in* Ioh.
Saint Augustine, The Apostles ate the Bread the Lord, Judas the bread of the
Lord against the Lord. Sentent.
Again, He that disagreeth from Christ neither eats the Flesh of Christ nor
drinks his Blood, although he daily receive the Sacrament of so great a thing
to judgment. Observe the Bread of the Lord, not that which is the Lord: and
the Sacrament of Christ's Flesh and Blood, Enar. in Ps. 9 8.
not his Flesh and Blood. So again, you shall not eat this body which you
see, nor drink that blood which my crucifiers shall shed: I have commended
unto you a Sacrament, which spiritually understood shall quicken you. And yet
again, Ep. 23. and Decr. did. 2. de Consecr. Ca. Hoc. est.
As the heavenly bread which is the Flesh of Christ, after its manner is called
the Body of Christ, being in truth the Sacrament^ of Christ's Body. Mark, that
which is called Body is not so in truth but only in sign and after a manner.
Sermon. 2. de ascens.
Pope Leo, Christ being lifted up into heaven, set an end to his Bodily
Presence, being to abide at the right hand of his Father, until the times
appointed by God for the multiplying of the Sons of the Church be
accomplished. If till then he have set an end to his Bodily presence, then till
that time he is no more here. Apud ^at. l. de corp. and sang domini.
Fulgentius, the holy Catholic Church throughout the whole world cease not
to offer unto Christ the sacrifice of Bread and Wine in Faith and Charity. If a
Sacrifice of bread and wine, then is it bread and wine after consecration. De
duab. not. con. Eu^. and Nestor.
Pope Gelasius, certainly the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ which
we receive is a divine thing: wherefore by them are we made partakers of the
divine nature: and yet the substance or nature of Bread and Wine cease not to
be. And verily the image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ are
celebrated in these mysteries. Ibid.
And, They pass by the work of the holy Ghost into a divine substance,
continuing notwithstanding in the propriety of their nature. Lo the Substance
and Nature of bread remain, and the Sacrament is but an image and Similitude
of Christ's body. What can be more plain? Dial. 1.
Theodoret, Himself has honored the Visible Symbols with the name of his
body and blood, not changing their nature, but adding grace unto nature. And
again disputing against an Eutychian Heretic, who to overthrow the Humanity
of Christ had thus argued, that as the signs in the Eucharist are after
Consecration changed, so the body of our Lord after the assumption thereof was
changed into the Divine substance: he brings in Orthodaxus thus answering,
Dial. 2.
Thou art taken in thine own nets, for the mystical signs after consecration
depart not from their proper nature. For they remain in their former
substance, and figure, and form, and are visible and tangible as formerly they
were: but are understood to be thee things they are made and believed, and are
honored as being the things they are believed. These passages of Gelasius and
Theodoret are the very rack and gibbet of you Papists: whereunto the best of
you know not what to answer, but only that by substance Accident is meant. An
incredible obstinacy and madness, and needing rather a Physician to cure it
then a disputer to confute it. For with as good reason may you say that by
white black is meant, and by Heaven Hell, and any thing by whatsoever. Lastly
Gregory the Great, Moral. l. 14. c. 31.
proves the truth of Christ's body against Eutychius by those words of our
Savior, Handle me and see. Can you prove the truth of Christ's body in the
Sacrament by the same argument? Verily if that which is neither felt nor seen
be not Flesh and Bone, neither is the Flesh of Christ in the Sacrament, for it
is neither felt nor s^ene. And if bread be transubstantiated only by virtue of
those words, This is my body, then in the Apostles time there was no
Transubstantiation at all. For as Gregory says, Lib. 7. ep. 64.
The manner of the Apostles was only by the Lords prayer to consecrate the host
of the Oblation. And thus have you a full grand Jury of the ancient Fathers,
all of them living within six hundred years after Christ, and with joint
consent crossing your new vpstart fiction of the Real Presence. To these I
might easily add a long list of those who succeeded in after times, as Bede,
Rabanus Maurus, Walafridus, Strabo, Bertram, Waleram Bishop of Medburg,
Druthmarus, and others, not one of them in their times taxed for error in this
point. But I will only relate what the Doctrine of the Church of England was
about seven hundred years after Christ, as appears by those Homilies that
then were publicly read unto the people. The holy Font water that is called
the wellspring of life, Ser. Sax. for Easter.
is like in shape to other waters and is subject to corruption: but the holy
Ghosts might comes to the water through the Priests blessing, and it can after
wash the body and soul from all sin through Ghostly might. Behold now we see
two things in this one creature. After true nature that water is corruptible
water, and after ghostly mystery has hollowing might. So also if we behold
that holy housel after bodily understanding, then see we that it is a creature
corruptible and mutable: if we acknowledge therein ghostly might, then
understand we that life is therein, and that it gives immortality to them
that eat it with belief. Much is betwixt the invisible might of the holy
housel, and the visible shape of his proper nature. It is naturally corruptible
Bread and corruptible Wine, and is by might of Gods word truly Christ's Body and
his blood: not so notwithstanding bodily but Ghostly. Much is betwixt the body
Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to housel. The body truly
that Christ suffered in was borne of the flesh of Mary with blood and with
bone, with skin and with sinews, with humane limbs, with a reasonable soul
living: and his Ghostly body which we call the housel is gathered of many
corns, without blood and bone, without limme, without Soul. And therefore
nothing is to be understood therein bodily, but all is Ghostly to be
understood. Thus the Homily: and thus much thereof have I thought good here at
large to set down, to the end you may know, that our Ancestors in this Island,
notwithstanding your loud craks to the contrary, have not always at leastwise
in this point, been Papists. Besides these testimonies of antiquity we have
their customs also against you. In 1 Cor. 11.
St Hierom reports that in the Primitive times, after the holy Communion was
ended, they were wont to feast together in the Church, In Levit. l. 2. c. 8.
and to spend the residue of the Eucharist that remained. Hesychius says that
it was the custom, not to reserve till the morrow, as your manner now adays
is, but to burn what fragments soever remained of the consecrated Elements.
Hist. l. 4. c. 35.
Evagrius and Nicephorus both do testify that the ancient custom of the
Church of Constantinople was to send for little children from the school, Lib.
17. c. 25.
such as otherwise were barred from the Communion, and to give the remainders
of the Sacrament to them. Had the Church in those days verily believed that it
had been the true and Real body of Christ: do you think they would so have
profaned it by feasting upon it, and bestowing it on children? Or that they
would with such impiety and sacrilege have burned and consumed it in the fire?
It is altogether incredible. As incredible therefore that they held it to be
the Lords Body. But of Antiquity enough.

Fifthly and lastly it implies in it innumerable contradictions: which
according to the rule of Logic, cannot possibly be true at once. For truth
evermore agrees with truth, and never crosses it: and whatsoever resists or
contradicts truth is Falsehood. Hence the rule, and the infallible rule of
your own School, that God cannot do those things that imply contradiction.
For contradiction is not in the bosom of God, seeing he is essentially Truth
it self. And being, not yea and nay, but yea and Amen, he cannot say yea is
nay or nay is yea. And if he cannot say it, neither can he will it to be so.
If he cannot will it, neither can it be so. For what God cannot will cannot be
done. Neither do we herein derogate from the Power of God: for whatsoever is
against his Truth is against his Power, and therefore as St Augustine says,
Powerfully he cannot do it. Which being so, let us see whether this Doctrine
of yours imply such contradictions or no. First you say that Bread is made the
Body of Christ, and yet that the Body of Christ was before Bread was made his
Body. Now if to unmake that which never was, imply contradiction, by the same
proportion to make that which already is implies it also. That which is not
made as yet is not, and that which is already made is, and is, and is not, be
direct contradictories. Is it possible to kill a dead man? Or to beget the
child that is already borne? As impossible is it to make him of Bread, who was
long before he is pretended to be made. Secondly, to be locally in a place and
not locally in a place is a contradiction. But that Christ's Body is locally in
heaven you all confess, and that at the same time he is not locally in the
Sacrament you likewise acknowledge. Can you reconcile this contradiction?
Besides what confusion of speech is this, Christ is in a place but not locally,
or as in a place? As if a man should say, such a one is reasonable but not
reasonably or as reasonable, and learned but not learnedly or as learned. How
then? Certes as unreasonable and unlearned. Thirdly, I hope you will not deny
unto Christ as much power as you grant to every petty Mass Priest. But you
grant power unto them to reserve the consecrated Host until the next day, yea
until it begin to corrupt and putrify. If then our Savior instituting his
supper the even before his Passion had delivered unto his Apostles any part of
the Eucharist to be kept unto the end of the next day: I demand whether the
Body in the Pixe should have been scourged, crucified, thrust through, and
slain, together with that which was fastened to the Cross? If no, as your
Church concludes: then have we here another contradiction. Christ's Body is at
the same time scourged and not scourged, crucified and not crucified, thrust
through and not thrust through, slain and not slain. Fourthly, you say that
the Body of Christ is contained under the Accidents of Bread, yea that the
whole Body is in every the least crum of the Host. Yet you say it is much
greater then that which contains it, and elsewhere besides the Accidents. You
say also that Christ at his last supper ate himself and swallowed down his
own body into his stomach: so that his stomach containing himself, he was
both within and without himself. Which in effect is a mere contradiction, the
Accidents, the stomach contains and not contains, Christ's Body is
contained and not contained. Fifthly, you confess that the Body of Christ then
when he celebrated his Supper did see and hear, and move, and breath, was
weak and passible and subject unto death. Yet you say that the same time the
Body of Christ in the Eucharist could neither see, not hear, nor move, nor
breath, but was utterly insensible, impassible, and without infirmity. And is
not this a manifest contradiction? If you say he is passible in the Sacrament,
but after an impassible manner: you shall pardon us if we answer it with no
other then laughter. For it is as if you should say the crow is black after a
white manner, or that the world is square after a round manner. Sixthly, before
Transubstantiation was invented it went for current in Philosophy that the
very essence and being of an Accident is to be in the subject. Yet you say that
in the sacrament the Accidents of Bread are in no subject. But for an Accident
to be and not to be is a contradiction: for not to be in is not to be. As well
may you say a substance subsisteth not, or the shining shines not, or the
living lives not, as that the Accident does not accidere or befall the
subject. Seauenthly, every creature is measured by time and place. If therefore
it be a contradiction to say such a thing is and yet is in no time: it is as
clear a contradiction to say such a thing is and yet it is limited in no
place. Nevertheless you say that the body of Christ in the Sacrament occupies
no place. Again, if it be a contradiction to say that a man at the same
instant of time lives in the fifteenth and sixteenth hundred year of Christ,
because there is a great distance between them, and they are not the same
number: as palpable a contradiction is it to say the Body of Christ is at once
both in Heaven and Earth, seeing earth is not heaven nor heaven earth, and
there is such a vast space betwixt them. Phys. l. 4. c 6.7.8
Eighthly, Aristotle maintains that vacuity or emptiness is impossible, and
if you should grant it, infinite contradictions would follow. But your doctrine
establishes it. For what is vacuitie but a space vnfilled by a Body? I ask
then when the Cup is consecrated, wherewith is it filled? With wine? So indeed
it seems: but after consecration you say it is not Wine, and that which is
not there fills it not. With blood then? Nor that. For that which fills the
Cup must every way be as large as the hollow surface of the Cup. But the blood
is not so: for it wants Dimensive quantity. Unless therefore the Accidents
help (and they cannot being no Bodies) the Cup must needs be empty and void:
which cannot but imply contradiction. For voidnesse, as the Philosopher says,
is the root of infinite contradictions. Ninthly and lastly, if one and the same
Body may be in mo places then one at once, why not in a thousand? And if in a
thousand, why not in a thousand thousand millions? If so, then a little point
or drop continuing still in the same Quantity, may occupy as much space as
the greatest mountain or the whole Ocean. For so many may the several places
be that all put together may make a greater space: then which what plainer
contradiction? Unto these few, I might easily add six hundred other as gross
absurdities: as that Christ at the same time is to himself both near and
far off, above and beneath, within and without, before and behind, at his
right and at his left hand, that he is also elder and younger, sooner and
later, shorter and taller, broader and narrower, thicker and thinner, greater
and lesser then himself, and such like of the same garb. But I study to be
brief, and it is high time to remove my hand, as they say, from the Table.
Only I must forewarne you, that if being unable to untie these knots, you
shall attempt to cut them asunder with the sword of Gods Omnipotence, you shall
but loose your labor. For if they be contradictions (as undoubtedly they are)
your Angelical Doctor can tell you, Sum. p. 1. q. 25. a. 2.3.
that they fall not within the compass of Divine Power. So that of force you
must either demonstrate that these things are not contradictorie, which I am
sure you can never do: or as becomes Christian ingenuity, you must for ever
bid farewell to Transubstantiation, and yield unto the truth discovered unto
you.

And thus at length by Gods assistance have I finished the task you have laid
upon me, and fully answered whatsoever here you have alleged in maintenance of
your Real Presence. My desire now is that laying aside all prejudice, you will
but with indifference read what I have replied thereunto. Which if you shall
vouchsafe to do, I persuade my self it will make you to remit much of that
confidence you had in this cause, when first you sent this Schedule unto me.
Especially if withal you consider that the wittiest and subtlest heads amongst
you could never find it so clearly and strongly grounded either upon
Scripture or Fathers, as you pretend. Scotus surnamed the subtle Doctor
affirms, In 4. did. 11. q. 3.
that there is extant in Scripture no place so express, as without declaration
of the Church can evidently constrain a man to admit of Transubstantiation.
And this, says Bellarmine, is not altogether improbable. For although the
scripture may seem unto us so clear, De Euch. l. 3. c. 23.
as it may constrain a man that is not froward: yet it may justly be doubted
whether it be so, seeing most learned and witty men, such as Scotus specially
was, have thought the cont^ary. The same Scot farther says, that were it not
for the authority and determination of the Roman Church, the words of Christ
and of the Fathers might more simply, plainly, and truly be understood and
expounded. Ibid.
Nay he yet farther adds, and your Cardinal Bellarmine confesses it, that
before the Lateran Council Transubstantiation was not a doctrine of Faith: and
he wondreth that being no principle article, and such as exposes the Christian
Faith to contempt, it could be received and believed. 4. q 6. a. 2. f.
The Cardinal of Cambray also doubts not to avouch that that manner which
supposes the substance of Bread still to remain is possible, neither is it
contrary to reason, or the authority of scripture. Nay it is easier to conceive
and more reasonable, then that which says the substance does leave the
accidents. And of this opinion no inconvenience does seem to ensue, if it
could be accorded with the Churches determination. And he adds, that the
opinion which holds the substance of Bread not to remain, does not evidently
follow of the Scripture, nor to his seeming of the Churches determination.
Cardinal Cajetan is as peremptory, In p. 3 q. 75.2.1.
that there appears nothing in the Gospel that can force a man properly to
understand these words, This is my body: and that (were it not for the
interpretation of the Roman Church) they might very well admit another sense,
as that of the Apostle, the Rock was Christ. To these Cardinals may we join
another Cardinal, though happily he never ware the Cap, I mean Fisher Bishop
of Rochester, who expressly averreth, that in that place of Matthew (where the
institution of the Sacrament is recorded) there is never a word whereby it may
be proved, Cont. Capt. Bab. c. 1.
that there is made in the Mass the true presence of the flesh and blood of
Christ. Lect. 41. in can. miff,
Gabriel Biel also, The Scriptures may be salved and expounded after a more
easy understanding. And Occam, This doctrine that the substance of bread
remains is subject to lesser inconveniences, and is not so repugnant to
reason, L. 4. d. 11. q. 1.
and the Scriptures. And Durand, It is great rashness to say that the body of
Christ cannot by divine power be in the Sacrament but by converting bread into
it. Howbeit if that way which supposes bread to remain were indeed true, many
doubts which meet us holding it not to remain, L. 4 d. 11.2.
were dissolved. The Master of the Sentences also freely confesses, that if it
be demanded, what that conversion is, whether formal, or substantial, or of
another kind, he is not sufficient to define. From these your Jesuits swerve
not very much. De praes. in Euch. l. 1. c. 10
Gregory de Valentia says, that the Fathers spoke of Transubstantiation
somewhat obscurely and simply, as thinking they could not be understood of
Catholics but Catholikely, and least they should have exposed the mystery to
be laughed at of Infidels if in their popular Sermons they should have unfolded
their minds. Modest. discourse.
Your Secular Priests affirm that it was concluded among the Fathers of the
Society (and what Catholic would not believe them?) that the Fathers have not
so much as touched the point of Transubstantiation. Des. mon. ep. con. Bell.
Finally, not to muster up any more, it is well known, that diverse of your
Priests being demanded, if after sentence of death pronounced upon them, that
very morning when they were to be executed, they might have leave to say Mass,
to the intent they might be certain of their own intention to consecrate, and
not doubtfully depend upon another, whether after consecration for the
confirmation of our Faith in the point of Transubstantiation, they durst to say
thus unto the multitude, Unless that which is now in this Chalice, whose
Accidents you see, be the very self same blood which issued out of the side of
Christ hanging on the cross, let me have no part either in the blood of
Christ, or in Christ himself for ever, and so with these last words bid
farewell unto the world: being I say demanded whether they durst adventure to
do so, they all with one voice denied it. And Father Garnet in a conference
with the Deanes of the Chapel, Paul's, and Westminster, being in particular
asked the like, answered very perplexedly, not daring to hazard his salvation
thereupon. All these testimonies duly pondered and considered, you must needs
acknowledge, unless you see better then these quick-sighted Eagles, that you
have not so strong hold either in Scripture, or Fathers, or right reason as you
imagined: and that not only the name, but the Doctrine also of
Transubstantiation, has been but of late created an article of your Faith. It
remains that I entreat you, these things undoubtedly being thus, that you
suffer not your self any longer to be beguilded with novelties under pretense
of antiquity: but rather that you open your eyes, and stretch forth your arms
to embrace the truth, now that she offers her self so manifestly unto you.
And this I entreat the more earnestly, because of the great danger that
follows upon this error. For if Christ be not present in the Sacrament in
such sort as you hold, there was never either seen or heard the like Idolatry
unto yours, as your own Coster confesses. For, says he, it is a more
tolerable error to worship Images of silver, or gold, or other stuff with the
Gentiles, or a red cloth on a pike with the Lieflanders, or living creatures
with the Egyptians, then to adore a morsel of bread. Oh therefore let me yet
again beseech you, and that by the dearest name of Jesus Christ, to pity your
own soul, and with all speed to retire your self from Babylon, the mother of
all spiritual whoredom. Heretofore happily your ignorance might in part
excuse you: but now that the light has shined upon you, if wilfully you close
your eyes against it, you are altogether inexcusable, and these papers one day
will appear in judgment against you. Oh how glad would the blessed Angels in
heaven be, might they once behold your conversion? How readily and lovingly
would the true Church of Christ entertain you? and how humbly thankful would
my poor self be unto the Divine Majesty, if through his blessing these
endeauours of mine might be a means to reclaim you? For my part I have done
what belonged unto me, that truth I have both propounded and demonstrated unto
you. To turn the heart is not in my power: that I leave unto God whose office
it is. Yet will I never cease to address my vows unto him for you, if at any
time he may be pleased in Jesus Christ to have compassion upon you.


FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE FORmer Answer against the Reply of N.N.

OXFORD Printed by I.L. for E. F. 1633.

A DEFENSE OF THE FORMER ANSWER AGAINST the reply of N. N.
SIR, I perceive would I follow the tract you seek to set me in: I might
travel long enough, and be never the nearer my journies end. All the Passages
alleged by you in maintenance of Transubstantiation, I have fully answered:
adding thereunto sundry arguments, clearly demonstrating the impiety thereof.
Whereupon I expected either that you should yield being convinced by the
evidence of truth: or particularly acquaint me wherein I had not satisfied you.
Now what you? Forsooth neither the one nor the other. But instead thereof you
send me a fardle of idle Generalities, picked out of I know not what blind
author: all making no more to the matter in hand, Hora^. in Art^.
then, as he says, a Cypress tree does to a table of shipwreck. In regard
whereof I could not hitherto persuade my self to reioyne unto it. For why
should I stray with him that will needs out of the Way? Nevertheless fearing
least by holding my peace I might seem either to prejudice my cause, or to
disable my self, and knowing what clapping of wings and crowing there uses to
be amongst you upon every the least show of advantage: I have at length
resolved to vouchsafe you one encounter more, and then if you still persist in
your outlopes and impertinences, to wast no more oil or paper upon you. Tit.
3.10.
For it is St Paul's advice to avoid an heretic after one or two admonitions,
knowing that such a one is perverted, and sins being condemned of himself.
To proceed therefore in order, let us begin with your Preamble.

N. N. Musing why your kinsman delivered me not your papers, you suppose it was
because he conceited not well of them, or thought they would not pleasure.


I. D. You conjecture not amiss. For being demanded the reason, he answered,
because you had written nothing to the purpose, and yet continue obstinated in
your error. Which how could it be welcome to either of us? But take heed I
beseech you how you close your eyes any longer against the light of truth. 2
These. 2.10.11.
For to them that receive not the love of truth that they may be saved, God
threatens to send them the efficacy of error to believe lies.


N. N. The passages now sent are taken out of your Papers. These again out of
your author. Yet truly. And all to show you build not upon any one man's
opinion.


I. D. You might have done well to name your Author, that we might know his
worth, and whether your Papers have wronged him: and if not, whether your
Authors self have not wronged those, out of whom he has taken his
collections. But suppose neither You nor your Author fail, yet is your
inference ridiculous. For though the writers you quote be many, yet is your
Author but one. And alleging them upon his sole credit, without any
particular knowledge of your own: you build herein but upon one man's opinion.


N. N. No nor on Lutherans, Anabaptists, Protestants, Puritans, or termed
Papists, farther then they agree with the authority of the Catholic Church.


I. D. Lutheran is a name not chosen by us, who in point of Faith depend upon
no man, but by you thrust upon us. Anabaptists we detest as much as you.
Puritan is the ancient name of the Novatians, and better fitteth you then us.
For we hold not as you do, that we can eschew all sin all our life, and
perfectly fulfill the law, yea supererogate, and merit heaven by our works.
The name of Protestant was first given unto the Princes and Free cities of
Germany, Protesting their Faith at a Diet in Spire Ann. 1529. neither do we
disclaim it. But who I pray are those termed Papists? For relying on the
Omnipotency of your Lord God the Pope, you are Papists indeed: and your betters
approve the term. 3 conver. p. 1. c. 12.
Parsons says that it imports no more hurt then if in a sedition they that
side with the King be called Royalists. Lib. 7. c. 12. parog. 12. De not. Ecc.
l. 10. c. 6.
Florimond Raimond, that it is a name of honor and whereat none should take
offense. Tho. Bozius, that you have good reason to glory in it. And an old
Catholic, Search into mat. of rel.
as Walsingham reports, that it was a most honorable thing for men to stand
with their Head, and to have their denomination from him. Thus they.

But nor Papists nor others shall move you farther then they agree with the
Catholic Church. And reason if thereby you understand that of all times,
including the Apostles. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
For they erred not. And what they Preached, they left in writing, ever after
to be the rule and ground of Faith. But if you mean as I doubt you do, the
Now-Roman Church, besides that it is not Catholic, there will be but little
salt found in your speech. For it will be as if you had said, you will not rely
on Papists or any other farther then they agree with Papists: of which only
that Church consists.


N. N. Succession, continuance, visibility, unity are notes of the Catholic
Church: and only found in her.


I. D. These Notes are not Proper, agreeing only and always to the Church.
Certain therefore and infallible they are not. Not Personal Succession. For
in the beginning of the Church it was not: and in the time of Antichrist you
say it shall not be. It has also been continued in the Churches of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople: which yet you esteem no true
Churches. The consideration whereof forced from Bellarmine this confession, De
not Ec. c. 8.
that it follows not necessarily, where succession is, there is a Church. Nor
Continuance. For the malignant Church has lasted hitherto, and will yet
longer: and many of the Churches planted by the Apostles are now failed, which
yet were true Churches, Nor Visibility. For the Church of Greece, which you
count Heretical, has ever since the first founding of it been, and is still
Visible. And such Persecutions, and Scandalls may arise in the Church, as may
much eclipse the glory thereof, reducing the Saints to a small number,
scattering the Ministers, suspending the exercise of Ecclesiastical
discipline, and interrupting the public service: so as the true Professors
seeking shelter from the storm shall hardly be discerned. 1 King. 19.10.14.
So was it under the old Testament in the days of Elias, so under the new when
the whole world groned under Arianisme: and so shall it be in the time of
Antichrist: as out of your writers in the former treatise I have already
declared. Nor lastly Unity. For as the Church of God is one, so the Devils
Babylon is also one. And who knows not what jars and dissentions sometimes
were among the Corinthians and Galatians, and between the East and West
Churches about the celebration of Easter, which nevertheless were true
Churches. And thus you see how uncertain and deceivable your notes be. If this
yet be not enough to persuade you: I hope being backed with authority of your
great Cardinal Bellarmine it may suffice, De not. Ec. c. 3.
who makes them in themselves to be but probable.


N. N. If it could be proved that these notes belong to the Protestant Church,
it would much alter your opinion.


I. D. It seems you take for granted that these notes are to be found in the
Roman Church. But you presume too far. Was never a more broken Succession in
any Church then that. Who at the first succeeded whom is uncertain: namely in
what order, Linus, Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus should stand. About thirty
Schisms have been therein, some of them continuing scores of years together:
in which have been two Popes, Bell. de Pont. l. 4. c. 14. Genebrard.
three Popes at once, neither could it easily be discerned which was lawful
Pope. Fifty of them in a row were Monsters rather then Men, Apotacticall and
Apostaticall rather then Apostolical. How many have intruded themselves into
that See by Simonie? How many have been intruded at the pleasure of harlots?
Yea a Whore has sitten in the Pontifical chair. So says Sigebert, Marianus
Scotus, Bergomensis, Johannes Stella, Nauclerus, Johannes Lucidus, Baptista
Ignatius, Balaeus, Sabellicus, Ranulphus, Petrarch, Boccace, Matthew Palmer,
Trithemius, and Martinus Polonus: all which it will be hard for your new
vpstarts of yesternight to outface or control. As for the rest of your Notes,
if the present Church of Rome be much degenerated from its Primitive purity,
and nothing resemble that which Saint Paul first planted there, as I am ready
to prove whenever you shall call upon me for it: then are they not to be
found therein. For neither has it continued the same, nor is the profession by
which it is Visibly the same, nor is it One with it self. For of other
differences and dissentions among you, you shall hear more anon in the due
place.

But can we find them in the Protestant Church? Let us try. That the
Succession of Bishops in the Church of England until Archbishop Cranmers time
was lawful, I know you will not deny. That he, and all the Bishops in the time
of K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth, and so downward, were Canonically called and
consecrated: what stronger proof can you desire, then the public Registers of
every See? By Fr. Mason.
Out of which so much as concerns this business is now published to the view
of the whole world, designing both the time when, and the place where, together
with the names of those Bishops that imposed hands. And this is so clear, that
your own Cudsemius coming into England, De desp. Call. causa c. 11.
of purpose to observe the state of our Church thus writes, concerning the
state of the Calvinian sect in England, it so stands, that it may either
endure long, or be suddenly changed and in a trice, in regard of the Catholic
order there, in a perpetual line of their Bishops, and the lawful succession
of Pastors received from the Church: for the honor whereof we use to call the
English Calvinists by a milder term, not Heretics but Schismatics. Touching
your other three Notes, I presume it will not be denied that a Church
professing to believe in the Lord Jesus, and by him in the holy and blessed
Trinity, and confessing all the Doctrines contained in the Scriptures, together
with the three Creeds, of the Apostles, the Nicene, and of Athanasius, has
hitherto continued Visible and in Unity from the Apostles times. And such is
the Church of the Protestants: for all this we both profess and confess, and
whatsoever we affirmatively hold, the same in a manner do you affirm with
us. For as for the Negatiues, they are but novelties, nor can you prove them
out of any Antiquity, Succession therefore, Continuance, visibility, unity
belong unto our Church: I must entreat you to remember your promise, and
according thereunto to alter your mind. And so much for your preamble.


N. N. Your treatise was not intended to me. Howbeit you thank me for my
reply: acknowledging your inability to answer, and hoping I expect it not from
you.


I. D. Whether your Treatise were intended to me or no, is not much material.
Sure I am it was delivered me as from you: and thereupon did I return you
that reply: which had it taken due effect, I should have had more cause to
thank God, then now you have to thank me. Answer from your self, I confess
I expected none^ for I knew your insufficiency. But I hoped you would have
taken counsel of some more sufficient then your self: and upon conference
with them, have sent me your common Answer. Which because you have not done,
being conscious to your own inability: it is a manifest argument of wilful
obstinacy, and that you will not be persuaded though be persuaded.


N. N. Notwithstanding you have no reason to believe me, seeing other Divines
not Papists only but Protestants also seem to understand the Fathers as you
do.


I. D. It is a foul untruth that Protestants understand the Fathers as you
do, as shall by and by to your shame appear. In the mean season know that
what I have said, I have not barely affirmed but soundly proved: and neglecting
demonstratiue reasons merely to be swayed with humane authority, is no other
then to put off common sense, and to forget that we are reasonable creatures.


N. N. I except only against two or three passages: the rest therefore are
truly related, and the letter of them is for the real Presence. Which how it
can be, and yet no Transubstantion you understand not. The word
Transubstantiation was indeed devised in the counsel of Lateran: but the thing
was always believed of the ancient Fathers, as appears by their words,
Conversion, Mutation, and the like.


I. D. Had you attentively read my Answer, you would never have said I excepted
to two or three Passages only. For I excepted to all the passages of Ignatius,
Cyril of Jerusalem in his Catechismes, Ambrose de Sacramentis, and Mysterijs
initiandis, Eusebius Emissenus, Cyprian de caena Domini, the Canon of the Nicen
counsel, and Magnetes, as suspected by your own Rabbis not to be the men
whose names they bear. Again of Damascen, Theophylact, Euthymius, Nicephorus,
and Rupertus, as being Punies and too young to be Fathers: besides those many
Passages which are miserably either curtald or rackt or falsely alleged.
Neither are their words so plain for you as you pretend. For I have made it to
appear, that some of them say nothing at all for you, some speak rather
against you then for you: and to those that seem to say any thing, I have
opposed a whole grand Jury, speaking far more plainly on our side. For what
words can be more plain then these, This is my body, that is, the figure of my
Body; that Christ said This bread is my body, which your own men grant cannot
be true unless figuratively understood: that Bread and Wine still are what
they were, that the Nature of bread continues, that the nature of bread and
wine cease not to be, but continue in the propriety of their nature, that the
signs after consecration depart not from their proper nature, but remain in
their former substance, figure, and form, and suchlike many.

But perhaps your Fathers speak as plainly. Let us try that. They say that
the Body, flesh, and blood of Christ is truly in the Sacrament: Ergo, a Real
Presence. Who denies it? Transubstantiation is that which you should prove,
which Real Presence inferres not. This, you say, you understand not. The more
is your dullness. For Really and Corporally are not all one: and that which is
Spiritually present is Really present, unless you will say that a spirit is
Nothing. Is not the Blood of Christ really present in Baptism to the washing
away of sin? Is he not Really also present to the Faith of every true
believer even out of the Sacrament? Doubtless he is: and none will deny it,
but he that never felt the virtue and efficacy thereof. What should let then
but the Flesh of Christ may be present in the Eucharist Really, and yet not
after the Corporal manner? Nay what if I should yield you a corporal
presence? Would that necessarily infer a Transubstantiation? Nothing less.
For it may be by consubstantiation: the flesh being there together with the
Bread, without turning the Bread into Flesh. Neither may you deny this to be
possible, unless you will deny the Omnipotency of God, and your
Transubstantiation withal: for thereupon do you build it. Transubstantiation
therefore and the Real presence are not all one. Yea but the Fathers use the
terms of Conversion and Mutation. What then? Ergo Transubstantiation? A
pitiful consequence. For this is to argue from the General to Special: as
if you should say, It is a color, therefore it is black, there being many
colors besides black. Learn then that Change is a general word, and there
are diverse kinds thereof: of Substance by Generation and corruption, of
Quality by Alteration, of Quantity by Augmentation and Diminution, of Place by
Lation. Now he that affirms a Change, does not presently affirm Change of
Substance: for it may be some other, either of Quality or Quantity, or
Quantity, or Place. The Fathers therefore speaking of a Change in the
Sacrament, may as well mean a Change of Alteration in the Use and Virtue of
the Elements, as of Substance by way of Transubstantiation. And so for ought
the Fathers say, Transubstantiation may still be a brat of the Lateran
Counsels: disputed of perhaps before, but never believed as an Article of
Faith till then.


N. N. I allow no authority after 600. years: Ergo I acknowledge the next
1000. to be contrary in this and all other controversies betwixt us.


I. D. To speak plainly, I allow no Authority at all as Infallible, but only
that of Christ and his Apostles. Those that afterward succeeded, were all of
them subject unto error, and cannot be the ground of our Faith, as I have
elsewhere answerably demonstrated. Howbeit those of the first 600 years we
reverence more, and rather admit, then those of the 1000 following, because
they were freer from error, as living nearer the Apostles times, and before
the first discovery of Antichrist: which was about the year 607. when Boniface
the third purchased of that bloody tyrant Phocas the title of Universal
Bishop, and with it the supremacy over all Churches. Whereof his predecessor
Gregory the great seemed to prophecy, when writing against John B. of
Constantinople for usurping that title, Lib. 4. ep. 34.
he gathers from thence that the times of Antichrist are at hand. After which
discovery, although errors every day crept in apace: yet we yield you not
that all your opinions instantly and at once leapt into the Church. For as Rome
it self was not built in a day: so neither was that huge heap of Romanish
impieties raised in one age. It was a good while after this before
Transubstantiation began to appear. Damascen in the East not contenting
himself with the old language of the Church, fell a coining of new Phrases,
yet reached not home to Transubstantiation. A hundred years after Amalarius in
the west maintained in plain terms, that the simple nature of Bread and wine
is turned into a reasonable nature, De Eccl. offic. l. 1. c. 24.
to wit, of the body and blood of Christ. And herein was he seconded by
Paschasius Radbertus, and others. Yet could they not carry it so clearly, but
that they were mightily opposed by the most famous writers in their times,
whose names you have in mine Answer. But specially by Bertram under Carolus
Calvus, of whom Turrian the Jesuit thus, De Euch. con. volan. l. 1. c. 22
to cite Bertram what is it other then to say, the heresy of Calvin is not
new. And a good time afterward again by Berengarius, on whose side many
disputed both by word and writing, and those not of one nation only, Flor.
hist. an. 1087.
but English, French, and Italians, as Matthew of Westminster says. But all
these Antichrist (who was now in his height) bare down: and at length anno
1215. under Innocent the third in the Lateran Council, was the Idol set upon
its base, and adored. So lately, and with so much ado was your doctrine of
Transubstantiation brought in and established.


N. N. For 900. years was no outward face of a Church in England but the
Catholic. In which it were uncharitable to say that none knew the meaning of
Scriptures and Fathers as well as we, or all lived in ignorance till the true
light came in with Luther. Yet in this last age England has yielded many
learned men: among others an uncle of yours, and Master of Arts, who left all
his hopes for his conscience, and would not be persuaded to return to his
great possibilities, which much strengthens and confirms you.


I. D. By Catholic you still mean Roman: for Catholic and Roman are now
grown convertible terms, a mystery that the Primitive Church never so much
as dreamed of. But what? No outward face in England for so many hundred years
together but Roman? What face then I pray, was it which it bare some 650 years
since, when the Saxon Homily of A^lfrick Abbot of Malmsbury, not only agreeing
with Bertram in this matter of the Sacrament, but also for sundry passages
expressly translated out of him, was publicly appointed to be read unto the
people upon Easter day before they received the Communion? Or when the Bishops
at their Synods delivered unto their Clergy the same doctrine out of two other
writings of the same Aelfrick, the one whereof says thus That housel is
Christ's body, not bodily but spiritually. Not the body which he suffered in,
but the body of which he spoke when he blessed the bread and wine to housel
the night before his suffering, and said by the blessed bread this is my body,
and again by the holy wine, this is my blood, etc. The other likewise says
thus, The Lord which hallowed housel before his suffering, and says that the
bread was his own body, and the wine was truly his blood, halloweth daily by
the hand of the Priest, bread to his body, and wine to his blood, in spiritual
mystery, as we read in books. And yet notwithstanding that lively bread is not
bodily so, nor the selfsame body that Christ suffered in: nor that holy wine
is the Saviors blood which was shed for us in bodily thing, but in spiritual
understanding. Both be truly, that bread his body, and that wine also his
blood, as was the heavenly bread which we call Manna, that fed forty years
Gods people, and the clear water which did then run from the stone in the
wilderness was truly his blood, as Paul wrote in one of his Epistles. Thus he.
Tell me now, good Sir, was the face of the English Church Roman, when such
doctrine, so cross unto Transubstantiation, was by public authority delivered
to the Clergy, and commanded to be read unto the people: or was it at that
time other then a Roman face, truly Catholic and Orthodoxe? You have heard I
suppose of those Christians, whom anciently they termed W^ldenses and
Leonists. Contra Haeret. c. 4.
Your Ranerius says of them, that they had been of very long continuance,
even from Pope Sylvesters time, or as some say, ever since the Apostles: so
Universal also, that there was scarce any country wherein they abounded not:
finally, that where other Sects most fearfully blaspheamed God, these made
fair show of religion, lived honestly among men, believed all things rightly
touching God, and all the Articles contained in the Creed, only they
blaspheamed and hated the Church of Rome. What? Was the face of this Church
also Roman? How so, being so opposite unto it? Certainly it was rather the
face of our Church. Hist. Fran. l. 1.
For as your Poplinerius testifies, they differed very little from us: and in
this point of the Sacrament they perfectly agreed with us. It is true, they
were charged with many foul opinions: but enviously and maliciously, as
appears by the public Confessions of their Faith, Thuan* ^om. 1. p. 1.
and by the testimony of Cardinal Sadolet, and others who by commission were
commanded to examine it. It is true also that they were most barbarously and
bloudily persecuted by the Roman Synagogue. But what says Michael Cesaenas who
flourished some 250. years since? There are two Churches, the one of the
wicked flourishing, in which the Pope does reign: the other of the godly
afflicted. Whence it plainly appears, that there has heretofore been
another face of the Church besides Roman: if not visibly glorious, yet at
leastwise visibly persecuted.

You add, it is uncharitable to think that all this time there was no
knowledge of the meaning of Scriptures and Fathers until Luther brought in the
true light. True: neither is there any man that says so. Nevertheless, be it
spoken to the glory of God, and the honor of the present times, the meaning
both of Scriptures and Fathers was never better known (shall I say, never so
well known?) as now. This I have elsewhere proved both by the causes thereof,
and the testimony of your own men. As for your nine hundred years,
questionles they were not the learned times. The knowledge of languages
quickly decayed, and blindness and barbarism crept in apace: insomuch as by
the testimony of Genebrard, Bellarmine, Bell. de Pont. l. 4. c. 12.
and Baronius, there was never age more Unlearned and unhappy then the ninth
Century, Genesis Chron. l. 4.
wherein were no men famous either for wit or learning, Bar. tom. 10. an. 90. 2.
and whosoever studied the Mathematics or Philosophy was presently counted a
Magician. Neither were some of the after times over much amended, when the
chiefest of their Schools scarce knew whether Saint Paul wrote in Greek or
in Latin, In civ. Dei l. 2. c. 21.
as Ludovicus Vives says: and to have skill in Greek was suspicious, but in
Hebrew almost heretical, as Espencaeus. In 2. Tim. 3. digres. 17.
But blessed be God, who in the midst of these blindest times has still
preserved the light of his truth: and, though envy burst and split at it,
blessed be his holy name for that greater light of his Gospel which we have
received both by Luther and since Luther. He was a noble champion of Christ
Jesus, and gat so much ground of the Papacy, as I hope will never be recovered
again until by the brightness of our Lords coming it be utterly destroyed.

If England in these latter times have yielded such learned men of your side:
you may be pleased to know that it has afforded on our side also as learned
Clarks in the knowledge of tongues, and all kind of literature whatsoever, as
any in your Church wheresoever, if not excelling them. Yea but yours were
content to forgo all their means and hopes for their conscience. And did not
ours trow you do so also in Q. Mary's days? Nay did not Archbishop Cranmer,
and sundry other Bishops (to speak nothing of those of inferior rank) choose
rather to loose their present honors and estates, and themselves cruelly to be
martyred in the fire, then to perish their consciences by subscribing unto the
Romish Apostasy? As for your uncle, whose domestical example so much confirms
you, I think he was a man of no great note, sure I am of no great fame either
at home or abroad. Yet were his deserts far greater, I am not unprovided of a
domestical example, able every way to match him, yea and over-match him too.
My mothers Brother I mean, that invaluable Jewel, whose name is renowned
throughout all the Churches. Who being Fellow of Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, and Bachelour in Divinity, possessed also of a Benefice near the
University, and by reason of his eminence in learning, as likely to rise as
any: yet he readily forsook Fellowship, Friends, Benefice, Hopes and all for
Christ's sake, and put himself into a voluntary exile all the reign of Q.
Mary, until Q. Elizabeth of blessed memory being advanced to the Crown, he
returned into England, where he was according to his worth soon after
preferred to the Bishopric of Salisbury. Now if so obscure a man as your uncle
living but as a serving Priest beyond seas, do so much strengthen you: I hope
the example of so profound a Clarke, and so reverend a Bishop and Confessor as
my uncle, may much more confirm and settle me. But it is high time to hear
the reasons why you cannot believe the Fathers meaning to be as I say.


N. N. Your first reason, some of our writers give the same sense to the
Fathers that you do, as Mason, Perkins, Field, Covel, Sir Edwin Sands,
Midleton, Morton, the now Archbishop of Canterbury.


I. D. Suppose all this were true: yet seeing the sense I give, I have by
sundry plain arguments demonstrated to be the right sense, the bare saying of
others cannot be a sufficient reason why you should forbear assent. But what?
Do all these indeed interpret the Fathers as you do? A vast untruth, and
utterly incredible: save only to those whom the Romish Circe has turned out of
their wits. For would any man think that they who so confidently allege the
Fathers against Transubstantiation* should notwithstanding in their writings
acknowledge, that their meaning is clean contrary to that they allege the^
for? Were it not that you have bound your Faith absolutely to believe what
every Popish shaueling tell^ you, how unlikely soever it be, and never to
believe us with what strength of reason soever we speak: so absurd a thought
as this could never have entered into your mind. Let us yet examine the
Particulars.


N. N. Mason is forced to these Words, St Ambrose testifies that imposition of
hands is certain mystical words whereby he that is elected into the
Priesthood, is confirmed, receiving authority, his conscience bearing him
witness that he may be bold to offer sacrifice to God in the Lords steed. S.
Chrysostom says, in many places there is offered, not many Christ's, but one
Christ, every where being full and perfect. S. Augustine says, that Christ
commanded the Leper to offer sacrifice according to the law of Moses, because
this sacrifice the holy of holies, which is his Body, was not yet instituted.
And elsewhere, what can be offered or accepted more gratefully, then the Body
of our Priest being made the flesh of our sacrifice. And Cyril, Leo,
Fulgentius, and other Fathers have commonly the like.


I. D. First, these words are altogether impertinent to the matter of
Transubstantiation, being vouched for the Sacrifice of the Mass; and therefore
no way opening the meaning of the Fathers for you in that point. Secondly,
these are not the words of Mason, but the Objection of a Papist. For you are to
know that this book of Mason is written Dialogue-wise, as a conference
between Philodoxus the Papist, and Orthodoxus the Protestant. Now these words
are by Mason put into the mouth of Philodoxus, De Missa l. 1. c. 15.
and are indeed objected to us by Bellarmin, whom he calling himself
Orthodoxus undertakes in that place to answer. Whereby you may easily
perceive what credit is to be given unto such cheating companions as your
Author is: who bear you in hand that the Objection of a Papist is the
resolution of a Protestant. Which that it may yet more plainly appear, Lib.
5. c. 8.
take Masons Answer also. S. Ambrose elsewhere expounds himself saying, What
therefore do we? In ep. dd Heb. c. 10.
Do we not offer daily? Truly we offer, Ibid.
but so, that we make a remembrance of his death. And again, We offer him
always, or rather we work a remembrance of his sacrifice. In ad Heb. hom. 17.
S. Chrysostom expounds himself in the same place, We offer him, or rather
we work a remembrance of the sacrifice. What S. Augustines meaning was let
himself declare, Was not Christ once offered or sacrificed in himself? Epist.
23.
And yet he is offered in a Sacrament, not only at all the solemnities at
Easter, but every day to the people. Neither does he lie that being asked does
answer, that he is offered. For if Sacraments have not a certain resemblance
of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they should not be sacraments at
all. And for this resemblance they take the names commonly of the things
themselves. Therefore as after a certain manner the sacrament of the body of
Christ is the body of Christ, the sacrament of the blood of Christ is the blood
of Christ: so the sacrament of Faith is Faith. Cont Faust. l. 20. c. 21.
And elsewhere, The flesh and blood of the sacrifice of Christ, was promised
by sacrifices of resemblance before he came, was performed intruth and indeed
when he suffered, is celebrated by a sacrament of remembrance since he
ascended. Thus he. Whereof nothing makes for your sense, but every thing
rather for the contrary.


N. N. Mr Perkins writes thus, the ancients when they speak of the supper,
have many forms of speech which show a conversion. S. Ambrose uses the name
of conversion and mutation. S. Cyprian says it is changed not in shape but in
nature. Origin says that bread is made the body. Gaudentius says, Christ's
body is made of bread and his blood of wine. Eusebius Emissenus, that the
Priest by secret power changes the visible creatures into the substance of
Christ's body and blood, and that the bread does pass into the nature of our
Lords body.


I. D. Here Mr Perkins only reports the words of the Fathers, but declares
not the sense of them. That he does by and by in the words following, Probl
page 154.
The ancient Doctors, says he, when they speak of the conversion and changing
of bread, understand the change of use and condition not substance. In the
reading of them therefore the Sacramental change in signification and
obsignation is to be distinguished from substantial. And we are to know that
for 800 years, at least they knew not Transubstantiation, but condemned it
rather. And all this he proves by the sayings of Cyprian, Ambrose, Theodoret,
Gelasius and others, which I forbear here to set down, because you have them
already in my answer. Now if your meaning accord with this of M. Perkins, I am
the gladder. If not, it was too great boldness to say, he understood the
Fathers in the same sense you do.


N. N. D. Morton, the Centuriators, and others are plentiful in such
citations, and so manifest for the verity, that D. Field writes thus, that the
Primitive Church thought the sanctified and consecrated Elements to be the
body of Christ. D, Covel says, the Omnipotency of God makes it his Body.


I. D. Quote the sayings of the Fathers they may and that plentifully. But
Transubstantiation, or your sense, they do not, nor cannot find in them: for
they never dreamed of it. Of the Chapter l. 3. c. 34.
The words of Dr Field are these, The manner of the Primitive Church was, as
Rhenanus testifies, if any parts of the consecrated Elements remained so long
as to be musty and unfit for use, to consume them with fire, which I think
they would not have done to the Body of Christ. This shows they thought the
Sanctified Elements to be Christ's Body no longer then they might serve for the
comfortable instruction of the faithful by partaking in them. Here we have a
plain argument against Reservation, and that the Fathers thought not the
Elements properly to be Christ's body. For had they so thought they would never
have burnt them. He intimates indeed that they thought the Elements to be the
Body: neither does any deny it. For, as I have showed in my Answer, they all
understood Christ as if he had said, De Euchar. l. 1 c. 1.
This bread is my Body. But Bread in proper sense is not Christ's Body, nor
cannot be, as your own Bellarmine confesses. How then? Tropically only: as
Circumcision is the Covenant, and Water in Baptism Regeneration. And so,
Epist. 23.
as St Augustine says, the Sacrament of Christ's body is after a manner Christ's
body: to wit Sacramentally, the outward sign putting on the name of the thing
Signified. And whereas Dr Covel adds that Gods Omnipotency makes it his
Body: neither does this import Transubstantiation. For, as you might have
learned out of my Answer, no power is able to make a Sacrament, and by earthly
Creatures to convay unto us heavenly graces, save only that which is Omnipotent
and Divine.


N. N. Sir Edwin Sands, With Rome the Greek Churches concur in the opinion
of Transubstantiation, and generally in the Service and whole body of the
Mass* in offering of sacrifice, and prayer for the dead: their liturgies be
the same that in the old time, namely S. Basils, S. Chrysostoms, S. Gregory's
translated. And another, among all these nations (Greece, Asia, Africa,
Ethiopia, Armenia, etc.) all places are full of Masses, there be seven
Sacraments, etc.


I. D. Ergo what? That the Knight understands the Fathers as you do?
Ridiculous: For the now Grecians are not the ancient Fathers. Or thus,
therefore you are in the right? Absurd: for they are in your opinion but
Schismatics and Heretics. Yet says the Knight, they hold Transubstantiation.
He says so indeed: but by his leave I much doubt thereof. For the Patriarch
Jeremy expressly says, Resp. 1. c. 10.
that when our Savior said, take eat, this is my body and my blood, the flesh
of the Lord which he carried about him, was not given to the Apostles to eat,
nor his blood to drink, nor is now in the divine celebration of those
mysteries. What then? Surely an extraordinary bread, which yet is his Body: but
how, says he, a thousand tongues are not sufficient to utter. As far as I
can conceive, this they hold, that the matter of the Bread still remains, and
the Body of Christ still continues in Heaven: but yet the form, or hidden
qualities and properties of his body are after an unspeakable manner derived to
the Bread. And because as the same Patriarch says, the better things have the
preeminence, therefore is it not from thence Bread but Body. And even as Iron
united with fire becomes fire, and yet the matter of Iron remains, and
Christ's Body united with us changes us into it, not it into us, our nature
still continuing: so the secret properties of Christ's flesh being imparted to
the Bread, by putting on this new form it becomes Flesh, and yet still
retains the matter of Bread. This in my shallow understanding is the meaning
of the Greek Church in this point: which as you see no way suits with
Transubstantiation. But to put the matter out of all doubt, the Council of
Florence held some two hundred years after that of Lateran, Sess. vlt.
plainly declares, that that Church flatly refused to yield unto them
therein. And if so, then neither do they admit of your Sacrifice, which has
no other ground then Transubstantiation. Prayer also for the relief of souls
tormented in Purgatory how can they hold, not believing that there is a
Purgatory? The rest that follows is little to the purpose: and your other
author is so misnamed both in your text and margent, that I cannot imagine whom
you should mean. Transeat Ergo.


N. N. Midleton witnesses, that the Dead were prayed for in the public
Liturgies of Basil, Chrysostom and Epiphanius, that the Sacrifice of the Altar
and unbloody Sacrifice were used in the Primitive Church, that to pray, make
doles, and offer Sacrifice at the Altar for the Dead was a tradition of the
Apostles and Fathers.


I. D. Still you wander out of the way. For how does it appear from hence that
Protestants understand the Fathers in point of Transubstantiation as you do?
But as you lead, so must I follow. There are two Liturgies that pass under the
name of St Basil, the one in Greek, the other lately translated out of Syriake
by Andreas Masius. Between which there is such difference that they seem not
both to have had one Father. Of these the Greek is the prolixer, and as the
said Masius censureth, neither does Possevin the Jesuit mentioning it disprove
thereof, has suffered much change by many alterations and additions, and those
superstitious too: so that whosoever be the Author, it is not now the same it
was at first. That which goes under the name of St Choysostome either is
supposititious, or in process of time much corrupted. In it Prayers are made
for Pope Nicholas and the Emperor Alexius: whereof the one lived almost five
hundred, the other about seven hundred years after Chrysostom. De (...) var.
r. 220.
And that many things are added, your Claudius Espencaeus freely does confess.
So that these Liturgies cannot be of any great authority. For as for
Epiphanius, I cannot yet find that ever he composed any. But what says
Midleton of them? That the Dead were prayed for in them. Sect. 7. Ans.
What dead? Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Confessors, Bishops,
Anachorits, and the blessed Virgin Mother. And for what? Not to relieve them,
but to glorify God in his Servants, and to profit the Church by commemoration
of their virtues. Thus he. which I trow is not according to your meaning. He
says farther, the sacrifice of the Altar, and unbloody sacrifice were used in
the Primitive Church. Suppose so: yet he says withal, that the sacrifice of
the Altar hurts us no more then the Sacrifice of the Table does you: Sect. 15.
Ans.
and the Unbloody sacrifice hurts you more then us. For in your Sacrifice Blood
is offered: and there is no more reason why you should call it Unbloody then
Vnfleshy. If you say, because Blood is not shed therein: I say neither is Flesh
broken therein. Lastly he says that Prayers, Doles, and Sacrifices at the
altar for the Dead is a tradition of the Apostles and ancient Fathers. But here
your author overlasheth: for he says expressly, Sect. 6. Ans.
from the Fathers not from the Apostles. And adds, yet notwithstanding prayer
was then made, not after the Popish fashion to ease the dead of the pains and
torments of Purgatory: but to persuade the living that they are not vanished
into nothing, but live and have their being with the Lord, which knocks out the
brains of Purgatory. And by and by, This tradition of the Fathers was no more
but Memoriam facite, keep the memory, as we may see evidently in Cyprian. Lib.
1. ep. 9. and l* 3. ep. 3.
Nothing of all which I trow makes any whit for your meaning.


N. N. Dr Morton cites out of Bibliander, that it was a most common opinion
among the Jews, that at the coming of the Messiah all the legal sacrifices
should cease: but the sacrifice of Thoda in Bread and Wine should not cease.
Whereupon he is forced against Mason and his directors to say, The Protestants
acknowledge in the E^charist a sacrifice Eucharisticall. He might as well have
acknowledged with those of Basil, Frankford, and Stancarus, what this Sacrifice
should be. For they cite these words of the Rabbis, the sacrifice that shall
be made of wine, shall not only be changed into the Substance of the blood of
the Messiah, but also into the substance of his Body. And in the sacrifice that
shall be made of bread, notwithstanding it be white as milk, the substance
shall be turned into the Substance of the body of the Messiah. Thus R. Cahana
who lived long before Christ, and so R. Judah, R. Simeon and others: whose
testimonies, says Dr Morton, are so direct for Transubstantiation, as no
Romish Doctor for a 1000 years after Christ is so express: yea they are more
pregnant then the sayings of Transubstantia^ors themselves.


I. D. I am very sorry that I have not Dr Mortons book now at hand by me. For I
am very confident that where your Author found his Objection, there I should
also meet with a full solution. In the mean season till I have procured it,
which I hope will be ere long, briefly thus. First the Passage cited out of
Bibliander makes against you, not us. For if it be Bread and Wine which is
sacrificed, then they remain after Consecration, which overthrows
Transubstantiation. If they do not remain, and the Body and Blood of Christ
only be offered: then were those Jews false Prophets, and foretold nothing but
lies. Secondly, the Doctor acknowledging an Eucharisticall Sacrifice, neither
is forced thereunto by any such testimony, nor is against Mason or any other
Protestant: for they all acknowledge the same together with him. But I think
you knew not that Eucharist signifies Thanksgiving: or else you would never
have thought it strange he should acknowledge a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving.
Lastly, I am strongly persuaded that when these testimonies of R. Cahana, R.
Judah, R. Simeon, and the rest shall come to the ripping, they will prove
Hippocentaurs and mere fictions. For (supposing you are in the right) is it
likely that such fellows as these should either know or speak more clearly of
the mysteries of our Faith, then any of the ancient Prophets, inspired of the
holy Ghost, and sent of purpose to foretell to them? Or is it probable that
your greatest Rabbis, and among them Cardinal Bellarmine, searching curiously
into every corner, to find witnesses of all sorts, would yet carelessly omit
these, if they were so plain and pregnant for you as you pretend? Verily when
the Doctor says, that no Doctor for a 1000 years after Christ, no nor
Transubstantiator almost, ever spoke more plainly: it is a mere flout, and
argues how lightly he esteems of the authority. But of this enough until I
be more certainly informed. Only thus, to allege Jews, is not to approve
your sense of the Fathers.


N. N. The now Archb. of Canterbury says, and with him Midleton agrees, that
Berengarius was called into question for denying Transubstantiation, and he
yielded once or twice to recant and abjure the Doctrine he held: Ergo he
assures us Transubstantiation was the Doctrine of the Church constant and
general hundreds of years before the Lateran council defined it, yea
farther, he assures us, that to deny it was Heresy to be recanted.


I. D. Had not your Author wanted, or forehead, or brain, or both, he would
never have made such a shameless and senseless inference. If he had said,
Ergo many believed Transubstantiation before the Lateran council, he had kept
his tongue within compass: but saying, Ergo it was the constant and general
doctrine for hundred of years before, his mouth overfloweth, and it is a lie
with a latchet. For be it known unto you, the Church of England held it not,
as I have already proved out of the Homily of Abbat Aelfrick. Neither did the
Waldenses hold it: whose number yet was very great, and they dispersed through
all the countries of Christendom. And if you think that Berengarius stood
single and by himself in this point, you are much deceived: for he had as
many for him as were against him, and it was nothing but the tyranny of the B.
of Rome that bare him down. Howbeit the French Churches still resisted both him
and his Synods, and diverse meeting together in Anjow and Turon, resolve against
him, and subscribe unto Berengarius. But to put the matter out of all doubt,
Benno in vit. Hild.
it is reported of Pope Hildebrand, that he appointed a Fast of three days
together with a solemn Procession, to entreat of God some sign from heaven,
whereby he might be assured what he was to determine in this business. If at
that time the head of the Church himself staggered, and doubted which way to
resolve: is it credible that the rest of the body could be so settled therein,
as generally and constantly for hundreds of years to maintain it? Apellas the
Jew may believe it if he list, not I. Breefly, Transubstantiation might well
be disputed of some while before the Lateran Council: but held for an Article
of Faith it was not until then, as I have elsewhere showed out of Tonstal and
Scotus.


N. N. The same Bishop and Dr Field tell us that the Greek Church is a true
Church. Yet their Patriarch Jeremy says. It is the judgment of the Church,
that in the holy supper after consecration and benediction the bread passes
and is changed into his Body, and the Wine into his Blood.


I. D. Yet the same Bishop and Doctor tell you also, that a true Church may
err: so that Transubstantiation might be an error though the Grecians held
it. But the truth is that the Greek Church never held it, as I have above
showed out of the same Jeremy and the Council of Florence which you are bound
to believe. For though the Patriarch say Bread is changed into Body: yet he
adds by and by, the flesh of the Lord which he carried about him was not
given to the Apostles to eat, nor his blood to drink, nor is now in the divine
celebration of those mysteries, which directly overturneth your Change by
Transubstantiation. But of this see more above. And thus much in answer unto
your first reason, which before I pass unto the next I must crave leave to
retort upon you.

If you may not yield unto the sense I give the Fathers, because some
Protestants allow your sense: neither may I yield to the sense you give,
because many Papists allow mine. For there is the same law for Titius as well
as for Seius. I assume, but many Papists allow the sense I give. This if I
would follow your course, I might easily prove by all those Popish writers, who
acknowledge those words of the Fathers which we object against you, without
mentioning any of their Answers. But so doing I should show my self as
ridiculous and unconscionable as your Author. Thus therefore, Scotus,
Cameracensis, Caietan, Roffensis, Biel, Occam, Durand, Peter Lombard, with some
Jesuits, and the Canon Law, profess, some of them that they could not find
Transubstantiation in the Scriptures, and some that they could not in the
Fathers. Their express words you have in mine Answer, whether I refer you:
for it would be too long to transcribe them. If so, and all these were grand
Papists, I have no reason to believe you or your Author rather then them: nay
great reason have I to cleave the faster unto my opinion, as better according
both with Scripture and Fathers.


N. N. Your second reason, There are amongst us differences even in many
essential and fundamental points, as namely between Protestants and
Puritans, whatsoever D. Abbat, Dove, Willet, Powel, Sr Edward Hobby, Rogers,
and others say to the contrary. And this you prove by Rogers, Covel, Ormrode,
Parks, Willet, Powel, and sundry others.


I. D. That there are differences and dissentions amongst us is too true and
cannot be denied. This therefore we grant. But the Consequence which you
infer thereupon, Ergo you may not yield unto my judgment or any of our side,
I deny. For to make this follow, you must of necessity hold, that where there
are dissentions, there you may not harken to any side. A dangerous and
desperate Position: and the very Objection of the Jews against Christianity,
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
We may not believe because of your distractions. By which reason, as you may
not hear us, so may not we you, nor Turks and Infidels any of us all how
Orthodoxe soever, because the Christian world is still full of contentions. A
man would think that diversity of opinions, especially in matters concerning
soul and Salvation, should rather quicken and stir up the mind diligently
among all to search which is the truest: then to cause it sit still, and
forbear assent until all sides be accorded. Neither let any pretend
inabilitie: for as Chrysostom says, Seeing we acknowledge the scriptures,
which are so true and plain, Hom. 33. in Act.
it will be an easy matter for to judge. And tell me, have thou any wit or
judgment? For it is not a man's part barely to receive whatsoever he hears.
Say not, I am a learner and may be no judge, I can condemn no opinion: this is
but a shift, etc. And Gerson renders the true reason hereof, De Exam. doct.
page 1. con. 5.
The trial and examination of doctrines concerning Faith belongs not only to
the Council and Pope but also to every one that is sufficiently learned in the
scriptures, because every man is a sufficient judge of that he knows. But o
ye miserable servitude and slavery of you, the common sort of Papists! your
eyes are pulled out of your heads, neither are you allowed the use of common
sense and reason. The Scriptures by which you should see are wrested out of
your hands as a dangerous book. If you will see, it must be by another man's
eyes. Your Faith must depend upon the warrant of some equivocating Priest. And
whatsoever is said to the contrary though never so soundly proved, you may in
no case harken to it: for why, there are dissentions among you.

This reason being thus fully answered, I might without more ado pass on to
the next, but that I see by your spinning it to such a length you make great
store of it. Let us therefore bestow a word or two more upon it. There are, say
you, dissentions amongst us. True. And was there ever, or will there ever be a
Church so happy as to be altogether free of them? If not: why do you vpbraid
them unto us? Is it because notwithstanding them we count one another brethren
and members of the same Church. That is an Argument of our charity, and that we
dare not cut off, and condemn as Heretics every one that differs though
never so little from us in opinion: whereas you presently condemn to the pit
of Hell all Christians whatsoever, wheresoever, and how many soever that will
not veil bonnet unto the Popes Miter, and believe all to be true that he
resolves upon. But what? May not brethren disagree and yet continue brethren?
Or does every quarrel exclude out of the Church of God? I trow not. For then
Paul and Barnabas, Peter and Paul, Victor and Polycrates, Cyril and Theodoret,
Chrysostom and Theophilus, Epiphanius and Chrysostom, Hierome and Ruffin, and
sundry others should not be brethren. Nay the East and West Churches dissenting
about Easter, and the Roman and African about Rebaptization should be no true
Churches. Yea but our differences are not in petty matters, but essential and
fundamental points. And such were also in the Churches of the Corinthians and
Galathians: for in the one they differed about the Resurrection of the dead, in
the other about the necessary observation of the law of Moses together with the
Gospel. De not. Ec^ c. 2.
And yet says Bellarmine, they were true Churches, and they that so erred if
they were ready to learn the truth, and to believe it being taught, were true
members of them also. But by your leave sir, your Author overlashes when he
says we differ in points Essential and Fundamental: neither do our Divines
only say it, as you bear us in hand, but clearly demonstrate it also. And
indeed all the quarrel is rather about the shell then the kernel, that is,
the outward government and ceremonies of the Church rather then the Faith of
the Church: or at the most, it is rather about some deductions and conclusions
in Divinity, then the Principles themselves, and those truths that are
necessary unto salvation. For as for the Article of Christ's descent into Hell,
though your Author would insinuate the contrary, yet there is not one of us but
willingly subscribes unto it: and acknowledges that Christ has spoiled Hell,
and triumphed over Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 2.15.
and all the enemies of our salvation. But whether he did this by descending
locally in soul into the Hell of the Damned, or Virtually and by the power of
his Godhead, is all the Question amongst us: whereby for ought I see, we
neither overturne the Article, nor dissolve brotherhood. And your self must
needs confess so much, unless you will disclaim brotherhood with Durandus,
and condemn him of a Fundamental error together with us. For he held that
the soul of Christ descended into Hell, not in the substance thereof, In 3
did. 22. q. 3.
but by certain effects. And hear the resolution of Suares the Jesuit
touching this Article, Tom. 2. in par. Tho. d. 43. 2.
If by an article of faith, says he, we understand a truth which all the
faithful are bound explicitly to know and believe: so I do not think it
necessary to reckon this among the Articles of Faith, because it is not a
matter altogether so necessary for all men, and because for this reason
peradventure it is omitted in the Nicen Creed, the knowledge of which Creed
seems to be sufficient for fulfilling the Precept of Faith. Lastly, for this
cause peradventure Augustine, and other of the Fathers expounding the Creed,
do not unfold this mystery unto the people. Thus he. But perhaps your Author
has reason for what he says. Certainly none at all. Only he rakes together
all the vehement and passionate speeches, whatsoever he can find to have
passed from any of our pens in heat of contention, to work all the disgrace he
can upon us. And if any of us for proof of his Conclusion draw his Argument
from an Article of Faith, and then shall say (as sometimes through too much
eagerness men use to do) the Controversy is about such an Article: lo,
says your Author, by and by, a difference in matters Essential and
Fundamental, whereas notwithstanding we all agree in the Article, and the
difference lies only in the Conclusion. And seeing in all disputations it is
the manner to fetch proofs from common Principles assented unto on all sides:
what folly is it, leaving the Question in debate, to make that the matter of
controversy wherein we all perfectly accord? If any in pursuing their quarrels
have suffered themselves to be transported with passion farther then becomes
Christian charity: I acknowledge humane infirmity, and undertake not to
defend them. Yet you may know that others have proceeded much farther. For in
that of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria; and Epiphanius B. of Cyprus against
Chrysostom, Niceph. l. 13. c. 13.
they grew to such violence, that Epiphanius and he cursed one the other, many
were slain in taking of parts, Socrat. l. 6. c. 17.
the Cathedral Church of Constantinople and the Senate house were burned to the
ground, Sozom. l. 8 c. 2^.
and Chrysostom himself lost both his Bishopric and life in banishment.
Which made Baronius beginning to entreat thereof to use these words. Socrat. l.
6. c. 21.
A shameful contention in the Church, Annal to 5.2^ 40^. nu. 51.
the lamentable narration whereof I now take in hand: wherein shall be
described the bickering and cursed persecution, not of Gentiles against
Christians, or Heretics against Catholics, or wicked men against good and
just men, but (which is monstrous and prodigious) of Saints and holy men one
against another.

But what? is there all peace in the Romish Church? no quarrel, no contention
at all? So would your lying Masters have all their credulous scholars to
believe, though all the world know to the contrary. For have there not been
therein about thirty Schisms, and some of them continuing many years
together, wherein Pope has been against Pope, one thundering excommunications
against another, and by their factions renting the whole Christian world
asunder? Have there not been long quarrels between the Franciscans and
Dominicans about the Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary? Does the Church of
France at this day admit of the Council of Trent, which you count the chiefest
stake in your hedge? Was there not of late a foul bickering between the state
of Venice and the Pope about the power he would have usurped over them? I
suppose you are not such a stranger in England but you may have heard of the
infamous dissentions between the Secular Priests and Jesuits. Watson in Q^od
lib.
Which themselves were not ashamed to publish to the world. For a taste, thus
say the Seculars of the Jesuits, and you may assure your self they were repaid
in their own coin. Howsoever Jesuits talk of their perfections, holiness
and meditations, and exercises, yet their plat-forme is heathenish,
tyrannical, satanicall, and able to set Aretine, Lucian, Machiavel, yea and
Don Lucifer in sort to school. It seems impossible for Antichrist to invent
a more sleightie, plausible, and colorable devise, nor with greater art and
more cunning tricks bring it about to make him be credited, then the Jesuits
have invented and put in practice. Jesuits teach that the Catholic Church
must now hang upon the Monarchy of K. Philip and his heirs. A Jesuit
maintained that a man that is no Christian may be Pope. There is not a Jesuit
nor a Jesuits fautor any where to be found but has a foul taste of Atheism.
Jesuits impudence to deny all truths against them as lies, and object any
slanderous lie as a truth. The Pope said of them, that on the one side they
pretended piety and zeal, and on the other showed the very spirit of the
Devil in pride, contumacy, and contradiction, etc. They have three maxims,
times are changed and we are changed in them, all for the time and nothing for
the truth, divide and rule. Of Father Parsons also thus in particular, A
bastard unhonestly begot, basely borne, a Wolsey in ambition, a Midas in
Mundicity, a traitor in action. The villainy of this bastardly Renegate Parsons:
cursed be the hour wherein he was borne, the son of sin, of iniquity, of
sacrilege, of the people of the Devil. The great Emperor illegitimate,
irregular, abstract, quintessence of all coins, coggeries and forgeries,
Parsons the bastard of Stockersey. O monster of mankind, fitter for Hell then
middle earth. Thou give occasion to diverse to think thou art not a mere man
but some Fairy-brat, begotten by an Incubus or Aerish spirit, upon the body of
a base woman. I might be infinite in this kind: but this is enough to let you
see, that all the distemper lies not on our side, but that your very
ringleaders can outrage one another, and far exceed us in bitterness and
tartness. And least you should think that all your quarrels are rather about
by matters then in points of Doctrine: know that herein also you are miserably
distracted and divided. Your ancient Schoolmen, Thomas, Scotus, Durandus,
Occam, and the rest, what almost does any one of them say, but is straight
gainsayed by another? Is it not ordinary also with your new writers,
Bellarmine, Suares, Gregory of Valentia, Mother. def. of oath. of Alleg.
Stapleton, and others, one to control and confute the others opinions?
Bozius, says Warmington, blames many excellent Divines, and namely
Bellarmine, calling them new Divines, and teachers of false Doctrine. The
Vulgar translation of the Bible I suppose is made Authentical by your Trent
Fathers, yet, says the Jesuit Mariana, Lib. pro edit. vulgat.
there has been of Late especially in Spain, such disputation moved about it
among Divines, and pursued with such heat and eagerness, and implacable hatred
on each side, that from reproaches and contumelies wherewith they disgraced one
the other, they came at length unto the tribunalls: and that side which was
most confident, vexed their adversaries most greevously, accusing them in point
of religion, as wicked, proud, arrogant, such as boldly elevate the authority
of the books of God, and the credit of that interpretation, which the Church
every where uses, and is termed Vulgar, preferring and bringing in new
interpretations contrary to the Laws both of God and man, and the decrees of
the Tridentine Council not long since published. And now at this instant, what
deadly wars are there, and how many battles have there been fought between
the Jesuits and Dominicans about no meaner matters then Gods free Grace, and
man's free will? To be brief, there is scarce any thing wherein you dissent
from us, that you agree in amongst your selves, as our Divines have at large
proved. Hugo de sancto victore, Richardus de sancto Victore, Petrus
Cluniacensis, Liranus, Dionisius Carth^sianus, Hugo Cardinalis, Thomas Aquinas,
Waldensis, Richardus Armachanus, Picus Mirandula, Caietan, and others, reject
all those books as Apocryphal which we do. Scotus, Gerson, Occam,
Cameracensis and Waldensis, Contro. 3. q. 3.
affirm the Scriptures to be sufficient in all matters of Faith. Stapleton
confesses that the infallibility of the Popes judgment is yet no matter of
Faith but of opinion only, because so many famous and renowned Divines have
held the contrary, as Gerson, Almaine, Occam, almost all the Parisians, with
^undry others. The same Divines together with Adrian the sixth, Durandus,
Alfonsus a Castro, and many besides hold that a Council is above the Pope.
That a man (...) not justified by any inherent quality, but only by faith in
the merits of Christ. Gerson, Contarenus, Albertus Pighius, the Canons of
Cullen, the authors of the book offered by Caesar to the Protestant Collocutors
at the assembly of Ratisbon, Stapulensis, Peraldus, Ferus, and others do
justify. That we may be assured we are in the state of Grace, Alexander of
Hales, John Bacon, Ambrose Catharin, Andreas Vega, with others do clearly
testify. That all sins are in their own nature Mortal, Gerson, Almaine, and
Fisher B. of Rochester, even by the testimony of Bellarmine do confess. De
amiss. gr. and stat. pec. l. 1. c, 4.
That there is any merit of Condignity, Scotus, Cameracensis, Arminiensis and
Waldensis utterly deny. That Matrimony is no Sacrament Durandus affirms.
Alexander of Hales says there are no more but four Sacraments. That one body
should be locally in more places then one at once implies contradiction, says
Thomas of Aquin. and with him agrees Aegidius, Godfrey de Font, Alanus, and
Henricus. The conversion of bread and wine into Christ's body and blood, all of
us says Caietan do teach in words, but in deed many deny it, thinking nothing
less. Finally Peter Lombard, Thomas, and the other Schoolmen, hold not a
real and proper Sacrifice in the Mass, De missa l. 1. c. 15.
as now you do, as your own Bellarmine is forced to acknowledge. It were easy
for me to instance in diverse points besides: but this may suffice for the
present to stop your mouth, and to teach you this lesson, that you be not so
busy to vpbraid others with their warts or freckles, your selves meanewhile
being so full of ulcers and botches. For it is foul indiscretion to object
that to another, whereof our selves are more deeply guilty: as here you have
done to us, taxing us for our petty quarrels, while your selves like Amalekits
are nothing but stabbing and killing one the other.


N. N. Your third reason. D. Field says the Church of Rome has continued a
true Church even till our time: held a saving profession of truth: by it
converted nations: and diverse of that Church, even learned are saved. D. Covel,
they of Dome were and are the Church: and they that live and die in it may be
saved. Willet, Kings and Queens of the Roman faith are Saints in Heaven. Yea,
says your author, Many Kings and Queens of Great Britain have forsaken
their Crowns and Kingdoms to become Monks and Nuns.


I. D. Append. p. 3.
That which you object out of D. Field, D. Field him self has long since at
large answered. I will contract it as briefly as I can. The Sum is, the Roman
Church is not now the same it was before Luther. His reasons. First, the then
Church was the whole number of Christians subject to the Papal tyranny, of whom
many desired to be free of the yoke, and as soon as Luther began to oppose
shook it off: but the now Church is the multitude of those that adore the
plenitude of Papal power, or are content to be under the yoke still. Secondly,
the Roman Church then consisted of men not having means of information, and so
not erring pertinaciously: but the now Church consists of those who
obstinately resist the truth, or at least consent in outward communion with
them. So that they might be saved in their simplicity, and these perish in
their contradiction. Thirdly, the Roman Church then had in it the same abuses
and superstitions it has now, and those that erred the same errors: but it
had also those that disliked them, and thought right in those points wherein
the rest erred. These were true living members of the Church: those a faction
in the Church. In regard of those it was truly a Church, that is, a multitude
of men professing Christ and baptized: in regard of these a true Church, that
is, a multitude of men holding a saving profession of Christ. Lastly, the
errors then taught in the Church, were not the Doctrines of the Church: but
now they are the Doctrines of that Church. That they were not then the
Doctrines of the Church appears thus. The Doctrines then taught were either
those which all consented unto, such as are the Articles of the Creed, or those
errors which many then taught, or the contrary truths opposed to those errors.
The first were absolutely the Churches Doctrine. So were the third though all
received them not, because they were theirs, who were so in the Church that
they were the Church. But the second were not, because they were taught by the
faction in the Church, and not consented unto by them that were the Church.
Thus far the Doctor: who at length concludes, that whatsoever it has been,
the present Romish Church is not that true Church of God, whose communion we
must embrace, whose directions we must follow, and in whose judgment we must
rest.

Yea but D. Covell in the name of all the rest affirms that it is still a
true Church, and Salvation may be had in it. In the name of all the rest? Why,
who gave him that commission? and how comes he to be the mouth of us all, more
then any other of his brethren? Certainly your Author much wrongs the Church of
England, and abuses his reader, to make the private sayings of this man or that
man to be the common voice of all. If he have spoken more largely then can be
justified, he must answer for it himself, no reason the whole Church should
be charged with it. You will not endure it amongst your selves: and why should
you then obtrude it upon us? To the words themselves I answer with D. Field.
Ibid.
Some will say, De bapt. con. Don l. 1. c. 8. and 10.
is the Roman Church at this day no part of the Church of God? Surely, as
Augustine notes, that the Societies of Heretics, in that they retain the
profession of many parts of heavenly truth, and the ministration of the
Sacrament of Baptism, are so far forth still conjoined with the Catholic
Church of God, and the Catholic Church in and by them brings forth children
unto God: so the present Roman Church is still in some sort a part of the
Visible Church of God, but no otherwise then other Societies of Heretics are,
in that it retains the profession of some parts of Heavenly truth, and
ministers the true Sacrament of Baptism, to the salvation of the souls of
many thousand infants, that dye after they are baptized, before she have
poisoned them with her errors. Thus he. Whereunto I add that of St Hilary,
Contra. Auxent.
God in the Churches of the Arrians called many by the word and Sacraments to
the knowledge of the truth, whose ears were more pure then were the mouths of
their teachers. The issue of all is this. You are a Church: but neither the
Catholic Church, nor a sound member thereof. What then? An Heretica^ and
impure Church. And if Salvation may be had therein: it is only by those truths
you have common with us, and not the Papacy. wherein notwithstanding there can
be no more security had thereof, then of life in a pesthouse* of which though
there may be a possibility, yet the danger is such, that a thousand to one if a
man escape the infection. And what folly is it to leave that Church wherein
there is security, and to clea^e unto that wherein there is no hope but only of
a poor possibility.

Willet remains, for whom what better advocate then himself? Antilog.
That many Kings and Queens of this land are Saints in Heaven is not by any
protestant denied. For they might be carried away with some errors of the
time, then not revealed, yet holding the foundation, through Gods mercy they
might be saved. It is a diverse case when a man sins of infirmity or
simplicity, and when he offends willingly and of obstinacy. To stumble in
the dark craves pity: to grope at noone-daies is great folly. I say
therefore in this case as our Savior to the Pharisees, Ioh. 9.41.
If ye were blind ye should not have sin, but now ye say we see, therefore
your sin remains. Act. 17.30.
And as St Paul, the time of ignorance God regarded not. God therefore might
show mercy to them that erred of Simplicity, which is no warrant for them that
should now be seduced willingly. And such are you Recusants, to whom we can
promise nothing but fearful things, though of our forefathers we hope all
good. That which your Author farther adds of himself, let the same Willet
answer. Though diverse says he, of those ancient Kings became Monks, yet
neither was the Monastical life so far out of square as now it is, they made
it not a cloak of idleness and filthy living, a nursery of idolatry and gross
supertitions: but they desired that life as fittest for contemplation, and free
from the encumbrances of the world. Neither does this one opinion of the
excellency of Monastical life show them to be resolute Papists: for it
follows not because they were Monks, that consequently they held
Transubstantiation, worship of images, and the more gross points of the Romish
Catechism. Will you have any more? In few words thus. Anciently Monks, some of
them were laymen, some were married, they bound themselves with no vows, they
made no distinction of meats, they labored with their hands, and lived not in
Cities but remote places. By all which you may see Polydor Virgill had reason
to say, Hist. Ang. l. 6.
It is incredible how much nowadaies they are degenerated.


N. N. Your fourth and last reason, the quarrels and bitter speeches of
Luther, Melancthon, Zuniglius, Beza, Carolus Molniaeus, Amsdorfius, Hosiander,
Protestants of Zurich, of England, etc.


I. D. This reason differs not in substance, but only in quotations from the
second. Which quotations whether they be true or false, neither will I spend
time to search, neither is it any whit material. And therefore neither will I
vouchsafe it any farther answer, then that which already I have given to the
second. The best Churches have seldom been without their quarrels, and
usually are menaged with two much passion. The malice of Satan is the cause of
the one, and humane infirmity of the other. Which infirmity seeing we cannot
altogether put off while we live here in the flesh, Christian charity would
rather pity it then vpbraid it. Nevertheless that which is amiss may not be
defended: neither mean I to go about it. Only I persuade my self that if we
understood one the other better, our quarrels would never be so vehement. For
what was it that set Luther and Zuinglius so far asunder, but misprision? And
what caused such hard censures to pass upon Hosiander, but his own
inconvenient speeches, and other men's mistakings? These are the two principal
quarrels here mentioned by you: give me leave therefore to show so much in
them, but briefly.

The quarrel between Luther and Zuinglius was about Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, which as you hold to be by way of Transubstantiation, so did Luther
by way of Consubstantiation. Which how it could be unless the body of Christ
were every where, Zuinglius and others could not conceive, and being pressed
therewith, he and his followers not being able to avoid it, maintained that
also. But how? by reason of the Hypostaticall union and conjunction thereof
with the word. For the Word being every where, and the Humane Nature being no
where feuered from it, how can it be, say they, but every where? And hence the
distraction, and thereupon all those passionate speeches. Misc. jud. de dissid.
caen. dom.
Now says Zanchy, if they mean that the body of Christ is present according
to his personal being, they say true, and contradict not those who speak of
his Natural being or being of Essence. Lib. 3. c. 35. of chapter
D. Field thus expresses it. The humane Nature of Christ has two kinds of
being, the one natural, the other personal: the first limited and finite, the
second infinite and inco^prehensible. For seeing the nature of man is a created
nature and essence, it cannot be but finite: and seeing it has no Personal
subsistence of it own, but that of the Son of God communicated to it, which
is infinite and without limitation, it cannot be denied to have an infinite
Subsistence, and to subsist in an incomprehensible and illimited sort, and
consequently every where. Thus then the body of Christ according to his
Natural being is contained in one place: but according to his Personal being,
may rightly be said to be every where. So Field whereby you may easily
perceive, that the wars betwixt hony-bees are not such, but the casting up of
a little dust will soon stint them. For if this distinction had well been
conceived: this Vbiquitary strife had quickly been ended. If any
notwithstanding have been so gross as to maintain an Vbiquity according to
Essence or Natural being (which I can hardly believe) I must profess I know
no excuse for them.

The second quarrel is against Hosiander, who seems to define Justification
by a transfusion of the Essential righteousness of Christ into us, and a
confusion, as it were, and mixture of it together with us. And against this
diverse have written very vehemently, as justly they might if this were his
Tenet. Smidelin. Brentius. Others.
But there are who defend him, affirming that it was but out of a mistake. For
acknowledging in Christ a threefold Righteousness, Active, passive, and
Essential of the Word (for the Righteousness of God is not Accidental, but
his very Essence) he holds that we are justified, not only by the imputation
of the Active and Tassiue Righteousness of Christ unto us, but also by the
admission of us unto the participation of the Divine nature, as St Peter
speaks, that is of his Essential Righteousness: to the end that receiving
of his fullness, we might be replenished with all divine qualities and graces.
The reason why he so much urged this doctrine was, because he had observed that
many out of a persuasion they had to be justified and saved by the merits and
obedience of Christ imputed to them, cared not to have any righteousness in
themselves, and utterly neglected the practice of holy duties. Wherefore he
taught that the Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ imputed, availed
not either to the remission of sins, or the purchasing of Gods favor,
unless they were also made partakers of the divine nature, for the avoiding of
sin, and the leading of a holy and virtuous life. This as it seems was all
Hosiander held. If he held farther then this, and his adversaries understood
him aright, I am no Patron for him.

The last quarrel is touching our English translations of the Bible. Wherein
that diverse things were amiss, it was never denied of us. For being an humane
act, and humanity being subject unto error, it could not be avoided but that
some faults what through ignorance, what through negligence, what through other
infirmities, might pass vnheeded and vnobserved. If the former translations
had been faultlesse: the Church of England would never have thought of setting
forth a new, as now it has done. Which it did not, as if those aberrations
were so dangerous and prejudicial unto the substance of Faith: but out of a
holy desire that our English streams, as near as may be, might run with the
same purity that is found in the Hebrew and Greek fountains. So that her
meaning was not, Praef. ad lect.
as our late learned Translators say, of a bad Translation to make a good (for
this had been in a manner to acknowledge that our people hitherto had been
fed rather upon husks and akornes, then the flower of wheat) but to make a good
one better, or out of many good ones to make one principal good one, not
justly to be excepted against. But tell me in good sooth, you that so busily
object unto us our quarrels in this point, is your Vulgar translation, even
that which your Trent Council has made authentical, and is every where read
in your Churches, free from error? Or are there no bickerings and contentions
among you concerning it? If it be faultlesse, what needed other translations,
as that of Pagnine, Vatablus, and Arias Montanus? How comes it to pass that
Valla, Stapulensis, Erasmus, Vives, Budaeus, others, find so great fault with
it, wishing it were amended, or another made in room of it? Nay that Isidorus
Clarius, a Spanish Monk should find to the number of eight thousand faults,
and every one as he professes changing the meaning of the text? Pope Sixtus
the fifth did not think all was well, when he went about to correct the faults
thereof with his own hand. And who would have thought but all had been well,
when he set it forth so corrected, charging that none should afterward be
published with any change, addition, or detraction of the least particle? And
yet some two or three years after this Pope Clement the eight finding all not
perfectly amended, alters, adds, detracts, yea and contradicts his
predecessors edition. For example, where Sixtus says, Ios. 11.19.
there was not a city which did not yield, Clement says, 1 Esd. 3.
which did yield. Again, where Sixtus has, They built upward to the
horse-gate, Clement has, from the horse-gate. Sap. 2.11.
And where Sixtus reads justice, Clement reads Injustice. This for a taste:
whereof whosoever will have his fill, let him see Doctor James, who has
written at large of this argument. Whereunto I might add the barbarismes and
solecismes of that translation, together with those known and manifest faults,
which yet they suffer to pass in every print: Luc. 15.8.
as, Evertit for Everrit, she overturned ^he house, Ib. 10.14.
for; she swept the house: consum masset, had perfected, for consumpsisset had
wasted or consumed: Prove. 16 11.
Saeculi of this world, for Sacculi of the bag: praescientiam foreknowledge,
2 Pet. 1.1^.
for praesentiam presence, and six hundred like or worse errors. But I
forbear for brevities sake: only I cannot but acquaint you with the reasons
hereof, for they are feriall and pleasant. Faults says the Jesuit Mariana, De
vulgat. ed. c. 21.
are still left in the vulgar edition, first because there is no danger in them
to faith and good manners: Secondly least the novelty of an exact amendment
should offend the ears of them that were enured unto them: Lastly, that they
might reverence the old edition, and tread in the steps of their Ancestors, who
out of a holy kind of piety tolerated those errors* Ib. c. 1.
Hear also what the same Mariana says, touching your bickerings about this
matter. Some Catholics, and those also in Spain, tax the vulgar edition as
defiled with many foul faults, appealing every foot unto the fountains,
whence those rivers have issued unto us, contending that as often as they
differ from them, they are to be corrected by comparing them with the Greek
and Hebrew books: men puffed up with the skill of languages, making a mock of
Ecclesiastical simplicity, whose boldness and temerity in pronouncing
deserves to be curbed. On the contrary side, others more in number, through
the hatred of their adversaries, think it great sin once to touch the vulgar
edition, and count them in the number of impious ones, who adventure to correct
the least word, or to expound any place otherwise then the vulgar
interpretation will bear: whom certainly we are not to follow, men of little
spirit filled with darkness, conceiving too narrowly of the Majesty of our
religion, who while they defend the block-houses as it were of opinions, as
articles of faith, seem to me to betray the chiefest tower it self, and most
shamfully to viola^e brotherly charity. Therefore avoiding these extremes and
by-waies which lead unto a downe-fall, we have resolved to hold the middle way,
etc. Thus you see that there are as violent contentions among your selves about
translation, as there is amongst us: and that we may justly say unto you,
Physician heal thy self, before you have to do with the diseases of others.


N. N. Good Mr Down calling to mind that you told me, craving some certain
rule to know the true sense of Scripture, that the true sense of Scripture is
easy to be understood as much as appertains to Salvation. I demand then if
the doctrine of Baptism be necessary? If so, then is some part hard: else would
not Calvin have cavilled at those words, Unless a man be borne again of
Water, etc. Is not the doctrine of the blessed Sacrament necessary? Yet how
many expositions of, this is my Body? So is that of Justification: yet twenty
expositions of Scripture about the formal cause thereof. So also is the
doctrine of the Trinity, and of Christ's Divinity and humanity: yet Ebionits,
Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Valenti^ians, Monothelites, and Apollinarists,
holding heresies against them, prove them all to their thinking out of
Scripture. Ergo, Scripture is not so easy as I make it. For where all things
are plain, there men commonly agree.


I. D. The truth is, being demanded the rule of Faith, I named the Scripture:
and being farther demanded a rule whereby to know the sense of Scripture, I
answered two things. First that all things necessary to salvation are so
expressly and plainly set down, that there needs no farther rule: secondly,
that those places which are more obscure are to be expounded by those that are
more plain; and that sense which disagreeth is to be rejected, that which
agrees may safely be admitted. Safely I say: for although happily it may not be
the right, yet dangerous it cannot be, as long as it accords with the Analogy
of Faith. This I declared somewhat at large in the writing sent to Mr Bailey:
which I perceive has come to your hands also, yet satisfies not. Otherwise you
would not thus dispute against it. But know you against whom you dispute?
Certainly, not against me only, but the ancient Fathers, who affirm the same
that I do. For touching the Perspicuity of Scripture in things necessary, thus
St Augustine, De doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 9.
In those things which are openly laid down in Scripture, are to be found all
things which contain Faith and manners of living, to wit, Hope and Charity.
And St Chrysostom, In 2 These. hom. 3.
All things necessary are open and manifest, so that there needed not homilies
or Sermons, were it not through our own negligence. Contr. Iul. l 7.
And Cyril of Alexandria, To the end they might be known to all both small and
great, he has delivered them unto us in such familiar speech, that they exceed
no man's capacity. So the rest. And this is so true that your Gregory of
Valentia confesses it. Anal. Fid. p. ^00.
Such verities, says he, concerning our faith as are absolutely and
necessarily to be known and believed of all men, are plainly taught in the
Scriptures themselves. Bibl. l. 6. ann. 151.
So Sixtus Senensis also, Ascet. q. 267.
and others of your side. As touching the interpretation of darker places by
the plain, thus Saint Basil, those things which seem to be ambiguous and
obscurely spoken in some places of holy writ, are enlightened by those which in
other places are open and perspicuous. De doct. Ch^. l. 2. c. 6.
And St Augustine, There is nothing almost among these obscurities, but in
other places one may find it most plainly delivered. And St Chrysostom, In 2
Cor. hom. 9.
The Scripture every where when it speaks any thing obscurely, interprets
it self again in another place. And this is the common voice of all the rest.
So that the answer I gave you being no other then that which I had learned of
the Fathers: you cannot reject it, but you must reject the Fathers with all.
But let us hear your reason.

The Doctrine, say you, of Baptism, of the Eucharist, of Justification, of
Christ's two natures are necessary: yet some texts upon which they are grounded
be litigious. Grant it be so: yet some again are clear and evident. That
Christians are to be baptized, what more plain then that Go teach all nations
Baptizing them? That the Eucharist is to be administered and received, is clear
by the institution of our Savior, and the practice of his Apostles. That we
are justified by Faith without the works of the law, we have the evident
testimony of Saint Paul. That Christ is God, the very first words of Saint
John's Gospel testify, Ioh. 1.1.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was
God. And lastly that he is Man also, 1 Timothy 2.5.
what more express then those words of Saint Paul, There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus? If other places be not so
plain, they are to be expounded by these or the like. But it may be your
Doctrine of Baptism is the absolute necessity thereof unto salvation. If so,
then certainly that place of S. John is not clear enough for it. For it is
not necessary it should be understood of Christian Baptism, which was not yet
instituted: or it must be meant of those that are Adulti, such as Nicodemus was
to whom our Savior spoke. In like manner if your doctrine of the Eucharist be
Transubstantiation, neither is that other place plain enough for it. For it is
manifest both by the circumstances of the Text, and the testimony of the
Fathers that the Relative This has reference to Bread. Now Bread in proper
speech cannot be Body, as your own men confess. Then is it so tropically:
and consequently no Transubstantiation. The same do I say of the errors about
Justification, which should particularly have been showed, if you had quoted
any particular place. Esa. 6.9.
As for those Heretics, they were such as the Prophet speaks of, who in
seeing saw, and yet perceived not, having closed their eyes that they might not
see. And therefore it is a foul fault in you to excuse their obstinacy, by
charging the Scriptures with obscurity. That Rule is sufficient which is able
to convince the Conscience, and satisfy all those who love the truth, and are
ready to acknowledge it when it is made known: though it stop not the mouths of
refractary and stubborn Heretics. This perhaps your living judge by virtue of
fire and faggot may be able to effect: but the other if evidence of Scripture
cannot, nor he, nor his Church will ever be able to perform. More of this see
in the Treatise sent to Mr Baylie.


N. N. If as I write to M. Baylie, you may not rely too much on the authority
of the Fathers, because of their differences in opinions: much less may you
upon the authority of our men being worse divided. For they differ not in
essential points, we do. They wrote not so bitterly one against another, as we
do. Lastly, they differed in matters as yet undefined by a general Council,
and so not dangerous: but we have no Counsels, nor any other means to decide
our causes. So that you cannot know which of us gives the true sense of
Scripture.


I. D. That the Fathers are no way a sufficient ground of Faith, I have so
strongly proved unto M. Baylie, that me thinks none of you is in have to
answer it. Among the rest of my reasons, this I confess was one, that they
varied so much in opinion one from another: yea and are now made to vary from
themselves through your intolerable abusing of them. This I declared at large:
whereunto for farther evidence, I now add an example or two. S. Ambrose, Lib.
4. c. 4*
or whosoever is author of the books de Sacramentis, was wont to say thus, If
there be so great force in the speech of our Lord Jesus, that the things which
were not began to be: how much more operative is it, that things still be what
they were, and yet be changed into another things? But now, because that
clause, that things still be what they were, make sore against
Transubstantiation, in the Roman Edition, and that of Paris, an. 1603. that
clause is clean left out, and S. Ambrose must no longer say so. S. Chrysostom,
or the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, Hom. 11.
was wont to have these words, If it be so dangerous to transfer unto private
uses those holy vessels, in which the true body of Christ is not, but the
mystery of his body is contained: how much more, etc. But what is become of
them now? In the edition printed at Antwerp by Ioannes Steelsius, anno 1537. at
Paris by Ioannes Roigny, 1543. and by Audoenus Parvus 1557. not a syllable of
those words, in which the true body of Christ is not, but the mystery of his
body is contained, appears. Why? Because they make so strongly against your
Real Presence. So likewise where he used in the elder impressions to say the
sacrifice of bread and wine: Hom. 19.
now in these latter editions he is forced to change his language and to say
the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ. More examples I might easily
produce: but these are sufficient to show that Vincentius Lirinensis had good
reason when he gave this Caveat, But neither always nor all kind of heresies
are to be impugned after this manner, De Haer* c. 39.
but such only as are new, and late, when they first arise, while by
straightness of time it self they be hindered from falsifying the rules of the
ancient Faith, and before that their poison spreading farther they attempt to
corrupt the writings of the Ancient. But far spread and inveterate heresies
are not to be set on this way, forasmuch as by long continuance of time a long
occasion has layne open unto them to steal away the truth. But return we
again to the matter from which we have a little digrest.

The Fathers, say you, differed not in points essential. True. Neither do we,
as is above showed, yet by your leave their differences were not always in
petty matters, unless Rebaptization, Communicating of infants, the Popes
universal jurisdiction, and the like, be of small consequence with you. Supra.
Their differences were not so bitter as ours. No were? When they proceeded not
only to curse one another, but to fire, bloodshed, and banishment also? And
when casting off the rule of piety, Eusebius. hist. l. 8. c. 1.
they did nothing but increase strife, Asser. prooe. de ^ud. dei.
threats, envy, and qua^rels, every man with all tyranny pursuing his ambition:
whereby as S. Basil says, the Church of God was unmercifully drawn in sunder,
and his flock troubled without all care or pity. Lastly say you, they
differed in matters undecided by a general Council. What then? No danger. No
danger? Then belike a man may safely believe all he lists before a Council
determine it. The very high way to Atheism. For so the very Articles of the
Creed during the first three hundred years after Christ, should be but
disputable points, and not necessary. For until Constantine the great there
were no general Councels. By the same reason your Adoration of Images was no
matter of Faith till the second Council of Nice about 800 years after Christ,
nor Transubstantiation till the Council of Lateran some 1200 years, nor
Merit, nor Justification by works, nor the most of your Tenants till the Trent
Council above fourteen hundred years after Christ. If they were, I require
you to show what general Council had before determined them. If you cannot,
then are you but novellers, and hold not the ancient Faith. The truth is,
Counsels cannot make that an Article which was not: but whether they decree or
not decree, whatsoever God affirms in his word, as soon as it comes to our
knowledge, is absolutely and upon pain of damnation to be believed. And it is
horrible sacrilege and impiety to think, that it is not necessary to believe
God, unless a Council of the Pope say Amen unto it. Yea but, say you, we nor
have, nor can have general Councels. No more can you, nor any Church in
Christendom, without the general consent of Christian Princes. Synods of our
own Churches we may have, and have had by the indulgence of our Princes. More
then this you cannot have. For you are but a handful of the Christian world:
and the greatest part thereof neither is nor will be subject unto you. When
you can get the Greek Church and that in Prester John's country, with the
Armenians, and others, to submit themselves unto the Popes omnipotent and
vbiquita^y power, then may you peradventure have hope to call a general
Council. But that I think will be at the Greek Kalends, that is in plain
English at Nevermasse.

Howsoever, say you, if you may not rely on the Fathers because of their
differences, neither may you on us because of ours. If this be a sound reason,
as I confess it is, neither may you rely on the Church of Rome, because of
theirs. But you mistake the matter much if you think we require men to rely
on our bare authority. That privilege belongs unto Christ only, and under him
to those holy Penmen of the Bible that wrote by inspiration. To us
appertains to prove what we say by their authority: and when we have so
done to require assent and not before. If Scripture, and sound deduction from
it according to the art of reasoning, together with the proof of the sense
thereof by the circumstances of the place, and the analogy of Faith, will not
move you: we can but pity your wilfulness, and leave you unto God till he
turn your heart and have mercy upon you. For certainly miserable is the case
of that man, who knowing the Scriptures to be Gods word, and having the use of
right reason, shall refuse trial both by the one and the other preferring
thereunto the authority of man which may err it self, and lead others into
error.


N. N. Your conclusion is, you mean not to forsake the religion taught in that
Church which is descended from Christ and his Apostles by succession, but with
Litinensis to prefer it before all things: That you will follow universality,
Antiquity and consent in your belief, and that faith which has been held
from time to time in all places, in all seasons, by all or the most Doctors of
Christianity: That Church which as S. Augustine says, had her beginning by the
entering of nations; got authority by miracles, was increased by charity, and
established by continuance: and has had succession from S. Peter's chair to
our time: That church which is known by the name of Catholic both to friends
and foes, even Heretics tearming her so, calling themselves for distinctions
sake, Reformers, Illuminates, Unspotted brethren. In this you will remain
during life, and then if your life hinder not (as you hope it will not) you
shall enjoy everlasting life.


I. D. What you profess you will not do, that you have already done. Very
weak and wavering have you showed your self in forsaking that religion, which
is descended unto us by succession from Christ and his Apostles, and has
always been taught and maintained in the Catholic Church: to embrace a new
vpstart superstition, utterly unknown to the Primitive times, and grown out
of the earth, but some two or three nights ago. What Motives you then had for
your revolt, I know not: They that knew you well, speak of some other thing
rather then Conscience. The best construction I can set upon it is this, you
had been but badly informed in the truth. And now least you should incur the
imputation of levitie and inconstancy if you returned to us again, I fear
you have obstinately resolved to close your eyes, and not to see the truth how
brightly soever it shine upon. So that the saying which I think I have some
where read in Tertullian, is verified upon you, Miserable is the case of that
man, who was persuaded before he was instructed: and afterward refuses to be
instructed, because he is persuaded.

The sayings of Vincentius Lirinensis and S. Augustine we well allow of: but the
application of them to your self has more face then forehead in it. For as of
old Dioscorus the Heretic cried out in the Council of Chalcedon, I am cast
out with the Fathers, I defend the doctrine of the Fathers, I pass not beyond
them in any point, and I have their testimonies not barely but in their very
books: even so you, and wish no more modesty nor truth then he, I follow
universality, antiquity, and consent in my Belief, I stand to the Faith that
has been held in all places, in all seasons, by all or the most Bishops,
Priests, Doctors in Christianity. I follow a Church begun by entrance of
nations, authorized by miracles, increased by charity, established by
continuance, in which is succession from Saint Peter's Chair, and known of all
by the name Catholic. But soft good sir, how is all this proved? For you
cannot be ignorant that we deny al these things, affirming the clean contrary,
that the Romish Synagogue is not the Church S. August. speaks of, but
altogether degenerated from it: and that the points in difference betwixt us
were neither Universal, nor Ancient, but sprung up of late, and ever as they
rose up mightily opposed by the most famous Clerks of their times. If you would
persuade us otherwise, you may not think to prevail with your strong
imaginations, but you must convince us with sound demonstrations, wherein God
wot, the best of you all are as weak as water. For as for your self I cannot
but wonder, that knowing no more then you have picked out of the writings of
two or three sneaking Friars, you yet talk so co^fidently and presumptuously
of Universality, Antiquity, and consent, in all places and seasons, of all
Bishops, Priests, and Doctors: as if either your self had lived all the while
to see it with your eyes, or had read all the story of the Church, and
whatsoever monuments they have left behind them. If you think you may be so
bold and confident upon your Author, tell us I pray you why we may not be as
bold and confident on our? The rather seeing your writers are open maintainers
of Equivocation and I know not what pious frauds and lies, which our men even
from their hearts detest and abhor. But why should either we or you trust so
much unto deceitful man? The safest course would be with the wise ^ereans to
search the Scriptures whether these things be so or not. He that shall do this
with an honest heart and out of the love of truth, cannot but find
satisfaction, unless he fail that has promised, seek and ye shall find.
Verily one testimony from the mouth of God, and his sacred word, will be of
more force to settle the Conscience, then ten thousand of those Topicall
arguments and probabilities, wherewith your Author gulleth and beguileth you.

But where you say that the Roman Church is by all both friends and enemies
known and called by the name Catholic, you show your self to be a pleasant
and merry man. It may be some of us at some times may have called some
Recusants Catholics. What then? Do we therefore indeed count you so? Nothing
less: for we call you not so in earnest, as if you were so: but only in jest
and by way of Irony, because you affect to be called so. Otherwise then thus,
we never either count or call you or your Church Catholic Why Should we,
seeing you your selves, howsoever in word you retain it, yet in effect seem
to disclaim it, calling your selves Roman Catholics. For Catholic is
Universal, Roman Particular: that is of the whole world, this of one City. So
that Roman Catholic is as much as to say Particular Universal, that is, Not
catholic Catholic. Whence it follows evidently that while you restrain
your Faith to Roman, you utterly cut it off, and your self withal, from being
Catholic. Having therefore lost the kernel, why are you so greedy of the
shell? Of the name I mean, being destitute of the thing? Content your self
with Roman, leave Catholic unto us. For we are indeed the true Catholics,
holding all that Faith, and only that Faith which the Apostles preached, and
was generally believed throughout the World. An ancient friend of mine, and a
worthy Scholar, being demanded in a Stationers shop in Venice, while there he
followed the Lord Ambassador, what was the difference between us here in
England and the Catholics, answered, None at all, for we count our selves
good Catholics. But the party being loath to be put of so, pressed him again
to know the difference betwixt us here and them there: and was answered, This,
that we believe the Catholic Faith contained in the Creed, but believed not
the thirteenth Article which the Pope had added to it. But it being replied
that he knew none such, the Extravagant of Pope Boniface was brought, where
he defines it to be altogether of necessity to salvation to every humane
Creature, to be under the Bishop of Rome. The belief of this thirteenth
Article thus patched unto the rest by your thirteenth Apostle, may perhaps make
you Bonifacian or Roman: but the belief of the other twelve makes us I am sure
true and perfect Catholics. Whether you allow us the name or not, it matters
nothing: as neither whatsoever nicknames you impose upon us. For by the grace
of God we are what we are: and it is neither the one nor the other that can
make us other then we are. As neither can you by assuming the name of
Catholic, or any other Sectaries by calling themselves Illuminates, or
Unspotted Brethren, make your selves to be that which indeed you are not. For
as for Reformers, although such Corruptions were crept into the Church as
needed Reformation, and many worthy men that feared God, earnestly wished and
longed for it; yet because it could not be obtained at the hands of those that
then swayed in the Church, it is true some Heroical spirits of our side, not
without the singer of God attempted it, and by Gods blessing effected that
which the Saints of God rejoice to see, and none but Superstitious and
Idolatrous Papists grieve and repine at. Howbeit they never took unto
themselves the name of Reformers, but ascribed the whole work unto God, and
we bless his holy name for using them as instruments therein. In regard
whereof I see no reason, why we having rejected and pared off all those
errors wherewith you had corrupted the true religion, may not term our
selves Reformed Catholics: as well as you still retaining them, and resolving
to settle upon your dreggs, call your selves by the name of Roman Catholics.

But a Roman Catholic, you say, you mean to keep your self during life: and
it is likely you will do so indeed. First to avoid the imputation of
inconstancy if you should return to us again: secondly because I see how
obstinately you refuse to believe whatsoever we say, though never so strongly
proved. You add that so doing if otherwise your life hinder not, as you hope
it shall not, you shall enjoy everlasting life after this. Wherein I Will not
be your Judge. You are servant unto another: and for me you shall stand and
fall to your own Master. Only I would advize you not to be too confident. For
first, whatsoever your life be, as I have said, it is as hard for you to
attain everlasting life in a Church so fearfully infected with so many
pestilent and deadly heresies; as it is for a man to escape with his life in a
pesthouse. Secondly, adhering unto the Church of Rome, and conforming your
self unto the practice thereof: you must needs make your self guilty of
horrible idolatries many ways. Whereof unless you timely repent, it cannot be
but such a life must needs hinder your salvation. Lastly, although perhaps to
many simple people that live in Spain or Italy, where such means of knowledge
cannot so well be had, it may please God to be merciful and gracious, if they
hold the Foundation and be willing to know if they had the means: yet I fear
much of our English Recusants, who live in the bright sunshine of the Gospel,
and have the means daily offered unto them, least their obstinacy in rejecting
thereof, and refusing to see, work unto them in the end everlasting
destruction. Certainly if any of you be saved, it is not by those doctrines
wherein you differ from us: but those only which you hold in common with us.
Especially for that when you lie upon your deathbeds, and perceive that
shortly you must yield an account of all whatsoever you have done in the flesh:
you then think it good with all speed to turn Protestants, that is, to
renounce all your own works as insufficient to justify you before God, and to
put your whole affiance upon the mercies of God, through the merits and
obedience of Christ alone both for Justification and Salvation. For indeed this
is a sure, and a safe way even by the confession of Bellarmine himself. By
reason says he, De justify. l. 5. c. 7.
of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the danger of vaineglory:
it is the safest course to set our whole affiance on the mercy and goodness of
God alone. And the like safety do others of your side yield us in other things
also: as namely, in forbearing to make any image of God, in worshipping none
but the holy Trinity, in praying unto none save only God in Christ, in the
marriage of Ministers, and other such things; as it is easy to demonstrate, but
that it is now high time to come to a conclusion. Only I would have you
carefully to observe, that even they who persuade you to stick close unto the
Popish Faith, stick not themselves to acknowledge the Protestants Practice
both in life and death to be many ways the more safe. And thus much in Answer
unto this second Schedule.

It remains that I earnestly entreat you in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
as you tender the everlasting salvation of your soul, that you would please to
bethink your self a little better of your present estate, then heretofore you
seem to have done. You have suffered your self now a long time to be lead up
and down in the mist of I know not what generalities: a path which they that
love to deceive, use much to tread in. They tell you of Universality,
Antiquity, Succession, Consent, and the like: and you presently believe them.
But what security have you in so doing? for infallible they are not. If they
be matters of so great consequence, it were good you knew the^ yourselfe, that
you need not trust the uncertain reports of others. Know them your self you
cannot, unless you acquaint your self with all the records of former times,
and search into them with much diligence and attention: for otherwise you may
herein also soon be deceived. But this would prove too long and tedious a
course for you: and alas the well is deep and you have not wherewith to draw.
What then? Surely you have a shorter way if you would follow it. Deuteronomy. 30
11.12.13.14.
For as Moses says, The commandment is neither too high for you, nor far
off. You need neither to mount up into heaven, nor to pass beyond the seas for
it. It is very near unto you. For you have at hand the Scriptures of God: Ioh.
5.39.
search them, and therein shall you surely find eternal life. By them, and no
other did the ancient Fathers confute all the heresies of their times: unless
happily they had to deal with such Heretics as rejected the Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17.
And to this end were they written, that the man of* God might be made perfect
and wise unto salvation. Yea but they are obscure, dark, equivocall,
ambiguous, subject to diverse constructions, and each sect pretends to
confirm their errors by them. Strange, that they should be the testament of
our Father, and the instrument of contract between Christ and his Spouse: and
yet they should be drawn up so perplexedly and doubtfully, that by them
neither can the children certainly know what legacies are bequeathed to them,
nor the Spouse what conditions are agreed upon betwixt her and her husband. But
mark what farther follows hereof. For if the Scriptures be indeed such as
you say, then have not Papists any certain ground at all for their Faith. Yes,
will you say, the Church. But she speaks not by her self, but her heralds
and particular messengers: and I would feign know what assurance you can have
that they pass not beyond their commission, or deliver not some other errant
besides that they are charged withal. The Authority also and Unerring power of
this Church had need to be most soundly demonstrated. I doubt of it: how can
you warrant it? By Scripture? You have barred your self from all hope of
succor thence. For it is obscure, equivocall, ambiguous, every way uncertain.
By Natural Reason? The Articles of Faith are above Reason: and the Natural
Man is not capable of them. By the Spirit then? That is the thing you so much
jest at in others. And if by your doctrine you cannot assure your self that
you are in the present state of Grace: neither can you know whether you have
the spirit of God or no. What then may be your last refuge? The testimony of
the Church touching her self? Ridiculous: for no man's testimony may be
admitted in his own cause. And what a reasoning is this? You believe the
Articles of Faith? Why? Because the Church bids you do so. How follows
this? Because she cannot err. And how prove you that? Because she says she
cannot err. If this be not to expose the Christian Faith unto the laughter of
Atheists and profane men, I know not what it is. Will you, nill you, when you
have said all you can say, either you must have no certain ground at all for
your Faith, or you must rest upon the Scriptures as the final resolution
thereof. Return therefore, I beseech in the fear of God, return unto the
sure anchor-hold of your salvation. Abandon those frothie generalities of your
seducing authors, which at the best are but coniecturall: and labor to
stablish your Conscience upon the testimony of him that will not, that cannot
deceive you. Pray unto him fervently and proceed in a sincere love of the
truth: and you shall surely find, that if you be not defective to your self,
God will never fail you. For my part I have done what belongs to me. I have
planted, I have watered: it is God that must give the increase. And to his
mercy in Christ Jesus I commend you.


An advertisement to the Reader.
Unto the Section of Page 27. I there freely confessed I could not certainly
answer for want of Doctor Mortons book. Since that time I have met with it,
and thereby I perceive that though I answered only by con^ecture yet I
coniectured not amiss. Yet now farther be pleased to understand, first that
the Doctor cites not Bibliander, as my adversary untruly charge him: but
only answers a passage quoted by his adversary Breerly out of him. And he
answers in effect as I do: save that he brings in Bellarmine confessing
that which to my good man seems so strange, De Mis^. l. 2. c. 1.
namely that all Protestants acknowledge in the Eucharist a Sacrifice
Eucharisticall or of thanksgiving. Secondly, touching those Rabbis R. Cahana,
R. Judas, and R. Simeon, he belyeth the Doctor: it is Breerly that cites them
not he. Neither does he Positiuely say that their testimonies make directly
for Transubstantiation: But conditionally, if they were such. Now that they are
not such he proves. For consulting with D. Smith, D. Layfield, and M.
Bedwell, very learned Hebricians about this matter: they after their painful
and industrious search into the cited places, returned under their hands this
answer. R. Cahana in that book on the 49 of Genesis is not cited, nor has he
there any thing to that purpose. R. Judas in that book on the 25 of Exodus has
no such thing, nor in the whole Parasha Terumah. R. Simeon wrote no book
carrying the title of Revelatio Secretorum. And thus you see, while simple
Papists will believe nothing but what their guides tell them, what pretty tales
of Robin Hood they devise for them. O that God would be pleased to soften the
seared consciences of the one, and to open the blindfolded eyes of the other.

Farewell. JOHN DOWN.

FINIS.
A Testimony taken from M. Perkins on Heb. 11. v. 7. to be added to those
annexed to the first Sermon.
But how does God work this faith? By his word: For as God is the author and
worker of Faith, so God has appointed a means whereby he works it, and that
is his word; which word of God is the only ordinary outward means to work
faith. And that word of God is two ways to be considered: either as revealed
by God himself (as to Noah here) or else, being written by God; is either
preached by his Ministers, or read by a man's self in want of preaching: and
these are all one, and are all means ordained of God to work faith; and that
not only to begin it where it is wanting, but to augment it where it is
begun.

END

