THE Divine Lantern: OR, A SERMON PREACHED IN S. Paul's Church appointed for
the Cross the 17. of July M. DC. XXXVI.

By THOMAS DRANT of Shaston in Com. Dorset.

PSALM. 119. 105. Thy Word is a light unto my feet and a Lantern unto my
paths.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, and are to be sold by Henry Hammond
Bookseller in Salisbury. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr. CHRISTOPHER CLETHROW KNIGHT, President of Christ's
Hospital: THE WORSHIPFVLL M. JOHN HAVVES, Treasurer, and M. RICHARD CASVVELL
Subtreasurer, and the rest of the Right Worshipful and Worshipful Governors
of the said Hospital.
Right Worshipful and Worshipful:
NEver age did afford more variety of Sermons, more Elegancy: who will blame
choice where there is store and good, or fear to Surfeit at the sight of too
much, where the meat is wholesome and heavenly? Who, if not of a sour
sullenness, will grudge others (...), Heliodori Aethiop. lib. 3.
what delights, but gluts not, what at once does ravish and profit: where is
mixed utile dulci, it is a squeamish stomach turns at the plenty, and as rude
an care, startles at all descant and harmony: My heart bubbleth out a good
matter, (...) or if we Psalm. 45. 1.
read it a good word, the Original will be are us out; and indeed the
intermixtures of polite phrase, gives to the matter it self, if not weight,
yet ornament: divine truth must have a decent, though not gaudy dress: were it
so in this, or were it that. Chariclea's zone, of which Heliodorus tells us,
(...), Aethiop. lib. 3.
it might be spread before your eyes, and perhaps attract at once your view and
liking: but this were a task for Apelles himself, my pencill cannot reach it:
why so boldly than have I fixed your names here? I might allege the custom of
the Age

renet insanabile multos Scribendi cacoethes: not a Rheumaticke quill, but is
dropping into the press, though it drop tumors and froth only; not an idle
head, but is busy at the mart, and asks in his Athenian humor, what new
things? all Scribimus indocti, doctique, etc.
buy, most out of lenity, all write, most out of fancy, it is not my private
fault, I moove in the same Orb with others: I plead not this, nor any
worthiness in the piece it self, that it should look up to so high a
Patronage: the life it had to please, is buried by the disadvantage of a dead
letter: that which makes it Public, and now sends it to kiss your hands, is
to show the world, where I have settled my Estimation and Service, where I am to
pay the fealties and homage of my grateful mind: to whom are the first fruits
due, but to him, who bestows the whole crop? I would not smoother the publi
que fruits of charity in Any, the oil of refreshing which you have powered on
the heads of thousands (and quorum pars magna fui, not a few drops fell on
mine) I dare not silence it, and make GOD a looser: I cannot, the whole world
sees and does bless you for it, sees the incense of your Aims, how it ascends
in pillars of holy smoke into the nostrils of GOD: your names thus enbalm'd
shall never rot: thus much I tell others, whilst I make this public address
to you, pardon the rudeness of it, it is a testimony of your goodness, whereto
I have set my hand, and a weak expression of my duty, sent you as a token of
the gratitude of my heart: let him not want your candid Acceptance, who shall
pray ever for your flourishing estates every way, and Pride himself to be
thought

Your Worships most humbly devoted THOMAS DRANT.

Recensui hanc Concionem, dignamque judico quae typis mandetur. THO: WYKES R.
P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

THE Divine Lantern.
1 JOHN 1. 5. GOD is Light.
THE Truth still gains by Opposition, it not only bears up against the
violence of Affronts, but comes of with victory and triumph: like your noble
metals, it is fined by those flames, which the breath of malice has reared to
consume and wast it: what matchless Champions in all ages has even the
madness of impugners, armed to the patrocinie of the faith, Holy and
Cotholike? among others our Apostle is interessed in this sacred quarrel: In
this whole Epistle he purposely combats Carpocrates and Epiphan. in Pana^ lib
2. T^m. 2.
beats down in him that prodegie of opinion: Sin we must, and but by doing
the will of the devils themselves, we have no other ascent or staire, by which
to mount up to glory: In this first Chapter he enters the lists with Ebion, and
vindicates both Zanch. in Prolegom.
from his envy and cavil, that CHRIST is from eternity GOD, one with His
Father in power and everlastingnesse, there were Meteors too, who made a blaze
of piety, but were indeed false fires and soon went out in a stinch: they ware
the livery of CHRIST, but Service or Attendance, they had none for Him: what
the Romans did condemn in Publicola, who praised Brutus in Plutarchus in vita
Publ.
words, but followed Tarquin in deeds, their works did ever jarre and brawle
with what they spoke or taught: these our Apostle unmaskes in my Text, pricks
the tumor, which swells them, and what ever dress they put on, displaies them
to be a Spurious brood within the pale, but no true Sons of GOD or of His
Church: were they so, their looks would not speak smiles, whilst storms did
surge in their breasts, they would steer as they set their compass, nor would
their faces be toward Canaan, and their hearts at Ashdod: what they seem, they
would be, be holy as their heavenly Father is holy, do the works of mercy, as
He is merciful, tugg and wrestle for perfection, as He is perfect, walk in
light, as He is light, for (...), GOD is Light.

The words are not many, but as Chrysostom that miracle of the Greek Church
spoke of the Chrysostom. ad pop. Antiocb. Hom. 1.
like, (...)* they are weighty in substance, though not in bulk, as much
sparkeling luster may be in a small jewel, and in a little globe, we may
surveigh a world of countries: the (...) is soon said, that GOD is Light, but
the (...) how He is so, to traverse this, will be a task of more sweat: it
must be mine now, and my way shall be, to show you what Light is, and withal
what GOD is in relation to it: and so at once, how GOD and Light do agree in
the same proprieties: in the handling whereof I shall be animated (I hope) with
your most Christian patience and attention.

The first quality in which GOD and Light do agree, is the imperceptibility of
both. 1.


The property of Light is such, as has staggerd strangely and tired the
Naturalists in the search and definition of it: insomuch that some Philosophers
Cap. 53. sacr. Phi.
(says Vellesius) have thought it the bodily and material part of the
Godhead: GOD does at once ask of Job and stoned him: Where is the Job 38. 19.
way where light dwells, and as for darkness where is the place thereof,
that thou should take it to the bounds, and that thou should know the paths
to the house of it.

GOD is in this respect Light, His Incomprehensiblenesse is above the pitch of
all determinate capacities: What is immense how can the fleet dimensions of
the mind contain it? GOD He is so.

First, for time, all successions of Ages are but Immensitas divinae
magnitudinis tuae ista est, ut intelligamus te intra omnia sed non inclusum,
extra omnia sed non exclusum. Aug. Med cap. 30.
an instant to Him, time it self but a drop of His Eternity.

Secondly, for place, to Him the vast circumference of Heaven and Earth is but
a point: He is no where excluded, included no where, every where and yet
without expansion.

We may admire and adore this infinitude, our thoughts are of too narrow a size
and bore to comprehend it: and indeed GOD is for man to stand amazed and wonder
at: the clogged and drossie soul can never sound Him, who is the invisible
fountain of Spirits: nor is it within the reach of Art to define quidditative
what He is: de Deo scire Aquinas p. 1. qu. 1. art. 7.
non possumus quidest: what the divine Essence is the full knowledge thereof
descends not to any finite apprehension: Let others fathom this bottomless
Abyss, and scorch their wings whilst they venture them about this flame; I
shall not desire to see what the Cherubims saw not, who covered Esa. 6. 11.
their faces with their wings, as not able to behold this glory: May I be
shown the least dawning or glimpse of it, it is as much as I am capable of,
more than I can look on without ecstasy and ravishment.

GOD is Light, but such that non nisi purissimis Soliloq. cap. 34.
oculis videri potest, in Aug. we must have pure eyes, clear above the Eagles
to gaze on this Sun: GOD dwells in Light in the Apostle, but such as 1 Timothy 6.
16.
no man can approach unto: brightness is before my GOD in the Psalmist, bright
enough (would Psalm. 18. 12.
I ourface that luster) to dazzle mine eyes, if not blind them: dark waters
too, and thick clouds of the sky are His pavilion round about Him, ver. 11.
dark and thick enough to keep of my dim sight that it pierce not through
them: I am doubly tutored not to pry too far into this mystery, both by the
gloominesse that is about GOD and the Light that is in Him.

Empedocles did well define GOD, who said, GOD is a Sphere, whose center is
every where, Flut. Apoth.
and circumference no where: nor blame I Simom* des, who asked by King Hieron
(as Tullie tells it me) De natura deorum liber. 1.
what GOD is, if after much pause and travel, he gave his reason non plust and
at a bay, with a quanto diutius considero, tanto mihi res videtur obscarior,
the more I sift here, the more I am giddied, it is a riddle I cannot unfold, a
knot, I am not able to untie: no marveile, for Job peremptorily* Touching the
Almighty, we cannot find Him out: pardon Job 27. 23.
the Schoolmen their dalliance with words, they bias aright for the maine:
three things, they say, are without the verge of a definition: One the
Philosophers materia prima the first womb of all things, this they define not,
ob summam informitatem, Petr. Galat. de arcanis cathol verit. lib. 2. cap 1.
for it is informity and rudeness; the second is sin, the first spoil of
all things, this they define not ob summam deformitatem, for it is misshapen
deformity: the third is GOD, the first wellspring of life in all things; Him
they define not, ob summam formositatem, because of that beauty, the least
beam of which puts out all inferior and borrowed lights.

Something we may and ought to know of GOD, Heaven and life depend upon it, as
death and hell on a muffled ignorance: This is eternal life to know 1 John 4.
13.
thee the only true GOD, and whom thou have sent JESUS CHRIST: but, O GOD,
quis cognovit te, nisi tu te, as Saint Augustine sweetly: we may read over
all the volumes of thy works, and turn over every leaf of thy Word, we may
search after thee, as with Cressent light, in every angle of Heaven and Earth,
after all our queries of thy Majesty, it is well if we know this, that Sola
trinitas tua, soli tibi integre nota est. Aug. Soliloq. cap. 31.


Something we learn of GOD in the School of nature; every creature has a
trumpet in his mouth to proclaim Him; In these we see Him, as in a glass,
says Saint Paul; we read Him too 1 Cor. 13. 12.
as in a book, not a page whereof is unwritten on, Basil. Hom. 11. Hexam.
not a line but dictates us a divinity Lecture; we hear Him as in a harp,
not a string of it can be touched in so sweet an harmony, without an infinite
GOD: and says Saint Athanasius, we view Athan. Orat. contr. Idola.
Him as in a picture: even the beasts in Job, wear His stamp and image, Ask
the beasts and they shall tell thee, that the hand of the LORD has Job 12. 7.
wrought them: Anaxogoras being asked wherefore man was made, made answer to
behold the Heavens, and did he, what miracle and power might he behold in them?
not a Star spangles there, but is a Preacher and Herald to the Majesty of
its Maker: When I consider the Heavens (says David) the works of thy fingers,
the Moon and Psalm. 8. 4.
Stars, that thou have ordained, What is man? He so speaks of their
excellency, as if no streams or rivers of Eloquence could express them:
pictures, some say are the books of Idiots, which lead the gross conceit to
GOD, not without delight and pleasure; such an image is the world, not an
ignorance so dull, but by the pedagogie of it may be brought to know GOD, so
much of him, as to strip Romans 1. 20.
even Heathens of excuse.

Something we may know of GOD, from the standing Oracle of His-Word, enough to
perfect 2 Timothy 3. 16.
us to every good work: this is Jacobs well in Orig: in Mat. contra celsum.
Origin, whence all draw the waters of life, not only Jacob and his Sons,
the high-built apprehensions, but also the cattle and sheep the lowrooft
capacities: it is a river of clear waters in Gregory, fluvius est, in quo agnus
peditat, and Elephas Greg. Epist. ad Leand.
natat, where be shallowes for Lambs, and depths for Elephants: what the large
Manuscript of the universe could not, the Tomes of holy writ, have discovered
of the Deity: the Co-eternity of the Son of GOD with the Father, the
procession of the HOLY GHOST from both, the unity of the three in one uncreated
Essence, who ever saw through the dark spectacles of nature? all essential
truths, so far as salvation is linkt to the knowledge of them, we see
clearly by the light of the Scriptures, which (as says David) are a light
Psalm. 119. 105. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
to our feet, and a light shining in a dark place, Clem. Alexan. Protr. p. 25.
says Peter: they are (...), candles that never go out in Clemens now, and
(...), an universal light to all anon.

This Light shows to every man, the (...) of our holy faith, that the
mysteries of it are divine and true, but fully to no man the (...) the reason
or manner, how they be so: I know with Augustine that GOD is unitas
divinitatis, personarum pluralitate Meditat. cap. 30.
multiplex, that there is a glorious Trinity in Unity, in which the Father is
to be adored as being altogether of Himself, the Son to be glorified Hooker
lib. 5. Sect. 5. Eccles polit.
as that Consubstantiall Word, and the HOLY GHOST ever to be blessed and
magnified, as that Coessentiall Spirit eternally proceeding from both: I know
not, it is a depth I dare not dive it, how there is one Essence of three
persons, or three Lumb Sent. 1. d 34. a. 5.
persons of one Essence, and yet not one GOD of three persons, or three persons
of one GOD; that GOD has a Son equal with Him out of the womb of
everlastingnesse, GOD essentially as He, I believe this: but how He who made
the world was borne, how a Son and yet one eternal with the Father, or not
after Him in time, here I say with Ambrose in Lombard, men's deficit, Sentent.
lib. 1. d. 9. a. 8.
vox silet, non mea tantum, sed and Angelorum: how can I but be dumb, where
the tongues of Angels stutter? how not entranced, when the glorious Cherubims
clap their wings? for who shall declare His generation? that the HOLY GHOST
Esa. 53. 8.
is not the Fathers alone, nor the Sons alone, but proceeds equally from
both, I subscribe here, Sentent. lib 1. did. 10. a. 1. and d. 12. a. 3.
how this Spirit of Truth comes from the Father, and is of one substance with
Him, yet may not be said to be borne, nor called the Son of GOD, or how the
Son of GOD comes from the Father, yet may not be said to proceed, nor be called
the HOLY GHOST, Augustine here makes a proud knowledge strike sail to a devout
ignorance: distinguish betwixt that generation there, and this procession here,
nescio, non valeo, non sufficio, I S Aug. in Lumb ubi Supr.
know not, J cannot, it is not within the kenn of my skill: And what Vaticans
have we read, what Antiquity have we traded with, or had commerce with? what
Histories? what fasts have pined us, what prayers have we breathed out, that we
should stand and not shake when the grand pillars of the Church shrink, or
unlock those mysteries the Seraphins have no key for? can thouby searching
find out GOD, or know the Almighty unto Job 11. 7.
perfection? let it be the pride of others to tread this maze, I shall as soon
measure Heaven with my span, or weigh the smoke, or catch the wind in a
seive, or shadow the Sun with my palm: as soon I will plow the waters, and
sow my hopes there; for as thy judgments, O LORD, so thy Psalm. 36. ver. 6.
nature is a great depth.

Most men crack of their knowledge of GOD, and whereas Saint Paul rapt up into
Heaven saw things he could not speak, these will speak things they never saw:
it is indeed the Epidemicall disease of the Age, we had rather be Rabbis than
Saints, rather eat of the tree of knowledge, than the tree of life; nor care
many to loose GOD in the practike exercise of piety, whilst they seek Him in
the speculative niceties of the Schools: GOD looks for, I dare say, more
conscience than most men have, asks less science than most men brag of:
knowledge, it is true, is the souls eye, the mistress to guide the life to
virtue, a Mercury to point the road to goodness: when it does so, I prize it
above Rubies, and say, the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gaine-thereof than fine gold: but Prove. 3. 14.
that which fires the brain, warmes not the heart, which disjoined from grace
does floate in some frothy notions, and seek the applause only of a dexterous
wit and voluble tongue; who would fraught his ship with such drossie oar, or
stay for that gayle, which cannot waft him to Heaven? in that day, when all
knowledge shall vanish away, 1 Cor. 13. 8.
where will be the scribe, where the disputer, where the wise? a dram of
devotion will then outweigh a pound of discourse, one work of mercy turn the
scale to the whole library of Aristotle: Some talk over the series and
descents of all times, as if they had been made with the first Adam, and with
such perfumed breaths, in such richness of language, as if myrh and pearls
dropped from their lips, but at that Assize, the laurel and crown will be
charities: Come ye blessed, I was naked and ye clothed me, I was hungry and
ye fed me, I Mat. 25. 34.
was sick and ye visited me.

What ever tympany of knowledge swells others; grant me, O LORD, to know thee
savingly; So inspire us all, as to obey thee in thy Word, not curiously pry
into thy nature; what ever Art we would be graduats in, thou stand'st in the
forefront of the School, and bidst us learn thee first, ere we turn over a
new leaf? but how learn thee? learn to awe thee for thy power, to trust thee
for thy truth, to dread thee for thy justice, to depend on thee for thy
providence, love thee for thy mercies, fear thee for thy love, reverence thee
for thy goodness, and for thy tender compassions, take the cup of salvation,
and sing praise unto thee: we beg not to see thy face, nor view thee as thou
art, Moses, that standard of examples could not; thy back-parts are enough, the
least twilight or ray of thee enough to seal up our happiness unto us and
enhaunce it: thy Name is so appareld with Majesty, such mystery is shrin'd in
it, that it Tertull lib. de Trinit init. page 197.
is (...) with some, ineffable, (...) with others, indicible, with many (...),
ineloquible, (...) with all, obscure and unknown what it is: what brightness
than is in thy self, O GOD, what mists too about thee? I say no more, thou art
Light, and because so great a Light, not to be seen of any: and thus much of
the first property, betwixt GOD and Light, the imperceptibility of them both.

The second property betwixt GOD and Light 2.
is the delight somenesse and comfort of either.

Light is a most lovely and amiable quality, haud scio an reru^ coelestium
ulla sit excellentior luce, So Scaliger: Exercit. 71.
it beautifies Heaven it self, the Sun would be but a blind heap, but for the
light of the Sun: GOD from this treasury would enrich the whole Genesis 1. 14.
world, and therefore made it the storehouse of Light in the Creation: the
day, which is the child of Light, Plato will have it so called (...) to long
after, let the Preacher interpret the Etymon; Eccles. 11. 7.
Light is sweet and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes (...) Dion. Chrysostom.
Orat. 4.
to behold the Sun, the worth of this benefit they can truly prize who live in
disconsolate dungeons, fast bound in fetters and irons: what were the world
without it? how confused? how formelesse? what more comfort in it, than in the
grave? what joy can I have, asks blind Tobit, when I sit in darkness and do
not see the Light of Heaven.

GOD is in this respect Light, the Light and serenity of His countenance, is
the only happiness of man; in His favor is life, Psalm. 30. 5. His living
kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63. 3. What is a bundle of Myrrh between
the breasts, what a Cant. 1. 12, 13.
cluster of Cypres in the vineyards of Engedi, such is GOD to atrue Christian
heart, His love laid close unto it, and His grace spread abroad there, like
aromatike odours in a house, or in the boosome, with what unimaginable
refreshings is it cheered? how sweetened with a divine fragrancy? no powders of
the Merchant smell so, the world yields not a breath, but it is stinch unto it,
how pleasant soever insent to a carnal sense: these are those perfumes and
unguents the Spouse speaks of; because of the savor of thy good ointments,
Thy name is an ointment powered out, therefore the Virgins Cant. 1. 2.
love thee: the Hebrews observe, that those four letters which make up the
name JEHOVAH, that (...), that mighty Name of GOD, are liter aequiescentes,
letters of rest: and this inference Zanch* de natura Dei, lib. 1. cap. 13.
Fagius extracts thence, In GOD alone is the rest, repose, tranquillity of all
creatures: He is that haven of rest, where till we arrive in our spirits, we
are mazd in endless wanderings, tortured on the rack of self vexation, our
desires know no shoares or bottom: the glorious Trinity alone, who made it,
fills the heart with gladness, every Acts 14. 17.
roo^^^ond angle of it, leaves not a chinke for distractions to creep in; for
how can a sparkle of them fall on that breast, where to quench it is a
fountain of living waters, and fulness of joy flowing thence: whilst we are
in our corruptible rags of earth, our soul will be irregular and erratike,
like the planets in their Epicicles, there will be winds to raise storms in
it, like Noah's Dove, she finds not amidst the swelling tides of this world
whereon to stay her feet: when dismantled of the clogging flesh, she shall be
satisfied with the fatness of GODS House, and filled with the rivers of His
pleasures, when united unto GOD, who is the Ocean of all true happiness, it
shall lie down in the lap of eternity, it will than be pleased and quiet,
there will be no storm or tempest in it, it will rest in GODS everlasting
rest: O GOD what are the heavens without Light, what are our bodies without a
soul, what are our souls without thee?

Thou, O GOD, art our rod and staff of comfort, the joy and bliss of our
souls, how should they long afterthee, and the fruition of that happiness
thou have richly stored up for those who seek thee and it: but alas we seek
thee not, nor care to find thee, but in our gardens of pleasure, or wardrops
of vanity, or ware houses of profit, or tables of surfeit, or cellers of
drunkenness, or offices of bribery, or parlours of wantonness; I had almost
said, but in the stews of impurities, the brothels of lewdness, or Acheldama
the field of blood, we are no company for GOD: Some say to the wedge of gold
thou art our confidence, and do base homage to that, which should be the
worst drudge; Some roll on the floods of pleasure, nor did Cleopatra vie a
more costly health to her Mark Antony, than what they let down their throats,
into the Charibdis and Scylla of our Laert. de vita Phil lib. 6.
life, the belly, as Diogenes styled it* Some like brutes look downward, nor
know any other joy, than what is in the shadow and froth of things transitory,
these are the men of this world, whose portion Psalm. 17 14.
is in this life only, O what fools are we to cast away our souls upon such
gaudes and trifles! to loose an eternal kingdom for toies and vanities, to
chaffer Heaven for Earth, as sottish Indians truck away Oar for glass: heap
up all the riches of the world in one pile, till they reach the stars* charm
up all the delights of the world into one circle, and enjoy them freely; there is
a desire in man which looks over them as things fleeting and transient, as
bark and shell only, without pith or substance of true solace, such as can
neither satiate, or stay.

First, they have nothing solid in them, they are Non sunt solidae, non
fideles, etiamsi non nocent, sugiunt. Senec. Epist. 27. ad Lucil.
meats of a washy and fluid nature, which or slip through the stomach without
concoction, or if they digest, it is into raw and noisome crudities: who carouse
deepest of pleasures, shall vomit them up again, or if they stay, they will be
the gall of Aspes within: thoughts that stream toward wealth, cataracks and
rivers are but draughts enough for them: quod naturae satis est, homini Seneca
Epist. 119. ad Lucii.
non est: the grave Moralist speaks it of Alexander, who had swallowed up
Darius and the Indies, and yet in those floods did thirst, and in that surfeit
was hungry: the land with her Mineralls of gold, the Sea with her ship-wrackt
treasure, nature in her rich storehouse, had not wherewith to quench the flame
of his desire; inventus est qui concupisceret ali quid post omnia, that huge
vastness of appetite is now found, which craves somewhat after all things: I
speak this among those, to whom wealth has flowen in that abundance, as not
to satisfy alone, but amaze, who send ships of Tarshish to the West for gold,
and such spices from the East in the Navy of Hiram: the blessing of Heaven
has showred opulency into your laps, be content and thankful, else you know
whose it is, He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with Eccles. 5. 10.
silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase.

Secondly, there is nothing sure in them; you that lade your selves with thick
clay, you that swim in a sea of voluptuousness, let me ask with the
Prophet, How long? the bowls, pleasure Hab. 2. 16.
quafs in, may please the palate for a round or two, but the lees are at hand,
even her best cordials Plus Aloes, quam mellis habet. Iuven. Satyr. 6.
have some tart ingredients in them, and whatever honey they are in the mouth,
they are bitterness in the belly: Solomon once feasted his ears with music,
and his taste with wine, and his eyes with whatever they desired; here is all
Comedy to the last Scene, which is shut up with I said of laughter it Eccles.
2. 2.
is mad, and of mirth what does it: the pomp of riches is brickle, like your
globes of Crystal, the least touch crackes them: the Wise man one while
curtailes them only of Eternity, Riches are Pro. 27. 24.
not for ever, elsewhere he shootes home to their fleetingnesse, Will thou set
thine eyes upon that Pro. 23. 5.
which is not? Sure riches make themselves wings, they fly as an Eagle toward
Heaven: there is a gadding vein in money, which makes it ever and anon to
shift masters, (...)* Pythag. (...).
in Pythagoras, it is a trick it has, now to fawn, and anon to be coy, and who
would weary himself to hunt the wind?

The Cosmopolite without my envy shall graspe this cloud, nor will I fret at
the Epicure and his earthly paradise: Say thou, O LORD, unto my soul, I am thy
portion in the land of the living, it is enough to bless and raise me above
those icy hills of joy, whence our earth-wormes, Senec Epist. 119. ad Lucil.
Idem de brevit. vitae cap. 16.
whilst they climb them, not slip only but tumble: Absolute content dwells
not here below; what we here traffic for, is but Alchymie and dawbing: were
we Monarchs of the world, and retinu'd with all the Equipage of greatness, all
were but bracteata faelicitas, copper leaved with gold, a bugel at best or
glassy carkanet, which if we finger, we break it: An apple of Sodom, Josephus
de bello Iudaico, lib. 5. cap. 5.
which we may eye not taste, unless our bread should be Ashes, for such a
touch makes them: A false light, such as betraies our Seamen to rocks and
shelves, and as it leads, shipwracks them: A fresh brook of water, which may
dance and sport a while in her crystal channel, but falls into a mare
mortuum, a sea of gall and wormwood: for know thou not that it will be
bitterness 2 Samuel 2. 26.
at the latter end: GOD is that Ocean, into which all the rivers of a full
delight do run: He the fruit of that Eden, whose alone smell is all pleasure,
whose taste is life: He that Spring and Source of true felicity, which all
souls pant after, and of which who drinks shall never thirst: He that clear
Sun, where all the light of grace and glory is centered, and which no Eclipse
can darken: O give us of the fruits of that Orchard, O lead us to those waters
of comfort, O be thou our star to the Heaven of happiness: Thou, O LORD, who
madst the Light without a Sun, and than made the Sun to be the chariot of
that Light! O be thou our Sun, that all our Light may be gathered unto thee,
be thy presence our Light, that we may shine like the Sun in beauty; whilst
thou art our Light, we can never want beauty, whilst thou art our Sun, we can
never want Light: for thou art Light. And thus much of the second property
betwixt GOD and Light, the delightsomenesse and comfort of them both.

The third property in which GOD and Light agree is their unblemisht purity and
fairness.

Light is a quality most clear, most pure, most unblemisht, that especially,
whose emanation being from a body most simple and free from mixture, the
Philosophers entitle celestial: hence perhaps it is, that (...) affies
somewhat with (...), which Macrobius in the first of his Saturnals, takes for
the Sun, the Prince of the Planets of Heaven, the fountain and alone mine of
Light.

GOD is in this respect Light: that perfection of purity which shines in Him,
no clouds of error, no mists of impieties can obscure or shadow: a luster of
holiness shows it self in the glorious Dietie, such whereto the fairest
beauty of Angels is a ball of darkness: So those glorious Hierarchies
themselves in their mutual cry; Holy, Holy, Esa. 6. 1.
Holy, is the LORD of Hoasts: the holiness of Saints, though a fair body of
brightness, is but a beam of this, and influenced from it: GOD only is by
nature pure, in the abstract purity, and His is the praise and glory of it in
the sweet singer of Israel; Exalt the LORD our GOD, and worship Psalm. 99. 9.
at His holy hill, for the LORD our GOD is holy: and therefore as He is Light
here in my Text, so in Saint James He is the Father of Lights, James 1. 17.
the rays of which did He not dispense unto us we were in darkness, more
palpable than those groping Egyptians, more hellish than hell it self: what
ever midnight is below with man, there is all noonday with GOD above, what
ever darkness is under His feet, there is all brightness before His face, and
such as dampes all other: it is no Hyperbole in Job, Behold the Moon and it
shines Job. 25. 6.
not, yea the Stars are not pure in His sight: there is beauty in the
Stars, more in the Sun, from whose Magazen of Light they borrow theirs: O how
incomprehensibly glorious is that Light which is in thee O LORD! who could
create Lights to give such glory to thy work-manship! these even the brute
creatures may behold, those not the very Angels.

GOD is Holy, Three in one, all three but one GOD, and all holy in that Antheme
of the four beasts: Holy, Holy, Holy LORD GOD Almighty, Revel. 4. 8.
which was, and is, and is to come: whom these beasts emblem, whether the
four Evangelists, as Haymo, Ribera, and others, or four Angels who In Locum.
for their more noble emploiments are set (...) in regard of the rest, is a
question may giddy, not better me. Saint Augustines gloss has more of pith
and juice in it: Vnum JEHOVAM celebrant, Aug de fide ad Pet cap. 1.
repetendo unum and idem (Sanctus) trinum agnoscunt, ter repetendo, quod uni
tribuerunt: they acknowledge one GOD, whom they esteem only holy, and a
Trinity they acknowledge in that blessed Unity of the Godhead, whilst they
repeat thrice Holy, Holy, Holy: GOD the Father is Holy: with this inscription
the Bethshemites could blazon Him: Who is able to stand before this Holy LORD
GOD? 1 Samuel 6. 20.
GOD the Son is Holy, Gabriell as both His Priest and Herald, at once
christens Him and proclaims it; that Holy thing which shall be borne Luke 1.
35.
of thee, shall be called the Son of GOD: So is the HOLY GHOST, witness that
royal title in Daniels vision, in which the Ancients interest Him, as by whom
is the unction of holiness the most Dan. 9. 24.
Holy: Some things are holy by Creation as Angels; bless the LORD ye His holy
Angels, that Psalm. 103. 20.
excel in strength: Some things by communication, as the Elect, who are (...),
as Saint 1 Cor. 1. 2.
Paul phraseth it, called to be Saints: Some things by dedication, as His
Temple, O worship the LORD in the beauty of Holiness: Somethings are Psalm. 84.
7.
holy for use, as the creatures, Moses branded with uncleanness some of them,
but Adam caused it, by his sin filth was powered on all: CHRIST has wiped out
this legal impurity, and lodged under one roof, whole hoofes and cloven: if
the Jews were than a holy people, the Gentiles are Deuteronomy. 14. 2.
now a holy Nation: it is true of men, beasts, things, all creatures, through
the four corners of the earth, are clean and holy, and this was taught 1 Pet.
2. 9.
us by Saint Peter's great sheet, let down by four corners from Heaven, but
made good by CHRIST, who pulling down that Screene or wall of partition
between them, has taught us not to call any thing unclean which GOD has
cleansed: when Julian poisoned the wells, the shambles, the fields, with his
heathenish lustrations, the Christians (says my Antiquary) drank Theod. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 3
freely of them, and by virtue of Saint Paul's Quicquid in macello: (...),
nothing unclean is S. Peter's rule, at least with Saint Paul's paraphrase, munda
mundis, if my self be clean, I read this posie on what ever I use, Holy: if
otherwise, my clothes (says Job) shall make me filthy. Job 9. 31.


All things are in themselves in some degree Holy, GOD alone is holiness it
self: So those Heavenly Musicians chant it: Who shall not fear Revel. 15. 4.
thee, O LORD, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art Holy: who would not
set this Sampler before him, to work by, who would not write after so fair a
copy? thus to do we are pressed by a Summons from above; be ye Holy, for I am
Holy: Levit. 11. 44.
I say not, Absoluta aequalitate, but similitudine: GODS perfection is above
the Heavens, we cannot Job 11. 7.
reach it, imitate it we must, though the best fall short of the pattern, it is
here as in the stars; those of lesser magnitude have light in them, the
greatest shine brighter, yet these are dim to the Sun: the holiness of
Saints is beneath that of Angels, the holiness of Angels not at the same
height with that of CHRIST'S glorified humanity, and this infinitely below the
loftiest pitch of holiness, which is GOD: Strive we must to be holy as GOD is,
not that we can equal our example, but to arrive at what perfection we may,
and we are capable of: Strive we do, some for health, more for riches, and
not a few here for gay clothes: but holiness, the salve of sins, the wealth
of Saints, the robe of Angels, who strives for this salve, more sovereign than
all the ointments of the Apothecary, this wealth more precious than the rocks
of most pure Diamond, this robe more glorious, than all the wardrope of
Solomon: the Hypocrite much cackles of purity, when all is shell and
rottenness; one who worships GOD in public, and at home cares not for him,
who prays often, and his heart knows not, whether his lips go, who will have
all good about him, and be himself the worst thing he has: the mere Moralist
breaks gloriously, and at his first rise outshines the morning light, but a
storm clouds him at noone, or like Hezekias Sun, he goes back many Theod.
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 2, 3.
degrees in the dial, or like Julian, full of hope and piety in his first
years, a Nero in his end, all massacre and villainy; or as the four Ages in
the Poet, the first gold, as the head of that image in Hesiod. opera and dies.
lib. 1.
Daniel, the last, as the feet, clay or worse, (...): the true Saint, is
Antipode and treads cross to them both, he is for the life, not paint of
holiness, nor till the game is his, gives he ore the chase, he mistakes not
the goal, nor till he wins it, lags of, with Paul (...), he does press Phil.
3. 14.
hard toward the mark, and says, cloth me with righteousness, O LORD, I
prize it above cloathings of wrought gold, and those garments that smell of
myrrh and richest powders of the Merchant: one mite of grace is worth a talent
of bravery, the sackcloth of a Saint more glorious than the purples of a
glutton: raiments of needleworke and precious imagery are for Kings Palaces on
earth, without the white stoles of godliness we shall never look into those
courts, where dwells the King of glory: Blessed are the pure in Math. 5. 8.
heart, for they shall see GOD; nor those, who are pure in their own eyes, who
about the froth of their own brains, dare rent the peace of the Church, and
war for the aerie projections of their giddied heads, as if Heaven and Earth
were little enough to be mingled in the quarrel; the holiness, without which
we shall not see GOD, is that of the heart, not the lip; write, O LORD, upon
these flintie hearts of ours, holiness unto thy self, give us but a drop from
thy Ocean, for thou art all holy, one glimpse from thy Sun, for thou art all
Light.

GOD is all beauty, as the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 1. 16.
My beloved, behold thou art fair and pleasant: O how should the love of Him
inflame us! how ravish us out of our selves! Amiablenesse is the object of
love, and what things are fair are gracious, and sweetly win our souls to
desire them: it is beauty in all things does allure or rather entrance us:
whiteness in the Lilly, red in the Rose, purple in the Violet, the purity of
the marble, the sparkling of the pearl, the silver scales of fishes, the
matchless color of birds, the congruous symmetrie of parts in beasts: here we
gaze our selves into wonder, and cry out as in a trance, O the wonderful works
of GOD, that such glory should dwell with corruption! O think than what
celestial excellencies are in those courts above, where is no need of the
clear light of the Moon, or the Revel. 21. 23.
bright beams of the Sun, to enlighten them, what inexpressible glory is in
GOD Himself, whose glory is the Light of those heavenly Tabernacles! if
beauty, which, though it be (...) in (...).
Theocritus, yet (...) is his verdict of it, if it be naturae gaudentis opus,
a privilege of nature, or her wit put into the frontispeece, as Plato; if a
dumb comment or still Rhetorique, that persuades without speech, as in
Theophrastus, if an acurate Epistle written in the court hand of Heaven, for
the praise of the creature as Lucian, if the only lodestone Dial. Amor.
or compass to attract, and draw love unto it? How should our hearts cleave
unto thee O LORD! How our souls be enamourd of thee!

If you will have a perfection drawn out to the life, you have it in Cant. 5.
10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the standard bearer of ten thousand: nature
did never frame such a feature, nor did ever such mixtures kiss in any other
cheek, no art can counterfeit such colors of holiness, no pensill reach to
express a contexture of such delicacy; the very report of it wounds to the
heart all foreign Assemblies, they ask, and with darted bosoms: O thou
fairest among women whether is thy Cant. 5. 17.
well-beloved gone, whether is thy well-beloved turned aside, that we may seek
Him with thee? Since thy Bridegroom (O thou worthy Spouse of such a Husband)
is so divine a frame of beauty, may we join with thee in the quest of Him, a
holy fire Cant. 8. 6.
burns in our breast, much water cannot quench it.

We have all of us doted too long on the surphuld face of this world, too much
prized the artificial complexion'd pleasures of it: nor will we yet know that
our structures of Cedar and Vermilion, our garments of tissues and
embroyderies, our tables of junkets and delicacies, our couches of ease and
Ivory, our coffers thronged with gold, all our pomp here, is but paint and
garishnesse, the world it self but a decaid piece of deformity: O that Troy
should flame for such a wrinkled Hellen, or man's soul for such a gaudy nothing
be endangered to eternal fire! Open thou our eyes, O LORD, that we may see
those glorious shinings, which come from thy divine self: So beauteous an
Aspect will be Spell enough, to chain our hearts unto thee: Constantius, when
he came in triumph to Rome, than the myrrour and mistress of the world, and
beheld there, the Rostra, the Capitol, the Baths, the Amphitheatrum, the
Pantheon, the Theator of Pompey, the marketplace Ammianus Marcellinus. lib. 16.
of Trajan, and other her works like Babell, so high, ut eo vix aspicere
humanus oculus possit, that the eye of man could scarce climb up unto them; it
did not a little amaze him, that nature should empty all her riches, and even
impoverish her self on one city: the Kings of the earth, when they were
gathered together to the city of GOD, the mountain of His holiness, and joy
of the whole earth: they saw it, says the Psalmist, and so they Psalm. 48. 5.
marveiled, they were troubled and hasted away: if earthly objects can so
enchant us to fear and wonder, how should heavenly ones enamour us to love and
rapture! GOD especially, the least gleame of whose infinite purity, excells as
far all light and holiness of the creatures, as Light it self does the
pitchiest darkness: for GOD is Light, and in the close of this verse, in Him
there is no darkness at all. And thus much of the third property twixt GOD and
Light, the fairness and beauty of both.

Light is an enemy unto darkness, at the approach 4.
of it darkness flies, they cannot be wrought to an agreement, they never
meet without a fight and opposition: to dehort us from the works of
darkness, because they are perpetrated against the Father of Lights, is the
But and White, our Apostle here levels at: your garb and profession calls you
the children of the day, those characters, which are writ on your face, speak
you the Sons and Daughters of Light; why than are those opera tenebrarum of
your retinue, why not casheerd? if you are of GODS family, sin must not be of
yours: for sin is darkness, GOD is Light:

GOD than is in this respect Light: Sin has in it an Egyptian fogg, GOD
hates it, nature was never capable of the like Antipathy: the works of sin,
are the works of darkness, for the parent of them is the Prince of darkness,
whose Ephesians. 6. 12. Coloss. 1. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.
kingdom is a kingdom of darkness, whose walks are the walks of darkness,
and the Actors of them, are the children of darkness, who sit in darkness and
Esa. 9. 2.
in a deadly shade: Now GOD is Light and darkness thwarts with His nature, and
therefore betwixt them there must needs be a war and fewd more than mortal:
we need no Herald to trumpet it, it is done, Psalm. 5. 4. Thou art not a GOD
that Psalm. 5. 4.
have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee: Who ever
drank of the cup of the LORD, and the cup of devils? Can the Arc and Dagon be
housed under one roof, as if an insensible statue were a fit mate for a living
GOD? Can the same heart be a Sacrary for the Holy and un-holy ghost? Or will
CHRIST have His Chapel where Beliall has his Synagogue? The purity of GOD
and man's sin are at a more remote distance, nor can they more meet, than
parallel lines in the Mathematics, no more than the two poles may kiss, or a
Cammell be streind through the eye of a needle and not split it: it is a
question without an aenigma, nor need we an Oedipus to unriddle it; Shall the
throne of iniquity Psalm. 94. 20.
have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief as a law? It never shall,
the Sun shall before drop from Heaven and shine to the land of darkness, that
Starre-eyde Canopy ore our heads shall first become dull earth; Heaven and
Earth shall be sooner mingled as in that first Chaos: the word is spoken, nor
is there any witchcraft to conjure it back: The face of the LORD is against
them that Psalm. 5. 6.
do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth: Cornelius Agrippa has
drawn us a large Catalogue of strange effects in nature, of Antipathies and
blind discords betwixt stones, plants, beasts; whose proper and radical cause
being unknown, Lib. 1. de occulta Philos. cap. 18.
the Academiks did ascribe their virtues to Platonike Idaeaes, Avicen to the
rule and presidency of Angels, Hermes to the influence and aspect of planets;
some to the joint work and concurrence of all causes: there are between GOD
and the wicked, rents and wide breaches not to be made up; these He marks out
for vengeance, His Artillery is ever in readiness, His arrow on the string and
at their very boosomes: but why this opposition? What unluckey constellations
have fore-sign'd them to it? we need not gaze upward, there is an evil star
within them, whose malevolent influence works all: GOD is pure, pure beyond
rocks of Marble, or coasts of Jasper, or the Orient and sparkeling majesty of
Pearl, these are all vile, very Spirtles of uncleanness, dunghills of filth,
vessels brim'd up with iniquity: GOD is all Light, no beauty of Angels, no
myrrours of crystal can match it: these are all darkness, a very dungeon and
loathsome den of evils: Now what communion has light with 2 Cor 6. 14.
darkness? did this darkness ever usurp the same eye, where that Light
dwelt: contraries in their abstract are out of all composition; the lightsome
air may become dark, but make Light darkness, no Limbick or extract can do
it; as health cannot be sickness* though an able body may languish into
crazinesse: (...)* no Arist. lib. 1. Phys. cap. 9.
league betwixt things in their own nature opposite, nor does their combat
cease but in the not being of the one: fire and water, truth and falsehood,
Light and darkness, GOD and sin, can never be made friends, not brought so
much as to parlee or enterview: For thou art of purer Hab. 1. 13.
eyes, O LORD, than to behold evil, neither can thou look on iniquity.

Here is that Pandoraes box, whence all evils do fly; those arrows which
drink up the blood, that sword, which eats up the flesh, that pestilence
which cleaves to the bones: here is the stock, on which grow all those
miseries, which environ man, his sins, which work him into the frown of
Heaven, the hatred of GOD, thou hate all workers of iniquity: and Psalm. 5. 6.
whom* He hates, He will bruise them as with a scepter and rod of iron: (...)
comes, justissime Lips. de constant. lib. 2. cap. 16.
para semper est: if sin march in the front, punishment will be in the
rear, who foster this in their breasts, Nemesis shakes her rod at their
backs: Some or drink disease to their bodies* or feast them into surfets, as
the voluptnous; Some muffled in a non-imploiment, and lying still, rot their
souls into stinch and noisomeness: as the idle; Some like vultures fly ore
meadows, and fall on carrions, not touch what is found in others, and light on
their sores, as the detractor; some will be rifling the altar, and as the
Eagle snatch a morsel thence though they fire their nests, as the Sacrilegious
Avarice enflames some* others pleasures engulph, some lust disjoynts, others
rancor envenoms, some are madded with rage, others blown up with pride: the
Tragedian as if his boosome had been divinely influenced* could doom it of
the last, and it is true, of all -- Sequitur ulior a tergo Deus, vengeance
Senec. Herc. Fur. Act. 5.
dogs them at the heels, GOD holds a a dagger at their hearts, and is ready to
sheath it in their bowels: the least grain of evil is enough to poize down
the soul to the lowest hell: I am yet to learn what those venial sins are,
which we need not rinse of with our penitent Desen. Council. Trident. lib. 3.
tears in Andradius, nor for them fall down at the footstool of mercy, with
a Forgive us our trespasses* as the Rhemists: Sure I am that Saint Basil once
asked in earnest, (...), Ad Romans cap. 7. v. 8.
who dares say of a sin it is little, when the least is able to plunge him
into the bottomless pit* Who would judge that leake small, which sinkes the
vessel, or that a slight wound, which gives a sudden i^^^^ to death? the
rain that falls in small drops* makes the earth mirie, our drislingst slips,
bedash and dirtie the soul, which spots, fire shall wash away, if penitence
do not.

As Saint Paul says to the Corinths, would GOD ye could suffer me a little:
many have sung Panegyricks hence, my tune is to wail out an Epicedium: This
Island of ours may be called August. de Civit. Dei Liber. 8. cap 23.
the* Image of Heaven, (as Mereurius Trismegistus spoke of Egypt) This City,
the Temple of the Island: What complaints have been in her streets? One cries
out of hunger, as Esua, another of treacherous friends with the Psalmist, a
third, of that eues-dropping or tame fury, a bad wife, as Job: One is pained in
his belly with the Prophet, another in his head, with the Shunamites Son, a
third in his bowels, with Israel: this man Jer. 4. 19.
mournes as a Dove, in the courts of his house, that Isa. 28. 4.
chatters as a Swallow on his house top, I will weep bitterly, a third
protests with Isaiah: and wishes a fourth with Jeremy, O that my head were Jer.
9. 1.
waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears! Not a few, put* up their moan with
the Psalmist, O LORD thou feedest us with the bread of tears, Psalm. 80. 5.
and give us tears to drink in great measure: these have been your City
cries, yet not so loud as the cry of your sins, but I spare you here: the
days can tell you, when this populous and (what Cine as apud Plutar. in Pyrrho.
the Epirot spoke of Rome) this (...), has been so shaken into emptiness,
that scarce the gleaning grapes have been left: O for a friend calls one here
to close my eyes at the hour of death! Who shall lay me out for burial says
another there, or carry my bones to the grave in peace: Now a David throbs out
an Elegy, and says, O my Son, my Son: anon the Orphan blubbers his
cheeks, and sighs with Elisha, O my Father, my Father: Your whole 2 King. 2.
20.
City than was one Theator and woeful* Spectacle of sorrow, and the whole
Country looked amazedly on, whilst you acted your dying parts* GOD has now
drawn His bow again, and scattered some of His arrows here and there as on
your skirts, I hope, as Jonathan did direct his three flights to David, to
warn you out of his Quod autem crebrius bella concutient, quod sterilitas and
fames sollicitudinem cumule^t, quod saevientibus morbis valetudo frangigitur.
Cypr^^d Demetr.
tenderness and love: but if in these Characters ye spell not GODS meaning,
let Saint Cyprian read, and hear how he lessons his Demetrius: Are you shaken
with Wars, are you molested with Dearth and Famine, is your health crushed
with raging diseases, is mankind generally tormented with Epidemicall
maladies? it is all for your sins, for which we roar like Bears in the
Prophet: So Sion, when she sings a sadding of Isa. 59. 11, 12.
her misery, for that her crown was fallen from her head, she makes this the
burden of her Lam. 5. 16.
song, Woe unto us for we have sinned: O than as you desire the welfare of
this your Jerusalem, let uncleanness be purged out of her streets,
profaneness whipped out of her Temples, may not Drunkenness reele here, or
Sacriledge-rifle Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
there: (...), in that hony-mouth'd Father, and the worst stealth is to rob
GOD: both (...). Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 2.
are deeds of the night: Surgunt de nocte latrones, it is by night that thieves
spoil and destroy, and they who are drunk are drunk in the night: be 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7.
sure, if ye cross not with GOD, nor fall at odds with Him by your sins, He
will be your Sun and shield; your shield to safeguard, your Psalm. 84. 11.
Sun to lighten you: Spread, O LORD, the Light of thy grace into our hearts,
and bless us with the Light of thy countenance, direct our steps in thy ways,
which are the ways of Light, and so bring us to that Light, which shall not
change as the Moon, nor be ecclipst as the Sun; nor set as the Stars* even
thy glorious self, O LORD, for thou art Light. And so much of the fourth
property betwixt GOD and Light, as both are enemies to darkness and sin.

The fifth property in which GOD and Light 5.
agree, is the spreading virtue of both.

Light is a quality diffusive: the Sun as it is a most perfect lamp and
spring of Light, so most largely spreades his heat, and lends his operative
influence, to quicken and cheer this Sublunary globe of ours: (...) the Sun,
Eustathius will have so called (...), from the heat, which is embosom'd in that
bright and opacous body: and Psalm. 19. 6.
in the Psalmist, nothing is hid from the heat thereof.

GOD is in this respect Light: The day is His, Psalm. 74. 16.
and the night is His, He made the Light and the Sun: wherefore made He it,
for the Heavens alone, or the godly alone? Neither, He makes Mat. 5. 45.
His Sun to rise upon the evil and good: the riches of His goodness all
things taste of, every creature is enricht from His maintenancy: none ever
enterd the porch of life, but enjoyed the Light and heat of the visible Sun;
none ever walked on the pavement of the earth, but was lead by the hand of His
invisible goodness: the Psalmist sweetly warbles it: O give thanks unto the
Psalm. 106. 1.
LORD for He is good, for His mercy endures for ever; there is a goodness
Subjectivo, which is tanquum lux in lucido, this is GODS, but we see it not,
it is coverd with a curtain of sacred secrecy, and dwell in Light as
unaccessable as GOD Himself: there is goodness in the Object, which is
tanquam lumen in Diaphano, this is GODS and we feel it: it is not confined to
the Orb of Israel only, nor coopt up within the pale of Jury, no tenure
entayld to the fleshly heirs of Abraham: GOD powers out of His treasures upon
all, even reprobates have a pension out of His Exchequer: the whole earth is
full of the Psalm. 119. 64.
goodness of the LORD: GODS goodness alike extends her sphere with His
Sovereignty, for as the eyes of all things wait upon Him in the front, so
Psalm. 145. 15.
in the heel of the verse, He fills all things with plenteousnesse.

There is a goodness proper to the Elect, the Apostle styles it, the riches of
His goodness, Romans 2. and elsewhere the riches of His grace, Ephesians. 2. this is
that blessing which makes rich, and fills, not our garners with store, but our
hearts with gladness: GOD at His own cost maintains the whole world, and
showers down the happy influences Mat. 5. 45.
of Heaven upon the unjust man's ground, but there are riches of mercy which He
stores up for the faithful only, nor shall hogs slaver those Romans 9.
pearls: GOD keeps all Cities, if He does not Psalm. 126. 1.
the Watchman wakes in vain, but He loves Jerusalem, and the gates of Sion
above all the dwellings of Jacob; Moab His wash-pot tastes the sweetness of His
bounty, and shall Judah the signet on His finger lack? Joseph feasts all his
Brethren, but Benjamins mess shall five times be doubled to Genesis 43. 34.
theirs: Not a Subject in his Dominions but owes much to the goodness of his
Prince, but they partake of his more royal favors, who wait in his court,
and eat at his table: the pottage may be Esaus, the Birthright is Jacobs,
even the wicked have their annuities, but the inheritance is to the righteous:
why than will you ask, is the sea of the wicked so calm, of the good so
stormy? why are the eyes of these dim, when the other swell out with
fatness; hereunto I reply thus.

First, Those who forage in the wilds of vice, may brave it a while, as the
only favorites and darlings of the age, they may swim in a stream of gold,
and tumble in Arabian Spices: David when he sees this, how they start into
honor, it sadneth and staggers his encumbred mind, and does force him to fly
to a stop, with a Fret not thy self O my soul: all goes well hitherto, Psalm.
37. 7.
but think these minions of the world, how despair vultures their hearts,
whilst pleasures merry their fenses, they are in the depth of sorrow, even in
their height of delight: what ever masks and triumphs the godless state it
in; there is a worm gnawes perpetually, what ever harmony or light be without,
there is all discord and darkness within: the rays of a Sunshine may guild
ore his countenance, rip him up, Tacit. Annal. lib. 6. page 185
and as Tacitus speaks of tyrants, there is all gnawings and stripes* or if
their conscience sleeps, whilst they dance in the circle and round of sin,
how often in the Meridian of their jollities do they set in wretchedness, how
soon are their warbeling Aires turned into the mournings of Dragons: they may
frolike it for a Scene or two, what will the last exit be, what the
Catastrophe? their doom is sealed, no juggling or imposture of flesh and blood
can corrupt it: when the wicked spring as grass, and all the workers of
iniquity do Psalm. 92. 7.
flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

Secondly, The true Saint may be in a low ebb of sorrow, as a tree in winter
without branch or leaves, or fire buried under the embers without heat: but
again he is in a flow of comfort, his withered branches spread, his fainting
fire is blown up into a bright flame, and still he jubilates unto GOD with, It
is good for me that I was Psalm. 119. 71.
afflicted: there is honey to be sucked out of this thistle, and unction of joy
which supples and makes easy this cross: if GOD diets and physics his, it is
for their health: if dross be in His gold He will fine it, if chafe in His
floor He will cleanse it: He will lance and tent to the quick a fore
festring in the body of His Church* Our Heavenly Physician, where the gross
humors of evil begin to corrupt in his, He will purge them out though with
the bitterst pills and potions, and as it is an earnest of His love to us, when
our cure is perfected by gentler unguents, so a pawn of His displeasure at our
malady, if he use cauteries and and fearings: the sickness of Israel how often
was it healed by these tart ingredients; affliction wrought their recovery,
when neither miracles from Heaven not prodegies on earth could do it: See the
Psalmist, When He Psalm. 78. 34.
slew them then they sought Him and enquired after GOD early: whether we
reflect then on the ungodly or godly man, we may discover without a
perspective, GODS goodness to both, as well the sons of darkness as of
light; here His special goodness, which to them makes salves of sores, of the
flesh of vjpers sovereign Methridate; which for them extracts Light out of
darkness, and confects of poisonous ingredients the wholsomst Antidots, as a
skillful Apothecary works out of hurtful simples a medicinal composition;
and therefore in all estates, still the Saints carroll it to His praise, quam
bonus DEVS Israeli, Sure GOD is good to Israel: there His Psalm. 73. 1.
general goodness, whence it is, that they flourish as a palm, that they sit
under the shade of their own vines, that their breasts are full of milk,
their bones of marrow, their bellies of His hid treasures; that waters of a
full cup are wrung out to them, that their ways are paved with pleasures, and
the paths honey where they set their feet: May thy Sun, O LORD, shine on our
Tabernacles here, nor scant us the blessings of thy left hand, a portion of
them competent for us, or if our Light must be enterchaing'd with darkness, if
our days, some may be fair, others will be cloudie, so long as we live in
this vale of tears, this true Bochim, as the Israelites Judge 2. 5.
called their mourning place: O yet may the Light of thy grace arise in our
souls, and as the Sun dispels the early mists, may it scatter those fogs of
sin and error, which naturally we grope in: As that shining Light, which
shines Pro. 4. 18.
more and more unto the perfect day, so may this spiritual Light in us spread
still, till from the morning dawne it climb up to its zenith, and be
swallowed of a more glorious Light, the Light of glory, and we in those
Mansions of Light dwell together with thee, who art the true Light, for thou
art Light. And thus much of the fifth way of agreement betwixt GOD and Light,
the diffusive and spreading virtue of them both.

The last property in which GOD and Light 6.
agree, is the Omnipresency of either.

Light has in it a kind of ubiquity, it fills all places: I except only that
land of darkness, where vengeanee boyles in a torrent of fire, but as black
as hot, where the damned shall meet flame enough to scorch and fry* no Light
to refresh or solace them: Hell is a fiery dungeon, no seas of waters can
quench the least spark of it, it is a burning Tophet, where fury reakes in a
river of brimstone; who shall be cast into this furnace ( Nebuchadnezzars was
an Elysium to it) shall see nothing which may allay the rage, or sweeten the
tartness of their pains, they shall see all things, that can embitter their
sufferings and make them matchless: GOD appeared to Moses out of the midst of
a bush, Genesis 3. 2.
the bush burnt and consumed not: there was a fire without heat: the wicked
shall be turned into Mat. 8. 12.
hell, where they shall be lodged in beds of fire, but wrapped up in utter
darkness too, here is fire without light, here torture and blackness kiss
in this vale of Hinnon; all other places are cheerd and blessed with the presence
of the Light: lux simplissima est, and omnia occupat, Light shines every where.

GOD is in this respect Light; Immense is a peculiar Attribute, wherewith He is
clothed, He comprehends all places, none include Him: we do acknowledge Him
with Augustine, sine situ S. Aug, Meditat* Liber 12.
ubique praesentem, sine loco ubique totum, sine extensione omnia implentem:
without site every where present, every where whole without place, and without
extension of parts filling all things: all bodies have their proper place, and
there we say they are circumscriptively, nor would Aristotle Phys. lib. 2. cap*
6. Text 45.
exempt the highest Heaven, could we find out a body or superficies to
encircle it: how excellent are the Angels, who behold the face of GOD in glory,
how dignified by CHRIST himself, who though He took not their nature, yet
wears their name, the Angel of the Covenant: how Mal 3. 1.
ever they are limited in their natures, they are of finite virtue, nor is
Gabriell than with the Hierarchy Lumb. Sentent lib. 1. did. 37. a. 13.
in Heaven, when he stoopes to the Mother of GOD with an Ave on earth, Hail
Mary; these are in their places definitively: it is GODS prerogative royal, of
which to rifle Him it were a mere treason and robbery to be in all places
repletively; it wears indeed the image and stamp of Apocrypha, yet search it
to the quick and kernel, and a mysterious weight is shrind in it, the Spirit
Wisdom 1. 7.
of the LORD fills the world.

How fills? vertually alone? as the Sun though fixed in his own Orb, yet
enlightens all things with his beams, does cherish them with his heat,
enliven them with his influence? or as a King, who sits on his throne, and
stretches out the rod of his power over all his Dominions, rules all the people
of his Realms with the Scepter of his Authority? if we coast here, we divest
GOD of His power, and bring Him down to His creatures, nay under them, for the
very Air is every where, nature not being patient of a vacuity; if I digg
down to the center of the earth it is at the point of my spade, if I shoot up
as high as Heaven, it is at the top of my Arrow: how than fills? what per
parts as the Air, whose parts though Homogeneall, take yet up all places
severally, Arist. lib. 2. de generat. cap. 3.
where no bodily substance is? or as CHRIST (the ubiquitary may storm at this
truth, he shall stifle it) is, if we reflect on His Deity, every where, if on
His Manhood, in those courts of bliss above, which shall hold Him, till at
the last day He shall break the clouds, and come with flames of fire to
judge all flesh: is GOD so? Can the Heavens or the Heaven of Heavens 1 King 8.
contain Him? No, adest ubique and ubique totus est, non per parts usquam
est, sed in omnibus omnis est: it is Saint Hilaries descant on that streine of
the sweet singer of Israel; Thou art near O LORD, Psalm. 119. 123
and all thy Commandments are true: How than fills? so as that He is mixed
with things sublunary? which was the foul Blasphemy of the Manichees, Zanch.
de natura Dei lib. 2. cap. 6 qu. 3.
or as their substantial form makes one compound with them? which was the
stale and engine to all heathenish Idolatry, if we believe Averroes a Lib. 12.
Metaph. Arist. comment.
Patriarch of their own: No GOD is above all things, says the Apostle, Romans
6. and in Isaiahs Isa. 6. 1.
vision, He is high and lifted up: and how ever the Poet fills his cheeks with
a Iovis omnia plena, or we hear it from a tongue divinely touched and with a
true Cherubim, In Him we live, and moove, and Act. 17. 27.
have our being: yet it is so, not that GOD is part of our substance, but
Author of it: being the only source and fountain of our life, motion, being:
the Platonists, who styled GOD the soul of the world, did fancy yet and coin
a god to themselves, who was supreme to this, and him they bedect and crowned
with this rich Epithet, Zanch. de natura Dei lib. ^. cap. 2. qu. 2.
the parent of the worlds soul, a (...) always existent in himself, simple,
omnipresent: How is GOD Omnipresent? Soft Critic thou art running on shelves
which will shipwreck and split thee: that GOD is every where I believe it, and
my faith shall Anchor here, how He is so, what Just in. Histor. lib. 11.
Alexander has a sword to cut a sunder this Gordian knot? what Library* of the
world a key to unlock this mystery? for quomodo ubique sit, intellectu Sentent.
lib. 1. did. 37 a 6.
non capimus, so Lumbard out of the goldenmouth'd Homilist does school us, and
bids hush such malapart enquiries as may entitle us to insolence, not improove
our knowledge.

When we speak of GOD, we are to believe an ubiquity, though what this
ubiquity is, is a bottom, we cannot unravell: Heaven is His throne, Isa. 66. 1.
and the earth His footstool in Isaiah, in Jeremy He Jer. 23. 23.
fills Heaven and Earth, omnia implet sine inclusione, I am taught by Saint
Augustine here, and I am Medit. cap. 29.
told by Saint Hilarie there, that a miracle is spher'd in it, Deum ubique
esse, and nusquam abesse, in omnibus esse, and totum esse; that GOD is present
In Psalm. 138. Exponens illa verba, Mirabilis facta est scientia tua ex me.
every where, and in His whole Essence so: to sift this Sacrament, were to be
quaintly mad, but what puzzles my reason, my faith shall not startle at: I
believe though I boult my doors, I lock not GOD in, though I close my
casements, I shut not GOD out: If I take a fee, to blind my eyes, He sees it,
for He is in my closet, He is my cloister when I make it a stews, and under a
religious cool live as in a brothell-house: when I unhallow it by irreverence,
as if I came to a Mart, to bargain with, not an Oratory to beseech Him, GOD is
in His Temple; His residence is especially here, though His presence be every
where, indeed tangit omnia, but non aequaliter tangit omnia, Greg. in comment.
in Ezekiel. Tom. 2. Hom. 8.
GOD fills all places with His presence, His Church with His gracious presence,
no place excludes Him, this is sure of Him, it is His Highness Court of
Requests, where our petitions are best put up, it is that ladder of Jacob,
where the Angels ascend with our suites, and descend again besprinkling us
with graces, it is that Navy Royal which transports our holy Merchandise to
Heaven, it was the cheat, with which Jeroboam guld the Israelites in Josephus;
my good people and friends, you cannot but know that no place is Antiq. lib* 8.
cap. 3.
without GOD, and that no place does contain GOD; wheresoever we pray He can
hear us, wheresoever we worship, He can see us, therefore the Temple is
superfluous, a journey needless to Jerusalem, GOD is better able to come to
you, than you are to go to Him: GODS Essence, it is Lumb. Sent. lib. 1 d. 37.
a. 14.
true, is diffusive through Heaven and Earth, as my soul through every
fraction of my body, yet as this has its chief seat in my heart, so the
beauty of the LORD is peculiar to His own house: One thing have J desired of
the LORD, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house Psalm. 27.
7.
of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD: no
place lifts up pure hands, no one darts up faithful prayers in vain, for they
pierce the clouds, and enter the ears of GOD, wheresoever they are made, yet
His ears are more open to one miserere from the Priests mouth, than the whole
service from the peoples, to one Collect of the Church, than whole piles of
chamber devotions; for there His honor dwells, that is the place of His
rest, and the LORD that made Psalm 134. 2.
Heaven and Earth, does bless out of Sion: I shall therefore be prostrate and
uncovered (spite of the sauciness of too many) in this place principally,
though in no place I can be without my GOD, whom I cannot wind into a Meander,
nor entangle in a Labyrinth, nor hide from Him in a thicket, nor loose Him in a
cloud: Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend up to Heaven thou art there, if I make my bed in hell
thou art there also, if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me Psalm. 139. 7.
and thy right hand shall hold me: How than, if GOD be in all things, escapes
he pollution? think we on the Air, how it is in our lightlesse chambers, nor
though we draw our curtains, can we keep it out of our beds, nor out of our
hearts when we breath, which would soon be stifled in us, were it not for the
cool fannings of the Air: we say vulgarly it infects, but those vapors only
do so, which breathed from putrid things, are carried by the stirring wind
and fly about in it: the Air clarifies of it self, and mixeth not with that
dross and fogs, it does purge out: much less can things below mingle
themselves with GODS purity, though He be in them, nor His unblemisht Essence
be tainted by their touch: the glass we know presents deformities, not
deformed it self, the Sun we see not being defiled therewith, darts his beams
of light, on carrion and mud; no more can our impurities bespatter GOD, though
He be as Essentially in that place where they are don, as we who Act them, for
He is not far (...), Act. 17. 27.
from every one of us: may this imprint on our souls, a double instruction.

To meditate thus, where ever we are, GOD is there, in our houses, our beds,
our hearts, that ere our sins are quickened to the birth, or our thoughts have
given them conception, He has a Register Psalm. 139. 16.
of them, in whose book are all our members written, when as yet there are
none: how should it be abridle in our jaws, when we rush into sin, as the
horse into battle, and in paths strewed with pleasures, run like Dromedaries:
No man can roof or vault himself from GOD, the Egyptians Hieroglyphick of
Him was an eye, seven eyes He has in the Prophet, which run to and fro
thorough the earth* divinely Hesiod, (...) the Zach. 4. 10.
eye of GOD beholds all things, every work of our hands, every step of our
feet, every word of our lips, every motion of our souls: Thy eyes, O LORD,
are upon all the ways of the Sons of men: Jer. 32. 19.
how then can he be eluded? He that planted the ear, shall not He hear, He
that formed the eye shall He not see, shall not he know that teaches man
knowledge? What we do in the darkest cells are to GOD Psalm. 94. 10.
as done on the tops of Mountains; So was Gehazies secret bribery, the close
plots of Achitophell, Pilats washing himself into hypocrisy, the lustful
rape of the Elders, when they tempted that Emblem of chastity with, the gates
of the Orchard are shut and no body sees us:

Tam facile and pronum est superos contemnere testes Iuven. Satyr. 13.
Si mortalis idemnemo sciat:

We draw a vale of secrecy ore our foul deeds, and say, the clouds and
darkness shall be a covering for them: but what clouds of day, what
darkness of night can shadow us from Him, to whom the Light and darkness are
both alike, whom no thickness of walls, no closeness of windows, nor bars of
iron can shut out from us: J admire Thales, who asked whether a man doing ill,
Diog. Laert. de vita Philos. lib 1.
might be obscured from the eye of GOD, he replies, ne cogitans quidem, his
very thoughts are unbosom'd before Him: into what ever actions we embarke our
selves, take we with us the advice of that prince and Patriarch of
Philosophers, So do Senec. Epist. 25 ad Lucil.
all things as if a Cato, a Scipio, or Laelius did look on: GOD overveiwes all
our enterprises, let us shame to act that before Him, we would blush should be
whisperd to men: GOD sees all, when lust is lodged in the eyes, when violence
does bruize in the hands, when blasphemy croakes in the tongue, when
drunkenness reeles in the streets: if the treasures of wickedness be in your
houses, if fraud and coozenage in your contracts, if in your shops false
balances and bags full of deceit: think not with those Atheists in the
Psalmist, that GOD hides His face, that He will never see it: would Psalm. 10.
11.
we but consult the sacred raptures of the Sybels, this they give out of Him,
(...): not the dens of the earth, not the holes of the rocks, not the depth of
Seas, or bottom of hills, but GOD is there, who is every whit every where, --
quocunque vides, quocunque moveris.

Secondly, Is GOD every where, what other witness need we of our best Actions?
as Socrates said of Plato, Plato instar omnium, no croudes or throngs of
Auditors to one Plato, no such Record or Chronicle of our good deeds, as GODS
inspection of them: when I fast, though I strive (...), GOD sees me, though
Chrysostom. in Mat. cap. 6. Hom K.
no sowernesse diffigures my look; when I pray and do so, (...), Chrysostom. (...).
GOD hears us, though no thunder or noise be in our tongve: when I do my
alms, though I blow no trumpet nor cackle straight, so soon as my egg is
laid, yet I have those who see me, (...), not Angels Hierogl lib. 33.
only, or Archangels, but GOD, the parent of the universe, who being mundi
oculus, says Pierius, has His eyes upon us, where ever we are: And sure not a
tear drops from our eyes in penitence, but GOD is ready with His bottles to
take it up; not a word falls from our lips in praise, but it is Music in His
ears, not an Alms is scattered abroad by our hands, but is a sweet incense in
His nostrils* the bread you cast upon the waters, is truly trajectitia pecunia,
money, for which you take a bill of exchange from GOD, and it meets you in a
far country; no robbers by land* no pyracies of Sea, no unfaithfullnesse of
Factors, no violence of tempests, shall take it from you; dispersit, dedit
pauperibus (says the Psalmist) he has given Psalm. 112. 9.
to the poor, and his righteousness remains for ever: in one day he dispersed
his riches, and we see his memory extends to all ages: the Jews tell us that
the Corban which was in the Temple of Eccles. 7. 1.
Jerusalem, had this proverb written about it, the gift given in secret
pacifieth wrath; and that charity, which like oil makes no noise in falling,
does swim above when it is fallen; our wealth, which may seem lost, is
indeed put into a Bank, whence we shall have it with interest, that, and Heaven
to boot; I must speak it here to the glory of GOD, who gives us to give, to
the honor of the Gospel, that we preach not Solifidianisme, nor can envy it
self cavil at what I say: This City because of her successive prosperity in
Ammianus Marcellinus wears the royal name of Augusta; She may as well for
her works of Charity, which she may vie with any in the world, and without
boast: She has her (...), Hospitals for the poor, whom she feeds with her
morsells, warmes with her fleeces: She has her (...), Schools of education
for friendlesse infants, whose bowels as she does refresh, so adorn and enrich
their minds; May She be ever a City of praise, the Seat of Kings, and Mart
of the world: May her Merchants be as Princes, and You the Worthy Governors of
her most famous Nursery, Christ Hospital, founded by King Edward the 6.
Yours be the dewes of Heaven, and fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn
and oil: Opera charitatis, are opera lucis, Let your Light so shine before
Mat. 5. 16.
men that they may see your good works: that is, (...): Yours has been
Chrysostom. in locum.
such, GOD, who is Light, give you the Light of Joy in your dwellings, the
Light of Peace in your consciences, And in your souls and bodies, when
darkness shall be banished for ever, the Light of Glory, Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

