THE YOUNGER BROTHER HIS APOLOGY BY IT SELF.

OR A Fathers free power disputed, for the disposition of his lands, or other
his fortunes to his Son, Sons, or any one of them: as right reason, the
Laws of God and Nature, the Civil, Canon, and Municipall laws of this
Kingdom do command.

By I. Ap-Robert Gent.

Nisi Dominus aedificauerit domum: in vanum laborauerunt, qui aedificant eam.

Psalm. 126. Unless our Lord build the house: they have labored in vain that
build it.

Imprinted, Anno M. DC. XVIII.

TO ALL FATHERS AND SONS OF WORTHY FAMILIES, Whom Virtue, Birth, and
Learning have justly styled Gentlemen: Health, Happiness, and Increase of the
best Knowledge.
AS in the front of this brief Discourse, there is (Right Worthy Gentlemen)
already delivered unto you some light of that which concerns the Quality,
Reason, and Scope of the same: so do I here sincerely profess, that I did not
privately write it at first but for private satisfaction; neither do I now make
it public, but with due relation to the general good of Great Britain, and
for the exercise of Honorable Spirits, in this our much-speaking, and
Paradoxicall Age.

Not upon the least presumption of a self-sufficiency, to confront thereby any
received Custom (if any such be) nor to diminish the natural Reverence, due
by Younger Brothers to their Elder; not to enkindle emulatio^s in families; nor
to innouate any thing to the preuidice of public; or private quiet (which
none I hope will be so ill affected as to suppose;) neither mine inoffensiue
zeal for younger brothers (among whom I am rancked one;) nor the absolute
consent of Imperial and Ecclesiastical Laws (which I having a little studied,
do not a little respect;) nor the particular honor I bear to the vsages, in
this point, of our ancient Britans (from whom I am descended;) nor disire to
maintain and justify an act in this Kind, done by a Friend, (whom I must ever
reverence;) nor yet the hope of bettering my private fortunes (which mooues men
much in these our times) has drawn me to this undertaking: but principally
(as before is so^what touched) the singular Respect which (as a Patriote) I
bear to the glory, and good of Gentlemen's Houses, whose best Originalls,
surest means of Maintenance, and principal Ornaments are Virtue, or Force of
mind: The want whereof, is a common cause of ruin.

The free Power therefore of You who are Fathers, is here in some special
cases argued and defended, to give you occasion thereby to consider with the
cleerer eyesight, for the establishment, and continuance of families. Here
also the Natural rights of us that are children, be so discoursed and
discussed, as that we younger Brothers may have cause and courage, to endeavor
by virtuous means, to make our selves (without the least wrong to any) capable
(if need shall be) of the chiefest uses. And both, and all are so handled, as
that no offense can reasonably arise in any respect: much less for that the
whole is conceived, and written in Nature only of an Essay or Problem, to
which I bynd no man to affoard more belief, then himself has liking of, and
is free to refute the whole, or any part at his pleasure, as he feels himself
able and disposed.

If I may seem among some, to have handled this subject with more earnestness
and acrimony then they think expedient: let them be pleased to weigh the
Decorum of Disputes, which is principally herein observed their Nature
absolutely requiring quicknes, and vehemence on whether side soever. Neither let
this length of Epistle seem unto you like the gates of Myndus, which were so
great and the City so little, that they ministered occasion to the Cynick to
scoff at the disproportion, bidding the Townsemen shut their Gates, for fear
the City should run out through them, seeing that in a new Matter a necessity
lies upon me to use so large a Preparation.

As for the remedies of Evils, by way of enacting Laws, that is the proper
office of Magistrates, and Courts of public Counsel: nevertheless to speak
and treat of them (under the favor and correction of Superiors, to whom I do
always very dutifully submit) is a thing which may well belong to every man.
But as for those grave, and learned Censors, unto whom I may seem to have
bestowed my pains in very needless arguments, because no less then I my
self, they hold the case (as here it is put) to be most clear, and out of
Controversy: to such I answer, that I wrote it not for them, unless perhaps
to confirm their judgments; but for others, who are not altogether so
persuaded. Nor to any, as to prescribe, or bynd further then their own
Consciences shall think good. For that were far too peremtory.

Finally, nothing being here defended but by Authority, Reason, and Example,
nor any person taxed, nor particular personal vices; if nevertheless I have
not performed my part in the work so well as I desire, or as the Cause
deserves (which I fear I have not:) yet my hope is (Right Worthy Fathers, and
Worthy Sons of Right Worthy Families) that for my honest meaning, and good
intentions sake, your will ever conceive well of, and taken into your special
protection,

Your unfeigned vvel-vvisher, I. Ap-Robert.

THE YOVNGER BROTHERS APOLOGY.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of writing this Apology, is to prove, that Fathers may
in some cases dispose of their worldly Estates to which of their Sons shall
reasonably please etc. for so much thereof as they will; and that to be Lawful
by the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations.
NOT many months since being invited by a dear friend of mine to a solemn
Feast, made by him to many of his well-deseruing friends, it was my fortune at
that Meeting to acquaint myself with many gentlemen of no mean discourse:
Whereby I feasted as well my understanding with their pleasant society, as my
taste with the variety of most excellent meats. With what our Senses were
delighted, I let pass to recoumpt, since neither profit, pleasure, nor praise
can arise thereof, either to the writer or reader. Only my intent is, to make
my Reader acquainted what accident caused me to write this small Treatise, and
imbouldned me to publish the same to the common view of this al-reprehending
age. In which nevertheless I do rather hope for allowance, then in any sort to
fear displeasure.

For though my subject be new, yet I hope it shall want at the first rather age
and strength, which grows by years, then probable arguments, yea forcible
reasons to defend it self. As for friends, I hope it will find some; and
peradventure more then enemies, if it deserve well. For, as younger Brothers be
more in number then elder, so are they generally more free in bestowing their
deserved love. For want breeding understanding, makes them know and prize
their friends according to their worth. Whereas the elder, either seated in
their Fathers wealth and possessions, with more then hopes to enjoy their
Fortunes, do somtynes neither love truly themselves, not any man else; but
abusing that which indeed might gain the love of God and Man, and easily
mayntaine their hereditary honor, loose themselves in Vanity, and most idle
courses; yea, in their Fathers lives, so strangely carry themselves as though
the law of God, of Nature, and all other Canon, Civil, and National laws,
constitutio^s, and customesspru^g from the^, could not either in reason or
religion bar them of that which they expect; or give to a wel-deseruing younger
Brother any little hope lawfully to share with the^ the least part of their
Fathers inheritance; much less to expect an elder Brothers fortunes; oron any
terms, or for any cause by a Fathers favor, to step before them.

Which argument among many others, was then handled by the Company Pro and
Contra, so doubtfully, that it gave unto me an occasion to write this present
discourse, concerning the free power of some Fathers. Wherein I intend to
displease no elder Brothers; no, not them, who not inheriting their Fathers
Virtues, strive not to mayntaine their Ancestors honor, in preserving their
Noble Names, and Families; by which, as a reward to their virtues and trauells,
men have alwates labored to live to al succeding ages their Posterity.

But my intent is to show, how opinion and inconsideration makes oftentimes the
wise to be scrupulous, and through superstitious zeal, not only to fear to
do that which reason may, or might have commanded; but rashly to condemn
other men's acts as unlawful, and irreligious. Which according to reason and
Religion have been done and ratified; using themselves that Custom for the
overthrow throw of their families, which was indeed only devised for their
preservation; and being hood winked with false conceits, do wittingly leave
that, which they and their Ancestors had gotten, as the reward in this life of
their virtues, to be the future fuel of al inordinate desires, and Beastiall
sensuality, which in their providence they could willingly otherwise have
disposed of.

All which I doubt not but to make clear to the impartial reader: proving by
the law of God and Man, that a Fathers freedom is such that he may Lawfully,
and Religiously, give his lands and goods, or other his fortunes to any of his
Children, for the Preservation of his Name, and Comfort of his Posterity,
without all scruple, as right reason, or the better deserts of a Son shall
persuade him, void of all tenderness, or blyndnesse of affection, which
oftentimes leads a Fathers will, and corrupts his understanding: so as he be
true Lord thereof, not tied by consideration of Money received, or Contract made
by Marriage of his Son, which may alter the Case, and make the Son Lord,
and the Father to have but the use only during his life, as all our Common
Lawyers well know. In which Case, we also have experience, that our Law permits
many times to alter the Title, and to undo what by former times was held not
to be controlled. But of this point I will not treat. Only I mean to argue,
whether a Father possessed in fee-tayle, may in law and equity, upon the former
considerations, make any child which he has, his Heir, leaving to the rest a
competency; and do an act, which according to equity and Religion may stand
good and valuable.

In this my present discourse let not any expect many quotations of authors;
for I never read any of this subject. What I bare away of the discourse made by
my friends, that I will set down: and what other reasons my understanding shall
affoard, which I hope shall prove so demonstratiue, that they shall be of
Authority sufficient to satisfy my reader, or incite some better pen and
understanding, to treat of the same more largely and substantially. And lastly
and chiefly, to clear some of my Worthy friends from those imputations, which
I find the ignorant to lay upon them: which if I may do, I shall think my time
and pains well employed.

CHAP. II. That the grounds of all good Constitutions being in Nature; yet
she, neither before, nor after the law of Propriety established did command,
that all should be left to any one, more then to another.
SVCH are the wise and te^perate works of Nature, that nothing is done by her
rashly, or unaduisedly. For though in the infancy of the world, she had an
invincible power to produce all effects, which the had their Original in her:
yet being studious to please mankind, not only with variety, but also with
rarity, successively discovers, and daily does disclose to the searching wits
of the world her secrets: as Time and Place either has, or does daily beget
Occasion; still as it were keeping in store her heavenly treasure, till man's
necessity best moves her liberality.

For what can the wit of man devise, or what does time, or Art make known,
which good is; that Nature, from the first time she began to work, had not in
her (though to her self only known) the ground thereof, either to produce the
particular or general effect which wisely she left to be tempered according as
the reason of man (whose glory she pretends) should think fittest to give the
form; as time, place, and the Nature of the thing should require.

For though that Marriage, as it is a coniunctio^ of man and woman, containing
an inseparable society of life, be of Nature it self; and (as Deuines and
Canonists hold) to have his Original in the state of innocence, which
undoubtedly was then ordained for issues sake, from which a lineall succession
was also intended: yet until necessity in forced man to make division of the
Blessings of God and Nature, the claymes, and rights which follow lineall
succession to inheritance, were not discovered. For all things being common
among men many ages were numbered from the worlds beginning, before any man laid
proper claim to any thing, as due to himself alone. Whereby it well appears
that hereditary succession, or Title to a Parents lands or goods, could not
then be in use, or so much as thought of.

This, I persuade my self, was the law of Nature vndepraued. To the which I
inclyne my will the sooner to credit; because, I find that all sorts of people,
as well Christians as others, who have perfection in Natural Society, or a
perfect Religious life in a Natural and worldly conversation of men have; and
do daily imboace this natural, and blessed community. Which happy law of
Nature (as I have said) for many age: and without doubt had longer continued,
had not sin (which breaks al union and depraues all natural perfection)
gotten such dominion in the minds of men; that in natural equity all things
could not longer be used in common.

For as some being possessed with an insatiable desire to get rule and reign,
sought the oppression of others, by taking from them that fredome which Nature
had give them: so others given to sensuality and idleness, sought to live of
other men's labors. Whereas by Natures laws every one ought to live by his
proper industry, within the rules of justice and honesty. Whereupon natural
reason persuaded, that all things being divided, every man should know his
own: otherwise no peace or concord could be maintained in humane society. For,
all things being Common, the way lay open to every man at his pleasure to abuse
others, and as it were to rob them of God his Blessing.

Hereupon, Aristotle judged the division of all worldly goods, to have been
agreeable to the law of Nature, which the precept of our Decalogue seems to
approve,

NON FVRTVM FACIES. For the Law of God is never contrary to the Law of
Nature: neither does Nature ever contrary it self, though some may perhaps
think that herein she has. For albeit at the Creation of all things together
with man in the state of grace, a co^munity was intended: yet was it not so
absolutely resolved of by Nature, but that by necessity (I mean by fall of man
from Gods grace) she did dispense with this law, and left free to man's choice
to embrace, upon her warrant, either the one or the other, as best might fit
the time, place, and natures of men, which ever since the world began have
given occasion of the making of all laws.

Whereby we see, that though Nature give the grounds to laws: yet man's
understanding still gives the particular form. For Nature creating man, gave
unto him those worldly blessings to use well, with warrant either to hold them
in Common, or in Proper, as reason from time to time could best persuade his
will. But, when reason and will had agreed, that it was fit that every man
should enjoy his part in proper; Nature moved man further, and told him, that
now he might lawfully think on his succession; and not only live in his
species, but breath as it were to the worlds end, in a lineall Posterity by
honorable deeds and virtuous Acts; with which desire, Nature as a wife mother
so inflamed man her noblest child after his fall from grace, that some men by
Natures light only, have done acts almost above Nature; and none has hardly
been so base, but desirous to live, and leave an honorable memory behind them.

Which, that they may the better do, Nature has not only given them power, to
leave their well gotten wealth, but in a manner their habitual virtues to
their issue; in which this worldly honor (the souls worldly life, and virtues
temporal reward) may live free from all-killing time. Yet, did she not then by
any Command, leave it to any one in particular, but giving a general
suggestion of the fitnes of the thing, left the form to their best discretion.
For had she not done so, all Nations had been tied to observe one form, in
leaving their goods, and fortunes to their Posterityes; for Nature being one,
without change to all, of necessity prescribes no binding rule to any in
particular, but to all in general; no man being able to say, that this Natures
law Commands me to do, and yet byndes not any other to do the like. Which is
evident in the matter of succession, or claymes of inheritance; no one Country
observing the form held by another, or tying it self without control to
observe his own, as I shall hearafter declare.

For albeit (as I have said) the conjunction of man and woman, which we call
Marriage, or Matrimony, together which the desire of issue, be of Nature, from
whence also are sprung not only a division of goods, and the fortunes of this
world: but also a laudable desire to preserve a family, and name, by the
ordination of heirs, to well gotten possessions; yet did Nature never set
down as a law, that those fortunes should be left to the elder brother or
younger, or to any one in particular, or to all, but to whom the Father, being
true and free Lord thereof, should best devise by will guided by reason. For it
was never yet auerred by any sound Divine, Philosopher, or lawyer, that Nature
makes immediately heirs, but men, whom the positive laws of every Country
ordain by that form, and power of law, where such an act should be done. And
this is (I presume) without control, what the law of Nature commanded
touching the matter in question. Next let us see, what the laws of God do
command.

CHAP. III. That the breach of some written laws of God upon warrant of the
Primarie law of Nature, is without sin: and that therefore there can be no
such right in Primogeniture, which is not in the Fathers power to avoid, though
there were a precept to the contrary, as there is not.
IF Nature, being taken for the principal, and all-producing cause of the
whole frame of the Universe with all creatures therein, be nothing else, but the
working. Will of the Highest, and first Moouer, as Deuines and Philosophers do
hold; then surely must Natures law be his will, which he cannot contradict or
command to the contrary, except he should be contrary to himself, which he
cannot. For, what is in God, is God; therefore Constant, and Immutable.

Out of which ground it is easily proved: That if the law of God teach that
which the law of Nature has ordained, the right of inheritance cannot be tied
to any other person or persons, then to those which the Fathers will approues,
according to power given him by the laws of the Nations where he lives. Which
power derived from Natures law, cannot err from the law of God. For whosoever
shall consider but of Gods Commandments given to man, shall well find, that
God thereby has still seconded his former ordinances given by Nature. For so
long as man kind lived in a sort, after the innocence which Gods grace in his
first Creation had wrought in him, God gave him no other law; but when as by
sin those sparks which remained after his fall were quite extinguished, he
gave him new laws, yet agreeable to Nature.

As for example, in our present affairs. When man had made by Natures
privilege partition of Gods and Natures blessings; then God said to his people
by the mouth of Moses, Thou shall nor steal: Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors house, his wife, his ox, his Ass, or any thing that is his. As
also, Thou shall not kill. Which with all other his Comaundements teaching what
sin is, are agreeable to the law of Nature, yet are dispensed withal as far
as the laws of Nature ever permitted. For, though that the express
Commandment of God be; Thou shall not covet any thing that is thy Neighbors,
nor kill, yet in some cases, both may lawfwlly be done. The one in extreme want
of present food: the other in defense of life and goods; in which, the law of
God is good, by the original law of Nature, which made all for the sustenance
of man; and gave leave to defend life with the loss of another blood, yea
life, if otherwise it cannot be. Upon which ground I argue thus.

Suppose the law of God did at this present co^ maund (which indeed it does
not) that the in heritance should be left to any one particular person, and
namely to the elder Brother: yet in some Cases it would not bynd the Father to
observe it. For as in the former Commandments upon some considerations, the
Commandment may be dispensed withal, so in this. For, it is not sufficient to
be the elder Brother, or the nearest in blood to gain an inheritance, in the
Case which I have now proposed; for other circumstances must concur, which if
they be wanting, bare propinquity or ancienty of blood may justly be rejected:
and he that is second, third, fourth, fifth, or last may lwafully be preferred
before the first, and this by all law divine and humane, and by all Reason,
Conscience, and Custom of nations Christian.

For if it should fall out that the next in blood, should be a Natural fool,
or a madman; or being taken by the Turks or Mores in his infancy, and brought
up in their religion would maintain the same: or if any other such accident,
ministering cause of just exception should fall out; is it likely that any law
would allow, that such a man should be admitted to the inheritance Wherefore
how idly should they talk, that would have that it was his birthright, or that
God and Nature had made him heir, since that neither God nor Nature does
imediately make heirs, as I have said before. True it is, that God and Nature
makes men, who by the mediation of the laws and customs of nations may come
to be heirs. Upon which ground our common Lawyers say, that no heirs are
borne, but men and law make them.

True it is, that in holy Writ, great respect is had of the first begotten, and
a blessing is held to come to parents thereby. But this blessing (I presuppose)
to be, that thereby the fear of sterility was taken away, which in the old Law
was held to be a great punishment of God, and in respect thereof parents had of
themselves, and by the national laws and customs, a great regard of their
first begotten, and preferred them to the better part of their possessions: yet
not by any command from God, as a precept to bind his elect people under pain
of sin. For, had any such Law bound them, under such a penalty; then should
it bynd all Christians now, on the same conditions. For we see it by general
practice of all countries to be otherwise. Therefore it follows directly, that
it was not Gods Commandment, but a National Law. For God both is, and ever
was one, without change to all his people; and so ever were, and will be his
Laws positive, made for them that truly worship him.

The claim which Esau made to his Birthright was not by the law of God, as
some ignorantly affirm, but by the laws of his country. For, should the law
of God have commanded it, it had been sin in his Mother, and brother, by
cunning to have gotten it from him. Neither could the Father or the State
wherein they lived, upon no just cause known but to God alone, without sin,
have settled the same upon his Brother. Jacob, as it was, and as it may seem by
allowance from God, and as it may be judged by the sucesse. Whereby it is
thought, that God ordained it as a punishment of the one, and blessing of the
other: which by the permission of sin to be committed, God does never do.

Neither did the National law or custom of the Jews (as it is said)
absolutely command the Father to leave unto his first begotten, all, or the
greatest part of his goods and fortunes. But if in case he died, not disposing
thereof by act in his life, or will at his death, then the custom of the
Nation, laid a double portion on the eldest or first begotten, providing for
the rest proportionably.

By all which you may gather; that neither the law of God, or man, in this
case, commanded that Esau should have the inheritance; but power to do the
contrary was given to the Father in his life time; even by the law it self.
For many Deuines hold, that Esau selling his Birthright (as it is termed) sold
not goods, or lands, but his claim of being high Priest after his Father,
which by custom was to come to him, being his Fathers eldest son. Of which
dignity God seeing him unfit, permitted him to passeaway his right in his
Fathers life, as we read in holy writ, and which God seemed to approve. And
thus (I hope) this objection is answered.

Further, if it were true, that the effect of Eldership were such by the law of
God, as some passionately defend: that is, that the whole inheritance should of
right pertain to the eldest; the^ sure it follows by good consequence; that
there should, nor ever could, have been but one temporal Lord of all the
world. For of necessity Adams inheritance should have gone still to the next in
blood; which how absurd it is, let all men judge.

Moreover, we read, that Noe having three sons, and the whole world to leave
unto them, gave it not all to the Eldest, but equally divided it among them,
and their posterity, as all authentical histories do witness. God requiring
obedience of children to parents, promised a reward, saying, Honor thy Father
and Mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord shall give
thee. This surely was not spoken to one, but to all the children of men. For
with God there is no exception of persons: but as a just and pions Father, he
gives every one according to his deserts: Terram autem dedit filijs hominum.

We read also in holy writ, how the prodigal child, being weary or his Fathers
house, came unto him, and boldly said: Pater, da mihi portionem substantiae
meae, quae me contingit. This child of which the Gospel speaks, was the
you^ger brother: yet you see how boldly he said: give unto me that portion of
goods which belongs to me. By which words it is evident, that a division, or
partition of a Fathers fortunes was then in use: and that any child as well
you^ger, as elder had power by law, to demand his legitimate, or childs part,
according to the Nature of the Civil and Canon Law, as you have heard. For the
words following in the text are these: Et diuisit substantiam illis. Thus we
see, that the privilege of Eldership was the^ excluded; which now in our
country by custom only is gotten to be of such force.

But it may be objected, that this was a parable only (as indeed it was) and
cannot be alleged as law. True it is; yet it cannot be denied, but that all
similies, parables, or examples, which ever were alleged by the wise and
learned, to represent the truth, have ever been derived from the customs and
nature of things, according to the known truth in that time, place, and to
those to whom the speech, or discourse is directed. And shall we think, that
our Savior Christ being wisdom and truth it self, treating of so important an
affair as he did then in the Gospel, would use an unknown discourse, or
strive to make the truth appear to our weak understandings by a Parable which
in equity could not be true? Noe surely. For it appears by Solomon his
succeding to his Father David, that David had power by the laws of god and
man, to give his Kingdom to the worthiest, which hedeeming to be Solomon, gave
unto him his Kingdom, though he was the youngest son.

Neither was there any just exception made against Adonias his eldest Brother,
or against some other of his Brethren, why they should be disinherited by their
Father David, contrary to the common practice of those times, in settling
inheritances. But, the only known reason of this act in Scripture, was David
promise made to Salomons Mother, together with her great entreaty made to
David to perform the same. Which surely he would not have done, except he had
found a lawful power in himself, to have executed the same. And thus much
concerning what may be said out of Scripture, or law of God in our present
question.

CHAP. IIII. That nations beginning to denise sundry forms of settling
Inherit^nces, the Romans especially therein respected the free power of
Fathers; the right of Children to their Fathers estates beginning only at their
Fathers Death.
HAVING now declared in the former chapter what the laws of God, and Nature
do determyne of our present question; we inted to examine in brief, what is
commanded by the law of Man, as well civil of other Nations as common of our
own Gontry. And first touching the civil Law thus.

Though that all Law, which ever had but the name or credit of Law, does surely
derive her original from the Law of Nature; whereupon Cicero many hundredth
years since said, that the ground of all law making, is to be taken from the
chief law, which was borne before any law was written, or City builded: yet do
they differ much in form. For as it is no law, but tyranny, which wholly
disagrees with the law of Nature, as Aristotle says:so if it agree in all with
the law of Nature without limitation, or difference it must of force be the
very law of Nature it self, and not the law of man. Which surely is nothing
else, then a temper, or form of equity, drawn by right reason from the grounds
of Natures laws; according as time, place, and the Natures of men either gave
or shall give the occasion. For though new laws be daily made of new and
several accidents: yet all are agreeable to the old, and ancient grounds of
reason in Nature, the just Mother of all law. Wherefore, having set down
before, what the law of Nature is, touching the matter in question, I shall
need only now to show, what temper or form has thereunto been added by the
Civil Lawyer.

After that mankind was enforced (yet by Natures warrant) as I have said to
make a partition of the Blessings of God, and Nature: and that men were
possessed by the same right of goods and lands, which they desired to leave to
posterity; lawmakers, and in particular the Ciuilian, devised by little and
little certain forms of inheritance, and ordination of heirs, at the first
somewhat rigorous; giving to Parents power of life and death over their
Children, and a free disposition of all their fortunes to any one of them in
his life: but dying intestate, then all which was the Fathers, to be equally
divided among the Children, as well daughters as sonns. Which Constitution was
afterward upon good grounds altered: The Father being bound to leave every
Child a portion, which the Civil Lawyer calls a legitimate, others a
Patrimony; which at the first was the eight part of the Fathers substance
equally to be divided (as I have said:) which after a while seeming little, the
law commanded, that the fourth part should be left without control: except,
that upon just cause the Testator did disinherite him or them who by course of
law were to succeed him: still upholding the former laws, that as well
daughters, as sons, should equally succeed to their Parents dying intestate;
herein assigning fourteen Causes, why an heir might lawfully be disinherited.

Many hundred years passed, from the establishing of the Civil law, and
before that it was ordained by force of law that Parents should leave a Childs
part (as it is now called) or that he could not disinherit, without expressing
the cause thereof in his last Will: yet, in all this time, nor until this
present day, the priuiledg of engrossing all by Primogeniture was not once
heard of, or at least wise not admitted, but rather excluded; as by many texts
in the same Law it well appears: The end of the Imperial, or Roman Civil
law, being only to maintain moral Justice inthree short precepts, Live
honestly; Hurt no Man; Gine unto every one his own. So he who observes these
three, fulfills this law, yea the law of Nature, from whence this law is
sprung. Now, if any Brother can prove, that his Father either in life by deed,
or by will at his death disposing of his goods and lands, no otherwise then I
have set down, does none act against these three; then why should he not
content himself, either with the fruits of his Fathers love, or his own
deserts whatsoever they be.

True it is, that in Natural justice, children during their Fathers life, have
Ius ad rem, and not Ius in re to a Fathers goods. Whereupon the Law calls
them Quasibonorum patris Dominos. Which their right only takes effect after
their Fathers death. For during life, he has power to alter, alien, sell, and
give as it shall please him according to form of law; but being dead without
will, or disposition thereof, they fall upon his children (as I have said)
according to the law of nations. This law imbraceth a two fold justice; the one
in exchange, the other in distribution. The first has not to do with our
cause: the other surely rather commends, then condemns a Father, who upon good
occasion, that is, for the bad demerits of his eldest son, and for the
preservation only of his family, shall give, or convey his lands and goods to
the younger. For the Nature of distributive justice, is not only to give
proportionably to the well deferuing: but also to forbear to place benefits
upon any one who shall abuse them; or use them to any other end, then to that
good for which they were lent him, and he shall leave them. And this is, Ius
suum vnicuique tribuere. For no man can give or sell his goods to an evil end,
or to any one whom he assures himself will use them to the dishonor of God;
or the wrong of those who shall live with him, or by him; of which I will speak
more in the last chapter, being there to handle what a Father may in conscience
do, or not do, in our present question, with sin, and without sin. And thus
much of the Civil and Canon Lawyers auerment of an elder brothers right to his
Fathers fortunes.

CHAP. V. That the present custom in our Co^ntrey of giving all, or almost all
to the Eldest, was never so begun, that it meant to exclude just remedies for
such evils, as should grow out of the abuse of that custom, when it may make
Fathers guilty of their sons faults, and of their families ruins.
I Have of purpose reserved to treat of the laws of our country in the last
place, because (I assure my self) that they are of most force to sway the
matter in question. For many things may be permitted by the laws of God and
Nature; and yet they on the contrary are forbiden, or practiced by course of
law in several States of the world, as the lawmakers, and the customs of the
countries do allow or comaund. I do confess, that the general practice of our
time among parents is to leave either all, or the most part of their lands to
their eldest begotten son. This without all question, was (as it has been
said) first devised in former ages, for the preservation of a family, and to
raise some one, who might be a comfort to his brothers, sisters, and family,
and in whom his progenitors virtues might line to the world. Moreover, I will
not deny, but the partition of lands may bring, in the end, a goodly estate to
nothing, or to so little, as it may be like an A tomie in the sun: yet I find
in Natural reason, that, ex nihilo nihil fit, or at lest, that,

Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat Res ang ista domi.

But if men do fail of those happy ends to which this general custom should
guide, then would I wish, that they would not use that for their destruction,
which was meant for their preservation. For who does not see, in these our
times, may unbridled youths, to be so violently carried away with the humor of
spending, that they neglect brother, and sister; yea, bring to extreme misery
their Natural Mothers after their Fathers death by their vnthristines. What
help for this has law left unto us? no means to put a bridle to these unruly
colts if they become heirs according to the custom of our time? no truly.
For some starting hole will be found to vnty the knot which a Fathers care once
tied. How then? must many an hopeful, and well-de serving brother and sister,
be left to the mercy of this whirlwind? There is no necessity in it. For our
law has given power to a Father, and free will to dispose of his own,
according as reason shall guide his will, without all obligation to his heir.
Besides, this custom takes place, only after a Fathers death, if he dispose
not of what is his by deed in life, or by will at his death.

But least my words be more generally taken, then they are meant; I mean those
Fathers, who are possessed of their lands in fee, or fee-tayle; that is, are
absolute of themselves, and have not upon good consideration, conuaied their
lands from themselves. For all our lawyers do agree, that such parents may
alien, sell, and give by power of our law their lands to whom they will,
without respect of person or eldership. But me thinks I hear one say, that the
custom is otherwise; and that this custom is a law. True, it is the custom.
But let us see whether it binds sub peccato, or as a custom, which rather
inuites then commands. There never was any comaund to tie a Father under a
penalty which admits no limitation; but it was ever left indifferent, and then
only to take place where former provision according to course of law is not
made; the surely a parent is free from this devouring custom, and may in good
consideration prevent what evil it may bring to his posterity, yea reason
comaunds it should be so. For, Interest reipublicae vt quilibet re sua been
vtatur, as says the civil law. For if a man can ney there sell, nor set, much
less can he give any thing to another, which he thinks in his conscience will
use it to the dishonor of God, the ruin of himself, or others.

Some Deuines hold, that it is not lawful to sell, or let an house to any
that he thinks assuredly would make thereof a stews; or to sell, give, or lend
a weapon to a man who intends therewith to do murder. Excomunications are
imposed on them, who sell arms offensive, or defensive to Turks, though they
be not assured that they will use them against Christians.

Thus we see, the rule of conscience, not only to command a man to use well
those fortunes which God has bestowed upon him: but forbids him, either upon
affection, or gain, to part with them to others who will abuse them; least he
be partaker of others sin; which a parent may be after death who leaves his
lands to a desperate unthrift. But what religion, and conscience does command,
shall be declared in the following chapter. In which upon grounds drawn out of
these former four Chapters, it shall be argued, what sin may be contracted by
the parting of an estate among sonns, or by disinheriting of an eldest son,
upon just cause; and unto whom the Father is only tied by the Custom of the
Country, without obligation of promise, or contract in Marriage, which may
alter the Case.

CHAP. VI. That it is no offense before God for a Father, being tenant in
fee-simple, to disinherit the eldest, or to parcel his estate upon cause: and
that extreme vices of Heirs apparent, together with the fewer means which
younger Brothers have now to live on, then heeretosore, cries out against the
contrary opinion.
THE right of these insociable inheritours, of which we now treat, may grow
(as I magine) out of three titles, or claymes, which they may pretend to a
Fathers inheritance, and whereby it may be deemed (as they think) sin in a
Father, upon what desert soever, to bar them of the faid right. These three
tytles, are Purchase, Custom, and Entaile. Of each severally. And of the first,
which is Purchase; surely in the judgment of the good and learned, there is no
question in law, or conscience, but that a Son joined Purchaser with his
Father, has Ius in re, and by equity must, suruyuing his Father, inherit such
lands as were purchased in their names. Now of the other two, though it be as
clear, as the noone light; that a Lord in Fee simple, or Tenant in tail, may
sell, or give by course of our Common law, at his pleasure, all such lauds held
by him in that kind, according to those forms of law, which the learned in our
laws have, and can set down: yet there seems to arise a great difficulty how
such an act, or acts may in conscience be executed. I have heard some say, in
this our Case, Summum ius, summa iniuria.

Of these points therefore I will speak, saluo meliori iudicio, what may in
Conscience, upon good and just occasion given by the son to his Father, be
put in execution. It is well known to all divines (as I have said) that holy
writ has not prescribed any direct, or precise form to the Children of God,
whereby they are bound in Conscience to dispose of their lands and goods, but
has absolutely left them to the customs of their Country, where any act of
that kind shall be executed, only as confirming all forms of devises which by
public consent, and authority, either have, or shall in rightful manner be
devised, or ordained.

Out of this ground and others before mentioned; let us examyne, whether a
Father parting his fortunes by power of law, and on just cause; shall do a
wrongful, and a sinful act as some pretend to make it.

I confess, that every act in it self, or by Circumstance evil, and which
upon no occasion can be justified, is both before God, and man sin; and is by
no means to be executed by a Christian. But that the parting of an inheritance,
or the disinheriting of an eldest son, upon just cause, and according to
course of Law, is an act of that nature, does not appear. For I do not find,
that either the Law of Nature, or grace, nor yet the Laws of man, common,
civil, or Canon, ever forbad such acts, whereby sin may be imputed to those
who do them on good considerations. Sure I am, that the Cannon, and Civil Law,
are so far from forbidding them, that they command, as a thing in equity, the
Father either to divide his inheritance, or allow him, according to his
affection, to give to one, more then to another: yet with this prouiso; that he
who has the least have his childs part, which the Law does also assign,
except on just desert he do disinherit any one; which at this day may, yea must
be by will, with the cause of disinherision named therein. Of which causes the
Imperial Laws have set down fourteen, as it shall well appear to them who
are desirous to understand more thereof. So it is evident, that by these two
Laws, no sin can grow upon such acts, being done upon their warrant, and
upon such consideration, as has been before often by me set down.

As for the common Laws of our Realm sure it is, that they allow no less,
and with a greater preuiledge. For a man may by this law, give his lands held
in Fee, either by deed in his life, or by will at his death, to any of his
Children; yea, to a stranger, without rendering a reason why he does so. True it
is, that a Father, not disposing thereof in such sort, the Custom gives the
whole estate to the eldest: yet in some parts of our Country, the youngest
Brother by Custom is to have the land, held by some kind of tenure, if the
Father in his life time do not dispose thereof.

As yet therefore I cannot see how any sin is committed, or contracted by the
former acts, being neither done against the law of God, or man, as we have
proved; except it should be said to be sin, not to leave it to the power of a
custom; which cannot be except the former law shall be proved not to be of
force, and no way to be executed, which can no way be done. For though I must
confess, that the custom of leaving the child-estate to the eldest son,
has of later times been much embraced by our Gentry, for the preservation of
their families, for which it was invented: For the times have so ruled, that
men of sort being either idle, or not possessed with a covetous humor, have
contended themselves with their Fathers fortunes, and have preferred their
younger sonns by those means, which the times did affoard; which preferments
were the^ better then now they are namely by many commendable courses; as
either by service of spiritual men, whereby many were raised or by professing
a spiritual life, whereby the younger brother has oftentimes in ho^nor stepped
before the elder. But this manner of life is not so grateful to our English
gentlemen's Natures as it has been.

The trade of the Merchant, the Military profession, the Courtyers life,
advanced many more, then now they do; and lastly, the elder brothers were the
of better temper in spending: and if they had no humor to get, yet had they a
care to keep what was left unto them; and ever held themselves bound by
religion to provide for their younger brothers and sisters, left to their
dispose, which now is far otherwise. For an elder brother is found to spend
more in a year idly, then would prefer, or maintain a whose family nobly;
and to suffer their brothers and sisters to shift, which as these times shape,
is oftentimes to live either lewdly, or most miserably: being forced either to
forget their good education, or to lay aside all badges of gentry, who
otherwise with some reasonable helps, might do God, their Country, and Family
much honor.

Since we have gone so far, let us see on what grounds this custom first has
risen. Surely for the maintenance of a family, yet led with, an ambition, at
the example of princes, who finding some difficulties in the admitting of many
to a government, and feling what inconveniences the parting of an estate
brought, devised that one should govern; sometimes the worthiest, sometimes
the eldest was elected, according as the order was agreed upon, and yet the
other brothers were mainteyned like Princes. And thus, custom also among them
has been broken, without imputation of sin. For to go no further then our
later times; it is well known that Ferdinand (Charles the fifth his brother)
being settled in the Empire, divided his estate. To Maximilian his eldest son,
he left the Empire, with Austria, Hungaria, and Bohemia. To Charles his second
son, Styria, Carinthia, and other dominions, And to Ferdinand the youngest,
he gave the Earldome of Tyrol. All which, if in his life time he had not
disposed of, had come to the eldest. Philip the second, late king of Spain,
gave to his Daughters the 17. Provinces, which were of right to have descended
to his son after his death, if he had not disposed thereof in his life time.
This is, and was deemed lawful by the Divines of this age, otherwise surely
they would never have done it.

But does this custom in meaner degrees work that effect which it has done in
them? No truly. For as we have proved, it is rather the overthrow then the
preservation of many families. And let us see withal, whether families
florithed not as much and more then now they do, before this custom was
received. Liuic says that three hundred of the Faby, being all of one name and
family, issued out of Rome gates at one time on their own cost, to the defense
of their city, which was done before this custom was dreamed of.

In Scotland 300. of the name and family of the Frasers, gentlemen, were at one
time slain in a fight by their enemies neighbors; and 140. gentlemen of one
name in Yorkshire waited upon their chief, or principal man of their house
being at that time high Sheriff. In other countries many Noble families, from
the Romans downward, have continued where this custo^e has been deemed
unjust, as by their laws it is manifest: whereas in our country, in these our
times, if there be one family in a Shire, which is of three hundred years
continuance, very many others are scarce of five descents in a blood.

Why should our age then, seeing the fruit of this custom to be so small,
embrace it with such zeal, as to deem the breach thereof, being warranted for
good and just by the Law of God, of Nature, and of man to be a sin? Is it
possible that it is held both lawful, and expedient, for the preservation of a
family, that degrees of kindred should be dispensed with to mary, being known
contrary to the general practice of gods Church: and can it be lawful before
God and man, for preservation of our goods, to venture our lives, and to kill a
Theife who shall assault us, and that perhaps for a trifle: and yet that for
preservation of our whole estate, and maintenance of a family, it shall be held
sin to break a bare custom, under no penalty obligatory, yea always allowed
by law? I have never heard, that a custom was of force, to abiogate a law so
far that it should be deemed a sin to follow the said law; though it have
power to dispense with the law, which other wise to break were sin,
especially, when as the law is both more pious, and more natural then the
custom is. For how far is it from the law of Nature, and from the practice of
Fatherly piety, the Father dying intestate, the eldest son to become
absolute Lord of all his Fathers lands, and not to be bound by law to provide
for brother or sister, but at his own good liking. Aliud tempus alios mores
postutat. Men of virtue, men of learning and virtue, both now, and in former
ages in this our country have broken this custom, as the world knows, upon
good consideration, and just causes; not upon spleen, or false suppositions
persuaded to leave their fortunes to strangers, or to a lustsuil issue, as some
have done.

CHAP. VII. That Fathers being tenants in Fee-tayle, may likewise without
scruple of Conscience, discontinue the state-taile upon cause, and devise the
same at their reasonable pleasure.
HAVING treated largely, and (as I presume) proved sufficiently, that lands
held in fee-simple, may either be parted, or upon just cause wholly given away
to a younger son; I intend now to speak of the lawful freedom of a Father
in like sort, and on the same causes; moved to dispose of his lands intailed:
of which there seems more doubt then of the former.

Every humane act, which of it self is not forbidden by the law of God or
Nature, is to be judged good or evil, lawful or unlawful; either by the law
of the place where the act is done or by intention of him who shall do the act.
For, as the law of God commands somethings to be done, and other things to be
avoided, under pain of sin: so the third sort of actions are left free (by
the said authority) from sin; except the law of man shall forbid them, and so
make them sin; or else evil intention make the^ (being of themselves lawful)
to be a sin, and unlawful; according to that principle of Moral Philosophy,
Finis specifical actum. For as an act of it self lawful, being done against law
is sin: so a good act commanded by law, yet done with an evil intention, may
be sin.

Out of these grounds let us see, whether the Common law of our Country, and
the intention of a Father, which are to be the Judges of our Cause, can allow
the cutting offan entaile, the parting of an inheritance, or (upon
proportionable cause) the disinheriting of a son. First, it is clear, that
the act of it self, by law, may be done; but whether such an act be summu^ ius,
which may be summa iniuria, that is the doubt. What shall be the trial? By other
laws, it is either made lawful, or left indifferent. Our law which makes this
tie, gives leave to undo it without any exception. Ergo, to a good end, and
upon just cause it may be done. But it may be said, that the eldest son
during this entaile, is quasi Dominus, yet having neither Dominium directum,
nor indirectum, he, during his Fathers life, has only ius ad rem, and not in
re. Whereby no change is forbidden to be made by the Father, according to the
form of the law under which he lives, and by which the son is to make
claim, if the Father shall create no new estate in his life. For it is lawful
for every man to dispose of his own, as far as the law shall permit him; if it
be not forbidden by some other law; but such an act is not forbidden by any
other law; Ergo it is lawful and no sin.

But it may be said, that the intention of him who entailed the land was, that
it should not be untied, or the state changed. To which I answer. That no act
done by law, can be free from chaung, further, or longer, the^ the law that
made it a bynding act shall allow. And it is well known to the learned in our
laws, that every man's intention is to be construed according to law, by which
his act, and intentions are directed. Whereupon the Ciuilian says in like
Cases, valeat quantum valire potest. Neither is it thought, that any man, who
conuayeth his lands by entaile, can intend an act beyond law; or desire that
his son, whom he makes te^nant entaile (as our lawyers term him) shall in
no case no, not for the preservation of his family, or relief of many others of
his Children, have power to cut off this entaile, and to be able to alien,
sell, or give his lands, as reason, law, and religion shall permit. For it may
be judged, that he who does an act to a good end, as namely to preserve his
family, will always assent to another act, which shall with better assurance
then his own, strengthen his intention. To the former considerations we may
add, what incoueniences may follow of this general position. For if in
Conscience the whole inheritance of the Father, is to come without comtroule to
the eldest son, then must it of necessity be inferied, that the Father,
without this consent, cannot give to pious uses, or set out for the advancement
of his other Children any other thing after his death. So that if God should
bless a Father with many Children, and cross him with as many misfortunes;
his other Children, and all other his pious intentions should be provided for
only at his sons, or heirs courtesy. Which how absurd it is all men know.
For hereupon all donations to pious uses, and to younger Brothers for their
preferment, may be called in question.

It is an ordinary thing in these our times, when the land is let to the Heir
general, to alter the estate, if the land so conveyed shall come to Daughters,
and to leave it to a Brothers son, or to some other of the same name, though
peradventure many degrees removed, for preservation of the name and family. If
this may be deemed lawful and no sin, being done against a well deserving
child, for whom Nature, and her deserts plead her worthy to be her Fathers
heir: then without all compare, if the preservation of a name and family,
might not justly be labored for, according to power given by the law of God
and man: what may be lawfully acted against an unthrifty heir, who in any
reasonable man's judgment is likly in his shroud, to bury the memory of all his
Ancestors virtues, which should live in him, and his offspring, as his
forefathers have done in theirs.

It is neither new, nor straung, in the practice of our times, in causes of
this Nature, to overthrow in tended perpetuities, and by act of parliament to
give leave upon some good considerations to sell lands, which otherwise by no
laws can be sold from the heir, the Father being but tennant only for term
of his life. Which surely by no power under God could be done, if the thing in
it self be unlawful and sin. Out of which it may be argued a fortiori: If
power may be given to a Father being tennant for term of life, to sell his
sons lands, only to pay his own debts (peradventure idly made) though it be
to the overthrow of his Family; because natural equity (say they) does will,
that every one should be relieved with his own, for so it may be deemed,
though in love to his child he has passed the estate, yet that he ought to be
preserved from thraldom therewith in his necessity: which if it be so (as all
men do confess it) how reasonable a thing, yea how comendable, and far from
sin is it, for a Father truly Lord of his own, without all tie of law,
either divine, or humane (as I have proved) to dispose of his lands, to the
honor of God, and comfort of his family, to a younger son, when as it is most
probable that the elder will neither use it to the one, nor the other, but
rather to nourish sin and sensuality.

CHAP. VIII. That unthriftiness is one known name of many hidden sins, and is
alone a sufficient cause of disinherison, proved by the Law of God and Man.
HAVING thus upon good consideration beyond my first intention (as it appears
by my Preface) enlardged this my discourse with the precedent Chapter; I have
resolved my self, upon my Readers favor, and on the former grounds, to argue
one question more, which I hold very necessary for the perfecting of this
small work: which is; whether a Father may disinherite his eldest son, or
heir at common law, for such an unthriftiness as in most men's judgments, is
like to be the ruin of his family?

Though many foul sins, besides the abusing of gods blessings, be
concomitant to vnthriftynes, yet because they are not apparent to the world,
and de abscondit is non iudicat Praetor, I will only briefly argue, whether in
reason, or conscience a desperate unthrift may be disinherited.

It is well known to all the wise, and temperate, whose judgments passion does
not ouersway, how great an enemy prodigality, or vnthriftynes is to all manner
of goodness; and how cunningly she not only hinders the increase of all virtues
in those in whom she reigns: but also unjustly oftentimes cuts off the
virtuous reward of many a worthy predecessor, yea, gives occasion to the evil
to detract, to the good to suspect their deserts. All which, how great a wrong
it is to a Noble family, I leave to the indifferent reader to censure. I will
not deny but there may be many sins in a man, which in the sight of God, and
judgment of men, of themselves are more heinous, and deserve afar greater
damnation then Prodigality does: yet, since that sins in this world are to be
punished, Those sins more punishable which are more offensive to common
society, though less heinous in their particular Nature.
not as they are in themselves, but as they by circumstance are offensive to
the society, peace, and honor of mankind, which God and Nature, ever as the
reward to all moral virtues, and as the chief end of man's life, intended. For
otherwise usury, detraction, forgery, adultery, fornication, swearing, and
drunkenness, all which and many more, which are as greiuous offenses in the
eye of heaven, as theft, should be punished with death, as theft is. But since
they do not offend so much the peace of a public weal (at which the Civil
magistrate aims) as theft does; they are not censured with such severe
punishment at it is. All which shows directly, that offenses by circumstance
are made in a Civil society against which they are committed, either great
error lesser; and are accordingly to be punished: and no less does the reason,
and righ rule of state command.

Out of which grounds it is evident, that all forms of government do most
punish that offender, who directly or indirectly seeks to disturb the peace,
or overthrow the liberty, or disgrace the state wherein he lives: yet many
greater offenses then these may be committed, as Incest, and Apostasy, which
are not so sharply punished by the Civil Magistrate. For every one, to whom
God has given power on earth, does chiefly seek the end, for which his power
from above is given unto him; and does censure and punish in the highest degree
those offenses, which tend to the overthrow of a well settled state, and by
good and lawful power confirmed.

Now to come upon these premises to the matter in question, and to apply that
which has been said to our purpose. It is well known to the world, that a
family is a civil society, yea the only common weal which God and Nature
first ordained, and from which all societyes, Commonwealths, and species of
Government first took their original. For the mantainance of which society,
there is no question, but God has given many privileges to a Father, as well
to reward the well-deseruing, as to punish an evil child, or member of his
body: not only, by depriving them of their expected fortunes; but by cutting
them of from his body, either by banishment, or by death it self. For it is
evident by the Civil law, that a Father had for many years, not only free
power to disinherit, but also power of life and death our his children, who
should greiuously offend him or his, living under his Civil government. But
since that things unknown are grown out of use, and may seem as well
incredible as strange: I cannot in discretion pass over the matter in
question so lightly, as that it may worthily be subject to sharp censure, or
rashly be branded with the mark of untruth.

Therefore laying aside the testimony of the old Roman laws, in the case of a
Fathers sovereign power over the life of his child, given to him by the laws
of the twelve Tables, where it is written, that Leg. 12. Tabular. cap. 3.
Dionys. Halicarnass. Lib: 2. Antiquitat.
Paterfamilias haberetius vitae; yea more: terque filium venundandi potestatem,
I will briefly, and effectually prove what I affirm herein, out of the sacred
Text it self. There the^ it plainly appears, that Fathers had power among
the Jews, to cause their children for riot, disorder, or unthriftiness, to be
stoned to death. Ergo power to disinherit. Deuter. 21.
For the greater does ever include the less. And not to seem to speak
without book, it shall not be amiss to set down Moses words, which are as
follow.

If a man shall beget a stubborn, and unruly son, who shall not hear the
commandment of his Father, and Mother; and being chastised shall contemn to
obey, they shall apprehend and bring him to the seniours of that City, and to
the gate of judgment. And they shall say to them: This our son is headstrong,
and disobedient, contemns to hear our admonishments, gives himself over to
rioutous excess, and is a drunkard. The people of that City shall ouerwhelme
hini with stones, and he shall dye, that ye may take evil from among you; and
that all Israel bearing it may fear.

Out of which place in Gods word, we may gather how odious a vice unthriftiness
was among the people of God; and what ample power a Father had to punish the
same in his child. For if we do well observe the manner of the process,
between the Father and the child in this case, we shall find that the Father
was accuser, witness, and as it were judge of his own cause. For we find not,
that the Seniours of the City did give sentence, or further examyned the
proofs of the Fathers accusation, but their presence giving as it were
allowance to a Fathers power, and intention to punish his son, the people
might without more inquiry, stone to death so evil a deserving child. Which
being by my reader well considered, my hope is, that it will never hereafter
seem unlawful, though somewhat straung, that a Father should disinherit his
eldest, or any other son of his, for the cause only of unthriftiness.

And although the world, of men is grown^^^ to that greatness, that it is
necessary, that one general Father, or politic head should be in a Kingdom,
or State, which may justly abridge some of those privileges, and abate a
Fathers power; all Fathers being become children to the Father of all Fathers,
their Lord and King under God: yet the power to raise and maintain a family by
good and lawful means, is still both allowable, and commendable in a Parent.
Who may from time to time reward, according to distributive justice, al those
who live under him, by leaving his fortunes to them, as in justice they shall
deserve, and law shall allow. So that there is no question, but he may still
disinherit, according to the power of that law under which he lives. For no
other tie is over him; God and Nature allowing that, at this day, and for ever,
which once they gave unto him. Which authority he not only may, but ought also
to execute, as far as the law of man shall permit; otherwise he shall err in
his Paternall justice.

For a Father is not only to beget and nourish his Children in his life, but by
Natures law must provide to his power, that they live both in his life, and
after his death to the honor of God the service of their Country, and Comfort
of their family: which were the only ends for which God created man a civil
and a reasonable Creature. All which, if it shall assuredly be thought by a
Father, that any Child of his will wholly neglect, or rather execute the
contrary; the^ no question, a Father is not bound to leave him any more then
shall honestly suffice the necessities of Nature. For as I have said before, no
man may give, or lend his goods to any one, who will in all men's judgments
assuredly abuse them.

But let us see, whether a desperate unthrift may be arraigned, and adiuged
guilty of these accusations. Surely it is clear; that all unthrifty courses
are displeasing to God, and contrary to his honor. And how can he be able to
serve his Country, who in short time will not be able to serve himself with
necessaries wherewith to live, but must of force be mainteyned like a Droane in
a Common wealth, out of others labors. As for his family, what greater
discomfort can it have, then an absolute overthrow: whereby the Noble acts and
honor gotten to it by their Predecessors virtues, are buried in oblivion; and
the present, and future hopes of all worldly and lawful honor (virtues
temporal rewards) are taken away. And shall not all this deserve disinherison?
Can there be a greater sin committed against the honor, and essence of a
family, as it is a family, then to be spoiled of her honor, and life it self?
For in these our times welgotten goods, and used as they ought, are the only
soul, by which a family, and all the virtuous acts which it has done, may
live.

Since therefore the highest is sought and aimed at in this sin, surely
according to the proportion of distributive justice, the greatest punishment is
in equity due to the same, according to the reason of the precept, ^us suum
vnicuique tribuere. Nature teartheth the silly Bees in their Common wealth, to
do to death their Droanes, who live of others labors; and shall it then be
thought unlawful for a Father so to punish an incorrigible unthrift, who will
not only live of others labors; but also subvert the honorable endeauours of
his Noble Ancestors?

Thus if sons may be deemed and domed by the offended, having power to do
both, according as the offense done against them shall by circumstance be of
quality (as we have proved they may and ought;) then certainly it is lawful
for a Father so to do, as I have formerly set down But because example in all
doubtful questions, do make their side the stronger; it shall not be amiss,
for the clearing of all the premises, to add some few to the former, drawn as
well from Kings (by whose patterns totus componitur orbis) as from inferior
persons, whose qualities best fit the condition of our present subject. And if
kingdoms and Common wealths have favored it, then certainly by all arguments a
maioriad minus, it may much rather be done, and ought to be suffered in private
families.

CHAP. IX. The maine points of the Premises exemplified in diverse particular
Facts, as well of Princes, as of private Men.
It is not fit perhaps to urge the better acceptance with God, of Abels
offering above Cayns the elder Brother, but of that estate which Abel had in
Adams Patrimony. Abel.
Nor will I reinforce the memory of Iaphets share in his Fathers right to the
whole world, though he being the youngest son of three, had Europ for his
inheritance, which in all arts, and uses of life, far excels Afric, Asia,
and all the rest of the earth. Whereas, according to the pretenses of those
customary challenges, Iaphet.
Sem should either have had all, or been Lord Paramount of all, and Cham, and
Iaphet with their posterity but Farmers, or Fre-holders under him.

I will not also (as if there were penury of resemblances) again use for
example Esaus disinherision, though that were enough for our present purpose.
For if it had been sin (which Iosiphus the Jew, neither in his Antiquities,
or Scripture faith) the Mother could not have procured it, God would not have
prospered it, nor Jacob himself, being a good man, have accepted it, nor Esau
(whose anger Jacob feared) have left it unrevenged. Neither is there in
Scripture, nor in any written Law under heaven, any commandment to restrain
the Fathers power, but rather the contrary. For such is the law of Nature that
they who are, exaequo, one man's children, should, if not exaequo, yet not
exiniquo, be provided for.

Against which partiality, the Imperial Laws admit so forcible a remedy,
under the title of an inofficious Testament, as it shall enable the younger
child, to a certain proportion of estate, whether the deceased Father would
or no if he had no just reason for omission, or disauowment in his last will.
The example certainly of the same holy Patriarch Jacob, in preferring Ephraim
before Manasses, Ephraim.
the younger son before the elder, being his grandchildren, against the set
purpose of Joseph their Father, seems vna^swerable on behalf of the power of
parents for transferring, or distributing their blessings. Of which it may
truly be said, Qui prior in benedictione est potior in iure.

Of Solomon I have spoken before, who was not the eldest son of David,
Solomon.
but Adonai after Absalom was slain: as David himself was not the eldest
son of less his Father, but the youngest, and yet chosen by God (who sees
not as man does, for with him there is resp^ctus personarum) to govern Israel,
though he was not set before his brothers in the private inheritance of his
family. And in the Gospel it is apparent by the Parable of the workmen, who
came at unequal hours into the vineyard, and yet had equal wages, that first
and last are to him a like, who though he created things in number, weight,
and measure, yet he squares not his favors by priority of being, but of
well-deseruing.

Augustus Caesar, the most renowned of all the first Emperors, settled the
succession of his Empire, not upon his only G^andchilde Agrippa Posthumus,
Agrippa Posthumus
the son of his daughter and sole heir the lady Iulia, though Tacitus says
that he was nullius stagitij comp^rtus (then what if he had indeed been a
notorious unthrift) but upon Tiberius a stranger in blood, and his son by no
other, but by a civil title of Adoption, because he reputed him far the fitter
to govern.

Chosroas King of Persia, Medarses.
made Medarses his younger son companion in his Empire, and left out his
eldest son Sinochius.

But let foreign examples pass for briefnes sake, wherewith of all times, and
places books are full.

In our Country we might alledg the fact of Brutus, Brutus.
the reputed fou^der of our Nation, who divided Albion, afterward called
Britain, to his three sons, leaving only the best portion to Locrinus,
ancie^tly called Loegres; Albania (now Scotland) to Albanact; and Cambria, or
Wales to Camber.

Leir, long after, knew he had so much power in himself as a Father, even
against the evidence of his own act of partition, by the original law of
Nature; as for the ingratitude of his own children, to confer the kingdom
wholly upon his younger child Cordeilla in prejudice of his grandso^nes M^rgan
and Cunedage, Cordeilla
borne of his eldest daughters.

I know that some will deny credit to Brutus history, which in this case they
might with the more reason do if the ancient Weal, or British Custom, did
not answer in the practice thereof, to that act of Brutus. For, not only king
Roderick divided his kingdom of Wales to his three sons, according to that
distinction of the country into Northwales, Southwales, and Po^island, but
others since have done the like among them.

As for Brutus History, Brutus History,
an it has some enmies so also has is many friends, and those of special
worth and note Henry Archdeacon of Huntington, Matthew of Westminister, and
others among the ancient. And of later times, Sir John Price, William Lambert,
Humphrey Lloyds, Doctor White of Basingstoke Count Palatine in right of the
Civil law Chair (an honor due to the just number of years by him passed) and
innumerable others. Above all the rest, Edward the first King of England, with
all the Earls and Barons of this Realm, by their authentic deed or
instrument, confirmed in Parliament. But let us proceed.

They who know the old fashions of Ireland, either by report, or by the printed
Statutes of that Nation, may testify of their most ancient Tenure, Irish.
Tauistry.
or Fundament custom, which there is called Tauistry. By which the land and
chiefest of a Name, after the predecessors death, is not a warded to the eldest
son but to the worthiest (if I misremember not) the judgment whereof is left
with the people and such Tenants about as have interest and right of voice. As
Alexander the great though (as it is apparent in the Machabees) very falsely is
said to have left his Empire. And the custom of equal shares may be in other
places also, which never borrowed their equal partitions from Gauelkind: A
custom, I grant, which some have very lately altered in their private
families by Parliament.

In Scotland, there is scarce any thing in their most ancient Records, more
often found concerning their succession to the Crown thereof, then Uncles to
reign before Nephews, ever by National Custom, as is auerred. But the
abundance of foreign examples must not carry me from home.

Arthur?
Arthur the Great was left heir to the crown by his Father King Other,
surnamed Pendragon, or Dragons head, though begotten in Bastardy, rather the^
the sons of Lot king of Pic^tland, being borne of Vthers sister or, as some
write, of his daughter Anne: an history which even Buchanan relates out of the
Scottish Monuments, on Arthurs behalf, for very true. To come nearer in the
same kind.

Athelstane, that victorious king of England, Athelstane
being a Bastard, was notwithstanding preferred before the lawful eldest
son, even by his Father King Edward, surnamed Sinior, to whom (says
Florentius Wigornienss, an author above 500 years old) R^gni gub? rnacula
reliquit, and not to any of his sons by his wife and Queence. Little cause is
there to seek examples so far off. William the Conqueror preferred William
his youngest son, before Robert the eldest in the Kingdom of England: and
Henry the first was surrogated to Rufus his Brother: William Rufus.
and still kept Robert out.

The title of more sufficiency, not of more propinquity made Stephen, K. Stephen
as being then a man grown, to step in before Matildes the Empress, and her
Infant son Henry Plantagenet.

I will not speak of King John's succession before his nephew Arthur, the son
of Geffr^y, the elder brother to John. Henry the 4. K. John.
King of England, did in open Parliament pretend a descent from Edmund Earl of
Lancaster, Edmund Earl of Lancaster.
son of Henry the third king of England, in prejudice of king Richard 2.
auering that Edmund was disinherited for deformity, and his brother Edward
(afterward by the name of king Edward 1.) preferred. Which, though it were not
so, yet is it sufficient to show that Henry 4. did hold, that his ancestour
king Henry 3. might have done such an act, if the cause had been sufficient.

And what interest had Henry of Ri^hmoud to his Diadem, being neither of the
right blood nor of the Royal Name, when nevertheless of the true:
Plantagenets sundry Males were alive; and one of them at that very time king of
England also in possession.

But to lean Kings affairs. If all must necessufily have gone to one, how
came it then to pass, that in this kingdom there were at one time, so many
great and honorable families of one blood; disinyned in their seats, and
distinguished in their Annories by different arguments? Our whous to meanly
seem in our antiquities and stories, as not to know it was so? And that many
renowned houses (to speak as de magis notis^) Plantag^nets, Sundry grint
Families of one (...) at a time.
Mortiniers, Beaufords, B^^^champ^, 1 Disla-Poles, Neuill, Grayes, and the
like, have grown and flourished out of one common Ancestour? It can never be
refelled.

Of disinherisions in worthy Families, M. William Camden ^^ L^renceaux King of
Arnies gives us two eminent examples. And who is he that remembers not one or
other, in this own knowledge, or acquaintance?

Ianc, Daughter of Hugh Courtney, and heir to her Mother* Carewes
wife of Nirold Lord Carew, disinaerited her eldest son Thomas, cum mirus
reuerenter matrem haberet; and parted her lands (which were goodly) among her
three younger sons, of whom are sprung three several worshipful bouses of
the Carewes, called Haccombe, Anthony, and Bury. So that God has by the
success confirmed the lawfulnes of the fact. And this is the first of Master
Caindens examples.

The other is this. Bryand Lile, or Fitz-Earle, Lord of Abergeuenny having two
sons, Brientius de insula.
both leprous, built for them a Lazaretto, or spittall, and gave to Miles Earl
of Heresord far the greatest part of his patrimony from his Children. The one
of these examples is in the description of Devonshire, and this other in
Monmouthshire. And this Chapter may suffice for the illustration, and clearing
the former Doctrine, and the subject of this whole discourse by examples.

CHAP. X. That the Law of Natural Equity and Reason confirm just
Disinherision. and that the riotous lives of Elder Brothers deserve that
vehement reproof with which the Author closes up this Treatise.
LET us now look into the Nature of equity, and examine whether in Natural
reason, which is the law of all laws, the temperate ought to be subject to
intemperate. Fools and Madmen, to whom no law imputes sin, are not punished
for theft, or murder, or for any other offense which they do, being mad, or
unreasonable. For though humanely they cannot offend: yet in this sort,
according to equity, they many be punished. The reason is; That all law being
grounded on Natural equity (for otherwise it is no law) does not only punish
offenses committed; but also preuents offenses which may be done, by reasonable
or unreasonable creatures. And since that Fools and Madmen cannot offend to be
punished, or by punishment can be reformed; and yet they with whom they shall
live, shall surely be offended, if not overthrown by them having power, as
Namely Brothers, Sisters, and all their whole family put in danger of misery
and ruin: the law, according to all Natural equity takes al power from them.

I have inserted this clause according to Natural equity, for that it is
against Nature, that men should be subject to beasts, or insensible creatures.
Heerupon Aristotle disputing the nature of rule and subjection, says: That
none are borne slaves, but such as Nature has abridged of the use of reason,
who being truly slaves, are altogether unfit to govern. Upon which ground also
the same great Philosopher; disputing whether a Monarchy or Comonweale is the
better form of Policy; he says, a Comonweale: Because the wisest and best me^
are admitted to sway therein.

But, it may be said, What is all this to our purpose? Yes; thus far it may be
well applied. If Nature, intent to make al mankind reasonable according to
their species, being hindered by some inevitable accident, shall so blemish and
maime those, in whom such want, and Natural weakness shall be found, that they,
according to divine, and humane law, may and ought to be deprived of all right
and claim to any thing more then to sustain Nature; as other creatures may
do, and not to give unto them any sovereignty, rule, or government, which by
law, or custom might otherwise have fallen on them: Because, according to
natural and divine equity, neither man, nor yet the creature made for man's
use, ought to be governed by Beasts: and such do fools and madmen seem.

If this be so (as according to Natures rule it cannot be otherwise) what
punishment shall we think due to that reasonable creature, borne in a civil
society of men, unto whom Nature has not been a Stepdame in bestowing of her
blessings; and whose name and Family has been ennobled, and enriched by the
industry and virtue of many worthy Predecessors, who shall through disorder,
and inordinate desires, habituated in him by custom and evil conversation,
become unreasonable, yea a sinfull-creature a wilful, and most punishable
madman, and a thing unworthy the name of man, a Prodigal; who contrary to all
rule law, or order of the most barbarous society of men, takes away the soul
(as I have said before) of all his Ancestors, who being dead, yet long might
live in their posterity; and consumes the womb (his family I mean) wherein he
was borne: and without all remembrance of his obligation to the dead, (whom as
having his being from them, he ought to honor) or respect to the huing (to
whom he should be a comfort) deuoures in some sort, them of his own species,
society, and blood. All which the Anthropophages do not.

For though they feed on their species, which are men like to themselves; yet
they hunt after strangers, and nourish then nearest blood with others flesh,
observing still some law of society among themselves, which our civil monster
does not. For he, contrary to all course of Nature sucks out oftentimes the
b^oud of his nearest, and dearest friends; namely his children, brothers, and
sisters: Ariotous heir is a civil Monster.
yea some have brought their all-tender-harted parents to the greatest of all
woes, ^b^^^ary in, their old age: And all this to maintain by force, of fraud,
a damned crew of Devils in the shapes of men.

Nature has given, yea she so strongly has inhabituated a laudable desire in
all creatures to preserve them species, that directly, or in directly, to
undergo the contrary, wore not only unnatural and mo^^^rous, b^^^worthy also
of seuerest punishment, Families, let them be Princely, Noble, Gentle or
Vulgar, are in a manner particular kinds; or species allowed of by Natures law
to be raised; or maintain of, under, or in their chief genus, mankind
universal: which to overthrow either directly, or indirectly, let the
Philosopher either Natural, or Moral: the Lawier either Ciull or Ca^^^^; the
Divine, Scholeman, or Casuist, judge how punishable.

Moral Lawmakers for many ages, pretermitted to make laws, against this sort
of oftenders: being asked why? they answered: That no man could be so
ungrateful or inhumane.

By which we see how grievous the offense was deemed by them, and how severe
punishment (were they to make laws in these our corrupted times) they would
prescribe for such offenders. Thus much for our present matter in question. In
the arguing whereof, if what I write in defense of younger Brothers, as here
the case is put, I seem to have taken upon trust, rather then upon knowledge,
or reading: the wiser sort will (I hope) not blame me. For my intent was nor,
but only as at first I promised, to set down a Table-discourse, and not a
Controversy discussed in Schools.

If I have spoken according to dialecticall reason as I believe) then may I
safely think; that my discourse is armed with strong Authority. For what has
been spoken heretofore truly, which reason has not dictated to all Authors
pens? If therefore I were able to cite a thousand great Writers for what I have
said; yet should they be no more, but that which Natural reason has, or may
teach daily. All which, with my self, I entrust to the gentle and equal
Censure of my Courtuous Reader.

FINIS.

