THE CATECHISERS HOLY ENCOVRAGEMENT, To the profitable exercise of Catechizing
in the Church of England.

Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul: The
Testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple. Luke 2.46.
And it came to pass three days after, that they found him in the Temple,
sitting in the midest of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions. LONDON, Printed by VV. I. dwelling in Red-crosse. street. 1623.

To the true Catechisers of his Church, the true grace mercy and peace of the
true God, be true encouragement.
IF I should accuse you for writing your many Catechismes, I should rather
discourage yours from reading them, then excuse my self for penning these
encouragements for us all to Catechizing. Yet (let it be spoken with all
humility) if you in the crowd of Catechisers each one find an excuse for all
the company; I hope (if it be not presumption) you all will hold me excused,
for these small encouragements for you all, being but one; If you observed, the
two Texts of Scripture on the otherside of the former leaf, you may easily
perceive, these things were one day Preached as Sermons of encouragement, in
the Ears of Parents, Governors, and old men, in the Congregation; if you will
see the leaves that follow hereafter, you may understand they were Catechizing
ways in the Hands of little ones in writing, for their encouragement, another
day; I should then be very sorry, that what day soever they shall be seen by
your Eyes, you will see the motes that are in your brothers eyes, that labor
to show you, though unworthily the encouragements that they have seen: but I
hope you will join your Hearts in prayer, that God by all means, whether
great or small, will harten us all in this holy exercise. And so

right humbly I rest your poor Brother in the Lord. THO. DOWNING.
Aldermanbery London.
To the Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and all my souing and worthy
Parishioners of S. Mary Aldermanberry London, the multiplication of all
spiritual grace, and assurance of Celestial glory through Christ lesus our
Lord.
RIght Hononarable: Right Worshipful, and my best beloved in him that loves
you best and has paid for his love dearest. In the hearing of the most of you
(according to the godly command of lawful authority known unto you all) I
have lately entered upon that most commendable and most profitable course of
Catechizing: and to the end that I might the more cherish you, and bolden
yours, I took courage to my self by God, before I began the work it self,
to say something as a short beginning and introduction to my future endeauours
by Gods permission: For your selves by way of Sermon and continual discourse,
as the food of the strong, for your children and servants, by taking of the
same into pieces, for the smallest and weakest disgestions, by way of
questions, for all (I hope) as members of the same body, a fit receipt and
preperation, especially it being the desire of of some of you to have these
published for the benefit of children, as crummes in common, I know whit-meates
are wholesome for you that are grown great ones, but yet I presume it will not
be troublesome to you to taste of the milk, both before, and after your small
children. I shall be refreshed before the Lord for the time present, as well as
any fare can make me, if you like the Lord that makes both the body and the
bread, will accept of these poor pieces I have to present you; and for the
time to come, your gathering of such fruit as is grown shall be full payment
for the past season: God that only must give increase (even to Paul's planting)
grant unto your information, and my consolation, his heavenly blessing, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and glory.

Your affectionate Pastor, THO. DOWNING.

THE CATECHISERS HOLY INCOVRAGEMENTS TO THE PROFITABLE EXERCISE OF CATECHIZING
IN THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
Question.

WHat way might a Minister win the wills, and sharpen the wits of Christians
to be Catechized.

Answer.

By encouraging them unto the same out of Gods holy word, as Solomon by his
parables gives to the simple sharpness of wit. Pro. 1.4.


Quest. How many motives be there to this godly work of Catechizing?

Ans. Many, but for memory sake they generally be divided into three: 1. the
Matter of Catechizing. 2. the Manner of Catechism. 3. the Means we have of
Catechizing.

Quest. For the Matter, first tell me what the word Catechism is in
signification?

Ans. Catechism is a word that is drawn from the greek word (...) Catecho,
which signifies to echo, or sound out, and so it is true, Instructions and
answers are sounds from heaven, and echoes from earth, 1. Cor. 14.19
therefore Saint Paul uses the word to teach the rudiments of Religion saying,
(...).
I had rather speak five (that is a few) words with mine understanding that I
might (Catechize others) in the Church, then ten thousand words in a strange
tongue?

Quest. Who be those (others) the holy Apostle speaks of.

Ans. Whosoever are capeable but yet are void of the elements of the Christian
faith.

Quest. But is it not presumption at least if not folly, for small children to
meddle with great matters of Religion. 1. Cor. 13.11
Paul confesses, When he was a child, he spoke as a child, he understood as a
child, he thought as a child, and before he became a man, he put not away
childish things: how then should smattering children be fit for profound and
holy matters?

Ans. It is meet for us that are Children for all that, to read, to study, to
meditate, and to confer touching grounds of Religion.

Quest. What reason can be shown for that?

Ans. A double reason: First from our own profit. Secondly from Gods law.

Quest. What profit will it be to you?

Ans. That appears from the knowledge of God, without which vain is every
child of man, but knowledge of God brings righteousness in this world, and in
the world to come eternal life, as Jesus says, John. 17.3.
This is life eternal to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. But as a candle through a window, so a glimpse of the
Godhead may be discerned through the Cranies of our childhood.

Quest. Profitable though it be, yet what warrant have you to tell me for it?

Ans. David the holy father may be a pattern to all our parents, and he tells
us and them in the 19. Psalm. 7. Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord gives wisdom to the simple, therefore we ought to
receive it when it is offered, and Solomon his wise son, that may be a
teacher of all the children of men, Pro. 1.4.
To give to the simple sharpnes of wit, and to the child knowledge and
discretion, he wrote his parables, so that we are Salomons table books as well
as others.

Quest. But is not that to be understood of little ones of soul, rather then
of body and age, of children in grace rather then in growth?

Ans. Not rather, but indifferently to both, for the Lord of heaven requires,
Psalm. 148.12
That young men and maidens, old men and children should praise the name of the
Lord on earth. But they cannot do that till this, not acknowledge his praise
till they know his person and properitie.

Quest. But what then? grant it that children are docible, are their poor
souls ere the safer for some knowledge without practice? What good would the
light of the sun do a man and take away the heat. Wherefore holy David
says that a good understanding have all they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111.10.
and Saint James bids us not be hearers of the word only deceiving our selves,
Iam. 1.21.22
but doers also: etc. But tender children do rather mind childish folly and
play, then regard to practice that they hear, Pro. 22.15.
hear Solomon, Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child?

Ans. We must confess our selves guilty of all but yet not without something to
say for our selves, and something that wise Solomon himself will say for us,
and so we hope though one should break, the other will hold, we have a double
answer.

Quest. Which is the first?

Ans. First for profit, if we learn something, and practice nothing, or but
little.

Quest. What profit would that be?

Ans. There is a double commodity, first a profit pertaining to the way unto
the end, secondly, a commodity in the end of the way.

Quest. What commodity have you in the way?

Ans. Information of our slender understandings, touching things to be known
in the way to our future life, and not to be known to be believed, and not to
be believed, to be done or to be shunned, to be feared, or to be hoped.

Quest. What is your commodity in the end of the way?

Ans. The end of instruction is incomparable not only grace in this short life
but glory in life eternal.

Quest. Why attain this great encouragement?

Ans. Not learners, but livers, not hearers, but fearers, yet we that are poor
children, if we have not this rich profit presently, we learn the right way by
Gods word to it, and this is a great part of profit, for as learning without
living is unprofitable, so living without learning is impossible.

Quest. But you say that wise Solomon has something more to say for you, tell
me what it is?

Ans. He gives us not only sharp but sweet, he calls us fools in the
bonds of childhood, Pro. 22.15.
but yet be makes us amends (though we fools do not think so) the rod of
corection chaseth it away.

Quest. But may not you attain this without knowledge, as well as many simple
and illiturat men do. Wisdom says Apply thy heart unto me, Wisd. 1.
and think of God with humility. (Not speak mistically of him) but think and
seek him in simplicity of thine heart, but a child may do this as well as
many lay men do.

Ans. Our answer to this is from every fingers end to the contrary, from the
right hand to the left: 5. to 5.

The five fingers: 1. Necessity of knowledge. 2. Tradition of Teachers. 3. Text
of Scriptures taught. 4. Tuition of the Truth. 5. Encouragement to all.


Quest. What necessity is there?

Ans. It is necessity that we should have this knowledge of eternal life,
either by our own studies or by others, either implicity or explicity, either
by report or knowledge, and this is necessary for lay men as little children.

Quest. What is that second finger of Tradition?

Ans. It is no doubt better to have the documents, and lessons of Religion by
our own labor then by tradition, yet first we must have them by Traditions of
our teachers.

Quest. What was the third answer?

Ans. Thirdly we answer to the text alleged by Text of Scripture. Though God
will accept of none without simplicity of heart, yet the Lord requires more,
as the Apostle says, With the heart man believes unto righteousness, but with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Iam. 1.
So Saint James, that faith without works is dead. They deceive themselves
therefore that trust to simple hearts, without understanding in matters of
Religion.

Quest. What is the fourth answer?

Ans. Reason not to regard our own profit alone, but the tuition of the
Gospel, and the defense of the truth, the depth whereof was never more dug
at, nor the profession thereof ever more pusht at, now is the time both for old
and young courageously to sanctify The Lord in their hearts, 1. Pet. 3.15.
being ready to satifie every one that shall ask a reason of their faith and
hope that is in them.

Quest. What is the fifth Encouragement?

Ans. Comfort and joy to all from the royal King that sits on his throne to
the lowest subject, to prince pastor and people, as Solomon says it did him.
Pro. 27.11.
My son be wise and rejoice my heart, that I may answer him that reproacheth
me: And surely if ever there was cause, now there is, for all, for Kings to
command, and Ministers to obey in instructing their hearers, and for both to
make glad the heart of their dread Sovereigns, by witnessing of wisdom, and
answering the spiteful reproaches of all hereiques.

Which if every man would but labor for a while, hope we ere long, that if our
adversaries will but stand at our Church doors, they shall hear those
resounding ecchocs from the mouths of babes, that shall rejoice their nurcing
father and liege king, the spiritual and natural parents, and confound all
false heresies, which grant O Lord Jesus Amen.

Quest. The profit of a thing does not consist in the bare matter, so much as
in the fruitful manner, and therefore since you have spent so much pains on
the matter of Catechizing, do no less on the manner, will you be tractable to
be encouraged to know the same how it is to be performed?

Ans. Yes withal our hearts and studies: for the manner God respects as well
as the matter, and for defects in the manner does reject the matter, as in
Caine, Genesis 4.5.
because he had not respect to the manner of his sacrifice to do it well, God
had no regard of him nor his oblation, he had no profit nor commendation.

Quest. What then in a word is required in the comely manner of this goaly
business generally?

Ans. As in receiving the holy Sacraments, devout prayer unto almighty God, Ex.
19.7.10.
hearing his holy word, there is a time of premeditation, so in Catechizing
youth in the heads of Religion, there must be preperation.

Quest. What duties are required in this preperation?

Ans. The duties herein required are sundry, but for memories sake again they
shall be reduced to three.

Quest. Which be those three?

Ans. First, duties that do concern your self and those that are in place to
teach us. Secondly, duties that do concern our selves that are to be taught.
Thirdly, duties that do concern our parents and governors, that are both to
teach us, and to be taught by you.

Quest. What be the duties concerning my self that am to Catechize?

Ans. They are diverse, as well as ours or our parents, but may fitly be drawn
to three sorts.

Quest. Which be those three?

Ans. First, duties before Catechizing.

Secondly, duties at Catechizing.

Thirdly, duties after Catechizing.

Quest. You have answered plainly, so do still, and tell me what parts in me
before we come to Catechizing, will set your hearts on work with courage to it?

Ans. Two: Faculty, and Freewill.

Quest. What is that Falculty?

Ans. It is that ability and power to open the doors of entrance into the
temple of Religion, faith and godliness, both to old and young, rich and
poor, for no man can enter himself that cannot open the door, so no man can
teach that he does not know, and as a Chariot man must have skill to rule the
charge committed to him, else he can neither do well nor it, so neither can
they be without danger whose Chariot of their souls is desperately left to an
ignorant pastor, and Saint Paul tells Timothy, that a Bishop must be apt to
teach, 1. Tim. 2.5.
that is, one that can prudently moderate his labors to the stirring up and
encouraging of his followers to the love of labors.

Quest. What mean you by free will, which you say will freely encourage you to
be Catechized by me?

Ans. A willingness whereby you are godly well affected with all readiness to
further our proceedings and proficiency, desirous to be loved of your answerers
and auditors, applying your self to our green age, poor powers, and slender
capacity, as our shepherd compassionate, first feeding us the tender Lambs
of Christ's flock, Ioh. 21.15.
before the flock of his sheep, not for any lucre and benefit of Much was
proffered in my Church before the King sent forth his charge to do it freely.
hundred pounds, but for love and bowels of Christ the chief shepherd of
our souls, our future happiness, and your own account of us at the day of
judgment, neither for any disreputation, some scorners shamefacedly forsakeiug
us bashful babes, but in an affable manner childishing with us in the handleing
of these things and holy exercises, counting all your grating toil ours, and
your own felicity in the midst of the furnace of your function, Dan. 3.25.
as the Son of God and his Angel in the midest of the three faithful
Children walking and talking with us.

Quest. Set forward so still, and tell me my duty at my Catechizing to
encourage you?

Ans. Your office now is threefold, 1. Matter. 2. Measure. 3. Method.


Quest. What is the first?

Ans. Matter.
First to communicate and deliver wholesome doctrines and lessons, to the true
end that we may attain precious wisdom, and cheerfully profit something in
this open school of Christ Jesus, Our Church therefore does confine us to the
Decalogue the Lords Prayer, and the Creed. Titus 1.9.
and then we all hope steadfastly in God (though through our weakness we wot
not how) that the learning and nurture of the Lord (as an army that is mighty
and subtle) will insinuate it self, and slip into our hearts and heads, and
creep into our souls, and hold there as Paul to Titus, Hold fast that
faithful word according to doctrine, that thou may be able to exhort with
wholesome, (not with eloquence or nouelty) but with wholesome doctrine. This
first will encourage us.

Quest. What is my second duty, that being done will encourage you to do your
duties at Catechizing?

Ans. Measure.
If you instill these wholesome things by little and little (as we hope you
will, and you ought to do) and not burden our childish wits with too much
plenty (which will neither be profitable to us, nor pleasant to you) this will
make us take good courage and strengthen us to come unto you merrily, as the
proverb is Festinalente, hasten slowly, for to say truly, have makes wast, and
vessels that have narrow mouths, receive not the liquour hastily powered over,
yet if it be by little and little dropped in, they may in time be filled, as
Job says that Water with small drops will break stones, so may your
instructions by degrees and soft steps get into our hearts more kindly then
break in by oppression, this measure is the second encouragement.

Quest. What third encouragement desire you at the exercise of Catechizing?

Ans. It will harten us to wait upon your words, Methods.
if they have not only full weight, but you set them in fair order, as the
Apostle proscribes, 2. Cor. 14.
that all things should be done in order, for words without method give sound
without understanding, Oration dat sieve mente sonum. Esa. 5.17.
and the prophet holy and eloquent, says that the Lambs shall feed, but it
must be by good order and manner, for this is the mother of all learning in all
schools, and this will lastly encourage us at Catechizing in Christ's school.

Quest. You have answerea me, you have truly told me what you ought to desire
at my bands in the time of this exercise, but what have I nothing to do
afterward to encourage you?

Ans. Two things if it please you: the one is the eye office, the other the
ear, as those two are commonly the greatest encouragement, or discouragement,
especially in our teachers.

Quest. Which way may I encourage you with mine eyes?

Ans. By lookeing after us, and watching over us, driving far from us any
evil thing, that may hinder us from the blessing and benefit of your labors,
as corrupt company, which would poison us with corrupt learning and life, like
bleared eyes that will make our eyes as blind and as sore as themselves; and
by seeing that our consorts may make us more and more apt, better mannered,
better learned, and this is the first and aptest manner to move and encourage us
to learning after Catechizing.

Quest. Which way may I encourage you by my ears?

Ans. By listening to our language whether it be of Canaan or no, to our words
whether they be of one sweet fountain or no, I am. 3.
not words full of savor in the Church alone, Ephesians. 5.
gracious administering good content to our parents and all good people, with
your self in the Church, but such abroad as the ears of God himself, does
like and long for of these encouragements, we shall be glad both before, at, and
after Catechizing.

Quest. As you have told me soberly, that like Saint Peter's cock, Mat. 27.
I must first clap and beat mine own side before I sing to you, now like
little chickens let me hear you lift up your voices to tell me your own, and
what is to be done on your side, what rules were good for you to have before
your eyes to encourage your hearts?

Ans. We are to have in mind the same orderly with your self, before, at, and
after Catechizing.

Quest. What are the rules before Catechizing?

Ans. Two, first, good minds must be to it, secondly, the best means must be
used.

Quest. What spirit must you be of, and how must you be minded?

Ans. We must girt up our minds fit for labor, and one time after another
revive our spirits when they are let down, for as it is lost labor for a
waterbearer to power it out of his tanckard into a cisterne that is deftled, or
that will not hold, so is it for a Minister to put the Law of God into the
mind of them that are or will not be docible, neither the father nor the son
can well rejoice, Luke 11.
if when the father shall offer him bread, he will not so much as reach out his
hand, he deserves to starve, that will not open his head, so those that will
not be ready, but make light of the bread of their souls, and the bread of the
Sabbath, if they should want a piece of bread it were no pity, what good will
your masters do you, oh you excusefull servants about your masters business,
when the Lord of your masters shall require these things at the day of your
souls account? the wheel we hope shall be turned, and you like spokes in the
same shall bear some part of the burden, to encourage us poor children.

Quest. What is the second branch of encouragement before the tree of
knowledge of God?

Ans. Means that we can use in writing, that which you have written and
delivered, both for us and our friends, and their families this makes us to
hear and hand your directions, and shun no labor to learn; Our rejoicing
therefore aforehand to stoop like children weakly to the grounds of Religion,
is that we are able to write them with our fingers for our learning, though
inperfectly.

Quest. What morsells or draughts are those that will comfort you at
Catechizing?

Ans. Two: Heb. 2.2.
The first to eat sauourly the counsel, and receive attentively your
commandments reverently, with all pains that we are fit for markeing the
places that you press to us, and knead upon us in this holy place, that we may
deliver and draw again that we receive from you: that you may as the conduit,
and we as the pipes, run into our parents, as the vessels and tanckards,
these waters that must be divided amongst us at home.

Queste What is the second comfortable morsel at the time of Catechizing?

Ans. The second encouragement it is, that this Catechizing is but a little
break fast in the morning of childhood and youth, and we hope for a feast and
dinner to strengthen and settle us in the age of Manhood, and to be satisfied
with our Master Jesus Christ at Supper: for why should not the light of the
Gospel, that in this exercise dawneth upon us, make us to look up to higher
purposes, and expect fairer points, and to trust that after these groves and
purleyes of low shrubbes without the pales, we mean these questions of
primerlie beginners, we shall come to walk among and to clime upon the Cedars
of Lebanon the mountain, one day being able to ask questions, as well as now
to answer.

Quest. What branches of encouragement grow behind this tree of the knowledge
of God?

Ans. Two branches spring out after Catechizing.

Quest. Which is the first?

Ans. The first branch after our Catechifing that comforts us is grafted in our
memory, for this hartens us, that our heads through delight in this holy
exercise, Heb. 2.
do not let slip that you have taught us, for this remembrance is the mother of
the muses in our schools, and more in the house of God, nothing breeds
knowledge more in religion, then heed taking, that those things that we have
heard as out of cract vessels run not out, yea further, though the morning of
our childhood lets many a drop of this heavenly dew to sweat and bleed through,
yea we hope that as the Sun in his Tabernacle, that rises and runs over
us, and sets down upon us, does tan our tender skins, so continuance of
sitting in this Sun of Gods holy Tabernacle, will leave a Christian color of
godliness upon us, this is the first comfort after Catechizing.

Quest. What is the second comfortable branch after Catechesing?

Ans. Then the gift of God to take pleasure in that we remember in this and the
like exercises of godliness, to think willingly our selves most happy to have
our wits exercised, and seasoned with this heavenly liquour, and filled with
this ripe treasure, so to shun pleasures that are noisome, and therefore to
delight in reading, hearing, medetating, and conferring of the same, which for
instruction will make us the apter, but for swearing, lying, or idleness, to
eschew them as serpents, which will make our thoughts to fall foolishly from
these things, as if they were toylesome.

Quest. As you have showed me what milk out of my breasts will encourage, and
battle you in the first place, secondly, as your mouths have satisfied my
soul with the good things that concern your selves; so the next thing is to
know what blessings your fathers, and mothers have in keeping for you, if you
do this duty manfully, if you be the sons of wise parents, they will further
you in proceeding on the wisdom of God very much; for look how much joy they
hope to reap in the harvest of their fullness of days, from you there young
seed, so much seed of grace and godliness must they set in the beds of your
childhood, as you have told me your duty to them, so what will you ask or
choose of them?

Ans. Not to leave us riches, if they may, not to lend us righteousness, if they
could, not to get us for honor, or honor for us, when neither we, nor that
shall long abide, not to make us their deerlings in worldly pleasures, 1. King.
2.9.
but as Solomon gardens full of the flowers of wisdom, and grace of God to
regard us.

Quest. What blessings then do you namely desire of them?

Ans. As in you and our selves the same order did comfort us, so in them both
before, at, and after Catechizing.

Quest. What duties will comfort you from your parents, like Gardeners and you
the gardens?

Ans. Three, first, to see us sown with good seed, when we have been dressed
like a garden. Secondly, to blow upon us, as the South wind upon the Rose bud,
and water us like wells, when we are in sowing and dressing. Thirdly, to lock
us up well from the browsing and brusing of beasts, and picking of birds,
afterward we mean to look to us carefully after Catechizing.

Quest. But are they obliged to grant and to stand to these duties?

Ans. Both of them are bound to stand to them by a double law. First, of
nature. Secondly, of God: Nature binds them, whenc comforts descend to us from
the god of nature, having made such a well of natureall affection in the garden
of nature, that waters all the plants, and children therein to be beloved
entirely; a living and running stream to provide for us carefully, an inbred
care to cherish us from our conception tenderly, till we be made able to shift
for our selu^es by God our father almighty.

Quest. But how does the Law of God bind them?

Ans. Our bended knees shall do their humble duty to them, and our preuaileing
tongues shall cheerfully ask of them, whether they can find in their indulgent
hearts to do otherwise or undo us, Esaias. 49.
the Prophet therefore as a spiritual parent makes it a strange question,
saying, Can a woman (if she be not worse then a very beast) can she forget her
child, or a mother (except she be worse then a very Tygre) can she not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Luke 11.9.
So the bowels of all compassion, our Savior, his heart earnes toward us,
when he tells us what our parts are in three terms past: that a son must
ask, First, before such food as this be set him. Secondly, he must seek at
Catechizing. Thirdly, he must knock after at the doors of his fathers ears
and heart: Secondy, he specifieth our parents duties in answerable points,
demanding for answer to the first, whether any father will not give his son
bread, and not a stone, before this: Secondly, if at this feast he ask a fish,
will he give him a serpent: Thirdly, if the son knock again, whether the
father insteede of an egg, will give him not a shell, but a scorpion? as if he
should say, no father that has but the bowels of nature in him, but he will
put good meat into the mouth of his child, so now no godly father but will put
wholesome things into the heart of his son. This therefore does encourage us
that we hope, look how many fathers we have, so many Jacobs we have, that will
tenderly love us, being so many obedient Joseph's, Genesis 37.34.
and little Beniamins, and look how many mothers, true ones to us, so many
loving, affected grievously, that their eyes should be open to see their poor
childrens souls cut a sunder, 1. Kin. 4.
but as much rejoicing to keep them safe from the murtherous sword, that is in
the mouth of the harlot, and the false mother.

Quest. Now you have summed out their affections, let us cast over the
particular effects of those affections, and first before Catechizing?

Ans. They are not so few as that a child can tell them; yet more then there be
good fathers and mothers, but as the parents are two, so shall their parts be
both before, at, and after Catechizing.

Quest. What is the first before Catechizing?

Ans. First we answer, that as before we could either ask of them, or answer
what they asked, before we knew these hands one from another, they performed
Christian parts in suffering us little infants, Mat. 19.14.
not able to come, no: but in bringing us to Christ, so that as the kingdom of
God belongs to us, so we to it, by being delivered into the arms of Christ's
mercy at the Baptistery, so now as they promised before at Baptism and vowed
they would, they will look that we can say understandingly in our mother
tongue, the ten Commandments, the Lords prayer, and the holy Apostles Creed,
so as from them we may be taught whatsoever is necessary for a Christian to
know to his salvation. But this (we heartily thank them) they have done, and
this is the first encouragement.

Quest. What is the second thing that the loving parents have done to you
before hand, to give you courage to this holy exercise?

Ans. It is the first encouragement that Baptism of water, wherein they put
upon us the white and pure garment of Christ to cover us, but it does secondly
encourage us, that as we grow in years and stature, they prouid the warm
garments of education, and not only fit our bodies with clothes that are long
and large enough for us, but their desire is to fill our souls with fit meat
for us, and therefore we have been led and carried to godly schools before we
could go our selves, and sent to such houses where we have learned to read
and write, and so they have spent their money, and we the months of our youth,
in tasting the principles of Religion, Heb. 5.12.
that now when they have sent us to Church, we are able to drink up the
precepts of piety: 1. Tim. 4.5.
so that our parents being like Timothies Grandmother Lois, and his mother
Eunice, 2. Tim. 3.15.
instructing us before hand, we are encouraged (we thank them) to this holy
exercise.

Quest. Whereas you have showed me what seeds of encouragement you have
received already from your parents, so now tell me when Christ is come down
into you, as into his garden bedds, what things do encourage you now?

Ans. As in a garden, water and wind will make seeds and nuts to grow and
flourish, Cant. 6.
if they be seasonable and soft, and Southernly, so in our hearts, so will the
prayers and praises of our parents, Can. 4.
lovingly blowing upon us, will make us spring and spread beautifully; and
therefore we pray them now to sanctify us unto God at this holy exercise, and
as ever they desired to be delivered of us out of the vault of the dark womb,
so desire now that we be conceived from above, Ioh. 3.5.
and borne again of water and the holy Ghost, that we may be delivered in our
hearts, from that which they naturally, and the devil maliciously has put
into us in the first garden: Joel. 2.16.
so the Prophet did sanctify the children, as well as the Congregation, and so
did Hannah consecrate her son to the Lord, 1. Sam. 2.
esteeming him better as the child of God, then her own, his prepared for
life, hers for death.

Quest. What is the second thing that does encourage you at the time of this
work from your parents?

Ans. The second is the South wind, of sounding still secret praises to
almighty God, blowing on the buds of goodness and grace, that they see shoot
from us, as signs of the summer of ripe and good fruit hereafter, not having
stinking breath, from corrupt lungs and rotten teeth, as the old pharisees,
murmuring, and grateing their teeth against the Lord and his disciples, Luke
19.39.
saying, Master, rebuke thy disciples, when they deserve to be rejoiced at, nor
as the surley and the saucy Scribes, Mat. 21.15.
when they saw his marvelous works, and heard his gracious words, such as
never man spoke, Ioh. 7.
yet they send officers to apprehend him, and for the children that cried in
the Temple, Hosanna to the son of David, disdain at it, as if it were but
boys play: so did they, and what is this that many amongst us do? cauil and
carpe in every company, they come in, contemn the Congregation, censure the
Catechizing, and charging the Catechiser either of tediousnes, or of hardness,
or of confusednes, or else odiously presuming to compare what one does, with
what another Minister does, if they cannot deny but it is good, yet mince, it
is not so good as such a ones, and in my mind such a course were more
commodious, when none will content them that are so combustuous, but these are
sleights of the devil to discourage the Ministers, to discomfort the
Congregation, to chill the new kindled courage of the children, to dishonor
the ordinance of God, whiles the devil does lead them out by the elbowes,
from likeing any thing that is good, but we hope our parents, while we are
setting forth the praises of Jesus Christ with our mouths, will not have stony
heart, but spread the boughs in the way, and cast the garments of gratitude
and honor in the paths of his ordinance for the same.

Quest. What is the lock of this garden, Can. 4.
to keep you and that is implouted in you, in this exercise, and what
blessings do you desire of your parents after Catechizing?

Ans. We have two private domestical petitions, to put into their hands at
home, yet as children have a privilege, we may tell the truth in public; let
not our parents be angry if we speak to them here for our encouragement to be
domestical schoolmasters, at home examining us over and over what we have
learned at Church, and as they have faculty more plentifully, as our heavenly
Father commands that they should whet them continually upon their children,
Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.8.9.10.11.12
and bind them as frontlets (or signs of remembrance) and write them upon the
posts of their doors, and if they shall set them up upon the dry and dead
posts of their houses, or else one post will cry out to another for judgment
for neglect of Gods commandment, how then shall we their suruiuing posterity
perishing, how loud shall our blood cry for judgment against our parents? 1.
Kin. 20.31
and therefore if the servants of Benhadad can slay the Kings of Israel are
merciful, if the adversaries can, we may much more, that our gracious King of
England is merciful to the little people in his kingdom, and we doubt not but
that the Lord took of that spirit which was upon King David, Number. 11.25.29.
and put it on our King, when he in Psalm. 34.11. Calls and says, Come little
children hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear (that is the true
Religion) of the Lord, the Lord take of the same spirit and give it to the
threescore and ten Elders, we mean the Ministers of his word, and the Masters
of the families of this populous kingdom, that as we are (as Solomon says of
himself) the sons of our fathers (their derlings) and tenderly beloved of
our mothers, Pro. 4.4.
so the fruit may be seen by being instructed by them, and locking our hearts
to hold fast Gods word, and to keep our Kings commandments, that so we may
live, live here religiously, live with the King of Kings hereafter eternally.

Quest. What is your second petition, wherein you do conclude all you are able
to crave at their hands?

Ans. The last is this, that though we be not all one men's sons, nor all of
one degree and birth, nor of letter and shape, nor all of one stature of body,
nor of one nature, disposition, and faculty of soul, yet from the honourablest
to the meanest that is a child, from the beautifullest to the homeliest that
has a father, from the strongest to the weakest that is borne of a mother,
that they would (God to help) consecrate us to the best service and worship of
God in this life that we are fit for, not regarding blood, beauty, or bigness,
to our hinderance in the holiest things, for if the seminaries of heresy do
give such encouragement, and their blinded kings do as Nebuchadnezar did, Dan.
1.3.
first speak to their Eunuchs to prick and choose of the children of Israel
of the kings seed, and of the Princes.

Secondly, children in whom was no blemish but well favored. Thirdly, ripe
witted, instruct in all wisdom and well seen in knowledge. Fourthly, strong
and without in firmitly in body, or without impediment in speech, able to utter
knowledge, and such as were able to stand in the kings palace, if they that are
the princes and Eunuchs of Babell be so laborious, so liberal to provide
every day such children for their king, and such portions of the kings meat,
for the children they corrept and corrupt, to the end they may stand, and
instruct their kings to carry them to hell and destruction, then how much more
should our spiritual and natural parents of Jerusalem, of what degree or
dignity soever enourage us in the true way to God and salvation? and when they
have seen at our Catechizing any hope of profit, or vein of godliness and
virtue in our faces, they would thereafter let their hearts and hands go as
Gods do, Pro. 20.11.
for as Solomon says, A child is known by his studies, Syra. 33.
whether his works be pure or right, hopeful or not, fit for our calling if
not for another, though not as Samuel did, yet growing a little in favor and
credit both with God and men, with these on earth, Transition.
and him in heaven. So be it. Amen.

Quest. Turn your hearts now from the matter of encouragement in Catechizing
it self, and from the manner of it either in the Minister or your selves, or
your parents, turn your hearts from these two, and tell me the third means of
hartning you from the means we all have by Gods blessing?

Ans. 2. Cor. 6.
The means to make our hearts large with comfort to us all, is very large, and
the ways many, but that we may go down from the Temple with the same
comfortable stepps numberly that we came up, the means we find is threefold,
Before, At, and After.

Quest. What are the means?

Ans. 1. Temples our hearts are. 2. Temples our bodies are in. 3. Temples that
they shall be in hereafter.

Qu. Before we come, what are the temples of courage.

Ans. Three, First, Jesus Christ our head is a Temple of comfort to us, the
holiest of holiest to our hearts, Ephesians. 2.20.21. Jesus Christ himself being the
head corner stone, in whom all the building being coupled together, grows
unto an holy Temple to the Lord. For if it were a comfort to good Joseph, Luke
2.16.
and the blessed Virgin Mary, to find him in the Temple after three days
seeking him, when he was but twelve years old, and when the Temple of his body
was to be destroyed, Joel. 2.
behold a thousand times more encouragement it is to us, to seek him in the
Temple of glory that never perishes, whether we are taught he is raised and
ascended, and where are we to learn to worship God through him.

Que. Which is the 2. part of this spiritual Temple?

Ans. The Foundation of this holy Temple of comfort to us is twofold, 1.
Principal. 2. Subordinate.


Que. What is the principal Foundation of courage?

Ans. The Foundation principal is the Scripture, the holy Prophets and
Apostles, as Saint Paul to the Ephesians 2.20. Ye are built up on the
foundation of the Apostes and Prophets, and this no small comfort that we have
so sure a foundation that cannot be shaken.

Quest. What is the subordinate foundation of this Temple of courage to this
exercise?

Ans. Though we have not so many Prophets as the Church of Israel had, nor so
many holy Apostles as the Primitive Church had to comfort us, yet our Fathers
are the Fathers of more prophetical sons and apostolates then they were, and
our Church the Mother of more reverend Doctors, Luke 2.
then the Church of Jerusalem, to teach us the way unto life eternal; and this
though subordinate is no small encouragement.

Quest. What is the third Temple of encouragement that we are to our own
hearts?

Ans. Not only Christ our corner stone does comfort us, but the Church, though
in a less measure, and not only our flourishing Church, but even every
Christian in the Church, which is fuller of Temples of the holy Ghost, then
flourishing Corinth, for we hope our Preachers may speak to more then S. Paul
then could there, Know you not that your bodies are the Temples of God, 1. Cor.
16.17
and not only Temples but holy; For the Temple of God is holy, which ye are.
Having therefore a head or corner stone of so fine gold as Christ, a foundation
of such pure silver that has been seven and seven times tried in the fire, we
receive the golden cordialls of courage from them both to this holy exercise,
that ever we were borne to be Temples built of the same Temples.

Quest. What is the second general means of encouragement at Catechizing?

Ans. The Temple we are in, which is either for the matter of it, or the
manner, either the outward, or the inward parts of it comfortable

Que. What comfort is there for this from the Temple?

Ans. The sacred Churches wherein we meet together in due sort (let God have
his due praise for it) to hear and learn the grounds of Religion, if they
were but few and straight and poor bouses, yet might they be some courage to
us, but they are many, large and beautified, the many Cathedral Churches
ordained to spread religion, and the goodly Colleges annexed to both, both for
enlarging of learning in Church and Commonwealth, what largeness of comfort
do these bestow upon us? besides the vulgar schools where many poor boys
and girls poor orphans do learn these foundations of religion, these do
spur us forward to this learning of Catechizing, lest the Churches that we
are in, at the last day should condemn us, when they shall be consumed with fire
for our negligence in the same.

Secondly, for the manners in the Church, such consociation and concord of
Ministers of the Church in the exercise of godliness; such rules and Laws both
for Pastor and people in, and, of the Church, such variety of exercises in the
Church after the necessity of sorts and degrees, whom would they not move
either to govern, or to be governed to Catechize or to be Catechized? away
therefore withal those spirits that either if they be able will destroy the
matter or the manner of this Temple we are in, such as depopulate Towns, and
disfigure Churches, or any ways steeple the beauty of the Temple we are in, or
the rule and government of the Church we are of, that as soon as they be
loose, fly upon the throat of the Church, it is a shame, it is a shame, that
any such should be suffered to the great discouragement of the weak, but
because this is not a thing that is vpholden in our charges, let it pass, and
let us take courage from our Temples, as Adam did in Paradise in innocence,
more then the Israelites in the Tabernacle, or the Jews in their Temple, and
this must be by keepeing them religiously, and vseing them reverently, and
receiueing instructions attentively.

Qu. What is the Temple that we shall be of, which us Temples in the Temples we
are in, does so encourage?

Ans. This is as far beyond and above all other Temples of encouragement, as
heaven is above the earth, the Celestcall Temple this is, a Tempole so high, so
great, so holy, so precious, so clean, so walled, so dored, so gated, so
windowed, so situated, so founded, so squared, so long, so broad, so
garnished, so allied, so full of all these, that John's eyes could not see it,
Reu. 21.11.
for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple, this is our last, our
best comfort that we hope our poor desires of our hearts, our echoes of our
mouths shall not like lead and earth descend downwards, but shall be heard in
that Temple, whether we hope for our encouragement, the exorable clemency of
God will bring us his poor Temples, that when our dead bodies shall descend
into our graves in these material Temples, our souls shall before ascend into
that Temple so glorious, that it cannot be called a Temple, whether the head of
both Temples, Jesus Christ bring both our bodies and souls at the day, when he
shall judge us, to whom be all honor, and glory, both in the Temples of heaven
and earth, for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

