LECTVRES ON THE XV. PSALM: Read in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, in
London.

Wherein besides many other very profitable and necessary matters, the
question of Usury is plainly and fully decided.

By GEORGE DOWNHAM, Doctor of Divinity.

Whereunto are annexed two other Treatises of the same author, the one of
Fasting, the other of Prayer.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1604.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY KING, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING of great
Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
YOUR Majesty's gracious acceptance of my Treatise concerning Antichrist, has
emboldened me to dedicat these my labors unto your Highness, which are in no
other respect worthy of your royal patronage, but that they have been
employed in the explanation of an excellent Psalm of the royal Prophet David;
whose writings the holy Ghost has the rather commended to posterity, that by
his example Kings and Princes might be admonished to spend part of their time,
which they may spare from their royal administration, in heavenly meditations,
and spiritual exercises: whereby they might gather assurance to themselves,
that after their earthly kingdom is ended, they shall inherit an everlasting
kingdom in heaven: for although it be a singular favor of God vouchsafed unto
them, that they should so bear the image of his power and authority amongst
men, Psalm. 8^ 6.
as that they should be called Gods: Exodus 22. 28.
yet godly and Christian kings, are not so much to glory in the fruition of
their temporal crowns and kingdoms; as to solace themselves in the
comfortable expectation of that incorruptible crown of glory, which is laid
up for them in heaven: For which cause King David thought it to be his duty,
to give all diligence (as Peter since has exhorted us all) to make his calling
and election sure: 2. Pet. 1. 10.
and by undoubted testimonies and infallible tokens, to gather assurance unto
himself, that he was the true child of God. And that he should not take his
marks amiss, (as men are apt to deceive themselue in this point) he entreats
the Lord in this Psalm to reveal unto him the undoubted marks of the sons and
heirs of God: which having learned by the information of the holy Ghost, he
publishes them, to the common good of the Church: Showing as it were from the
Oracle of God, that not all that profess the true religion, nor all that are
able to discourse thereof; but those that walk worthy of their calling, that
behave themselves as it becomes the children of the light, that is, that live
uprightly, work righteousness, speak the truth from their hearts, etc. are
the sound members of the Church militant upon earth, and shall be inheritors
of glory in the Church triumphant in heaven. The meditation and practice of
which things I do so much the more boldly commend to your Majesty, because it
evidently appears by your former both studies in private, and also speeches in
public, and writings published, you have propounded David to your self as a
pattern for imitation. And now as a Minister of God, I exhort your Highness
to immitat him still, as in speaking and writing, so especially in the
conscionable practice of Christian duties: that you may be more and more (as
he was) a man according to Gods own heart, walking before the Lord as he did in
truth, and righteousness, 1. King. 3. 6.
and uprightness of heart; and governing and guiding the people of God,
according to the integrity of his heart, Psalm. 78. 71. 72.
and the singular wisdom of his hands. So shall the Lord take pleasure in
you, as he did in him, and will not only give your Highness long and
prosperous days, but will also bless your posterity after you, and establish
them in the throne of these kingdoms for ever, to the everlasting glory of
his name, and the perpetual good of his Church: which mercies the Lord grant
for his Christ's sake. Amen.

Your Majesty's obedient and loyal subject, George Downame.
LECTVRES ON the 15. Psalm.
Verse 1. A Psalm of David. Lord, who shall soiourne in thy Tabernacle, who
shall dwell in the mountain of thy holiness?
THis Psalm of David, The Argument of the Psalm.
is a Psalm of doctrine: wherein the Kingly Prophet shows by what marks and
notes a sound member of the Church militant, and a true citizen of the kingdom
of heaven may be discerned and known. And it is set down in form of a
dialogue betwixt David and the Lord, consisting on two parts; David's question,
Verse 1. and Gods answer, in the rest of the Psalm. The occasion of the
question seems to have been the disguising and counterfeiting of many
professors in all ages, who living in the Church, and not being of it, but as
goats among the sheep, and as tares among the corn, do notwithstanding by an
external profession of religion, and false opinion of true piety, deceive not
only others, but sometimes themselves also. For many there are, who place all
religion in the performance of the outward worship. And therefore such persons,
if they frequent the Church, hear the word, receive the sacraments, call upon
God with the rest of the congregation, they imagine that they have sufficiently
discharged their duty, though their life and conversation be irreligious and
unrighteous. Yea and not a few seem to repose such trust and affiance in the
very name of the Church, that if they imagine themselves to be in the true
Church, and do not gain say the doctrine therein professed, they take no
further care for their salvation, but live securely, as though all the members
of the visible Church, were also members of the invisible; and as though all
which have the external Church to their mother, had also God to their
spiritual father in Christ. Wherefore, to the end that men should no longer
deceive themselves with vain opinions and fond conceits, the Prophet having
first consulted as it were with the Oracle of God, sets down certain marks
or notes of a true Christian and citizen of heaven, whereby every man may
discern himself. And withal he teaches that in a sound and lively member of
the Church, an external profession of the faith, and an outward communion with
the Church of God, is not sufficient, unless the uprightness of our life be
answerable to our profession. And the same is confirmed by our Savior Christ:
Mat 7. 21, 22, 23.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Many shall
say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and
cast out devils in thy name, and done great wonders in thy name? And then will
I profess unto them, saying, I know you not, depart from me you workers of
iniquity.

But now let us search out the true sense and meaning of this question. The
meaning of the words. Ver. 1.
By the names of Tabernacle and Mountain, we are to understand the two parts
of the Catholic or universal Church: For the Tabernacle signifies the
Church militant upon earth; the holy Mountain, the Church triumphant in
heaven. By sojourning in the Tabernacle, is understood the short and
transitory abode of Christians, as it were pilgrims in the earth, as in a
strange land: by dwelling in the Mountain of God, is signified their perpetual
and eternal rest in heaven, as in their own country. Wherein the Prophet
alludeth unto that material Tabernacle, which was called the Tabernacle of the
assembly or congregation; and to the mount Moriah, where the Temple was placed:
2. Chro. 3. 1.
the one whereof was a type of the Church militant upon earth; the other was a
figure of the Church triumphant in heaven. I am not ignorant, that both members
are by some expounded of the Church militant, and by others of the Church
triumphant: but I follow that exposition which seems best to agree with the
words and meaning of the holy ghost. For the variety of phrase plainly
argues diversity of matter; sojourning in Gods Tabernacle, being much
different from dwelling in the Mountain of his holiness. And the conclusion
of the answer in the last words of the Psalm, which without doubt does render
the true meaning of the question, belongs both to this life and to that which
is to come. He that does these things, shall not beremooued for ever: that is,
he shall neither fall away from the grace of God in this life, nor be excluded
out of Gods glorious presence in the life to come. The sense therefore and
meaning of the question is this, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Lord, thou searcher and trier of the hearts and reins of men, who art
acquainted with all secrets, and best know who are thine, for as much as
there is so much unsoundness and hypocrisy among them that profess thy name,
and frequent the places of thy worship, that many deceive others with a
counterfeit show, and some beguile themselves with a false opinion of religion,
declare, I beseech thee, unto thy Church some tokens and cognisances of a true
and sound Christian, whereby the sheep may be discerned from the goats, and
the wheat from tares: show us Lord who is a sound member of the Church militant
here on earth, and shall be an inheritor of glory in the Church triumphant in
heaven: who is a true subject of thy kingdom of grace, and shall be an heir
of the kingdom of glory.

And this was the meaning of the question. Now let us come to the words of this
text. Wherein we are to consider two things: The division (...) the text.
Verse. 1.
the parts of the question, and the party to whom it is propounded. Of the
parts we are to speak, first, severally of either, and then jointly of both
together. Esaias 40. 22.
The former part: Lord who shall soiourne in thy Tabernacle? By Tabernacle some
(as I said) understand heaven, which elsewhere in the Scriptures is called Gods
Tabernacle: Psalm. 104. 2.
and not vnsitly, seeing the Lord stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and
spreads them out as a tent to dwell in. But howsoever the name Tabernacles is
sometimes figuratively used to signify heavenly and everlasting habitations.
Luke 16. 9.
Notwithstanding, it more properly signifies tents in war, and the flitting
habitations of warfaring men. And that by Tabernacle is here meant the Church
militant, the other word of soiourning does import. For heavenly Tabernacles
are not tents to sojourne in, but mansions of perpetual habitation, and
everlasting rest.

Basil by Tabernacle understands our flesh, In Psalm. 15.
which the Apostle calls the ^arthly house of our Tabernacle: 2. Cor. 5. 1.
for our bodies are not only Tabernacles, 2. Pet. 1. 13, 14.
but Temples also of God. 1. Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19.
As if this were the sense: Lord, who is he, who having sojourned as a stranger
in this flesh of ours, 2. Cor. 6. 16.
shall at the length rest with thee in thine heavenly kingdom? And surely, the
sense which he gives is godly, for it teaches, that those which shall for
ever rest in the mountain of Gods holiness, do live in this flesh as pilgrims
and strangers, Col. 3. 5.
mortifying their earthly members. Notwithstanding his exposition is not fit.
For according to this interpretation, the former part of the question
contains the answer to the latter: for so he says, He that has soiourned
as a pilgrim in the flesh, he shall dwell in the holy mountain. (...).
Most fitly therefore by Tabernacle we may understand the Church militant,
which elsewhere is called the Tabernacle of God, Psalm. 61. 5. etc. The Church
militant is the Tabernacle of God.
and sometimes the house, sometimes the Temple of God. For a Tabernacle is a
military mansion, and as it were a portable house which has no fixed seat or
settled place.

Now whereas the holy ghost calls the Church of God a Tabernacle, The first
use.
we learn first, that the life of a Christian is a warfare, Job. 7. 1.
as Job says, wherein we are to fight against the enemies of our salvation,
which fight against our souls, namely, the flesh, the world, and the devil:
Whereupon, the Church of God upon earth is called the Church militant. It
behooves therefore every one of us that would be esteemed a true member of
the Church, to behave our selves as Christian soldiers, fighting under the
banner of Christ. And for as much as our adversary the Devil goes about like
a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom he may devour; Job. 1.
and seeing the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
sending out of the heart as it were a furnace, 1. Tim. 6.
the sparkles of foolish and noisome lusts, which fight against our souls: 1.
Pet. 2. 11.
and the world likewise, partly by the desires thereof, partly by bad examples,
carries us away, 1. Cor. 7. 31. (...).
to embrace the world, to mind earthly things, to serve Mammon, and to place
our paradise here on the earth: It behooves us therefore both to prepare our
selves to this combat, and therefore not to be secure or to sleep, as others,
but to stand upon our guard, to be sober and vigilant, and to arm our selves
with that complete armor of God described. 1. Pet. 58.
Ephesians. 6. and also in the fight valiantly to encounter, Ephesians. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17.
and constantly to withstand our spiritual enemies, to resist the devil, sam.
4. 7.
and he shall fly from us, with the shield of faith to quench his fiery
darts, and with the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, to refell
his assertions, and repel his assentations. So to use the world, that we do
not ouer-vse it, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
so to possess worldly things, that we be not possessed of them: but rather
renouncing worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 12.
and being wained from worldly desires, to meditate and mind heavenly things.
Psalm. 131. 2.
To crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, Col. 3. 2.
and to mortify our members which are on the earth, Gal. 5* 24.
living not according to the flesh, Col. 3. 5.
but according to the spirit.

This warfare is to be entertained, this war is to be maintained of us, if we
would be esteemed sound members of the Church militant, who sojourning in the
Tabernacle of God, do fight in his camp against our spiritual enemies. But
on the other side, if we execute the works of the devil, giving our selves
over unto sin and iniquity; if with Demas we embrace the world, following
after pleasures, riches, honors; if we conform our selves to this present
world and the examples thereof; Rom, 13. 14.
if we take thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: then are we
soldiers indeed, but in the devils camp; we fight, but under Satan's banner,
against God, against the spirit, against our own souls. So far are we
either from sojourning in Gods Tabernacle for the pre^^nt or from hope of
resting in the mountain of his holiness for the time to come.

Secondly, The second use.
whereas the holy ghost calls the Church of Christ upon earth, a Tabernacle,
we may learn, that neither the Church it self, nor the members of it, have
any firm or fixed seat of habitation on the earth: for Tabernacles and Tents
are made to that end, that they may be removed from place to place. Yea, the
Tabernacle of God was a moveable temple, eftsoons changing his seat. 1. Cor.
10.
And as those Israelits were types unto us, so was that Tabernacle a type of
the militant Church. For even as that Tabernacle, after it was once made,
wandered up and down in the desert, and after sojourned for a while, now here,
now there, sometimes in Shilo, sometimes among the Philistims, sometimes in
Keriathjarim, etc. and never found any settled place, until it was transported
into the mountain of God: 2. Chron. 3. 1. and 5. 5.
so the Church of God wandreth many times as a pilgrim in the desert of this
world, Heb. 11. 37, 38.
forced often times to change her seat, tossed too and fro, persecuted, molested,
banished, and never finds any assured place of constant rest, until it be
translated into the celestial mountain of Gods holiness.

Thirdly, The third use.
whereas the Church is called the Tabernacle of God, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
as elsewhere in the Scriptures the house and temple of God, 2. Cor. 6. 16.
wherein God dwells and manifests his presence; Ephesians. 2. 21.
we may learn that the Lord dwells as it were in his Church, Apoc. 3. 12.
and after a singular manner is present therein. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
For to this end the Lord commanded the Tabernacle to be made, Exodus 25. 8.
that he might dwell among them: and again, whereas he promises by Moses, To
set his Tabernacle among them, Leuit. 26. 12.
and walk among them. The Apostle expounds his setting his Tabernacle, to
be his dwelling among them. 2. Cor. 6. 16.
You are (says he) the temple of the living God. As God has said, I will
dwell among them, and I will walk there. And to the same purpose elsewhere he
is said to be and to walk in the midst of his people, Esaias 12. 6.
to dwell in Sion, Deuteronomy. 13. 14.
and to walk in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, Psalm. 9. 12. and
132. 13.
that is, of the seven churches. Now the consideration of Gods presence in his
Church, Apoc. 2. 1.
ought to make us wary and circumspect, that we may so behave our selves as
in the presence of God, who searches the hearts and reins of men. For the
Lord is not only present to reward those which worship him in spirit and
truth, but also to punish and afflict those which fear not to sin in his
presence. Wherefore the holy ghost, as he charge the Israelits not to fear
their enemies, Deuteronomy. 20. 3.
because God did walk with them, and was among them a consuming fire to
destroy their enemies: Deu^. 9. 3.
so he commands them to abstain from sin, because God was among them a
consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 6. 15.
and could not abide any filthiness, especially spiritual uncleanness among
them. Deuteronomy. 23. 14.
This therefore must teach us to set God always before our eyes, and to behave
our selves as in his presence: knowing that we are more than shameless
sinners, if we fear not to sin in the sight and presence of God.

But although the Lord be present every where in his Church after a special
manner, God more especially present in the assemblies of the Church.
yet more especially he is present in the assemblies of the Church and
congregations of his people gathered together in the name of Christ, as Christ
himself has promised, Matt. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together
in my name, Mat. 18. 20.
there am I in the midst of them. Therefore in the old Testament, those who
were excluded from the assembly of the Church, thought themselves banished from
the face and presence of God. Genesis 4. 15.
The consideration whereof as it must affect us with an earnest desire and
serious care of frequenting the Tabernacles of God, to visit his face and to
behold his presence, so it must teach us to behave our selves in the assembly
of Gods saints, as in the presence of God. David when he was exiled, or
otherwise excluded from the assemblies of the Church, he desired nothing more
than that he might have liberty to come unto the Tabernacle of God, and to
appear in the presence of God. See Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to visit his temple. And Psalm. 42. Psalm. 42. 1. 2. 4.
As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so pants my soul after thee O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God, Psalm. 84. 1* 2. etc
etc. Likewise Ps. 84. O Lord of hosts how amiable are thy Tabernacles: my
soul longs, yea faints, that I might come to the Courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh cry out after the living God, etc. And when he had liberty
to come to the Tabernacle, Psalm. 122. 1.
he rejoiced in nothing more. Psalm. 122. Ireioyced when they said unto me, we
will go into the house of the Lord. And again Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84. 4. 10.
he judges them blessed that dwell in the house of the Lord, and prefers
one day spent in the Courts of the Lord, before a thousand elsewhere. But as I
said, the presence of God must also move us to behave our selves reverently and
religious^y, that before we come unto the house of the Lord, Eccles. 4. 17. and
5. 1.
we look unto our feet, that is, examine with what affections we come; and not
only so, but also to put off the shoes of our feet, Exodus 3. 5.
that is, our corrupt affections, that we may be ready to hear rather than
to offer the sacrifice of fools, Ios. 5. 15.
for the place of the assembly being sanctified by Gods presence, is holy
ground. And that when we are entered into the assembly, we may after the example
of Cornelius, Act. 10. 33.
behave our selves as in the presence of God. Those which come before an
earthly prince, either to speak unto him, or to hear him speak, how careful
are they to behave themselves in all comely reverence! how much more ought we
in all reverence and fear appear before the glorious majesty of the great
God, 1. Sam. 1^. 7.
the King of kings, Why the holy ghost does use the phrase of soiourning.
and Lord of lords, especially considering that the Lord does not behold us as
man does, but looks especially unto the heart. Our abode in the Church
militant, (...).
is signified in the word soiourne. Hebr. (...). Graec. (...), who shall
soiourne. Sojourning (says Basil) is a temporary abode, signifying not a
settled life, but transitory or passing on, in hope of trans^ation to a better
estate. This word therefore the holy ghost does use to signify, that a citizen
of heaven is a pilgrim on earth, and that his life here is a pilgrimage. True
heirs of heaven, and pilgrims on earth.
And so Peter calls the time of our life, the time of our pilgrimage. And
Jacob professes, that the days of his pilgrimage (meaning his life) were few
and evil. ^. Pet. 1. 17.
And likewise David, Genesis 47. 9.
I am a stranger (says he) before thee, ^ Chro. 2^. 15.
and a pilgrim, as all my forefathers were. In a word, it was the profession of
all the faithful, That they were strangers and pilgrims upon the earth. Heb.
11. 13.
Here therefore we are taught so many as desire to be citisens of heaven, to
behave our selves as pilgrims on the earth. 1. Pet. 2. 11, 12.
Who being exiles in a foreign land, desire to come unto our own country. He
that has a good patrimony in his own country, great wealth, kind and able
kindred and friends, and is forced for a time to sojourne in a strange land,
where he is ill entreated, disturbed, molested, assailed by his enemies on
every side, he will affect nothing in that strange country, neither will he
set his heart upon any thing there, but his mind is upon his country, desiring
nothing more than to return thither. But our country is in heaven, where we
have an everlasting inheritance, an incorruptible and inestimable treasure,
where, is God our heavenly father, Christ our eldest brother, and the rest of
our brothers and sisters, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all
the quire of heavenly Saints and celestial spirits: and we are pilgrims for a
time here upon earth, where we are hated and ill entreated, assaulted with the
temptations of Satan, the world, and the flesh, subject to many inward
infirmities and outward troubles. And therefore it behooves us not to set our
hearts on worldly things, or to place our paradise upon the earth. For if our
hearts be on the earth, how is our treasure in heaven? if the earth be our
country, how are we citizens of heaven? Wherefore, if we be pilgrims in the
world, let us not be addicted to worldly desires, let us not mind earthly
things, but being wained from worldly cogitations, let us mind those things
which be above. Let us use the world, as though we used it not, and let us be
so affected toward earthly things as pilgrims and wayfaring men are toward
such delights or commodities as they see in their journey, or at their inn.
Which if they use as means to further them in their journey: yet they set not
their hearts upon them. And yet assuredly* our abode in this life, in respect
of our continuance in the mountain of Gods holiness, is not so much as the
time of our lodging or bait in an Inn. Therefore howsoever such as be but
earthwormes, do crawle as it were upon the earth, and mind earthly things. Yet
must we remember, that we are citisens of heaven, Phil. 3. 19, 20.
and pilgrims on the earth. Are we pilgrims, living (as it were) exiled from
our celestial country and heavenly father? Phil. 1. 23.
What ought we then more fervently to desire than to be in our country, and
that this earthly Tabernacle of our body being dissolved, 2. Cor. 5. 1.
we might dwell in that habitation made without hands, eternal in the
heavens? Are we such pilgrims as indeed desire to be in our country? Let that
then be our chiefest care and endeavor to travel into our country. Mat 6. 33.
Let us first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and carefully
use the means of our salvation. And let us think, that if we be pilgrims,
we must also be wayfaring men. Are we wayfaring men in this life? then will
we use hac vita vt via, (...). Basil.
This life as a way; and the things of this life as they may be helps unto us
in this way. Let us make choice of the high, and as it were the Kings way,
which leads unto heaven, the way of true faith and unfeigned repentance. Let
us insist and persist therein, Mat. 7. 14.
though it be a narrow and an afflicted way. Let us walk before God in the
duties of our lawful callings, and in those good works which God has
prepared for us. Ephesians. 2. 10.
This is the way, let us walk therein. Let us not return to our sins, Esaias.
30. 21.
let us not de^^^ne from the way of Gods commandments either to the right
hand or to the left: let us not stand at a stay, nor look backward with Lots
wife, and much less go backward; but with Paul, Phil. 3. 14.
let us do one thing, forgetting that which is behind, and striving to that
which is before, let us make on toward the mark, unto the price of the high
calling of God in Jesus Christ, knowing, Mat. 10. 22.
that whosoever perseuereth to the end, he shall be saved. And this was the
former part of the question, concerning a true member of the Church militant,
which the holy ghost has expressed in these words: Who shall soiourne in thy
Tabernacle? calling the Church militant, the Tabernacle of God; and teaching,
that he which is an heir of the kingdom of heaven, is a pilgrim on earth.

Now follows the later part of the question, The second part of the question.
which is concerning the member that shall be of the Church triumphant, and
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven, in these words, Who shall dwell in the
mountain of thy holiness? What is meant by the mountain of God.
The kingdom of heaven by a metonymy of the sign, he calls the mountain of
God. For the mountain of God was a type of the kingdom of heaven. And this
mountain was either the land of Canaan, which was a type of the celestial
Canaan, as it is said Exodus 15. Exodus 15. 17.
Thou shall plant them, O Lord, in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the
place which thou have made for thine habitation: or else the mount Sion, which
elsewhere is called the mountain of Gods holiness, Psalm. 2. 6.
and was a type of the heavenly Jerusalem: or lastly, Heb. 12. 22.
the Mount Moriah, where the Temple was placed, which is somewhere called the
mountain of the congregation, Esaias. 14. 13.
standing on the North part of Sion; and is therefore called the holy
mountain, Psalm. 48. 2.
because it was the place of the holy assemblies, which the Lord sanctified for
his habitation and for his worship: and this al^^ was a type of the temple of
God, that is to say, of heaven. Psalm. 11. 4.
Whereas therefore heaven is called the mountain of God, it is a metonymy,
such as we find elsewhere in the Psalms, Psalm. 3. 4.
I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me out of the mountain of his holiness,
that is, heaven. And thus the most interpret this place: as namely, among the
Greeks Basil says this mountain does signify, (...). The supercelestiall
religion, Heb. 12.
which is every way conspicuous and bright (which some call Coelum Empyrium)
whereof the Apostle speaks. Heb. 12. Among the Latins P. Lombard. in thy holy
mountain, that is, says he, In everlasting bliss, where is the vision of
peace (signified in the name Jerusalem) and the supereminence or height of
charity, where none contendeth in fight, but rests in everlasting peace.

Now heaven is called the mountain of God for these causes. Why heaven is
called the mountain of God.
First, because it was figured by the mountain of God, even as Christ is
called our Passover. Secondly, because of the height thereof, whereby it is
elevated far above the earth. For albeit, in respect of us who are now placed
within the compass of heaven, and behold Comavam coeli superficiem, 1. Cor. 5.
as it were the inward roof thereof, it cannot so fitly be called a mountain:
notwithstanding as it is the throne of God, who sits on the globe of heaven,
as it were his throne, and as it is the seat of the blessed spirits, whose
conversation is in the highest heaven, as it were in the top of an hill, it is
not unfitly called the mountain of God. Unto this mountain, if we should
ascend but in thought, as Scipio once did in his dream, and from thence should
behold the earth; we should easily contemn this inferior world with the
desires thereof. For the whole globe of the earth together with the water,
which seems none so great unto us, if we could see it from the highest
heavens, would appear unto us like a mote in the sun. But if withal we felt
the unspeakable joys of heaven, and from thence should cast down our eyes
unto this valley of tears, there to behold the vanities of vanities, and
nothing but vanity in vexation of spirit, as Solomon says, it cannot be
expressed with how fervent a desire we should be inflamed to have our
habitation in heaven. Peter when as he was present in the transfiguration of
Christ in the mount Thabor, and had a taste of the heavenly glory, he was
straightway ravished therewith, and desired greatly to remain there. Lord
(says he) it is good being here, let us make three Tabernacles, Mat. 17. 4.
etc. Thirdly, heaven is called a Mountain, because it is a safe place, free
from all hazard or possibility of danger, where the blessed spirits dwell on
high safe from all danger and fear of evil. Esaias. 33. 16.


But heaven is not only called the mountain of God, but also the holy
Mountain, H^ly mountain.
or (which is all one) the Mountain of his holiness, because it is sanctified
by the presence of God. For which cause, Sion also and the mount Moriah are
called the holy mountain of God: Exodus 3. 5.
For where the Lord does manifest his presence, that is a holy place, namely,
because of Gods presence sanctifying it. But in the highest heaven the Lord
does principally manifest his presence, and reveal his glory. Wherefore, if
mount Thabor after the transfiguration of Christ there wrought, and the
presence and glory of God there manifested, 2. Pet. 1. 18.
was for that cause called the holy mountain; how much more does the highest
heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of his father in majesty and
glory, deserve to be called the holy mountain of God? The Scriptures ascribe
such holiness to ^his mountain of God, as nothing may enter therein which is
not holy. Which must teach us (beloved) to follow after holiness; Apoc 21. 27.
without which we shall never see God. Verily verily I say unto you (says
Christ our Savior) except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, Heb. 12.
14.
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. John. 3. 5.


Our abode in the mountain of God, The phrase of dwelling expounded.
is expressed in the word dwelling: whereby two things are signified,
Perpetuity and Rest. Perpetuity: for there the children of God remain not as
pilgrims for a time, but as citisens and heirs for ever. Hebr. 9. 15.
Whereupon the kingdom of heaven is also called an heavenly inheritance, Luke
16. 9.
wherein are everlasting habitations, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
and an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for us. I will not stand to prove this point, being the last
article of our Creed, confirmed by manifold testimonies of scripture, which
often mentions eternal life, eternal salvation, Dan. 12. 2. 3.
eternal kingdom: let us rather labor by all good means to make sure our
calling and election to this eternal kingdom, Mat. 25. 46.
that the meditation thereof may teach us, Heb. 5. 9.
first, 2. Pet. 1. 11.
to contemn in respect thereof the momentarie vanities of this present world:
2. Pet. 1. 10.
accounting it more than madness, if for the temporary fruition of sin we
shall deprive our selves of Gods presence, Psalm. 16. 11.
where there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore: 2. Cor. 4. 17.
if for light and temporary trifles we loose a superexcellent eternal weight
of glory in heaven. Secondly, with patience and comfort to run the race of
afflictions set before us, Heb. 12. 1. 2.
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, Rom 8. 18.
and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. For the and light
afflictions of this life, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
are not worthy the eternal weight of glory that shall be revealed, which
notwithstanding they procure unto us, whiles we look not on the things which
are seen, but on the things which are not seen. For the things which are
seen, are temporal: but the things which are not seen, are eternal. Again
the word dwelling, imports rest. For there the children of God do not wander
as pilgrims, neither are subject to any molestations, but do wholly rest from
their labors. Apoc. 14. 13.
And for that cause the kingdom of heaven is called the rest of God, Psalm. 95.
etc.
and as it were an eternal Sabbath. In respect whereof, Heb. 4.
the land of Canaan was a type of our heavenly country. For as to the
Israelits, after they had for many years wandered as pilgrims through the
desert, the land of Canaan was the mountain of their perpetual habitation and
rest: even so to us, after we have finished our pilgrimage through the desert
of this world, there remains an heavenly Canaan, that Sabbatisme or rest of
God, which the Apostle testifies, Heb. 4. 9.
is left to the people of God. But as against those Israelites, which after
they were brought out of Egypt, and were in the way toward the land of
promise, by their infidelity and contumacie provoked God, the Lord swear in
his anger, that they should never enter into his rest: so shall it happen to so
many of us, as professing our selves to be redeemed out of the bondage of the
spiritual Pharao, shall notwithstanding neither truly believe in Christ, nor
repent of our sins, but provoke the Lord by our infidelity and disobedience.
Heb. 3. 7. etc.
Wherefore, as the holy ghost says, To day if you shall hear his voice,
harden not your hearts as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation
in the wilderness, where your fathers tempted me, etc. to whom I swear in my
wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. Heb. 6. 11.
Let us study therefore to enter into that rest, least any of us fall after
the same ensample of disobedience. And let us take heed least at any time there
be in us an evil heart of infidelity to depart from the living God. Heb. 3.
12.
For the unfaithful shall be excluded, Apoc. 21. 8.
but so many as believe, Heb. 4. 3.
shall enter into that rest. And as Joshua (who also is called Jesus) brought
the Israelites into that rest: Heb. 4. 8.
so Christ, the true Jesus and Savior of his people, brings all those that
believe in him into this eternal rest. For he not only died, that he might
purchase by his blood this rest for us, and ascended into heaven, to prepare
eternal mansions for us: John. 14. 2.
but also, when we are to leave this earthly Tabernacle of our bodies, he
sends his holy Angels to convey our souls into the bosom of Abraham, Luke.
16. 22.
and to place them in this mountain of God.

By that which has been said, we see what difference there is betwixt the
Church militant on earth, and triumphant in heaven. For this is a Tabernacle of
war; that, a mountain of peace. In this we sojourne for a time as pilgrims
from God, or, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 5. 6.
(...), in that being removed from the body, we dwell with God, or, as the
same Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 5. 8.
(...). Here is trouble, there is ease; here is the valley of tears, there is
the kingdom of happiness and glory; here is the combat and fight, there is quiet
and perpetual rest; here we are in our way, there in our country.

Hitherto we have spoken of the parts of this question severally, Of the parts
of the question jointly.
now we are in a word to entreat of the^ jointly and together: For both parts
are to be understood of one and the same party or subject: out of which
co^iunctio^ we gather two things: the first, that those which shall dwell in
the holy mountain, do first sojourne in Gods Tabernacle; the second, that those
which do here sojourne in the Tabernacle of God, shall also rest in the mountain
of his holiness. The former serves for our instruction, teaching us that none
shall be members of the Church triumphant, but those which have bin members of
the Church milita^t, none shall be heirs of heaven, but those that have bin
pilgrims on earth. All men desire to rest in the holy mountain of God: but how
few behave themselves as pilgrims in his Tabernacle? (...), says Basil, such
men are geason, all desire with Balaam to die the death of the righteous, but
few do care to lead the life of the just: all desire glory, but few do care for
grace: al are desirous of the end, which is salvation, but few are careful of
the subordinat means. The latter serves for our consolation, assuring us that
all the true members of the Church militant, shall be members of the Church
triumphant; that all the children of God (as all the faithful are) be also
heirs of eternal life; that those which are obedient subjects in the kingdom
of grace, shall be inheritors of the kingdom of glory; that those who are
pilgrims on earth, shall be citisens of heaven: For this is the privilege of
a true Christian, noted in the end of the Psalm, that being once in the state
of grace he shall never be utterly removed. Herein therefore the faithful may
solace themselves, that although they are despised and abused in the world, yet
they are heirs of eternal life, and citizens of the kingdom of heaven.

And so much of the parts of the question: Of the party to whom this question
is propounded.
now we are to consider of the party to whom it is propounded. For as touching
this most weighty question, the Psalmist consulteth with the Lord, the
collector of his Church, and the giver of eternal life. And there may two
reasons be given why in this question he appealeth unto the Lord. First,
because in determining this question, we are not to stand to the judgment of
men, but of God only: For men's judgment whether they deliver their opinion
concerning others, is very uncertain; or touching themselves, it is many times
deceitful. For as touching themselves, how many are there especially in the
Church of Rome, who boast of the name of the Church, and in comparison of
themselves contemn all others as heretics or schismatiques; because they
presume that they are in the Catholic Church, observing the rites of their
Church, and believing as their Church believes; when as in truth they are
members of Antichrist, and nothing less than the true members of the
Catholic and invisible Church of Christ. And therefore no marvel, if many
who live in the face of the true Church, do falsely judge themselves to be sound
members of the same. Neither are we to stand to men's judgment concerning
others: For the judgment of the ungodly is corrupt, and of the godly
uncertain. The wicked judge the true members of the Church indeed, 1. Cor. 4.
13.
to be the scum of the world and offscouring of all things; them they hate,
contemn, persecute, excommunicate, either as impious or as heretical, even as
our Savior Christ has foretold, John 16. 2. ^
They shall excommunicate you, yea, the time shall come, that whosoever kills
you, will think that he does God good service. The world does love her own,
but hates those which are Christ's, John 17. 14.
as our Savior says, the world hates them because they are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world. John 15. 18. 19.
And again, if the world hates you, know that it hated me first: if you were
of the world, assuredly the world would love her own. But now because you are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
does hate you. But the judgment also of the godly concerning others, is
uncertain: For there is a twofold judgment, the judgment of Charity,
Certainty.
By the judgment of Charitie^ the faithful judge every professed member of
the visible Church, Phil. 1. 7.
when they speak of the particular persons, to be a member of the invisible,
elected, called, justified, sanctified; howbeit, they know in general, 1. John
2. 19.
that many are in the Church, which be not of it, ^at. 22. 14.
and that many be called, but few are chosen. The judgment of Certainty
appertains only to God, who only is the searcher of the heart. As the
Prophet Jeremy says, Ier. 17. 9. 10.
The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things: who can know it? I the
Lord search the heart and try the reins, that I may give to every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his works. Seeing
therefore we are to stand to the judgment of God, and not of men, let us
labor to approve our selves not to men, 1. These. 2. 4.
but to the Lord, who tries the heart.

Secondly, the Prophet deuolueth this question to Gods judgment, that we may
understand the answer which ensues to be without exception: as being the
answer not of man but of God, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
who best knows who are his; Mat. 25. 32.
who also in the end of the world shall separate the sheep from the goats.
When (...) let no man deceive himself any longer, either (...) title of the
Church, or with a fair show of an outward profession, etc. but let him know
this for a certain truth, as it were from the Oracle of God, That he is not
such an one as shall either sojourne in the Tabernacle of God, or dwell in his
holy mountain, unless the description of a sound Christian and citisen of
heaven, which is comprised in this answer of the Lord, agree unto him. And of
this answer we are now to speak.

For when as David, Gods answer.
as if he had been the high Priest standing before the propitiatory, had
consulted with the Oracle of God; The Lord makes answer as it were from
betwixt the Cherubins, therein fully satisfying his demand. For being
demanded who shall sojourne in the Tabernacle of God, and rest in his holy
mountain: He answers, That he which walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, etc. shall never beremooued. In which answer we are to
consider two things, the description of a sound Christian, in the whole body of
the Psalm: and his privilege, in the last words, he that does these things
shall never beremooued.

The description consists wholly of the effects, Of the description in
general.
whereby the Lord would have a true citisen of the kingdom of heaven to be
tried and known, as our Savior says; By their fruits you shall know them.
But here it may be demanded first, Why does he not rather describe a sound
member of the Church and heir of heaven, by his faith, or by the profession
thereof; seeing to faith the kingdom of heaven is promised, and seeing also
the profession of the true faith makes one a member of the visible Church? I
answer, because faith is an inward and hidden grace, and many deceive both
themselves and others by a profession of faith: and therefore the holy ghost
will have every man's faith to be tried and known by the fruits thereof. And
howsoever eternal life be promised to faith, and eternal damnation be
threatened against infidelity, yet the sentence of salvation and condemnation
shall be pronounced according to works, as the evidence of both. Secondly, it
may be demanded, Why among all the fruits of faith (which are almost
innumerable) he makes choice of those duties which we owe to our brother:
especially considering that the duties which we owe immediately to God, are more
principal, wherein also consists our religion and piety toward God. As for
example, the true invocation of the name of God, the sincere profession of the
faith, the saving hearing of the word, etc. Answ. We are to consider, that this
question is propounded of such as living in the visible Church, would seem to
be religious, making a profession of the faith, hearing the word of God, and
calling upon his name, viz. which of them (because all are not religious which
would seem to be so) are indeed sound members of the Church, and heirs of
heaven. For of those which are openly profane, and do not so much as make a
semblance of religion, there is no question to be made: For without question
there is no place for such in the kingdom of heaven. Now that we may rightly
discern of those which profess religion, who among them are sound, who
unsound; the marks and tokens are not to be taken from the outward duties of
Gods worship, as prayer, hearing of the word, receiving of the sacraments, and
much less the observation of humane traditions (for all these things hypocrites
also are accustomed to do;) but from the duties of charity and righteousness,
which we owe to our brethren: For the touchstone of piety and true religion
toward God, is charity toward our brother. 1. John. 3. 10.
Herein (says John) are the children of God known, and the children of the
devil: whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother. The^e is no man almost in the Church who will not
affirm that he believes in Christ, that he loves God, that he is the
disciple of Christ: How then shall he be tried? Gal. 5. 6.
True faith works by love, and is to be manifested by works, Iam. 2. 18. and
26
without which it is to be judged dead. The true love of God must show it self
in the love of our brother. 1. John ^. 20.
For if any man shall say, that he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a
liar. The true disciple of Christ is known by brotherly love. Hereby (says
our Savior) shall all men know you to be my disciples, John 13. 35.
if you love one another. Now in the love of our neighbor, all the duties of
the second Table are summarily comprised. Romans 13. 9.
Let no man therefore so deceive himself, as to think, that he is truly
religious toward God, if he live unjustly or uncharitably among his
neighbors. For our religion toward God is to be esteemed according to those
fruits which appear in our calling and conversation with men. For hereby
according to the Scriptures, is all our religion and piety toward God to be
examined and tried. And for this cause, in describing a citizen of heaven, he
reckneth up those duties which are to be exercised toward our brother, that by
them as it were certain cognisances, the true servant of God may be discerned
from the slave of the Devil. And so elsewhere in the Scriptures the like
questions receive not unlike answers. Psalm. 24. 3. 4. 6.
As Psalm. 24. 3. 4. 6. Esaias 33. 14. 15. 16. Esaias 33. 14. 15. 16.


Hitherto I have spoken of the description in general, The parts of the
description.
now we are to descend to the several parts and branches thereof: of them,
some are general, others more special. I call those general, which summarily
comprise all the duties of a good man, in the 2. verse, namely, that he be
upright in heart, just in his deeds, and true in his words. The more special
are contained in the rest of the Psalm, whereby the child of God is described,
partly (...) by way of denial, that he slandereth not, that he does not evil
unto his neighbor, that he receives not an ill report against him, that he
breaks not his oath, that he puts not to usury, that he receives no
rewards; partly (...), that he contemns the wicked and honors the godly.
And these specials may be understood as branches of the general: For he that
is upright is not partial, but behaueth himself toward men as they behave
themselves toward God, honoring those that honor God, and despising those that
contemn the Lord. He that is just, is not injurious to his neighbor, neither
is he an usurer or briber. He that loves the truth, he is true in his oath and
promises, he detesteth slandering both in himself and others, having neither a
tongue to utter, nor an ear to hear slanders. Or you may conceive thus, that
a citizen of heaven is here described by ten notes, whereof four is
affirmative, signifying the virtues wherewith he is endued; and six are
negative, signifying those special vices which he is careful to avoid.

Of these notes we are to speak in order. The first whereof is Integrity or
uprightness, in these words: He that walks uprightly. (...)
To walk, in the Hebrew phrase, signifies either generally, to live, to order
a man's life: or more specially, to live, or to walk in a calling, or else to
profess religion. Hereupon in the Scriptures our life or course of living, our
vocation, our religion, is called a way. But the general signification which
comprehends the other, best fitteth this place. This word therefore the holy
Ghost does use to teach us, that this life of ours is a way, and that we are
wayfaring men, Psalm. 119. 1.
whom it behooves to be upright in our way, as the Psalmist elsewhere speaks.

Now, if we be trauellours or wayfaring men, we are to be careful of three
things. First, that we go in the right way: For if we go out of our way, the
farther we go, the farther we shall be from our iourneys end. And therefore as
Christ himself exhorts enter, Mat. 7. 13.
yea, strive to enter at the narrow gate: Luke 13. 24.
for wide is the gate, and broad is the way which leads unto destruction, and
many there be which go in thereat, because strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. This way is the
true religion of Christ, which in the Scriptures is called the way, Act. 9. 2.
the way of life, the way of peace, the way of salvation: Psalm. 16. 11.
teaching two things especially, repentance toward God, Luke 1. 79.
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Act. 16. 17.
For by faith we come unto Christ, who is the way, Act. 20. 21. 24. 14. 15. 16.
the truth, and the life, and by repentance we bring forth the fruits of faith,
John 6. 35.
namely, good works, which God has prepared for us that we should walk in
them, John 14. 6.
This as I say is the way, Ephesians. 2. 10.
let us walk therein. Esaias 30. 21.


2. The next thing whereof we must be careful, is, that being set in the right
way we go forward therein, proceeding from faith to faith, and from a less
measure of grace unto a greater, till at length we come to a perfect or grown
stature in Christ. For neither must we stand still in this way, neither must we
go back: for if we do so, how shall we come to our iourney's end? The Apostle
Paul although he had proceeded very far in this way, he thought it not his
duty to surcease, but the nearer he came to his mark, Phil. 3. 14. 15.
the more he strives toward it* forgetting those things which ^e behind. And
thereupon infers, whosoever therefore are perfect or grown men, let them be
of this mind. Must those that are perfect be of this mind? how much more
behooves it us, who are but of small growth in comparison, to give all
diligence that we may increase and grow up in grace, that as the Apostle
exhorts, ^. These. 4. 1.
we may abound more? For not to go forward in this way, is (as one faith) to go
backward: even as a boat which is carried against a swift stream, either it is
rowed forward, or else it runs backward. We must take heed therefore le^t we
be non-proficients, and let us fear lest when we cease to be better, we begin
to be worse.

The third thing is, that we be upright in the way, neither treading awry by
secret dissembling, nor halting downeright, betwixt God and Mammon, betwixt
Christ and Antichrist: 1. King. 18. 21.
As the Israelites in Achabs time halted between God and Baal, and those
counterfeit Christians, Phil. 3. 18. 19.
of whom Paul complains Phil. 3. there be many, says he, which walk, that
is, makes a profession of Religion, of whom I have told you heretofore, and
now I tell you weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose
end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and their glory is to their
shame, who mind earthly things.

But of Integrity we are to speak more at large, forasmuch as it is here set
down as the first and principal mark of a true Christian. The Hebrew word
(...) is usually translated perfect, not that it signifies such an one as is
altogether free from sin, or is endued with righteousness, for so this note
would agree to no man living: Prou. 20. 9.
For, who can say that his heart is clean? yea if we say that we have no
sin, 1. John 1. 8.
says John the beloved of Christ, we deceive ourselves, and there is no truth
in us: for, in many things we offend all, Iam. 3. 2.
and there is not a righteous man upon earth, which does good and sins not.
Eccles. 7. 22.
But it signifies him who in the desire and purpose of his heart is free from
hypocrisy, dissimulation and guile, whom we call Upright. For N^ah, Jacob,
Job, David, Ezechias and others* are said in the Scriptures to have been
perfect, that is, upright men who all notwithstanding had their faults. 2.
Chron. 15. 17*
Yea, Asa is said 2. Chron. 15. to have had a perfect or upright heart all the
days of his life, Chap. 16.
and yet in the next Chapter there are recorded three sins of his together,
that he rested upon the King of Syria, that he committed the Prophet to prison,
that in his sickness he trusted in the Physicians more than in God. The
perfection therefore which is signified in this word, is not so much to be
measured by the goodness of the outward act or work, but by the unfeigned will,
sincere desire, and upright endeavor, aspiring toward perfection. For the Lord
accepting the will for the deed, esteems of the sincere: will, and unfeigned
endeavor, for perfect obedience in his children; insomuch that uprightness
every where in the old Testament goes under the name of perfection; and those
things which are done with an upright and entire heart, are said to be done
with the whole heart, and with a perfect heart.

Thamim therefore we may rightly interpret upright, that is, void of
dissumulation; and it may be two ways considered, as it is referred to God,
and so it signifies sincere, or void of hypocrisy: as it is referred toward
men, and so it signifies simple, or void of guile. So that he in this place is
said to be upright, who is void of hypocrisy toward God, and free from guile
toward men.

And first we are to speak of uprightness in respect of God, in handling
whereof I purpose to observe this order. First, to show what it is. Secondly,
that it is, as here it is made, a note proper to the children of God. And
thirdly, because we are not to be idle hearers of this discourse, we are to try
and examine our selves whether this note agrees unto us or not. And fourthly,
if we do find our defectiuenesse therein, either in whole or in part, we are by
certain forcible arguments to be stirred up to embrace it. And lastly, we are
to show the means whereby to obtain it.

1. What uprightness is toward God, What uprightness is.
it may be gathered by those phrases of speech whereby it is expressed in the
Scriptures. For first, to be upright, it is to walk with God, or before God,
(as the Lord says to Abraham, Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me and be upright) that is, so to lead our lives as in the sight
and presence of God, who sees the hearts, and searches the reins of men:
when as the Scripture therefore says of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaacke, and
others, that they walked before God, it signifies that they walked, that is,
lived uprightly, as in the presence and sight of God, admitting him to be the
witness and judge of all their actions and dealings: thus were Zachary and
Elizabeth said to be righteous before God, Luke 1. 6.
that is, upright persons. And in this sense upright actions are said in the
Scriptures to be done before the Lord. Luke 1. 73. 74.
In the song of Zachary we are said to be redeemed from the hand of our
spiritual enemies, to this end, that we should worship the Lord in holiness
and righteousness before him, that is, not as in the sight of men, who see but
the outward shows, but as in the sight and presence of God, who sees and
respects the heart. 2. Cor. 12. 19.
Thus are we with the Apostle to speak, as before God in Christ: 2. Cor. 2. 17.
thus are we to preach, as before God: thus are we to hear, Act. 10. 33.
as before God, with Cornelius.

2. Again, Gal. 2. 14.
to be upright, is (...), to walk with a rightfoot, neither covertly treading
awry with Peter, Gal. 2. 1. Kin. 18. 21.
nor openly halting, with the Israelits, 1. King. 18.

3. It is also (as I said) to be void of hypocrisy and doubling, not to have
an heart and an heart, or to be double minded, but to be single hearted. Thus
those things which be upright, are said to be (...), unfeigned, and to be
performed not with an heart and an heart, or with a heart divided or parted,
but with an entire or whole heart. After this manner, the holy ghost speaking
of the Zebulonits. 1. Chron. 12. 33.
1. Chron. 12. 33. that they came to David, nor with an heart and an heart,
(...) Verse. 38.
does afterward expound himself, when speaking of all the Tribes, he says,
they came to David with an upright heart. On the other side, hypocrites and
dissemblers, they speak (as the Psalmist says) with an heart and an heart,
Psalm. 12. 2.
and are therefore called (...), Iam. 1. 8.
double minded men.

4. Lastly, this virtue of Uprightness is commended unto us under other names,
viz. synceritie, and truth: Sincerity being opposed to mixture, and truth to
falsehood, both which hypocrisy is. Sincere is that which is without mixture,
Sincerum quasi sine cera.
as clarified honey is sine cera, without wax, or as bread without leaven. For
which cause, the virtue of sincerity is commended unto us under the type of
the unleavened bread, 1. Cor. 5. 8.
with which the feast of the Passover was to be celebrated. As contrariwise,
hypocrisy is signified by leaven, Luke 12. 1.
and is called the leaven of the Pharisees. There were other types also of the
law, wherein the mixture of hypocrisy and doubling was condemned, and
contrariwise sincerity commanded unto us. As for example, when the Lord
forbad the Israelits to plant their vineyards with diverse sorts, Deuteronomy. 22. 9,
10, 11.
or to sow their fields with diverse kinds of seed, or to plow with an ox and
ass together, Leuit. 19. 19.
or to wear garments of linsey wolsey. But it is also called Truth, as 1. Cor.
5. 8. 1. Cor. 5. 8.
for this is the truth which the Lord requires in the inward parts. Psalm. 51.
6.
Psalm. 51. 6. and wherein he is to be worshipped, John. 4. 24.
and called upon. He is therefore said to walk uprightly, Psalm. 145. 18.
who behauing himself as in the sight and presence of God, walks with a
right foot without hypocrisy or dissimulation, in sincertie and truth.

2. (...).
Now that uprightness is a proper note to the citisens of heaven, it may
easily appear by the reciprocal conversion which is betwixt them. For if all
the citisens of heaven be upright, and all that be upright are citisens of
heaven, then is it manifest, that uprightness agrees to all that be the
sons and heirs of God, and to them alone. First then, that all which be
heirs of the kingdom of heaven, are upright, it is evident. For those that
are not upright, have none inheritance in heaven. As Peter tells Simon Magu^,
that he had no part in the Communion of Saints, because his heart was not right
in the sight of God. Act. 8. 21.
For hypocrites (as all be that are not upright, for not to be upright, is to be
an hypocrite, and not to be an hypocrite, is to be upright) neither shall they
sojourne to the end in Gods Tabernacle, neither shall they rest in the mountain
of Gods holiness, but contrary to the privilege of the upright in the last
verse, they shall beremooued both by defection, whereby they seperat themselves
from God in this life; and by exclusion, whereby they shall be separated from
God in the life to come.

As touching the former, as constancy and perseverance is an inseperable
companion of uprightness, so hypocrisy is accompanied with inconstancy, and
is commonly punished with defection. (...) Iam 1. 8
The double minded man is inconstant in all his ways. 1. John 2. 19.
And the Apostle John does teach us, that those which be in the Church, but are
not of it (that is to say, hypocrites) are permitted by the just judgment of
God to fall away, that their hypocrisy may be detected. And to the same
purpose, Bildad the Shuhite, Job. 8. 11, 12, 13
Can arush (says he) grow without mire, or can the grass grow without water?
Though it should be green, and not plucked up, yet shall it wither before any
other herb. So are the paths of all that forget God, and the expectation of
the hypocrite does perish. Job. 27. 8.
And as touching the life to come, Job shows that the hypocrite has no hope,
when God does take away his soul. For all their reward they receive in this
life: Mat. 6. 2. 5.
as our Savior Christ says, Verily Isay unto you, they have their reward.
They are therefore in no expectation of reward, Job. 13. 16.
for the hypocrite shall not come into the presence of God, but are or may be
in certain expectation of punishment. For our Savior Christ, when he would
signify, that the wicked servant shall certainly be condemned, he says, That
he shall have his portion with the hypocrites, Mat. 24. 51.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Those therefore that be heirs
of the kingdom of heaven, they be not hypocrites and dissemblers, but such as
are upright. Which must teach us, as we desire to persevere in the faith to
the end, and to attain to the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our
souls; so to humble ourselves, Mic. 6. 8.
to walk with our God, in sincerity and uprightness of heart.

Now that all those also which be upright, are citisens of heaven, it may
evidently be proved out of the Scriptures. Psalm. 84. 11.
For as the Psalmist says, the Lord will give grace and glory (grace in this
life, and glory in the life to come) and no good thing will ^ee withhold from
them that walk uprightly. Grace he gives them with perseverance, for the
upright man builds upon the rock, Mat 7.
and therefore no temptations shall utterly overcome him. He is not only in
the Church, but also of it, and therefore certainly shall remain in the
communion of the Church: 1. John. 2. ^9.
and whosoever continues to the end, Mat. 24.
he shall be saved. Again, does the holy ghost call any blessed, that are not
heirs of the kingdom of heaven? But the upright are by the testimony of the
holy ghost happy and blessed. Blessed are those that are upright in their way.
Psalm. 119. 1.
Blessed are those in whose heart there is no guile, that is, hypocrisy. Psalm.
32. 2.
And to this purpose belongs that testimony of Solomon, Pro. 20. 7.
as Tremellius reads, the just man that walks in his uprightness, is
blessed, and blessed are his children after him. And yet the holy ghost is more
plain in testifying this truth. Pro. 28. 18.
Prou. 28. 18. He that walks uprightly, shall be saved. Psalm. 140. 13. Psalm.
140. 13.
The upright shall dwell in thy presence. Mat. 5. 8.
But most plain, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart (for so he calls
the upright) for they shall see God, they shall have the vision of God, and
enjoy his glorious presence, in the fruition whereof consists our eternal
happiness. And therefore most fitly, not only in this place, but elsewhere
also in the Scriptures, is Uprightness made the note and cognizance of the
sons and heirs of God. Deuteronomy. 32. 15 and 33. 5. 26.
For this cause Israel is called Ieschurun to signify, Esaias. 44. 2.
that whosoever is a true Israelite, is upright. Jacob himself is commended
for this virtue. And of those that are pure in heart, Genesis 25. 27.
it is said Psalm. 24, This is Jacob. Psalm. 24. 4. 6.
So Psalm. Psalm. 73. 1.
73, when the Prophet had said, that God is good to Israel, in the next words
he expounds whom he meant by Israel, namely, the pure in heart. So also our
Savior Christ speaking of Nathaniel, John 1. 48.
Behold (says he) a true Israelite in whom there is no guile. For as the
Apostle says, Romans 2. 28* 29.
he is not a Jew which is one outward, but he is a Jew, which is one within,
that is to say, the upright.

3. Seeing then as we have heard, all that are upright are citisens of heaven,
and contrariwise, all that be citisens of heaven be upright; it behooves us
diligently to try and examine our selves, whether this note does belong unto
us or not. For unless we be upright, we shall not rest in Gods holy
mountain; but must look to have our portion with hypocrites, where is weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 24. 51.
To this purpose I will set down certain signs and tokens, whereby the
upright and the hypocrites may be discerned.

1. And first, the study and endeavor of the upright is to approve himself to
God, to walk before him, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
to discharge a good conscience: 1. Cor. 4. 3.
the testimony whereof he greatly esteems and prefers it to the judgments
of men concerning himself. On the other side, the hypocrites care is to
approve himself to men, neglecting the testimony of his own conscience: and
therefore those good things which he does, he does to be seen of men; and the
evil which he omitteth, he leaves undone, least he should be seen of men:
for if men be not acquainted with his doings, he neither cares to do good,
nor fears to do evil.

2. It is the property of upright men to yield simple and absolute obedience
to the word of God, denying themselves, their own affections and reason; but
to obey humane precepts, so far forth as they are not repugnant to the law of
God. But it is the fashion of hypocrites to obey the commandments of God, so
further than themselves think good, as appears in the example of Saul: 1.
Sam. 15.
and more strictly to observe the traditions of men, Mat. 15. 6.
than the commandments of God.

3. A third sign of an vprightman is, so to contemn the world, and to be
wained from worldly desires, as that he prefers the keeping of a good
conscience, before the obtaining of any worldly desires: knowing, that it will
not profit a man to gain the whole world, Mar. 8. 36.
and to loose his own soul. For he that is not addicted to the world, it is a
good sign that he professes religion, not for worldly and by-respects. But the
hypocrites guise is to seem religious, and to be a wordling; to profess
religion, and to mind earthly things; to divide himself betwixt God and
Mammon, Phil. 3. 19.
to give to God the outward show, to the world, Mat. 6. 24.
his heart: not first and principally to seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, but to profess religion in a secondarie respect, so far
forth as it jumpeth with the fruition of his worldly desires, and consequently
to prefer the gain of the world before the keeping of a good conscience, and
to be ready to sin, that he may obtain any worldly desire.

4. The property of an upright man is to hate sin as well in himself as in
others, and to be exercised in judging himself. But the manner of hypocrites
is, to hate sin in others, but not in themselves; to be busy in prying into
other men's behavior, and to neglect their own; to be quick-sighted to
discern, and very censorious to judge the offenses of their brethren, but have
neither eyes to see, nor consciences to condemn their own sins: and as our
Savior Christ says of such hypocrites, Mat. 7. 3. 4.
to see a mote in their brothers eye, and not to discern a beam in their own.

5. The upright man repents of all sin, having an unfeigned purpose and
resolution to abstain from all sin, and not to retain any one, howsoever
besides and contrary to his purpose he may fail in some particulars. But the
hypocrite, howsoever he may be brought to abstain from diverse sins
whereunto he is not so much addicted, yet he will be sure to cherish and retain
some sin or sins that are more dear unto him, from which he will by no
means be reclaimed. Example in Mar. 6. 20.
Herod, who reverenced John Baptist, and when he heard him, did many things
which John advised him unto, and heard him gladly: but do John what he could,
he would not forgo Herodias his brothers wife.

6. It is the property of the upright, to love and reverence the good and
godly for their godliness sake, and to contemn and despise the wicked, though
mighty in the world, because of their wickedness: as it follows Verse. 4,
For the world does love her own, and hates those which belong to Christ. Psalm.
15. 4.
But hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, John 15. 19.
because we love the brethren. But it is the manner of hypocrites to stomach
the godly, 1. John. 3. 14.
to envy the^ which are better than they, and not to brook them that be had
in better estimation than themselves. And thus were the Pharisees affected to
Christ.

7. It is the property of the upright to prefer the greater and weightier
duties before the less, the substance before circumstances, the works either
of piety or mercy before ceremonies. But it has always been the hypocrites
guise to neglect the greater duties, and to affect the observation of the
less, to prefer circumstances before the substance, and ceremonies before
the works either of piety or charity, Luke 13. 15.
to place the height of their religion, either in observing or urging
ceremonies, or contrariwise, in refusing them, and inueighing against them, to
strain out gnats, and to swallow cammels, Mat. 12. 2. 7.
to tithe mint and cummin, Mat. 23. 23, 24.
and to neglect the weightier duties of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith.
Consider to this purpose two examples of the Pharisees and Priests. When Judas
brought them back the money which they gave him to betray Christ, they would
not put in into the treasury, because it was the price of blood: Mat. 27. 6.
but the precious blood of Christ himself they were not afraid to spill, and
to draw the guilt thereof upon their consciences. They were not afraid to be
defiled by giving Christ the immaculat lamb of God through envy unto death,
John 18. 28.
but they were at the same time afraid to go into the common hall least they
should be defiled.

8. Another note of an upright man, is Humility. For when a man is endued
therewith, it is a plain sign, that he has Mic. 6. 8.
humbled himself to walk with his God. As contrariwise, pride is the
companion of hypocrisy, as the Prophet Habacuc says, Hab. 2. 4
Behold, he that lifts up himself, his soul is not upright in him. For he
that walks with God (as the upright man does) cannot lightly be lifted up
with pride. Indeed whiles we look upon the earth, and behold other men whom we
conceive to be any way our inferiors, we may perhaps take some occasion to be
lifted up in a conceit of our own excellency: but he that has God before
his eyes, and sets himself always in his presence, he will be ready with
Abraham (although an excellent Patriarch) standing before the Lord, Genesis 18. 27.
to confess his own vileness; with Esaias that eloquent and zealous Prophet,
Esaias. 6. 5.
to cry out, That he is a man of polluted lips; Job. 42. 5. 6.
with Job the pattern of patience, when he sees God, to abhor himself, and
to repent in dust and ashes; with Peter being in the presence of Christ, Luke
5. 8.
whom he perceived to be God, to acknowledge himself a sinful man.

9. Again, the upright man being endued with a good conscience, is confident
in good causes, and courageous in time of peril, Pro. 10. 9.
as Solomon says: He that walks uprightly, walks boldly. Pro. 28. 1.
And again, The righteous are bold as a Lion: but the hypocrite contrariwise,
by reason of his bad conscience is overtaken with fear, Esaias. 33. 14.
as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Pro. 28. 1.
and such do fly when none pursues.

10. It is the privilege of an upright man to be constant in good things, and
to persevere to the end, keeping also a continued course of piety: for the
upright man is he which has built upon the rock, Mat. 7. 24.
and therefore cannot utterly be ouerthrown by any blasts or tempests of
temptations: Luke 8. 15.
it is he which receives the seed into good ground, and therefore takes root
downward, and brings forth fruit upward with patience: he being not only in
the church but also of it, shall surely remain in the Communion of the Church;
and as the Psalmist here says, shall never be removed. Iam. 1. 8.
But contrariwise, the double minded man is unconstant in all his ways: his
religion and goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes
away: Hos. 6. 4.
his profession is (...) for a time, for having received the seed among stones,
Luke 8. 13.
and wanting root, when the Sun of temptation arises, Mat. 13. 21.
he fades away; having built upon the sand, when the blasts of temptations
arise, Mat. 7. 26.
his building falls to the ground. Hereunto we are to refer patience in
affliction, as a note of the upright: whereupon affliction is called (...), Iam.
1. 3.
the trial of our faith, or (...), whereby (...), 1. Pet. 1. 7.
those that are found and approved, are known from those which be (...),
unsound.

11. And to conclude, it is the property of the sound and upright, to join
together piety toward God, and charietie toward our neighbor, the love of
God, and the love of our brother: 1. John 4. 20.
for it cannot be, that a man should love the Lord truly, whom he has not
seen, and loves not his brother whom he has seen: neither do we love our
neighbor aright, unless we love him in and for the Lord. (...).
And therefore no man can love his neighbor as he ought, unless he love the
Lord much more. The love of God therefore, or piety, if it be sound, will show
it self in the love of our brother, or in the duties of righteousness; and
the love of our brother, or righteousness, if it be sincere, must be derived
from the fountain of piety. Contrariwise, it is the hypocrites guise to sever
these two, which the holy ghost has joined together, holiness and
righteousness, the obedience of the first and second Table of the law. For
there are many as glorious professors among us, as the Pharisees were among the
Jews, who making profession of religion and piety toward God, do altogether
neglect the duties of charity and righteousness toward men. And again, many
there are among us as famous for civil virtues, as Aristides or Socrates among
the heathen, who resting in a civil conversation and outward honesty among
men, are void of all religion and of the fear of God. Both sorts are
hypocrites, the righteousness of the former not exceeding the righteousness of
the Phariseyes, who notwithstanding their glorious profession were notorious
hypocrites: the righteousness of the latter professing themselves to be
Christians, not exceeding the righteousness of the heathen, who knew not God.

Now I come to the fourth point, namely, to consider by what arguments we may
be stirred up to embrace this virtue, if we want it, or to continue and
increase therein, if we have it. The arguments may be reduced to three heads,
the excellency, the profit, the necessity of uprightness. Luke 1. 6.
yet they are esteemed as just, and that before the Lord, the Lord accepting in
Psalm. 45. 12.
this may not be understood of the outward apperance, Cant. 1. 5. 6.
for so she is something black and brown, by reason of affliction, and the
cause thereof which is sin; but of the inward beauty, in respect whereof she
is said to be all glorious and beautiful within, Psalm 45. 13.
which is that uprightness or truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6.
E^och Genesis 5. Genesis 5. 22. 24.
that he walked before God, Heb. 11. 20.
that is, that he lived uprightly; it is by the Apostle thus expounded, That
he was said to have pleased God. (...)
And the Hebrew word which signifies to be right or upright, does signify
also to please, that we may know that he which is right before God, does please
him. As it is said in the Proverbs, Prou. 11. 20.
They which are perverse in heart are an abomination unto the Lord, but such
as are upright in their way are his delight. Now this must needs be an
excellent virtue that goes under the name of perfection, which the Lord
esteems as the inward beauty of his spouse, which is not only pleasing unto
God, but as it were the pleasing of him.

But let us come to the profit, by which consideration most are led, Psalm. 4. 6.
as it is said Psalm. 4. There be many that say, who will show us any good, that
is profit. The profit of uprightness may be showed first in general, that God
is good and gracious to the^ that are upright. As the Psalmist after many
conflicts, Psalm. 73. 1.
at length resolves, Psa. 73. 1. But yet God is good to Israel, to those that
are pure in heart. And this goodness he manifests by doing good to them, and
causing all things to work together for their good, according to the prayer of
David Psalm. 125. Psalm. 125. 4. 5.
Do good O Lord to those that are good and upright in heart, but those that
turn aside by their crooked ways, them shall the Lord send away with the
workers of iniquity. Neither is the goodness of God sparing toward them: For
he is a Sun, that is, Psalm. 84. 11.
an author and giver of all comfortable blessings, and a shield, that is, a
protector of them from all evil, He gives grace, and glory, and no good thing
does he withold from those that walk uprightly. More specially the benefits
wherewith the Lord does crown the upright, are either temporal, or
spiritual: For as solomon says Prou. 2. Prou. 2. 7.
The Lord has laid up for the upright, substance, that is, Prou. 2. 21.
whatsoever is truly good, and verse 21. The righteous shall inhabit the land,
and the upright men shall remain in it. And as the Lord bestows good things
upon the upright, so he preserueththem from evil, and is therefore said to be
^ shield to them that walk uprightly: Prou. 2. 7.
or as David says, Psalm. 7. 10.
My shield is in God who gives salvation, or preserves the upright in heart,
according to the saying of the Prophet Hanani, 2. Chro. 16. 9.
The eyes of the Lord, says he, behold all the earth, to show himself strong
with them that have a perfect, that is, an upright heart toward him. The
spiritual blessings which God bestows on the upright, are as the Psalmist
speaks, Grace and Glory: Psalm. 84. 11.
Grace in this life, Glory in the life to come. The graces which God bestows
on the upright, are many: for sanctifying graces are so linked together, as it
were in a golden chain, that where some be in truth (as they are in the
upright) all are in some measure. Among many others, these spiritual blessings
accompany uprightness, Comfort in affliction, and Joy in the holy Ghost; Genesis
22. 18.
and (which before I spoke of) Confidence or spiritual security in
worshipping the Lord without fear, Luke 1. 73. 74. 75.
(which is the blessedness promised to the faithful in all nations, in
Abraham's seed, according to the exposition of Zacharias, Luke 1.) and also
Constancy and Perseverance. As touching the former before not touched:
Forasmuch as the upright (building, not upon the sand, but upon the rock) have
laid a good foundation against the day of trial, therefore when as they are
afflicted, they faint not, neither are overmuch discouraged, but with David in
his greatest distress, do comfort themselves in the Lord their God, 1. Sam.
30. 6. And being assured that the Lord will cause all things, Romans 8. 28.
even their afflictions, to work to their good, Job. 13. 15.
they resolve with Job to put their trust in him, though he kill them. But the
upright have not only comfort, but joy also in the holy Ghost. Eccles. 2. 26.
For God does give to him that is good in his sight, (that is, to the upright)
wisdom, and knowledge, and joy. Prou. 15. 15.
For the upright have a good conscience, and a good conscience is a continual
feast: For this is our rejoicing (says the Apostle) the testimony of our
conscience, 2. Cor. 1. 12.
that we have had our conversation in simplicity and godly pureness. And this
was Ezechias his stay when he had received the sentence of death, and which he
used as an argument unto the Lord, to obtain the lengthning of his life, and
prevailed, Lord, says he, 2. King. 20. 3.
I beseech thee remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with an
upright heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. For howsoever the
upright are sometimes under the cross: Psalm. 97. 11.
yet there is light sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart,
which in due time will sprout forth: yea, Romans 5. 3. 4. 5
in the mids of their affliction they do rejoice, knowing that tribulation
brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope
makes not ashamed. Psalm. 16. 8.
And seeing the upright do with David, set the Lord always before their eyes,
for he is at their right hand, therefore they must say with him, I shall not be
removed, wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also
does rest in hope. With these and such like blessings the Lord does reward the
upright in this life: for after this life eternal salvation abides them. He
that walks uprightly, Pro. 28. 18.
says Solomon, shall be saved, but he that is perverse, or walks peruersly,
in two ways (as double minded men do) he shall fall in one, or as some read, at
once. And to omit other testimonies, the holy Ghost testifies in this place,
That he which walks uprightly shall dwell in the holy mountain of God.
Finally to conclude all blessings under one blessedness it self is promised
to the upright: Blessed are those which are upright in their way. Psalm. 119. 1.
Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5. 8.
for they shall see God. And this blessedness does not only belong to
themselves, but it redoundeth also to their posterity. Pro. 20. 7.
Blessed is the just man that walks in his uprightness, Psalm. 112. 2.
and blessed are his children after him. And again, The generation of the
upright shall be blessed.

But it may be you expect examples, Plato. (...).
which one calls the hostages of our speech, whereby that may appear in
particular experience, which the Lord has confirmed in general promise. Let
Noah therefore be an example, whom the Lord because of his uprightness, Genesis
7. 1.
preserved in the universal deluge. And likewise upright Abraham, Genesis 15. 1.
to whom the Lord was a shield, and an exceeding great reward. David
professes, that for as much as he was upright before God, Psalm. 18. 23* 24.
the Lord therefore rewarded him according to his righteousness, and the
pureness of his hands in his sight. And the same is confessed by Salolon his
son, 1. King. 3. 6.
Thou have (says he unto the Lord) showed unto thy servant Dau^d my father
great mercy, when he walked before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in
uprightness of heart with thee. 2. King. 20. 3. 5.
Of Ezechias you heard before. But omitting other examples, let us call to mind
the example of Enoch, by which being the first in this kind, we may best
conceive what account the Lord makes of Integrity. Genesis 5. 24.
For when as he walked before God uprightly, Heb. 11. 5.
the Lord did therefore translate him out of this valley of tears, that he
should not see death, and assumed him into heaven, where he might enjoy
immortal glory.

But if neither the golden reason of excellency can move us, nor the silver
reason of profit allure us; then must the iron reason of necessity enforce us
to Integrity and uprightness of heart. For first, such is the necessity
thereof, that without Integrity the best graces we seem to have are
counterfeit, and therefore but glorious sins, the best worship we can
perform is but hypocrisy, and therefore abominable in Gods sight. For
uprightness is the soundness of all graces and virtues, as also of all
religion and worship of God, without which they are unsound and nothing worth.
And first, as touching graces, if they be not joined with uprightness of heart,
they are sins under the maskes or vizards of virtue; yea, as it may seem
double sins: for as Augustine says, Simulata aequitas est duplex iniquitas;
quia and iniquitas est, and simulatio: Fained equity is double iniquity; both
because it is iniquiti^, and because it is ^aining. 1. Tim. 1. 5.
Wherefore in the Scriptures it is required that our faith should be (...)
unfeigned, 2. Tim. 1. 5.
that is, Act. 15. 9.
such a faith as inwardly purifieth the heart, and outwardly works by love,
Gal. 5. 6.
otherwise it is not a true and a lively, Iam. 2.
but a counterfeit and dead faith. Romans 12. 9.
Likewise our love must be (...) unfeigned, 1 Pet. 1. 22.
that is, as John says, we must love not in speech and tongue, ^. John 3. 18.
but in deed and truth; Or as Paul speaks, our love must proceed from a pure
heart, a good conscience and ^aith unfeigned.

Our wisdom also must be (...) without dissimulation, Iam 3. 17.
not that mixed or Machiuilian prudence, which politic men in the world so
greatly praise, being mixed with hypocrisy and deceit, Mat. 10. 16.
but that prudence of serpents tempered with the simplicity of Doves:
otherwise it is as James says, Iam. 3. 15.
earthly, carnal, and devilish.

Lastly, our repentance and conversion unto God must be (...), unfeigned and
from our whole heart. For it is not the renting of the garments, Io^l. 2. 12. 13.
but of the heart that pleases God. Esaias. 58. 5.
Neither is it the bowing of the head like a Bul-rush, but the humiliation, the
melting, the contrition of the heart that is acceptable before him. Such as was
the repentance of Josiah, 2. 2. King. 22. 19.
King. 22. not as that of Achab, 1. 1. King. 21. 27.
King. 21. nor yet as that of the dissembling Israelites, who made semblance of
repentance and turning to God, Psalm. 78. 34. 36. 37.
but their heart was not upright with him. If therefore without uprightness
our faith be dead, our love cold, our wisdom devilish, our repentance
counterfeit, then is vprightnes no less necessary to salvation, then I say not
any one of these graces, but the^ all. But as those graces which we may seem
to have without vprightnes are cou^terfeit; so our religion and worship of God
without it is hypocrisy. For although it be the common practice of me^, not
only to content themselves with a profession of religion and piety toward
God, neglecting the duties of charity toward men, but also to rest in an
outward and bodily worship: notwithstanding it is no true religion before God,
Iam. 1. 27
which is altogether wanting in the duties of charity, neither is the outward
worship without the inward acceptable unto God. Mic. 6. 6. 7.
This is notably declared in the Prophecy of Micah, where to the hypocrite
demanding wherewith he should come before the Lord, and bow himself before the
high God, and making large offers, if outward service would stand for good
payment, Shall I come before him, says he, with burnt offerings, and Calves of
a year old? will the Lord he pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the
fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Verse. 8.
Answer is made, He has showed thee, o man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee; surely (toward men) to do justly, and to love mercy; and
(toward God) to humble thyselfe to walk with thy God. The reasonable service,
Romans 12. 1.
that is, the spiritual worship of God, is that living, holy, and acceptable
sacrifice unto God. John 4. 24.
For God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth. As for bodily exercise, that profits little, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
yea, if it be severed from the spiritual it hurts much. Esaias 29. 13.
Therefore the Prophet denounces the fearful judgments of God against
those, who coming near unto him with their mouth, and honoring him with their
lips, do notwithstanding remove their heart far from him.

But the truth of this doctrine will more clearly appear, if we shall descend
into the particular consideration of the several parts of Gods worship. As
first of prayer: to the acceptable performance whereof, there is required
uprightness, not only in the action it self, but also in the life of him
that prays. For as touching the action it self, it is not sufficient to move
the lips, or to utter a certain number of words as Papists and other
hopocrites do; but our prayer, if it shall be acceptable, must also be a prayer
of the Col. 3. 16.
heart, and of the Ephesians. 6. 18.
spirit, a Psalm. 25. 1.
lifting up of the soul, a Lam. 3. 41.
lifting up of the heart with the hands, a Psalm 62. 8. Lam. 2. 19. ^. Sam. 1.
15.
pouring forth of the soul before the Lord: and to pray aright, is to pray
with our Psalm. 111. 1.
whole heart, with an Psalm. 119. 7.
upright heart, out of a 2. Tim 2. 22.
pure heart, with Psalm. 17. 1.
lips unfeigned: finally, it is to pray in Psa. 145. 18.
truth, that is, in uprightness, and to this upright prayer is the promise of
hearing our prayer restrained. Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is near to them that
call upon him: What to all? yea, to all (says the Prophet, of purpose
excluding hypocrites) that call upon him in truth. For the Lord in our prayers
does not so much regard our tongue as our heart. As for them which draw near
unto the Lord with their lips, and are removed from him in their heart, they
abuse the Majesty of God, Hos 7. 13. 14.
whiles crying unto him, but not from their hearts, Psalm. 78. 36.
they lie unto God, and go about to deceive him with their lips, and by their
hypocrisy to cast as it were a mist before his eyes. But herein they are
greatly deceived: For how soever masking under the vizards of hypocrisy, they
may hide themselves from men: yet before God such maskers do as it were dance
in a net, for before him all things, Heb. 4. 13.
even the secrets of men's hearts are naked and open. Prou. 15. 11.
Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the
sons of men? But as I said, uprightness also is required in the life of him
that prays. Psalm. 66. 18.
To which purpose we have a notable testimony of David. Psalm. 66. If I regard
wickedness in mine heart (says he) the Lord will not hear me. Esaias1. 15.
For the Lord hears not hypocrites: and such as turn away their ear from
hearing, Prou. ^8. 9.
that is, obeying his law, their prayer is abominable.

Let us now come to the ministry of the word, to the preaching and hearing
whereof, righteousness is necessarily required. To the preaching of the word,
that we may be able to say with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2. 17.
that we are not as many which make merchandise of the word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God we speak in Christ. And again,
so we speak, not as they that please men, 1. These* 2. 4.
but God which tries our hearts: For if we should seek to please men, Gal. 1.
10.
we were not the servants of Christ. Now he does behave himself uprightly in
the ministry of the word, 2. Tim. 2. 15.
who as the Apostle admonishes Timothy, does study and endeavor to show
himself approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing
the word of truth aright. Who has the testimony of his own conscience, that
he setting aside all sinister respects, does sincerely and from his heart seek
the glory of God in the salvation of the people, and not himself or his own,
either profit or praise. Of which Integrity they come very short, who seeking
not to profit their hearers, but to please them, endeavor not to approve
themselves to God, but to carnal men, neither seek the glory of God, but
their own praise, nor the salvation of the people, but their own profit and
preferment in the world.

But as in the minister that preaches, so also in the people that hears the
word of God, Eccles. 4. 17.
Uprightness is required. To which purpose, before they come to the house of
God, they ought to look to their feet, that is, their affections, and to put
off the shoes of their feet, that is, their corrupt affections, and with
sincere affections they are to desire the sincere milk of the word, 1. Pet. 2.
1.
that they may grow thereby. The purpose and desire of him who comes to the
hearing of Gods word, must be to perform therein an holy and upright worship
unto God; and with all good conscience and sincerity to use the ministry of
the word, as the power of God to our salvation, etc. But they that come to
hear the word, either for fashion sake, because we have such a custom, as
carnal professors use to do, or because the laws of men require it, as those
which among us are popishly affected, or because they would seem to some, that
they are religious, or at the least not irreligious, as dissemblers do, or
because they would see and be seen, as many proud and vain persons do, or
because they would take a nap, as some secure and s^outhfull persons do, or
because they would carpe and snatch at the preachers words, as malicious
persons do, or because they would hear and judge of the gifts of the
preacher, and so give their censure of his sermon, as diverse glorious
professors use to do, or if they come with the same affection to a sermon, as
they go to a stage play, that is, to be delighted, as those which have itching
ears use to do, or if they come into the assembly, as Cato was wont to come
to the stage, namely* that in show of his dislike he might goeout again, as
some conceited and humorous persons use to do, or to pass the time, because
they have nothing else to do, as some that live inordinatly, either wholly
neglecting their calling, or having no honest calling to walk in; all which
are practiced by hypocrites of diverse sorts, assuredly they are far from that
integrity which is required in those that come to hear Gods word.

When we are come to the ministry of the word, our duty is to take heed how
we hear, Luke 8. 18.
as our Savior Christ admonishes. For our bodily presence will not suffice,
unless we behave our selves uprightly in the hearing of the word. Our first
duty therefore is, when we are come into the assembly, to set our selves in
Gods presence, that we may say with upright Cornelius, Act. 10. 33.
we are here present before God to hear all things that the minister has in
commission to deliver unto us from God: and when the minister speaks, we are
to look higher than to him, remembering that he is an ambassador of God in
Christ's stead, 2. Cor. 5. 20.
by whom the Lord speaks unto us: and therefore as he which speaks must
speak as the Oracles of God, 1. Pet. 4. 11.
so he which hears (...), the word preached, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
must hear it not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God. Our
next duty is to hear the word with an upright desire to profit by it, and an
unfeigned purpose to practice it. Act. 8. 6.
In regard of the former, we are diligently to attend to the word, Luke 19. 48.
and as it were to hang on the preachers mouth, Heb. 2. 1.
as being loath to let any thing s^ip from us, Esaias 42. 23.
but carefully to lay it up in our hearts for our future use, and in a word so
to hear, as we desire to be heard: For want of this uprightness they offend,
who being present in body, are absent in mind, their ears going on pilgrimage,
their minds going a whoring after the vanities of this life, and their heart,
as Ezekiel speaks, Ezec. 33. 31.
going after their covetousness; but especially they offend, who when they
should listen to the word of God, do give themselves over to sleep. In regard
of the latter, our duty is to hear the word of God with an honest and good
heart, Luke 8. 15.
and therein to retain it; or as Solomon says to keep it in the mids of our
heart, Pro. 4. 21.
that there it taking root, may bring forth fruit with patience. As for them,
Eze. 33. 31, 32.
who with Ezechiels auditors come to hear the word, without any true purpose
to perform it; as they show themselves to be hypocrites in deceiving others,
Iam. 1. 22. (...).
so they play the sophisters in beguiling themselves.

The like may be said of receiving the Sacraments. For what would it avail
us, Act. 8. 21. 23.
if with Simon Magus we be baptized, and believe with a general faith? For
unless our hearts be upright within us before God, we may remain as he did in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Or what would it profit us, if
after the example of Judas Iscariot we be admitted to the Lords table, and
could so cunningly carry our selves, Mat. 26. 22.
as every one of the Apostles should be more ready to suspect the mselues than
us? for if our heart be not upright within us, but that we give the outward
face and show to God, and set our hearts upon the world, halting betwixt God
and Mammon, and esteeming gain to be godliness; John 12. 6.
we may be thieves, yea devils as he was. John 6. 70.
And not to insist any longer in the several parts of Gods worship, this may
be said of all external worship in general, that so often as it is severed from
the inward and spiritual worship of God, it is hypocritical and detestable in
the sight of God. To which purpose the Lord professes by his Prophet, Esaias 66.
3.
That he which kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices
a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he
offered swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol.
We must therefore beware least we rest in the performance of outward service,
or content our selves with opere operato, the deed done; which is the rotten
pillar of popish superstition. For it is not sufficient to do that which is
right, unless we do it with an upright heart. 2. Chro. 25. 2. 14
If with Amaziah we do that which is right, but not with an upright heart, we
may fall away as he did. Wherefore that exhortation which the Apostle makes to
men's servants, much more belongs to us, Col. 3. 23.
who are the servants of God, namely, That we should perform our duties toward
him from our heart, not in eye-seruices, as men-pleasers, but with simplicity
of heart fearing God, and from our hearts obeying the holy will and
commandments of God. Romans 6. 17.
Out of all which it appears evidently, that without uprightness of heart,
neither the graces of the spirit, which we may seem to have, are of any
worth; or our worship, of any account with God. But howsoever the most
excellent graces without it be glorious sins, and the most glorious worship
counterfeit, yet on the other side, where uprightness is, the graces which we
have, though as small as a grain of mustard seed, and our worship, though
performed in much weakness, is acceptable unto God.

The second argument is taken from the authority of God himself, auowing the
necessity of uprightness. And hereunto appertains first the testimony both
of the holy ghost in this place, affirming, That those who are to dwell in Gods
holy mountain, are such as walk uprightly; as also of our Savior Christ,
Mat. 5. 20.
Matthew. 5. denying, that we shall ever enter into the kingdom of heaven,
unless our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees. The righteousness which the Pharisees observed themselves, and
taught others to observe, was altogether outward, whereby they abstained from
outward and more gross offenses, neglecting inward and s^cret corruptions.
Secondly, the commandment of God enjoining uprightness. For this is the
especial duty which we are to perform toward God, Mic. 6. 8.
viz. that we bumble our selves to walk with our God. For when the Lord was
to establish his covenant with Abraham and his seed, this condition he
requires to be performed on their part, Genesis 17. 1.
to walk before him, and to be upright. This is that which David commends to
Solomon as his last will and testament, 1. Chron. 28. (...)
Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with an upright heart and a
willing mind, Ios. 24. 14.
which Joshua in his last speech commends to the people of Israel, that they
should worship the Lord in spirit and truth. As Moses also before had charged
them. Deuteronomy. 18. Deuteronomy. 18. 13.
Thou shall be upright therefore before the Lord thy God. For seeing the Lord
is a spirit, John 4. 23* 24.
he will therefore be worshipped in spirit and in truth. And as himself is a
spirit, so is his law spiritual, restraining not only the hand and tongue,
Rome. 7. 14.
but also the heart. Now the commandment of God imposes a necessity, not
absolute indeed, but with this condition, If we will avoid his curse. Thirdly,
the same is proved by the oath of God, Luke 1. 73. 75.
which he swear unto our father Abraham, that he would give us, who are the
sons of Abraham, and heirs of promise, that being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies, we should worship him without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him. For as the commandment of God imposes the
necessity of duty, so the oath of the Lord imposes a necessity of
certainetie, or as the schoolmen speak, of infallibility. And therefore if
we do not walk uprightly, worshipping the Lord, as before him, it is as
certain as the oath of the Lord is true, that we can have no assurance that
we are redeemed by Christ out of the world, to reign with him in his holy
mountain.

The third and last argument, enforcing the necessity of uprightness, may be
this: For either we must be upright, or hypocrites. There is no third: for not
to be upright, is to be an hypocrite, and not to be an hypocrite, is to be
upright. But we may in no case be hypocrites. For hypocrisy is a sin most
odious unto God, most foolish in it self, most pernicious to them that are
infected therewith. It is most odious unto God: for as the upright are the
Lords delight, Pro. 11. 20.
so the hypocrit is an abomination unto him. Luke. 16. 15.
For that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of
God. And not without cause: For all hypocrisy and doubling is a double if not
a triple sin: for counterfeit piety is double impiety, both because it is
impiety, and because it is counterfeit. And as hypocrisy is a counterfeiting,
it contains also two sins opposed to simplicity and truth; both which are
comprised in integrity, viz. falsehood opposed unto truth, as it is mendacium
facti, and deceit or guile opposed unto simplicity, as duplicitie or doubling.
The hypocrite in respect of his falsehood and disguising, in the Greek tongue
is called (...), that is, a stage player, who although perhaps he be little
better than a rogue, represents sometimes the person of a prince or monarch.
Those therefore are hypocrites, who lead their life as it were upon a stage,
cloaking sin under the show of virtue, having some ^orme or vizard of piety,
but denying the power of it, 2. Tim. 3. 5.
Qui in superficie boni sunt, sed in alto mali, as Augustine speaks, who
seem to honor God with their lips, Mat. ^5. 8.
but remove their heart far from him; who desiring to seem good, but not to
be so, and not to seem evil, Mat. 23. 25.
but to be so; make clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but
within they are full of briberie and excess: Mat. 23. 27.
and are therefore compared by our Savior Christ to painted sepulchers, which
appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones and all
filthiness. And as the fruit which grows near to Mare mortuum, when it is
ripe makes a fair show, but within is full of cinders or ashes, as some
write: Mat. 23. 28.
so these men outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within they are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity.

But as in the disguising of hypocrites there is falsehood, so in their doubling
there is guile, whereby they indeuouring to deceive both God and man, do in the
end beguile themselves. And therefore not unworthily is hypocrisy in the
Scriptures termed guile. Psalm. 32. 2.
And first, they foolishly go about to deceive God, John 1. 47.
the searcher of the heart, when they hope by a counterfeit semblance of
religion to blear his eyes, and by vain shows to please him, whiles they
securely abound with more hidden and secret sins: which seems to have been
the hypocrisy of the Israelits, reproved by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 58. Esaias
58. 2.
After this manner do they offend: first, when they pray with fained lips,
pretending such things in their prayer, as they do not intend, asking such
things with their lips, as they do not desire with their heart, promising such
things as they mean not to perform, and bearing the Lord in hand with the
Pharisie, Luke 18. that they be such persons as indeed they are not: for these
men, after the example of the Israelits, whose heart was not right within them,
go about to deceive the Lord with their mouth, Psalm. 78. 36. 37.
and with their tongue they lie unto him. Secondly, when as they either commit
secret sins, that God may not see them; or having sinned, do seek to
conceal their sins from God, that he may not know them: for such is the
folly of hypocrites, that because they when they hide themselves, see not God,
they imagine that God sees not them; like to the silly woodcocke, which when
she has so hid her head, that she sees no body, she imagines that no body
sees her. Thirdly, whereas the whole course of their life is leaud and
dissolute, they will seek to pacify God with some outward observations, and
those perhaps devised by themselves: And this is the ordinary practice of
Papists, who when they have fearfully sinned against God, Esaias 1. 11. etc.
they will make him a plaster of their own satisfactions.

But the most usual practice of hypocrites is to deceive men, to whom they
desire especially by outward shows to approve themselves, pretending a
profession of religion both to their worldly and their wicked respects. To
their worldly respects, when as under the profession of religion they seek the
world, and the things which are in the world, subordinating religion to their
worldly desires, and professing Christianity in a secondarie respect, so far
forth as it stands with the obtaining or retaining of their worldly desires,
etc. To their wicked respects, when they make religion a cloak for their
wickedness. Thus heretics to countenance their errors, prepretend
holiness: Mat. 23. 14.
Thus the Pharisees under a pretense of long prayers, John 12. 5, 6.
devoured widows houses: Thus Judas covered his covetousness under a
pretended care for the poor: 1. King. 21. 9.
Thus Iesabell when she intended the murder of Naboth, proclaims a fast: 2.
Sam. 15. 8.
Absolon when he intended treason against his father, Mat. 28. 13. 16.
pretended the keeping of a vow: H^rod professed to the wise men, that he would
go and worship Christ, when he meant to kill him.

Again, the hypocrite seems to sin with an high hand against the light of
his conscience, detaining the truth in unrighteousness, seeing the better
things, and following the worse. In Esaias 1^.
And therefore Hierome says, That in comparison of two evils, it is less to
sin openly, than to feign holiness.

But hypocrisy, as it is double iniquity, and therefore most odious unto God,
so is it extreme folly: for the hypocrite, whiles he seeks to deceive not
only man, but God also, who cannot be deceived, he beguileth himself. For he
that would seem religious, Iam. 1. 26.
and has not learned to refrain his tongue, but lets loose the reins to
his unbridled tongue, as hypocrites use to do in censuring, backbiting, and
slaundering their brethren, such an one deceives his own heart, his religion
is vain. Likewise, he that is an hearer of the word, Iam. 1. 22.
but no doer of it (that is to say, an hypocrite) such a one deceives
himself; and is indeed that foolish man, Mat. 7. 26.
who (as our Savior says) does build upon the sand. Those that content
themselves with the shining lamp of an outward profession, wanting the oil of
grace in their hearts, Mat. 25. 3.
are by our Savior Christ compared to the foolish virgins. For seeing it is
better to be good than to seem so, and worse to be evil, than to seem so, is
it not extreme folly in hypocrites to choose to be evil rather than to seem
evil, and to seem good rather than to be good? The folly of these men
therefore is worthily noted by Chrysostom; Oper. imperf. in Matthew.
Hypocrit, says he, if it be good to be good, why will thou seem to be that
which thou will not be? If it be evil to be evil, why will thou be that which
thou will not seem to be? If it be good to seem good, it is better to be so:
if it be evil to seem evil, it is worse to be so. Wherefore, either seem to
be that which thou art, or be that which thou seem to be. Again, is it not
extreme folly for a man, that he may have with the^ of Sardis the name that he
lives, to be content to be dead; Apoc 3. 1.
and that he may seem to be in the number of the^ that shall be saved, willingly
to be in the number of the^ that shall be condemned? Lastly, hypocrisy is
pernicious to him that is infected therewith, because it is a sin which the
Lord does grieuous^y punish both in this life, and in the world to come: in
this life, first by defection, and consequently by detection. For those which
be in the Church, but not of it, they are subject to defection or falling away,
and the^ the Lord suffers to fall away, that their hypocrisy may be
detected, 1. John 2. 1^.
as the apostle John shows. For the hypocrit is he which has received the
seed into stony ground, and therefore wanting moisture and root, Luke 8. 13.
is not able to endure the Sun of temptation, but is like the rush without
water, Job. 8. 11* 12* 13
or like the grass on the house top, which withers before it be plucked up.
Upon trial therefore the hypocrite fails, and by his failing his
unsoundness is detected. And this is the reason whereby the son of Syrach
dissuadeth from hypocrisy: Eccles. 1. 35.
for God (says he) will discover thy secrets, and cast thee down in the
midst of the congregation, because thou came not in truth unto the fear of
God, but thine heart is full of guile. And likewise our Savior, Luke 12. 1, 2.
Beware (says he) of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. For
there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid, that shall not
be known. And as touching the life to come, there is such assurance of the
hypocrites damnation, that our Savior Christ, when he would signify, Mat.
24. 51.
that the wicked servant, Math. 24, should certainly be condemned, he says,
He shall have his portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Mat. 5. 8.
For as the upright or pure in heart are blessed, because they shall see God:
Job. 13. 16.
so are the hypocrites accursed, for they shall not see him. Again, so
pernicious is hypocrisy to the double minded man, that there is less hope of
an hypocrite than of an open sinner: first, because he sins against the
light of his conscience: secondly, because by his outward shows he bleareth
the eyes of men, whereby he escapes those admonitions and reproves, whereby
the open sinner many times is reclaimed. And lastly, because in his pride and
self-love he posteth over all public reprehensions and exhortations to the
open sinners, because he is assured, that in the opinion of others they belong
not unto him. And this is that which our Savior Christ says to the
hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 21. 31.
That Publicans and harlots should go into the kingdom of God before them.

Seeing therefore uprightness is a grace so excellent, that it goes under the
name of perfection, and is esteemed as the beauty of Christ's spouse, wherewith
he is especially delighted: so profitable, that to them which walk uprightly,
the Lord denies nothing that is good, but gives them Grace in this life, and
Glory in the life to come, and not only makes them blessed, but their
posterity also after them: so necessary, as that without it our best graces
are counterfeits, and our best worship of God hypocrisy, and our selves
hypocrites, who shall never see God, but shall have our portion with hypocrites,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth; how does it behooue us to labor for
this grace, which is so excellent in it self, so pleasing unto God, so
profitable and necessary unto us, and contrariwise to avoid the contrary sin
of hypocrisy which is so odious unto God, so foolish in it self, and so
pernicious unto us? And to this purpose, that we may come to the fifth and
last thing, let us observe these few rules: Psalm. 16. 8.
first, let us according to the example of David, learn to set God always
before our eyes, and our selves in the sight and presence of God. And to this
end let us meditate evermore both of his omnipresence, remembering that he is
always present with us in all places, neither can we possibly avoid his
presence, Psalm. 139. 7.
as the Psalmist teaches: as also of his omniscience, remembering, That the
eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good, Pro. 15. 3.
and not only looking unto the outward actions and speeches, but also beholding
the inward affections of the heart, Psalm. 139. 2.
and cogitations of the mind, even before we conceive them, that so we may
learn to walk with our God, approouing our selves unto him, and so behauing
our selves, as those which have their conversation in the sight. and presence
of God. Who knows not how decently and reverently we carry our selves whiles
we are in the sight and presence of our superiors, especially of our prince.
Therefore Senec a admonishes his friend Lucilius, that he would set before him
Cato or Laelius, Epist. 11. in fin.
or some other grave and reverend man, that he might live as in his sight: for
as he says, Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis assistat: a
great part of our sins is taken away, if when we are about to sin, there
be a witness by us. How much more would the presence of almighty God strike
a reverence into us, Heb. 11. 27.
if we had the eyes of Moses, the eyes of faith, whereby he saw him that is
invisible, and is always present with us: especially, if we considered, that
the Lord sees not as man sees, for man looks unto the outward appearance,
1. Sam. 16. 7.
but the Lord beholds the heart; and that not only the bodies of men, but
the souls also are manifest before him. Hell and destruction are before the
Lord, Prou. 15. 11.
how much more the hearts of the sons of men? By this argument David
exhorts Solomon his son to uprightness, 1. Chro. 28. 9.
1. Chron. 28. And thou my son Solomon, says he, Know thou the God of thy
father, and serve him with an upright heart and with a willing mind; for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of thoughts.

Secondly, to the meditation of his omnipresence and omniscience, let us add
the consideration of his omnisufficiencie, remembering as the Prophet Hanani
said to Asa, That the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, 2. Chron. 16. 9.
to show himself strong with them that are of an upright heart toward him,
and that as Solomon says, Pro. 2. 7.
He is a shield to them that walk uprightly, and not that only, Psalm. 84. 11.
but as David says, He is the Sun (that is, author of all comfortable
blessings) and a shield (that is a preserver and protector from evil) the
Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them
that walk uprightly. And this is the argument which the Lord uses to move
Abraham to integrity, Genesis 17. 1.
Genesis 17. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me and be upright. For
assuredly, if we did effectually call to mind Gods all-sufficiencie, we would
never be so foolish, as to play the hypocrites, approouing our selves to men
rather than to God; seeing he is all-sufficient to crown us with blessings,
and to shield us from evil. Whereas men can neither do us good, unless God
be pleased to use them as his instruments, whereby he will convey his
blessings unto us, neither can they do us harm unless God do use them as his
rods, whereby to correct us.

Thirdly, to the former let us join a serious meditation of the last
judgment: namely, that God all-sufficient who is every where present, and is
acquainted with all our secrets, Romans 2. 16.
shall one day judge the secrets of men: and will bring every work unto
judgment with every secret thing, Eccles. 12. 14.
whether it be good or evil. Let us therefore set God before our eyes,
sitting in judgment, remembering that we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
that ^uery man may receive according to those things which he has done in the
body, whether good or evil, whether open or secret, whether alone or with
others, whether in light or darkness, by day or by night. For darkness
hides not from God, Psalm. 139. 12.
but the night shines as the day, the darkness and light are both alike. Let
us not therefore content our selves with an external profession of religion,
and outward show of virtue, when as our hearts be not upright within us, but
are possessed with hypocrisy, and abound with secret sins. For an external
profession severed from uprightness of heart, shall no whit avail thee at the
day of judgment, for God shall judge the secrets of men, but it shall be very
prejudicial unto thee, increasing thine horror and confusion. For how shall
thou be confounded, think thou, who have made a profession of religion, when
the books being opened, and thy secret sins laid open before all the world,
thou shall be convicted of hypocrisy, and condemned of many foul sins
unrepented of, which thou had labored to conceal from the world? And with
what horror shall thou be stricken, Mat. 24. 51.
supposest thou, when thy portion shall be assigned thee with the hypocrites,
where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? Remember that many in the
day of judgment shall say, Mat. 7. 22, 23.
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and cast our devils in thy
name, and done many great works in thy name? to whom the Lord shall answer, I
never knew you, depart from me you workers of iniquity. Mat. 25. 3. 12.
Call to mind the five foolish virgins, who having lamps, but no oil, were
excluded. If therefore we would not depart ashamed from our Savior Christ at
his coming, wishing the mountains to fall upon us, and to cover us from his
sight, but would stand before the son of man with comfort, let us endeavor to
approve our selves in the mean time to Christ our judge, walking before him
in uprightness of heart, and so demeaning our selves, as those who think that
of their most secret thoughts, words, and deeds there must an account be given
to God, who searches the heart and tries the reins, Ier. 17. 10.
that he may give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit
of his works.

Fourthly and lastly, let us follow the advice of Solomon, Prou. Pro. 4. 23.
4. Above all observation to keep our heart. For the heart, as it is the
fountain of life, so of living well or ill; from whence all our speeches and
actions, as it were streams, do flow and proceed. Those things which come out
of the mouth (says our Savior Christ) come from the heart. Mat. 15. 18, 19.
For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thef^s, false testimonies, Luke 6. 45.
slanders. And again, The good man out of the good treasure of his heart
brings ^oorth good things, and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart brings forth evil things: for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, and also the hand works. If therefore we desire, that our
actions and speeches may be good and pure, we must first have our hearts
purified by a true faith: 1. Tim. 1. 5.
that so our love and obedience may flow from a pure heart, and good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. For it cannot be, that the streams of our
actions should be good and sincere, if the fountain of our heart be corrupt.
Wherefore in reforming our lives, our first and chief care must be for the
purging of our hearts, as our Savior Christ admonishes, Mat. 23. Cleanse first
(says he) the inside of the cup and platter, Mat. 23. 26.
that the outside of them may be clean also. Iam. 4. 8.
And James, Purge your heart you double minded (says he) and not your hands
only. For what will it avail us to dry up the streams, whiles the fountain
springs: or to lop off the boughs, whiles the body and root do remain
untouched? Surely, if with Amaziah we shall do those things which be right, 2.
Chro. 25. 2. 14
but not with an upright heart, we shall fall away as he did. If with Simon
Magus we profess our selves to believe, Act. 8. 21.
and join our selves to the Saints of God, notwithstanding we may be as he was
in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, if our heart be not upright
within us. This neglect of the heart is the cause of all hypocrisy, making men
double minded, bearing as we say, two faces under a hood. Whereby it comes to
pass, that the most glorious professors sometimes become like to Summer
fruit, which many times being fair and mellow on the outside, is rotten at the
core.

Now, that we may the rather be stirred up to a diligent observation of our
heart, we are briefly to consider these two things. First, that the heart of
man is deceitful and wicked above all things, Ier. 17. 9.
and therefore cannot sufficiently be watched. And secondly, that such as is
the quality of the heart, such is the quality of the man in the estimation of
God.

Hitherto we have spoken of integrity, as it is referred unto God: it
follows now, that we should entreat thereof, as it has reference unto men.
For as we must walk before God in truth and sincerity without hypocrisy; so
must we have our conversation among men in simplicity and singleness of
heart, without dissembling or guile. For even in our conversation among men,
we are to have God always before our eyes, that as in his presence and sight
we may in singleness of heart perform such duties as we owe unto men. Col.
3. 22.
For howsoever simplicity is accounted folly in the world, and worldly
wisdom, consisting of dissimulation and deceit, be every where extolled: yet
if we would be esteemed citisens of heaven, and pilgrims on earth, it behooves
us to be fools in the world, that we may become truly wise, as the Apostle
exhorts, 2. Cor. 3. 18.
1. Cor. 3. Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seem to be wise
in this world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise, for the wisdom of this
world is foolishness with God. Not that I would have simple men to be fools,
but that wise men ought to be simple. Mat. 10. 16.
For true wisdom is tempered with the simplicity of doves. Iam. 3. 17.
And that wisdom which is from above, is pure, and without hypocrisy.
Whereas on the other side, the wisdom of the world, consisting of
dissimulation and deceit, is by the censure of S. James, earthly, carnal, and
diuellis^. Iam. 3. 15.
It is true indeed, that in the world simplicity is deemed folly, and simple
men are accounted as idiots, and innocent men esteemed fools. For such a
general wickedness has possessed the minds of most men, that now adays no
man is called innocent, but such as want wit to do evil. And contrariwise,
that mixed prudence is commended in the world, which is ^oyned with h^pocrisie
and deceit. Which notwithstanding it were easy for any man to attain unto, who
makes no conscience of dissembling, lying, facing, swea^ing, forswearing. But
in the Scriptures simplicity is both commended and commanded as a note of the
citisen of heaven, without which there is no entrance for a man into the
kingdom of God. Christ commands his followers to be wise indeed as
serpents, but withal to be (...), Mat. 10. 16.
that is, simple or sincere, without any mixture of guile, as doves are without
gall. And likewise Paul would have us wise unto that which is good, Romans 16.
19.
but simple unto evil. In regard hereof the primitive Church, Act. 2. 46.
Act. 2. is highly commended, that they conuersed together in singleness of
heart: and herein especially the Apostle glories, 2. Cor. 1. 1^.
2. Cor. 1. That in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fles^ly
wisdom, he had had his conversation in the world. John 1. 48.
And no marvel, for it is the note of a true Israelite to be without guile:
and such the holy ghost pronounces blessed. Christ our Savior in respect of
this simplicity is called a lamb; Psalm 32. 2.
and those that will be his followers, must not be foxes or wolves, but as they
are called in the Scriptures, sheep, following the steps of our Savior
Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 21* 22.
who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. And hereunto let
us add the testimony of the holy ghost in this place, affirming, That those
which shall dwell in the holy mountain of God, are such as walk uprightly,
that is, without hypocrisy toward God, without guile toward men. Mark. 12.
15.
Now this guile or dissembling, or doubling, or hypocrisy (for so sometimes it
is called) which is opposed unto simplicity, Luke 20. 23.
is twofold, in word, and in fact: in word, when one thing is said, and another
thought, which in the Scriptures phrase, Psalm 12. 2.
is speaking with an heart and an heart. (...). I liad. 9.
This divorce betwixt the mind and the tongue, is detestable unto God, and
odious to ingenious men: sometimes also it is called in the Scriptures a
deceitful tongue, Zeph. 3. 13.
which the Lord says should not be found in the remnant of Israel. Psalm* 109.
2.
Sometimes, a mouth of deceit, as Psalm. 109. such as is described Psalm. 55. The
words of his mouth are softer than butter, Psalm 55. 2^.
whiles war was in his heart: his words were more supple than oil, Ier. 9. 8.
yet were they swords: and Ie^em. 9. their tongue is an arrow shot out, and
speaks deceit: one speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in
his heart he lays ambushments for him. Verse. 9.
But what follows? shall I not visit them for these things says the Lord? Or
shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? If therefore we would
escape the judgments of God, Psalm. 34. 12, 13.
and desire to live a long and prosperous life, We must keep our tongues from
evil, and our lips, that they speak no guile, following, as I said before,
the simplicity of the lamb of God, 1. Pet. 2. 22.
in whose mouth there was found no guile.

Dissembling in fact is, when one thing is pretended, and another intended, or
as Augustine speaks, Dolus est cum aliud agitur, In Johan. 1.
aliud fingitur. In which doubling, the wisdom of our Politicians, brought up
at Machiauels feet* does principally consist: the practice whereof is now
grown so usual, that commonly it is said, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
viuere: he that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to live. Howbeit,
more truly it is said, and by warrant of Scripture, P^o. 10 9.
Qui vadit plane, vadit sane, He that walks plainly, walks safely. Prou.
10. He that walks uprightly, walks safely, but he that peruerteth his
ways, shall be known, namely, as an example to others. The highest degree of
this deceit, is that which we call cony-catching or cousenage: when as a man by
cunning tricks and artificial fetches ouerreacheth his neighbor: when with
his tongue concinnat dolum, Psalm. 50. 19.
he trimly forgeth deceit* and in his deeds lays wait for his brother, Ier.
5. 26.
setting snares and nets to catch men, as fowlers do for birds, or as
cony-catchers do for rabbets, bunting his brother with a net, Mic 7. 2.
as the Prophet Micah speaks. Now as simplicity in the Scriptures is
commended unto us as a note of the true sheep of Christ, imitating the
simplicity of the lamb of God: so deceit and guile is condemned as a
property of those, who resemble the image of Satan the old serpent, the forger
of deceit, and the father of lies. For if he be a true Christian, in whom there
is no guile, what is he in whom no simplicity or plain dealing is to be
found? If in the remnant of Israel a deceitful tongue shall not be found,
Zeph. 3. 13.
then belong not they to the Israel of God, who with their tongues do forge
deceit. If true Christians be the sheep of Christ, resembling his simplicity,
in whom there was found no guile: what then are those foxes and wolves, who
imitate the old serpent in subtlety and deceit? If those which shall rest in
the holy mountain of God, be such, as do walk in uprightness and
simplicity, then have they no inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, who walk
in dissimulation and deceit. And this may further appear by the Lords
prohibitions, censures, and threatenings denounced against deceit. Le^. 19. 11.
It is forbidden, Leu. 19, You shall not lie, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
nor use deceit one toward another. And 1 Thessalonians. 4, We are charged not to go
beyond or ouerreach our brother, (...).
or to defraud him in any matter. It is censured as a sin odious unto God. A
man of deceit God hates. Psalm. 5. 7.
It is reckoned Romans 1, among the crimes of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 29.
given over to a reprobate sense, that they were full of guile. Ezec. 22. 12.
And Ezec. 22, among the abominations of Jerusalem, for which destruction is
threatened against it, that they made gain of their neighbors by deceit. And
lastly, the judgments of God are denounced against it, Psalm. Psalm 55. 23.
55, The deceitful men shall not attain to the half of their days. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6,
1 Thessalonians. 4. 6, The Lord is a re^enger of such things, namely of cousenage and
deceit. And in the place before cited, shall I not visit them for these things,
Ierem. 9. ^.
says the Lord? or shall not my soul be avenged on suc^ a nation as this?

To conclude therefore this first note: seeing uprightness is made a proper
mark of the true child of God, and citisen of heaven, whereas contrariwise,
dissimulation and deceit are the brands of the wicked: it behooves every one
to apply this note to himself. Do thou walk uprightly without hypocrisy
toward God, without guile toward man? Mat. 5. 8.
happy and blessed art thou: for thou shall see God, and as thou now art a
sound member of the Church militant, so shall thou be an inheritour of glory in
the triumphant. Do thou not walk in sincerity toward God, and simplicity
toward men, but in hypocrisy and dissimulation? then most fearful is thine
estate, unless thou repent, Act. 3. 21.
for thou have no part or fellowship in the doctrine of salvation, or in the
communion of Saints, but thy portion shall be assigned thee with hypocrites,
Mat. 24. 51.
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The second note of a citisen of heaven, is Righteousness: For to the Prophet,
demanding who is a son and heir of God; the Lord answers, He that works
righteousness. Where first we are to consider the sense of the words, and then
are we to show, that the working of Righteousness is a proper mark of those,
who living in the Church, are appointed to eternal life.

Justice is that virtue which gives to every one that which is due unto him.
And it is either universal or particular. The universal, summarily compriseth
al those duties which we owe to our neighbor: and is therefore said to
contain all other moral virtues within it, according to the testimony of the
ancient Poet, which to this purpose is alleged by some. Theognis, verse. 147.


(...),
In justice is all virtue summarily comprised. Arsiot. Ethic. lib. 5. cap 3.

The particular Justice is either Distributive, or Commutatiue. The
Distributive is that, which having place in distributing rewards or
punishments, observes a Geometrical proportion, according to the worthiness
of men, or their deserts. The Commutatiue justice is that, which having place
in Contracts, observes an Arithmeticall proportion in the equality of the
things commuted.

But of the universal righteousness, this place is especially to be
understood, the sum whereof is that law royal, Iam 2. 8.
as Saint James calls it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: (...)
Wherein all the precepts of righteousness, that is to say, Romans 13. 9.
of the second Table are summarily contained. And the rule of exercising this
righteousness, is that law of nature commended unto us by our Savior Christ,
M^t. Mat. 7. 12.
7, Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, even so do you to them, for
this is the law and the prophets. Which sentence is said so to have pleased the
Emperor Alexander S^uerus, Lamprid in Alexandr.
that in his palaces and public buildings he caused it to be written and
engraven: and when he punished any man, he caused this saying to be proclaimed
by the crier, Quod tibi non-vis, alteri ne ^eceris. Do not to another what thou
would not have done to thy self.

Now the exercise or working of this righteousness is here made a note of the
child of God. For he does not say, he that can talk of righteousness; nor he
that delights to hear anoter man speak thereof; nor he which professes
righteousness, or makes a pretense thereof; but he that works
righteousness shall dwell in the holy mountain of God. For there are some
which can notably discourse of righteousness, than whose life nothing is more
unjust. And there are others, who with Eze^^iels auditors delight to hear the
Minister preaching of righteousness, Ezec. 33. 32.
as if he were some skillful Mulitian that has a pleasant voice, but it is to
hear only, and not to practice. There be many also who with the Pharisees say
and do not; Mat. 23.
which profess righteousness, but do not practice it.

Qui Curios simulant and Bacchanalia vivunt. But with the folly of these men
the holy Ghost meets in diverse places of the Scripture, Mat. 7. 21.
Mat. 7, Not every one that says Lord Lord shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Romans 2. 13.
Romans 2, Not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the
Law shall be justified, Iam. Iam. 1. 22.
1, Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your selves, Mat.
5. 20.
etc. Mat 5, Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, (who said and did not) you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Wherefore brethren let no man deceive you, 1. John 3. 7.
not he that hears, nor he that speaks, not he that professes or
pr^tendeth, but he that works righteousness, he is righteous.

Neither is that to be omitted that the holy Ghost speaks in the present
tence, thereby signifying a continual act, as Basil has observed: Mark
(says he) the accuratnesse of the speech; he does not say, who has wrought,
but he which works. For it is not one action that makes a virtuous man, but
it behooves a man in his whole life to keep a constant course of well doing.
For Justice is an habit induing a man with a perpetual and constant will to do
every man right. See Thom. 2. 2. 9. 58. 1.


But here some will object: The Scriptures testify that there is not a
righteous man upon the earth, Romans 3. 10.
Romans 3. There is not a just man, no not one. If therefore the righteous only
shall be saved, 1. Pet. 4. 18.
and scarcely they, as Peter says, How can any man living hope to be saved,
seeing there is not a just man upon earth, 1. King. 8. 46.
that does good and sins not, as Solomon professes. Eccles. 7. 22.


I answer: If we should be summoned before the Judgment feate of Gods justice,
and the Lord should deal with us summo iure, according to extremity, exacting
at our hands that full and perfect righteousness which is required in his law:
Psalm. 143. 2.
assuredly the Lord entering into judgment with us, no man living could be
justified. But we must appeal from the judgment seat of Gods justice to the
throne of his mercy: and from the sentence of the Law concluding all under
sin, to the sentence of the Gospel, pronouncing all those that truly believe
in Christ, not just only, but also blessed: that so being clothed with the
righteousness of Christ by faith, we may in him be justified, though unjust in
our selves in respect of legal righteousness. Now those which truly believe
in Christ, are said to be righteous two ways: before God by Faith, that is,
by the righteousness of Christ, apprehended by Faith: before men by the fruits
of Faith, that is, by righteousness inherent in us, and performed by us. For
those which believe in Christ, their Faith is imputed unto them for
righteousness; because they apprehending Christ, who is our righteousness,
and by the same Faith being united unto him, his righteousness and obedience
is imputed unto them, and accepted of God for them, as if they had performed
the same in their own persons.

But they who are justified by the righteousness of Christ, are also
sanctified by his spirit, regenerated, and as it were created a new to good
works, Ephesians. 2. 10.
which God has prepared for us, Romans 6. 18.
that we should walk in them. For so soon as we are delivered by Christ out
of the bondage of sin, we become the servants of righteousness: That as in
former times we gave our members as servants of sin unto unrighteousness,
verse 19.
we should from henceforth give them as servants of righteousness unto
holiness. And howsoever the best obedience of the faithful is but an
imperfect obedience joined with manifold infirmities and wants, and stained
with diverse corruptions, wherewith they are infected, and sins whereinto
they fall, in so much that Esaias compares the righteous works of the faithful
to menstruous clouts; notwithstanding the Lord beholding them in Christ, Esaias
64. 6.
and accepting their will for the deed, Job. 1. 1.
and sincere endeavor for the performance, not only themselves are termed
righteous, but are also said to work righteousness. Luke 1. 6.
And this working of righteousness, the perfection whereof is not to be
measured by the perfectness of the work, Act. 10. 22.
but by the uprightness of the will, Heb. 11. 33.
and sincerity of the endeavor aspiring toward perfection, is an undoubted
note of a true citisen of heaven, who in this Psalm is described. And that the
Lord accepts those for true members of the inu^sible Church, who work
righteousness, the Scriptures testify: Act. 10. 35.
In every nation, says Peter, he that seareth God and works righteousness
is accepted of him. And this is so universal a note of the children of God,
and so proper unto them, that whosoever works righteousness he is truly said
to be borne of God; 1. John 2. 29.
and he that works not righteousness is not of God, 1. John 310* 8.
but of the devil. But as they that work righteousness are the servants of God
in the kingdom of grace, so shall they reign with him in the kingdom of
glory. For that which is said in the beginning of this Psalm, That he which
works righteousness shall rest in the mountain of God; and in the end, That
he shall never be removed; the same is confirmed by the holy ghost in other
places of Scripture. Esaias. 33. 15, 16.
Esaias 33, He that walk^th in righteousness, etc. Pro. 10. 30.
he shall dwell on high. And Prou. 10, The righteous shall never be removed.
Psalm. 69. 28.
And so certain is the salvation of the righteous, that the book of the
living, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
is the book of the just: Psalm. 69. 28.
eternal glory is the crown of righteousness: the rising again unto glory,
Luke 14. 14.
is the resurrection of the just. And as justice contains all those virtues
which have reference to our neighbor, so the reward of it is the heap of all
rewards, namely, blessedness. For as the Scriptures testify, Psalm. 106. 3.
blessed are those that work righteousness; and not only they, Mat. 5. 6.
but those also which hunger and thirst after righteousness are blessed.

Wherefore seeing not only in this place, but elsewhere also in the Scriptures
eternal life is promised to those that work righteousness; the consideration
of this reward ought to be a motive to provoke and stir us up to the exercise
of justice: Which I do not speak to this end, as though the works of justice
were to be performed with that mind, as that we should hope thereby to be
justi^ied before God, or by them to merit eternal life; for that is an opinion
sacrilegious and blasphemous against Christ, whose justice alone, apprehended
by faith, justifies us before God, and makes us accepted unto eternal life.
Phil. 3. 9. 9.
In respect of which justice we are to esteem all our own merits (if we had
any) as dung, that we may gain Christ, and may be found in him, not having our
own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by the Faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God through faith.

And therefore if we desire that the works of righteousness which we do
perform, should be acceptable unto God, they are not to be performed to that
end that we might by them attain to justification or salvation: for good works
performed to that end are glorious sins: but in doing the works of
righteousness, these ends are to be propounded. First, in respect of God, that
we may glorify him: for which end we were elected, created, redeemed,
regenerated. For by the works of righteousness God is glorified. John 15. 8.
Her^in, says our Savior Christ, is my father glorified, that ye bear much
fruit. For which cause Paul prays for the Philippians, Phil. 1. 11.
that they might be filled with the fruit of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Neither is God glorified in us alone,
but in others also, which are the wit^esses of our good deeds. Therefore Christ
exhorts us, Mat. 5. 16.
so to let our light shine before men, that they seeing our good works may
glorify our father which is in heaven. And Peter likewise counsels us so to
have our conversation honest among the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 2. 12.
that by our good works which they shall see, they may glorify God in the day
of the visitation.

Secondly, that we may testify our thankfulness unto God for all his benefits
bestowed upon us, and may avoid the punishment which is due to unthankfulness.
For whereas the Lord in lieu of all his benefits, both temporal and spiritual,
as election, vocation, redemption, regeneration, expects at our hands these
fruits alone, of holiness and righteousness; assuredly it were unthankfulness
intolerable, if either we should be barren of good fruits, or bring forth
evil fruit. For wherefore has the Lord elected us? that we might be saved
howsoever we should live? No, but he has elected us that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love? Ephesians. 1. 4.
Why has Christ redeemed us from the hand of our spiritual enemies? that
being freed from them we might sin the more freely? No, but that being
delivered from the hand of our spiritual enemies, Luke. 1. 74, 75.
we might worship him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life. Wherefore has he freed us from the servitude of
sin? that we might have freedom to sin? No, Romans 6. 18. and 22.
he has freed us from sin, that we might be the servants of righteousness:
and being now freed from sin, and made servants unto God, we have our fruit
in holiness, and the end everlasting life. Why did he bear our sins in his
body upon the cross? that we living in sin should not die for them? No, 1.
Pet. 2. 24.
he bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being delivered from
sin, might live in righteousness. Wherefore does he regenerate us by his
spirit, and as it were create us anew? that we should do nothing our selves?
NO, We are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Ksus to good works,
which God has prepared, Ehp. 2. 10.
that we should walk in them. Why does he bestow his temporal benefits upon
us? that like well pampered horses we should kick against our Lord and
Master? No, he crowns us with his manifold blessing, to this end, Psalm. 105.
45.
that we might keep his statutes and observe his laws. For what else does the
Lord require of thee which art the people of God, Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
in lieu of all his mercies, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul? that thoukeepe the Commandments of the Lord, and his
ordinances which he commands thee for thy wealth? Let us remember that we
are trees of righteousness which the Lord has planted in his garden, Cant. 4.
12, 13.
that is, his Church, that we may bring forth the fruit of righteousness. But
if he shall come to seek fruit (as every year he comes) and shall find
none, Luke* 3. 6, 7.
howsoever he may forbear for a time, yet at the length he shall cut down the
unfruitful trees: for he cannot abide that they should cumber the ground, and
make it also barren. Let us remember that we are the branches of the vine, John
15. 2.
which if we be unfruitful, the Lord will cut off. Mat. 3. 10.
Let us consider that the axe is laid to the root of every tree; that every one
which brings not forth fruit, may be cut off and cast into the fire.

Again, in respect of our neighbor we are to work righteousness, that we
may help him either with the benefit or the example of our good work. For the
benefit of justice belongs to others. For whereas other virtues are referred
to the good of him that has them; justice only seems to be the good of
another man: for justice attends the duty of one man to another; (...).
but in other virtues is attended the duty of the inferior faculties unto
reason, Arist. Eth. 1. ^. c. 3.
as one says. But thou may help thy neighbor also by the example of thy
good work. Thom. 2. 2.
For when thou go before thy brother with the light of thy good example, q.
100. 1. Pet. 3. 1.
thou shall gain him unto Christ, if he be not already won unto him, 1. Pet.
2. 12.
that he also may glorify God in the day of the visitation. Or if he be
already ingrafted into Christ, by thy good example thou shall edify him, 2.
Cor. 9. 2.
and as the Apostle testifies of the Corinthians, thou shall provoke him to
good works.

Lastly, we are to perform the works of righteousness, in respect of our
selves, as being both profitable and necessary forts, profitable: First,
because by them we may make sure our calling and our election; 2. Pet. 1. 10.
as Peter teaches, they being so many testimonies unto us thereof. True indeed
it is, Romans 9. 11. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
that we were elected without respect of works, Romans 3. 28.
and we are called by grace, not according to works, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.
we are justified by faith without works, and by grace we are saved through
faith, and not by works. But if a man would know whether he be elected,
called, justified, and shall be saved, (as we are bound to give diligence, that
we may have a firm knowledge of these things) we are not to pry into the
secret counsel of God, but we are to examine our selves by our fruits: for
both we and others are to be discerned by our fruits. As our Savior says,
Mat. 7. 16. 201
by their fruits you shall know them, do men gather grapes of thorns, or
^igges of thistels? a bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit. By the fruits
therefore of righteousness we may evidently discern our selves to be
sanctified. And none are sanctified but such as first are justified; and
whosoever are justified are effectually called, and none are effectually
called, but such as are elected; and none are elected, but such as shall be
saved. Ia^^. 2. 18.
To this purpose James shows that the faith whereby we are justified, must be
demonstrated by good works. 1. John. 3. 14.
And John affirms, that by the the love of our brethren (which is all one in
effect with righteousness) we know that we are translated from death unto
life. Again, good works are profitable, because they have the promises both
of this life, and of that which is to come.

They are also necessary, not as the causes of our justification and salvation,
as though we were either justified by them, or saved for them; but as necessary
fruits of faith and testimonies of our justification, according whereunto the
sentence of salvation shall be pronounced: for although unto the act of
justification good works do not concur, as any causes thereof, yet in the
subject, that is, the party justified, they concur as fruits of our faith,
and consequents of our justification. For as breathing is such a fruit or
consequent of life, as where that is, we judge the body to live; where that is
not, we judge it to be dead: so is the exercise of righteousness and
performance of good works, such a consequent of faith, as that where good
works are, the faith is lively; where they are not at all, Iam. 2. 26.
the faith is dead. They are necessary also in respect of salvation, not as the
causes thereof, but partly as the way; Ephesians. 2. 10.
for we are his workmanship created unto good works, which he has prepared
for us to walk in them, (...).
and therefore they are fitly said to be Vni regum, non causa regnandi, The way
to the kingdom, not the cause of reigning: and partly as the evidence,
according unto which the Lord proceeds in judgment to the sentence of
salvation. Mat. 25. 34. 35.
Come you blessed of my father (says Christ the judge) inherit you the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world: For I was an
hungry and you gave me meat, I thirsted and you gave me drink, etc. It is
most certain that Christ our Savior by his obedience has merited and
purchased eternal life for all those that believe in him, according to the
maine promise of the Gospel, that whosoever believes in him shall be saved.
By that righteousness and obedience of Christ, apprehended by faith, and not by
or for any righteousness inherent in us, or obedience performed by us, are we
made sons and heirs of God, entitled unto the kingdom of heaven, acquitted
from our sins, and accepted unto eternal life. Notwithstanding, seeing all
that be in the Church profess themselves to believe, whereof many deceive
either themselves with an opinion, or others with a profession of faith;
therefore the Lord proceeds unto judgment, according to the fruits either of
faith, or infidelity: taking for granted, that in those who are members of the
true visible Church, where good works are there is faith, and where are no
good works there is no faith. And therefore it behooves us, as we desire
either to have assurance of our salvation whiles we live here, or to hear the
comfortable sentence of salvation pronounced to us in the day of judgment, so
to be careful to demonstrat our faith by good works. And hereby it appears
against the malicious slander of the Papists, that although we deny good
works to be meritorious of everlasting life, yet we do not teach men to cast
off all care and well doing.

Now for the avoiding of error: Whereas the works of righteousness are made
a proper note of the sons and heirs of God, we are first to restrain this
part of the Lords answer to that subject whereof David's question is propounded,
namely, to those who live in the true visible Church, and profess the name and
religion of God. Of these, because there be many hypocrites and unsound
professors among them, David desires to be informed, who are the true
professors. The Lord answers: He that works righteousness, and so by his
good works does demonstrat his faith. There are many works materially good to
be found, not only among heretics and idolatours, as the Papists, but also
among Turks and Pagans. But we speak not of those that are without, for they
are not within the compass, either of David's question, or Gods answer. And
secondly we are to know that all works in respect of the matter, or the thing
done, seem to be good works, are not straightwayes the works of
righteousness, neither does he which performs them always work
righteousness. For it is not a good and a true work of righteousness indeed,
unless it proceed from the right fountain, unless it be done in a right
manner, and to a right end. As touching the fountain, it is a good rule of
Gregory: That the streams of righteousness toward our brother, must be derived
from the fountain of piety toward God. For we love not our brother aright,
unless we love him in and for the Lord, and we cannot love him in and for the
Lord, unless we love the Lord much more: and we love the Lord, because we are
by faith persuaded, that he loves us first, his love being shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost: and we cannot believe in God and Christ our Savior,
unless we know God aright, and understand the mystery of our salvation by
Christ. If therefore we be ignorant persons, we have no faith, if we be
unfaithful persons, we have no true love or fear of God, nor any other
sanctifying grace: If we have no true love of God, we have no true love of our
brother. For even as the love of God, severed from the love of our neighbor,
is hypocrisy; so is the love of our neighbor severed from the love of God,
counterfeit. The good works therefore that are done, either by an ignorant
person, or by a more civil honest man, who is void of faith, of religion, of
the love and fear of God, although materially they be good: yet are they evil
as they proceed from him. For whiles the tree is evil, the fruit cannot be
good, whiles the person is not accepted as just in Christ (as none but the
faithful are) his actions cannot be acceptable: Heb. 11. 6.
for without faith it is impossible to please God. 1. Tim. 1. 5.
And this is that which the Apostle says, that the end and consummation of the
commandment is love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith
unsained.

In respect of the manner, our good works must be performed uprightly, 2.
Chron. 25. 2
not in hypocrisy and dissimulation: otherwise it is unfeigned and counterfeit.
For though we do that which is right, yet if we do it not with an upright
heart, we do it not rightly, neither can we be said to work righteousness.

In respect of the end, we are to perfome good works, that by the discharge of
our duty God may be glorified. But if our end be, to be seen of men, if to win
praise and glory to our selves, if to merit of God, and as it were to bridle
him by our good deed, all our works, though never so glorious in the eyes of
the world, yet are they splendida peccata, that is to say, glorious sins. To
this purpose we are to remember, that we are to worship God, Luke 1. 75.
not only in holiness, but in righteousness also: and we worship him in
righteousness, when as in a sincere obedience to God we seek by performing
the duties of righteousness to our brother to glorify God. From this note
therefore of Gods children, we distinguish the seeming good works, first of
infidels without the Church, or of more natural men within; because there can
be no true righteousness or love of men, without faith, piety and love of
God. Secondly, of hypocr^tes and dissemblers, who do no good, but for sinister
and by-respects, and therefore their righteousness being hypocrisy, is double
injustice. Lastly, of all Pharisaicall and Popish justiciaries, who by their
good works think (such is their Satanicall pride) to make God beholding unto
them, and to merit heaven to themselves, most sacrilegiously and injuriously
unto Christ our Savior, placing the matter of their justification, and the
merit of their salvation in themselves.

In a word, that is no true righteousness which is severed from holiness;
neither is that a work of righteousness, which is not a righteous work
rightly done, as that is not, which is done in hypocrisy, or to an ill end. He
therefore undoubtedly is the son and heir of God, who professing the true
faith, labors to demonstrat his faith by good works; his faith working by
love, and his love proceeding from faith unfeigned: who in upright obedience
toward God, seeks by the exercise of righteousness, and discharge of his
duty toward his neighbor, to glorify God.

The third note of the child God is Truth, which the holy ghost expresses in
these words, and speaks the truth in his heart. Which words (says Augustine)
are not thus to be understood, De (...) ad Consent.
as though keeping the truth in the heart, we should utter untruth with our
mouth. But the holy ghost uses this phrase of speech, because a man may with
his mouth utter the truth, which will nothing avail him, if he hold not the
same in his heart. Wherefore although this phrase of speaking the truth in his
heart, seem somewhat harsh, notwithstanding, if it be rightly understood, it
does more fully express the disposition of a man which is addicted to the
truth, than if it had been said from the heart. Thus therefore I read, who
speaks the truth which is in his h^rt, that is, who utters with his tongue
the truth which he has conceived in his mind. For that we may be vcraces, that
is, speakers of the truth, there is a double conformity or agreement required,
which is here expressed, the one of the speech with the mind (namely, that we
should speak as we think) the other of the mind, with the thing it self
(namely, that we should conceive in our mind, according to the truth of the
matter.) For as the rule and measure of truth in words, is the agreement of
them with our thoughts: so the rule and measure of truth in our thoughts, is
the agreement thereof with the things themselves. It is true indeed, that in
some sciences either agreement alone suffices unto the truth: as in moral
philosophy he is (...), a speaker of the truth, who speaks as he thinks,
although perhaps he thinks otherwise than the thing it self is: And in
Logic he is said to speak the truth, who speaks as the thing is, although
perhaps he thinks otherwise: But in divinity both, as I said, is required.
Neither can we be said, if either be wanting, to be veraces, that is, such as
speak the truth which is in our heart: for he which delivers an untruth,
supposing it to be true, howsoever he be free from the vanity of lying, yet
he cannot be said to be a speaker of the truth; for in his mouth he utters
an untruth, though in his heart he be well affected to the truth. Contrariwise,
he that speaks the truth which he thinks to be false, he is a liar, though
he speak the truth, because he has truth in his mouth, but not in his heart.
Such a one therefore, Psalm. 12.
because he speaks with an heart and an heart, may not unworthily be said to
lie. For ment^ri est contra mentemire: to lie, is to speak otherwise than a
man thinks. Wherefore, that a man may be said to speak the truth which is
in heart, there is a double agreement required, the one of the tongue with the
mind, the other of the mind, with the things themselves. And to this double
conformity in speaking the truth, there is opposed a double falsehood, namely,
when a man speaks either that which is false, or falsely. He speaks that
which is false, who speaks otherwise than the thing is, whether he thinks it
to be so, or otherwise. He speaks falsely, who speaks otherwise than he
thinks. He which speaks a falsehood, supposing it to be true, is not so much
to be blamed for lying, as for vnaduifednesse and rashness. For we ought to be
sure of those things which we affirm. But he which either speaks that which
he knows to be false, or speaks that which is true falsely, that is,
animo fallendi, with a purpose to deceive (as the devil sometimes does) he is
a liar: neither can you easily determine, whether is in the greater fault: for
as the one has less truth in his mouth, so the other has more deceit in his
heart.

Now that the love of the truth, and likewise the detestation of falsehood is to
be reckoned among the notes of Gods children, it is testified, not only in
this place, but also elsewhere in the Scriptures. Zeph. 3. 13.
Zeph. 3. The remnant of Israel(that is, the true members of the Church, which
shall remain) shall not speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be
found in their mouth. Prou* 13. 5.
And Prou. 13. A righteous man hates lying words, but a wicked man is so
addicted unto lying, that he stinketh as it were, and is confounded. And
whereas it is said in the end of the Psalm, He that does these things, shall
never be removed. The same is testified by Solomon, Pro. Pro. 12. 19.
12. The lip of truth (meaning thereby the man which speaks the truth) shall
be established for ever. And whereas in the beginning of the Psalm it is
promised, that he shall rest in the mountain of Gods holiness, the same we
read performed, Apoc. 14. 5. 4.
Apoc. 14. where it is said of those 144000, in whose mouth was found no guile,
that they were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God and the
lamb.

But it will be objected, that every man is a liar, according to that of the
Apostle, Let God be true, and every man a liar. Romans 3. 4.
If therefore none shall dwell in the holy mountain of God, but such as are
speakers of the truth, who then shall be saved? I answer, that no man indeed
upon the earth may be said to be so perfectly true, but that sometimes he
fails of infirmity, so far has the father of lies, the devil, infected
us with his falsehood. But that if we aspire and contend toward that
perfection, embracing and loving the truth, detesting and abhorring lies, and
have a settled purpose and unfeigned resolution to observe the truth in all
things, so far as God shall enable us; assuredly howsoever we may sometimes
fail of infirmity, as Sara once did, and Peter also through fear;
notwithstanding our infirmities being pardoned through and for the perfect
obedience of Christ, and our leasings covered with his verity, who is the
truth, the Lord will accept of us in his fonne, as those which speak the truth
in their heart: because the true desire and purpose of our heart is always to
observe the truth. For we must distinguish betwixt those, who hating falsehood,
do sometimes (though seldom) fall thereinto, and those which have got a
custom and habit of lying, and are delighted with untruth: for the former may
be verified of the faithful, but the latter cannot.

The use which we are to make of this doctrine, is this, That seeing the truth
of our speech is a matter of so great weight and consequence, as that the holy
ghost in this place has set it down, as one of the marks of Gods children, we
are to be stirred up to embrace the truth, and to abhor lies.

And to this purpose let us in the first place consider, that whereas the
faculty of speech is of so great use in our life, as that without it we
should seem to live like beasts, notwithstanding all this use of our speech
depends upon the truth thereof. For take away truth from the speech of men,
and it were better men should be dumb than able to speak. Of truth therefore
there is great necessity, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
not only in religion (for without the knowledge of the truth we cannot
attain to salvation) but also in our whole life. Lying contrariwise peruerteth
the use of speech, and makes it not only unprofitable, but hurtful also, it
takes away faith from among men, and in a manner dissolueth humane societies,
which without mutual contracts and negotiations (wherein truth does rule)
cannot be maintained, etc.

Secondly, whereas God is truth, and the author of all truth; and
contrariwise, the devil is a liar, and the father of lies; let us consider
whose image it behooves us to represent: for his children we are, John 8. 44.
whose image we do bear, the wit, the children of God, if we be speakers of the
truth; the children of the devil if we be liars.

Thirdly, as there be two fathers; of those which speak truly, God; and of
liars, the devil: so there are two kingdoms whereunto all appertain, the
kingdom of light, and the kingdom of darkness. The language or dialect of
the former, is truth; of the latter, lying: If therefore thou would know to
whether kingdom thou do appertain, thou may know by thy language.

Fourthly, Ios. 7. 19.
by the profession of the truth, as our brother is profited, Leu. 6. 2.
so is Gods glory advanced: but by lying, we sin not only against our
neighbor, but also against God.

Fifthly, for those causes, Truth in the Scripture is commended unto us, and
commanded, but untruth is forbidden and condemned. Wherefore (says the
Apostle) cast off lying, Ephesians. 4* 25.
and speak every man the truth unto his neighbor, for we are members one of
another. Where the Apostle uses two reasons; first, because we are renewed in
the holiness and righteousness of truth, according to the image of God, that
we may be true, as he is true: Secondly, because we are members of the same
body, and therefore ought to maintain truth among our selves. But especially in
the ninth commandment is truth commanded, and all falsehood forbidden. But it
may be you desire testimonies of either severally. As of truth commanded,
Zachar. Zach. ^. 16.
8. These are the things that you shall do: Speak ye every man the truth
unto his neighbor: execute judgment truly and uprightly in your gates. Verse
19.
And again, Therefore love the truth and pe^ce. Exodus 23. 7.
Of falsehood forbidden, Exodus 23. Thou shall keep thee far, Leu. 19. 11.
^ verbo mendac^, from a lying word. Leu. 19. Ye shall not steal, nor deal
falsely, nor lie one unto another. Where theft and lying, as they use to go
together, so are they joined as companions: and hard it is to say, whether is
the worse sin. Ec^les. 1. 20. 23, 24, 25.
A lie (says a wise man) is a wicked shame in a man: yet is it often in the
mo^th of the unwise. A thief is better than a man that is accu^tomed to lie:
but they both shall have de^truction to heritage. The conditions of liars are
dishonest, and their shame is ever with them. And hereunto let us add that
prohibition of the Apostle, Col. 3. 9.
Col. 3. Lie not one to another, having put off the old man with his practices,
and put on the new, etc.

Sixthly, Psalm. 51. 8.
as God does love the truth, as being himself not only true, Pro. 12. (...).
but truth it self: so he abhors lying, as one of the things which he
especially hates. Pro. 6. 17.


Seventhly: And hereunto accords the judgment also of all ingenious men,
even among the heathen and others: who commend truth, as a most excellent
virtue, as a most sacred possession, (...), Philo Ind.
as the Sun in the world, as that one thing wherein men may become most like
unto God. Wherefore Pythagoras being demanded, What that was, in doing
whereof, men might especially be like unto God? answered, (...), If they speak
the truth. And therefore another says, (...), Men^nder.
It is always best to speak the truth. Contrariwise, they condemn lying as a
most foul and shameful vice, and unworthy an honestman. To lie (says one) is
a base thing, but truth is noble. And therefore of all reproaches, (...).
Apollon.
an ingenious man can least brook this, that another to his face should say,
Thou lie. But if the very heathen people do so highly esteem of Truth, how
much more does it become us Christians to love and embrace it, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
who are his children, that is the Truth, who are redeemed by him that is the
Truth, John 14. 6.
and unto whom we are to conform our selves; who are regenerated by the
spirit of truth, John 16. 13.
by whom we are to be led into all truth, John 17. 17.
who are sanctified by the word of God, John 18. 37.
which is the truth, who are of the truth so many as are of God. Therefore
nothing less becomes a Christian than lying, nothing more than truth.

Eighthly, but if no other arguments will prevail with us, let us consider on
the one side, what rewards the Lord has promised to them that speak the
truth, and on the other side, what ^udgements he has denounced against liars.
To the speakers of truth, the Lord has promised, that they shall never be
removed, that they shall be established for ever, that they shall dwell in Gods
holy mountain, as before has been showed: against liars, the Lord has
threatened fearful judgments, A false witness shall not be unpunished, P
^0. 19, 5.
and he that speaks lies^ shall not escape. For first he is punished with
infamy, and loses his credit, insomuch that no man will believe him, when he
speaks the truth: Eccles. 34. 4.
For as one says, What truth can be spoken of a liar? Secondly, he is
discarded of the godly, he that tells lies (says David) shall not remain in
my sight. Psalm. 101. 7.
But these are light punishments in comparison of those that follow, for God
does not only punish liars, but also destroy them, Psalm. Psalm. 5. 6.
5. Thou shall destroy them that speak lies. Prou. 19. A false witness shall
not he unpunished, Pro. 19. 9.
and he that speaks lies, shall perish. For God destroys them either with a
temporal death, as Ananias and Sapphir^, because they had lied, were stricken
dead, Act. 5.
Act. 5. or with eternal: for who so ever love or make lies, Apoc. 22. 15.
shall be excluded out of the heavenly Jerusalem, and shall have their part in
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 21. 8.
which is the second death.

Ninthly, and lastly, seeing the holy ghost has reckoned Truth among the
marks of Gods children, it behooves us as we desire to have any assurance,
that we belong unto the Lord, or shall dwell with him in the mountain of his
holiness, so to love and embrace the truth, and to detest and abhor falsehood.

And thus have we showed in general, that lying is wicked and detestable, and
that the truth is to be loved and embraced of all those who would be held
citisens of heaven. But here are two questions to be decided of us. First,
Whether it be lawful for a Christian man at any time to lie. Secondly, Whether
he be bound always to profess the truth, and how far forth.

As touching the former, we are to hold a distinction of lics or untruths: for
an untruth is either improperly so called, or properly: that is improperly
called an untruth, which being true in sense, is false only in show of words,
as figurative speeches and fabulous parables: the lawfulness where of is
warranted by the use of speech in the Scriptures: for howsoever, if we respect
the sound of the words, they seem to contain some falsehood, yet if we regard
the sense and meaning of the speaker (as it is fit we should) they express the
truth, either (...), more significantly, or more profitably. More
significantly, as figurative speeches; especially such as we call Hyperbolae,
where of there are some examples in the Scriptures. Genesis 32. 12.
As when the holy ghost would signify a very great or innumerable multitude,
1. Sam. 13. 5.
he uses to compare it with the sand of the sea. Psalm. 78. 27.
And likewise, John the Evangelist, when he would signify, John 21. 25.
that Christ our Savior did work very many or rather innumerable miracles, and
other acts worthy to be registered, he says, That if every one of them should
be set down in writing, he supposes, that the whole world could not contain
the books that should be written.

And as for fabulous parables, they hide not the truth, but more profitably lay
it forth, that it may be more clearly discerned, and more sincerely
acknowledged: for the truth is more clearly discerned, when as by a fit
s^^ilitude (for such these parables are) it is illustrated. And it is more
sincerely and impartially acknowledged, when the person of whom it is meant, is
withdrawn. For better do men comprehend under the person of another, what is
to be thought of themselves: examples hereof, see 2. Sam. 12. 1. Mat. 21. 33.
41. Judge. 9. 7. 2. King. 14. 9. and 2. Chron. 25. 18. 19. A lie or untruth, so
properly called, is such a speech, as in sense and meaning at the least is
false. And such an untruth is delivered either for no cause at all, as that
which is called merum mendacium, a mere lie, or else for some purpose. The
mere lie is that which is uttered, neither with a desire to hurt, nor purpose
to help any, but only in a vanity and pleasure taken in lying: Which shows
our notable vanity and pronenesse to lying, that many are delighted therewith
for it self. But this vanity especially shows it self in those persons,
who in all their speeches almost love to tell of strange and wonderful things.
And of this kind of lie there can be no question, but that it is unlawful.

The lie which is told for some cause, is either to hurt some man, or to
pleasure him. That which is told to hurt any body, it is called mendacium
perniciosum, a pernicious or hurtful lie: neither can there be any
controversy, but that this is wicked and devilish. The lie which is told to
pleasure any, is either mendacium iocosum, the merry lie, or, officiosum, the
lie for advantage. And of these two sorts is all the controversy. For there
are which think these lies either to be no sins at all, or else not mortal
sins, because they seem to them not to break that commandment wherein
lies are forbidden. For these lies (say they) are not spoken against our
neighbor, but rather for him: namely, either to delight him, as the jeasting
lie; or to help him, as the officious lie. I answer, that the ninth
commandment, whereof they speak, is generally to be understood: for first,
under false testimony we are to understand all false speech concerning our
neighbor, and not only false speech, but also all vain talk. For the Hebrew
word (...) signifies both. As also the other word (...), which is used in the
third commandment. And in the fifth of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 5. 20.
where the law is repeated, Moses in the ninth commandment, in stead of
(...), puts (...), that we may understand not only false speech to be
forbidden, but also that which is vain. Again, the word (...) does signify
not only against thy neighbor, but also for him. For the preposition (...)
signifies both, Esaias 59. 12.
to wit, both against, as Esaias 59, Our sins do testify (...), Genesis 30. 33.
against us: and also for, as Genesis 30, My righteousness shall answer (...)
for me, or shall testify in my behalf. In the ninth commandment therefore is
forbidden not only false speech (as every lie is) but also vain speech (as
the jeasting lie commonly is;) and not only that false or vain speech which
is against our neighbor, but also that which is for him, whether it be for his
delight, as the jeasting lie, or for his profit, as the officious lie.
Augustine out of the words of the Apostle, De mendacio ad Consent.
I. Cor. 15. where the Apostle confesses, That if Christ be not risen again,
then he and other the Apostles should be false witnesses of God: For (says he)
we have testified of (or as the word may signify, against) God, that he has
raised up Christ, etc. he gathers, that that is said to be a false testimony
against any, which is falsely said in his praise. Seeing therefore these two
sorts of lies are forbidden in the decalogue, it is evident by the confession
of the Schoolmen themselves, that they are not only sins, but also mortal
sins.

2. Again, a lie is evil in general, and is generally forbidden in the
Scriptures. Apoc. 21. 8.
Apoc. 21. to all yers without exception eternal death is denounced. And
agreeably to the Scriptures, Eecles. 7. 13. (...)
the son of Syrach, (...), says he, (...): Do not thou make no manner of
lie. The Hebrew word, which signifies a lie, signifies iniquity, that we
might understand every lie to be a sin.

3. De interpr. 1. (...).
Every lie is against nature. For seeing words naturally are the notes of our
thoughts, as the Philosopher says, it is against nature and against duty,
that a man should signify in words that which he does not think in his heart;
See Thom. 2. 2. q. 110.
or that the will should direct the tongue to utter that which is contrary to
the illumination of the mind. Ethic. 4.
Whereupon the Philosopher says, That every lie is in it own nature evil and
to be avoided.

4. Augustine reasons thus. The truth teaches not that we may lie at any
time: 1. John 2. 21.
for no lie is of the truth. Therefore it is not true that we may lie at any
time.

5. We can do nothing (says the Apostle) against the truth, 2. Cor. 13. 8.
but for the truth, 2. Cor. 13, but every lie is against the truth: yea upon
every lie follows the loss of truth, which to God is most dear.

6. Again (says Augustine) the law is the truth. Psalm. 119. yea God is the
truth, therefore that which is against truth, is against the law, yea and
against God.

7. And hereunto we may add the testimonies of Augustine, Moral. y. 8. cap. 2.
No lies are just, for all are sins.

8. And of Gregory, Every lie is iniquity: for so much it dissenteth from
equity, as it discordeth from verity. For whatso^uer is opposed to virtue, is
sin: every lie is opposed to truth, which is a virtue, therefore every lie is
a sin.

9. Every lie is of the devil, therefore evil. John 8. 44.

10. The conscience of every man when he lies, accuses him of sin.

But let us consider them severally. And first as touching the merry lie, we
are to hold a distinction, namely, that there is a merry lie, which improperly
is called a lie, when as in show of words a false thing is uttered, but yet by
the jesture or pronuntiation of him that so jeasteth, it may appear, that
something else which is true, is signified by him: and that such a jest as
under the show of an untruth does hide a truth, may sometimes be used of a
Christian man, I dare not deny. But that which properly and in the meaning of
the speaker is a lie, may in no sort be used of a Christian. First, because it
is not only false, but also vain and idle: Mat. 12. 36.
and if of idle words an account must be given, how much more of lies?
Secondly, the Prophet Hoseas inueigheth against those, ^os. 7. 3.
who with their lies make princes merry. Now, if princes, to whom being
oppressed with great cares, mirth is most needful, may not be made merry with
lies, who then may? Thirdly, a lie may not be uttered to help a man, or to
deliver him out of danger, as shall straightwaies be showed, mueh less may it
be told to delight him. For as the schoolmen truly say, Bonum utile prefertur
delectabili, a profitable good is preferred before a delightful, De mendac. ad
Consent.
nay, the truth it self is not spoken to the end to delight men, as Augustine
says, much less may a lie. Fourthly, Epaminondas the heathen man, shall rise
in judgment against those who make no conscience of speaking merry lies:
Aemilius prob.
for he was so strict an obseruer and lover of the truth, that he could not
abide that a lie should be spoken, no not in jest. And to these reasons you
may add those arguments which before were produced to prove a lie generally
to be evil.

But the chief controversy is concerning the officious lie; for therein now
adays the policy of worldly men especially consists. But let us see by what
arguments they commend this office forsooth of lying. First, because it is not
against Christian charity (say they) to help our brother with a lie: 1. Cor.
13. 6.
yea, but Christian charity (say I) abhors lying, 2. Cor. 13. 8.
and rejoices in the truth, and those which are Christians, so long as they
keep a good conscience, they can do nothing against the truth, but for the
truth.

2. Yea, the honest friendship of Heathen men was contained within the limits
of truth. The Philosopher in his Morals professes, Eth. 1.
(...), to be a godly thing to prefer the truth, before his friends. And those
which were of the better sort among them, were wont to profess themselves
friends one to another, (...) unto the altars, to which they usually came when
they were to testify a truth: that it may be a shame for Christian men in
respect of friendship, to go beyond the bonds of truth.

3. Christian Charity requires not only that we should do good, but also
that we should do it well and by good means: Romans 3. 8.
For this a rule in Divinity, that Evil is not to be done, that Good may come
thereof. Those things only which are good and lawful are to be done of us,
committing the event to God.

4. Christian charity does not require that for another man's commodity thou
should cast away thy self. But God will destroy those which speak lies:
Psalm. 5. 6.
and as the wise man says, Wisd. 1. 11.
The lying mouth destroys the soul.

Secondly, they prove this kind of lying to be lawful, by the examples of the
godly. For first, say they, Abraham the father of the faithful, that he might
escape danger, said that his wife Sarah was his sister. Genesis 12. 10. 16. and
20. 2.
To this objection Abraham himself answers. Genesis 20. 12, In very truth she
is my sister, Gen 20. 12.
the daughter of my father, though not of my mother, and she also is my wife.
Abraham therefore uttered no untruth, but only concealed part of the truth: He
did not say (says Augustine) she is not my wife, but he said, she is my
sister: he therefore concealed some part of the truth, but he delivered no
untruth: when be concealed that she was his wise, he professed she was his
sister.

Again (say they) the Midwiues are commended, Exodus 1. 17. 19. 20.
which that they might preserve the male-children of the Hebrews alive, told
an untruth. But there is no necessity that we should grant that they did lie,
for it is very likely that diverse of the Hebrew women having notice of the
kings edict, did not send for the Midwiues, but were without their help (being
strengthened by God, and perhaps helped by other women) delivered. But suppose
they had told a lie, yet we must distinguish betwixt their lie and their
preservation of the infants: For the preservation of the children was a work
of mercy, and of the fear of God; but their lie had been a work of infirmity
and of the fear of men. Neither did they tell a lie (if they lied) to save the
infants, but having preserved before the infants, they told a lie for their
own safety. Moral. 18. 6. 2.
So says Gregory, Parcendo, conatae sunt infantum vitam tegere; mentiendo,
suam: By sparing, they endeavored to preserve the life of the infants; by
lying, their own. They are therefore commended for saving the infants, they
are not commended for lying.

Thirdly, Ios. 2.
they object the example of Rahab, who is commended in the Scriptures, Heb. 11
3^.
because she received the spies, Iam. 2. 25.
hid and sent them away, and by a lie saved their life. Such examples as are
doubtful, charity binds us to interpret into the better part: I answer
therefore with Tremellius and Iunius, that there is no necessity we should
interpret her answer as a lie; for it may be, that others had lodged with her
being an Inne-keeper, of whom she made that answer: God so disposing by his
providence, that she might truly give notice of some of her guests, which were
gone, and might also in faith and charity conceal others. But if she had
lied, yet her lie is not commended, whereinto she fell by infirmity, (and no
marvel if she so fell, being a new convert from paganism) but that her work
of faith and love. Unto both these examples, Augustine answers thus: Contra
mendac. ad Consent.
Whereas it is written, that God dealt well with the midwiues of the Hebrews,
and with Rahab the harlot of Jericho, it was not because they lied, but because
they were merciful toward the men of God. Wherefore not their lying was
rewarded, but their good will, Benignitas meant is, non iniquit as mentientis.

Now, if they shall object other examples of the godly, I answer with
Augustine in the same place, When as examples of lying are produced out of the
holy scriptures, either they are no lies. but are so supposed to be, whiles
they are not understood (of which sort are some speeches which were
prophetically uttered, as that of Jacob to Isaac, which Augustine says was a
my sterie and not a lie) or if they be lies, they are not to be imitated,
because they cannot be just. And secondly, the rule of our conscience is not to
be drawn from the examples of men, but from the commandments of God. They
were men, and therefore they might fall, but these slips of theirs were in
their godly life, as blemishes in a beautiful face, which we are to behold as
evidences of humane frailty, that we may be made more wary and circumspect,
and not to imitate them as examples.

In the third place they urge certain cases, wherein if we shall hold it
unlawful to lie, they say it is a hard doctrine, and which cannot be borne.
For first (say they) seeing the most men now adays are ready for every petty
commodity to lie; it were to great simplicity, if not folly, if to compass
great matters a man would refuse to lie: for this were the high way to beggary.

But what says Solomon? Pro. 23. 23.
Buy the truth, but sell it not. And our Savior Christ, Mar. 8. 36.
What will it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world and loose his
own soul? as the lying tongue casts away the soul. But these men are like to
profane Esau, who for a mess of pottage sold his birthright; saving that
they for matters of like value and less necessity do sell their inheritance in
heaven. Wherefore as Augustine truly says, De mencacio ad Consent.
No man can euince that it is lawful at any time to lie, unless he be able to
show, that an everlasting good may be obtained by a lie: But so much does every
one depart from eternity, as be discordeth from verity.

2. But say they, what if our own or our brothers life being endangered, might
be redeemed by a lie, shall it not be lawful in that case to lie? I answer
with Augustine, That death which foolish men do fear, who fear not to sin,
kills the body and not the soul: But the lying tongue slays the soul. It
is therefore most peruersly said, that the one ought spiritually to die, that
the other may corporally live. Seeing therefore by lying, eternal life is
lost, we may not lie to preserve any man's temporal life; no more than we would
think it our duty, if by our witchcraft, theft, adultery, we could save a man's
life, to play the witches, thieves, or adulterers, to that end. Nay rather
according to that counsel of the wise man, Eccles. 4. 33.
We are to strive for the truth unto death.

3. But suppose, say they, that if thou will lie thou may save thy chastity,
if thou will not lie thou shall be forced to fornication, or some other sin
which is more grievous than lying; must we not of two evils choose the less?
This case of compensatiue sins, whereby a more grievous sin is as they
suppose redeemed by a less, does trouble many. But although of two evils of
punishment, the less is to be chosen, yet this holds not in sins: For if I
may not sin, that good may come thereof, then may I not commit one sin,
that another may be avoided. Neither as I suppose can they allege any case
wherein a man shall so be concluded betwixt two sins, as that he may not have
an issue without committing a new sin. What then will you say, ought one
rather to commit whordome than to make a lie? I answer first with Augustine, If
you ask whether he ought to do; I say, he ought to do neither. For if I shall
say he ought to do the one, I should allow that one: when as indeed I disallow
both. But if you ask, whither he ought to avoid, who cannot shun both, but
may escape the one? I answer, he ought to avoid his own sin rather than an
others, and rather the less, if it be his own, than the greater, if it be
another. For although manslaughter be a more grievous sin than theft: yet it
is worse to steal, than to be killed. Secondly, he thatlyeth that he may not
be forced to whordome, or some other sin; to avoid an uncertain sin, he
runs into a certain. Thirdly, neither may they be said to commit sin,
upon whom whordome is enforced against their will: for they do but receive
wrong, whereas the others which enforce them, do commit the sin. Neither is
whordome which is enforced upon another against their will, in respect of the
sufferer, a corruption, but a vexation: For the mind remaining vncorrupt the
body is not corrupted. Who therefore sees not whether a man ought rather to
avoid the permission and suffering of another man's sin, which he cannot
hinder; or the doing of his own.

4. But what if by my lie I may further the salvation of my brother, may I not
lie in that case, as for example, of an heretic to make a true Christian, and
to reclaim a heathen man from paganism to Christianity? Neither may we lie
in this case, Lib. cont. Mendacium ad Consent.
as Augustine proves at large: for when as the Priscillianists, who were a
pernicious sect of heretics, did so cloak their heresy that they could hardly
be discovered; diverse professors of the truth, faining themselves to be
Priscillianists, denied the true faith, that they might insinuat themselves
into the company of the Priscillianists, that so they might be discovered, and
reclaimed to the profession of the truth. This fact of theirs Augustine
condemns. Neither doubts he to affirm that the professors of the truth,
that they might discover the heretics, did lie more perniciously, or at lest
more dangerously, than the heretics did lie in covering their heresy from
them. And again, far be it from a Christian (says he) that he should deny
and blaspheme Christ, to the end that he might make another man a Christian, Et
percando quarrat inueniendum, quemsi tale doceat, perdat inuentum, And by
casting away himself seek to find another, whom being found be shall also (if
he teach him such doctrine) cast away. For if this once be granted, That it is
lawful to lie for thy neighbors good, yea, for his salvation; all faith will
be abolished: for thou shall not be able to say any thing wherein he may not
think that thou do lie for his good. And that it is not lawful to lie for
the salvation of men, hereby it is evident: Because we may not lie for Gods
cause. Job. 13. 7. 8. 1. Cor. 15. 15.
Job. 13, For whosoever will lie for God, he shall be found guilty of false
witness against God. And thus it appears that we may lie for no cause.

1. And that we may abide firm and resolute in this truth, let us first hold
this as a firm principle in Divinity; We may not do cuill that good may come
thereof. Romans 3. 8.
For those that say we may, their damnation is just. But to lie is to do
evil, as has been proved, therefore we may not lie that good may come
thereof. Yea but (say they) actions are to be esteemed according to their end:
Therefore to lie to a good end, is good. That is true in things which be in
their own nature indifferent, but lying is in it own nature evil and unjust.

2. We are to consider that we are not to lie for our own life or safety,
otherwise Peter had not offended when being in fear of his life, he lied,
saying that he knew not Christ: and therefore we are not to lie for the life or
safety of another.

3. Every lie is pernicious, if not to the neighbor, yet to the speaker. For
every lie is contrary to the virtue of truth, and therefore is a lie; contrary
to the law, and therefore (...), Gal. 3. 10.
a sin, or transgression of the law: and every transgression of the law
makes us subject to the curse of the law. Therefore the lie which in respect
of the neighbor is officious, in respect of the speaker is pernicious.
Therefore no lie is lawful.

What then will you say, is the truth always to be professed?

2. That is the other question: Whereunto I answer, That the truth is never to
be denied, that an untruth is never to be affirmed, and yet notwithstanding the
truth is not always to be professed. For the profession of the truth is
sometimes necessary, sometimes free and in our own choice, sometimes
unseasonable. Necessary, when as the consideration of Gods glory, our
neighbors good, or our own duty, requires it at our hands: As first in causes
spiritual, when a man is called to an account of his faith and religion: for
then the Christian Apology and constant profession of the faith is necessary.
1. l. Pet. 3. 15.
Pet. 3. 15, Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you: For as with the heart we believe unto
righteousness, Romans 10. 10.
so with the mouth we confess unto salvation. He that confesses me (says
Christ) before men, Mat. 10. 32, 33.
him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven. But whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in
heaven.

In causes civil, as in the place of judgment, when as a man is lawfully
called as a witness to testify the truth: For then, as we are forbidden to
bear false witness, so are we commanded to bear witness to the truth.

The profession of the truth is unseasonable, when as there being no necessity
of uttering it in respect either of Gods glory, our neighbors good, or our own
duty, it is joined with our own or our neighbors danger or harm; for then the
truth may, yea must be concealed either in whole or in part.

It is free and in our own choice, when it is neither necessary, nor
unseasonable: for then we may either profess it or conceal it. And herein as
in all other, Christ's action must be our instruction: For when as he was
conuented before the Priests and Pharisees, whom he perceived to offend of
prepenced malice, he would answer nothing to their demands, lest he should
seem to cast holy things before dogs, Mat. 7. 6.
or pearls before swine, which would not only trample the truth under their
feet, but also persecute the professor thereof. Mat. 27. 11. 21, 1. Tim. 6. 13.
But before Pontius Pilat he is said to have witnessed a good confession: John
18. 36, 37.
For not only he confessed himself to be the King of the Jews, but also made
this profession, For this cause am I borne, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth, John 18. 20, 21.
etc. Again, when the Priests questioned with him concerning his doctrine, he
sends them to his hearers. For it was against all equity that he should
accuse himself. But when the high Priests adjured him that he should plainly
tell whether he was the son of God or not; then although the profession of
the truth were joined with manifest danger of his life, notwithstanding, seeing
it so nearly concerned the glory of God, the good of his followers, and the
conviction of his adversaries, Mat. 26. 63, 64.
he made a notable confession of the truth.

And that the truth sometimes may be concealed, it may be proved by the
authority of God himself: For when as the Lord appointed Samuel to go to
Bethlehem to anoint David king, Samuel desired to be informed how that might
safely be done; for if Saul should hear thereof, he would be sure to kill him.
The Lord therefore teaches him this godly policy: Thou shall take an heifer
with thee, 1. Sam. 16* 2.
and say, I am come to sacrifice, or as some read, to selebrate a feast to the
Lord. Whereas therefore Samuel was sent to Bethlehem for two causes, he was by
the commandment of God to conceal the more principal: which teaches us that
the simplicity of doves is to be tempered with the wisdom of servants. The
same is proved by the example of Abraham, Genesis 20. 12.
which himself does justify: for whereas Sara was not only his sister
(according to the Hebrew phrase) but also his wife; he professed the one, that
she was his sister; and concealed the other, that she was his wife: when as
therefore the profession of the truth not necessary, is joined with the damage
or danger, either of our selves or others, and so is unseasonable; howsoever,
we may neither deny the truth, nor utter an untruth: yet we may, or rather must
conceal the truth, either wholly or in part. As for example. An innocent man
who is persecuted for righteousness sake, is sought for by his persecutors
that he may be brought to punishment, commits himself to your fidelity and
safe custody: The persecutors come and demand of you where this party is:
What will you do in this case? If you tell where he is, you betray the
innocent: If you knowing where he is, shall say you cannot tell where he is; or
shall say he is where you think he is not, you shall lie. Will you offend in
lying against your own soul, or in treachery against the innocent? Forsooth
the circumstances are to be considered. If you plainly see that
notwithstanding whatsoever you shall say he cannot be concealed, it is all one
in respect of the innocent party, whether you conceal the truth or confess
it: For neither by confessing the truth shall you betray him, nor by concealing
it, save him. If it be doubtful whether by concealing the truth he may be
preserved or not, hide the truth so much as thou may, and by telling some
other truth as Ra^ab did, divert the fury of the persecutors another way. But
if the party be so hid that unless thou discover him he cannot be found, and
perhaps thou be asked concerning the very place where he is, whether he be
there or not: here, if you say nothing you betray him, if you say I cannot
tell, you lie. Therefore as Augustine faith, A man in such a case must say, I
know where he is, but I will never tell you: for which Christian humanity
whatsoever you shall constantly endure, Lib. cont. Mendacium
it is so far from being* worthy of blame, that it is to be commended. And here
unto belongs that memorable example recorded by Augustine in the same place,
of a certain Bishop, Firm^^s by name, but more firm (as he says) in
resolution: For when as messengers sent from a persecuting emperor, enquired
of him concerning a Christian (whom he had hid as secretly as he could) where
he was: he answered them, that neither could he lie, neither would he betray
the man: neither could they by any tortures make him to discover the party.
Whereupon they bring him to before the emperor, who admiring the constancy
and courage of the Bishop, was content for his sake to pardon the other.
Likewise in heathen writers the constancy of Zeno the Philosopher is highly
commended: Plut^rch. de gar^^ulitate.
who rather than he would be forced by any tortures to utter secrets against
his will, he did bite off his tongue and spit it in the tyrants face.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken of the three general notes: this
only remains, that we should apply them to our selves. Wherefore from this
proposition of the holy Ghost ( Those that walk uprightly, work
righteousness, embrace the truth, are such as shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven: and reciprocally those that shall inherit the kingdom of heaven are
such as walk uprightly, exercise justice, speak the truth in their hearts,)
let us consider what every man's conscience will assume: for if thy conscience
shall make this assumption, But I walk uprightly, work righteousness,
embrace the truth, though with great imperfection, yet with my true endeavor
and unfeigned purpose and desire of mine heart; then upon these premises will
follow this happy conclusion, Therefore thou are one of those that shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven. But on the other side, if this be the
assumption which thy conconscience makes, Thou playest the hypocrite before
God, and dealest deceitfully with men, thou live unjustly, and followest
after lies; upon these premises it will follow necessarily, That thou art not
such an one as shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. And therefore as thou
would hope to be saved, so repent of these sins, and embrace the contrary
virtues which are here set down as the proper notes of Gods children.

But let us come to the fourth note, which (as also the third whereof even now
I spoke) respects the tongue, and the same in part may be said of the eight.

Now whereas the holy Ghost among the ten notes of Gods children, takes two or
three from the tongue, it appears that great regard is to be had of the
tongue. For howsoever many make but light account of their words, which are
(they say) but wind; notwithstanding, the holy Ghost affirms, that death and
life are in the power of the tongue, and as men love to use it, so shall they
eat the fruit thereof. And Christ our Savior after he had said, Prou. 18, 2^.
that men are to give an account of their idle words, he adjoyneth this reason,
Mat. 12* 34.
for by thy words, says he, thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. Wherefore let us learn to govern our tongue, otherwise we
shall be convicted by three notes out of this Psalm, that we neither are sound
members of the Church militant, nor shall be inheritors of glory in the Church
triumphant; but rather shall show our profession of religion (though otherwise
never so glorious) to be but vain. For as James says, If any man among you
seems religious, Iam. 1. 26.
and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart; that man's
religion is vain.

Moreover betwixt the third note and this fourth, there is great assinitie. For
thereby are signified two duties of the tongue which may not be severed, the
contrary affirmative being understood under this negative, namely that the
speech of the upright man concerning his neighbor is full of charity,
whereby* The is so far from defaming him by uncharitable slanders, as that
he shows himself greatly to tender his good name. For in all our speech
concerning our neighbor, these two things are required, That our talk be the
speech of verity, and of charity: 1. Cor. 13. 6.
For charity rejoices in the truth: and truth must be spoken in charity, Ephesians.
4. 15.
as the Apostle says, (...), speaking the truth in love. Neither suffices a
true speech unless it proceed from charity, nor a charitable speechvnlesse it
be joined with verity. Truth without charity is malicious, and charity
without truth is a liar.

But let us come to the words themselves; He that slandereth not with his
tongue. The Hebrew word (...) signifies to play the epsy, and by a metaphor,
to backbite or slander: For backbiters and whisperers after the manner of
espies, go up and down dissembling their malice, that they may epsy the
faults and defects of others, whereof they may make a malicious relation to
such as will give ear to their slanders. So that backbiting is a malicious
defamation of a man behind his back.

Now that I may speak of this matter according to the scope of the holy ghost
in this place, I am to show, first, that those which be heirs apparent of the
kingdom of heaven, neither are nor should be backbiters; and secondly, that all
sorts of men besides them, do slander with their tongues. For so shall it
appear, that this is a proper note of the sons and heirs of God, agreeing
to them all, and to them alone.

And that the citisen of heaven does and ought to abhor from backbiting, the
horrible wickedness of this sin does euince. For first Leuit. 19, where it
is straightly forbidden, Leuit. 19. 16.
the talebearer is compared to a peddler, Thou shall not walk about with tales
and slanders, as it were a peddler among thy people; so much (...) signifies.
For as the peddler having bought his wares of some one or more, goes about from
house to house, that he may sell the same to others: so backbiters and
tale-bearers gathering together tales and rumors, as it were wares, go from
one to another, that such wares as either themselves have invented, or have
gathered by report, they may utter in the absence of their neighbor to his
infamy and disgrace. Psalm. 50. 20.
Likewise Psalm. 50. it is condemned as a notable crime, which God will not
suffer to go unpunished, Ezec. Ezec. 22. 9.
22. it is reckoned among the abominations of I erusalem, for which
destruction is denounced against it: and Romans 1. Romans 1. 29. 30.
among the crimes of the heathen, given over unto a reprobat sense, this is
placed, That they were whisperers and backbiters.

But the detestable abomination of this sin may more clearly appear, if we
consider either the causes from whence it springs, or the fruits and effects
which it brings forth. It arises of envy and hatred: for therefore
backbiters slander other, either because they hate them as their enemies, or
envy them as their betters. In both respects, backbiting is numbered among the
murders of the tongue: and for that cause, the backbiters tongue (which being
inflamed with rancour and envy, is worthily said to be set on fire from hell)
is sitly compared to a bow, ^am. 3.
a sword, a razour, an aspe, and other deadly things. Ier. 18. 18.
For those which smite with their tongue, they bend their tongue as it were a
bow of lies: Ier. 9. 3.
out of which they shoot bitter words as it were arrows: Psalm. 120. 3.
wherewith they shoot at the upright in secret, Psalm. 64. 3, 4.
they shoot at him suddenly and fear not. They whet their tongue like a sword,
Psalm. 64. 3.
and pronounce words like a piercing sword, Pro. 12. 18.
yea their words are swords. Their tongue is like to a sharp razour. Psalm. 55.
21.
They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent, Psalm. 52. 2.
venenum ptyados, the poison of the spitting aspe (which sends his poison
Psalm. 140. 3.
far off) is under their lips. Iam. 3. 6. 8.
In a word, their tongue is a fire, a world of wickedness, an unruly evil,
full of deadly poison.

But consider withal the fruits of backbiting: for the backbiter is not a
single manslayer, but he kills three men as it were with one stroke. For
which cause every false witness, and consequently every backbiter, who is one
of the worst kinds of false witnesses, is said to be an arrow, Pro. 25. 18.
an hammer, and a sword: an arrow, in respect of him that is absent, whom he
wounds a far off, in his good name, in his goods, in his friends, and
sometimes in his life. Eccles. 7. 3.
Of his good name he always spoyleth his neighbor, which is more precious
than ointments, Pro. 22. 1.
and more to be desired than great riches; and therefore does offer him greater
wrong, than if he had robbed him of his goods. Son of Syrach ^. 15.
Wherefore as that wise man exhorts, Be not counted a talebearer, and lie
not in wait with thy tongue; for shame does follow a thief, but evil
condemnation is upon him that is double-tongued. Again, that which is stolen,
may be restored again; but the blot of infamy can never be wiped away:
against the biting of the sycophant (which is backbiting) there is no remedy:
thieves also may be prevented or shunned, but who is able to escape or avoid
the slander of the talebearer? But the backbiter does not only spoil his
neighbor of his good name, but sometimes also of his goods, as we see in the
example of Ziba, who by slaundering his master Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 16. 4.
obtained his goods. Again, the backbiter or talebearer increases hatred
among enemies, and sows discord among friends. For as Solomon says, Without
wood the fire is quenched, Pro. 26. 20.
and without a talebearer strife cease. Pro. 16. 28.
And again, a froward person sows strife, and a talebearer makes division
among princes: and therefore the backbiter does not only rob a man of his
goods and good name, but sometimes also of his friends. But to bereave a man of
his friends, is a greater wrong than easily can be imagined: Pro. 18. 24.
for a friend oftentimes is nearer and dearer than a brother. Mat. 5. 9.
Now if they be happy which are peacemakers, then cursed are they that sow
hatred among friends: for this is that seventh thing which the Lord does
especially abhor. Prou. 6. 19.
And as the peacemakers are the sons of God, so are tale-bearers the
children of the devil, whose conditions in slaundering and sowing discord,
they do resemble. Lastly, the slaunderer sometimes bereaueth his neighbor of
his life, Ezec. 22. 9.
and carries tales to shed blood: 1. Sam. 22. 9. 11
as appears in Doeg, of whom David complains, Psalm. 52. 2. 4.
Psalm. 52. that his tongue did cut like a sharp razour, and that he loved all
words that might destroy. For howsoever the tale-bearers words do oftentimes
come out with sighs, as though he pitied the party whom he does backbite, Pro.
26. 22.
yet they descend into the bowels, and pierce the heart, and therefore the
backbiters tongue, as you have heard, is compared to most deadly things.

2. To him that receives the slander, the backbiter is an hammer to knock
him on the head, Eius enim aurem dum inficit animam interficit: for whiles he
infecteth his ear, he destroys his soul, casting thereinto the seeds of
suspicion, hatred, 1. Sam. 22. 11.
and contempt, as 1. Sam. 22. which afterward bring forth most damnable fruits.

3. Lastly, to himself he is a sword, destroying his own soul, by
committing that sin which is most odious unto God: Leu^t. 19. 14
for he which slaundereth his neighbor behind his back, he commits the
same offense with him that raileth on the deaf, and is like to him that
smites his neighbor secretly; Deuteronomy. 27. 24.
which whosoever does, he is accursed. And therefore no marvel, though this be
said to be that seventh sin which God does abhor; Prou. 6. 19.
for there is no sin which makes a man so like the devil, as this does: for
from slaundering and backbiting he has his name (...), 2 Timothy, 3. 3.
which is a common name to him with all slaunderers. Tit. 2. 3.
But as the Lord does greatly detest backbiting, so does he grievously punish
it; Psalm. 50. 20, 21.
and not only them, but also the places that harbor them; Psalm. 52. 5.
and not only in this life, Ezec. 22. 9.
but in the life to come: for if raylers shall not inherit the kingdom of God,
1. Cor. 6. 10.
much less shall slaunderers. And therefore it is evident, that this vice (I
speak of the habit or custom of backbiting, for in many things we sin all;
and he is a very perfect man that never offends in his tongue) is not
incident unto a citisen of heaven. Iam. 3. 2.
This note therefore agrees to all them that shall inherit the kingdom of
God. It remains therefore, that I should show how it agrees to them alone:
for backbiting is so common a vice, that it is naturally in all men: for unto
all does the Apostle apply those testimonies, Romans 3. 12, 13.
They have all gone out of the way, there is none that does good, no not one,
their throat is an open sepulcher, the poison of aspes is under their lips. And
therefore none are freed from it, but those which are regenerate: neither is
this vice seen alone in them that are profane and openly wicked, but also in
them who would seem to be religious. For those which would seem religious,
and yet be not so, these for the most part place the top of their religion, in
inueighing against the faults of others, that is to say, in backbiting: as
though other men's want of religion would prove them to be religious. But this
custom argues him that uses it, to be an hypocrit and a vile person. For as
James says, Iam. ^ 25.
If any man would seem to be religious, and does not refrain his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, that man's religion is vain. And it is truly said of
Hierome, It is the property of vile persons to make others vile: and those
which cannot be commended by their own desert, do seek to be commended in
comparison of others. Wherefore as we desire to be accounted heirs of heaven,
so let us learn to keep our tongues form backbiting; and in tender care of
our brothers credit, to cover his offenses, especially such as savor of
infirmity, as Sem and Iaphet once did cover the nakedness of their father:
Pron. 10. 1^.
For as hatred (which often bursteth forth into slaundering and backbiting)
raises contention, 1. Pet. 4. 8.
so charity covers the multitude of offenses.

What then, will you say, are the offenses of our neighbor so to be buried, as
that it is not lawful for a man to mention them?

As touching the vices of others, this is the duty of every honest man: Gal. 6.
1.
First in presence. If a brother be overtaken with some less offense, we are
to admonish him in the spirit of meekness: if he offend more grievously, we
are to freely to reprove him, Leu. 19. 17.
and not to suffer sin to rest upon him. De interiori domo cap. 42.
Wherefore as Bernard says, If thou will rebuke an offender, reprove him to
his face, and bite him not behind his back: Prou. 27. 5* 6.
For open rebuke is better than secret love. The wounds of a lover (that is to
say, even his sharpest reprofes) are faithful, but the kisses of an enemy are
to be prayed against. Psalm. 141. 5.
And David to the like purpose, Let the righteous (says he) smite me, and I
will esteem it a benefit, let him reprove me and it shall be a precious oil
that shall not break mine head. Wherefore we are in this behalf to follow the
direction of our Savior Christ: Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.
If thy brother offend against thee (that is, in thy sight, for an offense
committed before thee, is a scandale unto thee) go and reprove him between
thee and him alone: If he shall harken unto thee, thou have won thy brother:
But if he shall not harken unto thee, take unto thee one or two, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And if he will
not vouchsafe to hear them, tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse to hear
the Church also, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. And
this is the course which we must take with him that is a brother.

But if he be a son of Beli^l, or one that is openly profane, such as the
Scriptures calls a scorner, who makes a scoff of all religion; with such
when they offend before us, we are to take another course: For although our
hearts ought to be grieved and vexed at the wickedness of profane persons, 2.
Pet. 2. 7. 8.
as Lots was among the Sodomits; though we ought to mourn for the sins of
our neighbors and countrymen, Ezec. 9. 4. 6.
as those who were marked in the forehead, that they might escape the common
destruction; Psalm. 119. 158.
though it ought to be an irksome thing unto us, as it was to David, to fee
the transgressors which keep not the word of God; finally though with Dauid^
we ought to weep rivers of waters, Psalm. 119. 136.
because men keep not Gods law: notwithstanding, private admonition or
brotherly reprofe is not to be used to wards desperate sinners, or profane
ruffians. Mat. 7. 6.
For holy things, as our Savior Christ advises, are not to be cast before
dogs, neither is precious pearl of brotherly admonition to be thrown before
swine: for they will not only trample it under their feet, but also turn upon
thee, to offer thee violence or disgrace. And to the same purpose is the advice
of Solomon. Prou. 9, Prou. 9. 7, 8, 9.
He that reproves a scorner, purchases to himself shame, and he that
rebukes the wicked gets himself reproach. Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate
thee, but rebuke a wise man and he will love thee. Give admonition to the wise,
and he will be the wiser; teach a righteous man and he will increase in
learning. And such ought to be our behavior in presence of him that offends.

As for those which be absent, we are not, behind our neighbors back, Prou.
10. 18.
to publish their shame: For he that utters infamy is a fool. The secret
faults of our neighbors, especially such as are committed of infirmity, we
are to conceal and cover* 1. Pet. 4. 8.
For love covers the multitude of sins. Neither are we to utter the rest,
unless we be urged thereunto by some necessity, which may concern either thy
neighbor or thy self. Thy neighbor I say, either to whom, or of whom thou
speak: and for him of whom thou speak, it may be necessary that his
sins, as it were his diseases, which by private admonition could not be cured,
should be declared unto a superior, that has authority or government over
him, as it were his Physician to cure him. But herein we must be careful that
this delation or acquainting of the superior with the faults of the inferior,
Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.
do follow upon our private admonition, if conveniently it could be used, and
proceed from our love toward the party whose good we therein do seek. Genesis
37. 2.
Thus Joseph told the faults of his brethren to Jacob their father; Thus they
of the household of Chloe notified the vices of the Corinthians to Paul. 1. Cor.
1. ^1.
Now to the party to who^ thou speak, it may be necessary that he should be
premonished of another ma^s faults, when there is danger that either the
injury thereof will redound to his loss, or the contagion of them will infect
him. When the injury is feared, we may say to our neighbor, Take heed of such
a man, for he intends such a mischief toward you. Act. 23. 16.
Thus Paul's sisters son certified him how certain Jews lay in wait for
him. Thus Iohanan with other captains, premonished Gedaliah of the slaughter
intended against him by Isma^l. Ier. 40. 14.
When infection is feared (as nothing is more infectious than the company of
the wicked) we may say, Take heed you enter not into familiar acquaintance with
such a man for he is given to drunkenness, to whordome, to swearing, etc. or
he is in the number of such sinners, with whom familiar acquaintance is not to
be entertained. 1. 1. Cor. 5. 11.
Cor. 5. 11.

For thy self it may be necessary to declare another man's fault, when thou
may not conceal it, unless thou will be guilty of the same offense, as in
the matter of treason, and sometimes of other crimes. And this is that which
the son of Syrach advises in this behalf, Eccles. 19. 8.
Declare not other men's manners, neither to friend nor foe. And if the sin
appertain not unto thee, that is, if thou shall not by thy silence be
enwrapped in the guilt thereof, reveal it not: But if upon no necessity thou
shall utter the offenses of thy neighbor which is absent, thou playest the
part of a slanderer, yea of the devil. And how soever this vice of backbiting
and slandering be a very grievous fault, as has been showed: yet there is no
sin more common, none more usual, none less regarded; so common, that it is
in every bodies mouth almost, even of those that would seem religious; so
usual, that there is no feast, no meeting, no communication almost among me^,
which is not full of rumors and ill reports of other men; whiles some of hatred
defame others, others of envy detract from them, others of self-love desire
themselves preferred before them. And so ordinary a fault it is among me^,
that most men when by ill speaking they defame and disgrace their neighbor,
they do not perceive themselves to offend. But if we be Gods children, how
comes it to pass that we are (...), that is, devils, and carry the devil
about us, as a slandering and lying spirit in our mouths?

Yea, Objection. 1.
but so long as I speak the truth of my neighbor (says one) I am not to be
blamed. Answer. 1. Yea, but few tale-bearers or backbiters are able to say so
much of themselves truly, whose manner is either to invent tales of themselves,
or else to such reports as they have heard, to add of their own. 2. Howsoever
in show of words talebearers sometimes do seem to speak the truth, yet in
respect of their purpose and intent (which is, that their neighbor may seem
worse by their report than indeed he is) they are to be accounted liars and
slaunderers. It was true which Doeg reported to Saul concerning David and
Abimelech the priest: 1. Sam. 22. 9, 10
but because by his narration he would have Saul to gather that Abimelech had
conspired with David against him, 1. Sam. 21. 6* 9.
he is condemned of falsehood and lying. Psalm. 52. 3. But suppose the evil
report which thou vtterest concerning thy brother, Psalm. 52. 2, 3, 4.
be true, yet if it proceed from hatred of his person, thou art a backbiter and
slaunderer: For even as he is a murderer that kills a malefactor without
judgment, without calling; so he is a slaunderer, who upon no necessity
diffameth his brother, though he deserve so to be spoken of.

2. Yea but I (says another) in reporting the faults of my neighbor, have
regard to his credit: for I tell them to my friend, with this caution, that he
shall tell no body.

Indeed so do backbiters use to say: I have a secret to tell you, but you must
keep it to your self. But whether should I say is greater, your malice, or
your folly? that which you would have concealed, your self do utter. For if
you would have it concealed indeed, why do you not trust your own tongue
rather than another man's? or how can you require that of another, which you
cannot obtain from your self?

3. Yea, but he is my friend, and he will keep it secret. So has he friends,
and they also have friends, by whom the ill report or slander may be spread
far and near. Follow therefore the advice of Jesus the son of Syrach,
Declare not other men's manners, Eccles. 19* 8, 10, 11. 12.
neither to friend nor foe, and if it be not sin to thee, reue^le it not. If
thou have heard a word against thy neighbor, let it dic with thee, and be sure
it will not burst thee. A fool trauaileth when he has heard a thing, as a
woman which is about to bring forth a child: as an arrow that sticks in ones
thigh, so is a word in a fools heart, that is, it must out.

4. Yea, but I do so report my neighbors fault, as that it may appear I am
sorry for him. Or rather (say I) that thou may appear to be an hypocrite,
such as Bernard describes: Sermon. in Ca^. 24
You shall see them sometimes (says he) to send deep sighs before a
slander: and so with a kind of gravity, and slownesse of speech, with a sad
look, and dejected countenance, and doleful voice, the slander is uttered,
being so much the more credible, as to them that hear it, it seems to be
uttered with an unwilling heart, and with the affection of him that condoleth,
rather than of one that is maliciously affected. I am very sorry for him (says
one) because I love him, but I could never reclaim him from this fault. And
another, I had (says he) certain notice of this matter, but it should never
have been blazed abroad for me; but seeing the matter is made known by others,
I cannot deny the truth, with grief I speak it, but so^t is. And then be
adds: it is great pity, the man has good parts, and otherwise he is well
qualified, but in this matter (to say the truth) he cannot be excused. This is
that which Solomon says, Pro. 18. 8. and 26. 22.
Prou. 18, The words of a talebearer are like the words of them that are
wounded (that is, they be dolefully uttered) but they go dowue into the bowels
of the belly, that is, they inflict, though hidden, yet deadly and incurable
wounds.

By this which has been said, it appears what is the duty of every good
Christian, namely, to admonish or reprove our brother (if need be) to his
face; but behind his back to say nothing of him but good, unless we be
compelled thereto by necessity: and that to this end, either that his
neighbor of whom he speaks may be cured from the corruption of the sin;
or he to whom he speaks, may be freed either from the injury or from the
contagion of the sin; or he who speaks, may be preserved from the guilt of
the sin, which by silence he should incur. This Christian duty is duly to
be practiced of us all who would be accounted the sons and heirs of God: and
with so much the greater diligence and care we are to eschew the foul vice of
backbiting and slaundering, as it is more common in use, and more hard to be
left.

And to this purpose there are some things to be considered of us, some things
to be done. Consider, first the grieuousnesse of this fault: for every
slaunderer is a manslayer, striking his brother in secret, and wounding him as
it were behind his back; yea, as I said before, killing three men with one
stroke: he is a serpent which biteth secretly: a devil, deprauing also such
things as are well done. Consider, that by backbiting thou make thy self
guilty of the breach of two commandments, to wit, the fixed and the ninth.
Consider, that in other sins men communicate with beasts, but in this, with
the devil himself. Consider, that all thy slanders are registered in the
book of Gods providence; and howsoever the Lord seems for a time not to
regard them, yet he will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee.
Consider, how much thou would be abashed, if thy neighbor whom thou
backbitest, should take thee with the manner, and t^nquam lupus in fabula,
Psalm. 50. 21.
hear thy tale: how much more ought thou to be ashamed, seeing God himself
does hear thy slanders? Consider, when thou art about to speak of thy
neighbors faults, with what mind thou speak of them: for if of hatred, of
envy, of selfeloue, if to diffame him, or by disgracing him to grace thy
self; bid Satan auaunt, who seeks to be a lying and slanderous spirit in
thy mouth. Lastly consider, that of idle words an account is to be made, how
much more of malicious and slanderous words?

There are three things also to be put in practice, that we may avoid this
sin. First, we must fly curiosity, whereby men use to pry busily into
other men's behavior, and securely neglect their own: So does Plutarch not
unfitly define curiosity, De curio^it
(...), a desire to be acquainted with other men's evils. For there are many
curious persons and busy bodies, Plutarch de curiositate.
who with Lamia or the witch in the fable put on their eyes when they go
abroad, but lay them aside when they come home. Such kind of persons Peter by
an elegant name calls (...), superintendents over other men's affairs, 1.
Pet. 4. 15.
and as it were bishops over other men's dioces. And Paul likewise fitly
describes such kind of women, 1^ Tim. 5. 13.
which being idle, learn to go about from house to house: yea, not only
idle, but also prattlers and busy bodies, speaking things which are not
comely. We are indeed to observe one another, Heb. 1^. ^4.
to provoke unto love and good works: but we are not like busy bodies, to pry
into the conversation of others, that espying their wants, we should censure
them, disgrace or diffame them. We may not be many masters to censure others:
Iam. 3. 4.
For in many things we offend all. Romans 2. 1.
Therefore thou are inexcusable, o man, whosoever thou ^rt that iudgest: for in
that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that iudgest,
do the same things. And ^hereunto belongs the exhortation of our Savior
Christ Mat. Mat. 7. 1, 2, etc.
7, Judge not, that you be not judged. For with what judgment you judge, you
shall be judged, and with what measure you meat, it shall be measured to you
again. And why see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and behold a
beam is in thine own eye? Hypocrit, first cast out the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brothers
eye.

The second thing therefore is, that we should be conversant in judging of our
selves, and should, as Plutarch says, turn our curiosity inward. For as
Bernard well says, De interiori Demo, cap. 42.
Woe be to that man who neglects to amend his own life, and cease not to
carpe at the life of others. If thou will be carping, r^tort thine own sins
upon thee: behold not other men's faults, but thine own. For if thou view thy
self well, thou would never detract from others. Defile not thy mouth with
another man's sin, neither backbite him that offends, but be sorry for him.
For backbiting is a grievous sin. Tom. 4. ho^il. 3. ad popul.
Chrysostom says, The devil brings men into this custom, That enquiring
into other men's lives, they should neglect their own: for he that makes busy
inquiry into the life of others, has no leisure to regard his own.

Thirdly, we are to imitate the example of David. Psalm. Psalm. 39. 1.
39. 1. I said (that is, I fully purposed and set down this resolution with my
self) I will observe my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep
my mouth as it were with a bridle. For if we let loose the reins to our untamed
tongue, we shall find it to be as James says, Iam. 3. 6.
a world of wickedness. And because it is a hard thing to tame our tongues,
which James calls an unruly evil, (...)
* we are with the same David to pray unto God in this behalf, Psalm. 141. 3.
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. For of
our selves we are not able to govern our tongues, Iam. 3. 7, 8.
as James says, For the whole nature of beasts, and of birds, and of creeping
things, and things of the sea, is and has been tamed of the nature of man: But
the tongue can no man tame. And hereunto belongs that story of Pambus
recorded in the tripartite history of the Church. Lib. 8* cap. 1.
For he being unlettered, went to a learned man to be taught a Psalm; and when
he had heard the first verse of the 39. Psalm, I said I will observe my ways,
that I offend not with my tongue: he desired his master to stay there, for that
was sufficient for one lesson. And six months after, being reproved by his
teacher, that he came not in all that while to take out a new lesson, he
answered, that as yet he had not learned that one verse. And being long after
demanded, whether as yet he had learned it, he said, That in 49 years he had
not so learned that lesson, that he was able to perform it. For as James
says, Iam. 3. 2.
If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the
body. And as he is perfect, so also blessed, as that wi^e man says, Eccles.
14. ^.
Blessed is the man who offends not with his mouth. It remains therefore,
that every one should apply this note to himself. For as those which find
themselves to be given to backbiting and s^aundering, mustrepent of this sin,
if ever they hope to rest in the mountain of Gods holiness; because as yet
they be not so qualified, as they are who shall inherit the kingdom of God,
whose property it is, not to slander with their tongue: so those who
professing religion, have learned to bridle their tongue, and in tender care of
their neighbors good name, do love to speak charitably of them, may by this
note among others gather assurance unto themselves, that they be the children
of God.

The fifth note is expressed in these words, That does none evil to his
neighbor. Where first we are to understand the meaning of the words. By
neighbor who is meant, all do not agree. The vulgar sort esteems no man
their neighbor, who is not vicinus, near them in dwelling. The Scribes and
Pharisees accounted no man their neighbor, who was not their friend: for so
were they wont to say, Thou shall love thy neighbor, Mat. 5. 43.
and hate thine enemy. But Christ our Savior extends the signification of
neighbor, to our enemies also: Mat. 5. 44.
and Luke10, being demanded by an expounder of the law, Luke 10* 37.
Who was his neighbor? he euinceth, That the Samaritane, though hated of the
Jews for his country sake, was that Jews neighbor who had fallen among
thieves; and consequently, that every Jew was to show himself a neighbor to
any Samaritane or stranger in the like case. And in the law it self the Lord
so expounds himself; Exodus 23. 4, 5.
for whom, in Exodus 23, he calls thine enemy, Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3.
the same in Deuteronomy. 22, where the same law is repeated, he calls thy brother.
Now neighbor and brother is used in the same sense in the Scripture, as Leuit.
Leuit. 19. 17.
19. 17. Thy neighbor therefore is not only he which is nigh unto thee in
place, or near in friendship, but also he who is near unto thee in nature, as
every man is partaking the same humane nature with thee, whether he be friend
or foe, thy countryman or stranger. For all men are brethren among themselves,
having one father, which is God, and one mother, which is the earth. All are
neighbors, Act 17. 26.
being near one unto another in nature, all made of one blood, Esaias 58. 7.
all one flesh. For even the poorest man that has not a clout to cover his
nakedness, he is thy flesh, that is, of the sameflesh with thee, and therefore
art to pity him, and not to hide thy self from him. By the word neighbor
therefore we understand any man whatsoever, every man being near unto us in
nature, and nearly joined to us by the common bond of humanity. For therefore
does the holy ghost under the names of neighbor and brother, in the Scriptures
signify any other man whatsoever, to teach all men so to be affected one to
another, as it becomes loving neighbors and brothers.

By Evil we are to understand any harm, injury, loss, or hinderance
whatsoever, done either to the soul of his neighbor, or to his body,
chastity, goods, or good name: for to the soul harm may be done, by
scandales in life or doctrine, that is to say, by evil examples, or erroneous
opinions: to the body, by violence; to the chastity, by fornication and
adultery; to the goods, by theft or robbery; to the good name, by slanders
and ill reports. So that in these words the holy ghost assigns to the citisen
of heaven, such innocence toward all men, that willingly he will do no harm
to any man, whether friend or foe, whether countryman of stranger, whereby
either his soul may be scandalized, his body hurt, his or her chastity
violated, his goods impaired, or his good name impeached. And further, under
this negative, the affirmative also is required in those which are and shall
be citisens of heaven, namely, That they do not only abstain from evil, but
also that they be willing and ready to do good to their neighbor, Mat. 5.
44, 45.
that is, not only to their friends and welwillers, but also to their enemies.

Thus have we the meaning of the words. Let us now come to the scope and
purpose of the Psalmist, that is, to show, that this innocence is a peculiar
note to the sons and heirs of God, as belonging to them all, and to them
alone: for it is the property of Gods children to be more ready to suffer
than to offer wrong. 1. Cor. 6, 7.
For even Socrates, though a heathen man, could say, That it is better (...),
to suffer injury, than to do wrong. For from offering evil to any, they are
restrained by these considerations: First as touching any other men whatsoever,
they call to mind and consider, that they were created according to the same
image of God; and consequently that they cannot be hurt, Genesis 9. 6.
but that the image of God also shall be violated. They consider that they are
their brethren, of the same nature, of the same blood, of the same flesh, which
affinity makes even beasts of the same kind to love one another: and
therefore that he which hurts or wrongeth another, offends against humane
nature, and violateth humanity it self. And therefore are lovingly and
courteously affected toward all men, not willingly doing any thing to others
which they would not that others should do to them in the like case.

And as concerning those which be of the household of faith (in which number
when they think of particulars they esteem all that profess the same faith
with them) to them they think themselves tied by a nearer bond of love: For
those they embrace as brothers; not only in respect of creation, but also in
respect of adoption, as brothers not only in nature, but also in Christ: them
they love and affect not only as neighbors who are near unto them in nature,
but also as those who are one with them in Christ, Gal. 3. 28.
as being fellow members of the same body whereof Christ is the head. And
therefore they easily perceive that no wrong can be offered to them, Act. 9. 4.
which does not redound to Christ himself: for what good or evil is done to
his members, Mat. 25. 40. 45.
Christ esteems it as done to himself.

Wherefore the children of God are so far from any course or custom of doing
ill to their neighbors, that on the contrary, their desire and endeavor is to
do good to all men, Gal. 6. 10.
but especially to those which be of the household of faith. For first as
touching the souls of their brethren, their desire is to live without offense,
Act. 24. 16.
and not to hinder the salvation of their brethren, either by provocation,
counsel, 1. Ioh. 2. 10.
or example: For he that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is
no scandale in him. Nay they desire to be so far from hindering the salvation
of others, as that they acknowledge it to be their duty, to further by all
good means the salvation of their brethren, and to win them to Christ: and to
that end observe one another, to stir them up to charity and good works.
Heb. 10. 24.
They instruct the ignorant, reclaim those that err, admonish those that are
backward and exhort them, 1. These. 5. 14.
reprove those that are fallen and restore them, comfort the weak minded go
before others in good example, and by all good means desire to edify them.
Neither are they hurtful to them in temporal matters, but labor as much as
in them lies, to preserve the life, the chastity, the goods, and good name of
their neighbor. Neither do they good only to them that deserve well at their
hands, but also to those that deserve ill, 1. Sam. 24. 18.
they requite good for evil, and strive (if it be possible) to overcome evil
with goodness. Romans 12. 21.
For howsoever the wicked deserve ill of them, yet they will not defile their
hands with doing ill, 1. Sam. 24. 14.
but with David they will say according to the ancient proverb: Let
wickedness proceed from the wicked, but my hand shall not be upon thee. For if
we be the true children of God, we will do as our Savior Christ exhorts,
Mat. 5. 44, 45.
Mat. 5, Love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate
us, and pray for them which hurt us and persecute us, resembling therein the
disposition of our heavenly father, who makes his sun to arise on the evil
and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust. This is the study
and endeavor of Gods children, howbeit sometimes they fail through infirmity,
contrary to their purpose.

But in the rest who are not Gods children, this innocence cannot be found:
for although all men almost are ready to allege, that they never did any man
hurt, as though it were a very easy thing for a man to contain his hands from
evil: (...).
yet as Basil says, This is a duty hard to be performed, and requires great
diligence, neither is it common to the reprobat, but peculiar to the children of
God: for as John says, The whole world (that is, the whole company of the
wicked) lies as it were buried in evil. 1. John. 5. 19.
And as Paul testifies, This is the common corruption of all that are not
regenerat by the spirit of God, not to do good but evil. Romans 3. 10. 12.
Romans 3, There is none righteous, no not one: all are gone out of the way, they
are become altogether unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one
etc.

And as in respect of Gods children, that proverb is verified, Homo homini
Deus, Man toward man resembles the goodness of God, so in respect of the
rest, that other is no less true, Homo homini lupus, Man is as a wolf to man:
For that we may descend to particulars; If any man receive an injury, who
either may or dares requite it, he will never lightly (unless he be the child
of God) suffer it to go unrevenged. For not to revenge the lest injury that
may be, it is with most men esteemed cowardice: For that which the children of
God think to be a glorious thing, namely to pass by an offense; that, the
rest account to be ignominious. Prou. 19. 11.
The understanding of a man makes him long-suffering, and it is his glory to
pass by an offense. Now the children of God abstain from revenging wrongs
(which the rest will never suffer to go unrevenged) for these causes: First,
because they acknowledge Gods singular providence in all things, and are
assured that nothing can happen to them which the Lord himself has not before
ordained. And therefore when wicked men do them any wrong, they acknowledge
them to be the instruments of God, which being evil he uses well, to their
either chastisement or trial: and therefore they will not with the dog
snarle at the staff, neglecting the smiter, but they will look up unto God,
and as Esaias speaks, Turn unto him that smites them. David when he was
reviled by Shemei, acknowledged Shemeis cursed tongue which was set on fire
from hell, 2. Sam. 16. 10.
to have been the Lords instrument to correct him: when Joseph's brethren feared
lest he would revenge the injury which they did unto him in selling him into
Egypt, Genesis 45. 5. 7, 8.
he acknowledges that God by their means had sent him thither for the
preservation of the Church.

Secondly, because they are endued with charity toward all men; and therefore
if it be good that the injury should be dissembled, they are content to cover
it and to bury it in the grave of oblivion: Prou. 10. 12.
For as hatred stirs up strife, so love covers the multitude of offenses.
But if it be not good either for their neighbor, or for themselves, or for the
common wealth, that the injury should be put up, then fly they to the
magistrate: for he is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that does
evil: Romans 13. 4.
or if the magistrate neglect his duty in this behalf, Ier. 51. 36.
then do they commit their cause to God, Luke. 18. 7. 8.
who has promised to revenge it.

Thirdly, because they know all private revenge to be unlawful and condemned in
the Scriptures, as Leuit. 19, Leuit. 19. 18.
Thou shall not avenge, nor retain a purpose of revenge against the children
of thy people: but shall love thy neighbor as thy self, I am the Lord. And
Romans 12, Deerly beloved avenge not your selves, but give place to the anger,
Romans 12. 19.
namely of God: For it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord. But especially Math. 5, Mat. 5. 38. 39.
For when as the Pharisees had wrested that law Talionis, of requiting like for
like (which the Magistrates were to observe in punishing the offenses of men
committed against their neighbor) unto private revenge, Christ opposes himself
against this corruption, Ye have heard that it has been said (says he) an eye
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek turn to him the other also.
Which words we are to understand (...), that is to say, comparatively, or
spoken by way of comparison. For Christ would have us to be so far from
desire of revenge, that he would have us ready rather to receive a second
injury, than to revenge the former. And hereunto appertains that admonition
of the Apostle. 1. These. 5. 15.
1. These. 5. See that none recompense evil for evil unto any man, but ever
follow that which is good, both toward your selves, and toward all men.

Fourthly, Psalm. 94. 1.
because they know that the Lord (who is the God of revenge) has threatened to
avenge those that revenge themselves: Ezec. 25. 12.
And well is it said of the son of Syrach, Eccles. 28. 1.
he that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance of the Lord, and he will surely
keep his sins. For as Christ himself says Mat. 6, Mat 6. 15.
If you do not forgive men their trespasses, Mat. 18. 35.
neither will your heavenly father forgive you your trespasses.

Now if this be the property of Gods children, not to requite evil for evil,
we may easily conceive in what number those Caualliers, and fool-hardie
fellows are to be reckoned, all whose courage and manhood consists in
offering and revenging injuries, who also upon every occasion are ready to
quarrel and fight. But let these men know, First, that all private revenge is
unlawful, and that if every private man might be his own caruer, the
magistrate should carry the sword in vain: Secondly, Romans 13. 4.
that all fighting (unless it be in lawful battle) is murder in the sight
of God: Thirdly, that he which takes the sword, viz. not delivered unto him by
warrant from God, (as it is to the magistrate, to the soldier in lawful
battle, Mat. 26. 52.
to the private man in case of present necessity) shall perish with the sword:
Fourthly, that it is a most fearful thing, either to kill, or to be killed (as
often it happens) in private fight: for he that kills is a murderer, who so
polluteth the land with blood as that it cannot be purged but by his own
blood. Not to speak of that which every man knows, that manslayers have
none inheritance in heaven, but shall be excluded out of the heavenly
Jerusalem, Apoc. 22. 15.
and shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone;
Apoc. 21. 8.
which is the second death: in the mean time who is able to utter what horror
of conscience usually accompanies those who are guilty of murder? Neither is
their case better who are slain in fighting a private quarrel: For if as the
tree falls, so it lies: how fearful may we think their estate to be after
death, who in thirsting after another man's blood do shed their own blood; and
in a desire to murder another, are murdered themselves.

Wherefore when we are stirred up to fighting or revenge, let us remember the
Apostles advice, Ephesians. 4, Ephesians. 4. 27.
Not to give place to the devil: for undoubtedly they are inspired with a
fatanicall spirit, who breath out revenge. Wherefore David when Abishai stirred
him up to revenge, 2. Sam. 19. 22.
Shemai answered, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that this
day you should be unto me (...), in stead of Satan.

But to return to my purpose. This is a common thing to all them that are not
citisens of heaven, that so often as either they can or dare, they are ready to
requite evil for evil: and very many proceed further, who not only do evil
to them that have deserved ill, but many times also either through hatred, or
hope of gain, do ill to those who are innocent, neither have deserved evil
at their hands. Yea many there are who render evil for good, and seek to
harm them of whom they have received good. Seeing then all other men, who be
not the sons and heirs of God, are so accustomed to evil doing, it cannot
be hoped that they should use to practice the affirmative in doing good: For
may we think that those who use to do evil, not only to them that deserve
ill, but also to the innocent, and those that deserve well, that they will be
ready to do good offices to them that deserve not, and to requite evil with
good? Or is it credible that those who are careless of their own salvation
should be careful for others, to win them to Christ? Nay, the greatest
number are affected as Cain was, who being demanded by the Lord concerning his
brother, asked if he were his brothers keeper. Yes verily, we are all appointed
keepers of God, Heb. 10. 24.
to observe one another, To stir vy one another to love, 1. Cor. 13. 5.
and to good works: for love seeks not her own things, but is also careful
for others. And those which be the children of God, are also members of one and
the same body, among whom is the communion of Saints. But others are so far
from promoting the salvation of their brethren, that by all means they seek
to hinder the same, whiles either by provocation, counsel, or example they
bring them into sin, which is the cutthroat of the soul, and so become
murderers not of men's bodies, but (which is more grievous) of men's souls.
Wherefore seeing this Innocence agrees to all the sons and heirs of God, and
only to them, it is of good right reckoned among their proper notes, not only
in this place, Psalm. 24. 4.
but elsewhere also in the scriptures, as Ps. 24, Where to the like question,
Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord, etc. the like answer is shaped,
He that has Innocent hands, and a pure heart, etc. And as the Psalmist in this
place affirms, that he which does none evil to his neighbor shall never be
removed, but shall rest in the holy mountain of God; Esaias. 56. 2.
so the Prophet Esaias pronounces that man blessed, who keeps his hand from
doing any evil.

It remains therefore that every one should apply this note to himself: for
howsoever all men almost will affirm that they never did harm to their
neighbor, yet it is to be feared lest this Innocence can be found but in a
few, especially of those who would seem more wise and politic than others:
for such is the general wickedness of these times, that none but fools are
counted Innocent. And therefore those which would be citisens of heaven, 1.
Cor. 3. 18.
they must be content to be esteemed fools in the world, that they may be wise
to God.

Now follows the sixth note, in these words, And receives not an evil report
against his neighbor. The word (...) signifies an opprobrious speech, or as
the Septuaginta translate, (...), a reuiling and slanderous speech, a sinister
or evil report tending to the infamy of our neighbor. The verb (...),
admits diverse significations. The first and principal is, to take up: and
so a slander may be taken up either in the mind, to think, or devise it, or
in the tongue to utter it, or in the ear to harken or to give ear to it: all
which Gods children are to avoid: For as touching the first, howsoever many men
think their wicked thoughts to be free, yet notwithstanding the Scriptures
teach us that they are repugnant to charity; 1. Cor. 13. 5.
for as the Apostle says, Charity thinks none evil: Prou. 24. 9.
that they are sins, for the wicked thought of a fool is sin: that they
are not only forbidden; for so the Prophet Zachary says, Zach. 8. 17.
Let none of you imagine evil in your heart against his neighbor; Genesis 6. 5.
and 8. 21.
but also punished, for the holy Ghost does note that the Lord destroyed the
world by the universal deluge, Because the thoughts of men's hearts were
continually evil: Prou. 15. 26.
that they are an abomination to the Lord: and consequently that we are to
bewail them, Act. 8. 22.
and crave pardon for them, Esaias. 55. 7.
and also to repent us of them, Let the unrighteous, says the Prophet, forsake
his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord: For therefore is repentance
called (...), because it is a changing of the mind. And to conclude, those that
will walk uprightly before God, they must labor to approve not only their
outward behavior, but also the secret thoughts of their minds, and affections
of their hearts, to him that tries and searches the hearts and r^ynes of men,
and especially looks to the heart. Neither are the children of God to take up
in their mouths, that is, to utter (which is a second signification of the
verb nasa) slanderous reports: Pro^. 12. 18.
for the tongue of the godly wise is healthful, being ready to heal the good
name of his neighbor, and not to wound it; whether before his face, by
railing, scorning, cursing; or behind his back, by whispering and slandering.
And thus some do read this place ( and utters not a reproach,) which
translation seems not to be so fit: because we may not think that the
Prophet in such brevity of speech, would reckon one and the same note twice;
for according to this reading, the fourth note should differ little or nothing
at all from this. Neither are the children of God to take up ill reports with
their ears, or to give ear unto them, or to receive them; for that is a third
signification of the word which the Chaldey paraphrase, and the Greek and
Latin translations do embrace, viz. to receive: for so the Septuagints (to
omit the rest) do read (...), and receives not an ill report against his
neighbors. To these we may add a fourth signification of the verb, which is
to bear or endure: according unto which, the meaning of the Prophet may be
this, that the child of God cannot brook a slanderer, neither can he endure to
hear his neighbor defamed. By neighbor (as was said before) we are to
understand, not only those who are near unto us in place (which most commonly
are called neighbors) or in friendship, but those who are near unto us in
nature (as all men are) whether they be removed from us, either in place, as
forreiners and strangers; or in affection, as foes. The meaning therefore of
the words is this, that he who shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, shall be
so far himself from backbiting his neighbor, or slandering him, as that
willingly he hears not the slanderous reports of talebearers, neither can he
endure that the good name of his neighbor (which is so dear unto him) should
be violated.

For surely the good man, to whom the glory of God is dear, and who also
tendereth either the fame or salvation of his neighbor, he takes no delight
in hearing the faults of his brethren. For by offenses Gods glory is obscured,
the salvation of our brethren hazarded, their good name impeached, and the
judgments of God provoked. Whosoever therefore takes pleasure in hearing of
the offenses of others, he also delights to hear those things whereby God is
dishonored, our brothers salvation hindered, their good name impaired, and the
judgments of God procured: which is scarcely incident to a godly man, whose
property it is rather to mourn for the dishonor offered to God, and to be
sorry for the infamy of his brother, and to pity his miserable condition, in
that by his sin he has exposed himself to the judgments of God, both in this
world and also in the world to come.

As for the rest who, being of this world belong not to the heavenly Jerusalem,
forasmuch as they are full of envy and self-love, they think the
commendation of others to be to their disparragement, and esteem the dispraise
of others as a praise to themselves, and therefore take pleasure to hear the
vices and offenses of others, their ears being like to cupping-glas^es, ready
to receive the worst things. And this is so common a vice, though few observe
it in themselves, that scarcely there is any meeting or conference of men,
wherein the vices of others are not both maliciously related, but willingly
heard, and so heard, that they may be reported again to others. Whereby it
appears, that this charitable disposition whereby a man so tendereth the
credit and good name of his neighbor, as that neither himself will defame
him, nor willingly hear the slanderous reports of others, is particular to
the children of God, and heirs of eternal life; and therefore not unworthily
reckoned among the notes which are proper to them.

Here therefore we are taught, if we would be accounted citisens of heaven, so
to tender the good name of our brethren, as that we will not willingly hear
the slanders of talebearers and backbiters. And forasmuch as this duty is of
so great moment and importance, as that the holy Ghost reckons it as one of
the ten marks of Gods children, let us briefly consider and weigh the
arguments whereby we may be stirred up to the practice thereof.

Consider therefore both the discommodities which follow upon the receiving of
ill reports, and also the commodities which accompany the repelling or
rejecting of slanders. For if thou have thine ears open to talebearers and
slaunderers, thou becommest accessarie to their sin, and guilty of the same
offense with them. Now a slaunderer, as I have showed heretofore, is a
manslayer, killing three men as it were with one stroke, a serpent biting in
secret, a devil. To this foul offense he makes himself accessarie, who
willingly receives tale-bearers, and hearkeneth to their slanders. For if
there were not a receiver of tales, (...)
there would not be a talebearer. For as in the crime of theft, he is
accessarie, which receives wittingly stolen goods: so in this crime of
backbiting, he is accessarie, who willingly receives the whisperers reports:
yea, is more guilty of his neighbors infamy, than the other is of fellonie.
A thief by himself may steal, and without a receiver may rob his neighbor of
his goods: but a talebearer or slaunderer cannot rob a man of his good name,
nor yet impair his credit, unless there be another to hear and to admit his
slanders: well may he show his own malice, but him that is absent, he cannot
hurt. De interiori do^o.
Wherefore Bernard doubts not to affirm, That tale-bearers and tale-hearers
are guilty alike. And again, De considerat. (...). 2. infine.
Whether is more damnable (says he) to be a teller or a receiver of tales and
ill reports, it is hard to say: For as the talebearer has the devil in his
tongue, so the tale-hearer has the devil in his ear.

But if you would use to stop your ears against tale-bearers, and give them
the repulse, either by a frowning countenance, or some sharp reproof, these
commodities would follow thereupon: first, you should preserve the good name of
your neighbor, which is perhaps as dear unto him, as his life: secondly, you
should keep your self clear from the guilt of this sin. Dum aurem inficit,
animam inter^^it. Bern.
For as I said before, the backbiter whiles he i^^^cteth the ear, he
destroieth the soul, casting therei^^ the seeds of suspicion, hatred,
contempt. Thirdly, if you shall so tender the credit of your neighbor, though
no friend to thee, as that you cannot with patient ears hear his good name
impeached; hereby you may gather, that you are the child of God, for as much as
this note of the son and heir of God agrees unto you. Lastly, you shall
cure the slaunderer himself of this noisome disease: (...).
for reproof is the cure of such. For as Chrysostom says, If tale-bearers
shall perceive, Hom. 3. ad popul. ^om. 4.
that we mislike them more than the parties whom they seek to diffame, they
will cease from this evil custom, and amend their fault; and commend us, Ian.
5. 20.
who have reclaimed them from that sin, as those who have saved them.

Wherefore beloved, let us learn to carry our selves wisely toward
tale-bearers, Ephesians. 5. 11.
that we do not communicate with their sins, but rather reprove them. Let us
either by countenance, or speech, or turning away, make it apparent to the
talebearer, that we mislike his course. Let us shut our ears to Sycophants,
and turn them away with a frowning countenance. For even as the North wind
drives away the rain (and is therefore called (...), as it were the clearer
of the sky; Pro. 25. 23.
) so (says Solomon) does an angry countenance the slandering tongue. A man
ought not therefore to smile upon the talebearer, but to give him an angry
look: for if with a pleasant countenance you shall give ear to the
talebearer, you shall encourage him to slander: but if you shall hear him
with some show of mislike, Hieronym.
he will learn (as one says) not willingly to speak that, which he shall
perceive is not willingly heard.

But we are not only by countenance, but also (if need be) by speech to put
the talebearer to silence. If therefore it shall happen (as often it happens)
that a talebearer speaks evil of a man for that which is good, you may
shape him this answer: This is a matter for which you ought to commend him;
whereas therefore you maliciously pervert that which is well done or said, you
play therein the part of the devil, and make your self subject to the
fearful curse of God, Esaias. 5, Esaias 5. 20.
Woe unto them that speak evil of good. If he speak evil for a matter that
is doubtful, you may reply to this effect; Herein you ought Christianly to
interpret his doing or saying: 1. Cor. 13. 5.
Charity is not suspicious, neither will suffer us easily to believe that
which is evil concerning our neighbor, but always expounds doubtful
things in the better part: But if it were evil as you say, yet what should
either he be the better to be backbited, or you for backbiting, or I for giving
ear to your words? If for an evil thing, but such as is secret: admonish him
to keep it to himself, and privately to deal with the party by way of
admonition or reproof: tell him, that the secret faults of our brethren are
not to be diuulged: and that charity covers the multitude of offenses. If for
a manifest offense, and yet but a small fault: tell him, that it is a slip of
humane infirmity, and that in many things we offend all, and happy is the man
that fails only in small things. If for some great offense, say, What will
it profit me to hear that another man is wicked? if he has any virtues, I
pray you tell them me, but his vices declare to himself; if he be such an one
as you speak of, he is to be pitied rather than scorned, and we are to behold
him as a glass of our weakness. Wherefore let him who thinks that he
stands, take heed least he fall: We are subject to the like faults, and it is
to be ascribed to the grace of God, if we do stand. If he be his enemy whom
he backbiteth, tell him* That ill will never speaks well and that a malicious
report proceeding from hatred, deserves no credit. For whom men do hate, of
them they do think ill and speak ill: for them they behold through their
own affection of hatred, as it were a colored glass, which makes them and
all that they do, to seem evil and odious unto them. If he be his friend,
tell him, that he deals uncharitably to speak ill of that party who has
deserved well of him. If he allege, that he says nothing but the truth, tell
him, that we must speak the truth in love: Ephesians. 4. 15.
and therefore it is not sufficient, that our speech be true, unless it be
charitable. If you plainly perceive his speech to be false, defend the
innocence of him that is absent, 1. Sam. 20. 32.
as Jonathan did the innocence of David, against his own father. If you may
be so bold with him, bid Satan auaunt, tell him, that he which falsely
slaundereth, is a devil, and a manslayer, who with one blow (as it were)
seeks to destroy three, etc. howsoever it is, let it appear, that thou art
not well pleased with tale-bearers, that thine ears do long to hear not the
dispraise but the commendation of thy neighbor: if he have any to commend,
that thy ears are open to his discourse of virtue: but if either he must needs
be speaking, or thou hearing of faults, turn your curiosity toward your own
offenses. For how can you be excused, if neglecting your own faults, you busily
pry into the vices of others.

But howsoever, all men are to avoid sycophants and tale-bearers, yet
magistrates especially are to take heed of them, and such as be in authority:
for by how much the greater their authority is, so much the more pernicious it
will prove, if they give ear to sycophants and slaunderers. Putiphar having
given credit to the false accusation of his wife, cast innocent Joseph into
prison: Saul having hearkened to their words, 1. Sam, 24. 10.
who said, Behold David seeks evil against thee: persecuted David. And
likewise he believing the malicious report of the sycophant Doeg, put to death
all the priests of the Lord which were at Nob. David himself giving too hasty
credit to the calumniation of the pickthanke Siba, 1. Sam. 22. 17.
disinherited Mephibosheth. 2. Sam. 16. 4.
Ahasuerosh having given ear to the devilish suggestion of wicked Haman,
Esther 3. 10.
sent forth an edict to destroy the whole nation of the Jews. Wherefore it
behooves princes especially, not only in countenance or words, but also with
the sword, or other real punishments to repress the talebearer and the
sycophant. For as one well says, Princeps qui delatores non castigat,
Suetonius.
irritat, A prince that does not correct slaunderers, he does provoke them.
And therefore notable is that profession of David, and worthy of all Christian
princes to be imitated, Psalm. 101. 5.
Him that privily slandereth his neighbor, will I destroy.

By this which has been said, it is manifest, that we are not to give ear
to slaunderers: notwithstanding, for better evidence I will add, that to
hearken willingly to tale-bearers, is a thing unlawful, hurtful, and
shameful: unlawful, because God has forbidden it, Exo. 23. 1, Exodus 23* 1.
Thou shall not receive a false report. Yea a heathen man could say, Thuci.
(...).
That it is no honest thing either for men to deliver slanderous reports one
to another, or for the hearers to receive them. And how hurtful it is, there
is evidence sufficient in our mother Eve, who because she gave ear to the
father of all liers and slaunderers, the devil, overthrew as much as in her
was, both her self and her whole posterity. It is also a thing of ill report,
because it is a sign of a wicked man. For as Solomon says, The wicked gives
heed to false lips, Pro. 17. 4.
and a liar hearkeneth to the naughty tongue. Whereas contrariwise, the
detestation of slanders and false reports, is a good sign of the child of
God, as the Prophet here shows.

But some man will say, Is it never lawful for a man to hear another report
the faults of his neighbor, being absent? I answer, that it is lawful, when
either it is profitable for him that is absent, or expedient for thee which
hear, or necessary for him that speaks. It is profitable for the party
absent, when his faults are intimated unto thee, having authority over him,
that he may be reclaimed. It is expedient for thee, when by the fault of him
that is absent, there is danger to thee either of injury or infection: For he
that is forewarned in such a case, is forearmed. Necessary for him which
speaks, when silence would make him accessarie to the offense concealed.
Otherwise of them that are absent, nothing is willingly either to be spoken or
heard, but that which is good.

And thus have we had in this verse three notes of the citisen of heaven, which
are so many branches of charity, to wit, a charitable tongue, a charitable
(...), and a charitable ear. All which every one is bound to apply to
himself, etc.

Now follows the seventh note, verse. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned, but he honors those that fear the Lord. Pagnin and others read
thus, Aben Ezra D. Kimhi.
Who despises himself in his own eyes, and abaseth himself. And true indeed
it is, that the children of God, howsoever they endeavor to lead an inoffensiue
course of life, notwithstanding they think very meanly of themselves: for the
more holy every man is, the greater sense he has of his own corruption; and
the more perfect he is, the more he feels and acknowledges his own
imperfection. But albeit this assertion be true, yet this exposition does not
fit this place. For the Prophet makes a plain opposition or Antithesis
between the contrary dispositions of Gods children, toward men of contrary
disposition: namely, that they reverence those who fear God, and contemn
those that despise the Lord. And so the words sound, Contemned in his sight is
the reprobate. So also the Chaldee paraphrast expounds, The vile person is
despised before him. And Hierome, The wicked man is despised in his eyes. The
Septuaginta, whom the vulgar Latin translation follows, (...), The wicked is
set at naught in his sight. And likewise R. Shalomoh, as Bucer reports,
understands the words thus, That those who are for their wickedness truly
contemptible, are despised of the citisens of heaven. Esaias 53. 3.
Neither does the participle (...) signify him that despises himself, Ierem.
22. 28.
but simply, despised, as may appear by other places of Scripture. Mala. 1. 7.
and 2* 9
Neither is the conjunction copulative in the Hebrew text. Dan. 11. 21.


This note therefore contains an opposition or Antithesis of the contrary
disposition in the child of God, toward men that are contrary betwixt
themselves. And thereby it is signified, that he without partiality or respect
of persons is so affected toward men, as he judges them to be affected
toward God, to wit, that he contemns those that contemn God, though they
seem honorable in the world: and contrariwise, that he honors those that
honor God, although they be contemned in the world. For the children of God*
labor (as their duty is) to conform their judgments to the judgment of
their heavenly father: and therefore they honor those whom God would have
honored, and despise those whom God would have despised. But God would have
those honored that honor him, and those that despise him, he would have
despised, as himself professes 1. Sam. 2, 1. Sam. 2. 30.
Those that honor me, shall be honored: but those that contemn me, shall be
contemned.

Now of this opposition there are two parts, which being such as are not to be
severed, do therefore belong to one and the same note. For whosoever does
truly and without respect of persons despise the wicked, because of their
wickedness, the same will also honor the godly for their godliness, and
contrariwise. But as these two branches are to be joined together; so also they
are generally to be understood: Otherwise they do not seem to be perpetual
notes of Gods children. For this is not a sufficient note of a good man, that
he contemns the wicked, unless also he reverence the godly. For whom a man
hates, them commonly he thinks to be wicked. And therefore if the contempt
of the wicked were a sufficient note of a godly man, then all that be haters of
their brethren, would challenge this title of godliness to themselves. But the
godly man does not only despise the wicked, but also he honors the godly.
Neither does he set at naught this or that wicked man, only from whom perhaps
he has received some wrong, or whose outward estate is contemptible in the
world: neither does he honor only this or that godly man, from whom perhaps he
has received some good turn, or whose outward estate is honorable in the
world; but generally he hates and contemns all those that be wicked for
their wickedness sake; and contrariwise he loves and reuerenceth all those
that be godly for their godliness sake: for either affection, if it be
sincere, must be general, and without respect of persons.

But howsoever these two branches are not in use and practice to be severed,
yet are we to entreat of them severally. And first of the former part: In whose
eyes a reprobate or wicked person is contemned. The Participle (...) signifies
reprobated, (...), as Ierem. 6, Ierem. 6. 30.
Reprobat silver are they called, for the Lord has reprobated them: the
Chaldee paraphrase expounds it vile; the Septuagints respecting the meaning
rather than the word it self, (...), that is, wicked, or one that lives
wickedly. For thereby they give us to understand, who they are that are to be
held for vile and reprobat persons, namely, the wicked: but not every one that
sins, is to be held for a wicked or vile person; but in whom sin reigns,
who commits sin with greediness, who is to every good work reprobat,
(...).
and given over to a reprobat sense: such kind of men, Tit. 1. 16.
though never so mighty or wealthy in the world, are notwithstanding vile
persons and contemptible. Romans 1. 28.
In which sense, Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 11, though the son of a mighty
king, who for his greatness was called Antiochus the great, Dan. 11. 21.
is called a vile person: for sin makes men vile; and so they seem in the
eyes of the godly. By eyes he means the eyes of the mind, the judices and
discouerers whereof are the eyes of the body: for in whose judgment or
estimation another man is contemptible, his contempt will show it self in the
eyes.

Now that this contempt of the wicked is a note of Gods children, it may
appear, because it agrees to them all, and to them alone: to them all,
because the Lord has placed betwixt the godly and the wicked, betwixt the seed
of the woman and the seed of the serpent, Genesis 3. 15.
perpetual emnitie: Prou. 29. 27.
insomuch that a wicked man is abomination to the just, and he that is upright
in his way, is abomination to the wicked, as Solomon says: For they are
citisens of contrary kingdoms, the one of the kingdom of light, the other of
the kingdom of darkness: they are soldiers warring in contrary camps, the
one in the camps of Michael, the other in the camps of the old dragon: they
are sons of contrary parents, the one the children of God, the other the
children of the devil. As therefore there is opposition betwixt light and
darkness, betwixt Michael and the dragon, betwixt God and Satan, so also
betwixt the godly and the wicked. Secondly, for as much as the wicked hating
and despising God, are hated and despised of him; therefore the godly (who are
the children of God) are in like sort affected toward them: Do not I hate
them O Lord (says David) that hate thee, Psa. 139. 21, 22
and am not I vexed with those that rise up against thee? yea I hate them with
the perfection of hatred, and esteem them as mine enemies. Such was the
affection of Mardocheus toward wicked Haman, Est. 3.
etc. And thirdly, seeing it had been better for the wicked that they never had
been borne, Mat. 26. 24.
as our Savior says concerning Judas: and seeing also, when they are to
depart out of this life, they would be glad to be returned to nothing, and at
the day of judgment shall wish, Luke 23. 30.
that the mountains would fall upon them, Apoc 6. 16.
that they might be hid from the lamb, and consequently in respect of their
sins are as vile as nothing, and as light as vanity; therefore vt homines
nihili, as men of no account (...), they are set at naught by the children of
God, as the Septuaginta and the Latin interpreter translate this place. But as
this general contempt of the wicked agrees to all Gods children, so also to
them alone. John 15. 19.
For the world does love his own, and those that are of the world do love
worldlings: and howsoever sometimes they are at variance among themselves, yet
will they readily combine themselves against the godly, Luke 23. 12.
as Herod and Pilat against Christ.

Hereby therefore it appears that the general contempt of the wicked is a
note of the citizen of heaven. But you will say; what if wicked men be
magistrates or governors, are we not to honor them? Surely as they be wicked
men who have altogether defaced the image of God, according to which they were
created in holiness and righteousness, they are to be contemned: but as they
are magistrates, bearing before us the image of Gods power and authority; honor
and obedience is due unto them in the Lord: for we are to obey evil
magistrates, though not unto evil. If therefore we would be esteemed the sons
and heirs of God, the wicked are to be vile in our sight. And if we are to
contemn and despise the wicked, then their company is to be avoided, and no
familiar acquaintaince or friendship is to be entertained with them: for such
is the hatred and contempt which the children of God have conceived against the
wicked, that they can scarcely look on them with patience. Elisha protests,
2. King 3. 1^.
that had it not been for Iehosaphat, he would not so much as have looked upon
I^horam the son of Achab, though a king: For as the holy Ghost here says, In
the eyes of the godly the wicked are contemned. Wherefore as when a man sees a
serpent or snake, his heart rises with in him: so in the child of God when he
sees a man whom he perceives to be one of the offspring of the old serpent,
there is a certain rising of the heart against him; so far is he from
entering into a league of amity with the wicked: For friendship and familiar
acquaintance is for the most part procured by likeness of manners, according to
the old proverb, Pares cum paribus facilime congregantur, Like will to like.
And great reason there is why the godly should shun the company and
familiartie of the wicked. First, because they mislike their manners and detest
their vices: David therefore professes, Psalm. 26. 4. 5.
that he had not haunted with vain persons, nor kept company with the
dissemblers, that he hated the assembly of the ^uill, and had not companied
with the wicked. Secondly, lest they should be infected with the contagion of
their sin: E^cles. 13. 1.
For he that touches pitch shall be defiled therewith, and he that is familiar
with the proud shall be like unto him: Prou. 13. 20.
so says Solomon, He that walks (that is conuerseth) with the wise, shall be
wise, but a companion of fools (that is to say of the wicked, for they are
Salomons fools) shall be afflicted, that is, as he becomes guilty of the
same sins with them, so shall he be partaker of their punishments. The same
is testified by the very heathen themselves: 1. Cor. 15.
Menander, whom the Apostle cites in a case not unlike, (...) (says he)
(...); Conuersing with the wicked, thy self also shall become wicked. And
another, (...)
(...). Theog^^s.

Of the good thou shat learn good things: but if thou be conversant with the
wicked, thou shall loose that understanding which thou have* A little leaven,
1. Cor. 5. 6.
says the Apostle, does leaven the whole lump. And as it is commonly said,
one rotten sheep is able to infect a whole flock: wherefore as we are
careful to avoid the presence of him that has the plague, or some other
contagious disease, so ought we much more to avoid the company of those who
are ouergrowne with a leprosy of sin: for no contagion of any bodily disease
does so easily infect the body, as the spiritual diseases of a friend or
companion does corrupt the soul. Thirdly, because by the company and presence
of the wicked, the godly are hindered from the duties of piety: wherefore
David, Depart from me Psalm. 119. 115.
(says he) ye wicked, that I may keep the commandments of my God. Fourthly,
that the sinners may be ashamed and so converted: For which cause the Apostle
advises us not to have our conversation with any, who being called a brother,
that is, a Christian, 1. Cor. 5. 11.
is a fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or
an extortioner, with such a one eat not, that is, have no private familiarity
with him: for although we are not to forsake their company in respect of
public communion either in the Church (for then should we also forsake the
assemblies of the Saints, Heb. 10. 25.
as the manner of some is) or in the commonwealth (for then should we be wanting
in our duty toward our country, and leave the managing of matters to the
wicked only) yet are we not privately to accompany with them, for the reasons
aforesaid.

Again, if it be the property of the godly to contemn the wicked, then does
he not in any wise flatter the wicked in his sin: For flattery, whether it
be for the flatterers profit, it is a base sin; or whether it be for the
harm of him that is flattered, it is a most odious sin. The former kind
(which more properly are called parasits) like dogs do fawn upon a man for
his meat: howsoever in the end like Acteons dogs they devour their master: the
latter are like Scorpions, which when they fawn upon a man will sting him with
their tail: the former are fitly resembled by the Iuie, which embraces the
oak to suck out his moisture: the latter, like to conycatchers when they
flatter their neighbor, Prou. 29. 5.
they spread a net for his steps: Diogenes.
wherefore the Cinicke Philosopher being demanded, of all beasts which was most
noisome? he answered, of wild and savage beasts, a tyrant; of tame beasts, a
flatterer. Neither was it unfitly said of another, That it is better for a man
to fall (...), Antisthenes.
for crows do prey upon the dead, but flatterers on the living. Those then
that are given to flattery, may easily discern how far they are from the
behavior of the godly: For as Solomon says, Prou. 28. 4.
They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but they that keep the law set
themselves against them. And again, He that says to the wicked (as flatterers
use to do) thou art righteous, Pro. 24. 24, 25.
him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him; but to them
that (in steed of flattering) rebuke him, shall be pleasure, and upon them
shall come the blessing of goodness.

Now follows the other part of the opposition concerning those that honor
God: But he honoreth those which fear the Lord. The godly by a Synechdoche he
calls such as fear God. For the sanctifying graces which are the several
branches of godliness, as faith, love, fear, etc. they are so linked together
as it were in a golden chain, that where any one of them is in truth, there
the rest be in some measure, and for that cause some one of them is sometimes
put for all. Seeing therefore the fear of God is a principal part of piety,
in which sense, Psalm. 111, Psalm. 111. 10.
it is called caput sapientiae, the head or chief point of wisdom, that is,
true godliness, it is no marvel though many times it be put for all religion,
as Deu. 6. and 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 12.
and be said. Eccles. 12, Eccles. 12. 13.
to be the whole duty of man which must teach us, that those which have no
fear of God, have no religion in them. Now he is said to fear God, who being
truly persuaded both of the infinite power of God, as also of his fatherly love
toward him in Christ, above all things fears to offend God, that is, he is
afraid of nothing so much as to displease God, whom he acknow^^dgeth to be a
gracious and merciful father to him in Christ. And whereas by sin God is
displeased, therefore he fears more to sin, and by sin to offend God,
than to displease all men, than to be deprived of all his goods, friends, and
commodities of this life, yea of life it self. Wherefore he that fears God
departs from evil: Prou. 8. 13.
yea the fear of the Lord is to hate evil, and is therefore said to be a
wel-spring of life, Prou. 14. 27.
to avoid the snares of death. Those therefore that fear the Lord, the
Scripture doubts not to call blessed, as Prou. 28, Prou. 28. 14.
Blessed is the man that fears always. And Psalm. 112. Psalm. 112. 1.
and 128, Psalm. 128. 1.
Blessed is the man, yea blessed is every one that fears the Lord. Now the
child of God being rightly informed out of the Scriptures* concerning the
estate and condition of the godly, he reuerenceth and honors those that
fear the Lord. And why? First, because he knows that howsoever they are
contemned and despised in the world, as the scum of the world, and ofscouring
of all things, 1. Cor. 4. 13.
notwithstanding they are happy and blessed, and that they are in the world as
gold among the dirt. Secondly, he loves and reuerenceth the godly, 1. Sam. 2.
30.
because he knows that God honoreth those that honor him, In oculi^ f^^re.
^ach. 2. 8.
and that according to the Latin phrase, he does bear them in his eyes,
insomuch that whosoever hurts them, they seem to hurt, as it were, the apple
of his eye. Thirdly, because he understands that those which fear God are
the sons and heirs of God, the brethren and fellow heirs with Christ, the
temples of the holy Ghost: yea fellow members with themselves of that body,
whereof Christ Jesus is the head, and therefore whosoever loves and honoreth
them, in them loves and honoreth Christ.

Hereby it appears that virtue and true godliness make men true noble and
honorable, as contrariwise sin and ungodliness make men base and contemptible:
and therefore all that are lovers of virtue and piety, they cannot but honor
those who are virtuous and godly. And as this agrees to all the godly, to
love, reverence, and honor those that fear God, and to perform all good
offices of brotherly love toward them; so it agrees to them alone. For the
world (that is the universal company of those who are not citisens of heaven)
loves only those who are of the world. As for the rest who are not of the
world, but are chosen out of the world, for that very cause the world does
hate them, as our Savior Christ does testify. John. 15. 19.
Seeing therefore this duty of honoring the godly is proper and peculiar to
the children of God, it is not unworthily made a note of the citizens of
heaven. For John also in his Epistle, wherein he sets down diverse notes
whereby men may discern themselves to be the children of God, he reckons
this as one of the principal, John. 3. 14.
We know (says he) that we are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren. And so Obadiah that he might approve himself to Elias as one
that feared God, 1. Kin. 18. 12, 13.
he alleges that favor and honor which he had vouchsafed to the Prophets
and servants of God in the time of Iezabels persecution. Neither is there any
more certain way to testify our love toward God, than by loving and honoring
the children of God: For our goodness cannot reach unto God, and therefore is
to be extended toward his Saints upon earth. Psalm. 16. 2, 3
Neither can it be that we should love our brother aright, unless we love God
much more. And therefore if we love our brethren as we ought, it is an evident
sign that we love God: for he that loves his brother aright, loves him for
Gods sake: and he that loves his brother for Gods sake, he cannot but love God
much more, according to the rule of reason, (...) For which any thing is, that
is much more.

But as I said before, we may have in this place a most certain note of a
citizen of heaven, if we shall join both the members of the opposition: For
whosoever despises the wicked, though honored in the world, because they
despise God, and are despised of him; and contrariwise honoreth the godly,
though despised in the world, because they honor God, and are honored of him;
and consequently contemns the wicked, because they are wicked, or for their
wickedness sake; and therefore honoreth the godly, because they are godly, or
for their godliness sake: he does evidently show himself not to be of the
world, but of God. A notable example of both we have in Elisha the Prophet, 2.
King. 3, For when Iehoram the king of Israel being in great distress for want
of water in that expedition against the Moabites, did therefore with Iehosaphat
the king of Judah, and the king of Edom come unto him to ask counsel of the
Lord; Elisha makes answer to Iehoram the king of Israel being the son of
Achab and Iesabel, an Idolater, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the
Prophets of thy father, and to the Prophets of thy mother: and when he had
entreated him not to say so, and had signified in what distress he and the
other two kings with their armies were: Elisha replieth, As the Lord of hosts
lives, in whose sight I stand, if it were not that I regard the presence of
Iehosaphat the king of Judah (who was indeed a godly king) I would not have
looked toward thee, nor have seen thee. But then is this note most evident,
when the wicked (whom the godly man contemns) abound in wealth and flourish
with honor, and contrariwise the godly (whom the good man honors) are poor
and (...), contemptible in the world. For this, as Basil truly says, is a
token of a noble mind, (...).
to despise the wicked though honorable in the world. And thereof also men have
another notable example in Moses the man of God, who judged the Israelites when
they were grievously oppressed in Egypt, to be more happy than all the
gallants in Pharaos court, who lived in all prosperity. Heb. 11. 24, 25.
And therefore by faith refused to be called the son of Pharao his daughter,
choosing rather to be afflicted together with the people of God, than to have
the temporary fruition of sin. And surely beloved, if a man have an eye to
the recompense of reward; as Moses had, who would not choose rather to be godly
Lazarus, Luke 16.
than ungodly Dives.

We see therefore, if we desire to be in the number of Gods children, how we
are to be affected toward other men, namely, that we love, reverence, and
honor the godly, though contemned in the world; and contrariwise, despise and
set at naught the wicked, though honored in the world. But this we cannot
do, unless we be thoroughly persuaded, that virtue and piety makes men
though in poor estate, truly noble and honorable: and contrariwise, that
sin and ungodliness makes men, though mighty in the world, vile and
contemptible. Neither can we indeed be of this persuasion, unless we ourselves
be lovers of virtue and godliness, and haters of sin and iniquity. From
hence also there does or may arise both notable terror to the wicked, and
singular comfort to the godly, terror to the wicked, because howsoever they
flourish in the world, notwithstanding they are despised of God and his
children, as men of none account: consolation to the godly, because howsoever
they are contemned and abused in the world, yet are they dear and precious to
God, and to all the sons and heirs of God. And thus much may suffice to have
spoken of the seventh note.

The eightfolloweth in these words: He that swears to his own hinderance,
and changes not. The Greek translation of the Septuagints, which the vulgar
Latin does follow, reads, he that swears to his neighbor, and deceives
him not: for it seems, the book which the seventy translated, Chald.
paraphr.
wanted pricks, and that therefore they did read (...) regna for (...) rang,
Hieronym.
the difference only being in the pricks. Aben Ezra etc.
Others translate the word l^harang, to afflict himself, expounding it of the
vows of fasting, whereby the body is afflicted, and the flesh subdued. But the
holy ghost seems not to speak of a vow made to God, but of an oath made to
man: neither when he speaks of afflicting the body, (...)
does he use that word harang, which signifies to do evil, Leuit. 23. 27.
29. 32.
but the phrase of afflicting the soul. And besides, this note is reckoned
among other duties of charity and righteousness toward our neighbor. Number.
30. 14.
The words therefore are to be understood of that faith, Psalm. 35. 13.
or fidelity which the godly man keeps in performing his oaths and
promises, Esaias. 58. 5.
although the performance of them be joined with his own loss. And in the
like answer returned to the like question, Psalm. 24. 4.
Psalm. 24, this note in the same sense is specified, Nor has not sworn
deceitfully, as those do which mean not to perform their oath. The meaning
therefore is, that such is the fidelity of a godly man in keeping his promise,
that if he promise any thing, especially under the religion of an oath, he will
be sure to perform it, though it be to his own hinderance.

Here therefore we are occasioned to speak both of the making and keeping of
oaths: and concerning the same to discuss these two questions: first, whether
it be the property of a godly man to swear, or not: and secondly, whether
having sworn, he be always bound to perform his oath, or not: For in respect
of both, there are extremities to be avoided on both sides. Some think a
Christian man may not swear at all, others make no conscience of swearing at
all. Some think, when they have once sworn, they are to perform their oath,
though never so wicked: others will keep their oaths, though never so honest,
no further than may stand with their own advantage.

Now for the rectifying of our judgment in this behalf, we are generally to
consider, what account is to be made of an oath. And first we are to show what
an oath is, (...). Arist.
and wherefore ordained. An oath is an attestation or calling upon God to be a
witness and judge in such things as cannot otherwise be demonstrated: and it
is of two sorts, assertorie and promissorie. An assertorie oath (so called,
because it has place in assertions) is a calling upon God, to be both our
witness, that we affirm the truth, and also our judge and auenger, if we lie.
A promissorie oath (so called, because it has place in promises) is a calling
upon God as a witness of our true purpose to perform, and as our surety for
performance, and as our judge or auenger, if either we be deceitful in
promising, or unfaithful in performing.

Now an oath was ordained to supply the want of other arguments, and the
insufficiency of humane testimonies, to the end, that a needful truth, which
otherwise could not be known, might by this means be acknowledged: for an
oath has place neither in matters manifest nor general, as where is question
of right; but in things doubtful and particular, where is question of facts,
either past or to come. Wherein when as they cannot by other certain and
necessary arguments be demonstrated, men fly to testimonies. And because
humane testimonies have little force in proving by themselves, therefore they
fly to oaths, wherein God is called upon as a witness of such matters as are
either affirmed concerning things past, or promised concerning things to come.
And so great religion there is of an oath among all men, that even by the law
of nations, that is held for certain and true, which is affirmed under the
religion of an oath, though otherwise it could not be proved. For this is
engraven in the hearts of all men, That there is a God, to whom all secrets are
known, who also is the patron of truth, and auenger of falsehood: and therefore
to call upon him as a witness and a judge in that which is not true, it is
supposed to be a greater sin than any man that is not a desparat A theist may
be thought to commit: For may it be thought that any man almost is of such
outrageous wickedness, as that he fears not to call upon God whom he knows
to be a defender of truth and revenger of falsehood, to bear witness with him
that he affirms the truth, and to execute vengeance on him if he speak an
untruth, when he knows himself to lie? For what were this but wilfully to
provoke the Lord, and as it were to dare him to execute his fierce indignation
upon him?

And hereby it appears, that an oath is an holy ordinance of God, serving
greatly for his glory, and for the profit and necessity of men. It is
glorious unto God: because when men fly to the name of the Lord as a strong
tower and sanctuary of truth, he is acknowledged not only by him that
swears, but also by them that receive the oath, to be first omnipresent and
omniscient, that is, one who is present in every place, and is acquainted with
all secrets: secondly, true and a maintainer of truth, and revenger of
falsehood: thirdly, just, and therefore willing; omnipotent, and therefore able,
to punish those that swear falsely. And these attributes of God are so
acknowledged and celebrated in every lawful oath, that to swear by the Lord,
Esaias. 45. 23.
is to confess unto God, Romans 14. 11.
and in the Scriptures it is accounted as none of the meanest parts of his
worship, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall swear by his name.
Which must put us in mind whenever we do swear, that by our oath we are to
glorify God, and to perform a solemn worship unto him: which was also
further signified both by the solemn form of imposing an oath, Ios. 7. 19.
and the solemn rite of taking an oath among the Jews. John 9. 24.
The form of imposing an oath, 1. King 8. 31.
was this, Give glory to God: the manner in deposing, was to stand before the
Altar: Cic. pro Cornel* Bal. and pro Placc^.
which was also the custom of the Athenians and Romans.

And as an oath is glorious unto God, so is it also profitable and necessary
for men. (...).
For an oath being as one says, the greatest proof among men, it gives
satisfaction to our neighbor, who otherwise would not be satisfied: It is the
chief bond of truth, whereby men either bind themselves to God, Number. 30. 2.
as in voluntary oaths; or are as it were enforced to speak the truth, as in
oaths imposed: for as one well says, Plutarc. Quest. Romans
(...), an oath is the freemans rack. It is the chief preservative against
falsehood, the remedy against contention, and as the Apostle says, Heb. 6. 16.
The end of all controversies among men.

These premises duly considered, it will not be hard to determine the former
questions. For as touching the first: if an oath be (as has been showed) an
holy ordinance of God, making greatly for the glory of God, and profit of men;
then whosoever shall refuse to swear, when just and necessary occasion is
offered, he sins against Gods glory and the love of his brethren. Here
therefore is to be refuted of us the heresy of the Manichees, renewed by the
Anabaptists, who think it altogether unlawful for a Christian to swear,
though enjoined thereto by a magistrate. But they sin against the third
commandment, and they err, not knowing the Scriptures. For where the Lord
forbids us to swear in vain, there he commands us to swear aright, for
the discharge of our duty in the confirmation of a necessary truth, to Gods
glory, the good of our neighbor, or the clearing of our selves. And surely, if
it were unlawful to swear as they would bear us in hand, then should we by
swearing offend either against the glory of God, or the good of our brother.
But an oath as you have heard makes for both: and by the neglect thereof we
sin against both. And that an oath is lawful, it may appear by the examples
of those whom we cannot deny to have sworn lawfully. For first, the most
faithful servants of God, both before the law, and since, have used upon just
occasion not only themselves to swear, but also to impose oaths upon others.
Genesis 21. 23. 31. and 26. 28.
Examples of swearing in Abraham and Isaac to Abimelec, Genesis 31. 53.
Jacob to Laban, Elias to Obadiah, Elisha to Iehoram, 1. King. 18. 15.
etc. of oaths imposed, by Abraham upon his servant, 2. King. 3. 14.
Genesis 24, Genesis 24. 2, 3.
and by Jacob upon Joseph, Genesis 47, Genesis 47. 29, 35.
by Jonathan and David mutually, 1. Sam. 20. And if it might be objected (as
truly it cannot) that these servants of the Lord in these oaths offended, yet
other examples may be added, which are without exception: For it may not be
thought, that those holy men of God, who were the penmen of the holy ghost, did
offend in penning of the scriptures; but in the very penning of the scripture
they have used diverse oaths, Romans 1. 9. and 9. 1.
especially Paul in his epistles: 2. Cor. 1. 23. and 11, 32.
yea in the scriptures are recorded oaths of the holy Angels, who are free
from sin: Gal. 1. 20.
and to conclude with the example of all examples, Phil. 1. 8.
the Lord himself is sometimes said to have sworn. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. Apoc. 10.
6.
But an oath is not only warranted as lawful, Genesis 22.
but also commended as good, Heb. 6.
Psalm. 63. 11, Psalm. 63. 11.
every one that swears by the Lord, shall be commended, where (as in this
place) to swear by the Lord aright, is made a proper note by which a godly man
is described. Neither is it only commended as good, but also commanded as
necessary. And it is necessary, not only by necessity of duty, in respect
of Gods commandment, enjoining this duty as a singular branch of Gods
worship: Deu. 6. 13. 10. 20
but also by necessity of certainetie, Ier. 4. 2.
or as the schoolmen call it infallibility, in respect of the oath of the
Lord, which cannot be untrue. Esaias 45. 23.
By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) the word is gone out of my mouth,
that every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear by me.

But the Anabaptists object the prohibition of Christ, Mat. 5. 34.
Mat. 5, But I say unto you, swear not at all: therefore it is not lawful to
swear at all. Whereunto I answer, that the purpose of our Savior Christ
being not to abrogate the moral law of God, Mat. 5. 17.
as himself professes, but to expound it, and to deliver it from the gross
corruptions and deprauations of the Scribes and Pharisees, we may not think,
that he does absolutely and wholly forbid this duty of swearing, which as we
have heard, is expressly commanded in the law of God. Whereas therefore the
Scribes and Pharisees taught first, that the third commandment was to be
understood of perjurie only or false swearing, even as they understood the
sixth and seventh commandment of outward murder only, and adultery: and
secondly, that not all false swearing is forbidden, but only when the name of
God is interposed, or something else, which immediately belonged to his worship,
as the gold of the temple, which was consecrated to the Lord, Mat* 23. 16, 18
and the gift upon the Altar, which was offered unto God: Our Savior Christ
shows that in the third commandment is forbidden not only perjurie and
false swearing by the name of God, but also all rash and ordinary swearing in
our common talk, whether by the name of God, or by any of his creatures:
Because the offense committed in swearing amiss by them, Mat. 5. 34, (...).
redoundeth to the dishonor of God. Mat. 23. (...)
Our Savior therefore speaks not of public oaths before a magistrate (for
in them they swear by the name of God alone) but of private oaths in their
ordinary talk and communication, and in respect thereof he commands us not
to swear at all, neither by the name of God, nor by any of his creatures: For
so he says, Iam. 5. 12.
But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: which James expresses thus,
Let your yea, that is your affirmation, be yea; and your nay, that is your
negation, be nay: that is to say, if you have occasion to affirm any thing,
let it be sufficient to say, yea; and when you are to deny any thing, let it
be sufficient to say nay. Neither does our Savior Christ simply condemn all
oaths in our ordinary talk, but such as are needless or superfluous: For so
he says, Mat. 5. 37.
Whatsoever is (...), that is, redundant above these, it is of evil. For an
oath is not a good thing, but upon necessity, and therefore is not to be used
but upon necessity: for a necessary good without the bonds of necessity, is
not good.

Hereby therefore it appears, that as here it is made a note of a godly man
to swear, and having sworn to keep his oath, so it is lawful for a
Christian man to take an oath: provided always that those duties be observed
in swearing, which the holy Ghost has required in oaths. As first in respect
of the object, that we swear by the Lord alone: for seeing what we swear by,
that we deifie and make our God; therefore we forsake the true God, if we
swear by that which is not God, and consequently by this sin provoke the
Lord to execute his judgments, not only upon us, but also upon the country
wherein we live. As he says by his Prophet Jeremy to Jerusalem, Ier. 5. 7.
How should I spare thee in this, thy children have forsaken me. How so? they
have sworn by that which is not God.

Secondly, in respect of the manner: that we swear in truth, Ier. 4. 2.
judgment, and righteousness. In truth, that we may be able to say with the
Apostle, Romans 9. 1.
I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in
the holy Ghost: In judgment, that is advisedly and upon necessary occasion:
In righteousness, promising by oath nothing but that which is lawful and
just. Thirdly, in respect of the end, that by our oath God may be glorified,
our duty discharged, controversies appeased, our brethren satisfied, our
innocence cleared.

And forasmuch as the child of God who is here described, is careful to
perform these duties required in oaths, we may be assured that he is none of
these rash and ordinary swearers: but as he knows an oath to be an holy
ordinance of God, wherein the holy, glorious, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
and dreadful name of the Lord our God is used and called upon; so he will be
careful in all good conscience to swear holily and reverently. And as he
knows that an oath is not good but when it is necessary, so he will not
swear unless he be drawn thereto by necessity: (...)
for so much seems to be implied to the Hebrew word which is (...), and
signifies to be sworn, rather than to swear. As for those which swear upon
no necessity, usually and ordinarily in their common talk, they do most
vilely profane and pollute the holy name of God, turning the sanctuary of
truth and verity, into a common house of vanity; Exodus 20.
and therefore are such as the Lord will not hold guiltless. Eccles. 23. 11.
For as the son of Syrach says, A man that uses much swearing is full of
iniquity, and the Plague shall never go from his house. Yea so far are the
common swearers from being reputed the children of God, as that by the
judgment of Solomon it is a note of a godly man to fear an oath, and a badge
of a wicked man to make no conscience of swearing: For when he would by this
particular signify that which he had affirmed in general, that the wicked and
the good are many times alike in their outward estate, Eccles. 9. 2.
He that swears (says he) as he that fears an oath.

Thus much may suffice to have spoken of the former question concerning the
taking of oaths: it remains that I should entreat of the other, concerning
the keeping of oaths, viz. whether all oaths are to be performed, or not?
Whereunto I answer, that all oaths, which are lawful and in our power, are
religiously and faithfully to be performed and kept: For this faithfulness is
both commanded and commended to us in the Scripture, and the contrary
unfaithfulness condemned, Number. 30, Number. 30. 3.
Whosoever voweth a vow unto the Lord, or swears an oath binding himself by
a bond, he shall not break his promise, but shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth. Neither is it commanded among matters of less
importance, but among the weightier points of the law, Mat. 23, Mat. 23. 23.
it is commended unto us: First, by the example of the Lord himself, whose
fidelity in keeping of his promises is to be imitated of us, if we would be
reputed his children: Secondly, by this testimony of the holy Ghost, where it
is made one of the notes of Gods children; as also Psalm. 24: Psalm. 24. 4.
Thirdly, by the promise of great blessing; Prou. 28. 20.
for as Solomon says, A faithful man shall abound in blessings. As for
unfaithfulness in breaking promises and oaths, it is condemned as one of the
sins of the heathen, who were given over to a reprobat mind, Romans 1. 30, Romans
1. 30.
where he says they were covenant breakers, and punished in Saul's posterity,
because he had broken the covenant made by oath with the Gibeonites: 2. Sam.
21. 6.
and in Zedekiah who had broken the oath and covenant which he had made with
Nebuchadnezar, 2. Chron. 36. 13.
in regard whereof Ezekiel says, Ezekiel. 17. 15. 19.
Shall he break the covenant and be delivered? As I live says the Lord, I
will surely bring mine oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he has
broken, upon his own head, etc. Peiorare ( says Tully) non est falls u^iurare,
sed quod ex animi ^ui sententia iuraris, id non fa ^^r^periurium est. 3. de
offi^.
For not to perform an oath, when a man may lawfully and is able to perform
it, is perjurie: For perjury properly is not to swear falsely, but not to
perform the oath which thou have made. Mat. 5. 33. But what if the thing which
by oath is promised, be either unlawful, or not in our power? If when we take
the oath, we know it either to be unlawful, or not in our power, we sin
fearfully in swearing thereto: For he that swears to perform that which he
knows to be unlawful, if he has a purpose to perform it, he sins with an
high hand, of settled purpose and full resolution, which he fears not to bind
with an oath; and therein to call upon God both as his surety that he shall
perform it, and as his judge and revenger, if he do not: If he has no purpose
to perform it, he swears falsely, and deceives his neighbor under the
religion of an oath, and prophaneth the name of God, whom he calls to
witness an untruth; and that which is worst of all, he desparatly tempts
God, and as it were dares him to his face, when he fears not to call upon
God to execute his vengeance on him, if he perform not that which he has no
purpose to perform: If he knows it to be a thing to him impossible, or not
in his power, and yet will swear to do it, he wilfully forsweareth himself,
and desparatly provoke God to execute his vengeance on him, and in all
respects sins as the former, who swears to that which he has no purpose
to perform. But if at the first the matter do not appear to be either
unlawful or impossible, and yet afterward prove so, then he which so deposes,
swears rashly and unadvisedly: For we ought to be well assured both of the
lawfulness and possibility of a thing before we may presume to bind our
selves by oath to the performance of it. Howsoever it be, an oath so soon as
it appears unto us to be unlawful or impossible, it is void of none effect,
neither does it bind us: for an oath may not be the bond of iniquity, neither
can it tie us to impossibilities. If therefore thou have sworn to a thing
unlawful, thou have sinned in swearing unlawfully, and for that thou art to
crave pardon at the hands of God: but that which thou have unlawfully promised,
thou may not wickedly perform. Isidor.
Unlawful oaths are laudably broken, and damnably kept, as one says, in
swearing so, thou have sinned; but it is no sin to break an unlawful oath,
he that performs it adds sin unto sin, and unto a less sin many
times he adds a greater, to the rashness of swearing, the wickedness of
performing* Mar. 6. 23.
Herod made a rash oath, and as it proved, also a wicked oath: which if he had
not performed he had sinned no further in that matter; but by performing it,
unto the rashness of his swearing, he added fearful murder of the holy man
of God. 1. Sam. 25. 22. 32. 33.
David also took an unlawful oath to revenge himself upon Nabal: but when by
Abigail he was informed of the unlawfulness thereof, he not only desisteth
from his purpose and breaks that oath: but also blesses God that had sent
her, and blesses her that had kept him from shedding blood or revenging his
own quarrel. If further it be demanded, What if that which a man promises
by oath, cannot be performed without his loss or hinderance? The holy Ghost
resolves us in this place, That it is the property of Gods children to keep
their oath, though it be to their hinderance. But what if a man be forced to
swear to that which is against his profit? if it be not also unlawful, he is
to perform it. To unlawful oaths we ought not to suffer our selves by any
means to be forced. But if through fear or infirmity we have yielded to take
an unlawful, oath, we have sinned in swearing, but we are not bound to perform
it.

The ninth mark or note, whereby the holy ghost describes a sound Christian
and citisen of heaven, is, That he does not give out his money to usury: but
contrariwise (for under the negative we are to understand the affirmative)
justly gets his goods, and charitably exposes them to the benefit of
others, as it is said Psalm. 112. 5, A good man is merciful, and lends: and
again Psalm. 37. 26, The righteous man is ever merciful, and lends. August.
and Luther in hunc Psalm.
I will first speak of the negative. And because, as some worthy writers
testify, it is but a small matter not to put forth money unto usury, I will
afterward show, that it is required of every Christian, both ( quoad (...)) in
respect of the possession, that he get his goods justly: and also ( quoad
(...)) in respect of the use, that he be willing freely to communicate them to
the relief of others.

M. Luther writing on these words, says, Iste versus non indiget expositione
sed impletione: This verse needs not to be expounded for the rectifying of
our judgment, but to be performed in our practice for the sanctifying of our
life. For in Luthers time, and in all the ages before him, although many
practiced usury, as they did other kinds of theft and robbery, yet there was
never any controversy among the learned concerning the lawfulness of usury,
more than of other kinds of theft, but all with one consent condemned usury
and usurers unto hell. But if Luther were living in these our times, and
understood besides the common practice of usury openly, and the cunning shifts
whereby it is cloaked, the open defense also thereof undertaken not only by
usurers themselves, who have learned many subtle distinctions and instances to
justify their trade; but also by diverse divines, otherwise godly and learned,
who have either spoken or written more wittily than truly, in favor of usury:
assuredly he would confess, that there is scarcely any one moral point of
divinity, which needs more fully to be expounded, and more exquisitly to be
discussed. And although it may not be expected at my hands in this mediocritie
or meannesse of gifts, that I should more fully and more learnedly discourse of
this controversy, than it has been handled by others, men of greater reading
and riper experience: yet seeing the holy ghost in this place reckons
abstinence from usury among the marks of Gods children, whereunto we are now
by order come, having already entreated of those which go before, I may not
nor will not refuse to set down what we are to hold concerning this
controversy, and as God shall enable me to determine this question: That if
usury shall be found to be lawful and warrantable by the word of God, the
usurers may hereafter practice it in faith (which hitherto it is more than
probable they could never do:) or if it shall appear to be utterly unlawful,
that they wholly abstain and desist from the practice thereof, as ever they
hope to rest in the mountain of Gods holiness.

Of the name of Usury, and of contracts in general.
Usury has his name of the Latin word Vsura, which in the first
signification thereof, signifies the use or fruition of any thing, as of
money, Cic. 1. Tuscul. Natura dedit vsuram vitae tanquam pecuniae.

Secondly, Vsura signifies any accession, addition, overplus or increase above
the principal, which is yielded to the creditour in respect of the use of
money lent or forborne, or of any thing else which is spent in the use. And
this increase is either voluntary or exacted. The voluntary increase is a
free gift, gratuitie, or reward, which the borrower or debtour having gained by
the employment of the money borrowed, voluntarily and freely gives to the
lender, in testimony of his thankfulness for the benefit received; which some
call vsuram or foenus liberale. The exacted increase, is that which the
creditour demands either as a recompense of some loss or hinderance which
he sustaineth through the default of the borrower, or as a gain couenanted for
loan. The former is called Vsura compensatoria, recompencing usury or
interest; the latter is termed Vsura quaestuosa, or foenus, gainefull usury.

Of the liberal Usury (if I may so call it) which is nothing else but a
thankful reward, or gratuitie, as also of the recompencing usury or interest,
there is no question to be made, but that in themselves they are lawful: but
of the gainefull usury is all the controversy. And thus the Latin word Vsura
is distinguished; the English word Usury, though derived thence, yet is
otherwise used: for neither is it taken at any time for use, or for liberal
usury, or recompencing usury, but only for gainefull usury, whereof our
question is. And in this sense it is taken two ways, either for the gain it
self, couenanted or principally intended for loan, which in Latin is
properly called foenus; or for the contract it self of lending for gain,
which properly is called foeneratio. Of the contract, the holy ghost speaks
in this place, whereby a man gives or puts forth his money to usury.

Whereas therefore Usury is a contract, let us briefly distinguish those
contracts which concern the alienation or permutation of goods, that it may
the better appear, what kind of contract it is: for such contracts are either
for the perpetual alienation of goods, or but for a time. The perpetual
alienation, if it be liberal and free, is giving: if for recompense, then is
it a commutation either of ware for ware, which is called barterie; or of money
for money, which is called exchange; or of ware for money, which is selling; or
of money for ware, which is buying. The alienation which is but for a time, is
either of the use only, or of the property also: that which is of the use
only, if it be liberal and free, is called commodation, or lending to use; if
for recompense or hire, then is it called location, or letting to hire; that
which is not only of the use, but of the property also, if it be liberal and
free, it is called mutuation, or lending to spend; if illiberall and for gain,
it is called usury.



What Usury is.
Wherefore the contract of usury is nothing else but illiberall mutuation, and
may thus briefly be defined: Usury is mutuation, or lending for gain. This
brief definition does fully set forth the true nature of usury, and
sufficiently distinguishes it from all other contracts whatsoever.



For first I say it is mutuation or lending, wherein all learned men almost,
whether they write for usury or against it, Sum. Angel. ^. vs^a.
do agree. In solo mutuo (says one) vero vel interpretatiuo consistit vsura
secundum omnes doctores, that is, Usury according to all the Doctors,
consists only in loan, whether it be a bare contract of loan, or else
cloaked under some other contract, which may be resolved or reduced unto loan.
De Vsur. c. 8.
Likewise Car. Molinaeus, the chief patron of Usury, It is the common
opinion of all (says he) that Usury properly is not committed but in loan:
and again loan is the subject of usury. Subiectum vsurae mutuum.
Which is also presupposed in the Scripture, Exodus 22. 25, If thou lend money
to my people, namely and especially to the poor with thee, thou shall not be
as an exactour or as an usurer unto him, you shall not impose usury upon him.
And the same, if need were, might be proved by the other relative, which is
borrowing: for lending and borrowing are relatiues. And if he which takes up
money upon usury, be a borrower, then he that gives or puts it forth unto
usury, is a lender.

The contract therefore of Usury is a contract of lending: and whatsoever is
not a contract of lending either plainly or covertly, that is not a contract
of usury. Now in the contract of mutuation or lending, diverse things
concur, which also belong to the nature of usury.

1. That it is of such things as are spent in the use, and consist in
quantity, that is to say, in number, weight, or measure; as money and
victuals, corn, wine, oil, etc. which are particularly mentioned, Deuteronomy. 23.
19. Leuit. 25. 37. Neh. 5. 11.

2. And therefore is alienation not only of the use, but also of the
property, from which the use (of such things as are spent in the use) cannot
be severed.

3. As the property is transferred to the borrower, so the borrower stands
to the hazard of the thing borrowed.

4. That it is not a perpetual alienation of that which is lent but for a
time, which time being expired, the borrower is bound to restore the principal.

5. Because the thing borrowed is to be spent in the use, therefore the
borrower is bound not to restore the selfsame particular which he borrowed,
but so much in the same kind or of the same value.

6. It belongs to the nature of lending, that it be free and liberal. But
herein usury peruerteth the contract of lending, being illiberall and for
gain: for usury is a contract of lending, wherein the creditour or lender
requires of the borrower not only the principal in the equivalent or full
value thereof, but also an overplus or gain. And this is that which follows
in the definition, as the difference to distinguish it from free lending, that
it is for gain.

By gain is meant any addition overplus or increase over and above the The
sum lent, we call the principal: the Latins, sortem, the Grecians, (...)
and (...).
principal, whether it be money or money worth, required not for the
indemnitie of the creditour, to save him harmless, but for his advantage to
make him a gainer by lending; for that only is to be esteemed gain, which is
an overplus, clearly gotten above the principal. And whereas I say it is
either money or money worth: this money worth reaches far, not only to goods
and wares, but also to labors and services, and whatsoever else being valuable
by money, may lawfully be let or sold for money. And when I say that usury is
lending for gain, it is meant, that in the first act of lending upon usury,
or afterward in the forbearing, whereby that lending is continued, gain is,
if not couenanted for, yet at the least intended. So that where there is a
covenant or intent of gain by loan, whether it be in the first act of
lending, or afterward in the forbearing, it is usury: and contrariwise, where
there is neither a covenant nor intent of gain in lending or forbearing, there
is not usury, though there be an overplus or increase received over and
besides the principal. Now, that Usury is thus to be defined, it is evident:
first, because as all usury is lending for gain (as no man of learning will
deny) so reciprocally all lending for gain is usury; neither can it truly be
referred to any other contract: as I will make it plain anon, when I shall
show, how Usury by his definition is distinguished from all other contracts
whatsoever. Secondly, because all lending for gain, and all gain required for
loan, is in the Scriptures condemned under the name of usury.

The Hebrew word Neshek is the ordinary name to signify usury, as foenus in
Latin, or (...) in Greek, or usury in English. For the money which is lent
upon usury, is called Noshek, a biter, or which biteth: and the Hebrew phrase,
which signifies to be lent upon usury, is to bite, as appears plainly,
Deuteronomy. 23. 19, Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother money or meat, or
any thing else, Asheriishak, which biteth, that is, which is lent upon usury:
for whatsoever the usurer lends, it has teeth and jaws to eat and consume
the substance of other men; his corn or victuals which were made to be eaten,
do eat; and his money which was made to be spent, does wast the substance of
others. And therefore Hebrew writers do teach, that in the name of usury is
included an admonition, not to borrow upon usury: for he which takes money
upon usury, takes as it were a serpent into his bosom. Now the money which
is lent upon usury, is said to bite or gnaw, because it biteth and gnaweth
away some of the borrowers goods, which when it is repaid, it brings with it
to the lender: and for this cause the usurer who lends forth his money upon
usury, is said in the same place, Deuteronomy. 23. 19. Lo Tasshik.
to cause his money to bite; and the gain or overplus, whether it be more or
less, which the money lent upon usury has bitten away from the borrower,
whither he be rich or poor, is call Neshek.

And further that Neshek is the ordinary word in the Scriptures to signify
usury, and also that all increase and gain above the principal exacted for
loan is usury, is manifestly proved by the other words which the holy Ghost
uses to expound the word Neshek, and to signify usury; those are Tarbith and
Marbith, both derived from the same root Rabah, which signifies to increase:
and they are fitly translated incrementu^, augmentum, increase; amplius, more:
so that he which exacteth an increase or gain above his principal, or
requires more by covenant than he lent, he takes Tarbith or Marbith, that is
usury. The Grecians translate it (...), that is, says Balsamon Nysseni
scholiastes, when a man does lend any thing that he may receive more than he
gave. And that these words are used for exposition of Neshek first the text it
self in the Scripture, Leuit. 25. 36, 37. Pro. 28. 8. Ezec. 18. 13. and 22.
12. does plainly prove: Where these words being used as Synonyma, that is, as
words of the same signification, Tarbith and Marbith, are set after Neshek,
(...), that is, by way of exposition. This is also testified by D. Kimhi
writing upon Ezech. 18, where he sets this down as the received opinion of
the Jews, Hu Neshek hu Tarbith.
that Neshek and Tarbith are all one. And the same is confessed by Calvin
himself, that whereas usurers avoided the name Neshek, which signified biting,
as they do the name usury among us, as being odious; and therefore alleged,
that they took not Neshek but Tarbith, as among us they will not be thought to
take usury, but consideration, In Exodus 22. 25 Leuit. 25. 36, 37
vsance, or interest: therefore the Lord forbids as well Tarbith as Neshek,
whereby he condemns generally Quamlibet sortis accessionem (says Calvin)
any addition or increase above the principal. And upon Ezechiel, cap. 18. he
says, The Prophet condemns not only Neshek, which signifies biting, but
also Tarbith, which he translateth incrementu^, increase: hoc est (says he)
quicquid lucri sibi auari homines conciliant ex mutuo, that is, whatsoever
gain covetous men do get to themselves by loan. And the like may be said of
(...) and foenus, which are the fruit or birth of money, be it more or less.
Lastly, this is the received opinion of the most approved and ancient writers
in the Church of Christ, as of Ambrose, Hicrome, and Augustinc, to which we
may add the authority of the counsel held at Agatha, all which are to this
purpose cited by Gratian, Cause. 14. q. 3.
to prove, that whenever any gain is exacted for loan above the
principal, it is usury: for whereas some imagined, that they committed not
usury, because they took no increase or gain in money, but in wares and
other commodities, Lib. de Tob. c. 14.
Ambrose says, Et esc^ vsur^ est, and vestis vsur^ est, and quodcunque sorti
accedit vsur^ est: quod ^elis ei nomen imponas, vsur^ est: Meat is usury, and
garment is usury, and whatsoever is added over and besides the principal, it
is usury; give it what name you will, it is usury. Lib. 6. in Eze. 18.
Hierome likewise: Some think (says he) that usury is only in money; which
the holy Scripture foreseeing, takes away the overplus of every thing, Vt plus
non recipi^s quam dedisti, That thou receive no more than thou did give.
Again, some (says he) for money lent, receive gifts of diverse kinds, and
they do not understand that it is called usury and increase, whatsoever it be
that they receive above that which they gave. And to the same purpose is that
which is alleged out of the counsel held at Agatha, Vsur^ est vbi amplius
requiritur qua^ datur, It is usury, when more is required than is lent.
Augustine goes further, In Ps 36.
If thou (says he) have lent money to any man, of whom thou look to receive
more than thou gave, not money alone, but any thing more than thou gave,
whether it be wheat, or wine, or oil, or any thing else; if thou expectest to
receive more than thou gave, thou art an usurer.

Upon which testimonies Gratian concludes, behold it is evidently declared,
That whosoever for loan is exacted above the principal, Lactant. de vero
cult. 1. 6. c. 18.
it is usury. Lactantius also speaking of usury, says, To receive more than
thou gave, it is unjust: and afterward adds, That a justman will not
defile himself with such gain. Likewise, all increase whatsoever required for
loan, in the civil law also is accounted usury. Lastly, the common lawyers
are of the same judgment: For Glanuile, who was lord chief Justice of England
in the days of Henry the second, teaches, that usury is committed, when a
man having lent any thing that does consist upon number, weight, and measure,
does take any thing over and above his loan, Lib. 10. cap. 3.

And thus it appears, that the true nature of usury is expressed in this
definition. Let us now see how by this definition usury is distinguished from
other contracts, and also other things which may seem to have some affinity
therewith: for of the rest it is needless to speak.

It is therefore distinguished I. from all liberal contracts, as that of
donation, or free gift* of mutuation, or free lending to spend; of commodation,
or free lending to use; because they be free and liberal, but usury is
illiberall and for gain.

2. From all lawful buying: because in buying there is a perpetual alienation
of money, in usury but for a time: and therefore in the contract of buying and
selling, the seller is not bound to restore the money again; but in the
contract of usury, being a contract of mutuation or loan, the debtour is
bound after a time to restore the money again. Whereby it appears, that a
contract of buying rents, whether for ever, or for a man's life, wherein there
is an absolute bargain and sale, and a perpetual alienation of the
principal, howsoever there may be injustice therein, if equality be not
observed, yet is it not usury: for the subject of usury is loan, and by the
contract of loan the borrower undertakes after a time to repay the principal.

3. From lawful Location or letting to hire: which is the rather to be
observed, because some imagine, that money and other things which are lent upon
usury, may as well be let as other things. But there is great difference
betwixt usury and the lawful contract of Location or letting. And first they
differ in the subjects: so that the things which be lent upon usury cannot be
let, namely, to that use for which they are lent, and those things which be let
cannot be lent upon usury.

Usury is in those things which are spent in the use, and consist in
quantity, standing in number, weight, and measure. Location, is of such things
as are not spent in the use, neither stand in number, weight, and measure. The
subject of usury, are such things as have no fruitful use in themselves, but
the gain which is to be raised by employment of them, is to be imputed to the
industry and skill of the imployer. The subject of location, have a fruitful
use in themselves naturally. The use of things lent upon usury cannot be
severed, or reckoned apart from the property and dominion; because they are
such things as are spent in the use, and therefore if you use them, you spend
them. The fruitful use of things lent, may be severed and reckoned apart, and
is valuable by it self, as of la^d, goods, house, etc. which remain in the use
vnspe^t. In the contract of loan, whether free, or upon usury, the lender
grants to the borrower, not only the use, but also the property of the
thing lent, from which the use of that, which we lend to be spent in the use,
cannot be severed: hence it is called mutuum, because by lending it is made ex
meo tuum. In the contract of location, the letter grants to him that takes
to hire, the use only of the things, retaining the property to himself.
Because that which is the subject of loan and usury is spent in the use, and
is lent to be spent; therefore the borrower is bound to restore, not the same
particular which he borrowed, but so much in quantity or full value in the
same kind, without any impairing or diminution. Because that which is the
subject of commodity and location is lent and let, not to be spent, but only
to be used; therefore he that takes the same to use, is bound to restore the
self same particular which for the most part is impaired and made worse in the
use. As in mutuation and usury, the property is translated to the borrower,
so with the property also the hazard wholly appertains to the borrower: for
the very contract of mutuation includes in it an obligation binding the
borrower, that whatsoever becomes of this particular which he borrows, he
shall restore the full value thereof at the day appointed, in the same kind.
And to this purpose the borrower makes promise, either by word or writing,
enters into bonds and statutes, laying his goods to pawn, or his lands to
morgage, gives sureties, to assure and secure the creditor for the principal.
As in location the use is communicated to the hirer, but the letter retains
the property; so the peril and hazard of the thing, if it shall miscarie
without the default of the hirer, belongs to the letter, and not to the
hirer; because it came for his hire, Exodus 22. 14. And it is a rule in law, To
whom the hazard appertains, to him the fruit and profit belongs.

To conclude therefore, things that stand in quantity, in number, weight and
measure, as money, meat, and drink, wine, oil, etc. and are lent to be spent,
Non cadunt in commod^tum aut locatum, they cannot be let. For in such things,
contrary to the contract of Location, the property with the use is
transferred to the borrower, and he becomes owner for the time thereof:
neither is there in such things themselves any fruitful use, which is valuable
by it self, being spent in the use: but if there arise any gain, it is to be
ascribed to the skill and industry of the borrower, who is the owner for the
time of that which he borrows. Neither is he to restore the same particular,
impaired by the use, but the full value in the same kind with better rather
than worse: neither does the lender but the borrower stand wholly to the hazard
and peril. And therefore the letting of such things as are not lettable, is
nothing but mere usury under another name. Indeed if such things as stand in
quantity, as money and such like, be not lent to be spent according to that
use for which they were ordained, but to some other use and purpose; the lender
communicating only the use, and retaining the property, requiring again the
selfsame particular to be restored, himself also perhaps standing to the
hazard, if it miscarrie without the borrowers default; the^ this contract is
not mutuation (for thereby the property is always altered) or usury, but
co^modation, if it be free; or location, if it be for hire. Howbeit, this hire,
unless the letter do stand to the hazard, or unless the thing be impaired in
the use, ought to be little or nothing: for if there be inequality betwixt the
hire and the use, though there be not usury in such a contract, yet there is
injustice.

4. From the contract of partnership: wherein one man having perhaps no skill
in merchandise, commits a stock of money to another, being a merchant or
tradesman, to the end that he may employ the same in some lawful traffic,
and couenanteth with him not only to be partner with him in a proportionable
part of his gain, if it please God to make him a gainer, but also to partake
with him in the loss, which without his default he shall sustain. For here,
although there be expectation of gain, yea and a requiring and taking of gain
for the most part, yet there is not usury: for in partnership, the property
of the money is not transferred unto him that receives it, but remains in
him which did deliver it, and at his hazard and peril it is employed: and
therefore in partnership there is not so much as loan, and much less usury:
for as Molinaeus truly says, In contraectu societatis cessat subiectum vsur^,
scil. mutuum: in partnership the subject of usury ce^seth, viz. loan. For in
loan the property is transferred to the borrower, and with the property the
hazard: so that if the principal miscarry, it miscarrieth to the borrower; it
is safe to the lender, by the very contract of mutuation or lending, wherein
the borrower secureth the lender by such security as the lender thinks
sufficient, whether it be his word, or his bill, or his bond, or his pawn, or
his surety, for the repayment of the principal. In the contract of
partnership, he that delivers his money to the other, does not covenant
absolutely for the restitution of his principal, and much less for gain, but
conditionally, according to the event or success of the negotiation;
couenanting as well to be partaker of the loss as of the gain. But the
contract of mutuation or free lending, binds the borrower by an absolute
covenant to restore the principal: and the contract of usury binds the
borrower by an absolute covenant, not only to repay the principal, but also to
yield the overplus couenanted for. And this absolute covenant is not an abuse
besides the nature of this contract (as some have imagined) but as the absolute
covenant of the restitution of the principal is included in the contract of
mutuation, so the absolute covenant not only of repaying the principal, but
also of paying usury, is included in the contract of actual, or as they call
it, formal usury: and is so of the nature of this contract, that where this
absolute covenant is not, there is not actual and formal usury. For if there
be a covenant only in euentum lucri, to gain if he gain; or a bare
expectation of gain for loan without any further covenant, but for the
restitution of the principal, then is the former not formal usury, though it
be mental and actual in part, and the latter is but mental usury: and not
then neither, if as on the one side there is a covenant of partaking gain, if
there be gain; so on the other side there be a covenant of partaking loss: or
as there is expectation of gain, if the borrower gain, so there be an
unfeigned purpose of bearing part of the loss, which the borrower without his
default shall sustain: for then the former is the contract of partnership; and
the latter in respect of the outward act, is the contract of lending: but in
regard of the purpose of the heart, intending gain where there is gain, and
purposing to bear part of the loss where there is loss, it is partnership.
Where by the way we are to note, that howsoever usurers do build their
practice upon the judgment of some divines, yet no godly learned divine does
allow the usury which is usually practiced. And I am persuaded, that if they
understood this absolute covenant or expectation of gain, without purpose of
hazarding the principal or any part thereof, to be of the very nature of an
usurious contract, as indeed it is, they would never have spoken or written
word in the defense of usury. For they would not have a man to make an
absolute covenant for gain, but in euentum lucri, that is, that he may
covenant, if the borrower shall raise a lawful gain, to have part thereof.
And they define that usury which they allow, to be partem lucri, part of the
borrowers gain. So that by their judgment, if a man borrow money, not to make
a gain of it, but otherwise for his necessary uses, of such an one no gain
is to be required: or if the borrower, which takes up money, hoping to raise a
gain thereby, shall not gain, of him there is no gain to be exacted. But if
the borrower shall not only be no gainer, but notwithstanding he has used
his skill and diligence in his trade, shall also prove a looser, the constant
judgment of learned divines in this case is, That the lender, which for his
loan either couenanteth or looks for gain, must be content to bear part of
the loss: so that the difference which is in substance of matter betwixt those
divines which seem to speak for usury, and us that speak against it, is
very small. They allow that contract, in which there is a conditional covenant
for gain, if the borrower gain, with an unfeigned purpose of partaking in his
loss: We allow that contract wherein there is a covenant, as of partaking in
the gain when there shall be gain, so of bearing part of the loss, when
there shall be loss, without his default that received the money to employ it,
that so there may be equality. Which contract in substance differs little
from the former: for if thou must have an unfeigned purpose to bear part of the
borrowers loss, and art bound in conscience to put that purpose in execution,
when he is a looser; why should thou not make thy covenant accordingly, if
thou have to deal with an honest man? And why may thou not as well make thy
contract so, if the purpose of thy heart be upright, as to think, that after
thy contract is made, thou art bound in conscience so to deal? Now if thou
did covenant equally to bear part of the loss, as well as to reap part
of the gain, then were thy contract neither usury nor loan, but partnership,
which is a lawful contract. Indeed, I do confess, it is more fit many times
that the borrower should stand to the lenders courtesy, than the lender
altogether to the borrowers fidelity: and therefore though there be a covenant
on the one side, in euentum lucri, to partake in the gain, if there shall be
gain; and on the other side, but a purpose of bearing part in the loss, so
that purpose be upright and unfeigned, I would not altogether condemn such a
contract. It were therefore to be wished, that men having learned to
distinguish usury from other lawful contracts, would according to the
scriptures simply and absolutely condemn it, rather than they should by
seeming to allow and commend under the name of usury some other lawful
contract (which indeed are not usurious) give an occasion of so great offense
to covetous worldlings: who when they hear some usury allowed by divines,
they doubt not (such is our natural selfeloue) that the usury which
themselves practice, is to be warranted, though their practice differ never so
much from the judgment of all learned and godly divines.

5. It is distinguished from three other things, to which the name of usury
especially in the Latin tongue is assigned, but are not this gainefull usury,
whereof we speak: the first of these is the adventurers usury, which in Latin
is called nauticum, or m^ritimum ^oenus, and is a gain or allowance made for
money, which is transported beyond the seas, at the peril and hazard of the
creditour, contrary to the contract either of gainefull usury or free loan,
and seems to draw near to partnership, the manner whereof is thus: I deliver
to a merchant who is to travel beyond seas, a sum of money for him to use in
negotiation, as he thinks best for his advantage, conditioning with him, that
if his ship miscarie, I will loose not only my hope of gain, but also the
principal it self: but if his ship shall come safe to land, by the ariuall
whereof he is sure of good gain, I look for an allowance proportionable to
that hazard which I sustain. And this hazard, men were wont to undertake,
either for the whole voyage, couenanting for a certain gain, if the ship
arrived safe at the same port from whence it first set forth (which kind the
Grecians call (...)); or else but for the one part of the voyage, as from one
port to another; Budaeus de Ass Glare^^us de Ass. cap. 12. Ho^oman de vsuris.
as from London to Venice, which they called (...). But for as much as covetous
men were apt to use this practice as a cloak to cover their usury, pretending
great adventure or hazard when there was little or none, and to exact an
unreasonable gain far above the proportion of their adventure or hazard:
Therefore Iustini^n stinted this usury at 12 in the hundred: And the Canon Law
is thought wholly to condemn it. Decr. Greg. l. 5. ti^. devsuris Q. Nauiganti.
But as Hotoman has showed, the text is either corrupted, the word (not) being
omitted (for Gregory in that chapter sets down three cases, whereof this is
the first, which he exempteth from usury:) or else the law is very
unreasonable, seeing where is hazard, there may be gain required as the due
price thereof. And therefore adventurers usury may be allowed, not only in
tr^iectiti^ pecuni^, that is, in money sent over the sea at the creditors
peril; but also in other cases wherein the creditor sustaineth the like
hazard: Provided always, that there be an adventure or hazard in truth, and
not in pretense only: and also that the gain be proportionable to the hazard.

The second is that which some call liberal usury, being indeed a gratuitie
or free gift, which the borrower finding himself much benefited by the lenders
courtesy, does of his own accord in testimony of his thankfulness, freely give
to the lender, who neither intended when he lent, nor expected whiles he
forbore, any gain, and much less couenanted for it: For in this case,
although the le^der receive some allowance above the principal, yet he
commits not usury: because neither the contract which he made, was lending
for gain; neither is the overplus which he receives, a gain, either
couenanted, or intended, or required for loan; but a gratuitie or thankful
courtesy, which may with good conscience be given and received from an able and
willing gi^uer. For as the lenders courtesy has not made him incapable of a
good turn from the borrower, which before he had lent, he might have
received: so does it bind the borrower to duties of thankfulness, which they
call (...), especially if he have well gained by that which the creditor could
not well forbear.

The third, is that which is called vsur^ compens^tor^^, recompencing usury,
which we call interest: For although interest among Lawyers be of a more large
signification, as belongs not only to loan, but also to some other
contracts: yet as it is referred to loan, it is in effect the same with
recompencing usury, which is nothing else but a just recompense which the
debtor, having through his default been the effectual cause of the creditors
hinderance, does owe unto him by the law of nature. And that hinderance may be
twofold, damnum emergens, loss arising, or lucrum cessans, gain ce^sing: But
this ceasing gain which must come into estimation, must not be uncertain and
doubtful, but certain: or at lest very probable. For if the creditor through
the default, either incur loss, or be hindered of certain gain, it is
very equal that thou should make him such recompense quanto creditoris
interest, as he is damaged or hindered by the delay. And it is very lawful
that the creditor should provide for his own indemnitie in this behalf: For
it is against equity (as the Apostle says in a like case) that to the
creditor should be (...), 2. Cor. 8. 13.
and to the debtor (...); but the hinderance is to be recompensed, that there
may be (...), that is, it is unjust that the creditor should sustain loss or
hinderance through the debtors default: or that the debtor should be enriched
with the creditors loss or hinderance: But equity requires that a full
recompense be made, that the creditor may receive his own without ^olle or
hinderance; and the debtor having bin through his delay the cause of the
creditors hinderance, should sustain the penalty of his own, either
negligence or unfaithfulness: For interest in respect of the creditor, is a
just recompense of his hinderance sustained by the debtors fault; and in regard
of the debtor, it is a penalty: For which cause it is called co^pensatori^
vsur^, in respect of the creditors loss, so also punitoria vsur^, in respect
of the debtors defalt. As for example, I lend thee one hundredth pounds, which
thou undertake to repay at the end of six months: which time being expired,
and thou either through negligence or unfaithfulness failing of thy promise, I
incur a loss (perhaps by forfeiture of a bond, pawn, or by taking up money
upon usury to prevent that loss) or else having necessary occasion to employ
my money to my certain or very likely gain, am hindered of that gain: In this
case I may lawfully provide for mine indemnitie, by exacting an equal
recompense at thine hands: and thou art bound in conscience to make good this
loss or hinderance which through thy default I sustain. But here certain
cautions are to be remembered.

First, that interest be esteemed not according to the gain or benefit which
the borrower has reaped by the employment of the money, but according to the
hinderance or loss which the creditor sustaineth through the borrowers default.

Secondly, that interest is not to be required, nisipost mora^, but only after
delay and defalt committed by the borrower: for until then, the borrower
(unless he were such a one as could compel the creditor to lend) is not the
effectual cause of the creditors loss.

Thirdly, that not always after delay it is to be required, but only then,
when the creditor has indeed sustained loss or hinderance by the borrowers
delay.

Fourthly, that he do not voluntarily incur any loss, meaning to lay the
burden thereof on the borrower, but do his true endeavor to avoid it, either
in whole or in part.

Fifthly, that when he suspecteth loss or hinderance by the debtors delay, he
descend not unto extremities with those who have broken day, not through
negligence or unfaithfulness, but through want and necessity, which they did
not foresee: and let him remember, that where is no fault, there ought to be no
punishment.

Sixthly, that the estimation of the interest be not referred to the creditors
own arbitrament (for it is not fit that every creditor should be his own
caruer) but committed to the judgment of some other honest and discreet men.
[And for as much as it is supposed that the creditor might (to prevent his
loss) borrow according to the rate permitted by law, I cos qui cae^eros Cod.
lib. q. ^it. 32. c. 26.
therefore Iustini^n stinted recompencing usury, at six in the hundred.] Which
conditions being observed, it is lawful for the creditor to require an
overplus besides his principal: which overplus, notwithstanding is not usury.
For there is great difference betwixt usury and interest. In usury, the
lender intends and seeks gain; by interest, he only provides for his
indemnitie. Usury is intended, or perhaps couenanted for in the very contract:
interest is not intended at the first, but happens after delay. Usury is a
gain which from the time of the contract, until the time of payment, accrueth
to the lender: interest is a recompense of the loss, which after the day
appointed for payment, the creditor sustaineth through the borrowers default.

When as therefore men pretend the honest name of interest to their gainful
usury, Lib. de definit. appellat.
it is pernicious Sophistry, says Melancthon.

And thus you have heard what usury is. Now we are to proceed to a threefold
destinction thereof. And first, that usury is either inward and mental, or
outward and actual. Mental usury.
The mental is a lending for gain without covenant, that is, when the
creditor only intends and looks for gain by lending and forbearing his
money, but does not indent or covenant with the borrower for gain. And this
may be called the usury of the heart: for the Law of God being spiritual,
Romans 7. 14.
does not only restrain the hands, and outward man; but also the intent and
purpose of the heart: in so much that moral actions, though in show good, are
to be judged evil, if they proceed from an ill intent, and tend to an ill end:
For he that intends evil, has the like evil will with him that works
evil: And he which by lending only intends his own gain, he lends for
gain. And therefore, if actual usury be evil, then the intent and purpose
thereof is also evil. For lending is a work of charity, and an act of
liberality, wherein if we have true charity, we respect not our own profit,
but the benefit of the borrower. Wherefore as Augustine says, In Psalm. 36.
If thou look to receive more than thou gave, thou art an usurer. And
hereunto the most writers refer the speech of our Savior, Luke 6. 35, (...),
Lend, looking for nothing; that is, for no gain or profit thence: For as the
Canonists and Schoolmen say, Sola spes vsurarium facit, hope alone makes an
usurer: But that is thus to be understood.

1. When the expectation of gain is the cause of our lending; and when our
own profit is principally intended, that is, when we so lend for our own
gain, as that were it not for the expectation of gain, we would not lend: For
if our chief regard be to help our neigbour, and have but a secondary
respect to our own profit, as if that were not we would notwithstanding lend
for charity and humanity sake; this secondarie respect makes not an usurer,
though it something detract from the purity of our love, and the commendation
of our loan.

2. When there is expectation and purpose of gain, without any intent of
partaking in the loss: For when the lender so intends his own gain in the
borrowers gain, as also he purposes unfeignedly to bear part of his loss,
this intent is not usurious. For although his outward act be a contract of
loan; yet in respect of the purpose and intent of his heart it is partnership:
when as therefore the lender principally intends his own gain, without
purpose to bear part of the borrowers loss, that intent or expectation of
gain makes an usurer. An usurer I say, before God, but not before man: an
usurer in the inward court of conscience, but not in the outward and civil
court, which takes no notice of mentuall usury: neither can it be punished by
the laws of men, who cannot search the heart.

Outward and actual usury is, Actual usury.
when the creditor does not only intend certain gain by lending, but also
couenanteth for a certain sum to be allowed him at a certain time, or
times. This in the Scriptures is called imposing of usury, Exodus 22. 25, Thou
sh^lt not impose usury upon him: wherefore in actual usury, a covenant is
made for certain gain; and in that covenant the very form of actual usury
consists: For which cause some do call such a contract, Formal usury. And
this covenant uses to be confirmed by obligation, either verbal, as bills and
bonds; or real, as pawnes, or morgage; or personal, as suretiship; whereby
the creditor is secured for the receipt, and the debtor bound for the payment,
both of the principal and also of the usury. But in this actual and outward
usury, there is a covenant usually made for the payment, not only of a
certain sum, but also at certain times. The sum is proportionated or
rated according to the quantity of the principal, or stock which is lent,
and according to the length of the time: For by how much the principal is
greater, and the time longer, so much greater allowance is made. Now the
principal, be it more or less, is reduced to the rate of an hundred, to the
imitation of the Grecians and Latins: For whereas the Mina among the Grecians
contained an hundred Drachmas, they brought the principal to the rate of the
Mina, and the usury was reckoned according to the number of Drachmas. The
Romans also reduced the principal to the centenarie number. And because the
centesim^ vsur^ (an usury of the hundred part, that is, of one in the hundred
monthly) was the greatest which by law was permitted among them, therefore it
was esteemed as As or assis vsurarum, that is, as the gross or total sum of
usury: and all lesser vsuries were termed by the parts of the Assis. And for
as much as the Assis contains twelve Vncias, and every Vncia is the hundred
part of the principal, which was paid monthly for the centesimae vsurae;
hence it is, that the diverse notes of usury among us may easily be reckoned,
according to the Roman computation.

For the centesimae vsurae, which were one in the hundred monthly, are in a
twelve month (which is a year) twelve in the hundred.

So Deunx is 11. dext^ns or decumo. 10. Dodrans. 9. Bes. 8. Septunx. Molinaeus.
7. Semi^. 6. Quincunx. 5. Triens, that is, the third part of the centesim^,
Semis ad trientem (...), Lat. sescupla sei^ sesquialter.
4. Quadrans, which is the fourth part of the centesima, 3. Sextans, which is
the fixed part of the centesima, 2. Vncia, which is the twelfth part of the
centesima, is one in the hundred by the year. As touching the time, usurers
among the Grecians and Romans, Hinc liber faenebris pecuniae Kalendarium dictum.
were wont to covenant for their usury to be paid monthly. For which cause,
Faeneratori^. Haec ol^m consuetudo fuit, ut vltra statutum K^lend^rum diem, in
Idus concederens dilationem. l taq, solitum er^t, ut quae in Kalendis
faenerauerant, idibusreciperen^ and relegerent. Chabot. in Hora. epod. 2.
Basil calls usurers (...), monthly exactours; and compares them to those
unclean spirits, which cause the monthly fits of the falling sickness. And
according to that sum which was monthly paid, was the usury named: if the
hundred part of the principal was paid monthly for usury (which was after
twelve in the hundred by the year) it was called centesi^ae vsurae, and among
the Grecians vsur^ drachm^lis: if the 150 part (which was after eight in the
hundred by the year) it was called bes centesimae: if the 200 part (which was
after six in the hundred by the year) semis or dimidi^ centesimae: if the 300
part (which was after four in the hundred by the year) it was called triens
or tertia pars centesimae. Seeing therefore usury was paid monthly, and had
the name of that sum which was monthly paid, it were too great an absurdity
for any man to imagine (as some have done) that Semisses vsurae are fifty in
the hundred, Vid. Budaeum de Ass. fol. 24 and 25
that is, half of the principal; or trientes, to be the third part of the
principal: for then Semisses vsurae should be fifty in the hundred monthly,
and trientarium ^oenus should be after 33 pound, 6 shillings, 8 pence, monthly
for an hundred, etc. Whereas Antonius Pius is commended for exercising
trientarium soenus, as the least which then was in use, that with his substance
he might heap money. And accordingly Justinian, when he stinteth usury,
permits gentlemen and noblemen to take tertiam partem centesimae, that is,
four in the hundred: and to march^^ts, Vsque ad bessem (not sortis, but)
centesimae, that is, after eight in the hundred.

Secondly, Open usury.
Usury is either manifest, or covert. The manifest usury is a plain contract
of lending for gain: as when a man lends 10 pounds, with this covenant
expressed, that at the years end he shail receive 11 pounds. And this usury
commonly is contained within those limits and bounds, wherewith the positive
laws of countries do stint and circumscribe it.

The covert usury, Covert usury.
is a covert lending for gain; which is practiced either when men being ashamed
of usury, seek some honest pretext to hide their covetousness; or not being
contented with that moderat usury which is permitted by humane laws, find out
other devises, which some call mysteries, whereby they may defeat the laws
which stint usury, and may exact without danger of the law, immoderat and
excessive gain. But this mystical usury is not unworthily of some called
terrestris pyr^tic^, land-pyracie. Now it is called covert usury, because
whereas usury is a contract of lending for gain, this in appearance seems to
be a contract either not of lending, or not for gain. When it seems not to
be a contract of lending, it is cloaked under some other contract, which is to
be resolved into loan: for usury masketh sometimes under the vizard of
selling, or buying, or letting, or partnership, or exchange, or adventurers
usury: examples of all which are to be produced: Usury in selling.
and first of selling. For when the seller exacteth an overplus, more than the
just value of the ware, only for the time of forbearance which himself
grants to the buyer, he commits usury.

When I say an overplus above the just value, I call that a just value, when
there is an equality betwixt the ware and the price, according to the common
estimation at the time of the sale: but of that equality there is some
latitude; and we may not think that price to be unjust, which is but a little
under or over the precise Arithmeticall equality. And therefore the seller who
grants time, so long as he keeps himself within the latitude or compass
of an ordinary and equal price, he may not be thought to commit usury. And
it may so fall out, that the buyer will not be brought to give the equal
price, unless he may have some time granted for the payment: In which case,
though the buyer may perhaps think that he pays the dearer for the
forbearance, yet there is no usury, because the seller does not sell the
dearer for time. And when I say (only for the time of forbearance) I
insinuate, that there may be some other reasons, why the seller granting time,
may sell the dearer: as first, when he knows, that the value of the thing
will be more at the day of payment, than at the day of sale, he may sell it for
so much more, as in all likelihood it will be clearly more worth his charges
and hazard (if there shall be any) and the impairing or deminishing of the
thing (if it be subject thereunto) for the mean time being deducted. And
secondly, if the thing which he sells has a fruitful use, and yet
notwithstanding, that use shall be in all likelihood of no less price at the
day of payment, than it was at the day of the sale, he may take so much the
more, as the fruitful use of the thing is in the mean time clearly worth,
the estimation of the hazard and charge being deducted. As for example, when a
man sells land, and grants time for the payment, etc.

I add, for the time which himself grants to the buyer, because if the
buyer, detaining the price longer than the appointed time, shall be an
effectual cause of loss or hinderance to the seller, he is to allow him
interest, and the seller may with good conscience exact it of him; especially
if not through want, but through negligence and unfaithfulness, he uses delay.

But when a man sells his ware for more than the just price, only because he
gi^eth time to the buyer, he does indeed sell time, which is not his to sell,
and under the contract of selling he commits usury: for when the seller is
content to grant time to the buyer for the payment of the price agreed upon,
it is all one, as if he lent that money for such a time: for the voluntary
forbearing of money due to him for his ware, is all one with loan: and upon
such forbearing the buyer becomes a debtour, and the seller a creditour. As
for example, thou sellest me ware for 11 pounds, to be paid at the end of six
months, which thou would have sold for 10 pounds in present money: This men
may call what they will, but it is usury, after the rate of twenty in the
hundred. Likewise, if a man selling a cow, or some other commodity worth
forty shillings, to a poor man, shall agree with him, because he is not well
able to pay so much together, to take twelve pence a week for a year, under a
color of accommodating the poor man, and condescending in his sale to his
mean ability, he requires an usury of thirty in the hundred.

But will you hear a mystery? A gentleman in his need comes to an usurer to
borrow a hundred pounds, the usurer tells him he has no money, but (says he)
to accommodate you, I will help you with a commodity worth an hundred pounds:
which commodity you may commit to such an one (meaning his broker) and he will
sell it for you. The gentleman takes the commodity, enters into a bond of
two hundred pounds for the payment of an hundred, and perhaps with usury for
the said commodity: he entreats the broker to sell it for him, promising him
a reward. The broker undertakes the matter, and wills the gentleman to
repair unto him the next day: in the mean time he sells it to the same
usurer for fourscore pounds, or an hundred marks. So that under the color of
selling a commodity, the usurer lends but fourscore or an hundred marks, for
which he will receive a hundred, or perhaps a hundred and ten pounds.
Notwithstanding, the gentleman finding his present need supplied, is well eased
for a time, like to a man which in the fit of an ague has drunk a cup of cold
water: but when the day of payment comes, he is in greater distress than
before; for now being not able to pay, he forfeiteth a bond of two hundred
pounds. But you may not think, that the usurer will straight way sue the bond:
No, rather than he will deal extremely with him, he will give him a new day,
and it may be, feed his prodigality with more money, to the intent that he may
morgage his land to him, for the payment both of the new debt, and of the
former sum, with usury: which payment the unthrifty gentleman being not
able to make, the usurer having according to that curse, Psalm. 109. 11, gotten
his lands into his net, he makes a prey of him. And thus the possessions of
many gentlemen, become the prizes, as it were, of our land-pyrats.

Secondly, Usury in buying.
usury is cloaked under the contract of buying, when a man for the payment of
money beforehand to him that needs present money, buyeth any commodity under
that, which in all likelihood will be the price or true value thereof at the
time of the delivery. I say to him that needs present money. For otherwise,
no man will sell his commodities under foot, unless he have need of ready
money. And therefore this aggrauateth the fault of such buyers, who take
advantage by their neighbors necessity, and seek to gain by their need.
This is after a sort as the Prophet Amos Amos 8. 6.
speaks, to buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes.

I add, under the true value, because if it be doubtful whether the
commodity will bear a greater or less price at the time of the delivery
thereof, such a contract is not to be blamed as usurious. But when there is
certainty that the price will be greater, then is usury committed in such a
contract: for the laying down of money before hand to a man that stands in
need thereof, is in effect all one, as if he lent him so much money to be repaid
in ware. When as therefore he couenanteth to receive ware of greater value than
his money comes to, he lends for gain, and so commits usury.

As for example: a farmer wanting money to pay his rent, entreats an usurer
to lend him money until Midsummer; and finding him backward, offers him
consideration: nay (says he) I will not require usury of thee, I will deal
better with thee than so, we will take a course to supply one another want:
for as thou want money now, so shall I want corn then; here is sixteen
pounds, for which thou shall give me at Midsummer twenty quarters of good
wheat. This bargain the farmer is content to accept, rather than to forfeit
his lease, albeit he knows well enough, that at Midsummer his corn is like
to be better worth than twenty pounds.

Again, a countreyman comes to a farmer, that is at great charge in the
inning of his harvest, and understanding that he wants ready money to defray
his expenses, upon occasion of speech makes him this offer, to let him have
eight pounds in ready money, if the farmer on New-yeares day will deliver to
him twenty quarters of barley, which at that time are like to be worth 11 or 12
pounds: so that for the forbearing of eight pounds four months, he would
gain three or four pounds.

This kind of usury is often practiced in buying of rents or annuities: But
forasmuch as some are too favorable toward such contracts, and others too
austere against them, it shall not be amiss briefly to determine what we are
to hold in this point. For where is on the buyers part a purpose and an
absolute covenant for the perpetual alienation of his money, and on the
sellers part no covenant for the redeeming of his rent, it is plain that in
such a contract there is no loan, and therefore no usury: Howbeit if equality
be not observed, there may injustice and oppression be committed.

When as therefore a man having an hundred pounds, (on which he is loath to
spend being his stock) buyeth an annuitie or rent during his life, of twenty
marks, or 14 or 15 pounds, as shall be thought most equal; such a contract is
lawful and just, and is especially to be commended to single men or women who
have no charge depending on them.

Or if a man be willing to leave a rent or annuitie to others after him, he
may buy for his hundred pounds a proportionable rent, perhaps of five or six
pounds for ever, to the payment whereof the sellers lands may be liable. But
what if a man buy a rent for a certain and difinit time, as for ten or twenty
years? I answer, if it be a true contract or bargain and sale, and a
proportionable rate observed, that it is not usury, no more than by the
payment of a fine, to diminish the rent. Howbeit usury many times is cloked
under such contracts: As for example, A man borrows, or already owes an
hundred pounds, which because he is not able to pay at once, the creditor for
it does, as it were, buy of him a rent of twenty pounds a year for ten years,
which is a greater usury than of ten in the hundred: For the borrower paying
yearly ten pounds of the principal, does notwithstanding pay yearly ten
pounds for usury, as though no part of the principal had been in the former
years paid.

And thus we are to judge of those contracts wherein there is an absolut
covenant for the alienation of the principal. But the greatest controversy is
concerning those bargains wherein the seller of a rent reserueth liberty to
redeem it, and the buyer couenanteth upon the repayment of the principal to
sell it back again, or rather to release it. I answer, if the buyer of the
rent gives as much for it as it is worth in the common estimation of men, the
covenant of releasing it to the seller when he shall redeem it, makes not the
contract usurious. For that covenant makes the buyers bargain the worse, and
not the better. If therefore the seller require this covenant, that by paying
the principal he may redeem the rent, not because of the inequality of the
rent, but only because he would not have his lands liable to such a rent
charge; this covenant which makes his case so much the better, does so much
the more free the buyer from usury. But when this covenant of redeeming the
rent is made, because of the inequality of the rent, it is always a cloak of
usury: For neither the seller means perpetually to alienate the rent, the
greatness whereof forces him so soon as he able to redeem it, neither does
the buyer otherwise than in taking a pawn or morgage intend the perpetual
alienation of his principal. But you will say, in this contract is not loan,
because the buyer has no right to demand his principal: Neither does he
need, for the seller will be sure so soon as he is able to repay it. And
therefore such a bargain is rather a contract of oppignoration or morgage,
than of buying or selling. And even as he which has a pawn of better value
than his principal, needs not as in respect of his own profit to be
ouer-hastie with the borrower for the payment of his principal, which indeed
he has no right to require, having a pawn of more worth in lieu thereof, and
yet is truly said to have lent upon a pawn: so he which has a round rent
assured unto him, the right whereof is of more worth than his money, though he
may not, nor need not demand again his principal, may truly be said to have
lent as it were on a pawn or morgage, and in lending to have committed usury;
because even as in the contract of Antichresis, he has the fruit and profit of
the thing pawned until the principal be paid, and yet looks either to have
the principal wholly paid, allowing nothing back for the rent which he has
received in the mean time, or the same rent to be continued for ever.

Wherefore M. Luther writing on this Psalm, says Nostro autem seculo
^oelicissima est vsura, etc. In our age usury is most happy, being by the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, become justice and a lawful contract, the name
of usury being removed, Extrau. com. de emptione and ^endi^. cap. I. and
Contractum emptionis and venditionis annui census cum condition: reuenditionis
non esse vsurarium.
and a new name invented, whereby it is now called contractus redemptionis, The
contract of redeeming, or, buying again. For this is now called a fine figure,
and by this justice the whole world at this day is justified, especially the
Clergy, and that monster reigns securely, the Gospel being by this means
extinguished, and all the righteousness thereof with the kingdom of God,
Necsic tamen Antichristum adesse vllus credit: and yet not thus neither does
any man belecue that Antichrist is come: And for the same cause the greatest
patrons of these contracts do confess, Molin^us.
that they have succeeded in room of the old usury, from which they differ
little in substance. For what difference is it whether I assure a man ten
pounds a year out of certain lands, until I repay unto him an hundred
pounds, or enter into a bond of two hundred pounds for the payment of an
hundred and ten, this bond being renewed yearly until the principal be
paid? yet this difference there is, that as in some respects the new usury is
better than the old; so in other respects, worse. Better, because the creditor
cannot force the debtor to the payment of the principal at once: Worse, first,
because the debtor is fo^ced to greater security. Secondly, because whereas
the old usury by, the civil law, was to cease and to determine so soon as it
had matched the principal; and whatsoever was paid more, was to be abated from
the debt, (...) ^^at he which pays yearly ten pounds for an hundred, should
by the civil law, be wholly (...) charged o^ the debt in the end of twenty
years. But in the (...) there is no regard had of equalling the princi^ in so
much that the increase may by many degree^ ex^^ed the stock it self.

In this argument therefore we are to hold the mean^, neither condemning all
buying of rents (though it be with condition of selling back again the same)
nor yet allowing all.

We are not to condemn the buying of rents at an equal rate and indifferent
price, as lands and rents in the common estimation of men are valued: As
namely, after the rate of twenty years purchase, which is the rate observed
in this contract of redemption, by the imperial law of Germ^nie. For the
preception of this rent is not usurious: First, because this is not a contract
of loan, but of buying and selling: Secondly, because the rent which he
receives is the fruit of that which is his own, raised out of such lands as
are at his peril: whereas in usury, the creditor receives profit of that
which now is not his, the property being transferred unto the borrower, and
with the property the hazard. Neither does the covenant of selling back or
releasing the rent to the seller when he shall redeem it, disprove the
property or dominion which the buyer has therein, but only circumscribe and
restrain it: As when I give a man a commodity, with this condition, he shall
not allienat it to any other; I give him the property and dominion of the
thing, though restrained.

Neither are we to allow those bargains wherein a greater rent is bought, than
the money is worth: for such contracts, if they be absolutely made for the
perpetual alienation of the rent to the buyer, and of the money to the seller,
though they be not usurious, yet are they unequal and unjust. But if they be
conditionally made with this couenent, that the seller by the payment of the
principal, may redeem and so extinguish the rent, then are they usurious,
because a perpetual alienation either of the rent by the seller, or of the
principal by the buyer, is not intended, but a great rent by way of morgage,
according to the contract of Antichresis, made over unto the buyer, both for
his assurance in receiving of his principal in the end, and for his usury
allowed for his loan in the mean time. And forasmuch as such contracts are
usually practiced in the Church of Rome, and not only permitted but allowed
and authorized as just and lawful by the Pope of Rome, this evidently proves
that the Romish Church is deeper in this sin of usury, than the reformed
Churches, whom notwithstanding the Papists condemn for this sin: For albeit
the sin is practiced among us, as much perhaps as among them, yet do not our
laws allow usury as good, but permit it only, as evil, and permit it with
limitation and restraint, as shall be showed.

But will you hear a mystery practiced in buying? A man having urgent
occasion to use present money, comes to an usurer to borrow forty pounds for
three months: the usurer pretends that about that time he shall have
occasion to lay out his money for wheat, and therefore couenanteth with him that
at the end of three months he shall for his forty pounds deliver unto him
fifty quarters of good wheat, or for want thereof five and forty pounds:
which he says not, either that he needs corn, or that the borrower has
corn to sell; but that under this pretense of buying corn, he would exact an
unreasonable gain, viz. of five in the forty lent for three months, which is
after fifty in the hundred by the year.

Thirdly, Usury in letting.
usury is practiced under the color of letting, so often as men would seem to
let things which are not letable, when as indeed they lend for gain things to
be spent in the use, as money, victuals, and such other things as consist in
quantity, that is, in number, weight, and measure: For such things neither
have in themselves a fruitful use which may be let, neither are they to be
referred in the same particular impaired by the use, neither does the property
or hazard thereof as in things let, appertain to the letter.

But behold some other mysteries. A farmer wanting money to store himself with
cattle, comes to an usurer to borrow twenty pounds, and being loath in his
need to receive a repulse, offers usury. It is not my manner, says he, to
put out my money to usury, but here is twenty pounds for thee with which thou
may buy thee eight kine: these eight kine I will let thee for so many ryals
yearly, provided always that thou shall from time to time make good this
number of kine, allowing me the hire for the full number, that is to say four
pounds usury for twenty pounds, which is after twenty in the hundred. To
another, coming to borrow the like sum, he delivers 20 pounds, pretending
that the borrower shall buy therewith an hundred sheep: this hundred sheep,
says he, I will let thee yearly for so many shillings, so as thou will
undertake to make always my stock good: which he says not, that the borrower
should bestow his money in sheep, but that under pretense of letting, he might
exact five in twenty, which is after five and twenty in the hundred:
otherwise if indeed he did let cattle or sheep for an indifferent rate, and
stood to the hazard of them, the conaract were lawful. But in those
unreasonable covenants, the cattle which to the hirer are mortal and subject
to many casualties, are intended to be immortal and free from all hazard to
the letter.

And for as much as the contract of Facio vt des as the Lawyers speak, whereby
a man lets out his labor for reward, may fitly be reduced to the contract
of Location, therefore to this head such mysteries are to be referred as are
practiced under pretense of that contract. As for example, a poor man comes
to his neighbor to borrow 20 shillings, he having some small skill in
Scriueners craft, pretending that he will lend his money freely, so he may ever
have it again upon small warning, is content to lend his money for a month,
promising when that month is expired he will lend it him for another month if
he can forbear it, and so from month to month; only in regard of his pains
he is to have at the renewing of his bond every month twelve pence, which
(besides one shilling allowed him for a couple of bills or bonds) amounts to
twelve shillings in the year, which is after threescore in the hundred.

Fourthly, Usury in partnership.
usury is committed under the color of partnership, so often as the creditor
couenanteth to partake in the gain, not minding to bear part in the loss:
For the money which is to be employed he will have acknowledged to be his in
respect of the gain, but the borrowers in respect of the loss.

Fifthly, Usury in exchange.
usury is practiced under exchange. Now exchange is either of ware for ware,
or of money for money. The former is called barterie; wherein usury is
committed, when the first deliverer of his commodity requires more of the
other than his commodity is worth, in respect of the time which he grants
to the other for the delivery of his ware.

Exchange of money, is either for money presently delivered, or by bills of
exchange assured. In the former which is practiced by money-exchaungers (whom
the Scriptures cail (...) and (...)) there is no loan, John. 2. 14. 15.
and therefore no usury, though they use not to exchange without gain: For
seeing it is their trade wherein they spend their time, labor and cost, to
accommodate men in that behalf, a competent gain is to be allowed unto them.

Exchange of money for money to be received upon bills, is either without gain,
as when English money is exchanged for the just quantity there, in other
money, according to the public and known valuation thereof: or else it is
for gain; and that is either the bankers exchange, or the merchants exchange.
The bankers are they which are more properly called (...) Trapezites, Mat. 25.
27.
whose dealing in exchange by bills is twofold: For sometimes they give bills, and
sometimes they take: they give thus; A man being to travel to Venice,
delivers to a banker an hundred pounds, which he desires to receive at
Venice: The banker, because he is at charge with keeping servants there, as
also for that he takes upon him the safe delivery of the money, freeing the
traveler from the trouble and hazard of the carriage, thinks himself worthy
perhaps of 4 or 5 pounds for assuring him an hundred at Venice; and accordingly
for his hundred pounds received here, gives him a bill, upon the delivery
whereof at Venice, he shall be sure to receive ninety six pounds. In this
contract there may be injustice, if the banker require too much gain, but
there cannot be usury on his part, whiles he lends not: nor on the
travelers part, whiles his principal is not increased but diminished. Again
sometimes they take bills: as thus, An English man being arrived at Venice, and
having occasion to use money there, takes of a banker an hundred pounds, in
Venice coin, giving him a bill for the payment perhaps of an hundred and four
pounds of English money, in London: this overplus if it were required in
respect of the time of forbearing, it were usury; but being required in this
regard, because the banker uses a chargeable trade to free men from the
trouble, charge, and hazard of conueying their money to Venice, and is content
to receive it at their home, taking the whole labor, charge and hazard upon
himself, it is as lawful as the former. For this allowance is not made in
respect of the loan and time of forbearing, but in respect of the place of
payment, in which respect the banker takes a trouble, charge, and hazard upon
himself to free the traveler therefrom.

The merchants exchange of money by bills, is that which is not made according
to the public and known valuation of coins in diverse countries, but
according to such prices thereof as merchants do set among themselves,
respecting the length of time betwixt the loan and payment, and increasing the
price of the money lent, according as the time is longer. And first, there is
consideration had of the place whereunto the bill of exchange is directed: for
according to the distance, is the price proportionated, and commonly where the
money is lent, it is of a higher price, than where it is paid. But suppose the
money be lent upon a bill of exchange, to be exhibited at Midleborough: In the
next place consideration is had of the time, and the party which takes up the
money is demanded whether he will have it at sight, or at vsaunce, or at
double vsaunce, etc. At sight, that is, whether he will give his bill for the
present payment of the money at the sight and presentation of the bill to his
factor or friend that deals for him at Midelborough: At vsaunce, that is,
whether he will have it for a month longer, or at double vsaunce, that is, for
two months. When the party has signified for how long he would have the
money, inquiry is made how the exchange goes that day from London to
Middleborough, which every broker in the exchange can tell. To day perhaps
twenty shillings sterling at sight is valued at four and thirty shillings
and four pence of the Zelanders coin, and it may be to morrow at four and
thirty shillings and six pence, and so up and down as the price of corn
rises and falls in the market. And even as there be hucsters and ingrossers
of corn, by whose means the price of corn many times is much enhaunsed; so
are there some who makes a trade of exchaunging, and combining themselves
together, do find means to engro^^e the money as it were into their hands,
especially against such times as they know there will be greatest use of money,
that then they may put it forth at what prices themselves list. Well, suppose
the party would have the money at sight, being to allow for every twenty
pounds sterling as the exchange goes, perhaps four and thirty and six pence
of that coin, which is current at Middleborough: where in exchange the English
money is not so high rated, commonly by two pence or three pence in the pound,
as in the exchange at London: and so contrariwise the Zelanders coin higher
rated in their exchange commonly by two pence or three pence here in the
exchange at London; so that the lender commonly gains either way so much in
every pound for the loan of his money a few days, (as those too well know to
their great loss, which take up money both by exchange and rechange.) But if
the party will have the money at vsaunce, then every pound sterling is higher
rated by four pence: if at double vsaunce, then the price is raised eight
pence: so that when twenty shillings sterling in the Zelanders money is valued
at four and thirty shillings and four pence at sight; at vsaunce it is four
and thirty shillings and eight pence; at double vsaunce five and thirty
shillings, which is a gain of five marks (of their coin) in the hundred
pounds sterling for two months: and of twenty pounds of their money in an
hundred pounds sterling by the year.

In this exchange there are these faults: Money which was ordained to be the
price of all wares, and the measure of all bargains, is not only made a ware,
contrary to the nature thereof ( nam quod medium est venditionis non potest
esse terminus;) but also the price thereof, which ought to be certain and
certainly known, and by public and sovereign authority established and
settled in every commonwealth (for that is the rule and measure, whereby all
things are prized, (...), Eth. 5. 5.
as the Philosopher says) the price I say thereof, whereby all things are
prized, is made uncertain, for the gain of some other men, to the endammaging
of the commonwealth.

2. Those which make a trade of dealing by exchange, do either find means
themselves to raise the price of money, or else do lie in the wind, till the
prizes being raised, they may lend it forth for greater gain.

3. In exchange at sight, usury is committed by them which seek gain
thereby, though somewhat mystically, the lender being sure almost at all times
to be a gainer by his loan. Notwithstanding, I do not absolutely condemn
those merchants, who dealing by exchange at sight, do not thereby seek gain,
but mutually serve one another turn, following the prices as they go in the
exchange, being as well content as occasion serves, to borrow after this
manner, as sometimes they are entreated to lend, sometimes also, though very
seldom, they proving no gainers by this loan. Howbeit, their dealing were
more commendable, if in their exchange they could and would follow the common
and known prices of coins, appointed by public and sovereign authority:
For it may seem strange, that private men should take upon them to alter the
value of princes coins.

4. But as for vsance and double vsance, there is no question to be made but
usury, yea great usury is therein plainly committed, at the rate of twelve
in the hundred at the least.

Now the merchants exchange is either real or counterfeit: the real is, when
bills of exchange, whereupon money has been delivered, are in deed and in
truth transported to the place appointed beyond seas, to the end, that thereby
so much money may be received there to the lenders behalf, as by the manner of
dealing in exchange before specified, is due.

The counterfeit exchange is, when in imitation of the real exchange, money is
delivered upon bills of exchange, with mention also of the places of exchange,
not to the intent that the bills should be transported for the satisfying of the
creditour beyond seas, but that the lender keeping the bills at home with him,
may have the like allowance which merchants have for the same time, dealing by
exchange and rechange, betwixt the places named: the reason of which practice
is, because the gain which is reaped by exchange, is greater than any other
which is tolerated by the magistrate: insomuch, that they which put forth their
money in this counterfeit exchange, are supposed to gain after sixteen or
twenty in the hundred. And therefore this kind of exchange may most worthily
be called Cambium siccum, that is, dry exchange; because it is void of
charity, Sum. A^gel. voce vsura. 54
being indeed a griping usury, practiced under the color of merchandising
exchange: howbeit the former also by the doctrine of the schoolmen is to be
called dry exchange.

6. Lastly, usury is practiced under pretense of the adventurers usury, when
a man couenanteth for gain in lending, under pretense of hazard, when indeed
the principal is not hazarded: as when a man lends an hundred pounds, with
this condition, if himself and two or three other, which he shall name, or any
of them, shall be alive at the tweluemonths end, that the debrour shall pay him
a hundred and ten pounds, otherwise he shall pay but fourscore and ten pounds.
For if he should name but one, it were seven to one, that he should be living
at the years end, but numbering three, it is more than twenty to one, that
some one of the three shall survive: this therefore is but a cloak of usury.

And thus we have heard of usury, practiced in such contracts as having the
names of other contracts, do not therefore seem (though indeed they be)
contracts of lending. Now we are briefly to speak of usury committed, when
there seems to be no contract of lending for gain.

As first, usury is sometimes practiced under a color of free lending; as
when a man lending an hundred pounds in light or cracked angels, and other money
not current, couenanteth with the borrower, that he shall repay him in good and
current money. Such was the usury practiced of old by the Jews in the time of
Ezechiel, a little before the captivity: The shekel of the Sanctuary 320
gerahs. Exodus 30. 13.
For as some write, they having ordained a new shekel, exceeding the old two
and thirty grains, so that whereas the civil or Mosaicall shekel (which was
but half of the holy shekel) weighed an hundred and threescore grains, W. H.
de ass* ex Munstero and D. Kimhi in Exodus 30.
the new weighed an hundred ninety and two; they would lend after the old
shekel, but they would be paid according to the new.

Secondly, usury is practiced in lending upon pawnes. For although by taking a
pawn which the debtour may spare, the lender may lawfully provide for his
security and indemnitie: yet when gain is sought thereby, it is a cloak of
usury. As first, when he lends upon a pawn which is much better than his
money, in hope to get the pawn, it is a spice of usury. Again, when the
creditour couenanteth to have and enjoy the fruitful use of the pawn in lieu
of his loan, abating nothing of the principal; (...).
this contract of the lawyers is called Antichrests, wherein at the first sight
appears some show of equality and justice, That as the debtour uses the
creditours money, so the creditour should use and enjoy the debtours house and
lands: But indeed this contract is unjust and usurious: usurious, because it is
nothing else but lending for gain. For when the debtor yields to the
creditour the use of his house and land for the use of his money it is all one,
as if he allowed him the rent of the house and land for usury. Unjust also and
unequal; first, because the house and land, which is let for ten pounds a
year, and pawned for an hundred pounds, is worth two hundred or perhaps three
hundred pounds: and therefore it is unequal, that for the use of an hundred
pounds, which is spent in the use, and is not lettable, the borrower should
yield the fruitful use of his house and ground, which being worth two or three
hundred pounds, may be let for ten or twelve pounds a year. Besides, the
creditour, though he has the profit of the house and land, yet has he not the
property, neither does he bear the hazard thereof: and therefore reapeth the
fruit of that which is not his own, and whereof he bears not the hazard. But
to the borrower belongs both the property and the hazard of the money
borrowed. Wherefore the Scripture condemns the using of things laid to pawn,
as lying in clothes pawned, Amos 2. 8, I mean such an use, as whereby the
thing pawned is diminished or impaired. But among us there are usurers which
commit double usury, not only couenanting for usury in money, but also
impairing the thing pawned (as plate or garments) by the use thereof.

Thirdly, under lending upon bonds. For although it be lawful for a man to
take bonds for his indemnitie, and thereby by way of interest to save himself
harmless; yet if thereby he seek for gain, he commits usury. As for
example, one comes to borrow of thee twenty pounds for a tweluemonth: thou
say, thou can not forbear thy money so long, therefore thou will lend him
so much freely upon his bond for a month, hoping, that he which came to borrow
for a twelue-month, will not be in case to pay within a month. The month
therefore being expired, and payment not made, thou exactest more of him, than
by a contract of usury thou could have couenanted for. But whether in
taking bonds thou playest the usurer, or not, thou may discern by this
note: for it thou desire in thine heart, that he may keep touch with thee,
and not incur the forfeiture of his bond, it is a sign, that thou prouidest
only for thine indemnitie: but if thou wishest that he should rather break
his day, than keep touch with thee, it is a sign, that thou lendest for
gain, and take a bond, not that he should pay the sooner, but the more. But
if thy disposition be such, that thou would not lend to a landed man, if
thou did think that he would keep touch, then do thou lend not to
help thy neighbor, but to undo him: and whiles thou layest a net for thy
brother, thy self fallest into the snare of the devil.

4. Lastly, usury is practiced under the color of interest, so often almost as
men agree for interest aforehand. For although some have distinguished
interest, that there is a casual interest, Molinaeus. Interesse casuale
momentaneum. Promisiuum and successiuum. Interesse vsurarium.
which they confess is not to be regarded but after delay: and a promiscuous
or successiue interest, which as they say may be couenanted for proratione
temporis, according to the proportion of the time, which they call
intervsurium; and confess it to be called in the law usurious interest; Fr.
Hotoman.
yet those of soundest judgment do hold, that interest is not to be allowed,
nisi post moram, but after delay: for grant intervsurium, or successiue
interest (as they call it) to be lawful, then can you not but allow of all
usury. For first, interest is to be measured, not ex part debitoris, but ex
part creditoris. And therefore no respect is had therein, whether the debtour
do gain thereby, but only whether the forbearing of the money be an
hinderance to the creditour, or not. And secondly, if it be lawful for a man
to agree, according to the proportion of the time, for so much gain as the
laws permit; every lender may pretend, that by the forbearing of his money he
shall be so much at the least damnified, and therefore may covenant for so much
at the least by way of interest.

Notwithstanding, I will not deny, but in some case a man lawfully require and
take interest, though the borrower have not made delay: as namely, when by the
borrowers authority, or otherwise, the creditor (who cannot without his loss,
or certain hinderance of some just and lawful gain, forbear his money) is
as it were forced to lend to a man, whose estate or ability is such, that he
may better undertake to save the lender harmless, than the lender may want
his money: provided always, that it be true interest, in respect either of
certain loss to be incurred by want of the money, or of certain hinderance
of just and lawful gain to be sustained. For in this case, the borrower being
the effectual cause of the lenders hinderance or loss, and being better able
to bear that imposition of interest, than the lender is to forbear his money,
I doubt not, but the lender may by requiring interest, provide for his own
indemnitie.

We have heard two distinctions of usury: the third and last remains, viz.
That usury is either simple, or compound: the simple, wheu usury of the
principal only is exacted: compound, when usury not only of the principal
is required, but of usury also, and is therefore called usury of usury,
(...), Aristoph. Nub. 5. As for example, when a man having lent an hundred
pounds for a tweluemonth, after ten in the hundred, is content for a second
year to forbear both the principal and usury: there is due to him the first
year by simple usury, a hundred and ten pounds: but the second year by
usury of usury, Accessio accessionis iure civilly non conceditur.
a hundred and one and twenty pounds. And for as much as usury of usury was
ever condemned, it has been an ancient practice of usurers, to join the
former years usury unto the principal, and so anew to covenant for the
usury of the whole sum. Which contract of the Grecians is called (...), and
of Tully, renouati^ fanoris, renewing of usury.

We have showed what usury is, and how many ways* it is committe^ ^ow we are
to consider the quality of it, viz. whether it be lawful, or not: for this,
the covetousness of these times has made a controversy, which in former ages
was never doubted of. But not to hold you long in suspense, I will in this
short assertion determine, what we are to hold concerning this question: Which
assertion I will afterward not only prove by testimonies of Scriptures, and by
other arguments, but also defend and maintain against the objections of those
who hold the contrary opinion. My assertion therefore is this, That all usury
(which I have defined to be mutuation, or lending for gain) whether it be
mental or actual, whether manifest or covert, whether simple or compound, is
simply and in it own nature utterly unlawful: howsoever some usury is worse
than other, according either to the estate of the borrower, or the quantity of
the usury.

I will begin with the law of God, which in three places forbids usury,
viz. Exodus 22. 25. Leuit. 25. 35, 36. Deuteronomy. 23. 19: against which places the
patrones of usury bring many exceptions, which by the grace of God shall be
refuted. But I will chiefly insist on that place of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, the usury of money, the
usury of meat, the usury of any thing that may be lent upon usury. That is,
thou shall not lend for gain to thy brother, neither money, nor meat, nor any
thing else which consists in quantity, as in number, weight, and measure, and
is spent in the use, and wherein usury is usually committed.

Against these allegations there are diverse exceptions taken; as first
concerning the words whereby usury is signified in the Scripture: For in that
place of Deuteronomie, and in this Psalm, not all usury (say they) is
forbidden, but Neshek, that is, morsurie, or biting usury, which biteth and
damnifieth the neighbor. For there is (say they) a certain toothlesse or not
biting usury, which does not hurt but help the neighbor. But I have showed
before that Neshek is the common and ordinary name whereby all usury is
signified in the Hebrew tongue. And therefore this word does not distinguish
one kind of usury from another, but in general signifies, that all usury is
biting. And in like sort, he which lends for gain, is called Masshik, and he
which takes up upon usury, though for his gain, is called Nashuk, the money
which is lent for gain is called Noshek, that is, which biteth (as appears
evidently by this text) because when it is repaid, it biteth and as it were
gnaweth away some part of the borrowers substance for an overplus or gain to
the creditour, which is called Neshek, as it were the bit. So that all usury
in it own nature is biting, because it biteth or shreddeth away some of the
borrowers substance. And although perhaps the borrower by reason of his wealth
feels not this biting, or else licketh himself whole by biting of others;
yet usury is a gain which is bitten and shred away from the borower, and that
either to his loss, or (as hereafter shall be showed) to the hinderance of the
commonwealth, whose common profit in all contracts is especially to be regarded.

Secondly, I have showed before, that Neshek is all one with the other words
Tarbith and Marbith, whereby any gain or clear increase above the principal
required for loan, is signified: and therefore the least gain required for
loan, is Neshek, and condemned for usury in the scripture: as Leuit. 25. 36,
Thou shall not take of him usury or increase: which the old Latin translation
reads thus, Thou shall not take usury of him, nor more than thou gave. And
verse. 37, Thou shall not lend him thy money upon usury, nor thy victuals for
increase, that is, as Ambrose reads, in amplius recipiendum, to receive more.
Upon which words he says, Has sententia dei omne sortis excludit augmentum,
Lib. de Tobia. cap. 15.
This sentence of God excludes all increase above the principal. Whereunto
you may add, Pro. 28. 8. Ezech. 18. 8. 13. 17. and 22. 12: in all which places
these words are not only used promiscuously to signify the selfsame thing,
but the latter words Tarbith and Marbith are ever added as the exposition of
Neshek. And therefore those words which the holy ghost confounds, let not us
distinguish; and much less upon this frivolous distinction let us build our
practice, or hazard the eternal salvation of our souls. For you know who has
said, Eze. 18. 13.
He that puts forth to usury, or takes increase, shall he live? he shall
not live, he shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon him.

But against this truth concerning one and the same signification of Neshek and
Tarbith, they raise again diverse other exceptions, in which they shift from
one to another, because they have no sure ground to stand upon. First they say
we must distinguish betwixt Neshek and Tarbith: for Neshek is restrained to
money, and Tarbith to corn and victuals, Leu. 25, and therefore they are
deceived, who think that Tarbith of money is forbidden.

As if they should have said, Tarbith, that is, the increase of corn and
victuals, is indeed unlawful, but the usury or Tarbith of money is not
unlawful, unless it be Neshek. And yet themselves allow as great increase for
corn as for money. But I answer first, that Neshek is the usury not of money
only, but of corn and victuals, and every thing else which is put to usury;
as appears plainly Deuteronomy. 23. 19, where also every thing which is put to
usury, is called Noshek. For so he says, Thou shall not take the Neshek of
money, the Neshek of victuals, or the Neshek of any thing else Asher jisshak,
which is put to usury. Secondly, that there is the like reason for money and
other things, which consisting in quantity, are spent in the use: and
therefore it had been all one, if the Lord had said, Thou shall not lend thy
money, be Marbith, for increase; nor thy victuals, be Neshek, for usury.
Thirdly, the Prophets use these words indifferently for the same thing, as
Ezech. 18. and 22. Prou. 28. 8, Yea, but (say they) the Prophets, who are the
interpretours of the law, must be expounded according to the law. Nay rather if
they be interpretours of the law, the law is to be interpreted by them. But
they use to understand the word Tarbith as an exposition of Neshek signifying
more plainly that same thing which is meant by Neshek; and therefore these
words in the Law are so to be understood.

2. Their second exception is, that Tarbith does signify not euericincrease,
or accession, but multiplication; and therefore by that name, Usury, unless
it be an expressiue or multiplied increase, is not forbidden: But how does this
answer agree with the former, wherein it was said that Tarbith of money was not
condemned, but of corn and victuals? or may we think that an express and
multiplied increase of money is to be allowed? And therefore this is but a
mere shift, as well as the former: For not only all antiquity have
understood by this word, any gain, overplus or increase whatsoever above the
principal, but the most learned also of those new writers, who write but too
favorably of usury, acknowledge that hereby all increase or accession above
the principal is condemned, as before has been showed. Yea, but Rabah from
whence Tarbith is derived, signifies to multiply, as Deuteronomy. 17. 16, where the
king is charged not to multiply horses: for he is not forbidden to have many
horses; but to exceed in gathering a multitude of them. But say I, in the next
verse he is by the same word forbidden to multiply wives, not that an
excessive multitude only, but all plurality of wives is forbidden. Leuit. 18.
18.
And as Tarbith in the Scriptures; Mal. 2.
so (...) in Hebrew writers, is derived from the same root, whereby
notwithstanding the least and easiest vsuries are signified. And as I deny not
but that Rabah signifies to multiply, so I affirm that sometimes it
signifies to grow or increase, and sometimes including a comparison, to be
more or greater, as 1. Re. 4. 30. Genesis 43. 34. and Hiphil to augment or to make
greater or more, as Psalm. 71. 21. and in the same chapter of Leuit. verse. 16.
1. Chron. 4. 10. Exodus 30. 15.

So that Tarbith and Marbith does signify any increase whatsoever, Leuit. 25.
16.
when more is required than was lent. And if any shall further urge the force
of the word multiplying, I answer, that in usury there is multiplying, and
such a multiplying, as money being put forth from six months to six months
unto usury of ten in the hundred, and the usury also put forth to increase
(whether to the same man or to others, that makes no difference, in the nature
of the thing) does almost double the principal in seven years, and every
seven years doubleth the former sum, so that 1000 pounds being thus put
forth for seven times seven years, which is no long time, multiplieth it self
to 128000 almost, and in seven years more to 256000, etc.

3. Others have found out this evasion, H. Z.
That Tarbith signifies usury of usury. Which interpretation if we shall
follow, we must confess that the Lord condemns no usury of corn and
victuals, Leuit. 25. 36.
unless it be usury of usury, which is absurd. This therefore is a certain
truth, that Neshek, Tarbith, and Marbith, are words of the same signification,
whereby all gainefull usury whatsoever, is condemned in the Scriptures.

4. Others, who would feign prove the lawfulness of usury out of the
Scriptures, have found out (as they think) another word of a middle and
indifferent signification. And therefore howsoever they confess that all
Neshek, Tarbith and Marbith are forbidden, for they signify biting and
excessive usury: yet Masshah, whereby moderate usury is signified, is not
only allowed and commended, but sometimes also commanded toward the rich.

Whereunto I answer, that Masshah properly signifies an exaction, and in those
places which concern lending and borrowing, it signifies in respect of the
creditour mutuum, in respect of the debtour debitum, but such a debt as the
creditor lends upon security, and therefore means to exact again from the
debtor, as Deuteronomy. 15. 2. and 24. 10. Prou. 22. 26. And that in the Scriptures it
is not used in the signification of usury. For whereas they object Nehem. 5.
7. 10, I answer, that the word there is not Massbah, but Massa, proceeding
from another root, and signifying a burden, as Tremelius also, and Iunius
translate it. Or if it did signify usury (as indeed by that burden is meant
usury) yet is it there condemned.

Yea but Nasshah the verb, whence Massbah is derived, signifies to lend upon
usury.

Nasshah signifies properly to exact, and is used in the signification of
lending with purpose to exact that which is lent, whether it be freely lent or
for gain; as when men lend upon bonds, sureties, or pawnes (in which sense the
words (...) and faenerare, are often used in ancient divines.) And when it is
used in the signification of free lending, it does not signify that charitable
lending, whereunto our Savior exhorts, Lu. 6. 35, but that civil lending
upon sufficient security, which although it be lawful toward the rich, and
them that be of ability, yet is it not allowable toward the poor, to whom we
ought to lend looking for nothing again. Wherefore the Lord faith Exodus 22,
when thou lendest to the poor thou shall not be Kenosheh, like an exactor unto
him, neither in imposing usury upon him, verse 25. nor yet in taking a pawn
of him, Deuteronomy 24. 12.
verse 26. Ezekiel. 18. 7. 12. 16. But in the signification of lending for gain
or usury, it is never allowed in the Scriptures, or used in the better part.
And if any man can allege any one pregnant testimony of Scripture, where
Masshah signifying usury, or Nassbah signifying to lend upon usury, is either
commended as good, or allowed as lawful (which I am sure no man is able to do)
I will yield in the whole controversy. And yet this is the chief ground of a
tedious and disorderly discourse written, The Treatise beginne^h thus, The
question of usury, and^
but not printed in English, in defense of usury: wherein though there is
great show made of learning, yet do I not find many things worth the
aunswering. Those reasons which have any show of reason shall by the grace of
God in due place receive their answer. For as touching this point, whereas the
Author of that Treatise alleges for the warranting of usury, and lending
upon usury, as commended under the name of Masshah and Nassbah, Deuteronomy. 24. 10.
and 15. 2. 2. King. 4. 7. Prou. 22. 26, 27. Esaias. 24. 2. Ier. 15. 10. any
indifferent man that is of judgment will easily acknowledge, that there is
scarcely any show of reason in these allegations, as the bare repetition of the
places will sufficiently show. Deuteronomy. 24. 10, When thou lendest thy brother any
loan (namely which thou purposest to exact again; for so much, as I said, is
implied in the word) and therefore the English Geneua translation reads, When
thou shall ask again of thy neighbor any thing lent, thou shall not go into
his house to take his pawn: Tremelius and Pagnin read thus, Cum mutuaueri^
proximo tuo vllius reimutuum, etc.

The meaning of Deuteronomy. 15. 2. is this, every creditor shall forbear to exact
his debt of his brother in the seventh year, which is the year of remission
or freedom: in 2. King. 4. 7. Elisha bids the widow having sold her oil,
to pay her creditor: Prou. 22. 26, 27, Be not of them which are sureties for
debts; if thou hastnothing to pay, why should he (namely thy creditor) take thy
bed from under thee? In all which places the word is not used in the
signification of usury. And the like may be said of the other two places,
Esaias. 24. 2. Cannosheh Caasher noshe ^o, It shall be to the exactor, as to him
of whom he exacteth: and so Jerome reads, Sicut qui repetit, sic qui debet,
and the Septuaginta, (...), and Ier. 15. 10, I have neither lent to them,
neither have they lent to me: and so Tremelius and Iunius read, Non dedi
mutuum, neque mutuo dederunt mihi: or if any shall imagine that the
signification of usury is in these two places expressed, (which indeed cannot
be proved, though some translations read so) yet is usury neither commended nor
yet condemned therein. But I shall have occasion to speak of them both, when I
shall entreat of borrowing upon usury.

Now I proceed to a second exception, which they make against the allegation of
Exodus 22, out of the place it self: For say they, there is the like reason of
taking usury, and of taking and keeping a pawn, verse. 25, 26, 27. but a pawn
may be taken of the rich, and being taken may be kept, therefore in like sort
usury may be taken of the rich.

But I answer, that there is not the like reason of taking usury and pawnes:
the creditor in taking a pawn, only provides for his indemnitie, that he be
no looser; but in taking usury he requires gain: and yet to take a pawn of a
poor man, or such a pawn as thy neighbor, though not so poor, Deuteronomy. 24. 6.
10, 11, 12, 13.
cannot spare; it is a cruel and uncharitable part, Exodus 22. 22.
forbidden in the law of God. The sense therefore of that place is thus much,
That they should not afflict or oppress the poor; but contrariwise relieve
the^ by loan, and in lending, that they should not only abstain from seeking
gain by usury, but also that they should not provide for their indemnitie by
taking pawnes. And therefore by this place we are commanded, if our ability
may afford so much, to lend to our needy brother, without hope not only of
gain, but also of recovery of the principal, he being not able to repay. In
this place therefore there are two degrees: The first, that we oppress not the
poor, but relieve them with free loan. Secondly, that in loan we should be
so far from seeking gain by usury, that we should not take a pawn of them
for our indemnitie.

Their third exception is against the allegation out of Leuit. 25. 37, from
whence they reason thus, The usury of corn is as much forbidden as of money,
but not all usury of corn is forbidden, but only that which is great and
excessive: and therefore not all usury of money is forbidden, but that which
is great and excessive. The assumption they prove first by the confession of
those who have been the greatest scourgers of usury, who confess some usury
of corn to be lawful. For answer whereof, we are to know that usury is not
always committed in corn and such like commodities, whose prices do rise and
fall, so often as more corn or other ware is required than was lent, unless
more in worth and value be required: For commonly four bushels of wheat in
June, are worth five or six in October; and therefore if a man should lend
corn in June to receive the equal worth thereof by all likelihood in October,
though in a greater quantity, it were no usury, because it is no lending for
gain. Otherwise it is the received opinion of the learned, that usury is
committed in all those things which are spent in the use, Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
as money, meat, corn, wine, oil, Nehem. 5. 11.
when more in worth and value is required than was lent.

Secondly, they allege the example of Joseph, to prove that usury of corn is
not unlawful unless it be excessive: Genesis 47. 23, 24, 25.
For Joseph was very good to the Egyptians, and yet notwithstanding for
seed-corne once given, be required a fifth part for ever. Which example if it
were thus rightly alleged, it would prove that for a quarter of corn lent in
a dear year, it would be not only a lawful, but a bountiful act to require
a quarter at the lest to be paid yearly for ever. But indeed this example of
Joseph has no affinity with usury: For when the Egyptians money and cattle
were spent, Genesis 47. 18, 19.
and now had nothing left them wherewith to buy food for themselves, and seed
for their ground; in this extremity they come to Joseph in the seventh which
was the last year of the famine, and offer to sell themselves and their land
to Pharao for food and seed: whereupon Joseph being not to deal for himself
but for the king, accepts their offer, and buyeth both them and their land to
the kings use, and in testimony that the right property and dominion of the
land appertained to Pharao, he remooueth the people of the land from one side
of Egypt to another. When as therefore the right and property of the lands of
all the Egyptians, Verse 20.
excepting the priests, appertained to Pharao, he granted the same unto the
Egyptians, thus removed as it were in fee farm, reserving the fifth part of the
fruits for a rent to the kings use. And therefore in this example there is no
usury, unless it be usury for a man having bought lands of one man to let
them out to another at an easy rent.

Their fourth exception is out of both those places, Exodus 22. 25. Leuit. 25.
35. viz. That usury is forbidden toward the poor, and therefore it is
lawful toward the rich: and some add, That not all usury toward the poor
is condemned, but that only which biteth and oppresses them: For there may
some usury be imposed upon the poor, which shall not bite them, but rather
heal the bite which their pen^rie has made.

To omit the common practice of usurers, who out of their brothers want take
advantage of seeking the more gain; I answer, that this evasion is very
frivolous: for Deuteronomy. 23. 19, there is no mention of the poor, but all usury
is forbidden toward a brother, whether he be rich or poor; meaning by brother
any either Israelit or proselit, or as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, Strom. 2.
(...). And in this general sense including both rich and poor, the learned
among the Jews have understood this law, and unto this day it is observed
among them, as appears by the book of R. Abraham, lately set forth in
Latin, called Vox Dei. And our Savior Christ Luke 6. 34, giuith this tetimonie
to the very sinners of his time among the Jews, that they would lend one to
another, that they might receive (...), so much as they lent. And therefore it
is certain that not so much as the lest usury was lawful toward a brother,
whether he were poor or rich. Indeed if the Lord in the Scriptures had put
such a difference betwixt the poor and the rich, as he did betwixt the
Israelit and the Canaanit, To the rich thou may lend upon usury, but to the
poor thou shall not lend upon usury; then usurious contracts with the rich
might with good conscience be practiced. But Deuteronomy. 23. 19, 20, he makes
opposition not betwixt the poor and the rich, but betwixt an Israelit and a
Canaanit: and in other places of Scripture, as Psalm. 15. Prou. 28. Ezekiel. 18.
and 22, all usury and increase is absolutely and general without condition or
limitation condemned. In these two places, viz. Exodus 22. and Leuit. 25.
mention is made of the poor and needy, because the commandment of loan is
especially made for their good: and because usury imposed upon them is a more
grievous sin. But may we conclude from hence (as indeed the author of the
aforesaid english Treatise concludes) We may not take usury of a poor man,
therefore we may take it of the rich: Then by the same reason we may conclude,
wrong is not to be done to the poor, the widow, the fatherless, or stranger;
therefore wrong may be done to the rich, to the married wife, to the children
that have their parents living, to those which be not strangers: Prou. 22. 22.
or when Solomon says, Rob not the poor because he is poor; we might infer,
therefore thou may rob the rich because he is rich. But the Lord oftentimes
when he speaks against the sins of the sixth and eighth commandments, Exodus
22. 22. 23, etc.
makes express mention of the poor and helpelesse, Zach. 7. 10.
because all wrong, violence, robbery and oppession exercised toward them,
are most grievous and indeed crying sins. And not only in that respect does
the Lord sometimes mention the poor and needy in the prohibition of usury,
but also because those only which have need, have just occasion to borrow. And
as the needy have most occasion to borrow, so are they most subject to the
oppressions and injuries of the welthie: For as we commonly say, Where the
hedge is lowest, there every one goes over.

Howbeit the signification of a needy brother is not to be restrained to them
which are of base condition, but is to be extended also to those who being of
good callings are come behind hand, or fallen into need, not having means of
their own to supply their want: For if men have means of their own, they
ought not to borrow; For the holy ghost in the borrower presupposes need,
Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8, 9
and to the same purpose Plato provided by law, that no man should fetch water
at his neighbors well, until himself having first dug, (...), unto the
potters earth, under which there is no water, did find his own ground to be
without water. And it is truly said of Plutarch, Plutarch, (...) non fae^erand^.
(...), That the law provides for their help who want means of their own.
And therefore to those who have no need to borrow, we need not lend. But if we
do lend we must lend freely: or if we will look to gain by those which need
not our help, we must deal with them by some honest contract of negotiation.
For loan is such a contract as God has appointed to be free; and where it is
not free, he has condemned it with fearful terms under the name of usury.
For as Chemnicius well faith, Loc. com. tom. 2. de pauper^a. cap. 2.
In humane societies God would not have all things set to sale; but he
requires that some duties should be free, which are deformed and depraved, if
either they be sold as things venall, or let to hire as mercenarie duties. And
surely, says he, if the Scriptures in the contract of loan should grant
usury to be exercised toward the rich, the duty of free lending would soon
be abolished, and those who have need to borrow should not be able to borrow
freely: for every man will think he gives to the needy so much as he might
gain of the rich (and you may be sure that will not be much) and therefore
God should then have provided worse for the poor, when he intended to have
provided best for them: for men's necessity many times is such that they must
needs borrow, and better upon usury than not at all. And therefore, that
liberality and free lending should not fail, the Scripture oftentimes does
simply and generally condemn usury.

And whereas they say, that not all usury of money toward the poor is
forbidden, Exodus 22. 25, but that whereby he is oppressed, nor all increase of
corn and victuals is condemned, Leu. 25. 36, unless it be a multiplied and
excessive increase: I answer first, that all usury imposed upon the poor and
needy, is an oppression of them. Whereas therefore they urge, that Exodus 22,
oppression is forbidden first generally, and after particularly in the several
sorts of it; and that some do so read that place, You shall not oppress him
with usury, etc. themselves do prove that which I said, that all usury
imposed on the poor, is a kind of oppression. And yet to say the truth, the
words of the text, Exo. 22. 25, are, You shall not impose usury upon him: and
Leuit. 25. 36, Thou shall not take usury of him. The same does Zanchius and
others confess, that there is no usury imposed on the poor, but it is a
biting and hurting of him. Call. in Ezekiel. 18. A p^upere semper foenus exigere
nefas eri^. (...).
And it is not likely, that the biting of penury will be healed with the
biting of usury. No man (says Basil) heals one wound with another.

2. Again, I answer, that Exodus 22. the Lord does not only forbid oppression
of the poor, but also commands the relieuing of them by loan; and withal
gives charge, that in lending to the poor and needy, they should not only
abstain from usury, but also from taking of pawnes. And surely, if the taking
of pawns from the poor, be in their opinion an oppression of them, when as by
pawnes the creditour only provides for his indemnitie; how much more is all
imposing of usury upon them, an oppression of them, seeing thereby he does not
only provide for his indemnitie, but also requires more than he lent, seeking
gain out of his brothers need? The like is to be said of Leuit. 25. 35, 36,
When thy brother with thee shall fall into want, and his hand shall shake (that
is, shall want means of his own to supply his want) thou shall sustain him,
(namely by loan, as it were by putting a staff into his hand to stay him up)
the stranger also, and the soiourner, that (...) may live with thee. Thou shall
take no (...) of him, nor vantage, but thou shall fear thy God, (where by the
way we gather, that those who take usury of the needy, have not the fear of
God before their eyes) that thy brother may live with thee. From whence also we
may infer, that he which imposes usury on the poor, takes a course to eat
them up that they may not live with him.

Yea but say they, the poor sometimes is relieved by usury. I grant he is
relieved and eased for a time by the loan, though not by the usury; for that,
when the principal is to be repaid, gnaweth and biteth some part of the poor
man's substance from him, and so increases his want, and by little and little
eats him up. Money lent upon usury to a poor man to supply his need, may
not vnsitly be compared to a piece of new cloth sowed upon an old garment: for
that, although it cover the rent for a time, and seems to have mended the
garment; yet after a while, the new cloth fretteth the old, and brings away
part of it, and so makes the rent much worse. This therefore is but a cruel
relieuing of the poor and needy. For the like might be said of a victualler,
who selling a penny loaf for six pence to a man ready to die for hunger, does
relieve him in his want, and preserves him from death, but yet his and the
usurers mercies are cruel, Pio. 12. 10.
as Solomon says of all the wicked.

Thirdly, if the Lord straightly command free loan toward them that be in
need, then questionless all usury, be it never so small, is forbidden toward
the poor: but the former is certain, as we shall show out of Deuteronomy. 15. 8.
etc. Luke 6. 35. And therefore the least usury that may be, is forbidden
toward the poor, and that under the name of Neshek and Tarbith, that we
should no longer dream, that no usury is Neshek, unless it be great, nor
Tarbith, unless it be excessive.

Their fifth and last objection is, that the law which forbids usury, is not
moral, but judicial, and therefore not belonging to us. They prove it to be
a law judicial, because Deu. 23. 20, usury is permitted toward a stranger.

I answer first, if it were a judicial law, yet the equity thereof, which is
perpetual, would appertain to us, viz. That usury is not to be imposed upon
a brother: But behold we Christians are all brethren in Christ, this difference
of Jew and Gentile being taken away. Neither can there any sufficient reason be
given, why we should not deal as charitably one with another, as the Jews
were bound to deal among themselves, seeing we are not only brethren in
Christ, but also members of the same body, whereof Christ is the head;
especially seeing our Savior has propounded himself for a pattern, that we
should love one another as he has loved us, and has made this mutual love
the cognizance of true Christians. Hereby (says he) all men know you to be my
disciples, if you love one another. If therefore it were unlawful for the Jews
to require any usury, whether it were more or less of a brother, whether he
were rich or poor; much less is it lawful for Christians, whom it behooves
more than the Jews to be wained from covetousness and worldly cares, and to
whom some things are unlawful, which to the Jews because of the hardness of
their hearts, were permitted. But indeed the law forbidding usury, is moral,
as diverse of the most learned patrones of usury do confess, whose names,
because their memory otherwise is blessed, I will conceal. For it cannot be
denied, but that theft, oppression, and whatsoever is unjust and uncharitable,
is forbidden in the moral law of God; but usury is a kind of theft and
oppression, it is unjust and uncharitable, as hereafter it shall be proved,
therefore it is forbidden in the moral law of God.

2. The law which commands free lending, is not judicial but moral, and is
therefore renewed by our Savior Christ: therefore the law which forbids
usury or lending for gain, is moral. For the same law which commands the
affirmative, condemns the negative.

3. Usury is reckoned in the Scriptures among the transgressions of the moral
law: yea, somewheres it is raunged among the abominations, that is, the most
grievous crimes forbidden in the law: as Eze. 18. and 22. 12, where the
Prophet, as Basil has well observed, (...), In Psalm. 15.
places among the greatest evils, the taking of usury and increase.

4. Biting usury and excessive increase, is without question forbidden in the
moral law, as an high degree of theft and oppression. But the usury which the
patrones of usury understand to be forbidden in the law, is biting usury, and
excessive increase. Therefore the usury which the patrones of usury
themselves understand to be forbidden in the law, is forbidden in the moral
law of God.

5. Whereupon follows another consequent, That seeing the same usury which
is forbidden in the law, is permitted toward a stranger, therefore this
permission of usury is proved to be judicial, and the prohibition moral.

But for the better understanding of this law we are to consider who is meant
by stranger in this place. The Hebrew word used here is (...), whereby is meant
not every stranger which is not an Israelite by birth. For on him that was
either (...), that is aduena, a proselite, dwelling among them, who though he
were a stranger by birth, was a brother in religion: or (...), inquilinus, a
stranger by birth, but not by dwelling or affection, but such an one as dwelled
friendly among them, though not circumcised, (as appears Exodus 12. 43, 45,
48.) usury was not to be imposed, Leu. 25. 35, (Thou shall relieve him, viz.
the brother, the stranger also and sojourner, that he may live with thee) but
only on him that was (...), extraneus, or histis (as the word histi was wont
to signify) an aliant, as by birth, so also in dwelling, in religion, in
affection. See Obad. verse. 11. and Lament. 5. 2.

Now in this sense the word may signify either more generally any one that was
a mere aliant from the commonwealth of Israel, or more specially such aliants
as were the remnants of the Canaanits. If we understand this permission of
usury to be extended toward all aliants, there might be two causes rendered,
why the Lord permitted the same: the one, the hardness of the Jews hearts:
the other, the injustice of the Gentiles. For the Lord as a wise law giver, in
his judicial laws permits in a civil respect some things evil in
themselves for the avoiding of a greater mischief, not to allow or justify
the same from the guilt of sin, as before him in the court of conscience; but
to exempt the same from civil punishment in the external court before the
magistrate: as for example, the hardness of the Jews hearts being such, that
when they set their affections on other women, and waxed weary of their wives,
they would either put them away to their shame and utter undoing, or else
tyrannize over them, if they continued with them; the Lord therefore by a civil
or judicial law permitted men to put away their wives without the crime of
adultery, so as they could give them a bill of diuorcement, wherein they
should give testimony to their wives chastity. And yet whosoever did put away
his wife without the crime of fornication, howsoever he were by this civil
permission free from punishment of the magistrate, notwithstanding, he was
guilty of adultery before God, as our Savior Christ teaches, Matthew. 19. So
the hardness of the Jews hearts, and covetousness being such, that if they
were not permitted to practice usury toward strangers, they would exercise it
against their brethren; and likewise, the injustice of the Gentiles with whom
they did traffic, being such, as they would be sure to exact usury of the
Jews: therefore, that neither the Gentiles by inequality of negotiation should
eat up the Jews, nor yet the Jews should oppress one another by usury, it
might be, that in these civil respects the Lord permitted it toward the
Gentiles. And therefore as the permission, which gave leave to the Jews to put
away their innocent wives with a bill of diuorcement, does not disprooue the
law forbidding adultery to be moral, but proves it self to be judicial:
so the permission of usury toward strangers, does not prove the law
forbidding usury to be moral, but it self is evidently proved to be
judicial. And as he which without the crime of adultery puts away his
wife, is notwithstanding that civil permission an adulterer before God: so he
which practices usury, as permitted to him either by the law of Moses,
against any stranger, or by the civil laws of men, is notwithstanding a
thief before God.

But in my judgment we shall more rightly expound this place, if by stranger
we do not understand any stranger, but that stranger, that is to say, the
remnants of the Canaanites, by whose impouerishing the L. would have the Jews
enriched. For first the words are not Lenokri, as Dent. 14. 21, but Lanokri,
that is, extraneo ifti, as Tremellius and I^nius translate, adding this
exposition, extraneo ifti, to this stranger, that is, to the relics or
remnants of the Canaanits, whom the Lord had appointed to destruction, and
would have by little and little consumed. And to the like purpose Ambro^e
expounds this place: But perhaps (says he) you will say, ^ib, de Tob. c. 15
it is written, thou shall lend upon usury to a stranger, etc. Who then was
the stranger? but the Amalekite, but the Amorrhite, but the enemies of the
people of God? there (says he) exact vsuric, whom thou desire to hurt
worthily; against whom thou go to war lawfully, on him thou may
lawfully impose usury: whom thou can not easily overcome by war, on him
thou may easily wreakethy self by usury. Ab hoc (...) am exige, quem no^
sit crimen occidere. Take usury of him whom thou may lawfully kill:
therefore, vbiius belli, ibietiam ius vsurarum, against whom there is right to
wage war, against them there is right to practice usury.

And this exposition seems therefore the rather to be embraced, because when
these remnants of the Canaanites were rooted out, all usury afterward is
generally and absolutely forbidden, without exception of any as Psalm. 15. Prou.
28. 8. Eze. 18. and 22. Rabbi Salomo, as Lyranus reports in Exodus 22. 25.
denies it to be lawful for a Jew to take usury of a stranger. And the Hebrew
gloss so understands this text, Psalm. 15.
That has not given his money to usury, De arcanis cathol. verit. lib. II.
cap. 4.
no not to a Gentile, says he. Which P. Galatinus also does note to have bin
the judgeme^t of the Rabbines. Tom. 5. lib. 6. in Ezekiel. 18.
And this progress Jerome well observed. Vide profectum: See the proceeding
(says he) of the holy ghost, In the beginning of the law usury is forbidden
only toward brethren: but in the Prophet it is forbidden toward all, without
limitation.

But this permission, or if you will, allowance of usury toward the Canaanite
does no more prove the law against usury not to be moral, than the allowance
of manslaughter in war does prove the law forbidding murder, to be
judicial. For although the law condemning usury be never so perpetual or
moral, yet notwithstanding as all other commandments of God, so is it to be
understood with this limitation and restraint, namely, unless God otherwise
appoint. It is a moral law which forbids other theft as well as usury; but
if the Lord by special warrant allow the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians at
their departure out of Egypt, they may lawfully do it. It is a fearful sin
forbidden in the sixth commandment of the moral law, if a father shall kill
his only son: but if the Lord appoint Abraham to kill his own son, he is
authorized to do it. For if princes may dispense with their own laws, much
more is this pr erogatiue royal to be granted to the Lord, whose will is the
rule of justice, having this privilege, that whatsoever it wills, is
therefore just, because he wills it.

Whereas therefore some object, That if usury be permitted toward a stranger,
therefore simply it is lawful: I answer, if it be permitted, it is thereby
rather proved to be unlawful in it self: For if it were lawful in it self,
it should not need to be permitted, as the putting away of a man's innocent
wife, being a thing simply and in it self evil, was notwithstanding permitted
to the Jews.

Yea, but now all difference of brother and stranger is taken away: and
therefore that which is lawful toward one, is not unlawful toward another.
Assume, but usury is lawful toward one, that I deny. It was lawful toward
the stranger, because it was allowed by a judicial permission, or
dispensation; but is not now lawful, because by the moral law it is generally
and perpetually forbidden. Yea, but now difference of brother and stranger is
taken away: It is true indeed among those that believe in Christ, otherwise
there are brothers and strangers still. But what is hereof to be inferred?
Surely, if all difference of brother and stranger be taken away, then is not
usury lawful among those that profess the name of Christ: for we are all
brethren in Christ, and therefore that which is not lawful among brethren, is
not lawful among us. For I hope none will be so absurd, as to conclude, that
all difference of brother and stranger being taken away, we are all aliants and
strangers one to another, and therefore that usury among us may be lawful, as
it was lawful for the Israelits toward the Canaanits. But how was it
permitted toward the stranger? Surely as a grievous punishment, whereby the
Lord would have him impouerished and consumed. If therefore the Lord permitted
or allowed usury to be exercised only against the Canaanits, whom he had
appointed to destruction, and whom he would have by degrees wasted and
consumed, Deuteronomy. 7. 22. and also permitted it to this end, that thereby they
might be wasted and impouerished: do thou think that thou can in charity
impose the same upon thy brother?

And thus have I manifestly proved, that all usury or lending for gain is
condemned in the moral law of God: howsoever the judicial law allowed the
practice of it toward that aliant, that is to say, the Canaanite.

To these places of the law, I will add the example of Nehemias that godly
magistrate, Neh. 5. 11.
in the fist chapter of that book: for when as the needier sort had made
complaint that whereas they being employed about the building of the walls of
Jerusalem, and neglecting their own particular, were fallen into want, by
reason of their great charge of wife and children, and wanting means of their
own, had been forced to borrow of the wealthier sort corn, wine, and oil,
for their sustenance, and money for payment of the kings tribute: so it was,
that the wealthier sort had not only taken their houses, lands, and vineyards
to pawn, but also exacted of them for usury the hundredth part over and above
the principal: Nehemias therefore hearing this complaint, was greatly offended
with these rich men, who contrary to the law of God required usury of their
brethren, and causes them not only to remit this usury of the hundredth part,
which he calls a burden, Verse. 7. and 10.
and would have the people eased thereof; but also to restore unto the^ their
lands, their vineyards, their olive grounds, and their houses which they had
taken to pawn. Where the centesima vsura, that is, the usury of the hundred
part, which as it seems was permitted by the laws of the Persians, as after
it was by the laws of the Grecians and Romans (among who^ it being exacted
monthly, was an usury of 12 in the hundred) is plainly condemned. But against
this allegation I find three exceptions: the first, that the usury which is
here condemned, was exacted of the poor; and they do not deny, but that
usury is unlawful toward the poor: I answer, that although these borrowers
were in want, yet were they not such poor men as these patrones of usury
imagine: for they had houses, lands, vineyards, and olive grounds, and in
regard thereof were to pay tribute to the king: but now being cast behind hand
for the reasons aforesaid, were forced to borrow, and being not able to borrow
without a pawn, nor yet without allowance of usury, had yielded in their
necessity not only to pawn their houses and lands, but also to grant an
usury of twelve in the hundred to their creditours. And therefore this place
proves, that men of wealth ought to lend freely not only to the poor and
base sort of people, but also to men of better place and calling, being in need.

The second exception is, C. Molin.
that some understand this place not of the creditours taking usury for loan,
but of the governors exacting allowance of their needy brethren for their
maintenance. Which they prove, because usury was execrable among the Jews:
and therefore the centesima or hundredth part here mentioned, was not usury,
but the hundredth part of their rents and goods which they paid for the stipends
of their governors.

First to their reason I answer: that to so many of the Jews as feared God,
usury was execrable, as I partly observed before out of Leuit. 25. 36. but it
is the want of the fear of God, which Nehemias objecteth unto the rich men in
this place, verse. 9. who neglecting or forgetting the law of God in this
behalf, had learned the customs of the Medes and Persians, in requiring
usury for loan.

Secondly, as touching the objection it self, to the private judgment of one
or two I oppose the general and received opinion of all the learned besides,
who either expound or translate this place, understanding the same with one
consent of usury. And that this is the true meaning of the place, appears
both by the complaint of them which were oppressed, (who borrowing money for
the kings tribute, See Ezr. 4. 13. and 7. 24.
and corn and victuals for their sustenance, were feign to pawn their houses
and lands, yea some had bound over their children to their creditours) and also
by the remedy provided by Nehemiah, which was, that the creditours should
restore their pawnes, and remit the hundredth part of the money, corn, wine,
and oil: for these were the particulars which they had lent, and for the loan
whereof they required, vsur as centesimas, that is, usury of the hundredth part.

Thirdly, out of this place the aforesaid author of the English Treatise
labors to prove the lawfulness of usury by the example of Nehemiah
himself and his followers, who had lent upon usury to these men; for so he
reads verse. 10. for even I my brethren and my servants did lend them upon
usury money and corn: the word is Noshim, of the verb Nashah, which as I
have said before, signifies either to exact, or to lend with purpose to
require or exact again that which is lent; and so in this place is interpreted
two ways, either in the sense of free lending (as the most do read) wherein
Nehemiah commends his own example to be followed; or in the sense of
exacting, as Tremellius and Iunius translate. As if Nehemias had said, If your
dealing with your brethren were to be allowed, then much more might I and my
brethren and servants exact of them that which is due unto us: But that (as
afterward he shows) he had forborne all the time of his government: Verse.
14, 15. etc
for the sense which that author gives, is repugnant to the text it self.
For why should Nehemiah be so angry with the other wealthy men, if himself
and his followers, who were to give them example of charitable dealing, had
practiced the same thing? or how could he reprove them so sharply, if
himself were guilty of the same offense? or would he allege his own
practice of usury, to persuade them to desist therefrom? or if he condemn
usury in himself and his followers, as well as in the rest (as he does, if
that interpretation were good) how is usury justified by his example?

Now I come to those places of Scripture wherein usury is generally and
absolutely condemned, and they are four. The first is the text which we have in
hand, where, Psalm. 15.
unto the Prophet demanding who shall sojourne in the Lords Tabernacle, and
who shall rest in the mountain of his holiness, He that gives not his money
to usury, that is, that lends not for gain. Out of which place this
syllogism may be gathered; whereunto let every usurer consider how he shall
be able to answer before the Lord. He that shall inherit the kingdom of heaven
does not put forth his money to usury, but thou, (say I, to the usurer or him
that lends for gain) do put forth thy money to usury, thou therefore
(unless thou repent) shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, but shall be
cast out of the heavenly Jerusalem, and shall have thy part in the lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone, where is weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth: De Teb. c. 15.
For as Ambrose infers upon this place, If therefore he be blessed (says
he) that has not given his money to usury: then no doubt he is accursed who
has put forth his money to usury. Yea but (says the usurer) the word here
used is Neshek, which signifies biting, and therefore so long as I bite no
body, this conclusion includes not me. Whereunto I answer, that Neshek is the
general word whereby all usury is signified, and therefore that all lending
for gain is Neshek, as I have manifestly proved before. Neither is it called
Neshek because the lender biteth, but because the money lent upon usury biteth
or gnaweth away some part of the borrowers substance, and so he which lends
causes his money to bite, as the Hebrew words do plainly signify, Deuteronomy. 23,
19. And therefore consider well whether this distinction of biting and not
biting usury, grounded upon the notation of the word (which indeed
distinguishes not one kind of usury from another, as though one did bite and
another did not bite, but rather impor^eth that all usury is biting) be so
sure a distinction as thou will adventure thy salvation thereupon.

The second testimony is of the wise king Solomon, Prou. 28. 8.
Pro. 28. 8. He that increases or multiplieth his riches by usury and
increase, gathers them for him that will be merciful to the poor: that is,
riches gotten by lending upon usury and by taking increase, shall be
translated from the covetous usurer, who is commonly cruel and unmerciful to
the poor, unto the liberal and bountiful man who will be merciful to the
poor: For the translation of riches threatened, is an evident argument of
unjust possession. From hence therefore all that are addicted to wealth are to
be exhorted, that as they desire the continuance of their riches which are so
dear unto them, so they would not gather the same by usury.

Against this testimony they make three exceptions: The first, that not all
usury or increase is here condemned, but biting usury and multiplied
increase. I answer, that all gain or clear increase above the principal
couenanted for, or exacted for loan, is Neshek and Tarbith here condemned, as
I have proved before.

Secondly they object, that the proverb speaks of him who lending upon
usury to the poor, oppresses them thereby, for so much the proverb does not
obscurely signify, that goods taken from the poor by couctous usurers, shall
by just and liberal men be restored unto them again. This collection I deny
not to be witty, but I deny it to be sound. For no more can necessarily be
gathered hence, but thus much as I said, that goods unjustly gotten by men
covetous and unmerciful, shall be transferred from them, to the liberal and
merciful. To which purpose the holy ghost often speaks in other places of
Scripture, as Prou. 13. 22, The riches of the sinner is laid up for the just:
Eccle. 2. 26; Upon the sinner the Lord sends trouble and molestation to
gather and scrape together, that he may give to the man that is good before
him: Job. 27. 16, 17, Though the wicked should heap up silver as the dust, and
prepare raiment as the clay, he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on,
and the innocent shall divide the silver.

The truth of which commination daily experience does prove, for seldom do
usurers children thrive or come to good. And that which commonly is said, De
male quasitis non gaudet tertius haeres, is verified by Solomon, Eccles. 5. 12,
13.

And for as much as vsurours do not use to trust the poor but with small
sums, out of which arises a small increase; it is not therefore likely that
great riches are gathered by usury exacted only of the poor: and therefore
the proverb seems to speak of usury required not only of the poor, but
also of the richer sort, to whom the greater sums lent, do raise greater
gain.

Thirdly, they object that the proverb speaks of him whose trade and
profession is to seek gain by usury, and whose great wealth has no
otherwise risen but by usury.

To which I answer, If to lend upon usury were a thing lawful, why should not
the custom or trade of lending upon usury be lawful, as well as the custom
or trade of seeking gain by other lawful contracts. But now say the patrons
of usury, it is utterly unlawful to make a trade of usury. Yea Calvin
plainly affirms, that whosoever makes a profession of usury, In Ezekiel. 18.
he ought to be excluded from the company of men, and that he ought not to be
suffered in the Church of God, for an usurer is ever a thief. How then can
lending upon usury, though but for once or twice, be lawful? for if it were
lawful for once or twice, why not for three or four times? and if so often, why
not for five or six times? and if so, why not for ten or twenty, or for so often
as you will?

Now if you lay these three exceptions together, you shall perceive that this
patron of usury would have none to be condemned by this place, but such as
making a trade of exacting great and excessive usury of the poor, do thereby
alone gather great wealth: so that there can scarcely be found any so wicked an
usurer, who may not by these exceptions elude and shift off from himself this
so plain a testimony against all usury.

I proceed to the third testimony, Eze. 18, which if there were no more, might
alone suffice for the condemnation of all usury whatsoever: For there the holy
Ghost, verse. 8, and 17, describing a just man that shall surely live, among
other marks he recites this twice, And has not given forth upon usury,
neither has taken any increase: And again desciphring a wicked man who should
not live but die the death; he sets down diverse notes, any one whereof
should (without repentance) be sufficient for his condemnation: for so he
faith, verse. 10. Verse. 10.
and 11, Verse. 11.
If a just man be get a son that is a thief, or a sheder of blood, if he do
any one of these things: though he do not all these things, but either has
eaten upon the mountains, or defiled his neighbors wife, Verse. 12.
or has oppressed the poor and needy, or has spoiled by violence, or has
not restored the pledge, or has lift up his eyes unto the idols, or has
committed abomination, or has given forth upon usury, or has taken
increase, Verse. 13.
shall he live? he shall not live, seeing he has done all these abominations,
he shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon him. Where we That has
(says he) given forth upon usury, or has taken increase, shall he live? he
shall not live, he shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon him. And
lastly, that all usury or taking increase is this proposition, Whosoever
puts forth his money to usury, or takes increase, shall surely die,
meaning thereby eternal death. It is a wonder if the conscience of the usurer
do not from thence assume and conclude thus, But thou lendest forth upon
usury, thou take increase, therefore if thou continuest in this sin, thou
shall surely die eternally, and thy blood shall be upon thee.

Against this allegation they object, first, that the general which is here
forbidden, is oppression of the poor: of which general, this is one special
kind, biting or multiplication: The former of money, the latter of other
things. If therefore usury be so tempered that it oppress not the poor, it
is not forbidden: much loss, if it relieve him.

I answer, that to speak properly, nothing is here commanded or forbidden,
but certain notes are recited both of the just man who is to be saved, from
the fifth verse to the tenth: and also of a wicked man who should not live but
die, from the tenth verse to the fourteenth: And that among the notes of the
just man, abstinence from oppression, is not set down as a general including
other specials, but as a distinct note: or if it were set down as the genus of
usury, what other thing could be concluded thence, but that all usury is
oppression. Now in the catalogue of those marks whereby a wicked man is
deciphred, Verse 12, 13.
betwixt oppression of the poor and usury, idolatry is placed: which is a
sufficient argument that usury is not here set down as a species of
oppression of the poor and needy before specified; howbeit this is to be
acknowledged, that usury so often as it is exercised toward the poor, is an
oppression of them. But if you desire to know the true genus of usury, you may
say it is theft: For usury is the lenders theft, which if it be exercised
toward the poor and needy, is also oppression and robbery.

Secondly, they object that in this place of Ezekiell, the retaining of the
pledge is as well condemned, as the taking of usury: But the retaining of a
pledge is sometimes lawful, therefore also usury. I answer, that by the same
reason other malefactors might defend their robbery and idolatry, and such
other abominations, some whereof are here inter^erted betwixt the detaining of
a pledge and taking usury. But hereby you may perceive the strange dealing of
these men: for whereas among nine or ten notes one only is found which is not
simply evil, namely the retaining of a pledge; hence they will conclude that
there is the same reason of taking usury, and of keeping a pledge. Why do they
not rather gather seeing usury is reckoned among eight or nine other notes,
which be of things simply evil and abominable, that usury in like sort is
simply evil and abominable? and that is Ambrose his collection, Vide, says
he, quemodo foeneratorem cum idololatra copulauit, quasi crimen equaret, See
how he has coupled the usurer with the idolater, as though he would have
usury esteemed an equal crime with idolatry.

There remains the last testimony, Ezech. 22, against which no such
exceptions can be taken. For among other abominations, for which the Lord
threatens destruction against Jerusalem, this is reckoned, verse 12, Thou have
taken Neshek, Vetarbith, usury and increase: from whence we may plainly
gather, that seeing usury is called an abomination, and is reckoned among
things not only simply evil, but also (...), as Basil observes, the most
outrageous transgressions of the moral law, that it also is of the like
nature; and that it is such a grievous sin as that it pulls down the wrath
of God, not only upon the usurer himself, but also against the country
wherein he lives. And here we are to observe that the taking of usury and
increase is so condemned for such an abomination as I have said, as that no
such exception can with any show of reason be objected against this place as
against the former: For here is no mention either of the poor, as though it
were committed against them alone, or of the detaining of a pledge as though
usury were to be matched therewith, for it is matched with murder, idolatry,
incest, and other such abominations, neither that it is in this place so
subjected to oppression as a species thereof, but generally and simply it is
condemned as a grievous abomination, whereby the usurer provoke the
vengeance of God not only against himself, but also against the society
wherein he does live.

And thus we see all usury or lending for gain, by diverse testimonies of
Scripture to be plainly and manifestly condemned.

Of which doctrine the covetous worldlings are apt to make this use, If it be
so that we may not by the word of God lend upon usury, then surely we will not
lend at all. Answer, it is a greater sin not to lend at all to a man who is
in great need, than to lend unto him upon usury: Even as it were a greater
offense altogether to deny food to him that is almost famished, than to sell
it unto him at an unreasonable rate. And therefore many commonweales do
tolerate such usury as is not immoderat, for the good both of the borrower
and also of the lender: Of the borrower, because his necessity many times is
such, that it is far better for him to borrow upon usury, than not to borrow
at all: Of the lender, because to lend upon moderat usury to them that must
needs borrow, is a less sin than not to lend at all. But as the before cited
places condemn the negative, and forbid lending for gain, so there are diverse
manifest testimonies of Scripture injoyning the affirmative, and commanding us
to lend freely. And therefore as we are to abstain from usury because God
forbids it, so must we practice free loan because God commands it. These
places because they are so many evidences against usury, I will the rather
recite: And first, that in Deuteronomy. 15, where the Lord having provided by law,
that in the seventh year no debt should be demanded; and foreseeing that
hereby the covetous would take occasion when the seventh year should draw
near, to refuse to lend to them that were in need; therefore verse. 7. and 8.
the Lord straightly charge them not only at other times to lend freely to their
needy brother, but even then also when the seventh year was at hand. His
words are these, If any one of thy brethren with thee be poor and needy
within any of thy gates in thy land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou
shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother, but
thou shall liberally open thine hand unto him, and thou shall in lending lend,
that is, freely lend him sufficient for his need which he has. Beware that
there be not a wicked thought in thine heart, to say, the seventh year, the
year of freedom (wherein debts were not to be required) is at hand; nor that
thine eye be evil toward thy needy brother, so that thou will not give unto
him, and so he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee. Thou
shall freely give unto him, and let not thine heart be evil when thou give
unto him; for because of this the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all that thou put thine hand to. In which words the Lord not
only commands them straightly, to lend freely to their brethren being in
need, not only at other times, but even immediately before the year of
remission wherein no debts were to be demanded: but also uses two effectual
reasons to persuade them to the voluntary and cheerful performance of this
duty. The former, because if they should refuse to lend to their brother in
his need, it should be a sin unto them, and good reason: for we are not
absolut Lords of that which we have, but only the Lords stewards, who must one
day give an account of our stewardship, and therefore we are bound in
conscience so to employ those goods which he has committed to our trust, as
he appoints. And therefore seeing the Lord commands those which be of
ability, as his stewards to lend to them that are in need, it is a sin unto
them if they shall refuse to lend freely unto them. The second reason to
persuade men cheerfully to lend to them which are in need, is the gracious
promise of God: For because of this, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
thy works, etc. Now if this promise with some others in the word of God do
not prevail with us in this behalf, we shall bewray notable infidelity. If a
poor man bring unto thee a rich man to be his surety, thou will not fear to
lend unto him: but when the Lord becomes a poor man's surety, nay promises
himself to be thy paymaister and to make thee full recompense, thou will not
take his word; no not his written word, Prou. 19. 17, He that deals
graciously with the poor, whether it be by free giving or free lending,
lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has
given.

But lest any should allege, though falsely, that this is a judicial law, and
therefore binds not them: I will therefore produce two testimonies out of the
Gospel of our Savior Christ. The former, Mat. 5. 42, Give to him that asks,
and from him that would borrow of thee turn not away. What then (will you say)
is every one bound to lend to every one that asks? I answer, respect is to
be had of thine ability, and of his necessity, and also (if it be not a case
of urgent and present necessity) of his honesty: If his necessity urge him
to borrow, and thine estate enable thee to lend, thou art bound to lend unto
him, especially if his honesty deserve to be respected. The other testimony
is Luke. 6. 35. (...), Lend, looking for nothing thence: which words though
they be diversely read and expounded, yet in every sense they command the
duty of free lending.

The word (...) admits diverse significations, as first to bring into
despair; according to which sense thus much is insinuated, that those which
refuse to lend unto men in their need, cause them to despair. But this sense
is not incident unto this place, unless we read as indeed the Syriacke
interpreter does, instead of (...) for (...), lend causing no man to despair.
For they that go on borrowing they go on sorrowing, and when others will not
lend when they must needs borrow, they are out of heart and do as it were sink
under the burden of their want. When as therefore thy brother comes to borrow
of thee for the supply of his want, Mat. 5. 42.
turn not thy face from him, Deuteronomy. 15.
neither harden thy heart toward him, nor shut thine hand from him, Leuit. 25.
35.
but when his hand does shake, stay him and hold him up, suffer him not to
sink under his necessity.

Secondly, it signifies to despair, or to be out of hope. In which sense our
Saviors words may thus be expounded, Lend, nothing despairing of recompense:
as if he should have said, let not distrust or despair conceived at thy
neighbors want, keep thee from lending, as though thou should be a looser
by thy loan, but lend him freely for the supply of his want, though he be not
likely either to repay the principal, or to do thee as good a turn. For your
reward, says our Savior Christ, shall be great, Prou. 19. 17.
God himself will be your pay master: as elsewhere he has promised.

Thirdly, it signifies aliunde sperare, to hope from any thing: as if he had
said, looking for nothing thence, that is, either from your courtesy of
lending, or of the thing that is lent: from or by reason of your courtesy of
lending, look for nothing; that is, for no profit or benefit of your own. In
lending, respect not your own good or profit, but the benefit of the borrower.
Which general sense is very fit and apt, including in it these two
particulers, of either whereof some do understand this place, that is, either
of the like good turn, or of usury. 1. Of the like good turn, as if our
Savior had said, Lend where you do not look to borrow or to receive the like
benefit, either because they are unable or unthankful; not that it is
unlawful to lend where a man may look to borrow or to receive the like
courtesy: but our Savior would not have us rest there, for sinners will lend
to sinners to receive the like; but his meaning is, that we should not only
lend to our friend and such as are both willing and able to make us recompense,
but also to others who are either unwilling or unable to show the like
courtesy to us. And thus Zanchius expounds this place, conferring it with
the like in the fourteenth Chapter of the same Gospel, Luke 14. 12.
When thou make a dinner or supper call not thy friends, nor thy brethren and
kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and a
recompense be made thee: but when thou make a feast call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, and the blind, and thou shall be blessed, because they
cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of
the just. Not that it is simply unlawful for a man to inuit his friends and
rich neighbors, but that of the two sorts, the poor are the rather to be
invited; for the other is but an act of common ciuilitie^, but this is a work
of Christian charity, which shall not want his reward.

Secondly, it is expounded of usury, which is the most usual interpretation
of this place, as if our Savior had said, Lend, looking for no gain from
thence, as Henry Stephen also in his marginall notes translateth, Nihil inde
lucri (...) antes, hoping for no gain thence. Yea Zanchius sometimes so
reads, but with this addition, scil. Ob officium mutuation is, hoping for
nothing thence that is for the duty of lending. And in this sense all authors
almost that have in former times written against usury, understand this place:
For according to this (which as I said is the most common) interpretation, all
usury, whether it be actual or mental, is by these words most plainly
condemned: and whereas some of latter times (as you shall hear) understand
this nothing of the principal, others affirm, that you might as well put out
the word lend, and say give, because the contract of lending presupposes both
in the lender an intent of alienating the principal but for a time, and in the
borrower a covenant, to restore after a time the principal.

Lastly, it is expounded as I said, of the principal or the thing lent: and
then the sense must be this, Lend, looking for nothing thereof again. As if he
should have said; Lend not only to such as from whom you may hope by reason of
their ability or such security as they shall give you, to receive your own
again; but also to such, as by reason of their want you cannot hope to receive
the principal again. And this by the context it self does seem to have
been the meaning of our Savior Chirst in this place: for (says he) in the
former verses, If you love them that love you, and do good to them that do
good to you, and lend to them of whom you hope to receive, viz. that which you
have lent, what thank shall you have? for even sinners and such as are mere
natural men, void of the grace of God, do love them of whom they are loved,
and do good to those that do good to them, and lend to such as themselves,
that they may receive as much again: but you (says our Savior) love not
only your friends, as sinners do, but also your enemies, and do good to
those of whom you look for no good, and lend not only to them of whom you
hope to receive your own again (for so much sinners are ready to do one to
another) but also to those of whom you can have no hope to receive your own
again. So that (...), verse. 35. is all one with (...), verse. 34. And therefore
our Savior Christ requires an higher degree of love, than abstinence from
usury: for he would have us to lend not only without hope of gain, but also
if need require, without hope of recovering the principal. And (which is duly
to be observed) he gives this testimony to the very sinners of his time, That
they would lend to sinners, that they might receive (...)* so much again. For
as I have showed before, when we lend by mutuation, we do not look to
receive the same particular again, as in commodation; but (...), so much as is
equivalent thereunto. Whereof we may necessarily infer, that those which will
not lend to receive so much again, but more, are worse than the very sinners
among the Jews. And therefore that which our Savior uttered concerning the
Pharisees, may well be said of those sinners in respect of us: unless our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of these sinners of whom our Savior
speaks, Mat. 5, 20.
we shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven: but if our righteousness be
exceeded by them, how shall we escape the condemnation that is to come?
Against this testimony alleged out of Luke 6, I find three exceptions made by
one and the same author. They say this place makes nothing against usury,
first because Christ speaks not of negotiation and gainefull contracts, such
as usury is, but of the relieuing of the po^e, as appears verse. 30.

Answ. If our Savior do not in express words forbid usury, as he does, if
the words are so to be read, Lend looking for no gain; yet he does by
consequent forbid it: First, in that he commands free lending: Secondly, in
that he gives testimony to the very sinners, That they would lend to receive
their own again. And therefore says, it is not a thing thanks-worthie before
God, if men will no otherwise lend, but to receive as much again. Thirdly, in
that he would have us lend without expectation of the principal it self, or
any part thereof: and therefore if our neighbor is to be helped (as Beza
says) without regard of recovering the stock, much more are all usurious
contracts forbidden.

Neither does our Savior Christ speak only of relieuing the poor, but also
of civil lending, wherein a man looks to receive his own again: for we may
not so understand our Savior Christ, as though he did forbid men to love their
lovers, or to do good to those that have deserved well at their hands, or to
lend to such of their friends and acquaintance, as will restore what they have
borrowed; for they that will not do thus much, are worse than the very sinners
of whom our Savior speaks: but he requires a higher degree of Christian
love in those that be his followers, viz. to love not only those that love us,
but also them that hate us; to do good not only to those that do^ good to us,
but also to them that deserve ill at our hands; to lend not only to those who
will repay, but also to such, as of whom we cannot hope to receive that which
we lent: so that our Savior Christ requires both, as in a copulative sentence
(the notes whereof be, not only, but also) but commends the latter
especially unto us. For whereas lending proceeds from one of these three
fountains, as Zanchius also has observed, namely, either from covetousness,
when men by lending seek their own gain, as usurers do use to lend; or from
natural courtesy and civility, when men lending freely to gratify their
friends, intend to require their own again, as civil honest men (whom
notwithstanding our Savior Christ calls sinners) were wont to lend; or from
Christian charity for the Lords sake, as true Christians are willing to lend:
our Savior Christ is so far from allowing the first, that he would not have
Christians to rest in the second. And whereas men do choose rather to lend
after the civil manner, upon security to receive the principal, rather than
after the Christian manner for charity sake, not taking so much care for our
principal, as to help our Christian brother, because the former seems to
stand rather with their profit, our Savior Christ therefore even in this
respect also prefers the latter. For if men will lend only upon security
to receive their principal, Mat. 5. 46.
what thanks have they, says our Savior, or as Matthew reports, what
reward have they? for sinners will so lend, to receive recompense from men by
the repayment of the principal. But they that are ready to lend for the Lords
sake in Christian charity toward their neighbor to supply his want, though
they have no hope to receive their principal at the borrowers hand, their
reward shall be great, and in stead of recompense at the borrowers hand, they
shall receive plentiful recompense from the Lord. Secondly they object, That
what our Savior Christ commands, he commands to be performed toward an
enemy, but I am not bound to lend to mine enemy, unless he be oppressed with
want: therefore this commandment enioyneth this duty of free lending only
toward such as be oppressed with want.

I grant, that we are not bound to lend to any but to such as be in want. But
if I be bound to lend freely to mine enemy, being oppressed with want, or to
an ungodly man in his extreme need, for that also may be gathered out of this
place; how much more am I bound to lend freely to one, that being not an
enemy, is also of the household of faith? But the former they themselves
confess, and reason proves it. For if I ought to help and relieve the ox or
ass of mine enemy failing under his burden, Exodus 23. 4. 5.
how much more am I bound to help and succor himself, failing and fainting
under the burden of his want? See Romans 12. 20. and Prou. 25. 21. Thirdly they
allege, That our Savior Christ does not forbid expectation of gain, but of
the principal it self: for verse. 34. he teaches that one sinner will lend to
another, that he may receive so much as he lent. And therefore that they which
will approve their piety, must lend, though they be not like to receive any
thing again.

I answer, if men ought to lend without providing for their indemnitie in
receiving the principal, if so their brothers need require; much more ought
they to lend without requiring an overplus over and above the principal. And
again, if sinners be content to lend without gain, so they may have their
own again; what shall we think of those who will not lend to receive so much
as they lent, unless they may receive more? And lastly, if our Savior Christ
allowed of usury, he would acknowledge, that the lender should do an act
worthy of great thanks, if he would lend freely, though upon covenant to
receive his own again: for he that should lend an hundred pounds; should
besides the supplying of his neighbors want, do him as great a pleasure, as if
he gave him ten pounds out of his purse: but when as he says, if you lend to
them of whom you hope to receive that which you lent, (...); what thank shall
you have? he evidently shows himself to be so far from allowing usury,
that he would not have men to rest in civil lending. But the Lord
acknowledges no further benefit done by lending, than the supply of the
borrowers want, and signifies, that he which lends in assured hope to
receive his own, has full recompense made him by the borrower, when he
restores the principal in the full value thereof; whereas they which lend
without hope of receiving the principal at the borrowers hands, shall receive
a great reward at the hands of God.

And thus have we heard out of the written word of God, what is his both
revealed will and also judgment concerning usury. His will, both in that he
straightly commands free loan, and also severely forbids lending for
gain. His judgment, not only in that he censureth usury as a fearful
sin, and calls it an abomination, but also in that accordingly he
threateneth his fearful judgments, both temporal against the usurer
himself, and that which is more, against the country wherein it is committed;
Eze. 22.
and also spiritual, asking with indignation, Whether an usurer should live?
and plainly affirming that he shall surely die, Eze. 18.
moriendo morietur. Now the will of God is the rule of justice, and whatsoever
he wills, it is therefore good and just because he wills it; and
consequently, simple and absolute obedience must be performed thereunto,
whatsoever arguments, impediments, or inconveniences can be pretended to the
contrary. And therefore though no other reason could be given why men should
lend freely and not for gain, yet this alone were sufficient, because God
would have us lend freely, and not for gain. It ought to have been argument
sufficient to our first parents to restrain them from the forbidden fruit,
That God had forbidden it; though they had other reasons to induce them to eat
thereof. And as in that case, so in this, it is sin and folly to enter into
disputation against the word of God, according unto which we shall be judged in
the last day.

But as by the written word of God the (...) or unlawfulness of usury is
sufficiently proved, so also by other evident arguments and testimonies it may
be convicted to be sinful both in it self and in the judgments of all those
who have lived in former ages. Whereupon it will also follow, that the usurer
sins not only against the law of God, but also against the light and law of
nature.

And thus he sins against his neighbor. God. himself.


Against his neighbor. For whereas there are two duties especially to be
practiced toward our neighbor, that is to say, Justice and Charity; justice,
to give every man his own; 1. Cor. 10. 24. and 13. 5.
and charity, not to seek our own but other men's profit; justice, to do no
man wrong, charity, to do good to all: usury offends against both, as being
both unjust and uncharitable. Which copulation is duly to be marked. For
whereas some allege, that usury is not against charity, when neither the
lender nor borrower is hurt thereby; it shall hereby appear, that if at any
time it may seem not to be opposed to charity as an hurtful thing, yet is
it always opposed as an unjust and unequal thing. For first, the general law
both of justice and charity is this, As you would that men should do to you,
so do you to them likewise. Luke 6. 31.
But when you have need to borrow, you would that men should lend you freely,
Mat. 7. 12.
and not impose usury upon you: therefore in like case, when others would
borrow of you in their necessity, you ought to lend them freely, and not impose
usury upon them.

But against this argument diverse things are objected: First, by this reason
(say they) no man ought to let his horse or house for hire, or to sell his ware
for an equal price. For who would not rather borrow things to use freely, than
to take them upon hire? and who would buy ware, if he might have it given him?

I answer, not every thing which we would that men should do to us, are we to
do to them; but that which in equity and with good conscience we desire to be
done to us: otherwise, he which desires to be slain, might lawfully kill
others. But by commodation, a man cannot desire in equity and with a good
conscience to borrow freely that which is lettable, nor by free donation to
receive that which is saleable, unless it be of some special friend, or of
some that looks for as good a turn at our hands, or in case of present or
urgent necessity: for that were to desire another man's loss, without making
of recompense. But he which has need to borrow by mutuation, may in equity
and with a good conscience desire to borrow freely of him that is able to lend,
because he does not only purpose yea covenant to make full recompense, by
restoring the full value of that which he borrows (for so much is implied in
the very contract of mutuation) but also if he be an honest man, will be as
willing to gratify his creditor wherein he lawfully may, as now he desires to
be helped by him.

2. Again, some who exercise moderat usury, allege for the justifying of
themselves, That if they had occasion to borrow, they would be willing to
borrow upon usury, after eight or ten in the hundred. Yea, they would think
themselves beholding to such an one as would lend unto them after that rate.
And therefore they do as they would be done unto in the like case. I answer
first, that no man ought to desire to borrow, but for need: and therefore, what
men which do not borrow for need, may desire, it is not material. And
secondly, that no man which borrows for his need, is willing simply or with
an entire will to borrow upon usury, but upon a conditional necessity, for
avoiding a greater mischief. As he which casts his goods into the sea to
lighten the ship in a dangerous tempest, is simply unwilling to cast away his
goods; and yet is willing so to do, upon a conditional necessity to save his
life. And as he which falling among thieves, gives them his purse, being
forced thereto by a conditional necessity, viz. if he will save his life,
being simply unwilling to forgo his money: so he which in his necessity
yields to pay usury, does it (as the Poet speaks) (...), willingly, for
avoiding a greater inconvenience, but simply against his will. For that which a
man does not integra voluntate, Qui non integravoluntate consentit. inuitus
appellatur. Hotom. de vsur. ^^s^metus 85. D. de ad. haered.
with an entire will, he does inuitus, against his will, Eth. 3. 1.
say the Lawyers. Which always happens in these mixed actions, wherein the
agent is (as the Philosopher says) to be esteemed (...), that is, not willing.

When as therefore they object, Volenti non fit iniuria, Wrong is not done to
him that is willing: I answer, that neither is the borrower simply willing,
neither is that axiom generally true; for then Joseph had not sinned against
his mistress, if he had granted her desire, neither had Saul's armor bearer
been worthy of blame, 1. Sam. 31. 4.
if at Saul's own request he had killed him, being the anointed of the Lord.
But Joseph confesses, Genesis 39. 9.
that he should have sinned fearfully, if he had yielded to her desire: 2.
Sam. 1. 9. 10, 14.
And David puts to death that pickthanke, who had (as he said) at Saul's own
entreatie slain him. And therefore, seeing usury is as well forbidden in the
Scriptures, as murder or adultery, it is not the borrowers entreatie that can
make it lawful.

Yea but say they, The borrower is willing, he seeks to me, he intreates me,
yea and of his own accord he offers me usury. I answer, and yet is he not
simply willing thereto, but his necessity for avoiding a greater inconvenience,
makes him seem willing to that whereunto he is simply unwilling: For does not
the mariner in the tempest use all expedition with earnestness to cast out his
goods, as though he earnestly desired to be rid of them, and yet is indeed
unwilling to be deprived of them? Does not the party which is fallen among
thieves and is afraid of his life, earnestly entreat them to take his goods,
and readily give his purse and what else he has, so they will spare his life;
and yet simply is unwilling to loose his money if otherwise he could choose? Or
if that example mislike the usurer, suppose a man in extremity of hunger
coming to another to buy bread, who meaning (as the usurer commonly does) to
take advantage by his neighbors want, seemeeth unwilling to sell him any food:
will not this party in his extremity offer the other twelve pence for that
which is not worth two pence, and entreat him that he would take his money, and
perhaps tell him that in so doing he shall save his life? and yet no man is
simply willing to give twelve pence for that which is worth but two pence, or
if he were, his desire would not excuse the receiver. It is evident therefore
that the usurer breaks the general law of justice and charity, in doing to
others as he would not that others should do to him, and also in taking another
man's goods without the others man's good will.

But I will show you severally, first, that usury is unjust: and secondly,
that it is uncharitable. All illiberall contracts are unjust, wherein
commutatiue justice is not observed; and commutatiue justice is not observed
where is not equality kept of the things committed, whether the commutation be
of the things themselves for recompense, or of the use only for hire. Now that
there may be equality, allowance is to be made of the necessary cost, hazard
and labor which appertain thereto, for all these are valuable: as for
example. A merchant traveling beyond seas, buyeth commodities there at an
easy rate, which having transported into his own country, he may with a good
conscience sell so much dearer, according to the proportion of his necessary
labor, cost, and hazard. And where none of these considerations are, there
ought to be no gain: or if there be, there is inequality, and so injustice.
But you will say: what if a man sustain loss, is not allowance to be made
thereof? If any man has been the effectual cause of that loss, he and no
other is to make recompense: but if loss be sustained by the hand of God, we
must bear it as a cross which the Lord has laid upon us, and not presume to
lay it upon any other man's shoulders who has not been the effectual cause of
our loss.

But now (say I) usury is an illiberall contract, and although it be in truth
no other contract but lending for gain, yet it puts on the habit of
letting, exchange, partnership, and is not only an uncharitable lending, as
shall be showed, but also an unjust letting, an unequal exchange; and an
unconscionable partnership. And first, it is a most wicked and unjust kind of
letting, agreeing with true letting in nothing else but in taking an overplus:
for first as I have showed heretofore, Location is of such things as are not
spent in the use, but have a fruitful use in themselves which may be valued
apart from the property and dominion: and therefore he which lets any
thing, he alienateth the use for an equal price, retaining to himself the
property. But usury is of such things as are spent in the use, and are lent to
be spent, neither have they any fruitful use in themselves which may be
valued apart from the property, because they be spent in the use; and
therefore he which puts forth upon usury alienateth not only the use but
the property also, from which, as it is the subject of mutuation or usury,
the use cannot be severed. As for example, If I let an house or a piece of
ground, etc. I let the fruitful use which is in themselves naturally,
retaining still the property to my self: But he which puts forth money, or
meat, or any thing else that is spent in the use, he cannot let the fruitful
use of them, or value it apart from the property, for there is no such
fruitful use in them that can be valued apart, and therefore with the use if
he lend them to be spent, he must needs alienat the property also. For the use
of money and victuals and such like things (as they are the subject of
mutuation) is the spending and distraction of them; and if any fruit or profit
be raised by the distractio^ of them, it is to be ascribed to the industry and
skill of him that does employ them; and consequently the gain, if there be
any, of right belongs to him, who being now the owner thereof (for as I said,
in mutuation the property is transferred to the borrower) bestows his skill
and industry to raise a profit out of that which is his own.

Secondly, in location the letter alienating the use only and not the
property, is to receive again the self same particular, after it has been
used of the hirer, being for the most part impaired in the use, in respect
whereof there is a second reason of demanding and taking the hire. But in
usury, the lender alienating not only the use but the property also,
couenanteth to receive again not the self same particular impaired in the
use, but the full value thereof in the same kind, without any impairing or
diminution of the principal, and therefore in usury there is no such reason
of an overplus, as in location.

Thirdly, in location the letter as he retains the property of that which is
let, so he also bears the hazard thereof. In so much that if it miscarie
without the hirers default, it miscarieth to the letter, and not to him: for he
is only to pay the hire, Exodus 22. 14, in respect whereof there is a third
reason of the hire demanded, as being in part the price of the hazard. But in
usury the lender as he alienateth the property with the use, so also with the
property he transferreth the hazard to the borrower: in so much that if the
principal, or any part thereof miscary, it miscaries to the borrower, it is
safe to the lender, by the very contract of mutuation. Luit.. pen. C. de fur.
Now it is a principle in the law, Vbi periculum, ibi lucrum collocandum est,
To whom the hazard belongs, to him appertains the gain: Hotom. ex Pom. in
l. is qui, 13.
And that no man ought to reap gain by that whereof he bears not the
hazard: 1. D. commod In si non fuerunt. 20 in si. l. si igitur. 55. eod. etc.
and again, That there is no gain allowable by law, which has no hazard
joined with it.

Lastly, the letter many times is at charge about such things as he does let,
as in repairing of houses, in keeping of houses, etc. which may be a fourth
reason of dema^ding hire: but there is no such respect in usury. Nay the
usurer having transferred the property of that which is lent, to the borrower,
and with the property the labor which is to be employed, the hazard which is
to be sustained, the cost which is to be borne for the raising of any
commodity by the employment of the money; notwithstanding, he would have the
money to be thought his, in respect of the gain, though the borrowers in
respect of the loss. Now if you lay these things together, you shall in part
perceive how unjust and unconscionable a gain usury is, even then when the
borrower seeks to be a gainer by the imploime^t of that which he has
borrowed. 1. In that the usurer lets that which is not lettable, and
requires an hire for the fruitful use of that which has in it self no
fruitful use, but is spent in the use; and therefore being not valuable by it
self, ought not to be paid for by it self, as it is, when in respect thereof
an hire is required over and above the principal. Secondly, in that he
requires gain or hire for another man's industry and skill, hazard and charge
employed about that which now is not the usurers, but the other man's which
uses his skill and pains, and bears the hazard and cost about it; the
usurer in the mean time having nothing to do with the money, having
transferred the property thereof to the borrower, neither yet bearing the
hazard or charge, or being at the pains of the employment of the money.

But against this argument, diverse things are objected. First, they say money
is not spent in the use. I answer, it is spent to the borrower so soon as he
has used it, though the substance thereof remain in other men's hands: and it
is lent to be spent. For therefore the borrower is bound by the contract of
mutuation to restore not the same particular (for that is to be spent and gone)
but so much: and it is all one to the usurer, not only by the contract of
usury, but of mutuation, whether the principal be kept, or spent, or lost, or
employed to advantage, the borrower being bound alike, whatsoever becomes of
that particular, to restore the full value of the principal. It is nothing to
the lender how the money lent be used, for the time of the loan, so that the
principal be restored in due time.

2. Yea but although the money itself remain not to the borrower after he
has used it, yet it remains in the equivalent, that is, in some commodity
or ware which has been bought therewith, by uttering whereof, some gain may
be raised.

I answer, first, that it is all one to the usurer by the very contract of
usury, whether I give the money borrowed, or loose it, or mispend it, or pay a
debt with it, or buy a commodity with it; and if I buy a commodity, whether
it be such as is to be spent in necessary uses, as victuals and such like, or
whether it be to remain with me, or be a ware which I would sell to others.
And likewise the use of money is one and the same, viz. the distraction or
spending of it: For whatsoever I do with the money, and howsoever I use it,
whether to my loss or gain, I am by the very contract of usury bound to
restore the principal with the usury, and therefore these are but frivolous
pretenses. But suppose I buy a commodity which I mean to sell for gain:
first, I employ my skill and industry according to my trade, for the following
whereof I am at charge; I only bear the hazard of the bargain, which many
times falls to my loss; and lastly, the commodity which I sell is mine
own, and therefore the gain as well as the loss, if there be any, belongs
of right to my self and no man else. But as I said, whether I gain or lose by
the employment of the money, I am bound alike by the contract of usury to pay
the principal with the increase, and therefore my gain, is no more the cause
of his gain (though that be pretended) than my loss, because in both he
gains alike.

3. Objection. But although money it self has no fruitful use, Eccles. 10.
19.
yet as Solomon says, money answers all things, and therefore with money I
may buy that which has a fruitful use, as namely cattle, house, or lands,
etc. and what reason can be given why I may not as well let my hundred pounds
in money, as my hundred pounds worth of cattle, houses or lands, which I buy
with my money?

Answer. Your money cannot be let for the reasons aforesaid, and being lent it
is the borrowers, who bearing the hazard of it besides his pains and charges,
is to reap the gain thereof: but cattle, house and lands, may be let, they
have a fruitful use which is valuable, they remain yours notwithstanding they
be let, and the hazard of them appertains to you.

4. Suppose a man of better estate than my self, borrows of me an hundred
pounds, and therewith buyeth lands, and out of his land receives the fruits or
rent thereof. What reason is there that he should receive a rent for the land
bought with my money, and I in the mean time have none allowance for my money?

I answer, in such a case thou need not lend, or if thou do, thou may
lend thy money upon this condition, That so much land as is bought therewith
shall be morgaged unto thee, that so the bargain may be thine, and the rent
thereof paid to thee, until thou receive thy principal. But you will say?
Might I not as well lend my money for gain? I answer, no: for if he besides
the charges do also bear the hazard of the land which he has bought and is
his own, it is good reason that he should have the fruits thereof. And what
reason is it that when he which bears all the charge and hazard, receives
scarce five pounds a year, he should allow thee ten? But if thou take the
bargain into thine hands, the fruit that rises, is of thine own; and as thou
bear the hazard, either in respect of the title, or in regard of some common
calamity, so is it good reason thou sholdest have the profit thereof. As for
the other, he sustainenth no disadvantage: for by this means he may be assured
of the land which he desires, when he can procure the money: and if he never
procure the money, it is no reason he should ever have the lands.

5. Again, whereas I said that money being lent is the borrowers, both in
respect of the property, and also of the hazard, and therefore the profit
thereof belongs to the borrower and not to the lender, who has transferred
from himself both the property and the hazard for a time; the usurer
demands, What reason is there (says he) that I should lend my money, and by
lending make it another man's, without recompense?

I answer, if you do but lend your money, the borrower is bound by the very
contract of loan to make you recompense by restoring the principal in the
full value thereof. Yea, but why should I make that which is mine another man's,
and transfer the dominion and property from my self to another, if I may
not require some gain therefore? I answer, because the Lord himself has so
straightly commanded thee who art of ability, to lend freely to thy brother
being in need, Deuteronomy. 15. 8, 9.
as that if thou refusest to lend unto him, it is sin unto thee. And
secondly, because he has most straightly forbidden all lending for gain, and
condemns it as an abomination, which whosoever commits he shall not live,
but die an everlasting death. And thirdly, because the patrons of usury
themselves do confess, That for the duty or courtesy it self of lending,
that is, of making that which is mine to be thine for a time, no gain ought to
be required, or if there be, it is damnable usury. Whereupon I infer another
consequent, that if thou may not require gain for the act of lending it
self, whereby thou make that which is thine to be another man's for the time,
because the Lord forbids it, and the patrons of usury confess so much;
then can thou not require a gain, much less a certain gain, not only out
of the profit which he may perhaps reap of the money which now is his, and
whereof besides his skill, industry and charge, he alone does bear the
hazard, but also out of his loss. Thus therefore it appears that usury is a
very unjust letting.

2. It is also a very unequal exchange, when for an hundred pounds delivered,
an hundred and ten pounds is required.

Why, But by this reason, you will say, you condemn all gain, and negotiation
for gain. May not the merchant lawfully for his wares bought in another
country for one hundred pounds, require one hundred and ten here? I answer as
before, that there are three considerations, viz. of necessary cost,
industry, and hazard; for all or any whereof, a proportionable gain may be
allowed, but where none of those are found, there ought to be no gain:
consider then whether any of these are to be found in usury or not: does the
usurer therefore take any pains for the gain which he requires by usury?
Nothing less. Usury is a gainefull idleness, whereby men do eat of the sweat
of other men's brows. For whether they eat or drink, sleep or wake, work or
play, their gain by usury comes in alike. Is he at any cost for the getting
of this gain? Not of an halfepenie. Does he bear any hazard? It is no part
of his meaning. He requires a covenant of the borrower for the payment both of
the principal and also of the usury, at a certain time; and for the
performance of that covenant, before he will lend his money he will be sure of
so much security as himself thinks to be sufficient, whether it be by bonds
or statutes, by pawnes or sureties: so that if the principal or any part
thereof be lost, it is lost to the borrower, but it is safe to the usurer, by
the very contract of usury, ratified by other securities.

What then is the reason of this excess or inequality in the contract of
usury, that for an hundred pounds, one hundred and ten pounds of the like money
should be required?

Forsooth, says one, this gain I require for the forbearance of my money?
Why, but say I, if thou lendest thy money for a time, thou must needs forbear
it for the time of the loan. And if thou must lend it freely and take no gain
for the courtesy of lending, thou must also forbear it freely, and take no
gain for the courtesy of forbearing for the time of the loan. Yea but I
forbear it to my hinderance, and therefore so much as I am hindered, I may
lawfully require by way of interest.

Hinderance I confess is to be recompensed by him who is the effectual cause
thereof, and interest I have showed before to be lawful: and therefore if the
borrower through his default be the effectual cause of the lenders loss, the
lender may with a good conscience require interest, and thereby provide for his
own indemnitie. But indeed the borrower, unless he forced the creditor to
lend, is not the effectual cause of the creditors loss, until he has made
delay. Neither is the creditor after delay to demand interest, unless by the
delay he incur some loss, or sustain hinderance of some lawful and
certain gain.

We confess (say they) that the casual or moment any interest, Molin.
whereof you speak, is not to be allowed or regarded but after delay: but the
promiscuous or successiue interest is to be allowed according to the proportion
of the time of the loan even before delay. And what is this successiue
interest I pray you? Forsooth an allowance to be made for the forbearance of
money, pro rata temporis, according to the rate and proportion of the time,
which is also called, inter vsurium, and by our usurers, interest. I hear new
names, but the thing thereby signified is the gross and common usury which is
forbidden in the Scripture, and has been condemned in all ages, as I have
showed heretofore. For interest is to be esteemed not according to the
borrowers success in the employment of money, but according to the hinderance
which the lender sustaineth by the forbearance of his money, and thereof it
has the name. And whereof is the hinderance which he sustaineth? Forsooth of
so much gain as either himself might have raised by his money in the same
time, or another would have allowed him according to the laws.

Would thou then have employed it thy self? Perhaps it is but a usurious
pretense. But be it so: How would thou have employed it? By negotiation or
traffic? That is not likely: Usurers love not to be adventurers, there is
too much hazard in traffic. But if thou would, it may be thou should
have been a looser: and therefore set thy fear of loss by aduenturing, which
thou escapest by not hazarding the principal, against your hope of gain which
you looked to receive, if you had adventured, and let thy possible gain which
thou have missed, be recompensed with the possible loss which thou have
escaped. And know this, that the hinderance of uncertain gain is not to be
allowed after delay, much less before: neither can uncertain hopes be sold
with a good conscience for certain gain, especially to those that do not buy
them.

Yea but another would have allowed me after ten in the hundred.

But lawful interest is an allowance of lawful gain: After delay made by the
borrower, the lender cannot with a good conscience by way of interest require
allowance for the hinderance of either uncertain or unlawful gain, much
less may it be required before hand, and yet much less may it be couenanted
before hand.

Yea but what reason is there that I should sustain hinderance without
recompense?

Lay aside usurious pretenses. Can thou not indeed without thine hinderance
forbear thy money? consider then the estate of him that is to borrow. Is he a
prodigal gentleman, or riotous person? feed not his riot and vanity. Is he a
covetous tradesman that seeks to compass great matters, and to be an
engrosser or forestaller of commodities, to the prejudice of the common wealth?
make not thy self accessarie to his covetous practices, to such thou ought
not to lend. Has the party no great need to borrow? to such thou need not
lend, or if thou do, thine hinderance, if thou sustainest any, is merely
voluntary, and of such an hinderance thou can require no recompense of him
who has not been the effectual cause thereof. Is the party an honest man,
and has need to borrow? then if the Lord has enabled thee to lend, thou art
bound to lend, though thou shall sustain some hinderance, yea though thou
should hazard the principal, thou must willingly yield to both, as imposed
of the Lord: neither must thou seek gain out of his need, but lend freely for
the Lords sake, who requires this duty at thy hand, and will be sure to
recompense thee not by ten in the hundred, but by hundreds for thy tens, if not
in this life, as many times he does, yet in the life to come. Lend, says our
Savior Christ, looking for nothing thence, and your reward shall be great, etc.

If then the forbearance of the money, Interesse vsurarium.
and this usurious interest (as the Law does term it) be not a good reason to
justify the inequality which is in usury, what other reason may there be
thereof?

Forsooth, says another, the use of the money. Why, but the selling of the use
of a thing is the letting of the thing, but money cannot be lawfully let, as I
have sufficiently proved. The use of money is the spending of it, as the use
of victuals is the eating of it: and in things spent in the use, thou can not
without great inequality require one allowance for the thing, and another for
the use, which cannot be reckoned apart from the thing, or severed from the
property. If thou lend me ten loaves, thou should deal very unequally with
me, if thou should require eleven; or if having taken the price of the
loaves themselves, thou should also demand a price for the use, which is
the eating of them: and in like sort, if having lent me ten pounds, thou
should require eleven, that is, ten for the principal, and one for the use,
which was nothing but the spending of the money. But this indeed is not the
reason of the overplus demanded, though sometimes it be pretended. For, that
in truth is the reason of the usury simply, according to which the usury is
proportioned; the usury being less when that is less, and greater when that
is more: that is, the time of forbearance or successiue interest, whereof I
spoke even now. If you say, it is the time of the use, I answer, as the time
of the use of meat is the time of eating it, so the time of the use of the money
borrowed, is the time of spending it. For after it is once spent, as perhaps it
is the same day it is borrowed, the borrower never uses it more, though it
were lent him for a long time, it is gone from him, and to him (as the lawyers
speak) extinguished. Now if the same day, after I have used, and in the use
spent your money, I having received as much elsewhere, should bring you so much
as I borrowed, you would require nothing for the use or yet for the time of the
use; which notwithstanding had been one and the same, if you had lent and
forborne the money for a tweluemonth. This then is not the matter, neither the
use, nor the time of the use.

No says the usurer, I require not allowance for his use in spending the
money, but for the use of the money employed to his advantage. For what reason
is there that another man should gain by my money, and not make me partaker of
his gain? This also is another usurious pretense. For in the contract of
usury the lender makes an absolute covenant for certain gain, without
respect of the borrowers either loss or gain: and by virtue of the same
contract, demands his certain allowance or gain, as well out of the
borrowers loss, as out of his gain. The borrower you say borrows the money,
that he might employ it to his gain; and therefore you covenant for gain by
this loan: For why should he gain by your money, and not you? I answer,
though he intend to use the money to his advantage and gain, yet many times he
proves no gainer, but rather a looser. What then is the reason of your
demanded gain? is it not sufficient for him to loose the employment of his
labor and skill, unless out of his loss, he also make you again? And hereby
also it appears, that the best kind of usury (I mean when gain is required
of those only that borrow to gain) is an unconscionable partnership: For
there is no lawful partnership, where is not partaking in the loss as well as
in the gain. The usurer will partake in the borrowers gain, but in the loss
he will have no part. Yea whiles he seeks, nay couenanteth for certain gain
out of the uncertain negotiation of the borrower (which is most unequal) he
exacteth the same gain couenanted for, as well out of the borrowers loss, as
out of his gain: which is most unconscionable. But what if I covenant for
gain in euentum lucri, that is, to gain, if he gain; but if he do not
gain, then to require security only for my principal? That practice is
far more tolerable than the other, yet this also is unequal, unless as you
covenant for gain, if he do gain, so you be also content to bear part in
that loss, which without his default he shall sustain. But why should be
gain with my money, and I have no part therein? because the money being his
for the time, he bestows the pains and the cost in the employment of it, and
also bears the hazard thereof alone. Wherefore if thou will covenant for
gain to be raised by the employment of thy money, thou must by way of
partnership put it forth to be occupied, and not having transferred the
property thereof, to bear the hazard of the negotiation; that it being still
thine, and occupied at thine hazard, a proportionable part of the profit which
is raised thereof may in justice and equity belong to thee. Otherwise, if thou will not enter into a contract of partnership, this is all which thou may
lawfully do: Lend thy money to an honest and a thriftie man, taking security
only for the principal, and refer the rest to the blessing of God, and the
borrowers fidelity and thankfulness; but remember this withal, that to thine
expectation of gain, there must be an answerable purpose of partaking in the
loss. Or if thou will covenant for gain if he do gain, thou must also be
content to bear part with him in the loss. But you will say: If I may receive
from the borrower an overplus, which of his own accord he gives to me in
testimony of his good will and thankfulness, why may not I covenant with him
therefore? especially seeing it is a general rule of all contracts, that what I
may receive from another when he willingly offers it, I may exact the same of
him, so that provision be made for his indemnitie? Nay rather this is a rule of
contracts, That whatsoever I cannot lawfully take of my neighbor, I ought not
to covenant for it: but I ought not to take gain of the borrower when he is a
looser, and enrich my self by his loss, and therefore I ought not to make an
absolute covenant for gain, whether he gain or loose. But on the other side,
it is lawful sometimes to receive things voluntarily given, which it were
utterly unlawful to covenant for beforehand. Many things are honestly
received, which cannot honestly be demanded, and much less by covenant be
exacted. It is lawful in the commonwealth for private men, when the magistrates
have done them justice, and defended them from wrong, in testimony of their
love and thankfulness to bring them some present: in the church it is lawful
for the ministers having been freely preferred by their patrones, to give them
some gratuitie in token of their love and thankfulness: and it is lawful for
the magistrate and patron to accept of such gratuities, the magistrate having
intended justice, and not respected rewards; and the patron having regarded
nothing else but the discharge of his duty in preferring a worthy man. But if
the magistrate should covenant with the private man, to do him justice for
reward, it were the detestable sin of briberie, and selling of justice: and
if the patron should indent with the minister for reward, it were the
sacrilegious sin of symonie. In like case it is lawful for a creditour, who
having intended the help of his brother, and not his own profit, by free
loan, to accept from the borrower a gratuitie in testimony of his love and
thankfulness: but if he should beforehand covenant with him therefore, it were
the damnable sin of usury.

And whereas they add, That we may make such a covenant, so we provide for the
borrowers indemnitie: I answer, that the contract of actual usury including
an absolute covenant for gain, provides for the lenders certain gain, as
well out of the borrowers loss, as out of his gain, which is most unequal
and unconscionable.

Thus have I proved usury to be an unjust and unequal thing. Whereupon does
follow the proof of the second point, that it is also an uncharitable thing:
for where there is no justice, there can be no charity. But my meaning is to
prove, that as it is an unjust and unequal thing in it self, so it is an
hurtful thing to our neighbor. And this I will prove first in general. For
usury, as it is an illiberall, so also an uncharitable lending, not only
perverting and deprauing, but also euerting and extinguishing that most
necessary act and duty of charity and liberality, that is to say, free
lending: and consequently is most hurtful and pernicious both to private men in
particular, and to humane societies in general. Now this is a principle, That
whatsoever peruerteth and ouerturneth an act of virtue, especially such a
necessary act to humane societies, it is not only a vice, but a detestable
vice: for nothing is opposite to virtue but vice. As for free lending, it is a
commendable act of liberality, and a necessary duty of charity. There are
two acts of liberality, dono dare, and mutuo dare, (...). Basil.
to give freely, and to lend freely. And this latter, whereby one man does
supply the necessities of another, is so necessary, that humane societies
cannot stand without it. Usury having stepped into the room of free lending,
you shall hear usurers and patrons of usury not ashamed to say, that
commonwealths cannot stand without usury: without lending indeed they cannot,
but without usury they both might and ought. And surely, if lending were taken
away, necessity would drive many men into desperate courses; as the Syriack
interpreter understood that speech of our Savior, Luke 6. 35, Lend, causing no
man to despair.

But usury peruerteth and depraueth this necessary act of liberality and
charity, turning it unto an act of selfeloue, covetousness, and cruelty. For
whereas by the ordinance of God, and by the law of nature, lending is free and
charitable, intending the good of the borrower, and not of the lender; usury
has made it illiberall and uncharitable, intending the lenders profit
chiefly, if not only, and seeking yea couenanting for the lenders gain as
well out of the loss of the borrower as out of his gain. The property of
charity is not to seek her own, 1. Cor. 13. 5 and 10. 24.
but the good of others; and whereas other virtues serve for the good of the
subject wherein they are, the acts of charity and liberality are referred to
the good of others: Lending therefore being an act of liberality and charity,
ought to respect the good of the borrower, if not only, yet chiefly: but
lending by usury is made an act of selfeloue, wherein the good of the borrower
is sought either not at all, or but in a secondarie respect, as it serves to
further the lenders gain. For indeed the lender by usury couenanteth
absolutely for gain, which happens sometimes out of the borrowers loss, and
sometimes also out of his gain, which the usurer will pretend to seek and
respect, but the truth is, he will never look after his neighbors profit,
unless therein he may be sure to find his own gain.

The usurers lending therefore is an act of selfeloue, and it is also an act of
covetousness. For whereas lending proceeds from one of these three
fountains, either from Christian charity, or from civil love and humanity,
or from covetousness; he is said to lend in Christian charity, who lends
for the Lords sake to his needy neighbor, looking for nothing again; in
civil charity or courtesy, who lends to pleasure his friend, looking for
his own again; in covetousness who looks for more than his own. For
indeed, what is (...), that is, covetousness, but an unlawful desire of
having more? If any man object, that by the same reason I condemn all gain
which men do seek after by other contracts: I answer, That in the lawful
contracts of negotiation, a man may as well seek his own profit as another
man's; for therefore they were ordained, that by the mutual communication of
things upon equal conditions, both parties might be mutually profited. And
moreover, the gain which is gotten by them, may well stand with that equality
which in commutatiue justice is required. But lending was not ordained to be a
contract of negotiation, but an act of charity and liberality, wherein the
lender should not respect his own gain, but the borrowers good; and the gain
which is sought for by lending, does not nor cannot stand with equality and
justice, as I have proved before. Whereas therefore lending was ordained of
God to be a contract, whereby the lender should seek the good of the borrower,
without respect of his own profit, so far should he be from doing wrong
therein; the usurer has made lending a contract, wherein he seeks for his
own gain not only uncharitably, without respect of the borrowers either
profit or loss; but also unjustly, seeking gain where he bears no hazard,
and taking another man's goods without his good will.

Lastly, whereas lending is an act of bounty and mercy, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 37. 26. and 112. 5.
A good man is merciful and lends: usury has turned it into an act of
inhumanitie and cruelty. (...)
For as Basil well says, In very deed it is an excess of inhumanitie, when
the borrower wanting necessaries, and seeking to borrow for the comfort of his
life, the lender should not content himself with the principal, but should
out of the want and necessity of his needy brother seek gain and advantage
unto himself. And therefore as it is said of the good man, that he is
merciful and lends: so may it be said of the usurer, that he is cruel and
lends. For that which is said of wicked men in general, may principally be
applied to the usurer, That his very mercies are cruel. For when he would
seem to support a man, he does supplant him; when he seems to cure, Prou.
12. 10.
he inflicteth a deeper wound; and when he seems to have relieved a man, he
casts him into greater want. In Decalog.
And therefore Luther doubted not to call the usurer, a blood sucker of the
people. And in the judgment of the wise Cato, Cato interrogatus. Quid
faenerari? quid, inquit, hominem occidere? Cic. de off. in fine. Hug. Card.
it is no more lawful to be an usurer than to be a murderer. Thus you see how
usury has perverted lending, converting it from a work of charity,
liberality, and mercy, into an act of selfeloue, covetousness, and cruelty.
And for this cause the usurer is not unfitly compared by some, to the Magicians
of Egypt: for whereas the Lord has ordained the contract of lending to be as a
staff which the wealthier man is to put into the hands of his neighbor,
Leuit. 25. 35.
to stay and support him when his hands do shake, and himself does shrink
under the burden of his want, the usurer has turned this staff into a
serpent.

But usury does not only corrupt and deprave the duty of lending, but also
extinguish all free loan where it takes place, drying up the fountain of
love, whose streams were wont to run forth to the refreshing of others. And
it does not only harden the heart, and shut up the hands, and close the bowels
of compassion in the usurers themselves, as woeful experience shows; but in
others also it has made the duty of free lending, to seem so great a
benefit, and of so high a price, Append. in Psalm. 15.
that as Bucer truly says, A man may seem now adays to be very impudent,
that shall desire to borrow freely: For he that lends freely, does for the
most part make this estimation of his benefit, that besides the forbearance of
his money, wherewith he does pleasure the borrower, he does as much for him
besides, as if he gave him the tenth part of the principal out of his purse.
And thus by means of usury, charity is frozen among men, and the bowels of
compassion shut up; needy men are driven unto extremities, Luke 6. 35.
and the wealthier sort deprived of that great reward which is promised to
those that lend freely. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. and 23. 20.


But I will show more particularly, how usury offends both against private
and public charity, as being ever hurtful and pernicious either to the
particular men that do borrow, or else to the body of the commonwealth, whose
common profit is in all contracts especially to be regarded. The party that
takes up money upon usury, does either borrow for the supply of his necessity
and want, or else to raise a gain by the employment of the money to his best
advantage. He that imposes usury upon him that borrows for mere
necessity, in stead of helping him increases his need, and under a show of
relieuing him, he seeks his undoing: for such a one commonly, the more and
the longer he borrows, the more unable he is to pay, and so at length is
brought unto extreme penury, usury having turned all his substance into
debt, and eaten him out of house and home. And therefore, though the usurers
sometimes do vaunt, how kindly they deal with their debtours in forbearing
them from year to year: yet the truth is, the longer they forbear, the
greater is their gain, and though they defer the borrowers misery, yet in
deferring it, they do increase it: and therefore by some are not unfitly
compared to the greedy cat, which though for a while she plaieth with the silly
mouse, yet in the end she will be sure to devour it. And here I cannot omit
that notable speech of the author of the work unfinished upon Matthew, Apud
Chr^sost. tom 3. homil. 12. in fine.
though it be commonly cited by those which write of this argument. Christ
therefore (says he) commands us to lend, but not upon usury. For he that
lends upon usury, at the first sight seems to give his own, but indeed he
is so far from giving his own, that he takes that which is another man's:
for he seems to relieve a man's necessity, but indeed casts him into a
greater necessity. He loses him of one bond, and binds him with more:
neither does he lend for the righteousness of God, but for his own gain. For
the usurers money is like the biting of the Aspe; for even as he which is
bitten of the Aspe, goes to sleep, as if he were delighted, and through the
pleasantness of his sleep dies: so he which borrows upon usury is
delighted for a time, as one that had received a good turn: and so through the
pleasure of the imagined benefit be does not perceive how he is taken captive.
For even as the poison of the Aspe, secretly conveying it self into all the
members, corrupts the whole body: so usury dispersing it self through all
the borrowers goods, conuerteth them into debt. And even as leaven which is put
into meal, infecteth the whole lump, and drawing it to it self, turns it
into the nature of leaven: so when usury enters into any man's house, it
draws all his substance unto it, and turns it into debt. But the patrones
of usury themselves confess, that usury imposed upon a man that borrows
for need, is ever a biting and damnifying of him, and that men ought by the
commandment of God to lend to such freely: and therefore I shall not need to
prove such usury to be uncharitable.

If therefore the borrower takes up money to employ it to his gain, it may be,
that having used all his skill, and employed all his industry in the occupying
of it, he shall not be able to gain so much clearly as will pay the usurer;
but allowing more than all his gain to the usurer, and getting nothing but his
labor for his pains, and gaining nothing toward his living but loss, at
length becomes a bankrupt. And that this also is uncharitable, I shall not
need to prove, seeing the patrones of usury themselves allow no usury, but
that which is part of the borrowers gain. But suppose the borrower do gain,
yet notwithstanding the contract of usury is nevertheless unequal and
uncharitable, because the usurer couenanteth for certain gain out of the
borrowers uncertain traffic, and whether he gain or loose, whether he sink
or swim, or whatsoever become of the principal, whether it be lost by fire, or
be taken away by thieves, or miscarrie by any other calamity, he having made
an absolute covenant for the restitution of the principal with usury, is by
virtue of the same to demand it as well out of the loss of the borrower, as
out of his gain. And therefore although in respect of the event, the borrower
be not bitten or damnified, yet the contract of usury is nevertheless
unequal and uncharitable. But although usury in this case be not hurtful to
the borrower, yet is it very hurtful to the commonwealth, and especially to
the communaltie which pays this usury: for whosoever thriueth by occupying
money borrowed upon usury, he has so pitched the prices of his commodities,
as that besides a competent gain raised for the maintenance of himself and
his charge, he also has gathered up an overplus of a tenth part for the
usurer. And thus by usury the prices of all commodities are enhaunced, whiles
the sellers who borrow upon usury, if they will thrive, must needs make the
buyers pay two shillings in the pound more than otherwise were sufficient. But
you will say, He that borrows upon usury, must sell as others do, which do
not borrow upon usury; and therefore usury is not the cause why the prices of
things be raised. I answer, because they which do borrow upon usury, must
needs sell for so much as they may gain both for themselves and the usurers;
therefore the rest do pitch the prices of their commodities accordingly:
otherwise they which occupy with money borrowed upon usury, could never
thrive: but because sometimes they do thrive, it is evident, that all of the
same trades do so pitch their prices, as if all did borrow upon usury.

Thus usury cloggeth the commonwealth with a very great and I had almost said
an intolerable burden. For this cannot be doubted of, but that many millions
of pounds are put out to usury in this land yearly, partly in money borrowed
upon usury, partly in wares taken up on trust, whether by merchants
themselves, or by retailers from them, or by the particular buyers from the
retailers: the usury of every million (which are many) after ten in the
hundred, being an hundred thousand pounds. Of which burden the commonwealth
might be eased, if usury could be abolished. Wherefore as he which imposes
usury upon his needy brother, does cruelly oppress him; so he which lends
upon usury to those which borrow to gain thereby, with engrossers and
forestallers, and such like public thieves, he does his endeavor that the
prices of all things may be inhaunced, and makes himself guilty, as
accessarie at the least of public theft.

By this which has been said, we may easily answer their objections, who
allege first, That by usury charity is not broken, when both the lender and
the borrower are gainers. turned into an act of selfeloue and covetousness, it
cannot be denied, but that charity is violated, and liberality set to sale.
But when out of the uncertain negotiation of

2. And whereas again they allege, That many by employment of money borrowed
upon usury, have grown rich: I will not answer with Basil, (...), that is,
but I think more (says he) have come to the halter; but I think more have
proved bankrupts. And although some for a time may seem to be rich by that
which they have borrowed upon usury, yet usury at the length consumes them
and eats them up. Neither does this prosperous ^uent of the borrower justify
the contract of usury, which couenanteth for gain not in euentum lucri, but
absolutely, and therefore out of his loss as well as out of his gain. And
lastly I add, that the more the borrower is enriched by this means, the more
the commonwealth is damnified.

But besides that hinderance which has been mentioned, the commonwealth
sustaineth many inconveniences by usurers, as being not only unprofitable, but
also hurtful members thereof.

For they which live in idleness, and walk inordinatly, gathering wealth by
unlawful means, they are unprofitable members of the commonwealth, and
unprofitable burdens of the earth. For as in the natural body there is not,
so in the body politic there ought not to be any member which has not his
use and function serving for the good of the whole body: But usurers (I mean
especially such as make a trade of usury) they live in idleness: for usury,
Plin.
as one well says, is quaestuos a segnities, gainefull idleness; they walk
inordinatly, seeking gain by a trade of sin, even as the common thief or
baud does: for what is an usurer, but as Bernard says, fur legatis, a thief,
which for the hardness of men's hearts the laws do tolerate. The Philosopher
matcheth the usurer with the baud: and to the same purpose observe the
cohaerence, Deuteronomy. 23. 18, 19. It is a wonder therefore, that in the hiue as it
were of the commonwealth, such drones are suffered, which live of the sweat,
yea blood of other men: who out of other men's labor attain ease, out of other
men's hazard gain security, out of other men's loss reap gain.

For whereas usurers desire to be borne with, because they have no other trade
to live by, therein they are most intolerable. In Psalm. 128.
Hear what Augustine says, Audent etiam f^eneratores dicere, Non habeo aliud
vnde v^uam, etc. Usurers also are not afraid to say, I have no other means to
live. The same might the robber, the burglar, the baud, and the witch, allege
for themselves: as though this especially were not to be punished in them, that
they have chosen to themselves artem nequitiae, an art or trade of wickedness
whereby to live, and will thereby sustain themselves, whereby they may offend
him, by whom all are sustained. But why will they not follow some other trade
of life? because they being given to idleness, and daring not trust Gods
providence with their goods, they therefore follow this trade, though never so
unjust, because it promises them great gain, without either pains, or cost,
or hazard, whereunto other professions are subject. And for this cause again,
usury is a great hinderance to the weal public, and would be much more, if
men could be persuaded of the lawfulness thereof. And therefore it cannot
truly be denied (though the patrones of usury give out the contrary) but that
they do a very profitable and necessary service to the commonweal, who do
effectually either speak or write against usury. For certainly, if men could
be persuaded out of the word of God, that usury were lawful, it would be the
utter decay (as it is already in part) of all honestarts and occupations. For
who would toil and moile, who would carke and care, who would bear the charge
and hazard of other professions, for an uncertain and it may be no gain; who
might be assured, that the time, which is the parent of usury, as Basil says,
would bring him in without his labor, without his cost, without his hazard, a
very great and certain gain? For to omit the practices of those usurers, that
know how by an hundred pounds to gain forty or fifty pounds by the year;
who knows not, that money continually put forth to usury after ten in the
hundred, does in seven years almost double the principal, and in every
seven years double the former sum. So that 1000 pounds let out after this
rate from three months to three months, arises in seven years to almost 2000,
in 14 years to 4000, in 21 years to 8000, in 28 to 16000, in 35 to 32000, in
42 to 64000, in 49 to 128000, in 56 to 256000 pounds in 63 to 512000, in 70
years to more than a million, and that is ten hundred thousand pounds. Who
would not sell his lands and goods and all that he can spare to raise a stock
of money, that thereout he might by usury reap so great and so certain a
gain, if once in his conscience he were assured, that usury is lawful? Yea
husbandry it self (from which through the blessing of God there does arise
many times so great increase) Exodus 2.
would be in small request, Haec vbi loc^tus foenerator Alphius,
if usury might be esteemed as lawful as it. Alphius the usurer, in Horace,
having recounted all the commendations of the country life, and seeming for the
time to be ravished therewith, I am i am futurus rusticus, Omnem relegit idibus
pecunia^: Quaerit calendis ponere.
resolved straightwayes to be a countreyman: and having to that end gathered up
his money in the ides of one month, he seeks to put it forth to usury in the
beginning of the next. Hence it is, that gentlemen when they can scarce raise
an hundred pounds a year for their lands without racking their rents; are so
ready to sell them, and having put the price thereof to usury (perhaps for
three or four hundred pounds a year) give over hospitality and betake
themselves to some private house in a city, where they may live privately at
small charge, as though they were borne for themselves alone. Hence also it is
that tradesmen having once gotten a good stock, give over their trade and
traffic, and give themselves wholly to usury. And the rest whose stocks are
not great, do follow traffic, but so as either they borrow money of the
wealther upon usury to traffic withal, or else take up their wares on trust
at an high rate, and sell them again for time at an higher price to such as do
retaile, and they lastly do utter them to particular men at an excessive rate.
And therefore hence proceeds in part the deernesse of all things, as I have
showed before.

Again, there is such inequality in usury that many men being consumed
thereby, the wealth of the country where it is commonly practiced, comes into
the hands of a few. Now politicians have observed, Bodin de rep. lib. 5. ca. 2.
that nothing is more dangerous for the conversion or euersion of kingdoms,
than the great wealth of a few, and the great want of the most; and that is no
way so much effected as by usury. And therefore the enriching of a few by the
impouerishing of many, through usury, has been (as the histories of all ages
do testify) an usual occasion of raising seditions and civil contentions in
commonweals, when the fear of God has not contained men within their
bounds, as it always ought to do. ^ane vetus vrbi foenebre malum, and
seditionum discordiarumque creberrima causa, Usury, says Tacitus, has been
an old mischife to the city of Rome, Anal. lib. 6.
and the most frequent cause of seditions and civil discords. In all cities,
In Esaias 58.
says Jerome, it is the greatest cause of sedition. It is manifest, Lib de
difinit. appellat.
says Phil. Melancthon, that by reason of the inequality which is in usury,
the greatest part of men where it is used are impouerished, and that for the
same cause seditions have often been raised in kingdoms. A spice whereof we
may see, Nehem. 5.

And yet these are not all the mischiefs which come to the common wealth by
usury: for over and besides all these, it pulls down the fearful
judgments of God upon that country wherein it being publicly allowed, is
usually and openly practiced; as appears by that destruction threatened
against Jerusalem for this sin, Ezekiel. 22. 12, 13. Thou have taken vsuri^ and
increase, and have gained from thy nei^ghbour by deceit, and have forgotten me,
says the Lord God, wherefore behold I clap my hands because of thy gain, that
is, (as appears out of the former chapter) I will, Ezee. 21. 14. 17.
as it were by clapping of hands, set other nations upon thee to overcome thee,
etc.

Wherefore wise men when they have considered not only the wrong which is done
to particular men, but also the manifold inconveniences and mischiefs which
come to the common wealth by usury, they have confide^tly affirmed, that
usurers are worse than other thieves, and that it were better for the common
wealth that there should be a thousand thieves in it, than an hundred usurers.
For the further proof whereof, I refer you to the writings of that worthy
Bishop Jewel upon 1. These. 4. 6. Chrysostom.
Yea some have not doubted to say, that the usurer is to be esteemed as a
common enemy to all men. Luther says, An usurer is a blood-sucker of the
people: In decalog.
and as a worm in an apple or nut consumes all that is within, so an usurer
deuoureth the substance of the city by wonderful and secret means.

Now if any man shall object that notwithstanding all that has been said,
usury may seem profitable and necessary unto common wealths, because the
laws of all common wealths have allowed the practice thereof. I answer,
first, that seldom or never have the laws of any countries allowed of usury:
But ever the Lawgiuers when they saw any hope of abolishing it altogether, have
wholly condemned it: or if the covetousness and hardness of men's hearts would
not suffer them to conceive any such hope, they have labored to restrain it
only, and to keep it within some compass, that it should not be
ouer-burdensome either to the borrowers or to the common wealth. Among others,
Solon, Lycurgus, and Plato in his book of Laws, have wholly forbidden it. The
ancient Romans who are renowned for wisdom and politic justice, Taci^.
annal. lib. 6.
first stinted usury at one in the hundred, and by the laws of the twelve
Tables ordained that if any usurer should take above one in the hundred,
Duodecim tabulis sanctum ne quis vnciario faenore amplius exerceret. De re
rustica.
he should be punished fourefold; whereas a thief by the same laws was to be
punished but twofold. Whereby you may gather, says Cato, how much they
esteemed an usurer to be a worse commonwealths man than a thief. Within one
hundred and three years after (as Bodin has observed) and that Duilia
rogatione, it was reduced, ad semuncias, Semunciarium foenus.
says Tacitus, that is, to half a pound in an hundred; and the next year
after, that also was abolished, Genucia rogatione, Bodin ex Liu. lib. 7.
says Bodin, whereby it was enacted, Ne vllo modo foenerari liceret, that it
should not be lawful at all to lend upon usury, as Alexander ab Alexandro
reports. Afterward when usury grew to an head again, it was sometimes
stinted at six, and sometimes at four in the hundred, and sometimes altogether
prohibited. At length Justinian so accommodated the limitation of usury to the
diverse estates and conditions of men, ^od. lib. 4. tit. 32 lib. 26.
that to them which could better forbear their money, less usury should be
permitted, and to them which could worse forbear it, more. To Noblemen
therefore and Gentlemen who use not to occupy their money for gain, he
permitted Trientes, that is, four in the hundred: To merchants and tradsemen,
who live by the employment of money in negotiation, he permitted besses, that
is, eight in the hundred: And to all other men semisses, that is, six in the
hundred: And in traiectitijs pecunijs, that is, in money sent beyond sea at the
creditors peril, and in two other cases, he granted centesimas, that is,
twelve in the hundred. But in these latter times the civil Law has been
corrected according to the canon Law: For in the Diet held at Augusta by
Charles the fifth, all usury is condemned; and in steed thereof a contract of
buying rents after five in the hundred (which is after twenty years purchase)
allowed, with a covenant of releasing or selling back the same, when the
seller shall tender the principal. And not the Popes only by their canon law,
but even Ma^omet also in his Alcoron has forbidden all usury. Azoara. 4. vid.
centur. 7. Magdeburg.


But forasmuch as some patrons of usury have taught, that a Christian man may
with a good conscience take so much usury as the laws of the country wherein
he dwells do permit, and withal confess that he cannot with a good
conscience take above that rate which is limited by the laws; it behooves us
therefore to enquire what our laws have determined concerning usury. And to
omit the laws of former times wherein usury has been sometimes restrained
and stinted, as in the time of Henry the eight; sometimes altogether forbidden,
as in the time of Edward the sixth; and to come to those laws which now are in
force, which are as concerning this matter and other criminal causes, of two
sorts: the canon Law, wherein it is not disagreeable to the word of God; and
the penal statute made in the 13 year of Queen Elizabeth. The canons of the
ancient councels do wholly and absolutely forbid and condemn all usury, and
the ancient Bishops of Rome were of the same judgment, but as I noted before,
and as Bodin also has observed, the latter Bishops de via deflexerunt, are
turned out of the way: For although according to the rest of their
Antichristian hypocrisy they do in word and in show condemn all usury,
permitting not so much as Christian burial to him that dies an usurer; yet
indeed they have allowed, yea as Bodin says, Etrau. com. Calisti. 3. and
Martini 5. de emptione and venditione cap. 1. and 2.
brought in a contract of redeeming rents which as it is practiced by their
leave and allowance, is worse than the usury allowed any where else. But as in
other things so in this point, where the Canon law swarueth from the word of
God we do forsake it, and where it agrees therewith, we embrace it.

And as touching the statute made in the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth,
howsoever the most (looking to the practice of usurers and conniuencie of
magistrates, and not to the act of Parliament it self) Anno 13. Eliza. cap. 8.
do imagine that usury, after the rate of ten in the hundred, is thereby
allowed; yet the truth is, that it is not so much as permitted thereby. Not
allowed: for it is an act against usury as being a sin, yea and a detestable
sin, as the statute it self does call it: wherein also it is acknowledged,
that all usury is forbidded by the Law of God. Not permitted: for as all
usury above ten in the hundred, is thereby to be punished with the forfeiture
of the triple value of the principal: so all usury, whether it be after the
rate of ten in the hundred, or under, though it were but of one in the hundred,
is to be punished with the forfeiture of the usury or increase. From hence
therefore the argument of the patrons of usury in England, may easily be
returned upon themselves: So much usury and no more, say they, may with good
conscience be taken, as the laws of the land do allow and permit. But now say
I, the laws of the land do not allow, no nor yet permit ten, nor five, nor yet
one in the hundred; therefore in England a man cannot with a good conscience
take after ten, nor five, nor yet one in the hundred.

But suppose that humane laws did permit usury, as our statute does in the
case of orphans only, does not the permission sufficiently argue the thing in
it self to be evil? and if the thing be evil in it self, can the
permission justify the practice of it before God? No, the law of man may
clear thee from civil penalties in the outward court, and before the
magistrate: but it cannot clear thee from the guilt of sin in the court of
conscience, and from the penalties that are due to the same by the moral law
of God. Neither is the law of man, but the law of God, the rule of thy
conscience: and therefore though man had nothing to punish in thee for thy
usury, yet the Lord has more than enough to condemn thee for the same.

But you will say, May humane laws permit such things as be evil? For answer,
I will set down the true and learned sentence of reverend Beza in his
Annotations upon Matthew, Chapter 19. verse 8. The moral law (says he) because
it respects the conscience, it simply commands good things and forbids
evil: But civil laws, if they be well ordained, they do indeed command
nothing which God has forbidden, and they forbid nothing that God has
commanded, but by the wickedness of men they are forced only to moderat many
things which they cannot wholly abolish: and these are the things which are
said to be permitted by laws. As for example, Christian charity forbids to
lend upon usury: notwithstanding many magistrates do see that in respect of
traffic and dealings among men, they cannot simply forbid usury. Therefore
(which is the only thing which remains for them to do) they stint usury.
But may a man therefore with a good conscience lend upon usury? No surely: For
the rule of our conscience is to be fetched not from the civil laws of men,
but from the word of God. Nay the civil laws themselves do not allow, but
rather condemn that which they do only tolerat, forced thereto by the
wickedness of men. Thus also the Lord by Moses making civil laws, does not
command divorces (for so he should have been contrary to himself) but to
such as could not be got to retain their wives, he commanded them to give
their wives a bill of diuorcement, that provision might be made for them
against their husbands cruelty: and yet for all that, they which put away
their wives ceased not to be adulterers before God. So say I again, The laws
of men do not command nor allow usury: (For so should they be contrary to
the laws of God) and yet to them who cannot be got to lend freely, they permit
to lend upon usury, so as they do not exceed such a stint; that provision
might be made for men that be in need, both that they might borrow, and also
that when they must needs borrow, they should not be too much oppre^^ed. And
yet for all this, as he was an adulterer that put away his wife unless it were
for the crime of adultery, as our Savior there proves; Mat. 19. 8.
so is he guilty of theft before God, who practices usury though it be
permitted by men. But as I said, our law does not permit usury as men commonly
imagine, but is as well contrived (considering the iniquity of the times) as
could almost be wished. Only these two things I desire may be now considered
of in parliament; First, whether it were not more behoofefull for the common
weal, if usury were stinted at six rather than at ten in the hundred; or
rather that all usury being forbidden, men should be allowed to use in steed
thereof, the contract of redemption, in that manner which before I approved,
buying a rent after five, as in Germany; or (because of our greater use of
money in traffic by reason of our more commodious navigations) after six in
the hundred, or more, if more be thought more equal, with a covenant of
redemption in the behalf of the borrower, or rather seller, if he desire it.
For first it may seem unreasonable, that whereas of an hundred pounds worth of
land (which is fruitful by nature) a man can hardly raise a rent of five or
six pounds a year; an hundred pounds in money which has in it self no
fruitful use, should without his pains, cost, or hazard, yield him ten pounds
a year. Secondly, it would in mine opinion be a notable means to diminish the
number of usurers, and also to ease both the borrowers in particular of
oppression, and the common wealth in general of that great burden of usury
whereof I spoke before. And thirdly, it would be a means to prevent both the
usual committing of this sin, and also the punishment which God has
threatened for the same.

The second thing which I desire may be considered of, is, the permission of
usury in the behalf of orphans. For if it be simply evil, it cannot be
good in them, neither can the respect had of them make it good in others. And
it is a principle in Divinity, Romans 3. 8.
Evil may not be done, that good may come thereof. Augustine gives this
charge (which afterward was placed among the canons of the law) That men
should not lend upon usury, De verb. domi. homil. 35.
though they would give that which is gotten by usury as alms to the poor.
Cause. 14. 9. 5.
And Chrysostom, when some made this excuse, I lent indeed upon usury, In
Matthew. homil. 57.
but that which I gained thereby I gave to the poor: he says plainly, that
God does not accept such sacrifices: and adds, that it were better not to
give to the poor, than so to give. It is a good rule in the Canon law, if one
cannot be relieved without another be hurt, it were better neither should be
helped, than either wronged. Charity as it rejoices in the truth, so also in
justice: and therefore whatsoever is unjust and against the law of God, it
cannot be charitable. Neither does charity require, that I should sin to do
another man good, or to cast away my soul by sin, though it were to save
another man's life. For he that shall be saved, does not put forth his money to
usury: and he that does, Psalm. 15.
shall he live says the Lord? Ezekiel. 18.
he shall not live, but he shall die the death. Wherefore usury being simply
evil, and generally forbidden in the word of God, it cannot in any case be
exercised with a good conscience.

You will say then, What shall become of Orphans, if they may not be
maintained with the increase of their stock, but be forced to live upon their
stock, and so to spend it?

Answer. You might better ask, what shall become of those Orphans who have no
stock: for whom notwithstanding the Lord does graciously provide, according to
his merciful promises. I answer therefore that orphans and widows have a
notable privilege of diverse gracious promises peculiarly made to them: Psalm
68. 5, and 14. 6, 7.
Let them therefore, ^er. 49. 11.
or their friends for them, depend upon the gracious providence and promises of
God, in the use of lawful means: Let them either employ their goods in some
honest trade or negotiation, wherein they have as good cause to expect a
blessing from God, as any other; or let them deal by partnership: or if other
means fail, let annuities be bought for their lives, or lands, or rents
purchased for ever, or let some other honest course be tataken which wise men
can easily devise, if they list, how orphans may be maintained, without
impairing of their stock,

Again, if any man to make good the former objection concerning the
profitablenesse of usury to commonweals, Molin.
shall allege (as some have done) that the civil law allows thereof, and
does not only permit, but authorize usury according to the rates aforesaid. I
answer, that by the law it self it evidently appears, that it does not allow
it as good, but permit it as evil, for the avoiding of greater inconveniences;
and permit it with a threefold restraint. The first, in respect of the
quantity: for the law stinteth the merchants usury at eight, the gentlemen's
and noblemens usury at four, and the usury of other men at six in the
hundred. The second restraint is in respect of the continuance: For the civil
law provides that when the usury which in the continuance of the loan has
been paid already, does amount to as great a sum as the principal it self,
that then it shall cease, and whatsoever is paid afterward should be reckoned
in the principal: As for example, ten in the hundred do match the principal
in ten years, after which time no more use is to be paid: or if any be paid,
it is to be abated in the principal. The third restraint is in respect of the
compound usury, which is called usury of usury; for that is absolutely
forbidden by the civil law. Which two latter restraints do also prove, that
usury by the civil law is judged a thing evil in it self. For if usury of
ten in the hundred be lawful for ten years together, why not for the eleventh
and twelfth, etc. the principal being still forborne? and if the usury of the
principal be lawful the first year, why is not that usury of the usury
being lent to the same man the second year, as lawful as if it were lent to
another man?

But whatsoever other lawgiuers have judged of usury, it is plain, that the
Lord, who is the supreme, and in respect of the conscience, the only lawgiuer,
condemns all usury by his law moral; neither by his judicial law permitted
the same to be exercised by the subjects of that commonwealth which he
ordained, among themselves. And therefore it cannot without contumely against
the wisdom of God be affirmed, that a commonwealth cannot well stand without
usury; especially considering that the holy ghost has made the usual
practice of usury countenanced by the state, a note of a corrupt state. For so
the seventy interpreters, Psalm. 55. 11.
Psa. 55. 11, for the Hebrew Toc read (...), which as some think is derived
thence, and the ancient writers do read the place thus, Usury and deceit
depart not from her streets. Ezck. 22. 12.
And the Prophet Ezechiel, chap. 22. 12, among other enormities, or as he
calls them abominations of the city Jerusalem, he reckons this for one,
Thou have taken usury and increase. And contrariwise, among the notes of a
good governor this is mentioned, Psalm. 72. 14, That he should free his
subjects from usury, (for so again the ancient interpreters do read) and
violence: a notable example whereof we have in Nehemias that godly magistrate,
chap. 5. And hereunto we may add the judgment of that notable Historiographer
and wise Politician Cornelius Tacitus, Lib. 6. annal.
who, as he judges usury to be a mischief to the commonwealth, so he notes,
that it was repressed in the ancient commonwealth of the Romans, when their
manners were farthest from corruption. In Ezekiel. 18.
And to conclude, Calvin himself is of this judgment, that an usurer ought
not to be suffered in a well ordered commonwealth.

And thus you have heard how usury offends against our neighbor, as being
both unjust and uncharitable. Now let us briefly consider how the usurer
sins against God, not only mediatly by injustice and uncharitableness, but
also immediately by impiety and ungodliness.

For first seeing the practice of usury cannot stand with the true fear of
God, as may be gathered out of that opposition, Leuit. 25. 36.
Leuit. 25. 36, Thou shall take no usury of thy needy brother, nor increase,
but thou shall fear thy God: it is evident therefore, that they which take
usury of them which borrow for need, do not walk in the fear of God, Nehem.
5. 9.
as Nehemias tells the usurers of his time.

Secondly, the usurer sins against God by disobedience and contempt: for he
disobeyeth the commandments of God, straightly commanding free loan, and
sharply forbidding usury, and contemns the threatenings of God denounced
against the same.

Thirdly, by infidelity, in not believing the gracious promises of God made to
those who lend freely: For as Chrysostom has well said, (...), Usury is the
offspring of infidelity. And therefore, whereas the Lord has promised to
such, that they shall be the children of the most high, Luke 6. 35.
that they shall be blessed, and receive great reward at his hands; Deuteronomy. 15.
and 25. 20.
those that will not believe these promises, are to fear, that they are not
the children of God, and that in stead of that blessing and reward promised,
there remains to them the fearful curse of God, and condemnation.

Fourthly, by diffidence, ending commonly in profaneness. For the Lord would
have our faith concerning spiritual blessings in heavenly things, to be
exercised and confirmed by our affiance reposed in his goodness for temporal
blessings in earthly things, as may be gathered by the order of the fourth and
fifth petitions of the Lords prayer. For if we cannot find in our hearts to
depend upon the goodness of God for these vile and transitory things; how can
we persuade our selves, that we truly believe in him concerning the
forgiveness of our sins, and eternal life? The Lord therefore would have
us, whether we want means, or whether we have them, as well in the use of
means as in the want of them, to depend upon his providence, and to cast our
care upon him. If he lay a cross upon us, or seem to deprive us of our goods,
it is his good pleasure that we should fly unto him by prayer: if he vouchsafe
to bless us, thanks are to be given unto him, as to the author of all good
things. In a word, in all estates it behooves a true Christian to walk with
God, and to have daily recourse to him.

But the usurers whole endeavor is to settle himself and his estate as it
were out of the gunshot of Gods providence: he will not deal by husbandry or
traffic, because of the hazards whereunto either of both is subject; that is
to say, because of his diffidence in God, to whose providence he dare not trust
his goods: and therefore he will make sure work for himself, that he shall
not need to stand to Gods courtesy. The practice of usury shall be as a tower
of Babel unto him, that whether God do bless the traffic of men, or not, or
whether it go well or ill with husbandry, he will be sure both of his
principal and of his gain. All is one to him, whether the merchants gain or
loose, sink or swim, whether there be famine or plenty, fair weather or
foul, he fears no floods. He looks not up to heaven with the good
husbandman or godly merchant, either to crave the blessing of God upon his
labors, or to return thanks for the same: but is so wholly addicted to the
earth and to his usurious cogitations, that he is seldom seen to look up:
insomuch, that many times by his very look and gate an usurer may be
discerned. In a word, his chief endeavor is, that in respect of worldly
things he may have nothing to do with God: and so at length of a faithless
man he becomes also profane, having forgotten God, as for this sin the
Lord charge Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 22. 12.
Ezech. 22. 12: neither is God, Psalm. 10. 4.
I mean the true God, in all his thoughts. For his God Mammon does wholly
possess his heart: Ephesians. 5. 5. and a seruitour of Mammon, Mat. 6. 24, and
therefore no true servant of the Lord. Now you must remember, that for covetous
persons and idolaters, 1. Cor. 6. 9, 10.
there is no inheritance in heaven.

And therefore the usurer as he sins against God by manifold impiety, so
also against himself by desperate folly. For as every notorious malefactor may
truly be said to cast away himself, and is guilty of selfe-murther, as it is
said of Korah and his accomplices, Number. 16. 38.
Number. 16. 38: so the usurer likewise pulls upon himself the fearful
judgments of God, and is guilty of his own overthrow. For the Lord has
threatened not only the translation of their goods from them in this world,
Prou. 28. 8.
Prou. 28. 8, but also as touching the world to come, that they shall not dwell
in the mountain of Gods holiness (as may be gathered out of this Psalm) but
that they shall die the death (meaning thereby the death of the soul:) and
that you may know to whom the cause of the usurers damnation is to be imputed,
Ezekiel. 18. 13.
it is added, and his blood shall be upon him. And that is it which Leo says,
De Ieiun. 10. mensis sermon. 6.
Foenus pecuniae funus est animae, The gain of usury is the grave of the
soul.

Wherefore what extreme folly and desperate madness is this, for the usury,
that is, as it were, the tenths of thine own money, to cast away thy soul,
which thou ought not to hazard for the gain of the whole world. For as our
Savior says, What will it profit a man though he should gain the whole world,
if he loose his own soul? Mark. 8. 36.
Mar. 8. 36.

To these arguments I might add if it were needful, the testimonies of all
wise and learned men who have lived until our age: for first, the
Philosophers, though heathens, have written and spoken against it: the fathers
of the church have with one consent condemned it even to the pit of hell: the
Christian councels have severely censured it: the schoolmen, though corrupt in
many other things, yet herein they retain the doctrine of the primitive
Church: the godly learned divines of this age, and namely of this our Church,
do for the most part inueigh against it: those few among us that seem to
defend ^surie, do in substance differ little from the rest, erring especially
in this, that under the odious name of usury they defend and maintain a
lawful contract of partnership, as I have showed before. And because the
judgments of those learned men, who seem not to condemn all usury, are of
such force with usurers, that they seem to build their practice upon their
authority; I will also take this hold from them, and out of their writings
manifestly demonstrate before their eyes, that the usury which is practiced in
the world, is not allowed of any godly divine.

For first, though they think a man may now and then lend upon usury, such
cautions observed as they prescribe, yet they hold it to be utterly unlawful
for a man to be an usurer, or to make a trade of it. Now whereas they do not
deny, but that a man may make a trade of gaining by any honest or lawful
contract, this evidently shows, that even out of their assertions it may be
proved, that usury is not a lawful contract. Quisquis ex professo foeneratur
(says Calvin) (...). in Eze. 18.
ille omnino debet ab hominum consortio reijci. Whosoever is a professed
usurer, he ought to be excluded out of all humane society. And again, an
usurer ought not to be suffered in the Church of God.

Secondly, they absolutely condemn usury of usury, which in it self is no
more unlawful than usury of the principal. Vsura vsurarum iudicio bonorum
omnium etiam apud infideles damnata semper and infamis fuit. Iun. in Leuit.

The conditions whereby they circumscribe usury, are these and such like.

As first, That it be not required of them, who being in want, do borrow for
the supply of their necessity; but only of those who borrow money to make a
gain thereof: And that their lending to such, do not hinder them from free
lending to those which would borrow for need.

2. That they require not gain of him which borrows for gain, unless he be
a gainer. And therefore they define that usury which they allow, to be part of
the borrowers gain, and but such a part as the borrower may live of the rest.

3. That he which lends for gain, must not only require no gain, but also
must be content to bear part of the borrowers loss, if without his own
default he prove a looser.

4. That the end of this lending must be charity, whereby the lender is bound
to seek the borrowers good rather than his own.

5. That in this contract he respect the good not only of the borrower, but
also of the commonwealth: and therefore that he require not so much gain as
the party cannot raise by lawful means.

6. That this lending be agreeable to natural equity, which is to be judged of
not by men's practice, but by the word of God.

7. That it be contained within those limits which the laws of every country
concerning usury do appoint.

These cautions men must observe, or else they may not build their practice
upon the authority of godly learned men; who have by these and such like
conditions so qualified usury, as that where they be observed, there is no
usury, or at least no actual usury committed.

And because the authority of that excellent instrument of God, I. Calvin, is
much pretended for the defense of usury, I will therefore show you briefly,
how little encouragement usurers can truly receive from him. Resp^n. de vsur.
He says it is more than a rare thing, that the same man should be an usurer
and an honest man. Nay, he says, In Ezekiel. 18.
That an usurer is ever a thief and a robber: and although he says, it may
happen sometimes, that a man may in some case take usury, and cannot precisely
be condemned therefore, yet he sets down this assertion: But we must
always hold it to be a thing scarcely possible, that he which takes usury,
should not wrong his brother. And therefore it were to be wished, that the very
name of usury were buried and utterly blotted out of the memory of men. Resp.
de vsur.
And in another place, It were to be wished (says he) that all usury, yea and
the name of it were banished out of the world.

Having thus by testimonies of scripture and by other arguments and testimonies
proved usury to be unlawful, it now remains, that for the better
satisfying of the reader, I should answer such arguments as are made in
defense of usury.

But that you may not think, that the patrons of usury do promiscuously
defend all usury, therefore they circumscribe that usury which they allow
with these conditions: first, That it be moderat; secondly, That it be not
required of the poor and needy; thirdly, That it be not hurtful to the
borrower. Where, by the way we are to observe, that no man of understanding
goes about to justify that usury which is commonly practiced in the world:
in which, being immoderat for the most part, though it be but after ten in the
hundred, there is seldom or never any thing else looked after but the lenders
security, without respect, whether the borrower be wealthy or needy, or
whether he shall gain or loose thereby.

But let us examine these three conditions severally: for as touching the
first, whereas I have proved before, that every overplus or gain required for
loan, is that usury which is condemned in the Scriptures, and that it is a
thing in it self simply evil and unlawful, therefore I say with learned
Chemnicius, The schoolmen say, Vsura est peccatum non solum in se, sed etiam
secundum se, and ideo ex nulla circumstantia been potest fieri. Sum. Angel.
That when men make question of moderat usury, whether that be lawful, or
not, they might as well make question, whether moderat adultery, or moderat
lying, or moderat theft is lawful: for as adultery, as lying, as theft are
things in themselves simply evil and unlawful, and therefore cannot well be
done, so is usury, as I have proved. It is a good saying and a true of D.
Wilson in his book of usury, That there is no mean in this vice, more than
is in murder, theft, or whoredom: and as the stealing of one penny is theft,
so is the least usury, though it be but of a penny.

And as touching the second, whereas they allow moderat usury taken of the
wealthy: I answer (as before) That if God in his word had made this
difference of usury in respect of the poor and the rich, as he does in
respect of the Israelite and the Canaanite, To the poor thou shall not lend
upon usury, but to the rich thou may; their practice had been justifiable,
who require usury of the rich: but the Lord in diverse places of the Scripture
in general terms absolutely condemns all usury, as I have showed. And
therefore, if because in the prohibition of usury in one or two places there
is mention made of the poor, we may infer, that therefore usury is lawful
toward the rich; by the same reason the most notorious sins against the
sixth and eighth commandments may be justified, if they be not committed
against the poor and helpelesse, because in the prohibition of those sins,
there is express mention made in diverse places, of the poor, the
fatherless, the widow, the stranger, and such others as are helpelesse. And
therefore when the holy Ghost says, Prou. 22. 22, Rob not the poor because he
is poor; the robber might by the same reason justify his robbing of the rich.

And lastly whereas they allow usury, so it be not joined with the hurt of the
borrower: I answer, that by the same reason they may justify the officious lie
which is uttered to help and not to hurt the neighbor. But charity as it
rejoices in the truth, so also in justice; and as a lie, so also usury is
ever opposed to charity, if not as an hurtful thing to our neighbor, yet as
an unjust thing in it self. And it is a rule in Divinity, Romans 3. 8.
That we may not do evil, that good may come thereof: and therefore usury
though it were not hurtful, yet were it unlawful. But as it is unlawful in
it self, so is it ever hurtful, if not to the borrower in particular (as most
commonly it is, in the judgment of Calvin) yet (as I have before showed) to
the common weal, which is worse. Besides in the contract of usury there is an
absolut covenant for gain: and therefore no provision made for the borrowers
indemnitie, seeing by the very contract of usury, the same gain is to be
required out of the borrowers loss as well as out of his gain. Whereas
therefore they say, usury is to be allowed, when provision is made that the
borrower shall not be hurt or damnified thereby: it is all one as if they had
said, that usury is then to be allowed, when it is no usury.

But let us consider their reasons, which are of three sorts, viz. proofs out
of the Scripture, with other arguments and testimonies.

Their proofs out of the Scriptures are these. First the example of Joseph,
Ge. 47. which I have heretofore showed to have none affinity with usury.

Secondly, out of Deuteronomy. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, the author of the aforesaid English
Treatise would prove, that in the seventh year of freedom the rich debtor
was by the appointment of the Lord himself to pay his debt with the usury
thereof, though the poor were exempted from payments of debts that year: for
so it is said verse. 4. Save when there shall be no poor with thee: as if the
Lord bad said (says he) provided always that thy rich debtor shall have no
such privilege, etc. And how is this proved? Forsooth because the word Masshah
which (as he says) signifies usury, and the verb Nashah which signifies to
lend upon usury, are there used. But I answer, that Masshah in no place of
Scripture signifies usury, and in that place signifies a debt which the
creditor lends with purpose to exact again: but there the Lord takes order
that it should not be exacted in the seventh year. And Nashah in this place as
appears by the text it self, and by the consent of all writers, signifies
only to lend with purpose to exact again that which is lent. For otherwise
the Lord should allow the lending upon usury to the poor, and the exacting of
it also, so it were not in the seventh year. But that author absolutely
condemns all usury toward the poor: yea he affirms (though without
reason) that the exacting of the principal alone from the poor is usury. But
of the signification of these words I have sufficiently spoken before. As for
the prouiso which (as he says) follows, verse. 4, it appears by the reason
following, that it is not an exception of the rich, Quicquid fit, ne patiamini
vestra culpa quenquam esse inter vos mendicum. Calu.
for the Lord shall bless thee, etc for the words as Iunius reads, and
Calvin expounds them, are thus to be red, Only because thy brother ought not
by thy means to become poor, or be impouerished, and therefore are a reason
of that law of remission. For seeing in that year of Sabbath the ground was to
rest, and men had not the means of raising profits whereby to pay their debts
as in other years; therefore if the creditors should that year have exacted
their debts, they would have brought many to beggerie: for the prevention
whereof, the Lord says he instituted this law concerning the remission of
debts in that year of freedom. And that the creditors should not allege for
themselves, that they should be unable to forbear their money so long; the
Lord adds another reason, being a promise, That if they kept that and other
his commandments he would bless them in the land, Verse 4, 5, 6.
and so bless them, that they should be able to lend to many nations, and
should not need to borrow of them. So that in conclusion, this being not an
exceprion of the rich, and the word Masshah not signifying usury, there is no
show of reason in this allegation.

Thirdly, no more is there in the next out of Pro. 22. 16, which
notwithstanding the same author commends as a notable place to prove that the
rich ought to give interest or increase. He that oppresses the poor (says
Solomon) to increase himself, and gives to the rich, shall surely come to
poverty: whence he infers these consequences: First, that it is as great a
fault to give or lend freely to the rich, as to oppress the poor by taking
usury of them, because the same punishment, Viz. pou^rtie, is awarded to both.
And secondly from the contrary, that it is as lawful and good to lend to the
rich with a just increase, as to give or lend freely to the poor: and that the
like opposite blessing of plenteousnesse equally belongs to both. As if
Solomon had also said, he that gives to the poor freely and cheerfully, and
lends to the rich to increase himself, shall undoubtedly attain to great
riches. Thus you see how a partial and prejudicat mind, seeks rather to draw
the Scriptures to it self, than to conform it self to the Scriptures. This
prouerbiall sentence is diversely expounded: the most of them, that I have
seen, expound the latter clause as a punishment of the former. As if this were
the sense and meaning of this proverb, That he which seeks to enrich
himself by oppressing the needy, shall contrary to his expectation, either
by bribes given to magistrates that he may escape the punishments which by the
laws belong unto him, or else by forfeiture of his goods into great men's
hands, fall into poverty. Others observe here to be noted two practices of
worldly men, which they read copulatiuely; that is, to take from the poor and
to give to the rich, both of them in their intent and purpose referred to the
enriching of themselves, but by the just providence of God so disposed, that in
the event they tend to their impouerishment. As if Solomon had said, He that
takes from the poor to enrich himself, and gives to the rich, that from
them he may receive greater benefits (which commonly is the end of gifts given
to great men) shall by the just judgment of God come to poverty: or as one
understands this proverb, He that oppresses the poor to enrich himself:
also who gives to the rich small things, that he may receive from him greater
matters, and that he may do it, oppresses the poor in the mean while, that
he may have to give to the rich; he shall surely come to poverty.

But suppose the holy Ghost did here match these two as equal sins, to take
from the poor* and to give to the rich; yet the latter is not generally to be
understood, either as a sin in it self, as though it were simply unlawful
to give any thing to the rich, or as great a sin as to lend upon usury to
the poor: but with limitation to such things as are given to the rich, being
unjustly taken, or uncharitably withheld from the poor. Howsoever it is, the
holy ghost does not speak here of lending at all, and therefore those two
collections from hence are absurd and impudent, either that lending freely to
the rich is as great a sin as lending upon usury to the poor; or that
lending upon usury to the rich is as good a thing in his kind, as lending
freely to the poor. Which wicked and shameless assertions of this patron of
usury, I wish, may be an admonition both to others that have taken upon them
the defense of the same cause, that through the partiality of their affections
they run not into the like extremities; and also to usurers, that they rely
not much upon such patrons, nor hazard their salvation upon their credit: who
are now grown to this pass, as to call virtue vice, and vice virtue. Would a
man think it credible, that a Christian man having knowledge and learning
joined with a profession of the truth, should ever conceive, and much less
commit to writing, That to lend freely to the rich is as great a fault as to
lend upon usury to the poor; and to lend upon usury to the rich as lawful
and good a thing, as to lend freely to the poor? O tempora! ^o mores! in which
it is a sin not to be an usurer, and a virtue not to be liberal, friendly,
courteous, or civil. In which, religion is made to countenance usury for a
virtue, and to condemn liberality and humanity for a vice.

Fourthly, they allege, Ier. 15. 10. I neither lent upon usury, neither have
they lent me upon usury. Whence they gather, that lending upon usury is of
the same nature with borrowing upon usury, and both of them are there
mentioned as indifferent things.

I answer that the Prophet speaks not of lending upon usury, or borrowing
upon usury, though some translations so read; but of lending upon security,
or with purpose to exact that which is lent. And this signification better
fitteth the purpose of the Prophet, which is to show the contentious
disposition of the people, who contended with him when he had given them not
only no cause (as he had done if he had been an usurer) but none occasion of
cursed contention: for he had forborne all worldly (though otherwise lawful)
contracts, from whence many times contentions arise among men: as if he had
said, I did neither meddle nor make with them in worldly affairs, neither
bought nor sold, neither borrowed nor lent, and yet they contend. Or if the
Prophet had spoken of usury in this place, it would serve rather for the
condemnation of borrowing upon usury, which in many cases is unlawful, than
for justification of lending upon usury, which in no case is lawful; the
Prophet disclaiming the one as well as the other, as causes, or at the lest as
occasions of contention.

And these with some few other before confuted, are all their allegations out
of the old Testament. Let us come to the new: for (as some of them say,) It is
not to be omitted that the Apostles of Christ in their sundry catalogues of
sins do never once make mention of usury, which is an argument that it is
lawful, especially seeing in the Roman empire under which they lived, it was
commonly exercised even unto twelve in the hundred, as also among the Jews, to
whom James, Peter, and John did write.

I answer, first, although it be not forbidden by name in the new Testament,
yet that proves it not to be lawful. An argument drawn from the testimony
of some one part of the Scripture negatiuely, does not hold; it is sufficient
that it is forbidden in the old Testament, and namely in the moral law of God,
which is common and perpetual. And far be it from us to think that Christ
in his Gospel allows any sin which is forbidden in the moral law, as I
have proved usury to be. Again, there are many other sins forbidden in the
moral law, which are not once metioned in the new Testament. For to seek no
further, biting and griping usury is condemned in the moral law, and is a
thing in the confession of all, simply and utterly unlawful; and yet thereof
is no mention made in all the new Testament: and therefore if this argument be
good, no usury at all, be it never so immoderat or excessive, is unlawful.

Secondly I answer, that usury is forbidden and condemned in the new
Testament, not indeed expressly and by name, neither is that needful, for many
things are contained in the Scriptures, which are not expressly mentioned in the
Scriptures. There be, I doubt not, some sins condemned in the moral law,
which neither in the law, nor gospel, nor any where in the Scriptures are once
named; for the condemnation whereof it is sufficient, if it may by just
consequence be deducted out of the Scriptures. But usury is condemned both in
the old Testament and the new: In the old, expressly and by name; In the new, by
necessary consequence, as sometimes under the contrary affirmative: for where
free lending is commanded, as Mat. 5. 42, not free lending (that is, usury) is
condemned; sometimes under the general, as Ephesians. 4. 28. 1. These. 4. 6, Let him
that stole steal no more, Let no man oppress or defraud his brother, 1. Corinthians. 6. 10. neither thieves nor covetous persons shall inherit the kingdom
of God. Sometimes abstinence from usury is commanded under the arguments of
the greater and less, as Luke 6. 35. Lend looking for nothing thence. For if I
must lend without respect of mine own profit, or without expectation of any
benefit or gain thereby, as the most expound that place; then much more must I
lend without a covenant, especially without an absolut covenant for gain. And
if I must lend without hope or expectation of recovering my principal, as
others understand that place, then much more must I lend without expectation of
a gain and overplus above my principal: and if without expectation of gain,
much more without a covenant for gain. Hence Jerome says, In euangelio,
Hieronym. in Ezech. 18.
virtutis augmentum est, Ambros. de Tobic. cap. 15.
and Ambrose, euangelium dicit quod est before. Sometimes again by an
argument drawn from the less. Even sinners, says our Savior, Luke 6. 34.
are willing and ready to lend one to another without usury, how much more
does it become you that are Christians to lend one to another without usury?
Do sinners, who are but natural and civil men, in common courtesy and
humanity lend one to another, to receive their own without increase, and shall
it not be a shame to such as profess themselves members of Christ, to be
behind sinners? And whereas they affirm that usury was in the time of Christ
and his Apostles commonly practiced among the Romans and the Jews, I greatly
doubt of the truth of that assertion, in respect of the Romans, seeing
Tiberius in the latter part of his reign had used effectual means for the
abolishing of usury, Lib. 1. cap. 7.
as Alexander ab Alexandro reports: but much more in respect of the Jews,
among whom the practice of usury was forbidden by the law of God, and to whom
in the sixth of Luke our Savior gives this testimony, Luke 6. 34.
That the very sinners among the^ would lend one to another to receive as much
as they lent. Iam. 5. 3.
James also in his Epistle finds fault with the rich men of that time, that
they suffered their gold and silver to rust, which they would not have done if
they had been addicted to usury: and therefore the less practice of usury in
those times, may be some reason why it is not expressly mentioned in the
writings of the Apostles. And hereunto I might add the testimony of some
Historiographers, Vincent. Magdeburg ex P. Cantore.
who affirm that usury in the primitive Church, and in the time of the
Apostles was most odious among all that professed the name of Christ. But (say
they again,) What if our Savior Christ beso far from condemning usury, that
he approves it: for when as he condemns that slothful servant because he
had not occupied his talent, he says, that he should have put forth his money
to the bankers, that at his coming he might receive his own with usury, Mat.
25. 27.
Mat. 25. 27. Where (say they) our Savior speaks of usury as of a lawful
gain: and withal signifies, that it is better for a man, who has no other
lawful trade to gain by, to put forth his money to usury, than to have it idle
by him. And how is it proved that Christ speaks of usury as of a lawful gain,
seeing this is not Christ's own speech, but by him assigned to a worldly master?
Forsooth, because by this Lord or master, Christ himself is represented: and
therefore it is not likely that he would assign to him such a speech as should
contain any dishonest thing in it. Answ. First, it may be doubted whether this
lord or master would have had his money put forth to usury, though he speak of
receiving it again with usury. For when any thing is restored to a man with
increase, that increase by a metaphorical speech is called usury. As for
example: the earth is said by the Orator never to repay that which it received,
without usury, and therefore that is called natural usury. Cic. de senect.
The Lord is said to repay him that is merciful to the poor, as it were with
usury. Likewise when men shall have employed the gifts of God to the glory of
God and good of his Church, the Lord when he shall call his servants to an
account, will acknowledge that he has received his own with usury: and this
(as also the former) is called spiritual usury, whereof the holy Ghost
speaks in this place. Again, when the debtor having gained by the employment
of the money borrowed, does restore the principal, with the increase of a free
gift or gratuitie, the creditor may be said to receive his own with usury:
and that is called liberal usury. Likewise if a man should deal by way of
partnership with a merchant or exchanger, which in this place is called a
Trapezite, to receive part of their gain when they do gain; he may be said
when by partnership he proves a gainer, to receive his own with usury.

But suppose this speech were so to be understood, as that this Master would
have had his servant to have put forth his money to usury: yet this proves
not, that Christ does therefore approve usury. First, because the master
speaks of himself according to that opinion which his servant had conceived
of him; Thou know me to be an hard man, Luke 19. 22.
who (as usurers usually do) take up which I laid not down, and reap where I
sowed not, and gather where I strewed not, why then did thou not
accommodate thy self to my disposition, and do thy best endeavor that I might
receive mine own with vantage? Or if thou were so idle as that thou would
not according to my commandment, Luke 19. 13.
Luke 19. 13. take the pains, or so diffident and distrustful, as that thou
would nor bear the hazard of negotiation; yet at the lest thou might
have committed it to the bankers. From whence you may gather by the way, that
the course of usury fitteth them best, who are both idle and distrustful. But
this speech of this master, who represents our Savior Christ, does no more
prove, that he allows usury, than that he acknowledges himself to be an
hard and austere master, who takes up where he laid not down, etc.

And suppose again, that our Savior Christ had compared himself to a master
who was an hard man indeed, and would require his servants to put forth his
money to usury; yet this would not be a sufficient warrant either for the
hardness or austeritie of masters, or yet for the usury practiced by the
servants. For even as here he compares the bestowing of his gifts upon his
servants, (that they employing them and using them to his glory and good of
their brethren, and increasing them in the use, he might seem to receive his
own with vauntage) to a straight and austere masters delivery of talents to
his servants, that they might occupy or traffic therewith, to the end that
he might make us all careful to use and employ the good gifts of God according
to our several places and callings, remembering that we shall be called to a
straight account for the same: so elsewhere he compares his coming to the
sudden coming of a thief, Mat. 24. 43.
to the end that he might make us vigilant and watchful: Apoc. 16. 15.
and yet me thinks this should be but small warrant for thieves suddenly to
break into men's houses.

Yea but (say they) though theft it self be unlawful, yet the wisdom of
thieves in choosing a fit time, in respect whereof the coming of Christ is
compared to their coming, is not unlawful. To omit, that the coming of
Christ is compared to the coming of thieves only in respect of suddenness:
it cannot truly be said, that the wisdom of thieves in choosing their best
opportunity, is lawful: for all such wisdom James calls earthly, Iam. 3. 15.
carnal, and devilish. Yea, but you will say, although the unjust stewards
dealing with his master were unjust and unfaithful, Luke 16. 8, yet our
savior Christ commends his wisdom. I answer, even as in that place our
Savior Christ, though the dealing of that steward were unjust, yet commends
his wisdom; not that he simply allowed thereof, for it was (as James says of
all such wisdom) earthly and devilish, but commends it to his disciples, to
be imitated in spiritual things, that we likewise should make us friends with
the riches of iniquity, that when we must give up our stewardship, we may be
received into everlasting habitations: So in this place he speaks not of
usury as of a lawful gain, but commends the wisdom and care of the
children of this world (who are wiser in their generation than the children of
light) to be imitated of the faithful in spiritual things. For as worldly men
having received talents from their master to occupy for his best advantage,
use not to keep his money idle by them, but do their best endeavor to increase
the stock committed to them, by traffic or negotiation; or if they be idle
or distrustful, will commit it to the bankers, that their master may receive
his own with usury: so those who have received spiritual gifts and graces
from God to be employed to his glory, ought not to bury or to hide them, but
ought to employ them as it were by traffic and mutual communication of them
for the common good of the church; that by the employment of them, the Church
being profited, and the gifts themselves increased, the Lord may receive his
own with vantage. For such is the bounty of the Lord, that he accounts the
good of the church and the increase of his graces in his servants, to be his
own gain.

Thus have I showed, that although the similitude be pressed for the proof of
other matters than for which it is brought, yet nothing can be concluded thence
for the justifying of usury. But now I answer further, That a similitude
ought not to be pressed for the proof of any matter besides the purpose for
which it is bought: otherwise, from parables and similitudes a man might
infer very many absurd consequences. It is therefore a principle among
schoole-diuines, that Theologia symbolica non est argumentatius: that is, That
arguments drawn from symbolicall and parabolicall speeches, prove nothing in
divinity. And Basil speaking of this very parable, gives this rule, (...)
Parables do not in their specialtie, Ascet. quest. 254
or severally by themselves yield full rules or documents, but they lead a man's
mind to the argument or cause which is in hand. The scope therefore and purpose
of this parable, is to teach us, that for as much as we are all to give a
straight account unto God of those gifts and talents which we have received
from him, it behooves us therefore diligently and carefully to use and employ
them, that by the employment of them our brethren being profited, and the
graces themselves being increased in us, God may have the glory, and we
everlasting comfort. This doctrine our Savior Christ illustrateth by a parable
or fained example of a master, who having at his departure into a strange
country given talents to his servants in diverse degrees to be occupied, at
his return calls them to an account, how they have employed his talents, and
accordingly rewards the diligent and faithful, and punishes the idle and
unfaithful servant, taking from him his excuses, and condemning him out of his
own mouth: this was the proposition of the similitude, the reddition (which is
not expressed) is this: So our Lord and master, both when he ascended into
heaven gave, and also since by his spirit gives gifts and graces to men, to
some more, to some less, that we may employ them to his glory, and to the good
of our brethren; and at his return in the day of judgment, he shall call us
all to an account, how we have employed our talents; and so many as he finds
to have been diligent and faithful servants, he will reward with everlasting
joy and happiness; but such as have buried the gifts of God by idleness and
unfaithfulness, he will punish, taking from them their frivolous excuses, and
even condemn them out of their own mouth. When as therefore they say, that
our Savior Christ in this parable signifies, That it were better for a man to
put forth his money to usury, than to keep it idle by him: I answer, That
this is altogether besides the purpose and intendment of our Savior Christ in
this place: His drift is to show, that as worldly masters require their
servants to increase their worldly wealth by one means or other, and will not
admit their excuses which they pretend to their idleness and unfaithfulness:
so the Lord requires of all his servants, that they should use all diligence
to employ his spiritual gifts to his glory: neither will he accept the
frivolous pretenses of such as are idle and unfaithful. And to this purpose
only, as I take it, is this speech concerning the putting forth of the money to
the bankers, used; not that the like is to be done or can be done in spiritual
things.

3. Again, they allege the authority of John Baptist, Luke 3. 12, 13.
for when as the Publicanes, who fermed the customs, tolls, and tributes in
every province, and used to put forth money which they gathered, unto usury,
demanded of him, what they should do; John Baptist answered, Exact nothing
above that which is appointed you. Which the author of the aforesaid English
Treatise understands thus, That they should not in taking usury exceed the
centefima, that is, twelve in the hundred: as if John had approved usury, so
it exceeded not that rate.

I answer, That the Publicans who came to John, were not Romans, of the
worshipful order of knights, or other Gentiles, but certain of the Jews, who
being called soc^^ publicanorum, the Publicanes associats, as Beza rightly
judges, were hired by the Roman Publicanes to help and assist them, in
gathering the customs, tolls, tributes, and revenues which were due in Jury,
being a province to the city of Rome: for which cause, though they practiced
not usury, these Publicanes being Jews, were hated and detested of the other
Jews, and esteemed as most notorious sinners, insomuch, that they might not
enter into their assemblies, both because they associated themselves unto
Gentiles, and also assisted them in a business most odious to them, viz. in
exacting tributes and tolls from them, being a free people. These Publicans
therefore being in this common disgrace, and coming to John Baptist to be
baptized, propound this question to him, Whether it were lawful for them to
exact the tributes in behalf of the Romans; or if it be, how they were to
demean themselves, and to that purpose ask him, What shall we do? Unto which
question John answers thus, Require or exact no more than is appointed for
you. Which answer most plainly concerns their duty in exacting of
tributes, tolls and customs, that they should extort no more than was due, as
the Publicans by forged cauillations many times did. Luke 19. 8.


Unto these testimonies the same author adds two more, Mar. 4. 25, To him
that has, it shall be given: and Act. 20. 35, It is a more blessed thing to
give than to receive: but I will not trouble the reader with them.

And these are their allegations out of the Scripture. Now I desire every
Christian in the fear of God and without partiality to compare these
allegations which have been made for usury, with those testimonies of
Scripture which before I produced against it: and namely with that one, Ezekiel.
18. 13, He that lends upon usury, or takes increase, shall he live says
the Lord? he shall not live, but he shall die the death, and his blood shall be
upon him. And let him uprightly consider to which part he ought rather to
incline: For this may not be denied, but that if usury may be lawfully
practiced, it is to be done in faith, that is, in a sound persuasion out of the
word of God, that it is lawful. But whereupon shall this found persuasion be
grounded? On a few far-fetched allegations drawn into the defense of usury
perforce, contradicted with such manifest testimonies of scripture, and
confuted by most evident arguments?

But it may be, though their allegations out of scripture be weak, yet their
reasons are strong. Though they were never so strong, yet ought we rather to
deny our own reason, than not to yield simple and absolute obedience to the
word of God. But let us examine their strength.

And first, that usury so qualified as I said before, is not unlawful, they
prove first by the name thereof. For say they, Although the name usury in
English tongue be odious through the abuse of the ignorant, yet in the learned
tongues it is of a middle and indifferent nature.

Answ. By the learned tongues, are commonly understood the Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin: the first and ordinary name of usury in Hebrew is Neshek, in Greek
(...) in Latin foenus. Neshek signifies biting, and is derived from the same
verb which oftentimes in the scripture is ascribed to the biting of serpents.
(...) is derived either of the Hebrew Toc, which signifies deceit and by the
Grecians is translated (...) Psalm. 55. 13 and 72. 14. as also Isb Tecachim,
Prou. 29. 13. The man of deceit, is commonly understood to be the usurer, and
so by diverse is translated. Or else of the verb (...) to signify (as the
Philosopher rightly noted) that usury is a monstrous and unnatural contract,
whereby money, and other things which naturally do not fructify nor have no
fruitful use, but are spent in the use, are made against nature to fructify
and to bring forth gain. For which cause Ch^ysosiome calls usury a
pestiferous womb. In Math. homil. 57.
Others give this reason of the Greek name, that usury is called Tokos,
because it breeds grief to the borrower, or as Ambrose says, De Tob. cap.
12.
because it works in the borrowers soul griefs answerable to the pains of
childbirth. In Latin it is called foenus, either quasi foetus, as Nonius
Marcellus and others have taught, by the same reason that it is called (...) in
Greek, because it is as it were the monstrous and unnatural brood of that
which is borrowed: or else it is named, foenus, quasi funus (for in many Latin
words u is changed into oe dipthong: as in Pomoerium for Pomurium, and Moenia a
muniendo) because it is the grave of the borrowers state, and of the lenders
soul. Wherefore Ambrose says, Se^^. 6. de Ieiunio 10. mensis.
Nihil interest inter foenus and funus. And Leo says, Foenus pecuniae, sunus
animae.

The other words, viz. Tarbith and Marbith in Hebrew, signifying increase, and
vsura in Latin, were as Calvin faith devised by usurers themselves, when as the
odious names of Neshek and foenus did seem to make their practice odious. And
therefore disclaiming Neshek and foenus, they professed themselves to take
Tarbith and vsura; even as usurers among us and the French refusing the name
usury, as grown odious, have devised the names of interest, use, and vsance.
But for as much as the usurers among the Jews, under the name Tarbith
exercised Neshek, among the Romans under the name vsura practiced foenus, even
as the usurers among the French, as Calvin says, and also among us, under the
names of interest, use, and vsance, practice plain usury; therefore the words
Tarbith and Marbith are every where taken in the ill sense, and are forbidden
as well as foenus: and vsura among the latter Latin writers grown as odious
as foenus. Quid foenus and Calendarium and vsura, Lib. 7. de benif.
says Seneca, nisi humanae cupiditatis extra naturam quaesita nomina? What is
foenus and the Calendar (for so the usurers debt-booke was called) and usury,
but names of men's covetousness sought out besides nature? And therefore it is a
wonder, that any learned man should affirm, that the name of usury in the
learned tongues is of a middle and indifferent nature. Wherefore from these
premises this first argument may be retorted upon them which made it. For if
as the names of things be, such commonly be the things, for (...) says
Aristotle, (...), names do follow or imitate the things: and Plato calls
names the similitudes and resemblances of things; (...) in Craty.
then, odious and detestable names, are arguments of odious and detestable
things: but the names of usury are odious, as has been showed, for which
cause the usurers themselves do avoid them, and are ashamed of them, and
therefore such a thing is usury it self.

2. Objection. No usury is forbidden by the law of God and by the law of
nature, but that which is hurtful, and joined with the hurt or loss of the
neighbor.

But some usury is not hurtful but rather helpefull to the neighbor.
Therefore some usury is not forbidden.

First, the proposition is untrue, and of dangerous consequence: for the law of
God forbids all usury in general, as a thing in it own nature and in his
whole kind simply unlawful, without any such restraint or limitation, even as
it condemns adultery, lying, theft, or any other notorious sin. And
therefore, if it were lawful thus to argue in favor of usury, mincing the
commandment of God in an intolerable presumption, and restraining and
limitting the same out of our own brain: why may it not be lawful so to
argue in defense of other sins; as indeed some have done in defense of lying,
which as you heard before is generally forbidden as a thing simply evil, and
yet some have taken upon them the defense of such lies as are not hurtful but
helpefull to the neighbor. And why might not the pick-thanke as well have
justified his murdering of Saul, if he had according to his own report
slain him in charity, and at his own entreaty to end his pain, being past
recovery, and to prevent the scornings of the Philistimes, which he feared
more than death?

But they prove their proposition thus.

Usury is not forbidden, but as it is against charity, for charity is the
sum of the law, and he which observes the rules of charity, keeps the law.

But that which is not hurtful to the neighbor, is not against charity,
therefore that usury which is not hurtful to the neighbor, is not forbidden.

Answ. Charity, which is the sum of the law, has reference toward God;
toward our neighbor, not only in private, but also in public; and toward a
man's self. And in this sense I acknowledge the proposition of this syllogism
to be true, viz. that usury is not forbidden, but as it is repugnant to
charity. But hereby the assumption of this syllogism is proved to be false,
for there be many things which are not perhaps hurtful to our neighbor in
particular, with whom we deal, which are notwithstanding repugnant to
charity. The officious lie helps the particular neighbor, in whose favor
it is told, yet because it is repugnant to verity, it is repugnant to
charity. God who is truth has forbidden all untruth, and he will destroy
every one that speaks lies: The lying mouth destroys the soul: therefore
no lying can stand with that charity and obedience which we owe to God, nor
with that love which we owe to our own souls. So in like sort suppose that the
borrower sometimes is not hurt by usury, but rather helped; yet
notwithstanding all usury is against charity, for the practice of it cannot
stand with charity and our allegiance to God, who has forbidden it, denounced
his judgments against it, made gracious promises to them that will do the
contrary: nor with our charity and duty to our country, unto which usury
is in many respects noisome, as has been showed: nor with that love which we
owe to our own souls; for whosoever puts forth to usury, or takes
increase, he shall not live, but die the death. And moreover, you may remember
what I have before proved, that usury is ever repugnant to charity, if not
as a hurtful thing to our neighbor, yet as an unjust thing in it self.

Yea but say they again, to prove the former proposition, That usury which is
joined with the hurt of the neighbor, is condemned, therefore that which is
not joined with the hurt of the neighbor is not condemned.

Answer. I deny the consequence: for there are other respects which make
usury unlawful, besides the hurt of the neighbor, as even now I showed. By
the same reason the patrones of officious lies might argue thus: God forbids
us to tell a lie against our neighbor; therefore the lie which is not against
the neighbor, but for him, is not forbidden. But you will say, All lying is
forbidden: so is all usury, as I have already proved.

And thus I have showed against the proposition, that all usury is unlawful,
though all were not hurtful. Now I add against the assumption of the first
syllogism, That all usury is hurtful: hurtful I say, either to the borrower,
as commonly it is, or else to the commonwealth, as before has been proved.

Objection. 3. Usury is not uncharitable neither in respect of the borrower,
nor yet in regard of the commonweal: the former they prove thus. There is no
property of charity which may not well stand with usury. No not that,
charity seeks not her own: for I am not otherwise bound to love my
neighbor than my self. Nay rather the debtor should offend against charity
in too much seeking his own, if he would have another man's money freely, by
which he is sure in all likelihood to gain.

Answer. In traffic and negotiation it is lawful for a man as well to
respect his own gain, as another man's good. But in lending, which is an act
of charity, and a contract ordained for the good of the borrower, to seek
gain, it is against charity, which seeks not her own. We ought to lend by
the commandment of Christ, not respecting our profit or gain, but the good
of the borrower. But the usurers charity is, by his lending to seek ease out
of the borrowers labor, security out of his hazard, and gain as well out of
his loss as out of his gain.

Again, out of the uncertain negotiation of the borrower to covenant for
certain gain, it is not only uncharitable but also unjust and unequal. But
in the contract of actual usury there is an absolut covenant for certain
gain, as I have proved before, which the borrower whether he shall gain or
loose is absolutely bound to pay together with the principal. And this absolut
covenant for certain gain, is not an abuse happening besides the nature of
the contract, but of the very nature and essence of actual usury. But the
borrower (you say) is in a manner sure to gain. Why then (say I) will you not
adventure with him? for if the lender will be content to hazard his principal,
so as he will not only look for no gain but when the borrower gains, but
also will be content to bear part with him in his loss, he shall not deal
by usury, but by partnership.

And whereas they say that the borrower should offend against charity in
seeking too much his own, if he would desire to borrow freely, etc. I answer
by distinction, Men borrow either to supply their need, or to procure gain: Of
the former there is no question, but that they may with good conscience desire
in their necessity to borrow freely: only men must beware, how they fall into
this necessity. As for them which borrow for gain, you may consider their
dealing in the time, either of the borrowing, or of the payment. In the time of
borrowing, he does not therefore sin against charity, if he will not out of
his uncertain traffic promise certain gain to the lender, who will bear
no hazard with him: Indeed if the lender will be content to bear part of the
loss, the borrower ought to yield him part of the gain. At the time of
payment he is bound to be thankful to the creditor if he have gained, and
willingly to afford him some part of that gain wherewith it has pleased God
by the creditors means to bless him, especially if the creditor could not
well forbear his money. As touching the latter point, that usury offends not
against public charity, they endeavor to prove by these two reasons. Because
it is both profitable and necessary to commonweals. It is profitable: For if
the creditor have no skill in any trade or traffic, and the borrower having
skill wants a stock, not only both they shall be gainers, but the
commonwealth also shall receive good by the employment of the one man's stock,
and of the others skill, whereas contrariwise the common wealth should sustain
loss, if neither the creditors money be occupied, nor the borrowers skill
employed.

I answer, there are other lawful means whereby men's money may better be
employed for the good of the common weal, than by usury: For when the
borrowers do gain by that which they have taken up on usury, the common
wealth commonly pays the usury, as has been showed. But why wilt not thou
employ thy money thy self in some honest contract? Is it because thou will take
no pains, nor bear any adventure, but wilt be sure to provide for great and
certain gain with ease? Then art thou an unprofitable member in the
commonwealth, living of the sweat of other men's brows, etc. Or have thou any
lawful reason either because of thy calling, age, or condition, that thou
can not indeed employ thy money thy self? then may thou buy either lands
or rents after that manner which before has been showed, or else thou may
deal by partnership. But you must remember, there is no partnership without
partaking in the loss as well as in the gain.

That usury is necessary they prove, Because as the world now goes, and as
men's manners now are, no common weal can stand without it.

Answer. If that be true, then usury is proved to be a necessary evil: and
this necessity argues not the lawfulness of usury, but the wretched estate
of the world, which as John says, lies in evil. 1. John. 5. 19.
For to say absolutely that co^monweales cannot stand without usury, were
derogatorie to the wisdom of God, who would not suffer usury in that
co^monweale which he ordained, as has before bin showed. But whence arises
this necessity? the necessity of borrowing and so of lending arises from men's
wants, and hardly can humane societies stand without that contract: but the
necessity of usury arises of men's covetousness and hardness of their hearts.
For although there may be a necessity of borrowing upon usury, when men that
must needs borrow cannot borrow freely, yet there is no other necessity why
men should lend upon usury, but that which their own covetousness (when they
have once said they will be rich) has imposed upon them: 1. Tim. 6. 9.
for unless thy neighbor have need to borrow, there is no necessity of
lending at all imposed upon thee. But if thy neighbor have great need to
borrow, and thou be well able to forbear, the Lord has laid a necessity of
duty upon thee to lend freely, which without sin thou can not avoid. Or if
there be a necessity that thou should employ thy stock to gain, there be
other lawful contracts to that purpose, so that thou shall not need (unless
it be for idleness and distrust) to deal by usury. Now if a pretended
necessity, arising from the hardness of men's hearts, and settled resolution to
go on in the practice of usury, contrary to the commandment of God, be of
sufficient force to justify usury; then by the same argument, may any other
sin be justified.

Object. 4. It belongs to magistrates to determine of civil contracts, and
therefore usury is so far forth lawful, as they by their laws allow it.

Answer. The rule of our conscience is not the law of man but the law of God:
and it is a principle, That the law of the inferior cannot dispense with the
law of the superior. If therefore the Law of God condemn all usury, no law
of man can make any usury lawful.

Again, we are to distinguish betwixt allowing and permitting: no good laws
allow usury as good, though some permit it as a thing evil, for avoiding of
greater evils. Magistrates are feign sometimes to permit and tollerat that which
they are not able altogether to amend. Moses for the hardness of men's hearts
permitted the husbands to put away their wives, so that they did give them a
bill of diuorcement, wherein their wives innocence should be cleared; not that
he allowed thereof, but that he would provide for the wives safety, delivering
them from the fury or tyranny of their husbands. But notwithstanding this
permission, whosoever put away his wife having not broken the bond of wedlock
by committing adultery, by the sentence of our Savior Christ, himself
committed adultery. Mat. 19.
So the magistrates, by reason of the covetousness and hardness of men's hearts
are forced to tollerat usury, so it be kept within such bonds as they
prescribe, not that they allow thereof, but that they might provide for the
good of those who have need to borrow, both that they might borrow, and also
that borrowing they should not be too much oppressed. But notwithstanding this
legal tolleration, he that lends for gain is an usurer and a thief before
God. And therefore as the judicial permission of Moses in the case of
diuorcements, so the civil permission of magistrates in the case of usury,
does not serve to clear a man from the guilt of sin before God, but only to
exempt the party from civil punishment. And yet it cannot be truly said that
our laws do so much as permit any usury, excepting in the case of orphans.
Wherefore this argument may also be retorted upon our patrons of usury: for
seeing as they say, magistrates have authority by their laws to determine of
civil contracts; and seeing our laws determine of all usury as of a sin,
allowing none at all as good, but punishing it as evil, and not so much as
permitting any, except in the case of orphans; hereof it is to be inferred,
that no usury among us can be practiced with a good conscience.

Object. 5. If letting be lawful, then usury also is lawful, for usury is
letting of money; but letting is lawful, therefore usury.

Answer. To the prosyllogisme or proof of the proposition: I have before
sufficiently showed that usury cannot be committed but in things which are
lent to be spent; and therefore as they are the subject of usury, they are not
lettable. And as for the proposition it self, you have heard, that although
letting in it self be a lawful contract, yet usury in it self is simply and
utterly unlawful. But why may not money be let as well as other things?
Because none of those respects are incident unto money, for which hire is
lawfully required. For first, things which may be let have a fruitful use in
themselves, which a man may let and alienat for a time, reserving the property
to himself; but money and those other things which are the subject of usury,
which consisting in quantity are spent in the use, have no fruitful use,
which either may be severed from the property, or valued apart, as though it
might be let or alienated, the property reserved. Secondly, the party which
hireth things that be let, after he has according to the contract of hiring
enjoyed the use thereof, he restores the self same particular which he took
to hire, being for the most part impaired in the use. The party which
borrows money and such other things as consist in quantity, after he has
spent the same, is not to restore the same particular which he has spent,
impaired in the use, but the full value of the principal, with better rather
than worse. Thirdly, he that lets any thing to hire, as he retains the
property, so he bears the hazard thereof: but it is concontrarie in usury:
for the money being once lent, the property is transferred to the borrower,
and with the property the hazard. To omit the cost and charge which the letter
to hire many times is at, with those things which he lets: whereas the usurer
is at no cost at all.

There being these four considerations, why letting is lawful, and usury
unlawful, the patrons of usury take exception against the first, neglecting
the rest. For (say some of the most learned of them,) It is but an ignorant
objection which is made out of Aristotle, that usury is a gain contrary to
nature, because money begets not money: seeing the Scripture condemns the
increase of meat as of money.

Answer. Be it so, for there is the same reason of money and of other things
which are spent in the use. Let the Reader therefore judge whether Chrysostom
and Ambrose which make this objection out of Aristotle, or he which uses this
reason, were more ignorant: for it were as monstrous to require gain for the
fruitful use of meat being spent in the use, besides the price of the meat it
self, as to require a gain for the fruitful use of money which is spent in
the use, besides the full restitution of the principal. Yea but money, though
it be not fruitful in is self, yet by negotiation it brings forth greater
increase them other things which are let.

Answer. The gain which is raised out of any thing which has not a fruitful
use in it self but is spent in the use, is not the fruit of that thing, but of
his skill and industry which does employ it. No more have other things (say
they) no not the earth it self, without the labor and industry of him that
uses the same.

Answer. We must distinguish betwixt fructum and questum, fruitful use, and
gain. The fruit or fruitful use arises from the nature of the thing it
self, and as the Lawyers speak, Ex ipso cui^sque rei corpore, and such is the
fruit or fruitful use of things that be let, as of cattle, their young ones,
their milk, their wool, their labor in drawing, and carriage of the earth,
both that which grows within it, as metals and minerals, etc. and also that
which grows upon it, as herbs and trees and their fruits. Likewise of
artificial things, as of houses, the commodity of dwelling, of ships, the
commodity of sailing, etc.

Questu^, or gain, is that which arises not out of the nature of the thing it
self, but is gotten by negotiation or making of contracts, as buying and
selling, etc. And thus those which have skill and will be at the pains and
charge, may raise a gain not only out of those things which have a fruitful
use of themselves, as those which buy such commodities to sell them again
usually do, as horse-coursers, drouers, and other trades men; but also out of
such things as are spent in the use, which as the Lawyers speak, Non corpore
sed quantitate constant, as victuallers, money changers, salters, vintners, and
such as buy these kinds of commodities to sell them again, usually do. Now if
things which have a fruitful use in themselves cannot be let in respect of any
gain which may be raised out of the buying and selling of them; much less may
those things which in themselves are not lettable, because they have no
fruitful use, neither are to return in the same particular, be let in respect
of any gain which may perhaps be raised by the employment of them in
negotiation.

If you say that although things cannot be let to this use, because they are
not to return in the same particular, yet they may be sold to this use, and in
respect thereof may be sold the dearer: I answer, that all commodities are, and
indeed ought to be sold cheaper to such as buy to fell them again, than to
others who buy for their own use; otherwise they which deal by retailing,
which is a necessary trade, should either themselves be continual loosers, or
be forced to enhance the prices of commodities, to the prejudice of the
commonwealth. Only the usurers who ought to lend freely to those which are in
need, do think they may put forth their money and commodities at an higher
rate, to those which mean to employ them unto gain; whereby such persons
become either banquerups, if their gain be not great, or oppressors of the
common weal, if it be.

But suppose that money has a fruitful use in respect of the gain which is
raised by the employment of it, yet to whom ought the profit arising out of the
use thereof appertain? surely to him who having the property of the money,
does also bear the hazard, sustaineth the charge, takes the pains, uses his
skill in the employment of it, that is to say, to the borrower: to whom the
loss also if there be any, wholly appertains. If you say that by the same
reason the Landlord ought not to receive any rent for the ground which he
lets: I answer, first, that the land has a fruitful use in it self,
answerable to the rent, both without man's help, as in meadows, pastures,
woods, and mines, etc. and also with, as in arable grounds, wherein the rent is
proportionated according to the fruitfulness thereof. Secondly, that the
property of the ground belongs to the Landlord, and therefore the profit
belongs partly to him in respect of the fruitful use of that which is his,
partly to the tenant for his labor and charges. Colonus mercedem, si qua calam
it^^s a ciderit, non debet. l. ex conducto.. 1. and 7. Dig. lib. 19. tit. 2.
Thirdly, the Landlord bears the hazard of the ground, not only in respect of
the title, but also in respect of calamities, which happening, he is as well to
loose his rent, as the tenant his labor and charges.

Again, they allege two other reasons, in respect whereof they do imagine
that money may as well be put to hire as other things: The one is, the
property of continuance which it has, being not subject to be consumed, as
other things, and namely as cattle are: The other, because by mon^y a man may
buy any thing which is usually let. The former reason is to litl^ purpose: for
money though it continues in it self and is not perished, yet it continues
not to him that uses it: for to him that uses it, it is spent; to him that
uses it not, it is unprofitable: whereas other things remain in the use, and
continue profitable to them which use them. The latter I have answered before:
for although hire may not be taken for money, yet I do not deny but that hire
may be taken for things which are bought with money, if they be not such as
are spent in the use: for besides other respects before mentioned, he that
lets that which he has bought, he stands to the hazard of it; but so does
not he that puts forth his money to usury. These with some others which
before I refuted when I propounded mine own arguments, are the chief
objections which are made in defense of usury. The rest, which I have either
read or heard, are either of small weight, or altogether impertinent.

Of the former sort are four other arguments of mine English author: Object. 6.
as first, If men may not sell the dearer for time, then wo-worth to all
merchants and occupiers, whose use is to sell the dearer for time.

Answer. He might as well have said, If men may not lend upon usury lawfully,
then wo-worth to all usurers, whose use is to lend for gain. But (say I) the
former is true both in this proposition and in the former, as I have proved
heretofore, and therefore the conclusion of a fearful woe is to be inferred
against those, who will notwithstanding all that which has been said, continue
still in the practice either of open usury, or of selling dearer for time,
which is covert usury.

Secondly, Object. 7.
Either all contracts o^ gain are usurious, or those only which are unjust
and unequal: but it is absurd to say that all contracts for gain are usurious
(and that he proves valiantly and at large) therefore those only are
unlawful, which are unjust and unequal. All this I grant: what then? And
therefore by consequent usury is not unlawful. But how is that consequence
proved? mine author had rather the reader should take it for granted, than put
him to prove it: for I have made it manifest before, that all usury is unjust,
unequal, and uncharitable.

Thirdly, Object. 8.
Either men must lend upon usury, or else let their money he idle by them: but
the latter ought not to be done, therefore the former may.

To the proposition I answer, That there is no necessity in that disjunction,
for men must neither lend upon usury, nor yet suffer their money long to lie
idle by them, but part they are to communicate to the use of others, according
to the rules of charity and liberality: part they are to spend for their own
use, according to the rules of frugalitie: and the rest they may employ in some
honest contracts, according to the rules of justice and thrist, or good
husbandry.

Fourthly, Object. 9.
To lend upon usury and to borrow upon usury are relatiues, therefore if to
lend upon usury be a sin, it is a sin to borrow upon usury, and if to
borrow upon usury be lawful, than is it lawful to lend upon usury.

I deny the consequence, which is grounded upon a false supposition, that there
is always the like reason of relatiues. The same author says that the usurer
and the poor are as relatiues, therefore by this reason, if it be a sin to be
an usurer, it is a sin also to be poor. In like sort, the oppressor, and he
that is oppressed, the robber, and he that is robbed, are relatiues; but shall
we hence conclude, that if to be robbed, or oppressed is not a sin, therefore
it is not a sin to rob or to oppress?

To borrow upon usury is lawful only upon necessity, as I shall show, but
he that yields to pay usury when he is to borrow upon necessity, is
oppressed, and therefore be which imposes usury upon him, is an oppressor.
And in this consectarie drawn from relatiues, there is indeed par ratio the
same, or equivalent reason, on both sides. The borrower upon usury is
oppressed, therefore the lender upon usury is an oppressor. And contrariwise.

The rest of the arguments which I find used in defense of usury are
impertinent, serving to prove the lawfulnes, not of gainefull usury, whereof
is the question; but either of liberal usury, or recompencing usury and
interest, or of some other lawful contract.

And first for liberell usury. Object. 10.
Equity requires that he who has gained well by the employment of money
borrowed, should allow some part of his gain to the lender, especially if he
could not well forbear his money.

Secondly, Again the lender has helped thee to thy gain, therefore thou
ought to make him partaker thereof.

Thirdly, Charity requires that he which has raised great gain out of my
money, should impart some part thereof to me.

Fourthly, We must do to others as we desire that others should do to us. But
when others have gained well by our money, we could be content to be partakers
of that gain.

Fifthly, Should a richer man occupy a poorer man's stock, and gaining well
thereby, make him none allowance? should be grow rich with another man's
hinderance?

These reasons prove that the borrower is bound in thankfulness, when he
has gained well by that which he has freely borrowed, to impart some portion
of his gain to the lender, especially if without some hinderance to himself
he could not forbear his money so long. From whence this conclusion may be
inferred.

That which the borrower ought willingly to give, the lender may receive.

The borrower ought willingly to give some part of his gain which he has
raised by the money freely borrowed of him who could not well forbear it:

Therefore the lender may receive such part of the borrowers gain, as he does
willingly impart unto him.

All this I grant: but hereby the contract of usury, wherein is an absolut
covenant for the receiving of the principal with an overplus, whether the
borrower gain or loose, is nothing at all justified.

The second rank of impertinent arguments fight for interest or recompencing
usury, Object. 11.
of which sort there are in the aforesaid english Treatise, five, distinguished
by notes of number, that author (as it seems) laboring more for number than
for weight of arguments.

First, Shall the debtor (says he) being an able man, by seeking delays gain
time after time at his pleasure, to the loss, hurt, and trouble of his
creditor, without recompense?

Secondly, Is it reason that a rich man should withhold any man's money against
his will, and make his private gain thereof?

Thirdly, The father in law making delays for the payment of that portion
which he promised with his daughter, is to make allowance by way of interest to
his son in law, who bears the charge and burden belonging to marriage.

Fourthly, When the creditor being disappointed of his money at the day of
payment, is forced himself to take up so much after ten in the hundred, may
not he require the same to be allowed him of the debtor, through whose default
he sustaineth that loss or hinderance?

Fifthly, When the surety is compelled through the debtors default to pay the
debt which he undertook for him, the debtor is bound to make him recompense,
of what loss or hinderance he sustaineth through the debtors default.

All this I grant: but gaineful usury differs much, as I have showed
before, from recompencing usury or interest: for it is great reason that he
which seeks to be no gainer by loan, should be no looser. Neither ought any
man to be enriched with another man's loss. But whosoever has been the
effectual cause of the creditors loss or hinderance, he ought, if he be able,
to make him recompense.

Sixthly, To these another reason may be added, which is the only argument
grounded upon the Scriptures, which I find in one learned patron of usury.
There is the like reason of ceassing from labor, and forbearing of money: but
he that causes a man to cease from his labor, is to make him recompense
according to the law, Exodus 21. 19.
Exodus 21. 19. therefore he which causes another man to forbear his money, is
to make him recompense according to the time of forbearance.

I answer, first, that there is not the like reason, betwixt a man's labor, and
the use of money: A man's labor being lettable, and yielding to the labourer,
if he works, certain wages. Secondly, although there were the like reason
betwixt them, yet nothing could be proved hence, but the lawfulness of
interest or recompencing usury: For the law speaks not of allowance to be
made for a man's voluntary ceassing from his work, but when he ceasseth
against his will, having been smitten and wounded by another man, so that he
cannot work; in this case the smiter is to make him recompense for the loss
of his time and ceassing from his labor. In like case allowance is not to be
made for voluntary forbearing or lending of money: but when the creditor
forbeareth it against his will, to his loss and hinderance, through the
debtors default; the debtor having been by his delay the effectual cause of
the creditors loss, is to make him recompense.

7 Lastly, He which having bought wares makes default of payment, is by the
civil law to pay usury to the seller, from whom the price is detained against
his will to his loss and hinderance.

Answer. I deny not but that if the price were equal, the like allowance is to
be made in this case, as after delay in that which is borrowed: but this
allowance is not gainefull usury, but recompencing usury or interest.

There is another sort of impertinent arguments, Object. 12.
which serve to prove the lawfulness, not of usury, but of the contracts. As
first of the gainefull contracts of negotiation and traffic, in buying and
selling: for some have a conceit, that if any contracts of gain be lawful,
usury (which they like so well) cannot be unlawful. And to this purpose the
author of the English Treatise proves, first, that merchandise is lawful, by
the description of the virtuous, godly, and wise woman, Prou. 31. 18. 24.

Secondly, That buying of rents and lands is lawful.

Thirdly, That the gain of drouers and grasiers is warrantable: from all
which, as so many arguments, he would have us infer, that therefore usury is
lawful. But unless he can prove that men may as well lend for gain, as buy
and sell for gain (which I have before disproued) these arguments are to
little purpose.

Secondly, He alleges the lawfulness of the civil lending, whereby a man
lends expecting the like courtesy again: as for example, When a man lends
where he hops to borrow as much another time; when a miller lends money to
a baker, to the end he may grind at his mill; when a scriuener lends money to
a gentleman, to the end that he should have his writings made with him, etc.
But although this civil lending with expectation of the like courtesy, be not
so commendable as the Christian and charitable lending, which is without
respect of our own good or profit, even as the inuiting of our able friends is
not so laudable as the feasting of the poor and helpelesse, yet is it lawful,
so long as the courtesy expected is not valuable by money, or such as is
commonly and lawfully bought and sold for money. Such is the courtesy of
lending expected from them of whom we borrow, the courtesy of their custom in
frequenting our shops to buy our wares, or to have their work done with us,
and such like. Howbeit if we covenant with the borrower for these courtesies,
they may be clokes of usury: as if I bind him to lend who will be more like to
borrow, and more willing to pay usury for the former loan, than to lend as
much more (which has been a practice of some dissembling usurers:) or if I
require his custom, with this purpose, to make him pay the more for my work
or ware, because he is in my danger, or beholden to me. Otherwise, if he have a
peni-worth for his penny, and be as well dealt with as others that are no way
beholden to us, even by the natural obligation which binds all men to
thankfulness, he is bound to show that courtesy to those who have well deserved
of him, rather than to others.

And these are the arguments which are brought for usury, which also I would
desire the Christian reader to compare with those which have been brought
against it. Now we are to descend to their testimonies, which are partly the
public allowance of laws in these days, and common practice of most rich
men in all Christendom, partly the private judgments of diverse learned and
reverent men of this age.

Of the laws I have spoken before: that none allow usury; though some with
certain restraints do permit and tollerat it as an evil thing, for the
avoiding of greater mischief. The commen practice of rich men does not prove
usury to be lawful, but themselves to be covetous and void of charity. As
for the judgments of godly learned men: I answer, That none such do allow that
usury which is practiced in the world, or if any do, I oppose to them the
judgments of many more worthy and learned men in this age, the testimonies of
all the learned in former ages, both Christian and heathen, the censures of
Councels, the authority of the word of God.

Now if the conscience of any be not clearly convicted by the evidence of
truth, which I have delivered concerning the unlawfulness of usury, I will
for their sakes add a further consideration; whereby it shall appear, that
although we were not sure that usury is unlawful, yet it cannot be practiced
with a good conscience. First, because it cannot be done in faith, that is to
say, in a sound persuasion out of the word of God, Romans 14. 23.
that it is lawful: and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Wherefore, if
thou do but doubt of the lawfulness of usury, thou art to abstain from
it, being well assured, that this is the safer course, for men are not to do
that which they doubt of, but ever in doubtful things they must choose the
safer way. But it is to be feared, that many usurers do not only doubt of the
lawfulness of usury, but even in their own consciences condemn it, and yet
against their conscience do practice it: for they had rather be usurers than
seem so. Yea they account it a reproach to be called an usurer: and although
they practice the thing, yet they avoid the name, and in stead of usury use
these names, use, vsance, consideration, interest: and as they avoid the name,
so many times they cloak the thing it self with diverse other pretenses, as
has been showed.

Again, usury is a very odious thing and of ill report: the very heathen by
the light of nature detest it. Tully says, such gains are to be misliked
which are odious, De off. lib. 1.
as namely that of usurers. Columella says, De re rustica. lib. 1.
That usury is odious even to those whom it seems to help. Polit. 1.
Aristotle says, it is hated most worthily: Mostellar. Nullum aedipol hodie
genus homin^ est te^rius, Nec minus bon^ cum iure quam Danisticium.
for as Plautus well says, There is no worse kind of men this day, or that
deal with less right, than the usurers. Alexander ab Alexandro reports in
detestation of usury, that very many nations did so abhor it, that whereas
they punished a thief twofold, they punished an usurer fourefold. As for
Christians, usury in ancient time was so odious among them, Lib. 1. cap. 7.
that if any were but suspected to be an usurer, Vide Centur. 12. cap. 4. inter
peccata 7. praecepti.
his house was counted the house of the devil, no neighbor would fetch fire
at his house, or have any thing to do with him, children would point at him in
the streets: See D. Wilson, fol. 13 6. b.
yea, by the laws of Christians they are diffamed persons. The scriptures as
you have heard, censure usury as an abomination, that is, as a sin to be
abhorred. And Psalm. 109. 11, the holy ghost uses this interpretation against
the wicked: Let the exactour (meaning thereby the usurer, (...).
as all translations almost besides some English do read) ensnare all that he
has. Whereby it may be gathered, both that to be an usurer is an odious thing,
and that it is a curse to fall into his snare.

Now the Scriptures teach us, Phil. 4. 8.
that we should do such things as are honest and of good report, Romans 12. 17.
providing for honest things not only before God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
but also before men, abstaining from all shows of evil.

Seeing therefore usury is and always has been a thing so odious and of so
bad report, no Christian can practice it with a good conscience.

And thus I hope this question of usury is sufficiently decided.

Now let us consider what use this doctrine affords; which briefly is thus
much: that seeing usury is so detestable a sin, as has been showed, we
should therefore take great heed, that we be not guilty thereof, either as
principals or as accessaries.

The former use concerns either those who have not as yet been attainted
with this sin, or those that have practiced it. Those who have not defiled
themselves with this unjust gain, are taught to confirm their resolution of
abstaining from usury, and the rather, seeing the holy ghost in this place
makes it a note of a sound Christian and citisen of heaven.

As for those who have practiced this sin, their duty is to repent thereof,
whereunto they may be moved by this argument: Those that shall dwell in the
mountain Gods holiness, are such as do not put forth their money to usury.
Thou (say I to him that is an usurer) put forth thy money to usury,
therefore thou shall not dwell in the mountain of Gods holiness, namely,
unless thou repent. And again Ezech. 18, He that puts forth to usury and
takes increase, he shall not live, but die the death, viz. unless he repent
and turn from his wickedness: for that condition is to be understood by
warrant of the Lords own exposition, Ezech. 35. 14, 15, When I shall say to
the wicked (as he says to the usurer, chap. 18. 13) Thou shall die the death:
if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right, to wit, if
the wicked restore the pledge and give again that he had robbed, and walk in
the statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live and not
die.

Now unto repentance, besides the inward loathing of the sin and sorrow
conceived for it, is required (as that testimony out of Ezech. 33. 14, 15,
plainly shows) both a desisting from the practice of usury, and a
restitution of that which has been gotten by usury with the harm of others.
For the first: it is the express commandment of God by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
28, Let him that stole, steal no more: and by Nehemiah more particularly in
this case of usury, chap. 5. 10, Let us cease from this burden, meaning
usury: forsaking of sin accompanies forgiving of sin: He that confesses
his sin and forsakes it, shall have mercy, Prou. 28. 13. Neither may we
think that God remitteth those sins, which we our selves retain. But this
point needs no proof. If usury be a sin, and we guilty of it, our
conscience telling us that it is a sin, we cannot be saved, except this sin
be forgiven us; and it will never be forgiven of God, unless also it be
forsaken of us. Now upon this forsaking of sin, will follow the second duty
of repentance, namely restitution, as a necessary consequent thereof. Which
restitution whosoever makes not, being able to restore, he neither has
unfeigned repentance for this sin, nor any sound assurance of the forgiveness
thereof. He has not repentance: for he does not forsake the sin of theft and
usury, that continues in it; and he continues therein, that does not make
restitution. For so often as a man remembers, that whatsoever he has unjustly
gotten by usury or any other kind of theft, to the damnifying of others, is
not his own, but theirs whom he has wronged, and yet refuses (being able) to
restore the same, so often he commits theft. Si res alienae propter quam
pec^atum est, cum reddi possit non redditur, non agi^u^ poe^^tentia, sed
fingitur.
Therefore Augustine says, That men do repent indeed, but counterfeit
repentance, if when they are able to restore other men's goods, wherein they
have offended, they do not restore them. Zachaeus so soon as he repented him
of his former life, promised restitution. Judas having not true repentance, but
only a remorse for his sin, Luke 19. 8.
not (...) but (...), restored the thirty pieces of money, Mat. 27. 3.
for which he had betrayed his master.

But as he has not repentance that makes not restitution, if he be able, so
neither has he any sound assurance of remission. It is a true saying of
Augustine, Non remitti peccatum, Epist. 54. ad Macedon.
nisi restituatur ablatum, That the sin is not remitted, unless that which
has been unjustly taken, be restored, namely, if the party be able to
restore: for whiles a man continues in a sin, he cannot believe the
forgiveness thereof; and he continues therein, until he make restitution. To
restore, is to cease from doing wrong, therefore he that will not restore, does
not cease from the wrong.

But it is further to be considered, to whom and when this restitution is to be
made, and how far forth. To whom? Surely to him that has sustained loss or
harm thereby, Leuit. 6. 5. Number. 5. 7, 8, that is, either to the use of the
debtour if he has been bitten, or to public and godly uses, if the
commonwealth has been endamaged.

When? So soon as thou desire remission of thy sin, and reconciliation with
God. For so the Lord has expressly commanded, Number. 5. 6, 7, 8. Leuit. 6. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, viz. that first the sin must be confessed to God: secondly,
restitution is to be made to the party offended the same day that thou seek
reconciliation with God, if not before: and thirdly, a sacrifice was to be
offered, etc. the equity whereof remains unto us; that in the third place we
should call upon God for the forgiveness of our sin, desiring him for and by
the sufficient sacrifice of Christ (which was prefigured by the sacrifices of
the law) to forgive our sin. Many will seem to seek reconciliation with
God, but never think of making amends to their brother offended. But our
Savior Christ teaches us another lesson, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. For whereas the
priests and Pharisees taught (as the Papists do now adays) that the sins of
the people were expiated by those oblations, whereof they themselves had the
profit. Our Savior Christ therefore affirms, That no man is reconciled unto
God, or that his oblation is acceptable unto him, that seeks not to satisfy
his brother offended. If therefore (says he) thou bring thy gift, that is,
thy peace offering, whereby thou seek reconciliation with God, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, that is, that thou have
offended him and not made him amends, leave thy gift there, and go and first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

How far forth is this restitution to be made, that is, of what usury, and
of how much? Not of mental usury, where gain for loan is intended only and
expected: For howsoever that intent corrupts the act of lending, yet it
polluteth not the free gift of the borrower, which is voluntarily given in
testimony of thankfulness. And therefore it binds not the lender to
restitution to be made to the neighbor whom he has not wronged, but to
repentance toward God.

For the quantity: so much at the least is to be restored as has been gotten
by usury with the harm of others: or if the offendour be not able to restore
so much, yet he must restore so much as he is able. The Lord in his law
commands, that the offender should restore the whole sum, and also add a
fifth part unto it, Leuit. 6. 5. Number. 5. 7. And Zachaeus, Luke 19. 8.
to testify his repentance, promises fourefold: that those men may know how
far they be from true repentance, who will restore nothing at all.

I am the briefer in this matter, because this doctrine of restitution is not
peculiar to usury, but generally belongs to all sorts of unjust getting. If
therefore any shall think or say, Durus est hic sermo, This is a hard or harsh
doctrine, which is not so esteemed in respect of other kinds of theft: I
answer, the harder this doctrine seems to usurers than to other thieves and
robbers, the more desperate is their estate than of others. And this may be
another argument to aggrauat the grieuousnesse of this sin, That whereas other
thieves and robbers, if once they be discovered, acknowledge their fault, and
are willing to make restitution, usurers though convinced of this sin, yet
stand in defense thereof, and think not themselves bound to make restitution.

But as we may not be guilty of this sin as principals, so neither as
accessaries. For they are worthy of death not only that commit sin, but
also that consent thereunto, Romans 1. 32. And this lesson concerns either
brokers or borrowers upon usury.

As touching brokers, there is no question, but if usury in it self be
unlawful, then the practice of brokers and scriueners, which are factors for
usurers, as spies for thieves, is also unlawful and wicked: not only because
they help the usurer to rob his neighbor, and contriue the bargain betwixt
him and the debtour: but also because they have many shifts and devices to
wring from the borrower a fee for themselves, as it were for their brocage,
besides the usury which is to be allowed to the creditour.

But the greatest controversy is concerning borrowers upon usury: for some
do hold, that all borrowing upon usury is generally and simply lawful,
affirming that the borrower upon usury never offends: Rainerius Pantheolog.
it is. devsur. cap. 2.
others contrariwise do hold all borrowing upon usury to be generally and
simply unlawful, as well as lending upon usury: others again do hold, that
borrowing upon usury is neither generally lawful nor generally unlawful, but
in some cases lawful, and in some other unlawful; which assertion holding the
mean, seems to be true rather than either of the other, which run into
contrary extremities. The cases therefore are to be distinguished.

1. For first men borrow upon usury, either for necessity, and so
unwillingly: or without necessity, and so willingly. For necessity, when a
man (who is not to beg) must needs borrow for the supply of his want, and
cannot borrow freely: For men who are able to repay* are not to beg or crave;
and those who shall not in their own opinion be able to repay, they are not to
borrow: for borrowing impheth a promise of repaying, which promise a man ought
not to make, unless in his own purpose and persuasion he shall be both willing
and able to perform it: for there is no necessity of sinning, no outward
inconvenience being so great, as to sin. The first thing then required in
borrowing upon necessity, is, that the party which borrows shall be in his
own persuasion able to repay.

The second, that he be in present want, in respect of the necessity either of
nature, person, or state. Of nature, as when a man wants food or apparel:
of person, as when a man wants necessaries for his family and charge
depending on him: of state, as when a man wants present means for the
maintenance of his credit and estate in that calling wherein God has placed
him; and consequently, for avoiding of discredit, or of some notable impairing
of his estate.

The third, that it be not a slight, but an urgent necessity.

The fourth, that the party who is to borrow, have no present means of his
own to supply his want. For he that has means of his own to supply his
need, though it be by selling of any thing which he may spare, has no urgent
necessity to cause him to borrow.

The fifth and last is, that being by urgent necessity forced to borrow, he
cannot borrow freely: and therefore for avoiding of a greater inconvenience, is
feign to yield to a loss.

Without necessity men do borrow upon usury, when there is no necessity that
they should borrow; either first because they cannot borrow without sin, as
when they cannot persuade themselves that they shall be able to repay: or
secondly, because they be not in want, and therefore borrow not for need, but
either for pride, for riot, or for covetousness: for the satisfying of any
whereof, there is no necessity: or thirdly, because it is no urgent but a
slight necessity, which may easily be either avoided or undergone: or
fourthly, because they have present means of their own, whereby their want may
better be supplied: or fifthly and lastly, when they may (if they will be so
much beholden to others) borrow freely.

2. The second distinction, which after a fort is implied in the former, is,
that men borrow either for good and lawful causes, or for bad and unlawful
purposes. For there is no necessity of borrowing for wicked and sinful
respects.

3. The third, that usury is either offered by the borrower, or imposed by the
lender. And that it is offered either at the first, or after the lenders plain
denial or pretended excuses.

4. The fourth, that men borrow upon usury, either with assurance of future
means to heal the biting of usury without the injury of others, or
impouerishing of themselves, or without any such assurance.

5. The fifth, that the necessity whereupon men borrow, is either contracted
and drawn upon themselves by their own default: or else it is a blameless
necessity.

By help of these distinctions it will not be hard to clear this
controversy, which otherwise is very intricat. For hereby it will appear, that
neither all borrowing upon usury is to be allowed, nor all generally to be
condemned.

For against the former assertion, which allows all borrowing upon usury, we
are to hold, that the borrower upon usury offends either first, when he
borrows without necessity; or secondly, to ill purposes; or thirdly, when he
induces the lender to lend upon usury; or fourthly, when in respect either of
the time to come he shall not have means to cure the wound which usury has
made, without doing wrong to others, or impouerishing himself; or fifthly of
the time past, when as through his own former default he has brought himself
into this necessity. For although his necessity when he is once in it, may
excuse his borrowing, being rightly qualified according to the four former
distinctions, yet his fault in drawing upon himself wilfully or negligently
this necessity, cannot be excused.

But these five points need further explication. First therefore I say the
borrower offends, who borrows upon usury without necessity in any of
those five respects before mentioned, that is, if either he find himself
unlike to repay that which he borrows, or if he be not in want, or if his
necessity be not urgent, or because he has sufficient means of his own, or
if he might borrow freely if he would.

For as touching the first: On those who have no good hope or assurance that
they shall be able to repay, the Lord has not laid a necessity to borrow, and
much less upon usury, but to seek relief by other lawful means: for
although the usurer deserve to be deceived, and by the ancient laws of this
land, it has been decreed that it should be no fault to deceive an usurer; to
which purpose Plato provided also by law, 5. de Legib (...).
that it should be lawful for the debtour when the creditor has lent upon
usury, to pay neither the usury nor the det: yet I do not see how a man can
with a good conscience borrow, and in borrowing promise the repayment of that
which he purposes not to repay, especially seeing the holy Ghost makes it a
note of the wicked, Psalm. 37. 21.
to borrow that which they never mean to restore.

As touching the second and third: they offend as accessarie to the sin of
the usurer, who borrow upon usury without necessity, yea without urgent
necessity: for such, having no urgent necessity to compel them to borrow, do
willingly borrow upon usury, and voluntarily consent to the usurers sin. Now
this is the sentence of the holy Ghost, that they are worthy of death, not
only who commit sin themselves, but also willingly consent to the sin of
others, Romans 1: Romans 1. 32.
and therefore he has given us in charge, to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather to reprove them, Ephesians. 5.
Ephesians. 5. 11.


Such are they who borrow not for any great need, but for pride, riot, or
covetousness.

For pride and ostentation: as those who desiring to seem better and wealthier
than they are, refuse to contain themselves within the compass of their
calling and estate, but desiring to bear an higher sail in respect of their
diet, apparel, family and port, take up money upon usury: but such persons
sin, first, in respect of the usurer, to whose sin they make themselves
accessarie; seeing there is no necessity why their pride and vanity should be
satisfied. Secondly, in respect of themselves, offending against the rules of
frugalitie and thrift: for whiles they desire to seem rich, they become poor,
usury converting their substance into debt.

For riot: as those who being addicted to gaming or to other pleasures, as
whoredom, drunkenness, bellycheare, and such like, take up money upon usury,
that there may not want matter either to maintain their gaming, or nourish
their pleasures; for such men, so they may have present money to satisfy their
lust, they care not upon what conditions they procure it. But as these are of
all borrowers upon usury the most foolish, so those which lend unto them to
these uses, are of all usurers the most wicked; and either of them is
accessarie to the others sin. The riotous person to the sin of the usurer,
whereunto he voluntarily and without any necessity consents at the least, if
also he do not move and induce the lender thereunto. The usurer not only to
the borrowers riot, whereunto he affoordeth matter, but also to his utter
undoing, which he furthereth not only as an accessarie, but as a principal
also.

Wherefore these two sorts of men, I mean the proud and riotous persons, they
are to be dissuaded from their sin by this argument among many others, That
besides their own sins, which are too heavy for them to bear, they make
themselves accessarie to the sin of the usurer. For as Plutarch says well,
(...), delicacie, riot, and excess has set up usurers. For if these men would
live soberly and frugally according to their calling and estate, and would cut
out their garment (as we say) according to their cloth, they should not need to
fly to the usurer. Wherefore as others when they be in the usurers danger,
fly to sanctuaries; so to prevent this danger, the best course for these men
were, to make unto themselves a sanctuary of frugalitie, as Plutarch speaks.

Lastly for covetousness, as those which seek to enrich themselves by
borrowing upon usury. And this their* covetousness, for which they borrow, is
commonly joined either with oppression and hard dealing, or with hypocrisy and
dissembling, or with deceit and cousenage. Some therefore borrow for
covetousness joined with oppression and hard dealing: and of this kind there
be diverse sorts. First, those who borrow money upon moderat usury, that they
may put it forth again upon griping usury: a generation of men not so much to
be confuted by a minister, as punished by the magistrate. Secondly, such
tradesmen as having set down with themselves, that they will be rich; 1. Tim.
6. 9.
and being therefore not content to traffic with their own stock, to the
intent they may compass great matters, and perhaps that they may play the
engrossers, they take up money upon usury: But these men offend, first, in
maintaining the usurer, and consenting to his sin; secondly, by making the
buyers pay their usury; thirdly, by inhaunsing the prices of such commodities
as they ^ell, as before has been showed. But as these men consent to the
sin of the usurer, so is the usurer also accessarie to their oppression of
the buyer; and both of them conspire to the robbing of the commonwealth.

Thirdly, those which borrow money on usury to purchase lands or houses: for
besides that they offend in maintaining the usurer and consenting to his sin,
in buying lands with money borrowed upon usury, either they ouerreach the
seller, taking advantage of his want, or by racking of their rents, make their
tennant pay the usury; or themselves must live by the loss, if buying lands
after twenty years purchase, and so receiving after five in the hundred,
themselves do pay after ten in the hundred; or else they must abate so much of
their hospitality and housekeeping to the hurt of the poor, and perhaps
betake themselves to some corner in a city, where they may live privately and
obscurely, as if they were born only for themselves.

Again, there are which borrow for covetousness, joined with hypocrisy and
dissembling: as those which being indeed rich, do borrow upon usury, that
they may seem poor, and seeming poor, may avoid the communication of their
goods, either to the public use of the Church, as in contributions, or of the
commonweal, as in subsidies and taxes, or to the private necessities of their
brethren. Would you borrow of them? alas, their estate is such, as that
themselves are feign to borrow, and that upon usury. Thus besides their
wilful communicating with the usurer in his sin, they offend through
covetousness and hypocrisy.

But the most wicked sort of borrowers are those which borrow for
covetousness, joined with deceit and cousenage. A generation of men in these
days, who never minding to repay, borrow, or otherwise take up on trust, they
care not how much, nor upon what conditions; and when their credit will extend
no further, they become voluntary bankrupts; and by that means forcing their
creditors to take a third or fourth part of their debt, they enrich themselves
with other men's goods: the most vile and basest cousenage that ever was
practiced. And thus we have heard the three first cases, wherein men borrow
without necessity.

The fourth is, when men have sufficient and convenient means of their own to
supply their want. And I call those convenient means, in this case speaking by
comparison, which would not bring a loss upon us much greater than the biting
of usury. For whiles a man has means of his own, he ought not to borrow of
others, and much less upon usury. Wherefore Plato would have it provided by
law, That no man should fetch water from his neighbors well, until himself
had dug unto the potters earth. The Scripture always speaking of loan,
presupposes the borrowers want. Why therefore do thou go to the usurer,
seeing thou have in thine own store a remedy against thy necessity? thou
have plate or other stuff which thou may spare, yea thou have some lands,
which thou might better sell than borrow upon usury. Again consider, that
to be in state to borrow, Deuteronomy. 28. 12. and 44. and 15. 6.
it is a cross, but to borrow upon usury, and so to fall into the usurers
nets, it is a curse, which we should not be hasty to draw upon us, Psalm. 109.
11.
unless it be for avoiding of that which is a greater curse.

The fifth and last case is, when men borrow upon usury, who might if they
would borrow freely. Yea, but I had rather (says one) give ten in the hundred,
than make my self so much beholden to any man. Why, but thou professest thy
self when thou borrowest, much beholden to the usurer, and so art, unless
thou dissemblest; and will thou be beholden to him rather than to thy friend?
or if thou will be no more beholden to thy friend than to him, why may thou
not give to him voluntarily as much one way or other, as thou would to the
usurer upon covenant? But this evidently shows, that thou chuse^t rather to
give another man occasion of sinning by the practice of usury, than to give
thy friend occasion of well doing by exercising his liberality: and therefore
can not by any means excuse thy self from a wilful consenting to the
usurers sin. Neither may thou hope to be exempted from partaking in the
usurers punishment, if thou will be partner in his offense. Thus then he
offends who borrows upon usury without necessity: and that offense
reaches also to those, who without necessity borrow upon usury, though not
directly, when as they taking up of wares upon trust, do pay the dearer for
the time.

The second point wherein a borrower upon usury may offend, is, when as he
takes up money to ill purposes: as when he borrows to maintain his
unlawful gaming, to nourish his dishonest pleasures, to execute his covetous
designs, etc. for if it be not lawful to do ill that good may come thereof;
Romans 3. 8.
much more is it unlawful to do ill, that evil may come thereof. And
therefore he which borrows for any ill purpose, he sins not only in
borrowing as an accessarie to the usurers sin (accessarie, I say, because he
willingly consents thereto; and he consents willingly, because there is no
true necessity of borrowing to an ill purpose) but also he sins in that for
which he borrows: and besides the usurers sin to which he is accessarie, he
adds another of his own, wherein he is principal.

The third thing wherein the borrower upon usury may sin, is, if he induce the
lender to lend upon usury, who either would have lent freely, if it were
needful, or if it were not needful, would not have lent at all: for he which
induces another into any sin, which otherwise he were not willing to have
committed, seems of the two to sin the more fearfully: as the serpent which
tempted Eve, and as Iezabell who provoked Achab. But that it may appear, when
the borrower induc^th the lender to usury, and when not, we are to remember the
third distinction before mentioned. For it is one thing for the borrower to
offer usury of his own ac^ord, and another to yield unto it upon necessity,
being imposed by the lender: for he that does only yield to usury upon
necessity, being imposed on him by the lender, cannot truly be said either to
induce the lender unto usury, or willingly to consent thereto. Again, there
is difference to be made, whether a man that would borrow, offer usury at the
first motion of borrowing, or after the other parties refusal whom he desires
to lend: For seeing in a case of urgent necessity, it is a greater sin for
him that is of ability not to lend at all, than not to lend freely; therefore
he who being in urgent necessity, entreats an able man who has refused to
lend at all, that he would lend though it be upon usury, cannot truly be said,
either to induce him into sin, or willingly to consent thereto: for he does not
induce the lender into sin, when only he entreats him to avoid the greater
sin; neither does he willingly consent to that, which he makes choice of
only as the less evil. As for example, a man being diseased with some
dangerous sickness, comes to a Physician to be cured, promising an equal
reward: the Physician refuses to meddle with him; the party being in this
extremity, offers the Physician ten times the value of his cure, so he will
not refuse to heal him: to refuse the cure altogether, is in a case of
extremity, the greater sin in the Physician; this therefore the sick party
desires him to avoid: to pay an unreasonable fee, is a less evil to
himself, and therefore that he makes choice of. Suppose a man upon the way to
fail under his burden, or to be in any other distress (as we are subject
to many casualties) nay, suppose a man's horse or cart to be overthrown, and
himself not able to relieve himself or his cattle; therefore another able
man passing by, who both could and ought to succor him in this case, he
entreats his help: the party churlishly refusing his aid, he offers him
that which is ten times more worth than his labor, so that he would not
refuse to help him in his need. In like case, a man being in great need, and
ready to fail under the burden of his present want, comes to an able man,
who both could and ought to relieve him, and entreats him to lend him twenty
pounds: the party unchristianly refusing, he says, Sir, if you will lend me
this money in my need, I will make you allowance according to the statute. Why
this borrower should be accessarie to the sin of usury, and not the other
distressed persons accessory to the sin of oppression and extortion, as
indeed they are not, I cannot conceive. But if at the first motion thou
offerest usury to the lender, thou inducest him unto usury: and whatsoever
thy case be, thou art accessarie to his sin. But you will say, he is a known
usurer: of whom if I do but ask to borrow freely, I shall be sure not to
borrow at all. Answer. Thou know not how God may move and incline his heart
to thee: and it may be, that if not in regard of thy need, yet in regard of thy
friendship, or thy friends, or some other respect, he will not reject thee. Why
but he is a notorious usurer already, and therefore my motion will not induce
him to be an usurer. Distinguish betwixt the habit and the act: though thou
do not induce him to be an usurer, yet thou inducest him to commit an act of
usury: even as a whoremonger alluring a common harlot to folly, though he do
not induce her to be a whore, for that she is already, yet he induces her to
the actual committing of whoredom.

The fourth case, wherein borrowers upon usury may offend, is, when they have
no good assurance of any future means to repair the loss which usury
inflicteth, without either the damnifying of others, or impouerishing of
themselves. In respect of others therefore they offend, when as they purpose to
make other men pay their usury: As he which borrows money upon usury, with
purpose to put it forth at an higher rate, or that buyeth wares either upon
trust, and so pays the more, or with money borrowed upon usury, with purpose
to pitch his prices so, as that he will gain sufficient both for himself and
the usurer too, and thus becomes an hurtful member to the commonweal: or
buyeth lands with money borrowed upon usury, meaning so to rack his rents, as
that his poor tennants must pay his usury, and so becomes an oppressor of
others.

In respect of themselves, they offend when as they know no good means to cure
the wound which the biting of usury will make: but first borrow of one, and
then to satisfy him, of another, and so of a third, etc. the debt in every
change of the creditour being increased one tenth part, until at length usury
has consumed their whole estate. Unless therefore thy commings in do so much
exceed thy expenses as thy usury comes to, assure thy self, the longer thou
borrowest upon usury, the more will be thy want. Neither may thou think,
by changing thy usurious creditors to better thine estate: for it fares with
such a man as with him who sticks deep in the mire and clay, who lifting up
the one leg, in hope to get out, thrusts the other the deeper in, and then to
get out that, shifteth to the other, but the oftener he shifteth, the deeper he
plungeth himself: or, that I may use Plutarch his similitude, it happens to
them who change their creditours, as to a man, which being fallen into the
dirt, turns himself up and down; for the more he turns, the more is he
bedirted. If therefore thy future means are not like to be better than the
present, extend thy present means to the uttermost, for the supply of thy
want, and where they be defective, acknowledge thy want, and stand to the
favor of others. For if thou can not bear a less burden, now when thine
estate is better, how will thou bear a greater, when thine estate shall be
weaker than now it is? Well therefore may thou use that rediculous proverb
which Plutarch mentions, (...), I am not able to bear a goat, lay on me an
ox.

The fifth and last thing wherein borrowers upon vsusurie do sometime offend, is
when the necessity whereupon they do borrow, is not a blameless necessity,
but drawn upon themselves through their own default, as by riot, or any
excess, or through negligence, or improuidence: For although their borrowing
upon such a necessity may be excused, if they do not induce the lender to
commit usury, etc. yet they cannot be excused for casting themselves into that
necessity.

Their assertion therefore which hold all borrowing upon usury to be lawful,
is by no means to be retained, seeing it is manifest that borrowers may and
often do offend so many ways. Neither may it be hoped that usurers will make
conscience of lending upon usury, until men have learned to make conscience
of borrowing upon usury.

Now we are to proceed to the other contrary assertion, which affirms
generally all borrowing upon usury to be unlawful: for although I must
confess, that I never read any author either Papist or Protestant, new or old,
that maintains this assertion, yet for as much as I understand it to be the
private assertion of some well disposed persons, who are worthy to be loved
and reverenced, and whose arguments are worth the scanning, I will therefore
somewhat insist upon this point.

But first you are to remember, that I do not justify borrowers upon usury,
unless themselves and their borrowing be qualified according to those five
points which before I recited: for although the borrower is to be condemned
which fails in any one of those five, yet he is not to be approved or
excused, unless there be a concurrencie of them all: namely, unless he
borrow, first, upon urgent necessity and not otherwise; secondly, for good and
lawful purposes; thirdly, without inducing the lender unto the sin of
usury; fourthly, having future means to repair the loss which by usury he
sustaineth, and that without endamaging or wronging others; fifthly, his
necessity whereon he borrows, being not drawn upon himself by his own
fault, but being a blameless necessity. Which fifth point I added, as required
to the justifying not of the act of borrowing upon usury, but of the person of
the borrower; for the act of borrowing, without it may be excused, so the other
four do concur therein: but the person of the borrower cannot be cleared,
who by his default has pulled upon himself that necessity: That therefore
shows, that howsoever it may be lawful to borrow on usury in a case of
urgent necessity, yet men must take heed that they do not through their own
default cast themselves into this necessity.

But let us consider the arguments which may be objected against this truth; by
answer whereunto, it shall appear, that there are no Scriptures nor sound
reasons against it, but Scriptures and reasons for it.

First therefore it may be objected, Object. 1.
that there is no warrant in the word of God for borrowing upon usury, and
therefore that it cannot be done in faith: and whatsoever is not of faith is
sin.

Answer. Many things are contained in the Scriptures which are not expressly
mentioned in the Scriptures, as very many other particulers besides this in
question; which notwithstanding may all be proved lawful by just and
necessary consequence out of the Scripture: as for example, Where the general
is acknowledged to be no sin, there also the specials which are contained
under the same, are warranted. Thus therefore I argue.

To be oppressed is acknowledged in the Scriptures to be no sin.

To borrow upon usury in case of urgent necessity (with such cautions as
before I specified) is to be oppressed.

Therefore to borrow upon usury in a case of urgent necessity, is acknowleded
in the Scriptures to be sin.

The proposition I prove, because the Scripture promises mercy to them that
are oppressed, whether by usury, or taking of pawnes, or by any other means,
as Exodus 22. 23. 27. To be oppressed therefore is a thing not reproved of God,
but pitied.

If you shall reply, that the proposition is to be understood of those who are
oppressed wrongfully and against their will, which cannot be verified of those
which borrow upon usury: I answer, that whosoever is oppressed, is wrongfully
oppressed and against his will: for there is no oppression but it is wrongful,
neither can a man be oppressed but against his will: for vol^nti non fit
iniuria, he that is willing, is not oppressed. The proposition therefore is
generally true. It may be therefore that you will allege against the
assumption, That he which borrows upon usury is not oppressed, because he is
willing to borrow upon usury, yea and so willing that he seeks to the
usurer, and entreats him to lend, offering to give him consideration
according to the statute, that is to say, usury.

I answer, he that borrows upon usury in a case of urgent necessity, with
such cautions as before have been specified, does yield to usury against his
will, yea although he both offer and promise it: For in cases of urgent
necessity, men seem many times willing to that which is indeed against their
will. When a man is in danger of shipwreck, as before I have showed, how will
he bestirre himself to unlade and lighten the ship, and with such earnestness
cast his goods into the sea, that he may seem to be very willing to be rid of
them: and yet the thing which he wills, is not the casting away of his
goods, but the safety of his life: To cast away his goods he is simply
unwilling, and yet against his will upon a conditional necessity he seems
willing to do it. Or (to come nearer the question in hand,) A needy man
desirous to borrow, which without giving security he cannot obtain, brings
forth a pawn to the creditor (who by the law might not enter into the
borrowers house to take it) but such a pawn as indeed he cannot spare, D^ut.
24. 10.
but his necessity is such that he offers it, and brings it forth,
delivers it to the creditor to be kept as a pawn, until he restore the
money borrowed: notwithstanding the creditor if he receive this pawn and keep
it, he oppresses the borrower, Exo. 22. 26, 27.
and the borrower is oppressed: Deuteronomy. 24. 6, 10, 11, 12, 13.
For indeed he was not willing to give that pawn which he could not spare,
Ezekiel. 18. 7. 12.
but his necessity for the avoiding of a greater mischief made him seem
willing to that whereunto he was simply unwilling. In like case a man compelled
by urgent necessity to borrow, and being not able to borrow freely, offers
to his creditor, who otherwise will not lend, consideration after ten in the
hundred; this creditor if he shall lend upon this covenant, or require this
consideration, he oppresses the borrower, and the borrower is oppressed: For
this borrower was no more willing to pay usury than the other was to give his
pawn, but his necessity for avoiding a greater inconvenience, made him seem
willing to that, whereunto simply he was unwilling.

The assumption therefore may be proved by this unanswerable argument.

He that lends upon usury to him that borrows for urgent necessity,
oppresses the borrower:

Therefore he which borrows upon usury for urgent necessity, is oppressed,
and that as I have showed, both wrongfully and against his will.

Again, the like case are warranted in the word of God, and by the law and
light of nature: for why may I not give usury, or promise to give it in my
necessity? you will say, because the lender cannot take it without committing
a sin, which the Lord has forbidden under pain of damnation. If then I show
that in cases of necessity, one man may offer that to another which the other
without committing a damnable sin cannot receive, then is this question
proved by an argument of equals. Suppose then a man fallen into the hands of
robbers and murderers, to whom he promises for the safeguard of his life to
give them not only that which is about him, but also such a sum of money
besides: as the ten men mentioned, Ier. 41. 8, offered to Ismael and the
cutthroats that were with him, such treasures as they had in the field for the
safety of their lives: Or suppose a man being in sickness or hunger, to offer
ten times the value of the meat or medicine which he needs, to a greedy
cormorant that will take no less for the same. If you say these cases of
necessity concern a man's life, and it is not to be doubted but that a man may
give all that he has to save his life: it is true indeed, but yet a man may
not sin to save his life. May I not sin to save my life, and may I give for
the safety of my life that to another which he cannot receive without a more
heinous sin than the sin of usury, as in these cases even now specified?
then it is apparent that in a case of necessity, a man may lawfully offer and
give that to another which the other cannot receive without committing of such
a sin as the Lord has forbidden under pain of damnation. And this is true
not only in those cases that so nearly touch a man's life, but in all other
cases of necessity. A poor man having need to borrow, and not being able to
borrow without giving such a pawn as he cannot spare, is by his necessity
compelled to deliver that pawn, Exo. 22. 26* 27.
which the lender cannot receive and keep without committing a damnable sin.
Deuteronomy. 24. 6. 22.
And that he may lawfully give such a pawn, E^ech. 18. 12.
when his necessity is such as that he may much better want that pawn, than
be without that which he would borrow, there is no question: for the children
of God and such as are noted to have feared God, when other pawnes have failed,
have been feign to bind over their sons and daughters to their creditors. 2
King 4. 1.
If my house be in danger to fall presently without the carpenters help,
Nehem. 5. 2. 5.
my cattle being diseased or hurt, in danger to miscarie without present cure;
my corn or hay lying abroad in danger to be spoiled unless presently it be
inned; or if any such other casualtie happen wherein there is necessity of
present help; is it not lawful for me to give, yea to offer and promise to
such unconscionable men, as taking advantage at my necessity will not
otherwise help me, six or seven times the value of that which in equity were
due unto them: and yet it cannot be d^nied but that every one of these does
sin worse than the usurer.

I will add only one other instance which will make this matter evident.
Suppose I want food or apparel, or any other necessaries for myself, or those
that belong to me, and that also I want present money to buy that I need, and
present means whereby to make ready money; I am forced therefore to take it
up on trust for three or six months, according as I shall be able to make
payment: The party which sells these commodities, because he is to give day
of payment, he will not let me have that under eleven shillings which he would
sell for ten shillings of present money: Well, my necessity is such as I had
rather give twelve shillings, perhaps twenty shillings than not buy that which
I came for: may I in this case of necessity lawfully promise to pay at the end
of six months eleven shillings for that which of present money is worth but
ten shillings? as I think no man can truly deny: and may I not as lawfully in
a case of no less necessity promise to the lender after ten in the hundred?
Will you hear? this party which sells thus much the deerer for time,
lends upon usury, as I proved before, and that after twenty in the hundred:
therefore this buyer borrows upon usury, which by this example appears in
a case of necessity to be lawful.

But you will allege in the second place, Object. 2.
that all borrowing upon usury is condemned in the Scripture. I answer, that
all lending upon usury is indeed condemned in the Scripture, but that all
borrowing upon usury is condemned, it cannot be proved out of the word of
God.

It may be you will allege Ierem. 15. 10. and Esaias. 24. 2. In the former place
the Prophet Jeremy professes of himself (as some translations read) that
neither he had lent upon usury, neither had they lent to him upon usury.

Answer. Suppose that the Prophet did indeed speak of lending and borrowing
upon usury; yet hereof it would not follow, that therefore all borrowing upon
usury is unlawful: it may not be doubted but that there are many things
lawful either of themselves, or at lest in cases of urgent necessity, which
the Prophet Jeremy never practiced. It may be that he might as truly have
said, I neither For his purchase of the field in Anathoth, was afterward
Chapter 32, and then not vnd^rtaken by him of his own accord, as a worldly
contract for his own profit, but enjoined of the Lord, as a type and assurance
of the restitution of the I^wes after the^ captivity, verse 7, 8* 15, 43, 4^.
bought of them nor sold to them, I neither lent to them upon pawnes or other
security, neither have I borrowed of them upon security. Would it therefore
from hence follow, that all buying and selling, all lending and borrowing upon
security is unlawful? Yea but the Prophet disclaimeth the practice of lending
upon usury, as a thing unlawful, therefore the like is to be understood of
borrowing upon usury. The Prophet abstained indeed from lending upon usury,
because it was unlawful, but thereof it does not follow, that therefore he
abstained from borrowing also, because it was simply unlawful. It may be, he
had no need to borrow upon usury: and therefore that had been unlawful to
him, without necessity, which in a case of urgent necessity is lawful to
another. But the Prophet indeed, if he speak of usury at all, disclaimeth
both lending and borrowing, not as unlawful things, though to him both of them
had been perhaps unlawful, but as occasions of contention. For the purpose of
the Prophet is to show the contentious disposition of the people, who contended
with him that had given them no occasion of contention; which he proves by
these two particulars of lending and borrowing (whether freely or upon usury)
which are the most usual occasions of suits and contentions among men:
therefore the Prophets meaning was not to profess, that he had done no
unlawful thing, but that he had given the contentious people no occasion of
contention.

But what if the Prophet speak not of usury at all in this place, as indeed
he does not, but only of civil lending upon security, that is, when a man
lends with purpose to exact again that which he lends. The verb Nashah
which here is used (as heretofore I have showed) signifies in this argument
exacting that which a man has lent, or lending with purpose to exact that
which is lent. Neither is there any necessity that we should understand the
word in any place where it is used in the Scripture of lending upon usury.
Howbeit, the word Nosheh, which signifies an exactour, sometimes is understood
of the usurer, because he of all creditours is the greatest exactour. And
because the usurers above all others will be sure to lend upon security,
purposing to exact not only their own but also an overplus, therefore some
translatours understand the word (which signifies no more but to exact, or to
lend with purpose to exact) of usurious lending. Thus R. David Kimhi,
understands this place of lending in general. Lib. Radic.
Thus Tremellius and Iunius translate, The Greek: (...).
Non dedi mutuum neque mutuo dederunt mihi, or as some understand the place, I
am not in debt to them, nor they to me. Neither ought that to trouble any, that
the Latin translation has the word foenerare, or other Latin authors that
follow it; for both in it and them the word foenerare is often used in the
sense of free lending, as appears by these places, Deuteronomy. 15. 6. and 28. 12.
44. Prou. 19. 17. and 22. 7. As those which come from Gnaba^, and Lauah.
where the Hebrew text and other translations have those words, which signify
free lending: as also Luke 6. 34, likewise Ecclesiast. 29. 1. 2. Out of which
places it is evident, that as the word (...) in Greek authors, so foenerare
and foenerari in Latin translations (which also may be said of divines who
have written in Latin) are more often used in the signification of free
lending, than of lending upon usury. And even in this place where the Prophet
says, Non foeneraui, according to the Latin, Ly^anus expounds it thus, i.
Non commodaui, I have not lent. But you will say, Where Nashah is construed
with the preposition (...), as in this place, it signifies lending upon
usury. No such matter. Indeed some Hebrew writers have imagined, that Nashah
simply signifies to borrow; but with the preposition, to lend; and so expound
and read this place, I have not borrowed, neither have they lent to me; that
is, I neither sought to borrow of them, neither did they lend to me of their
own accord. But the truth is, that Nashah signifies to lend, and where (...)
is added, it is a note (as the English to) of the Dative case, having reference
to the party which borrows, Nos^im Bahem.
as Nehem. 5. 10. I and my brethren (says Nehemiah) lend to them money and
corn: unless we will with my aforesaid English author absurdly affirm, that
Nehemiah and his followers did lend to their needy brethren upon usury. Or if
I would in like sort urge the signification of the word Nosh^h (which is more
often used to signify an usurer, than the verb Nashah to lend upon usury) I
might bring a manifest example out of the Scriptures of a man which feared God
to prove the lawfulness of borrowing upon usury, which the Prophet Elisha
was so far from condemning, that he helped the widow of that party by
miracle to pay her debt, and as the Greek translation has (...), the usury,
2. King. 4. 1. 7.

The place therefore in Jeremy is thus to be read I have not lent (meaning the
civil kind of lending upon security, for so much the word signifies) neither
have they lent to me. And therefore as I have no cause to contend with them,
besides the duty of my calling in striving against their sins, so neither
have I given them any occasion to contend with me, and yet I am a man of
contention and strife to the whole land, (which may be understood both actiuely
in respect of their opinion of him, and passiuely in respect of their behavior
toward him) and every one does curse me.

And as this translation does best express the force of the Hebrew text, so
does it best fit the scope and purpose of the Prophet, which is to show the
untoward disposition and contentious behavior of the people toward him; who
when as he neither co^tended with them about any worldly affairs, nor yet gave
them any occasion to contend with him (he had neither lent nor borrowed, he did
neither meddle nor make in any worldly dealing or traffic with them, from
which contentions usually arise among men) yet they contended with him, and
judged him a contentious man, and for that cause cursed him. But the
signification of usury is not so fit, for the Prophet meaning as I said to set
forth their untoward and contentious behavior toward him, would signify that
he had given them not only no cause, but not so much as any occasion of
contention and hatred: for although he had not dealt by usury with them, nor
any way wronged them, but yet had otherwise intermedled with them by civil
lending and borrowing, or other worldly affairs, they might have had though no
just cause, yet diverse occasions of contending with him: neither was usury so
usual among the Jews, as that he should mention it as the usual and
ordinary cause of contention among them. And thus much I hope may suffice for
answer to that allegation out of Ier. 15. 10.

The other testimony is out of Esaias 24. 2: where the Prophet has these words,
as some translations read, Like lender like borrower, like giver like taker to
usury.

But this allegation, though it did speak of lending and borrowing upon usury
(as I have showed there is no necessity to grant so much, seeing the words
may thus be read, the exactour, as he of whom he does exact) yet it would
prove nothing concerning this controversy: for there the Lord threatens such
a confusion of all estates, and ouerturning of the commonweal, that all men of
dignity and ability being bereaved of that which they had, and so made equal
with them of low degree and poor estate, the people should be as the priest,
the servant as the master, the handmaid as the mistress, the buyer as the
seller, the lender as the borrower, the exactour or usurer, as he of whom he
exacteth.

And thus much concerning the testimonies of Scripture.

1. As first, that lending and borrowing upon usury are relatiues, and
therefore if to lend upon usury be unlawful, it cannot be lawful to borrow
upon usury.

I answer as before, that relatiues are not always of the like nature and
quality: for to offer wrong and to suffer wrong, to oppress and to be
oppressed, are relatiues; and such relatiues are to lend upon usury, and to
borrow upon usury through necessity: for to lend upon usury to him that
borrows for urgent necessity, it is to offer wrong, and to oppress:
therefore he which upon necessity yields to pay usury, does suffer wrong,
and is oppressed.

Thus therefore I may reason from the light of nature, as before I did from the
Scripture.

To suffer wrong is not sin.

The borrower which upon necessity yields to pay usury, does suffer wrong.
Therefore he does not sin therein.

The proposition is an axiom of Aristotle's in his Ethics, where proouing,
Eth. 5. c. 11.
that it is a less evil to suffer injury than to offer injury, he sets
down this principle, (...). To be wronged or to suffer injury, is without
sin and injustice. Eth. 5. c. 5. (...).
And in another place he says, That just dealing is a mean betwixt offering
injury and suffering wrong, the one is to have too much, the other too little.
But yet (says he) justice is a mean not as each other moral virtue is, a
mean betwixt two contrary vices; but as a mean betwixt too much and two
little, that is to say, as an equality: from which whosoever swarueth, runs
into both the extremes: for where too much is given to the one, too little is
given to the other. As for example, the usurer in taking from the borrower more
than his own, leaves to the borrower less than his own.

2. You will say, to be merely oppressed, or only to suffer wrong, we grant
to be no sin: but the borrower upon usury willingly consents to that
usury which is imposed upon him, yea he entreats the usurer, that he will
so lend unto him; and therefore he is guilty of his own harm, and accessarie
to the oppression of the usurer.

I answer, he that borrows upon necessity with such cautions as before I
mentioned, is guilty neither of the one nor the other: For first in respect of
himself, whereas there are two evils propounded unto him, the one, the
inconvenience or mischief, for avoiding whereof he desires to borrow, as
perhaps the forfeiture of an hundred pounds: the other, the loss which he
shall sustain by usury, which perhaps is five in fifty; the one whereof he
must needs incur: therefore this latter being the lesser evil, and having
the respect of a good or eligible thing, in comparison of the greater evil, he
makes choice thereof; not minding or desiring his own loss, but hoping to
redeem a greater loss with a less. And yet he does not willingly consent to
the payment of usury, but his necessity for avoiding a greater evil makes
him seem willing to that whereunto he is simply unwilling, as I have said
before. And as touching the usurer, whereas the borrower perceives him
resolute to run into one of these two sins, either not to lend at all, or
else upon usury, from both which it is not in his power to keep him,
therefore the former (which is, not to lend at all to him that upon urgent
necessity is desirous to borrow) being the greater sin, than the latter,
which is to lend upon usury, his desire is to keep both the lender from the
greater sin, and himself from the greater evil.

Why, but you will say, if the borrower would not entreat the other to lend, he
should not need to fall into eito either of both those sins.

I answer, when a man is in a case of urgent necessity, it is not only
lawful for him, but also he is bound in conscience to use lawful means to
come out of the same. When as therefore he wants presentmeans of his own, it
is lawful for him to borrow, having an honest purpose to repay, yea and to
desire those whom God has enabled, to lend unto him. In desiring the able man
to lend, thou only moouest him to a work of charity and liberality: but if
upon this motion of thine, his covetousness cause him to sin, either by
refusing to lend at all, or by requiring usury; well may that motion (as many
other good and lawful things are) be an occasion of his sin, but there is no
cause thereof but his own covetousness and the hardness of his heart, and
thou art not accessarie to his sin. But if at the first motion thou
intreatest him to lend, with promise of usury, then thou inducest him to
sin, and art accessarie to his offense (as I have showed before) either by
making him an usurer who was none before, (and so art deeper in the sin than
he) or at least by inducing him to the actual committing of usury. Which
being the usual custom of borrowers upon usury (whose manner is to go to
the usurer, or to his broker to take up on interest (as they call it) so much
money as they desire, perhaps an hundred pounds, where no mention being made
but of the principal (for the other is presupposed) bonds are drawn of two
hundred pounds for the payment of a hundred and ten pounds) it cannot be
denied, but that in this respect alone (not to mention the rest) the most
borrowers upon usury are accessarie to the sin of usury. At the first
motion therefore thou may not offer usury, but only desire to borrow: which
if thy need require, thou may lawfully do. But what if the covetousness of
the party who is able and therefore ought to lend, and the hardness of his
heart be such, that upon thy motion of borrowing he will either require usury,
or refuse to lend altogether? in the former case, if thy necessity be such,
that thou must needs borrow, and know not where to borrow freely elsewhere,
thou may lawfully yield to the usury imposed: for in yielding, thou keep
both him from the greater sin, (which is not to lend at all) and thy self
from a greater mischief.

Why but you will say, ought I not to admonish him at the least, and to
dissuade him from the practice of usury, seeing my yielding to pay, and my
silence in not reproouing usury, may argue that I approve it, and therefore
am guilty thereof, as accessarie thereto?

I answer, that difference is to be made of the party with whom you deal:
for if the party be tractable and of any hope, that Christian course of
charitable admonition and brotherly reproof is to be taken with him; but if he
be a desperate sinner (such as common usurers commonly are) whom if you admonish
or reprove, you shall not profit him but hurt your self, before such an hog
the precious pearl of Christian admonition and brotherly reproof is not to be
cast. Mat^h. 7. 6. Prou. 9. 7, 8.


But me thinks a man of a tender conscience (you will say) should hardly seek
to such a man. So I say also: for if his necessity do not drive him, he
should not seek to such an one neither hardly nor at all. But seeing God has
enabled him to lend, and the magistrate does tollerat him to this end, that he
may supply the wants of men which are in necessity: why may not I, upon whom
the Lord has laid a necessity of borrowing, seek to borrow of him who ought
to lend to me? so long as I induce him not to sin, nor persuade him to any
thing which is not good.

But you will say, if the party be a common usurer, you know beforehand, that
either he will lend upon usury, or not at all: and therefore seeing upon your
motion he will take occasion to sin, you ought rather to forbear it, than
that by your motion you should give him occasion of sinning, which for no
temporal commodity you ought to do.

I answer, that it is unknown to me, how the Lord (who would have the
wealthy men tried by the signification of their want who are in need) will
move his heart: and therefore so long as I move him only to that good which
he ought to do, if he will thereby take occasion to offend, See Thom. Aq. sum.
2. 2. q. 78. 4. ad 2.
it is an offense taken and not given. And for as much as this passive offense
is not of ignorance or infirmity, but of a resolved malice and of a settled
resolution in evil, such as was the scandale of the Pharisees, Mat. 15. 14. it
is to be neglected, neither am I being in a case of urgent necessity to
forbear asking to borrow for fear of this passive scandale.

But the latter point is more difficult, viz. whether after denial made by him
who was entreated to lend, a man in case of urgent and extreme necessity may
offer that condition to him, which if he shall accept, he shall offend by
usury. As for example, if upon his denial he should reply, Refuse not I pray
you to lend unto me, for my necessity is such, as that rather than I would not
borrow, I would yield to very hard conditions; require what allowance you
think good, or impose what condition you please, if it be not too
unreasonable, I will yield to it. Such an offer I have showed before by like
instances, not to be unlawful: to which I will add some others. Suppose a man
in extremity of hunger to come to another who has victuals, entreating him to
let him have some food for his ready money: the other, though he perceives
his need, refuses: whereupon he replieth, Refuse not I pray you to sell me
food, for such is my necessity, that rather than I would not buy victuals at
this time, I would yield to what price you shall require, demand what you
will, though it be the double price, etc. Or suppose the same man in the like
want of necessaries either for himself or such as belong unto him, but wanting
ready money, comes to one who has such commodities to sell, who refusing to
sell without ready money, the other desires him to let him have them, though
he pay the dearer for them. The party thus selling the dearer, commits
usury. And suppose again, that the party who is entreated to lend,
pretends as usurers many times do, that they have no money to pleasure the
borrower with: whereupon the borrower entreats him to help him with some
commodity whereof he may make money: the lender (intending perhaps to buy the
same himself under hand) lets him have a commodity, which he says is worth
an hundred pounds, and causes the borrower to enter into a bond for the
payment of so much: when as notwithstanding, the borrower when he sells the
commodity, cannot perhaps procure fourscore pounds for it. These examples
with those before mentioned, may prove, that a man in present distress may
make such an offer, which being extorted from him by his own necessity, and
by the hardness of their hearts with whom he has to deal, is, by his own
necessity compelling him, to make choice of the less evil, and by the
hardness of their hearts, whom he dissuadeth from the greater sin, to be
excused, which otherwise were not warrantable.

3. But it may be objected again: He without whom the usurer cannot actually
accomplish his sin, is partner of his sin. Without the borrower upon
usury, the usurer cannot actually commit the sin of usury, therefore the
borrower is partner of the usurers sin.

The proposition being generally understood (as it must, or else the whole
argumentation is a paralogisme) is untrue: for although it be true in those
sins which are committed betwixt a couple by the voluntary and mutual
consent of both parties, yet where the one party yields not voluntary
consent, but is a patient, and the object rather of the others wrong than an
agent with him, it is utterly false. The sin of rape can no more be committed
without the innocent party that is ravished, than the sin of whoredom
without the company of an harlot; and yet no man will say, that she which is
ravished is partner of his sin that commits the rape. The robber by the
high way cannot commit robbery, unless the way faring man do travel that
way: so likewise one man cannot oppress, unless there be another to be
oppressed, nor impose usury, unless there be another on whom it is to be
imposed: and yet he that is oppressed is not partner of the oppressors sin,
nor the borrower who upon necessity borrows upon usury, of the usurers
sin. Indeed he that willingly and without necessity makes that contract of
usury, he is not oppressed; neither may it be denied but that he is partner of
the usurers sin. But he that upon necessity and against his will yields to
the payment of usury, he is oppressed; neither can it truly be said, that he
is partner of the usurers sin: for whosoever is oppressed, is wrongfully
oppressed and against his will: and whosoever is wrongfully oppressed and
against his will, he is no partner of the oppressors sin. When as therefore
it is said, If there were no borrowers upon usury, there would be no usurers:
to prove that all borrowers are partakers in the sin of usury, it might as
well be said, That if there were no travelers by the high way, there would be
no robbers by the high way: if there were none to suffer wrong, there would be
none to offer wrong; if there were none to be oppressed, there would be no
oppressors; to prove that the robbed, the wronged, the oppressed are guilty
of the robbery, wrong, and oppression that is done unto them. For I have
proved before, that the borrower upon necessity yielding to usury, is
wronged and oppressed.

4. Again, if it be objected, That we may not do ill that good may come
thereof: neither may we use unlawful means though to good ends, neither ought
any worldly necessity force us to sin; all this I freely confess, and
withal profess, that if all borrowing upon usury were an evil thing,
(meaning the evil of sin) if to borrow upon usury upon necessity, were to
use an unlawful means; or if it were to sin, that this evil were not to be
done, though much good might come thereof, this unlawful means were not to
be used, though our end and intent be never so good, and that no necessity
should compel us to commit this sin. But this is the matter in question,
which must be proved, and not taken for granted. For the contrary part I
have proved, That to borrow in time of need is a lawful means, and to yield
to usury upon necessity, with such cautions as before have bin specified, is
not to do an evil, namely of sin, that good may come thereof, but to suffer a
less evil, namely of loss, for the avoiding of a greater.

Hitherto we have spoken of the negative, that is to say, of that which the
sound Christian and citisen of heaven does not, viz. That he does not put forth
his money unto usury. Now we are briefly to consider the affirmative, which
every true Christian in respect of his goods is bound to do: For whereas the
usurer offends two ways, both in respect of the use, that he exposes his
money to usury; and in respect of his gettings, that he increases his wealth
by usury: we are to show that two contrary duties are required of every
faithful man, both in regard of the (...), that is, the getting, that he get
his goods lawfully; and also in respect of the (...), that is, the use, that
he freely communicate them to the good of others. Of just getting, because it
is equally opposite to the vice mentioned in the next note, I will entreat after
I have spoken thereof, as being the common affirmative to both these negatiues.

The communication of our goods, whether by free giving or free lending, to the
good of others, as our ability shall afford, and their necessity require, is
that spiritual usury which the Lord (who so severely condemns all worldly
usury) does highly commend unto us in diverse places of the Scripture,
affirming, That those who are bountiful toward the poor and needy, whether
by free lending or free giving, do lend as it were upon usury to the Lord,
Prou 19. 17.
who will repay and recompense them with advantage. Whereupon Augustine, Deus
noster qui te prohibetesse foener atorem, In Psalm. 36. Con^. 3.
iubet te esse foeneratorem, and dicitur tibi, foener^ Deo: Our God (says he)
who forbids thee to be an usurer, commands thee to be an usurer, and to
thee it is said, Lend, as it were upon usury to the Lord: To which purpose we
are elsewhere exhorted, to distribute or communicate unto the necessities of
the saints. And again, Romans 12. 13.
To do good and to destribut forget not, Heb. 13. 16.
for with such sacrifices God is pleased.

But there are three obstacles and impediments of free lending and free giving,
by the removing whereof we may be effectually persuaded to put in practice this
spiritual usury. The first is an erroneous conceit of worldly men, who
imagine that the goods which they possess are their own, to dispose of as
themselves think good; and therefore that they are not bound to distribut or
communicate them to others, etc.

But the Scriptures do teach us that we are not absolut Lords of that which we
enjoy, Luke 16. 1^.
but the stewards of the Lord, who has committed these goods as talents to be
employed to his glory in the good of our brethren, and that of our stewardship
we are one day to render a straight account: neither may we think that our
account will be accepted, if we shall refuse to employ the good gifts of God to
such uses as he has appointed. If a noble man should commit a certain sum
of money to his steward, appointing him to destribut the same to the relief of
the poor; would not every man esteem that steward to be worse than a thief,
if he should convert that money to his own uses? or if the Princes Almoner
should not communicate unto the poor the money committed to his trust, but
withhold it from them, or divert it to other uses, would not every man condemn
him in like sort? But we are the Lords stewards, and so many as are of ability
are the Lords Almoners; and therefore if when God has commanded us to
communicate or destribut some part of our goods to the poor and needy, are not
we as bad or rather worse than thieves, if we being of ability shall refuse to
communicate to the necessities of our brethren? Let us then consider whether the
Lord has not required this duty at our hands.

The precepts of free lone I have mentioned before: and for alms and free
giving the Scripture is plentiful, charging not only the rich to be apt to
communicate and so to be rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6. 17. 18
but every one that is not poor, to give alms according to their ability:
Luke. 11. 41.
and we must not only give if we be able, but also we must do our endeavor
that we may be able, and if other means fail, we ought to lobour and work
with our hands that which is good (that is, Ephesians. 4. ^8.
to take pains in some lawful calling) that we may have to give to him that
needs. Yea if the necessity of our brethren so require, we are to make sale
of our goods and possessions for their (...). 12. 33.
relief, according to the commandment of our Savior Christ, Act. 4. 34.
and the practice of the primitive Church. And these duties of free lending and
free giving are to be performed, readily, without delay, Pro. 3. 27, 28,
constantly, without weariness, 2. Cor. 8. 11, cheerfully, without grudging:
for the Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2. Corinthians. 9. 7. And that we should not
think these duties to be arbitrarie, or the neglect of them not to draw upon
us either guilt or punishment; therefore the Lord besides his manifold precepts
straightly enjoining these duties, has added both severe censures, and
dreadful comminations against the neglect thereof, De. 1^. 9, 10, 11.
it is censured as an evident sign of no love of God, 1. John. 3. 17.
1. John. 3. 17. as a sin, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. yea as a sin of Sodom, Ezech. 16.
49.

The comminations are either general, Prou. 28. 27.
as Prou. 28. 27, He that hides his eyes (from the poor) shall abound with
curses; or special, in this life, that he shall not obtain any thing at the
hands of God: For he that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, Prou.
21. 13.
he shall also cry and not be heard: in the life to come, that he shall be
cast into everlasting fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels: For
such shall be the sentence of Christ our judge at the last day, Depart from me
you cursed, Mat. 25. 41, 42.
into everlasting fire, for I was an hungered (viz. in my poor members) and you
gave me no meat, I thirsted and you gave me no drink, Luke 16. 2.
etc. Seeing therefore our goods are not our own but the Lords, whose stewards
we are, it cannot be denied but that we are to employ them as our Lord and
master appoints: and seeing our Lord and master appoints us, and that
upon pain of damnation, to communicate them to the necessities of our brethren,
as their need shall require, and our ability afford; it behooves us as we
tender our own salvation, so also to tender the distressed estate of our poor
brethren.

The second impediment is covetousness, joined with distrust: for when as men
are covetous they will not lay forth any thing, unless it be for their
advantage: and being distrustful they imagine that what is given, is lost. But
hereunto I will oppose, as an antidote, the gracious promises of God made to
those who are gracious to the poor, whether by free giving or free lending.
Thou say thou will not give because thou know not what want thy self may
have: but what says the holy Ghost, Prou. 28. 27.
To him that gives unto the poor shall be no want: but to him that hides his
eyes, shall be plenty of cu^ses. Thou will not lend to the needy, because
thou doubtest that what is lent to them will never be repaid: But what says
the spirit of God? He that has mercy on the poor, Prou. 19. 17.
lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has
given. To which you may add, Deuteronomy. 15. 10. and 23. 20. Luke 6. 35. Seeing
therefore the Lord has made such gracious promises to those that are merciful
toward the poor and needy: were it not extreme infidelity to imagine, that
by our liberality toward the poor we should become loosers; seeing he has
promised to repay what is lent, and to reward what is given? Nay, so far
shall thou be from loss or hinderance by the charitable communicating of thy
goods, as that this is the surest way not only of saving them that they be not
lost, but also of laying them forth to increase: For whereas we are stripped of
all other our goods by death, which turns us as naked out of this world as we
came into it; these which we have charitably given, do remain unto us after
death. And therefore as they which travel into foreign countries, do not
carry their money with them, partly for fear of robbing by the way, and partly
because it would not be current in the country whereunto they travel, but
deliver it to the bankers upon a bill of exchange, whereby they may be assured
to receive their money: so we, being to depart out of this life, for as much as
we cannot take our money with us, neither is it current in heaven, ought to
commit it to the poor and needy, as it were the Lords bankers, upon his
promise in his word, as it were his bill of exchange, whereby he assures us
of full recompense in the life to come: Wherefore that which we commit to the
poor according to the rules of charity, Illud non amittimus, sed promittimus,
That we do not loose, but as it were send before us. And that is it which our
Savior says, Luke 16. 9.
Make you friends of this Mammon of iniquity, etc. For it is most certain
that we shall be put out of the stewardship by death, neither shall the
administration of these temporal goods any longer appertain unto us. What
course therefore may we take, that when we are put out of our stewardship, we
may have some benefit and comfort by the employment of our goods in the time of
our stewardship? we are by the charitable exposing of our goods, to make us
friends of this unrighteous Mammon, that when we shall be put out of this
stewardship, we may be received into everlasting tabernacles.

Again, the charitable exposing of goods, in the Scriptures is compared to
sowing of seed in the ground, 2. Cor. 9. 6, 2. Cor. 9. 6.
Therefore as the husbandman casts his seed into the ground in hope of good
increase in time of harvest, although his seed do rot in the mean time, and
die in the earth; so we should cast our seed upon the poor, as it were the
Lords plowed land, in certain assurance of a plentiful increase in the great
harvest, at which time it shall be said, Mat. 25. 34, 35.
Come you blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom which is prepared for you:
for when I was hungry, you gave me meat, when I was thirsty, you gave me
drink; etc. That therefore which hinders men from giving alms (that is a
covetous desire of bettering our estate) would chiefly stir us up thereto, if
we yielded any credit to the promises of God. Would thou then thrive by
usury? lend not upon worldly usury to men, who will pay thee but ten in the
hundred, but lend upon spiritual usury unto the Lord, who has promised to
repay an hundred fold.

The third and last impediment, is hardness of heart, shutting up the bowels
of compassion in the richer sort, and taking from them all feeling and regard
of other men's necessities. For the remoouing whereof, let the richer sort
consider, first, that the poorest Christian that lives, is his own flesh,
Esaias. 58. 7. Secondly, that he is his brother in Christ, redeemed by the same
most precious blood of Christ. Yea thirdly, that he is a fellow member of the
same body, whereof Christ is the head: and therefore in the fourth place that
Christ esteems that given to him, Mat. 25. 40. 4^.
which is given to his poor members; and that to be denied to himself, which
is denied to one of them. Consider then with me, if any man ought to deny unto
Christ an alms, who has not denied himself to us: or if any should, whether
he were not to be esteemed a most wicked and hard hearted man. If you shall
say, far be it from us that we should deny any thing to Christ our Savior,
and yet are hard hearted toward the poor; I would advise you to call to mind
the excuse which the wicked shall make at the day of judgment, with the answer
of Christ the judge: When (say they) did we see thee hungry, Mat. 25. 44, 45.
or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not
minister unto thee? To whom our Savior answers, Verily I say unto you, in as
much as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me, Mat.
25. 44, 45, where also we may observe that the sentence of salvation and
condemnation shall be pronounced at the last day, according either to the
performance or neglect of this duty. Wherefore as we tender the salvation of
our souls, so let us think our selves bound not only to abstain from all
worldly usury, which I proved to be a damnable sin; but also to practice
this spiritual usury, wherein we having lent unto the Lord, shall be sure to
receive a plentiful reward.

THere remains the tenth and last note of the sound Christian and citisen of
heaven, in these words, Nor takes reward against the innocent. Now rewards are
taken either by way of briberie to p^ruert judgment, or by way of treachery to
betray innocent blood. To pervert judgment, bribes are taken: first, by judges
and those that belong to them, 1. Sam. 8. 3.
after the example of the sons of Samuel, who when they were appointed
judges did not walk in the ways of their father (for he was free from taking
rewards, 1. Sam. 12. 3.) but turned aside after lucre, and taking rewards,
perverted judgment. Secondly, by counselors and aduocats, Act. 24.
after the example of Tertullus, who (so he might have his fee) cared not what
false calumniations he uttered against the Apostle Paul. Thirdly, by witnesses
who are hired to give false witness against the innocent, according to the
example of those who were suborned against Na^oth, 1. King. 21.
and against our Savior Christ, Mat. 26, 59, 60. and 28. 12* 15.
both before his death and after his resurrection. Of treachery also we have
examples in the Scriptures, as of Dalila, Iud. 16. 5, 18.
who for reward betrayed Sampson into the hands of the Philistines; Mat. 26.
15. and 27. 4.
and of Judas the traitor, who for thirty pieces of money betrayed our Savior
Christ.

But that I may speak to the intendment of the holy Ghost in this place, I am
to show, that this is a note of Gods children, to be free from rewards: For the
Lord in other places also of the Scripture, propounds abstinence from rewards
as a note of the godly; and contrariwise the taking of rewards, as a certain
badge of the wicked. For as touching the former, when question was made who
should dwell with a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
that is, Heb. 12. 19.
God: the Prophet Esaias makes answer Chapter. 33, Esaias. 33. 15.
He that refuses gain of oppression, and shakes his hands from taking of
gifts, etc. he shall dwell on high. The same is testified, Prou. 15. 27.
Prou. 15. 27. He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own house: but he
that hates gifts, shall live. On the other side, taking of bribes is
acknowledged in the Scripture to be an undoubted token of the wicked, Prou. 17.
23.
Prou. 17. 23. ( The wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom (to wit, of the
giver) to wrest the ways of judgment.) Of accursed persons, Deuteronomy. 27. 25.
Deuteronomy. 27. 25. (Cursed be he that takes a reward to put to death innocent
blood. And all the people shall say Amen.) Of reprobates and castawayes, Job.
15. 34.
Job. 15. 34. ( Fire shall devour the houses of bribes, that is, of them that
take bribes.) And Psalm. 26. 9, 10, Psalm. 26. 9. 10.
where the Prophet praying that he might not be destroyed in the destruction of
the wicked and reprobat, he describes them by this note, Gather not my soul
(says he) with the sinners, nor my life with the bloody men: in whose hands
is wickedness, and their right hand is full of bribes.

The use which we are to make of this doctrine is thus much, That seeing
abstinence from rewards is made by the holy Ghost a note of the righteous which
shall be saved; and contrariwise, taking of rewards an undoubted mark of the
wicked, who if they continue in this sin shall be condemned: therefore it
behooves us to shake our hands from taking of rewards, if we would have any
hope or assurance that we shall dwell in the mountain of Gods holiness: For
they that shall dwell in the mountain of God, are such (says the holy Ghost)
as do not take rewards against the innocent. Wherefore if thou do take
rewards, and that against the innocent (for the innocent party does not use to
give bribes, therefore bribes are commonly taken against the innocent) how
can thou hope that thou shall ever inherit the kingdom of God? But these
(...), these takers of rewards, do not only deprive themselves of all true
hope of salvation, but also incur most certainly the just vengeance of God,
which they pull not only upon themselves and their houses, as I showed before
out of Deuteronomy. 27. 25, Prou. 15. 27, Job. 15, 34, but also upon their country,
which should be more dear unto them than themselves; (...) therefore said to
destroy it, Prou. 29, 4: (...). 29 4.
For among the (...) abominations, for which the Lord does threat^^ ^struction
against Jerusalem, this is none of the least, ^zech. 22. 12, In thee have they
taken gifts to shed blood, Ezech 22. 1^.
thou have taken usury and increase, etc. But that which is spoken to all,
seems to be spoken to none. I will therefore convert my speech to all the
sorts of them that take gifts severally, as to corrupt judges, aduocats, and
witnesses. For as touching traitors, whom every one knows to be worse than
common cutthroats and murderers (because to the murder of the innocent,
whereof they are guilty, they add persidious treachery) I shall not need to
speak.

First therefore and principally I am to speak to judges, officers, and
magistrates: for now adays briberie has so corrupted public places and
functions, that every petite office, whereof the stipends and lawful fees are
but small, is notwithstanding by such corrupt ways and indirect means as are
found out, sufficient to gather great wealth.

But let such men besides the general arguments, before used, consider with me
how dangerous this kind of filthy gain is, how wicked, and how pernicious.
The danger is showed, Deuteronomy. 16. 19, Wrest not thou the law (says the Lord to
judges and officers) nor respect any person, Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
neither take reward: Exodus 23. 8.
for the reward blinds the eyes (not of the unwise only, but) of the wise,
and peruerteth the words (not of the wicked only, but also) of the just. But
the grieuousnesse of this offense will more clearly appear, if besides the
danger to themselves, we shall consider how greatly they offend both against
God and their neighbor: against God; Exodus 22. 28.
for judges and magistrates are by the holy ghost in the Scriptures called Gods,
Psalm. 82. 6.
because they are the Lords substitutes, sustaining his person: and the
judgment which they execute, is not the judgment of man but of God. And that
is the argument which I^hosophat used, when he exhorted the judges, whom he had
ordained, to the upright performance of their duty; 2. Chron. 19. 6.
Take heed what you do (says he) for you execute not the judgments of man,
but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and judgment. Wherefore
now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is
none iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving
of reward. Whosoever therefore peruerteth judgment, as much as in him lies,
he makes God (whose judgment it is) untrue and unjust.

Secondly they offend against that justice which ought to be exercised toward
our neighbor: first, because they do most grossly abuse the commonwealth, of
whom they receive both authority and maintenance, that they may do much
mischief thereunto. Secondly, because they are as the Prophet Esaias speaks,
Esaias. 1. 23.
companions of thieves. Thy princes (says he) are companions of thieves: every
one loves gifts and follows after rewards. Neither do they only help the
wicked to spoil his neighbor, but themselves also do rob and spoil them,
and that also under the color and show of judgment and justice. So that
whereas the Lord has ordained the judgment seat, to be a rock of defense and
refuge for the innocent and guiltless, they have made it an hill of robbers.
Thirdly, because they have not only set judgment and justice to sale (which
is an abominable practice) but also as the Prophet Amos speaks, Amos. 2. 6.
They sell the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes. Such
judges Demosthenes compared to a pair of scoles, which always incline on that
side whence they have received any thing. And surely, a small weight many times
will make them to incline to the wicked, who seeks to corrupt them, and to
decline from right, Prou. 28. 21.
Prou. 28. 21, To have respect of persons it is not good: for that man will
transgress for a piece of bread. It were therefore to be wished, that justice
and judges now adays were such, as they were wont to be painted: for justice
was blindfolded, and judges were pictured without hands: whereby was signified,
that judges should not receive rewards, nor respect persons, which is commonly
a consequent of rewards.

Upon the greatness of this offense follows the third thing, namely that is
is pernicious to them that use it: for therefore does the holy ghost denounce a
fearful woe against such persons, Esaias 5. 23.
Esaias 5. 23. Woe be to them which iusti^ie the wicked for a reward, and take
away the righteousness of the righteous from him, therefore, as the flame of
fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of the flame, so
their root shall be as rottenness, etc. But it is only pernicious to
themselves, but also to the country wherein they live, as I have in general
showed, Ezekiel. 22. 12.
Ezekiel. 22. 12. and thereunto we may add the testimony of the Prophet Micah,
Mic. 3. 11, 12.
chap. 3. 11, 12. for when as he had said, that the heads or princes of
Jerusalem did judge for rewards, and the priests did teach for hire, he
infers; Therefore shall Sion for your sake be ploughed as a field, and
Jerusalem shall be an ^eape, and the mountain of the house as the high places
of the forest.

I come to corrupt lawyers and aduocats; who so often take reward against the
innocent, as they do take upon them the defense of such causes, as they in
their own conscience are persuaded to be evil and unjust. Which being so
common a fault among lawyers, as that very few which plead causes either in
civil or ecclesiastical courts do seem to make any conscience thereof, to
whom all is fish that comes to their nets; therefore all lawyers are to be
exhorted to apply this note unto themselves. For if those which shall be saved,
are such as do not take a reward against the innocent, as the holy ghost here
witnesses; how then can they be saved, whose usual practice is to take
rewards against the innocent? And that they may the more effectually be
dissuaded from this sin, let them a little consider with me, how fearfully
they sin against God, their neighbor, and themselves. Against God, whiles
they seek to overthrow the truth, and to pervert the Judgment, which is the
Lords. Secondly, against their neighbor. And in this regard, every corrupt
lawyer is, as Solomon says of every false witness, an hammer, Prou. 25. 1^.
a sword, and a sharp ^rrow, an hammer or mallet to the judge, a sword to his
client, and an arrow to his adursarie. For whiles our lawyers do their
endeavors, as the Greek sophisters were wont (...), that is, to make the worse
cause the better, they do as it were knock the judge on the head, amasing him
so and dazeling his eyes, that he may not see and pronounce the truth. To their
client they are as two edged swords, wounding him two ways, to wit, in body
and soul. As touching his body and outward estate, they notably impouerish
him to enrich themselves, and pluck off his feathers to feather their own
nest: for as the fowlers ^age is full of birds, so the houses of these
faulconers are full of riches gotten by deceit, Ier. 5. 26. 27.
as Jeremy speaks. The soul also of their client they wou^d, when they
animate him to go on in offering wrong to his neighbor, and cause him to
sin against his own soul.

To the adversary, being indeed the innocent party, every Tertullus is a
sharp arrow, wounding him either in body, goods, or good name; against all or
any whereof they care not what untruths and slanderous calumniations they
utter, so their cause may thereby be aduantaged.

Lastly, they sin against themselves and their own souls, first, because
they aid the wicked unto evil which is forbidden, Exodus 23. 1. and is
reproved, 2. Chron. 19. 2, as also Psalm. 50. 18. When thou saw a thief,
thou consentedst unto him, and is condemned, Romans 1. 31. Secondly, because they
have sold their tongues to speak likes: for an evil cause cannot be
maintained but by manifold untruths. Now riches or treasures gotten by a
deceitful or lying tongue, is vanity tossed too and fro of them that seek
death, Prou. 21. 6. Prou. 21 6.
And therefore it is greatly to be feared, least these men as they have set
their tongues, so also their ^oules to sale: for that is truly affirmed of all
covetous persons. Eccles. 10. 9.

The like is to be said of every false witness, who for reward is suborned to
testify untruths, That he sins against God, whose judgment he seeks to
pervert; against the judge, whom he endeavors to auert from justice and
truth; against the parties who suborneth him, to whom he consents unto evil;
against the innocent party, whom by his false testimony he hurts, and
sometimes kills him with a word; against his own soul; for seeing a false
witness is an abbomination unto the Lord, Prou. 6. 18.
Prou. 6. 18, therefore he shall not escape, but surely perish, Prou. 19. 5. 9.
Prou. 19. 5. 9. And yet this is not all that may be said in detestation of
false witness bearing: For seeing witnesses in places of judgment do not
deliver their testimonies but upon an oath; therefore every false witness is
guilty not only of false witness bearing, but also of perjurie: whereby he
polluteth the holy name of God* wrongeth the innocent, abuses the judge, and
all that are present, and that under the religion of an oath; he cites the
Lord himself, and that in the place of judgment to testify an untruth, and
(which is most fearful) he tempts the Lord, and as it were dares him in the
audience of allthat are present to execute his fierce wrath and indignation
upon him. For in oaths we call upon God not only to be our witness, that we
swear truly, but also to be a revenger of us, if we swear falsely: therefore
he which swears that which he knows to be untrue, he provoke the Lord,
and as it were dares him to take vengeance upon him.

Thus then we see by these two last notes, what the sound Christian and citizen
of heaven does not, to wit, that neither privately in contracts, nor publickely
in place of judgment, he gets his goods unlawfully: as for example, by
usury, or briberie. Now we are briefly to consider the contrary affirmative:
namely, that every sound Christian makes conscience of his gettings, having a
true purpose and upright endeavor to obtain and procure the commodities of
this life only by good and lawful means, And that we may all of us in like
sort be persuaded to make conscience of this duty, let us have in our minds
these considerations: first, that riches are fitly compared to thorns, which,
if we be not careful in the gathering of them, will prick and wound, not the
hand but the conscience; yea, and if we be ouer-greedie of them, will pierce us
through with many sorrows: 1. Tim. 6. 10.
and secondly, that so often as they (being offered to our desire) cannot be
compassed by good and lawful means, they are the baits of the Devil. And
therefore we are not to lay hold upon every commodity which is propounded
unto us, but we are to look unto the lawfulnes of the means: for if we
attain them by unlawful means, we do with them swallow the hook of the
Devil. And this is a certain truth, that those which will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.
9.
that is, which have set down with themselves that they will attain to
wealth, whether the Lord do give them lawful means or not; they fall into
temptation and snares of the Devil, for he cannot lay any bait of commodity
to entrap them, which they will not be ready to obtain by sin, which is the
very hook of the Devil.

Thirdly, we are to acknowledge that it is the blessing of God which makes
rich, Prou. 10. 22, and that the Lord does not bless ill gotten goods, see
Prou. 13. 11. and I^rem. chapter 17. 11.

Fourthly, that better is a little with righteousness, than great reuenews
without equity, Prou. 16. 8. Psalm. 37. 16, and that it is better to be in
mean estate with a good conscience, (...). Hesiod.
than with the shipwreck of a good conscience to be rich.

Fifthly,, that goods justly gotten, are the good gifts of God, and pledges of
his love toward thee, if also thou have grace to use them well: but
contrariwise, that ill gotten goods, obtained by sin in the service of the
devil, they are the wages which the prince of this world gives to his
servants, and are as Nazianzene says, the earnest penny of perdition: or that
I may speak more effectually, they are the price of men's souls, for which
covetous men, Ec^les. 10. 9.
who have set their souls to sale, do sell them to the devil.

Lastly, let us esteem that only to be gained, which is gotten lawfully. And
when any thing which we desire cannot be gotten lawfully, let us remember, that
as the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 6. 6.
Great ga^e is godliness with contentedness: Whereas contrariwise, in that
which is unjustly gotten three is exceeding great loss. And therefore the
heathen man did well advise us, to choose loss rather than dishonest gain: for
the one (says he) will grieve thee but once, (...). Chilo.
and the other for ever. For indeed, what is gained in that which is gotten by
sin? an earthly commodity, which to a worldly man is not only vain and
unprofitable, but also hurtful. But what is lo^t? thy soul: For the wages of
sin as death, and the soul that s^^neth shall die. Now if the soul should
be weighed in the balance of Critol^us against all the commodities of the
world, it would ouerweigh them all. Wherefore let that divine Oracle of our
Savior Christ always sound in our ears, What will it profit a man, if he
shall gain the whole world, and loose his own soul. Mar. 8. 36. should we
not sin to gain the whole world, and shall we be ready to sin for every
trifle in the world? Would not the whole world be a sufficient ransom to
redeem our souls, and shall we ^ell our souls to the devil for every
nothing in this world? Was Esau profane and foolish, who in his hunger sold
his birthright for a mess of pottage, and are not we much more profane and
foolish, if for matters of like value but less necessity, we shall make away
an everlasting inheritance, yea, an eternal kingdom in heaven?

And thus much may suffice to have spoken concerning the description of the
sound Christian and citizen of heaven. Now follows the privilege of every
sound Christian, who is qualified according to that description, viz. That he
shall never be removed: for so says the holy ghost, He that does these
things, shall never be removed. Where we are to consider two things: first,
who it is to whom this privilege belongs; and secondly, what this privilege
is: the party to whom it belongs, is, He that does these things. He does not
say, he that knows these things, nor he that can discourse of these matters,
but he that does these things. For as we judge of the health and soundness of
the heart, not by the words of the mouth, or color of the countenance, but by
the pulse of the arm: so of the soundness and uprightness of the heart,
judgment is to be made not so much by the words or countenance, as by the
fruits of the hands. It is a good thing to say well, but we are no sound
Christians or citizens of heaven, unless also we do well. Mat. 7. 2^.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. It is a good
thing to read and hear, and by reading and hearing to know the will of God,
but we shall never attain to happiness, unless we be also careful to do
it. Apoc. 1. 3.
Blessed it ^e which reads (says John the Divine) and blessed are they which
^e are the words of this prophecy (but he stays not there) and observe
(says he) the things which are written therein. It is a good thing to have the
word of God preached and a miserable thing to be without it, as Solomon says,
Prou. 29. 18.
Prou. 29. 18. but he that so hears it as that he keeps it, o happy is he.
They are blessed (says our Savior Christ) that ^eare the word of God and
keep it. Luke 11. 28.
And again, If you know these things, John 13. 17.
happy are you if you do them. We are therefore from hence to be exhorted
unto well doing: For seeing a sound Christian and citizen of heaven is to be
discerned by doing these things, 2. Pet. 1. 10.
as the holy ghost here teaches, it behooves us by doing them to make our
calling and election sure. For if we do these things, we shall never fall, as
Peter also by the same spirit affirms.

The privilege it self is, that he shall never be removed, or as some read,
that he shall not fall for ever: not for ever, that is, never, as John 13. 8.
Thou shall not wash myfeet for ever. And the same privilege in the same words
is repeated, Psalm. 112. 6. The good man shall never be removed: and Prou. 10.
30. The righteous shall never be removed. Psalm. 112. 6.
And this privilege does so truly and properly belong to every sound
Christian, Prou. 10. 30.
as that to the holy ghost in this place it is one and the same thing to be a
sound Christian, and to be such an one as shall never be removed. For when
D^uid had demanded, Who shall soiourne in tby Tabernacle, and who shall rest in
thy holy hill? that is, Lord, by what tokens may a sound Christian and heir of
the kingdom of heaven be discerned? The Lord makes answer, He that walks
uprightly and works righteousness, and speaks the truth which is in his
heart, etc. he is a sound Christian, and heir of the kingdom of heaven. But
he uses not those words, but in stead of them he uses these to the same
sense, He shall never be removed. Whereupon it plainly follows, that every
upright and sound Christian is such an one as shall never be removed.

These words therefore afford this most comfortable doctrine, That the
perseverance, and consequently the salvation of the upright, of the righteous,
of the faithful and sound Christian, is certain. And this truth is elsewhere
in the Scriptures most plainly and plentifully taught, as shall be showed, when
my treatise of Perseverance, which I have already finished, shall be thought
fit to be published. In the mean time, let us from this doctrine gather this
use, That seeing it is the privilege of the upright and sound Christian never
to be removed, we ought therefore by walking uprightly, by exercising
righteousness, by speaking the truth from our hearts, etc. labor to make our
calling and election sure; for if we do these things, we shall never fall.

FINIS.
The Faults escaped are thus to be corrected.
Page 8 lin. 20. care. p. 9. l. a fine 10. jagur. in Mar. l. a f. 5. are. p.
13. l. 1. region l. 15. concauam. l. a f* 10. now l. a f. 5. vanity and* p.
15. l. 18. and 19. the short and light. p. 16. Marg. for Heb 6 11. ^. Heb. 4.
11. p. 19. l. 12. Charity. p. 23. l. 10. four are, p. 24. l. 8. I said the*
p. 25. l. 2. make. l. 11. with perfect righteousness. p. 27. Mar. l. 8. Be
lo-leb valeb. p. 40. l. 2. and 3. Solomon p. 43. l. 22. for righteousness r.
vprightnes. p. 59. l. a f. 6. and p. 79. l. 16. and 27. ingenuous. p. 67. l.
15. fruits. p. 69. l. 22. for us. Profitable. p. 70. l. a f^ vi^ regni. p. 71.
l. a f. 8. care of well. p. 72. l. 10. works which in l. vlt. mere civil p.
73. l. 13. they are fained l. 11. bribe l. 23. but splendida. l. a. f. 8. By
this l. a. f. 6. of mere p. 74. l. 18. child of God p. 75. l. a. f. 10 in his
heart p. 76. l. vlt. But yet p. 79. l* 15. seventhly, herunto. p. 80. l. 3.
eighthly, if p. 90. l. a* f. 13. pereundo quaerat p. 91. l. 17. and therefore a
vice. p. 93. l. 14. celebrate l. 18. serpents p* 101. l. 21. we are freely. p.
102. l. 7. Scripture. l. 14. is the pr. p. 103. l. 12. premonished p. 117. l.
9. and 10. to revenge, answered. p. 121. l. 18 are not only mal. l. 24.
peculier p. 125, l. 20. howsoever all. p. 129. l. a. f. 5. indices p. 137. l.
12. (...)* ^. 15. we have p. 145, l. 18. implied in. p. 146. Ma. l. a. f. 8.
peierare. p. 147. l. 9. and 10. void, and of. p. 154. l. 5 by this. p. 155. l.
10. (...). p. 136. l. a. f. 5. whatsoever p. 159. col. 2. l. 2. co^modation. p.
164. l. 7. contracts p. 166. l. 9. as belonging. l. 19. thy default l. 22.
quanti l. 26. (...). p. 167. l. 3. cause as it l. 12. certain, or. p. 170. l.
vlt. of the drachmae. p. 171. l. 10. diverse rates l. 16. decunx l. 17.
quincunx. Mar. l. 5. sesquialtera l. 10. foenerat^rum haec. p. 172. l. 9.
Antoninus. l. 11. help. p. 179. l. 16. Rome made. p. 180. l. 3. to give. 182.
l. 11. restored p. 183. l. vlt. (...) p. 184. l. 8. thereof p. 186. l. 6. who
making l. 12. twenty shillings l. 19. then in. p. 187. l. 9. some few p. 191.
l. 19. pro rata temporis p. 192. l. 22. Nubibus. As p. 196. l. 7. excelsiue l.
a* f. 5. in hiphil. p. 198 l. 7. and 9. and l. a* f. 9. and l. 199. l. 5.
Nashah. p. 203. l. 4. generally. 207. l. 14. shall men. p. 208. l. a* f. 3 and
4. hostis. p. 209. l. 22 would p. 216. l. 3 the Lord answers, he that p. 222.
l. 22. because his p. 235. l. a* f. 3. commuted. p. 238. l. 15. of horses. p.
244. l. 6. interusurium. p. 252. l. 4 (...) and l. 6. (...). p. 259. Mar. l. 1.
Epod. 2. p. 260. l. 11. wealthier p. 262. l. a. f. 4. trientes. p. 263. l. 12.
Alcoran p. 264. l. 16. forbidden. p. 287. l. a. f. 3. brought. p. 301. l. af.
8. carriage. Of p. 306. l. 2. secondly, the lender p. 308. l. 22. but of other.
p. 310. l. 4. reverend* p. 311. l a* f. 13. imprecation. In Marg. l. 11.
danisticum. p. 313. l. a* f. 9. and 10. do not repent. p. 314. l. a* f. 12.
all-sufficient. p. 317. l. a* f. 8. less. p. 330. l. 4. acknowledged in the
Scriptures to be no sin. p. 339. l. 10. and too. p. 345. l. 18. n usury. p.
350. l. 4. praemittimus.


