(...)

THE IAYLORS Conversion.

Wherein is lively represented, the true Image of a Soul rightlye touched, and
converted by the spirit of God.

The weighty circumstances of which supernatural work, for the sweet
amplifications, and fit applications to the present time, are now set down for
the comfort of the strong, and confirmation of the weak.

By Hugh Dowriche Batch. of Divinity.

The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: brings low and exalts. 1. Samu. 2.
7. Behold now, for I, I am he, and there is no gods with me: I kill, and give
life: I wound, and make whole: neither is there any that can deliver out of my
hand, Deu. 32, 39

LONDON, Printed by John Windet, dwelling at Paul's Wharfe, at the sign of the
Cross Keys, and are there to be sold. 1596.

To the Worshipful, and my approved good Friend: Valentine Knightly Esquire,
long prosperity, and peace of conscience in Christ.
BLessed is he (says David) whose wickedness is forgiven and whose sin is
covered, etc. Here is one Medicine for two maladies: here is one salve that
heales two sores. Sin is the testie botch that may not be touched. All are
infected with this plague: but here is the difference, some see it not at al,
some see it too much, some feel it, and fear it, some neither fear it, nor
feel it. In some negligent blindness, and security breeds contempt of
imminent peril; in some, the view of great danger accompanied with fear
without faith, commits them to the dangerous downfall of a deadly desperation.
The one sees not his sin, and therefore seeks no remedy; the other
overwhelmed with sin, finds not the means to apply the remedy. Here is
both the remedy and the application. There is a mean between these extremes:
This mean is, to see our sin, our nakedness, our wickedness, but so, as we
always have one eye on our selves and our sin, the other, on Christ and his
merits. If we see our sins in themselves, they exceed in number the sands of
the Sea, in greatness, the compass of the whole world. If we then go about
to match them, with our own power, strength, or merits, how infinitely shall
we be overwhelmed in this comparison? But if we, leaving our selves, fly to
the power of God, by which he can; and his mercy in Jesus Christ, by which he
will deliver us from this infecting plague; we shall presently see, both sin,
hell, and Satan to consume as smoke, before the presence of our God. Sin is
the plague, sin is the sore: The medicine is, the mercy of God, thorough
Jesus Christ in whom, and by whom, our sins are forgiven. This mercy is
apprehended by faith, and faith is the gift of God. Therefore, when we have
cast up all our reckoning, we shall find, that all our righteousness, and all
our merits, (in respect of perfection, to merit salvation) are nothing else
but the righteousness and merits of Christ, imputed to us by the mercy of God,
by which our sins are pardoned. And therefore with Saint Paul every man, to
his own Conscience, may rightly say, What have thou, which thou have not
received? Yet, to this mercy there is tied a blessing, and a curse, to show
the difference between the reprobate, and the children of God. They, which by
mercy, attain this mercy, are truly called blessed; They which for want of
mercy, are deprived of this mercy, are justly accursed. But can there be in
one, and one so certain and immutable cause, such, and such diverse effects?
Can mercy be found without mercy? Can light be seen without light? Can fire be
felt without heat? What more contrary the one to the other, then glory, and
confusion? Yet one, and the self same fire, makes gold more glorious, which
utterly consumes wood, straw, and stubble. What is more contrary then hard,
and soft? yet one and the self same sun does harden the dirte, and
mollifieth the wax. These contrary effects proceed not from any contrariety
that is found in the pure and simple essence either of Sun or fire, but from
the diversity which lies hid in the nature of the subjects, on which they
work. The mercy of God, being still one and the same, is offered to al without
respect, (as the Sun shines and the rain falls, as well on the unjust as the
just) but all receive it not. The wicked see it, but despise it, and make a
jest of it, till, by the just judgment of God they perish in their
wickedness, as did Pharao, Judas, and the wicked sons of Elie, etc. The
elect, being moved by the spirit of God, do see, lament, and repent their
sins, and so by mercy obtain pardon. So that, though, both the elect and the
reprobate are both alike happy, in that mercy is offered to both a like, yet
because the wicked refuse it, they are justly accursed; and the other that
receive, and take hold of it, are here accounted happy and blessed. And yet
not blessed in respect of any work or worthiness in themselves, but that, by
the merits of Christ, (which they apprehend by faith) they are by mercy and
imputation, made worthy of this blessing. This then is the golden mean, that
makes the godly blessed to behold their sins by faith in Christ; and not as
the reprobate, either, not to see them at all, or, without faith to behold
them. Of this mean, David himself took happy hold-fast. For now, conducted
by mercy, and faith, we see, how lustely he leapes out from the hote-house of
desperate temptations in which it seems (at the making of this Psalm) he was
deeply plunged, by the terror of a guilty conscience, touched by the hand of
God, for the sin which he had committed with Barsheba. The extremity of his
passions and the vehemency of his conflicts, are described in the 3. and 4.
verses of this Psalm. Now this is not David's case alone; but it is certain,
that all the children of God, that are elected in his eternal purpose, in
their times appointed, shall hear the like calling and taste of the like mercy.
For manifestation of the which, we may see an example of the same mercy, which
the Lord showed unto a simple and sinful man, the common Iailor of Phillippy;
of who^ in the 16. of the Acts there is an honorable memory left to al
posterity. K. David, and this Iaylor, were both sinners; both of them
acknowledged the hand of God heavy upon the^ for their sins; the one, called
to repentance by the voice of a man; the other, shaken from his drowsinesse, by
the terror of an Earthquake; both felt comfort in their miseries, by the mercy
of GOD, which kept them from desperation. The rarenes of which example, the
great mercy of God; and the singular instructions that rise, to the profit of
such as deeply weigh the whole action; besides the earnest desire of some,
whose request I could not deny; have drawn me now, to set down certain
notes, and considerations touching the singular working of the spirit of God in
this man, uttered long sithence upon occasion; which I have termed, The Iaylors
Conversion.

This being the first thing of mine, that ever past the press; I thought to
make bold, to Dedicate it, to the first friend, that ever was truly possessed
of my heart. The first fruits were still most accepted and desired of the Lord;
The first child, by nature, is best beloved of the father: The first faith is
ever most firm, most dear and sweet to the possessor: My first faithful
affection, has enforced me, to offer these simple first fruits, to you that
had the gift of my first faith. Which affection you first won by courtesy,
and after confirmed it by desert; which, being planted young, has now grown
to be old: being begun long sithence, has continued to this present,
inviolable; and as the green bays, (whom no tempest can blast) ever
flourishing; and (so I hope) shall continue so long, as life shall give leave to
love. If I could as easily bestow on you, a great part of the world, as I do
willingly give you this small portion of words, though you be great already, yet
would I make you greater: But seeing words for want of wealth, must show my
will, consider in these words, not the words, but the working of the spirit of
God. And I dare presume to say, that if you can imitate rightly this one
example, these words in short time, though you be good already, yet shall they
make you better.

The Lord, that has given you a great portion of faith, and has bestowed on
you great worldly blessings of wisdom and wealth, increase this faith, and so
daily multiply these blessings upon you, that you may go forward, from faith
to faith, from virtue to virtue, from life to life, till in the day of the
Lord, your imperfections being made perfect, you may receive the Crown of
immortal glory, prepared for such as love the Lord unfeignedly. Honiton in
Deuon, this 30. day of June. 1596.

Your loving friend. Hugh Dowriche.

Vain floting blastes of worldly bliss, that never stay,
Are smoke-like, mounting spied, but quickly quite decay.
Like vewes of fawning shades, that plant alluring baytes,
Err fully come, their farewell shows, their hid deceytes.
No trust, in trustlesse trash, no faith in friendly shows,
Truth quails in Hectik fits, whilst falshoode greenely grows.
Yea, masking visars fraud, great grace, in graceless finds,
No place, for naked truth, No time, for fraudlesse minds,
Esteemed vice soores high, on gales of witless winds.
Knock Wisdom while she faint, on rock of flintie heart,
No answer, but, I will not come, you may depart,
If supreme voice, to Conscience call, to count for sin,
Green Figleaues, grace defects, as sin had never binne.
High Cedars stoutly vaunt, that fruitless harvest yield,
The Volgo, bright, yet good, for neither fish nor feelde.
Let not false Susis springs, find poores in Corkie heart,
Yield not to loose the truth, though clad in careful smart,
Establish virtues throne, And say to sin, depart.
To the friendly Reader.
THere is daily preaching, and daily printing of good Sermons, and good Books,
and yet there is little profiting, and little amendment seen to follow, either
in words or works. We have had precept upon precept, Sermon upon Sermon; in
every corner, here a little, and there a little, and yet Egypt cannot speak
the language of Canaa^. Esaias. 8 13. Esaias. 19. 18.
Some professors cannot see what is belonging to their profession, and live
there after. The Vineyard yields but briers and thorns. The company of
vain, Papisticall, Libertine, Esaias. 27. 5. Ierem. 7. 11
and Machiauelion professors, are become companions to thieves, they are even
found to be the den and the sink of loath some hypocrisy; which the eye of
Christ viewed, his heart lothed, his whip purged. The swords edge is rebated to
them, it cannot Pearce: the shaft is shot in vain, it cannot stick. The force
of the Gospel, is become now so weak, it cannot move them. The bellows are
burnt, the led is consumed in the fire, the founder Ierem. 6 ^
has melted in vain. The preachers have lost their labors, and the Printers
have spent their care, their time, their strength in nothing, for The wicked
yet still wrestle against God, like wild Bulls tumbling in a Ierem. 1. ^
net: yea, they have made a new covenant with death, and with hell: they have
clapped hands upon a new bargain. As Satan told Eua she should not die so our
lying fancies have told us, that, No plague shall come near us. Long peace and
wealth has brought us to wanton 1. Cor. 4.
Babels estate: we are a virgin not to be oppressed by any; we are tender and
delicate, the mistress of felicity; we are a Lady of kingdoms, with a
perelesse prosperity, in the midst of Esaias. 47. 1^
our neighbors miseries, we never feared of our own calamities, our neck is
framed of iron sinews, it cannot bow; our brows are ouer-plated Esaias: 48. 4^
with brass, they cannot blush. The trumpe has blown, yet can be not bring
again them that Were lost in the land of Assiria: Though the preachers with
their Cornets have seven and seven times compassed Jericho, yet the cursed walls
fall not; though the voice, the cry, and the force of the Gospel, of signs
and wonders have been heard and felt in every corner, yet the weeds ouertoppe
the Corn: the soul lost in the sincke of error and land of transgression,
returns not again: the Papists deceived by the full flesh pots of Egypt are
not yet reclaimed; the Atheists, Brownists, Anabaptists, Libertines, and
carnal, careless, and dissolute professors, that are for their sin suffered
to be led into heresies, are not yet contented to join in one godly unity to
worship and serve the Lord in the mount of Jerusalem, the vision of peace. We
do not yet see that blessed time, when Ephraim shall be are no evil will to
Judah; nor Judah vex Ephraim, when preachers shall not wrangle for trifels and
be divided one from an other, but all join together to fly upon the
shoulders of the Pihlistins the common enemies of the Gospel. All our
preaching cannot draw on that happy time, when, Judah and Israel, shall walk
both together, When all preachers and professors that now hate, backbite, and
slander one an other shall so join hands and hearts together, that neither of
the^ walk or continue any longer in the hardness of their froward hearts. It
was a certain sign of Gods heavy plague against Judah, and a sure token that
their destruction was at hand, when the peoples ears began to be
Uncircumcised, when they could not patiently harken to the truth; and when the
word was to the^ as a reproach, and that they could not delighte in it. If the
same tokens may be now any way a sign to England of her destruction, as it was
to Jerusalem, then may Englands Music, be well turned into Iudahes mourning,
and say, Woe be unto me, Woe is me now, My heart, my health, my hope, my help
and all is gone from me. It were a lamentable thing, that our wilful and wicked
sins, (daily crying for vengeance to fall upon us, from the seat of God,)
our covetousness, usury, drunkenness, whordome, blasphemy, perjury;
contentions, pride, envy, and disobedience, should give our Corn to be meat
for our enemies, and the fruit of our labors, to refresh strangers, while we
our selves famish: yet thus it has been in time, and thus it may be again.

Some think there be too many Books, too many Sermons, too much preaching, too
much Printing: and I think there is too little of eueriesort. There is no
fault found with too much ease, too much pleasure, too much negligence, too
much wantonness in behavior, too much pride in apparel, too much love to
imitate new Apish toys and strange fashions: we are never cloyed with these,
come as thick as they can, but the poor despised word sounds too often, and
comes too thick upon us. O sin, O Satan, Papisticall envy says, every
boy is become a preacher: every fool is become a writer. Joshua enuiously
murmureth against Eldad and Medad, for prophesying in the Tent: The Disciples
Number. 11. 28 Mark 9. 38. Luke. 9. 48 John. 3. 26.
of John, envied at Christ for working of Miracles, but I say with meek
Moses, I would all the people of God did prophecy, I would all were learned,
I would all were preachers, I would all were so perfectly taught of God, that
every man were able to preach to himself, to teach and instruct himself and
his charge in all things, that we might indeed need less preaching, and
less writing.

Some would have no Books written, but such only as did wade into the depth
of Divinity, and contained the marrow, and quintessence of learning; such as
did profoundly handle deep points, and subtle quiddities of Divine or
Phylosophicall controversies; and such as in a manner should speak that which
was never spoken before.

This is the very policy of Satan, to take from the simple people, their
greatest comfort, (next unto preaching) that they enjoy, which is, the reading
or hearing, at leisure times some plain exposition or familiar Sermon, penned
to their capacity, wherein many and many take great and singular comfort,
delight and profit. Many there be, that for age, troubles and other occasions,
cannot often come to hear Sermons, where and when they would, which having at
home some good Book, supplies often times the want of a better means, to
bring them to the knowledge, and love of God.

I speak not this to patronise any lewd, wanton or foolish Pamphlets, which
tend not to edification, but rather to destruction; neither yet to prefer or
compare reading, or writing with preaching, which is the blessed, and ordinary
means of our salvation, but only to crop the blossoms of their proud Envy,
that despise their weak brothers gifts, in respect of their own surmised
perfections: and which think, that some profit may not redound to the simple,
by the most simple gift, that ever was bestowed of God upon the most simple man.

I detest the fantastical humor of them that write or publish any book, to
hunt for any private praise, glory, or profit to themselves, and not with a
single, and simple intent to seek only the glory of God, the furderance of
the Gospel; and the knowledge, comfort and salvation of Gods children, and the
weak brethren. With this intent and no other, (as he knows that knows my
heart) I have persuaded my self to suffer these plain and Country notes, to
subject themselves to the curious eyes, to the sharp conceits, and the quick
judgments of the learned Readers of this age, not intended or adorned for the
learned, but only vowed and plotted in the lowest kind, for the capacity of
the simple and ignorant.

It may be that I have studied more, to be plain, brief and perspicuous,
then some have to fly aloft in the mistie clouds of rolling eloquence; be
cause I seek the edification of the simple, not the praise of my self.

If I should vauntingly fly so high, as the wings of fancy would carry but a
mean Scholars reach, I might neither in duty do that I should; nor in
conscience, perform that which I would.

Let the Iaylors and keepers of Prisons in these days, accounte this example
the chief flower in their garland, that there has been so honest a man, an
undoubted child of God found in their Corporation: of whom, I would they
would all learn, to be more merciful and courteous to their poor brethren
that are in bands, to consider the cause of their imprisonment: not to hepe
misery upon misery, but in their punishments to see the anger of God against
their own sins: to be sorry for them that are in Captivity, to thank God
for their own freedom: not to insult over them, whom God has cast down, but
in a charitable mind to comfort them that are in heaviness, and relieve the
wants of the poor and needy, to their powers. So God (with this Iaylor) shall
bless them with the true knowledge of their salvation, and the joyful spirit
of regeneration: So shall the Lord comfort them in their distress, and deliver
them from the prison and punishment which their sins have deserved. This is the
wourst I wish the^, this the Lord grant them. And so I commit thee, gentle
Reader, to Gods merciful protection. From Honiton in Deuon this 30. day of
June. 1596.

Thine in the Lord, Hugh Dowriche.

Verses written by a Gentle -woman, upon The Iaylors Conversion.
THe man is blessed which can endure,
Whose heart does never slide,
When for his sin, with fiery scourge,
His patience shall be tried.
No daunting fear can once attainte,
The conscience that is clear:
The wicked wail that have no faith,
When dangers do appear.
The rod that does correct our life,
And sinful ways reprove,
Is said, to be a certain sign,
Of Gods eternal love.
No tempting trial from the Lord,
No grief or dire annoye,
Can sever once the faithful heart,
From Christ, his only joy.
Though sinful flesh do often rebel,
And fancy file our fall,
Yet happy man, that can return,
When God begins to call.
Though God permit his chosen flock,
Sometimes to walk astraie:
Yet sets he both the times and means,
To wayne them from their way.
How long did Paul, with cruel heart,
The Church of Christ molest?
Till called home to see the truth,
His blindness did detest.
How cruel was this Iaylors heart,
To vex the poor elect?
Till trembling earth by mighty power,
His madness did detect.
The God, that makes the haughty hills,
And Libans Cedars shake
When he shall take his cause in hand,
Will make the prowdest quake.
To comfort his, that be in need,
The Lord is always pressed,
And all that haps to his elect,
Is always for the best.
Which in this picture here is seen,
By that, which shall in sew,
Lord grant us grace, when he does call,
To frame our lives anew.
A. D.

Ad Authorem, amicum suum, vt plura det.
P^rge, mi: quidnam titubas eundo?
Hic labor certe, hoc opus est, Catenas
Nocte subnigra, misere Reclusis
Rumpere tetras.
Sieve diuinas, Calamo, loquelas
Pingis, aut sacrum (...) Ore pandis:
Pingis and pandis veneranda, pulchre,
Dogmata Iouae.
Hinc, and hinc, lauds (mihi creed) celsae
Te manent: Seeds manet ampla: vtrinque
Digna praeclaris, (quid enim recusas?)
Proemia factis.
Plura des nobis igitur, Iehouae
Seruiens, nobis, patriae, tibique,
Et mihi: Da, quos voluisse dix'ti
Dare, libellos.
Diuites (Dowrich per-amice) Dotes
Si tui cunctis animi paterent,
(Pluribus notae:) At taceo tacendi Aposiopesis

Nomen Amici.
Ergo, mi: nunquam titubes eundo:
Hic labor certe, hoc opus est, Cateruas
Quas Catenatas tenet atra nigri
Ianua Ditis,
Soluere vinclis.
Quo pede coepisti, sic been semper eas.

Per Guilielmum Palfraeium, Gener. Lin-colniensis Hospitij Socium.

Ad Carcerum Custodes. S. P.
(...), Terrae motu concussus, ad vnum,
Et verum motus, vertitur inde, Deum:
Quid facis, O Saeuo, stringens tua viscera ferro?
Sola Saius Animae, quaeritur vna tuae.
Heu cohibete manus, Custodes Carceris omnes,
Mittite sub Christi, colla superba Iugum.
Paul, Comesque Sila, Captiui corpora; nullas
Fregistis, Domino sed reserante, fores.
Ille aperit vobis, Neopoitae Ianitor aulae,
(...), ac Fletus, (...)que vias,
Et soluit duris, religatos crura, cathenis,
Ad Christum vt properent Liberiore pede.
Discite ab hoc Omnes exemplo, vera vereri
Numina, (...).
(...).

THE IAYLORS Conversion.
The Argument.
Paul and Silas were by the spirit of God, sent into Macedonia, and passing
through many places of the Country, came unto the chief City called
Phillippie. Where preaching the word, they found a fortune-telling Devil,
which had long time abused the simple people. Paul not able to bear with this
deceit of Satan, by the word of the Lord expels him. Hereof rose a grievous
persecution against the word. The worst part was the greatest. They prevailed.
Paul and Silas were whipped, and cast into prison. They prayed, and the Lord
heard them; and sent an Earthquake. The Iaylor would have killed himself, but
Paul stays him. The Iaylors eyes are opened, he humbles him self; he seeks
the way to be saved, he obtains it for himself and his whole family. etc.

THE TEXT.
Acts. 16. 30. And he brought them out, and said, Syrs, what must I do, to be
saved?
IN this verse is expressed only, a question demanded, by the Iaylor. In
which question these five circumstances are to be considered. First, The person
that does demand it. Secondly, Of whom he demands it. Thirdly, What the
question is which is demanded. Fourthly, What it was which brought this man to
this godly care, to demand this question. And lastly, the time when he fell to
this consideration what he ought to do to be saved

For the first. In the person that does demand the question, these three
things are to be considered. First, his Office. Secondly his Charge. Thirdly
his sodden Alteration. By Office he was the common Iaylor: which, though it be
an Office necessary, yet commonly, I know not how it falls out, they
continue not long honest men that have it; but, for the most part, are of
nature cruel, hard-harted; and oftentimes blind and far from the knowledge
of the truth, as this man was.



Every Office which is* either commanded by the word, or not contrary to
the same, is good, lawful, and honest, of it self in his own nature: if any
Office be contemptible, odious, or loathsome unto us, it is made so, by reason
of the wickedness, cruelty, covetousness, and folly of him that does
possess it. As the Publicanes, the Rent gatherers, or Roman Baylifes made
their Office odious among the Jews, by Requiring more, then that which was
appointed unto Luke 3. 13.
them. The soldiers made their calling odious, by doing of violence. Accusing
innocents falsely for their own luker, Not being content with their wages, But
robbing, stealing and spoiling besides. The Scribes and Pharisees made their
prefession odious, By their horrible and wicked hypocrisy. The laylors Mat.
23. 23.
make their Office odious, by unmerciful abusing of the poor prisoners,
robbing the^ by their great fees, selling them but a little liberty for a
great deal of money; murdering the simple by penury, by pinching them of
their allowance, and ordinary duty, and such like, etc. Nay, to fall to a
higher reckoning, Kings and Princes have made their seat and Crown infamous,
by their sin and wickedness, as Jeroboam by Idolatry, 1. King. 12. 28.
Ahab and Iesabel by covetous oppression, sheding of innocent blood, and
persecuting Gods Prophets and truth. David by murder and whordome caused the
enemies of The Lord to blaspheme: Noblemen and Gentlemen 1. Kin. 21. 8
make their degree odious, by their pride, contempt of the word, wantonness,
covetousness, whordomes, liberty in sinning, injury, and such like. Justices
turn justice into wormwoode, and judgment into gall, condemning the innocent
and justifying the wicked, dishonouring their calling. Lawyers defame their
vocation and the godly and honorable use of the law, by taking the patronage
of bad matters, by defiling their hands with bribes and their closets with
gifts against the poor and helpelesse, being content for gain to give
counsel with the wicked against the just, with the mighty against the simple,
with the rich, against the poor fatherless and widow, against Law, by Law;
against right, by making sower sweet and sweet sower, by altering cases, and
making right no right, where it is for their profit, against conscience, having
no conscience, where commodity shows it self. Physicians have made their
necessary and good science odious and infamous among the common people and
most men in these days, by their intolerable and excessive covetousness, by
taking such great sums of money for little labor, and oftentimes when to the
parties diseased they do no good at all but rather hurt, without either
piety, pity or conscience. Protestants and professors Protestants by
profession, but Papists indeed.
of the Gospel, make the glorious word and preaching of Christ to be
blasphemed among the Papists, and they hinder many from professing and
believing the same, because they walk not wisely toward them that are without:
because there is as much whordome, covetousness, drunkenness, usury, perjury,
simonie, subtlety, briberie and injury amongst them, as ever was among the
Papists, or can be among the Turks and infidels; because there is as little
faith, as little regard of promise or word, or less then ever was in the time
of ignorance. etc. But what shall become of these wicked hypocrites, of these
Painted walls, of these stinking Sepulchers, and fruitless Figtrees, which
defame their callings, abuse their places, pollute their Offices, and dishonor
the Lord by their sinful lives: Surely, they shall leave a deadly curse upon
their posterity: the filthy mawes of the hungry Dogs shall be thought to
be a Sepulcher, worthy and sufficient for such cursed carrions. The Lord
shall plague them by taking from them their son begotten in a dulterie, their
Offices, their dignities, and the thing they love best: the Lord shall punish
them by rebellion in in their sons, in their subjects, and heavy mishappes
within their own houses.

Some of these wicked abusers of their Office and calling, the Lord does
notwithstanding (as we here see) call home to a consideration of their miserable
estate, to the knowledge and sight of their sins, to a true humiliation of
their proud stomachs, and to an effectual repentance, because it is certain
and sure, that the wickedness of man cannot alter the purpose of the Lord.
Where we learn, that as God does suffer his elect for a time to be seduced,
and to wander out of the right way, as David by his lust, Paul by blind
zeal, Mary Magdalene by lewd concupisence, and this Iaylor by cruelty and
blindness, yet, as many as pertain to Gods election, have the times and
means of their conversion appointed, and they, at that calling, obey, (as we
see here this Iaylor does) though before oftentimes they have refused.

Here we see the great mercy of the Lord: which calls all sorts of men,
which despises no Office, nor the vilest callings: which refuses not to
think upon the greatest sinners in the midst of all their blindness, but
uses loving and fit means to call sinners to repentance. As, according to
the quality, greatness and continuance of any sin, so we see his motions
to repentance fitted for them. David had not long been forgetful, neither
remained any great time in the sincke of his sin: therefore the voice of the
Lord in a simple man wrought a sorrow and repentance in him. Peter had not long
continued in his Apostasy, he was brought unto that forgetfulness of his good
master, and duty, by the frailenes and fear that was in his flesh and blood,
and not by any malice or wilful contempt, therefore the voice of a Cock was
sufficient to awaken him, to make him see the foulenes of his finne, and to
lament his weakness with bitter tears. But of the contrary, where the sin
is settled of a long continuance, where the sinners after admonition have taken
delight in it, have continued it with malice, and wilful contempt, there, the
Lord must use great and mighty motions to remove them, as Earthquakes,
throwing down some tower in Siloe, stirring up great enemies, and showing
great and unusual wonders, etc. And yet these great motions move not all, for
there are some which pertain to the Lords inheritance, that are converted by
them, as this Iaylor and many other. But such again as be none of this
number, but those whom the Lord has forsaken, and cast off, cannot be moved
nor converted by all the signs, wonders and Earthquakes that can be showed:
such were the Scribes and Pharisees the masters of this Iaylor, such was
Pharao, such were the sons of Elie, and many in Jerusalem: such are our great
and grounded Papists, such are our libertine professors, and fleshly
Gospellers, such are our Atheists and Iesters in religion, etc.

2. His Charge.
It seems, that his Charge was very great and that it stood greatly upon
him, to restore again such as he had received. It should appear that these
Apostles were delivered unto him, with such a strait commandment, that, if
he did let them escape, his life should go for theirs. For, being now awakened,
by the sudden shaking of the earth, and rising out of his bed at midnight in
great fear, and coming unto the prison and finding the doors open, and
thinking assuredly that his prisoners had been fled, in a desperate mind,
determined rather to kill himself, then to stand to the courtesy of that
sentence, which his good masters the envious Scribes and Pharisees should
pronounce against him. Which wicked act, the fearful and desperate man had
committed in deed, had not Paul by the spirit of God in the dark seen his
intent, and with this joyful voice at that instant comforted him, Do thy self
no harm: for we are all here.

simple truth. There was a thief and a murderer preferred before Christ
himself. The illusion of Satan, and a Devil that deceived them, by blind
toys and telling of fortunes, was a great deal better accepted in this blind
City of Phillippie, then Paul and Silas the true preachers. For wherefore
were Paul and Silas cast into prison with so strait a commandment, after
they had been buffeted and whipped most cruelly before? Surely the holy Ghost
lays down no other causes but these. First, They preached the truth, and
assayed to turn them from their Idolatry and blindness. Secondly, They cast
out the Devil that did deceive them. Where we learn how unwilling the world
and the wicked are to have the Devil cast out of themselves, of their sons
and daughters, especially if the Devil bring any kind of commodity with him,
as this Devil did. For that was the cause of this commotion, because Paul's
new doctrine could not agree with their old Devil, because they might not
follow Paul's Religion, and yet still retain their former profit and
commodity. By which we see, how hard a matter it is to plant the true Religion
among the covetous and worldly minded wretches. We see now the cause, why the
godly in the primative church, why the blessed martyrs in Queen Mary's days,
were vexed, exiled, whipped, imprisoned, set upon the rackes, tied and chained
to the stakes and burned: only for this, because they preached truly the
Gospel of Christ which Paul and Silas preached before: because they called
them from darkness to light, from error to truth, from hell to heaven:
because they opened the illusions of the Mass, Purgatory and other such
peevish fantasies. But here a man might say, it seems that there was some
other matter which moved these rulers to lay up Paul and Silas with so strait
a charge. For as there was no commodity came to the rulers by the spirit of
Divination which was in the woman, but rather a private gain to certain that
were her masters, so there was no such hurt like to ensue unto the Magistrate
or state of the town, by expelling of him, as should force them to so great a
fury: therefore, there was belike some other matter. No, but here we see most
notably* the nature of the wicked. For it falls out many times, The natu of
the wiked.
that the Magistrate which fears not God, persuades himself that by
policy, and maintaining of that which best likes the multitude, the
commonwealth shall be both better and longer maintained quiet and peaceable,
then by establishing any thing be it never so good, which the people like not.
That was one error of the Magistrates. An other thing that we see in them is,
vain glory, and a desire to keep their dignity. Which thing where so ever
it does enter, it makes them unwilling to hear of any alterations, be they
never so little or never so good, and be they themselves never so full of
imperfections, for fear, least if they should allow the doctrine of the
Gospel, in the reformation of one thing, be it never so little, it would in
time grow farther, and at length perchance find a fault in their own best
cootes that had need to be amended. That was the cause which made these
Magistrates stop the proceedings of the truth in the first appearing, and to
allow and encourage wicked men in their fury against the same, when as (if they
had done well) they should have corrected the covetous abuse of the Devil: and
have praised the good men that did open it, and have thanked God that had
revealed this abuse unto the^. Here we see another abuse and folly, that was
in those Magistrates, for they presently upon the cry and exclamation of two or
three lewd fellows without examination of either causes, or parties, sent good
men to the prison, and let the varlets go unpunished. Lastly, we see the
dulnes and blindness of such Magistrates whom the Lord does not bless. They
could not see the right cause of this tumult, which was, a covetous mind;
neither could they perceive the policy of the Devil, in shadowing this
cause. For the wicked come not to the Magistrate and say, Sir, they by their
preachings have taken away our gain and commodity, for then it might easily
have been perceived from whence their heat proceeded, but they color their
covetousness with an other shadow, and say: Sir, These men, which are Jews,
trouble our City: They preach ordinances which are not lawful for us to
receive, neither to observe, seeing we are Romans. So, we see that it is a
common thing to entitle that truth (which we think will in time overthrow our
pride, and our covetousness) with rebellion, sedition, and conspiracy: by that
menes to make it a cloak for lewdnes and knauerie. Now we see the causes of
this strait charge which the Magistrates gave unto the Iaylor.

We learn here again, that the Lord suffers even his elect and chosen for a
time to run in the path of sinners, that he does exercise them with great
temptations, and that he brings them even to the brincke of hell and
desperation, and yet recals them, and even then when they are fardest gone, and
least think of succor, then is the Lord nearest unto them, as is here to be
seen by the example of this woeful Iaylor, and many other such like in the
Scripture. For when Abraham had hoped beyond hope, and had waited for the
promise, till it was past both man's help and hope, yet then did the Lord keep
promise when he least thought it. When the same Abraham Gen 17. 19 and 21. 2.
Heb. 11. 11.
(being commanded to offer up his son that he had so long looked for,) could see
no reason of the Lords promise, yet at the very Genesis 22. 10. Eccl. 44. 20.
instant when the axe was lifted up, unknown to Abraham, there was a means
provided to save the child, ere the Axe fell. When there was but a sily basket
between death and Moses, yet at an instant, the Lord Exodus 2. 3. 4
had provided an unknown means, to make him ruler of his people. When Joseph
was in great extremity, sold into a strange Genesis 41. 40.
country, and for a long time in grievous imprisonment, without friends, or
hope of restitution, and therefore might have been comfortless, yet the
Lord, when Joseph thought least of it, set him at liberty, and 1. Sam. 23. 27.
made him ruler of a great Country. When David was in great peril by Saul:
When Daniel was cast into the Lions den: When the three young men that would
not worship the Idol, were cast into the hot furnace, Dan. 6. 22. and 3. 25.
yet the Lord at that instant when flesh and blood could see no help,
preserved them. So, this fear, which the Iaylor felt, first in the Earthquake,
next in that he thought that his prisoners had been al gone, stroke him very
deep to the heart, and brought him to great extremity, which all, unknowing
to him, was used by the Lord, to be a mean of his conversion, and salvation.
Where we see, how the Lord watches over his elect, to comfort them, to keep
them, to defend them from water, from fire, from wild beasts, and from
desperation and cruel enemies, that nothing may hinder them from that happy
hour, wherein the Lord has appointed to call them, convert them, and save
them.

Lastly, we learn that they be happy, though they feel some misery, which
may hear the voice of the Gospel and true preachers: for they ever bring
comfort and joy unto them, that can hear them, they expel all fear, abandon
all qualmes of loathsome desperation, from their hearts* but more happy are
they that hear, obey, and submit themselves and their affections to the rule
of the word, speaking to their ears outwardly, or of the spirit of God,
moving their hearts inwardly, as this Iaylor did.

Thirdly, his sudden Alteration.
The Alteration of this man was sudden and marvelous. For he, which at the
beginning of the night, did with joy receive these prisoners, with cruelty and
disdain no doubt thrust them into the vilest dungeon, set them into the
stocks, and clapped gives upon their feet: before the same night was ended,
felt the power and spirit of God; confessed his ignorance; saw his own sin,
understood the vanity of his masters, the Scribes and Pharisees, perceived
himself to be in an error, humbled himself to them, whom before he had
abused, and with tears sought their comfort, whom he thought before to be
comfortless, desiring of them to know the right way to be saved, whom a
little before he had condemned as those that held some wrong opinions, etc.

Psalm. 34. 19. and 145. 18. and 34. 16. Act. 4. 31. and 12. 10.
it pleases him to deliver them, the strongest Irons, prisons, and tyrants in
the world, shall not be able to hold them.

And here we are to remember, what difference there is between the miseries
that we feel for the cause of Christ, and the torments which are put upon us
for our own wickedness. For when we are cast into prison Act. 11. 4 Mat. 25.
40 Zakar. 2. 8. Ephe. 1. 22. and 4. 13: 15.
for Christ's cause, Christ is there with us, when we suffer for him he is
grieved with us, for the head cannot be quiet, if the body be in pain. These
have always such peace and joy in their conscience, that suffer for the
truth, that when they are whipped they rejoice, when they are wounded they are
Act. 5. 4. Gal. 6. 17.
not agrieued, when they are tied to the stakes, they triumph in the midst of
the fire, the joy of a good conscience is so great, and the earnest desire, and
assured comfort, of the present receiving of that unspeakable joy that will
never fail, makes the greatest torments seem even to flesh and blood, either
very little, or no pain at all: knowing assuredly that they could not suffer
for Christ, Phil. 1. 29 Romans 9. 29. 2. Cor. 4. 10 Luke 24. 26.
except they were thereunto appointed, that they in these passions might be
made like unto the son of God. And assuring themselves that as soon as they be
delivered from the stinking prison of this filthy carcass, their soul shall
be presently in the hand of Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Wis. 3. 1. 2. Tim. 2. 11 Psalm. 116. 15
Apo. 14. 13.
the Lord: where no torment shall touch them, and that they shall be presently
with Christ in his kingdom, with whom, and for whom they have suffered: and
their death being precious in the sight of the Lord, they feel that they are
most happy of all other, that die in the quarrel of Christ. Of the other
side, they which suffer justly, for their theeuerie, murder, whordome or any
other like vice, they feel most horrible horror of conscience, and torment
both of body and mind, being separated from Christ and having no peace or joy
in their heart by the quietness of a good conscience, and assured trust in the
mercy of God. And therefore many of them in their torments and death,
lamentably houle without hope, without comfort, being without the company of
Christ, and so in miserable desperation, without especial grace, oftentimes
end a wretched life. Here we must remember that God does often give repentant
hearts, to such as have committed, and do suffer for most vile offenses, of
whom we are to judge the best.

We learn here, to have always a sure hope, and confidence in the Lord, our
cause being his, that though we always see not his power, and will ready to
deliver us, when our flesh does desire it, yet, let us assure our selves that
he is with us, and that he will help and deliver us, when he sees his time.

We see how quickly God can pull down the pride, and confound the devises of
his enemies, and by such means as they can neither suspect, nor prevent, and
how quickly he can turn the hearts of the wicked and enemies, to cherish and
favor his servants, and truth if he list.

We may learn of this Iaylor here a notable The right use of Gods judgments.
lesson, which is, to make our right, and true use of the judgments of God,
when we see or feel them; which is, that by them we descend into a deep
consideration of our own estate, life, and behavior, and see whether these
judgments fall not upon us for our pride, our wantonness, whordome, murder,
ignorance, ingratitude, negligence, contempt of Gods truth, and evil entreating
the servants of God: Which all it seems that this man considered, for he
feeling the Earthquake, and knowing that it was the hand of the Lord, he fell
presently to view his life, the damnable estate wherein he stood, and the
lamentable misery that he was to fall into, if his life at that instant
should have been taken from him. He comes therefore and desires the true
Physic, not that which comfort the body, but that which preserves the
soul. What shall I do, that I may be saved? How many of us in England either
high or low, have with our selves entered into this consideration, having felt
the like Earthquakes and many other signs and tokens? I doubt not, but there
be some which have, though it be, perchance, a little some. In all Philippie
the Scripture maks mention but of a few which were converted thoroughly, and
made to see, and acknowledge their sin. We read that the rulers were moved,
but this motion proceeded not so far, as to make them to see the estate
wherein they stood. Therefore we see that the signs and wonders of the Lord
are not effectual, in all, but only in such, as are his, and were before
known in his purpose. The cause of this defect is not in the judgments
themselves, but in the hardness, and sin of their froward hearts that see
them: as, the cause why a blind man takes no comfort of the sun, is not in
the sun it self, but in the fault of his own eyes. It may be that many of
our Rulers, our great men and Gentlemen were at that present when they felt
Gods hand shaken upon them, in the last Earthquake moved, and troubled in
mind, but it was such a motion, as the proud Pharisees felt, which was not so
soon and suddenly conceived, but it was even as soon and suddenly forgotten.
It was not such a motion as the Iaylor here felt, which made him see his sin,
his imperfections, his wicked life, and raised in him a hearty repentance for
the same, and which caused him to give over all other cares, as one now wholly
mortified, to seek only the right way, how he might be saved. For, this
motion of the Iaylor, had the spirit of the holy Ghost joined with it, which
moved inwardly, and effectually, the heart, with the outward motions of the
body: the other, moved but the outward limbs, and senses, with a sudden
fleshly fear, without the spirit of God. For, let us see, how many great men,
gentlemen and rich men, which before that time were whoremongers, adulterers,
usurers, thieves, pirates, rackers of rents, and and unmerciful to their poor
tenants, how many that were swearers, blasphemers, Athiests of no Religion,
neither hot nor cold, wantons, and libertines, have been since soundly
converted, have taken an accounte of their lives, of their behauiours, of their
sins, and have repented heartily for them, and have come unto their Preachers
and Ministers to learn the right way to be saved, and have ever since
continued in that godly course, which all, we see this Iaylor did? I know not
what other preachers can testify, but, for my self, I can witness but of a
very few, or rather none. There were in some few places, solemn and general
fastes, by the Pastors proclaimed, many did resort, from many places,
perchance many, for the novelty of the matter more then for any touch of
conscience: but the folly of some, the great hypocrisy of a number, the short
continuance of the good mind, the quick forgetting of these judgments, and
the murmuring of many against these proceedings: do argue plainly, that the
best of us all were far from the perfect inioying of that sweet motion,
which called this Iaylor to a sorrowful repentance, and kept him always in a
perfect obedience. If we consider this, we may lament, that the Lord in 38.
years peace and preaching of the Gospel, has not by his grace given unto us
so perfect hearts, and sorrowful consideration of our sin, neither such desire
to seek him, nor such obedience to hear him, believe him, and continue with
him, as at a sudden he gave then unto this poor and miserable Iaylor, but
now a happy and joyful belieuer. God grant that we now seeing our want, our
imperfections, and our blindness, which is the curse of God upon our sin,
may with this Iaylor be perfectly, (by the spirit of God) moved, upon the
sight of our sin, to true repentance, to humble hearts, to an earnest desire
to seek our salvation in Christ, that so we may continue in perfect obedience
to the word of life, and under the protection of Christ, escape those plagues,
miseries, wars and calamities, which our sin, rebellion and unthankfulness
do now threaten to pull upon us.

Lastly, this Iaylor received no comfort, joy, or peace of conscience, until
he was moved by the spirit of God, to love and comfort the preachers of the
word, to hear the voice of the Gospel, and yield obedience unto the same: so
we learn, that we which are sick, are not to hope for health; we that are
weak, are not to look for strength, and we that are wicked, are not to
promise unto our selves pardon, and forgiveness, until, we have with sorrow
confessed, and acknowledged our sickness, weakness and wickedness and have
sought help at the Lord, and his word, and have freely and willingly submitted
our rebelling affections to the orders and direction of the same.

The second circumstance. Of whom he demanded this question.
He came to the poor Apostles. The keeper, to his prisoners, a freeman; to
them that were in bondage; he that before thought well of himself, unto men
that were despised, etc. For now out of all question, he knew assuredly, that
they were the servants of God and preachers of the truth. Which opinion he had
conceived, by this strange and wonderful miracle, which GOD for their sakes
had lately wrought. It may be marueled, why he feeling his conscience sore
burdened, with fear, sorrow, grief and remorse of sin, had not gone for
comfort and consolation unto the great Scribes and Pharisees: which before had
taught him. Surely, the spirit of God had secretly made him to see, that they
were all blind guides, that they were far out of the right way, and therefore
now at length was well content to forsake them all, and to yield unto the
manifest truth, which at this time appeared plainly, and would no longer
wilfully stop his ears and refuse the proffered grace. Wherein, he did
maruelously disgrace the whole company of the Priests, Scribes and Doctors, in
that he preferred these men's learning counsel and doctrine, before all
theirs. These being poor men, strangers and in the outward show of the world
abiects: and the other, men rich, glorious, grave, and in the opinion of most
men, learned, and great Rabbis. Besides all this, he put him self in great
danger of excommunication, of life and living, which they had published
against Io. 9. 23, 34.
all such as should enter either acquaintance or familiarity with them which
spoke or taught in the name of Jesus, whom they had crucified. Yet we see, that
he casting away all fear and not consulting with flesh and Gala. 1. 16.
blood, submitted himself happyly to be a Scholar unto these Apostles.

Torrensis in confess. Augustiniana. lib. 1. cap. 7. Housius de expresso verbo.
the Iudasites, terming themselves Jesuits for they will tell us, that the
Scriptures are hard and obscure, and that it is but lost labor to read them,
etc. But the spirit of God, in the Scripture, teaches us the contrary, that
the word of the Lord is a light Psalm. 119. Prou. 6. Esaias. 45. John. 6. 2. Pet.
1.
unto our feet, and a lanthrone unto our paths.

When we are troubled with concupisence, the first motions of sin, the
pricks of Satan in our flesh, which drive the godly to great sorrow, we may
not go for counsel Torrens. lib. 1. ca. 2. Cathechismus ex decret. Cons.
Trident. in Sacra. Baptism.
and remedy, unto the Pharisaicall Papist, for he will go about to persuade
us, that this Concupisence, and the first motions are no sin in their own
nature, neither any sin at all, either in name, or substance, except Consent
go with it: which deuilish voice, and lie, is confuted by the word of God, for
it is called Enmity against God, it is against the commandment, Thou shall
not lust or covet, It confirms their horrible sin, which Romans 8. 7. Exodus 20.
17 1. John. 1. ^ Mat. 5. 22.
say They have no sin: Christ accountes the motion of anger a deadly sin,
and worthy judgment. Lastly the definition of sin by Saint John confutes
them. Sin is the transgression 1. John. 3. 4
of the law.

Little comfort shall the weak younglings find in them, which say, that the
Scripture is not sufficient for their salvation, but they must seek other
traditions: which say, that to believe in Christ is not sufficient, except he
keep the whole law: which impudently and wickedly affirm, that Christ by his
death has not sufficiently purged their sins but that there is an other
Purgatory, appointed to cleanse, and make clean the faithful, Col. 2. 8.
thorough which, every one must pass, that shall enter into heaven. Contrary
to the preaching of the true Apostles, and the sacred word, for we are bid to
take heed of Tit. 1. 14
men's traditions, that we be not deceived by them. Again, that we follow
not commandments of men which turn from the truth. And in the very next
verse to my text, Act. 16. 31.
Paul told this Iaylor that it was sufficient both for him and his household
to be saved Ioh 3. 18. and 5. 24.
if he did only believe: Christ has said. He that belieueth shall be saved,
He that belieueth in the son shall not come into judgment: He Wisd. 3. 1.
that hears my word, and belieueth in him that sent me, has life
everlasting, he shall not be judged, but has passed from death unto life.
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall touch
them. Heb. 1. 3.
Christ by himself has purged our sin, therefore we need no other
Purgatories, and we defy such as have invented them to the derogation of
Christ's power and honor.

Little comfort may a wounded conscience Torrensis. lib ^. ca. 4. and lib. 8.
cap. 4. Consilium Tridenti^um sess. 6. ^an. 12. and ^3. and can. ^5. and 16.
find at their hand who teach, That men must always doubt, and never assure
themselves of their election in Christ, what motions so ever they feel, and
that they must always carry an uncertain opinion, whether they shall
persevere unto the end, or not. But let them come to the pure fountain of the
word of God, and then they shall hear the spirit Iam. 1. 7.
tell them, that, except they believe the Forgiveness of sins, without
doubting, or if they waver uncertainly in doubtful dumpes, they shall never
obtain any thing of the Mat. 9. 2.
Lord: they shall hear Christ say, Son, stand not in doubt, but comfort thy
self and assure thy self, Thy sins are forgiven thee. They shall hear, that
Abraham after the promise was made unto him, never doubted of the Romans 4. 18. 19
performance of it, not considering himself, and the weakness of his own
body, but the promise, and the ability of the Lord that had promised. They
shall hear the spirit of God tell the Corinthians, and under them, us, that
we being sometime disobedient (having now received and believed the word) Are
sanctified, are justified in the name 1. Cor. 6. 11*
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God. They shall hear
Paul in the full assurance of his election, to rejoice without doubting, I
live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me, and in that, that I now live in
the flesh, I Gala. 2. 20.
(...), by the faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and given himself
for me. They shall hear the spirit exhorting them to go boldly Heb. 4. 16. and
10. 19.
to the throne of grace, and not to doubt, but rather, that by the blood of
Christ they may be bold, and trust perfectly (not doubtingly) 1. Pet. 1. 13.
on the grace that is brought unto them, etc. Ask of the Papists, which teach
this doubting doctrine, what is meant by that (...), or fullness of faith,
whereof the Scripture makes so much mention, calling it the full Assurance of
understanding, and the effectual Col. 2. 2.
faith? they must needs if they answer truly, say, that it is A peculiar
application, whereby every perfect believer, that feels the earnest penny
of his election, does apply unto 1. These. 1. 3.
himself, the promise of eternal life in Christ Jesus.

Now for perseverance unto the end, of which the Papists would have us to
doubt, Let them consider whether they say not daily in their belief, I
believe everlasting life. If they do, let them consider what they be that
Christ says shall be saved. They that endure to the end. Such as be not werie
in weldoing. Mat. 24. 13. 2. The. 3: 13
Then, if they believe that any shall be saved, they must needs also believe
that they shall endure to the end. So that they must needs confess, that the
faithful shall endure unto the end, such I mean, as are appointed to eternal
life. And if this argument suffice not, let us see, what speeches the full
assurance of this perseuera^ce unto the end, has brought forth in the elect
and godly. David says. Doubtless, goodness and mercy shall follow me Psalm.
23. 9.
all the days of my life, etc. Paul says, I am persuaded that neither death
nor life, etc. shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Romans
8. 38.
Jesus our Lord. Again, the same Paul says, unto such as afterward had
received the word, and believed in this City of Phillippie where our Iaylor
was, I am persuaded Phil. 1. 6.
that he which has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus we see that we are to comfort our selves in
this, that if we pertain unto Christ, we may not doubt of our election, or
perseverance, which both we must be assured of; not by reason of any
perfection, strength, or goodness in our selves; but only, relying on the
might, and mercy of Jesus Christ, which by his blood has redeemed our daily,
and fleshly imperfections, and falls, that our continuance in him, and by him,
may never be finally broken off.

Thus we see to whom we must go with this Iaylor for comfort in our
extremity, and whom we must avoid.

We see further, that GOD has at all times confirmed his truth, spoken by his
servants, with manifest signs, and tokens, whereby they that were not quite
forsaken, might be called to the knowledge of the same. What good our signs
and tokens have done to us, I can not see, but only, that many, by them are
made the more hard hearted, and careless, no doubt to their farther condemnation.

This Iaylor no sooner saw the power of God, making manifest and giving
testimony unto the truth, which the Apostles had preached, but he presently
yielded unto it, embraced it, sought his remedy by it, forsook his old
customs, and masters, and was content and willing to learn. He no sooner saw
the judgments of God, but straight he remembered his sin, he repented, he
bad farewell to his former delights, pleasures, pastimes, wantonness, and
wickedness, and of an enemy, became a friend, of a persecutor, a professor,
of a proud master, an humble servant, and of a sinful Iaylor a penitent
believer. Therefore as Christ said, that Tyrus and Sidon, and the Queen of the
South should rise in judgment, against the hardharted unbelievers of
Jerusalem, so no doubt, this Iaylor as he condemned the proud Pharisees then,
so, he shall be a heavy condemnation, to our blind Papists and our carnal
and licentious professors of the Gospel, now, which having the truth, have
loved error more then the truth: having the light, have desired darkness more
then the light, and having salvation offered by Christ, have chosen rather
damnation, in following their own devises, and wilfully continuing the course
of their sweet old sins, For our Papists, notwithstanding all the preaching
of Christ, will be still Moses Disciples, they will not forsake the customs of
their fathers, and the ignorance of that time, wherein they were Christened,
they will never suspecte that there can be hypocrisy, error and deceit under
the grave habites, and demure countenances, of their old Doctors, Priests,
Scribes and Pharisees. They would be loath to depart from the unity (as they
call it) and the consent, of so many ages, counsels, and learned fathers, to
believe the new doctrine of Paul and Silas, strangers, wanderers, but lately
heard of and but even now come to the town. These, and many other stops, were
laid in the laylors way, to have kept him from obedience to the truth, but,
when the arm of the Lord was revealed unto him, and when by the spirit of God
his heart was Act. 16. 14.
opened, he cast of these fantastical shadows, and obeyed the effectual
calling. He might have aleaged against the Apostles, every way, as much as any
Papist in the world can say, against the Gospel, and the Lords instruments,
which in this last age, he commanded, and appointed to vnrake the truth from
the dull ashes, and misties shadows, in which it lay long time for sin
enclosed, the world being not worthy of it. Now the Papists must condemn
this Iaylor, to be a fool for consenting so quickly to strange doctrine, for
giving credit to a few against many; to strangers, against men that were
known, and for reuolting so easilye from the faith wherein he was baptized:
or, if they will not condemn him, whom the word does commend, they must needs
condemn themselves, for not believing the same word, and obeying the like
callings. Especially, seeing they have many and diverse other examples, that
urge and teach the same, as, Elisha, who ran after Elias upon a 1. King. 19
20.
small calling, to our judgment: The Disciples also upon small acquaintance
were content to forsake, ships, nets, occupation, Mat. 4. 18.
gain, friends and father, to follow Christ, as soon as he called them.
Matthew being a Publican was content, at one word, to arise, to leave his
Office, his profit, his glory, his masters and former teachers, to follow an
other Mat. 9. 9.
master that had now called him. What should I reckon Paul, Cornelius, Lidia,
with infinite others, which obeyed the same calling that our Iaylor did.
Surely, if the like should happen now, if any should fall away from Popery,
from superstition, to follow Christ, or believe the doctrine of the Apostles:
if Elisha, if the Disciples, if Paul, if Cornelius, now lived, they should be
condemned by the Pope, to be rash, foolish and rank heretics. It is time
for us which have been so long and many ways called, at length to bid farewell
unto your pleasures, delights, deceit, hypocrisy, etc. This Iaylor will rise
in judgment against us.

The Popish chain of universality, was now not yet coined, or of this man
little esteemed; which, at this time, is one of the great Ankers, which holds
the Popedom that it sinckes not, and keeps so many simple fools in bondage,
upon great bragges and vain ostentation; of a Monster in the air, which
never was, That all the world (forsooth) is of their Religion; or was not long
since. If this be true, where was then, I say, not the popish universality,
(for that has always been an universality of error,) but where was any
universality of the truth, at all, when first the lineage of Seth; then of
Abraham, and his kindred, in all the world, Israel, among all nations: only
Judah, among all the tribes, only John Baptist in all Judea, Christ only and his
Apostles in all the earth, Paul and Silas only in all Macedonia, Luther and a
few others in all Germany, gave testimony of the truth? Had it not been a
foolish thing for this Iaylor to have iested at the truth, because there were
but a few that professed it? Even so gross an absurdity it is now, in our
Papists to say, that we have not the truth, because, it is not universally
credited, and believed of all men, and in all places received, when as it is
certain, that the truth has never been universally received, nor ever will:
but rather it has always been (by the wicked, and most part of the world)
universally persecuted, and kept under, and so will continue, till the day of
Christ.

We see, that if the opinion of wisdom, gravity, and learning; if gray
hairs, strange forms of apparel, with brave and gorgeous shows: if the
riches, pomp, pride, and glory of the world, in the dumb Scribes and
Pharisees, could have pacified the troubled conscience of this poor man, he
needed not to have come to the Apostles. But we learn, that though error, and
the illusions of Satan, bare a gallant face, and delightful countenance,
outwardly to the world, to blind, and deceive the senses of the simple, yet
there is nothing can pacify, (with true peace) the conscience wounded for
sin, but only the word of God. For I pray you, what is he, in all the time
of Popery, that can say, that he was either comforted in conscience, or
converted from sin, by any of the masking shows in apparel, by the melody,
sencing, perfuming, images, painting, guilting, crossing, shriuing, or any
other such Apish toys, used for a pomp, without preaching or expounding the
word? Saint Paul alowes not any thing to be used, neither by the minister, nor
in the Church, Romans 15. 2. 1. Tim. 1. 4. 1. Cor. 14. 26. 40.
but such things only, as concern a godly decency, and are known to edify.

Lastly, here is a glass, which never fails, to show us the true proportion,
of such as be A true glass for all estats.
rightly touched, at the touchstone of Gods spirit. We see this man after he
was touched, how little ashamed he was to confess his blindness, to condemn
himself, to desire help; how little afraid he was, to venture credit,
office, livings, life and all to obtain that salvation which he desired, and
of which he now felt the want. This was a sure token in him, and so it is in
all, to know them that are rightly called, from the hypocritical professors.
For it is as possible, that they which be rightly touched, should continue in
their old covetousness, whordome, drunkenness, blasphemy, malice, negligence,
and injury, as it is for the spirit of God to continue in the heart of a
wicked man: which can never be. Now we see what we are to think of those
liars, which say with their mouths, Wis. 1. 3. 4. 5 Titus. 1. 16.
they know God, and have felt his motions, and yet in their deeds deny him:
and of those fruitelesse and cursed Figtrees, which in the spring bud fair and
promise great hope and yet at harvest yield nothing but Mat. 21. 19.
leaves, etc.

The third circumstance. What question it was that the Iaylor demanded.
The question is. What must I do, to be saved?

He inquires not now, after the fashion of worldlings, what must I do to come
to promotion, to honor and dignity? What must I do to become rich, and to
obtain an easy and quiet life? What must I do to be revenged of my enemies,
to deceive my neighbors, and to satisfy my lust? etc. No he was not troubled
about any such matter, but the spirit of God had now made him careful only
for one thing, and the best thing, which was, what he might do to be saved,
and to have his sin forgiven. And it seems that the judgments of God had
touched him home, that so presently, a man so carnal, so fleshly, so worldly
and sensual, should so willingly take his leave of the love of the world, of
the vanities and pleasures of the same, the love of his house, wife, children,
living, life and all, and only crave to know that which few did desire, which
many did despise, that is, what he might do to be saved. Pointing as it were
with his finger unto the only mark, and end, upon which every man should
have his whole care fixed and planted.

In this question, we are to consider the manner of his coming unto them, and
his salutation. He fell down before the^, he trembled, he brought them out, he
called then in Greek my Lords, by a reverend title. What could he have done
more to Noble men? Nay what could he have done more to the greatest princes in
the world? But a man may ask, how could Paul and Silas abide to be honored
and not reprehend him. Surely, they knew that he honored the^ not
superstitiously (which Paul could not abide in other Act. 14. 14. 15.
places, and men,) but rather that he used this gesture, forced unto it, by the
manifest feeleing Act. 10. 26.
of the judgments of God in the late Earthquake, and therefore suffered him to
do it.



We learn of this Iaylor, to honor the Lords gifts, (especially the word of
truth) wheresoever we find it, whether it be in the prison, or at liberty,
whether it be contemned, or honored, whether it be in men simple and despised,
or in men of credit and dignity. For the Lord chooses many times the weak,
to confound the mighty, and the humble, to shame the proud, etc.

We see again, that the ministry of the word, is a calling and Office,
ordained, and blessed by the Lord, and therefore he will have it honored of
all men. Because the ministers thereof are not the Ambassadors of worldly
Princes, (which is also a calling of great honor, for they represent the
Majesty of the King and are as it were the very mouth of the Prince himself
(but they are the messengers of the Prince of all Princes, the eternal Lord
of heaven and earth: they represent the majesty of the Lord, in his word, and
when we hear them speaking (if they preach nothing but according to the very
word) we must assure our selves that we hear the Lord speaking unto us in
them. Therefore we find that in many places, the word it self gives them
honorable titles, for S. Paul says, they are worthy of double honor. This
Iaylor here 1. Tim. 5. 17
calls them by the worthiest name of pre-eminence that he could devise, not in
respect of their persons, which seemed to be but simple, but for the love and
honor which he bare to the word, which they professed.

Another thing we are here to consider, which may not be forgotten, That, the
Iaylor in demanding this question, What must I do to be saved, flatly and
plainly overthrows, and condemns, all the Religion of the Scribes and
Pharisees, to be nothing else, but a fardle of ceremonies, toys, and
superstitions, joined with a worldly pomp, and beauty only, having nothing
in it to comfort the heart oppressed with Woe, or assure the conscience of the
mercy of God in Jesus Christ, which is the only Savior and salvation of the
elect by faith. For if he had been persuaded that the doctrine which the
Pharisees taught concerning the fulfilling of the law, had been sufficient
for his salvation, and to have brought him the right way to the mercy of God,
and the forgiveness of his sin, he would never have come unto the Apostles,
to have learned another way, which had been superfluous. But we see plainly,
that he did now not only doubt, but boldly renounce, and abandon and forsake in
the plain field, the Pharisees superstition, the rites, and Religion wherein
he was borne, brought up, and had for a long time continued. Because he saw
that now, when he most needed, he could find no comfort nor salvation in it at
all. As if he should say: Sirs, I was borne under the Religion The Oration of
the Iaylor unto the Apostles.
which the Pharisees profess, I have been zealous in it, as many others at
this day are. I have had an honorable opinion of it, and have hated them that
have gain-saide it, I have been of long time now led with their outward pomp
of dumb shows, and I could never by any means be persuaded that these
great, grave, ancient, learned and wise men could ever have been deceived, or
have been convinced of any error, or so blinded, that they could not have seen
the truth. Yet now, I plainly see, that they all, the very best of the^, are
but hypocrites, blind guides, folish, ignorant of the true knowledge, wicked,
Ma, 23. 13
and the generation of Vipers, which shut up the kingdom of heaven, and will
neither enter themselves nor suffer others that would, which devour the
widows houses with color of long prayer, which compass sea and land to make
one of their profession, which make clean the outerside of the cup and
platter, but within are full of briberie and excess, which I see are nothing
else but whited Tombs, full of dead men's bones, and all filthynes, etc. I can
not find now in their Religion any comfort at all for a wounded conscience, or
any hope to have my sins forgiven. Now therefore since it has pleased the Lord
with one motion to move both body and heart, and that he has made me see my
sin, my ignorance, my blindness: I do here forsake, renounce and detest for
ever, this Pharisaicall superstition. And seeing this course that I have taken,
can do me no good, I pray you, who^ I now know to be the servants of the
living God, and prechers of the truth, Tell me at length what course I must
take, and what I must do that I may be saved?

By which words we see that he did not only suspect but utterly by the spirit
of God renounce that, which the same spirit had told him, to be wicked and
abominable. And I wish in perfect charity that all those which are now
blinded with Popery, and lie yet drunken with the cursed wine of the great
whore of Babylon, al what ever they be either in Italy, France, Spain or
England, may, (if they pertain to the Lords election) feel the like motions
and the like hartquakes to assault their conscience, and open their eyes, that
they may once feel and see their blindness, their errors, and their sins and
certain damnation, that they may once with this Iaylor perfectly bid farewell
unto all the Romish Pharisees, blind guides, and deceiving hypocrites, that now
so monsterously abuse them.

Again, seeing this Iaylor seeks to be saved, let us consider what salvation
it is that he desires. The Greek word signifies such a kind of saving, as
that a man may continually remain assured and without fear. The Syrian
Paraphrase has it, what must I do that I may live? Which is as much to say,
as, to be preserved: which teaches us, that he sought not for the temporal
and present saving of his life, the fear of the earthquake being passed, and
they being that way able to do him no good, neither did he as the wicked are
wont to do, which seeing the judgments of God, for a time tremble, and quake,
but the rod being past, they return again unto their former wickedness: But,
this man being rightly touched, and fearing more his sin, then the Earthquake,
earnestly sought for the salvation of his soul, the comfort of which might
continue with him for ever. If he desired the right way, the very truth, and
life it self, whom did he desire but Christ? If he desired John. 14. 6.
salvation, what desired he but Christ, which is the only Savior of the
faithful? Blessed, says David, is he whose wickedness is forgiven and whose
sin is covered. If no man Psalm. 32. 1
can be blessed, happy, joyful and saved, but they that have their sins
forgiven: then we see what salvation it is that this man sought, namely, an
assurance that his sins should be forgiven, and the means by which he might
attain unto this. This salvation the Pharisees could not teach this Iaylor
then, and our Papists purely without corruption will not have it taught now.

Further, we learn here, if we see any cruel, wicked, and malicious
persecutors of the truth, or any other abominable sinners, not to proceed in
rash judgment against the^, to condemn for reprobates, but rather to leave
this judgment to the Lord, who only knows what they be that are his, because
we know not whether the Lord have appointed both time and means for their
conversion, as he had for this Iaylor, etc.

Lastly we learn, that this care and desire of the Iaylor condemns the cares
and desires of many of us that have been longer ^h. 10. 41. 42.
taught. Christ said once to a worldly minded Martha, Martha, thou carest and
art troubled about many things, but one thing is needful, etc. This one
needful thing is to desire to hear the word of God and the means how to be
saved, and have our sins forgiven. This one thing had the Iaylor now found,
this one thing he desired and no more. Whosoever therefore neglecting the word
of God and care of salvation, applies his mind to any other exercise,
pleasure, or profit, his care is needless, vain, foolish and wicked. For all
our cares, studies and endeavors, wherein we have not a principal regard unto
the glory of God and our own salvation, are accursed of the Lord, and
therefore can never bring a blessing upon us. The counsels and conspiracies of
the wise Achitophels, 2. Sam. 17.
the Lord for his David shall overthrow by his appointed Hushais. No provision,
counsel, or determination for the government or safety of any common-welth,
can ever stand long, or bring a blessing upon that land, where the principal
mark of all their devises tend not to the establishing and setting forth of
the truth, the honor of God, and salvation by Christ Jesus our only Savior.
Hospitality is good: a reasonable provision of things necessary, is alowable:
an earnest desire to be diligent in our vocations, occupations, and callings,
is commended: but yet to love, follow, or be busied so in any of these, that we
neglect at times convenient, and when occasions be offered, to hear the
Sermons of Christ, or neglect the learning of the knowledge of our salvation,
is in Martha by Christ greatly reprehended. There be many Marthaes in England
which trouble themselves about many vain pleasures, offices, and devises,
while in the mean time they neglect the best duty: As Gentlemen that trouble
themselves to build fair houses and gorgeous palaces, which yet care not for
the building of the Lords house, and as little for their own salvation:
country men that are careful to provide for their posterity, yet careless
for their own safety and help of their souls: Ministers, which either for
ignorance, negligence, or contempt of the word, leaving the consideration of
their calling give themselves some to be husbandmen, farmers, grasiers etc, some
to be Physicians, Lawyers, and other secular officers, as though that one
blessed calling of theirs were not needful only, and sufficient, to preach the
word of God truly, and to live thereafter, and to bring the simple and
ignorant to know which way they must be saved. etc.

The fourth circumstance. What it was, which brought this man to this
Consideration.
The text shows us, that it was the judgment and hand of the Lord which he
felt in the Earthquake, and the holy Ghost also inwardly working which wrought
this care and desire in him, and made him to have a consideration of his sins,
etc.

It is good for me Psalm. 119. 67 71
that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statuts. For before I was
troubled, I went astray, but now I keep thy word. The worldly minds which are
not endued with spiritual knowledge, do wonderfully repine, murmr, and
frown against all miseries, sickness, calamities, plagues, or what troubles so
ever happen in this life, detesting al things which are not pleasant to the
flesh, as a thing most repugnant to nature. But the godly on the other side do
know, that the church and servants of God in this life, are subject to many
crosses, troubles, persecutions, not yt the Church shall perish with these
afflictions, but rather yt it is thus ordained by the singular providence of
the Lord, that by this means his servants may see their sins, and the Lords
anger against it, that they may learn to tame the mad and outrageous
concupiscence of the flesh, and that faith, love, charity and mercy, with the
feeling of one another infirmities, may daily increase, and be renewed in
them. Where we see, that these afflictions, are nothing but just corrections
for our escapes and faults: and we see what they be that are most fit to
receive admonition, even such as are most visited with afflictions, griefs,
sickness, want of things necessary, and such like, etc. Blessed is the man
whom the Lord corrects, because it is a sign of his love, and blessed Job.
3. 17.
is that man which indureth temptations, and continues constant to the end,
and is not Iam. 1. 12.
ouerborne with calamities, for he shall receive a Crown of life, which the
Lord has Mat. 5. 10.
promised to them that love him.

Again; we are to learn, that, whenever we see the Lord to wound our
consciences, or to threaten us with any calamity, wars, plagues, sickness,
or any other visitation, he does it for no other cause, but to make us to
consider that we are gone astray, that we are out of order, that our life is not
such as it should be, and that he has a heavy quarrel, and reckoning against
us. Then here we see the cause, why the Lord has of late given us so many
gentle warnings, showed us so many loving rods, and like a merciful father,
has rather made us as yet to see them, then to feel them. And yet surely we
have so seen the sentence (as it were) of our own condemnation, in signs in
the heavens, and wonders in the earth, in Earthquakes, in the necessity, and
cry of many thousands in this time of misery, by the stop of mutual traficke,
and even now in these rumors of wars, and expectations of foreign invasion:
that we may easily conjecture, what effect there will follow, if the cause be
not removed. Our sin, our unthankfulness, our negligence, our careless and
licentious liberty, in all estates, our wicked behauiours, our monsterous
apparel, our want of charity, love and patience, our abundance of envy,
malice, deceit, whordome, and like abominations, are the causes of these
tumults, of these motions, of these fears, and of these signs and tokens.
And, if we with this Iaylor be not drawn, by some means to seek help the
sooner, we are to look for some heavy misery to fall upon us and our land.
The Lord shakes these rods over our heads to some purpose, we must think. A
careful and loving father, if he find his child's stomach so stubborn, that
the sight of the rod, and threatening will not terrify him, at length he falls
to severe whipping, and chastning of him indeed. I pray God, that my fear and
conjecture in this respect, may be vain: but surely I fear, and by most
manifest signs am driven to conjecture, that, except very shortly we all,
even from the highest unto the lowest take an other course and trade of
behauior, we must look for a fearful end of our long, our sweet and pleasant
peace, that has now so soundly lulled a sleep some of us in the cradle of
security, some in the cradle of iniquity, some in the cradle of Atheism,
doubting of God, giving Manifest signs of Atheism.
no credit to the Scriptures, disputing of foolish and heathnish questions,
and seeking to comprehend the works and power of God, which are in the
vnscrutable wisdom of the Lord, by reason and not by faith: which Saint Paul
proves to be a monstrous folly, Romans 1.
some in the cradle of Anabaptisme, some at the breast and sweet teate of
Popery, all in the rolling and unsettled cradle of our own fantasy. Alas, the
careful souls of many thousand poor men that have been oppressed, cry out
of our land and every corner thereof, as the blood of Abel for vengeance
against our land, and against our hypocrisy, and abusing of our religion. What
end can we imagine, what reward can we look for, but the fearful mark of
Caine, and the heavy judgment of the forsaken, hateful and wandering Jew? I
fear greatly least these thirty and eight years of pleasant peace, have
provoked God more to anger against this land, then five hundred years before
of war and misery. O that Gods blessings should be so abused, that they
should end with so heavy a curse. O that his mercy should lead us to such
unmercifulness, that we should forget the care of our own salvation, and fall a
murdering of our own souls. O that we should live to see that day, in which
the sweet benefits and loving patience of the Lord should make us the worse.
Happy is the man that with this Iaylor finds occasion and his motions in these
things to come unto the Lord; and happy may that man be thought which rests
in the Lord, which shall not see the misery of the future times, which sin
and Satan without repentance will pull down upon this Noble realm, etc.

We see farther, by the great care which this man had to know how to be saved,
and the haste that he made to obtain his purpose, that he gave sure tokens
of his obedience to his calling: which teaches us that the judgments of God
take not like effect in all men, For in some, that is, in the elect which are
rightly touched by the spirit of God, it is true that the Prophet said: As Soon
as they hear, they shall obey me. But in others, Psalm. 18. 44.
this is true, I called but they would not hear nor obey. There be some which
at the judgments of God tremble for a time, but it is again presently
forgotten, as Pharao, the keepers of Christ's Sepulcher, Caligula and many
others. But in the godly they work Exodus 7. 3. Mat. 28. 5.
contrary effects. It is true amongst most of us, that the more signs and
tokens of Gods wrath we see, the harder our hearts grow daily: what may the end
of these things be? A blind man may see. The Lord be merciful unto us, and
give us grace with this Iaylor be more careful of our salvation.

We learn also, that a great festred sore, needs a sharp and quick
Surgion. These proud Rabbis and great Doctors would not hear the voice of
the Ministers of the Gospel speaking unto them, neither could their voice
drive them to any consideration of their estate. Therefore the Lord sent them
the voice of a more terible preacher, which shook both bodies and houses all
at once, assaying by this means to bring their impenitent hearts, to some
shaking, feeling, and fear of conscience for their sins. But as Which was
felt about the year, 1580.
that Earthquake showed them, so our last Earthquake, and other tokens since,
show us plainly now, the estate wherein we stand, which is, that we yet
continue in our sins, That we despise the voice of the Gospel, and need a
more sharp preacher* it opens our security, it threatens Gods justice in
severity, it promises our punishment, and shows us that it is very near the
last time of warning.

Happy (we see) are they which come, when the Lord calls them, for many be
called, but few are chosen, few come. What callings should we look for more
then we have had? We have had our daughter diseased, our son sick, our
servant like to die, we have seen fearful signs over Jerusalem, we have
heard of the gatherings, of the confederacies and conspiracies, of many nations
against us, we have found little faith in our friends, little loyalty in our
own natural children, great falsehoode in friendly face, great divisions,
quarrels, and hartburnings amongst our selves, many Malcontent daily rising,
and a thousand other such callings, besides the consideration of the silly
threede of our happy estate, depending upon one, and in earthly respects but
one only; the uncertainty of all things, when God shall visit us, the
turmoyles and hurliburlies, that we may long before plainly see, if God of his
mercy help not. These things are considered of few, of many not accounted of,
and feared of none. What will the end of these things be? Let all the
inhabitants of England cry: Lord save our Noble Queen Elizabeth from treason
at home, and from foreign enemies abroad. Lord forgive her her sins, and us
our wickedness, and grant, if it be thy will, that she may yet long and long
time in peace, and in saftie preserve this her Noble Realm of England. Amen.

Lastly, we learn the great mercies of our God. For he chideth before he
stricke, he warns before he destroys; he punishes not, till he have used
all means to have us return. He gives sinners, both grace and space to
repent, and to seek which way they may be saved, with this sinful Iaylor.

The fifth and last circumstance: The time when he fell to have this care, what
he might do to be saved.
He never fell to this consideration, till the Lord drew him unto it by his
spirit. For in the nature of man, there is no good thought motion or power to
return from evil, to consider and see our sins, or to lament and be sorry
for them, and at the word to seek for remedy against them; but rather, a
desire, will and affection still to remain in them. Therefore Christ said. No
man can come unto me, except my father draw him. This man John. 6. 37. 44. and
3. 27
had his part of two motions. The one outward by the miracle, the other inward
by the holy Ghost.



Again we see, how naked, weak and miserable we be of our selves: and that,
if we were not governed and nourished by better power then our own, how
quickly and miserably we should perish. Therefore this consideration may
serve to conquer the spirit of pride in our freewill men, when they shall know
that in their flesh and human nature there is no goodness at all, and that they
can perform nothing, that is good without him that said. Without me, ye can do
nothing. 1. Cor. 4. 7. Act. 20. 35.


What have thou (says Paul) which thou have not received?

We learn that faith is not in the power and nature of man, to believe or not
to believe when Ep. 1. 18. 19 1. Cor. 12 ^ 9 11.
it pleseth him, but yt it is the free gift of God for Christ's sake, unto those
that are his chose^. For if it were in the nature of man, then all Phil. 1. 29.
2. These. 3, 2.
men should believe. But Al men have not faith, therefore, it is in us a work
supernatural, wrought by the spirit of God only: The want of the presence,
and working of which spirit, in the hearts of men, makes them, that they have no
desire to hear the word, and when they do hear it, they take no profit by
it, for it is said. But the word which they heard, profited them not, because
it was not mixted Heb. 4. 20
with faith in them that heard it. Where we see a notable relation between
faith, and the word. The one can never be effectual without the other. They go
both together. Therefore as soon as there was a faith kindle in the heart of
this Iaylor, by the holy Ghost, he seeks presently for the word, as the body
for the soul. For as the body is a dead thing without the soul, so the word
also has no life, effect or motion without faith. Now we see why many
Gentlemen, Countriemen and others are yet either Atheists, ^esters in Religion,
or despisers of the word, because as yet with this Iaylor they have not
received the gift of faith, etc.

Here we understand, that all shall not be saved, against the error of Origin:
for without faith none can be saved: but none have faith but they only whom
God the father gave unto his son Christ. But he says, I pray not for the
world, but for them which thou Ioh. 17. 9.
have given me. Therefore the elect which are separated from the world, (that
is the reprobate,) by the free election, and donation of God, and are guarded by
the continual prayer of Christ, are they only that shall be saved. Of which
number we see now this Iaylor by his calling, and faith, to be one. For Gods
election oftentimes lies hid under a wicked life, till the time of their
conversion come, which the Lord has appointed.

All are not, we see, drawn to Christ in one manner: for there be many which
profess Religion, and talk much of Christ, whom God the father by his
spirit never drew, but either their belly, hope of honor, vain glory etc.
No marvel though they believe not rightly, and though they continue not long
in a good course. Such are many of our earnest Jesuits, Papists, and libertine
professors of the Gospel of Christ.

Lastly, when it is said, that this Iaylor was drawn to this Religion and to
this godly care, and in like manner all the elect, we learn what
unwillingness, what slacknesse, and what negligence we use in our coming to
Christ, and that we of our own nature have no list, affection, or good will
to come, longer then God by his spirit, moves us and compels us. Therefore
if Christ should look for us till we should come of our selves, we should
surely never see him, nor have any part in him. Let us therefore desire the
Lord, that as he by his holy spirit drew this Iaylor from the miserable
thraldom of ignorance, error, and iniquity, and planted a desire in him to
seek the truth, and by the same gave him both comfort and salvation: So in
like manner that he will by the same spirit move our hard hearts to lament our
sin, open our blind eyes to see our imperfection, and draw our proud
stomakes to humble our affections, to the obedience of the word, and kindle in
us a love to like, and seek the same, that we also in our most extremities,
may by Christ receive light, help, and everlasting comfort: which the Lord God
grant unto us, for his dear Son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the holy
Ghost, three persons and one eternal God, be al honor, power, praise, glory
and dominion both now and ever.

Let all praise and glory be given to God alone.
FINIS.

