THE SUM of Sacred Divinity Briefly and Methodically Propounded: More Largly
and clearly handled and explaned.

PUBLISHED by John Downhame Bachelor in Divinity.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AS in material buildings, the skill of those Workmen is commendable, who can
cunningly frame the singular parts, and so beautify and set them forth, as
that they may be pleasant to the eye, and convenient for use; as they that can
make fair Walls and Windows, a graceful Frontispice and comely Roof; but
they are most praiseworthy, who can well contriue the whole plot, lay a good
and sure Foundation, and in due proportion can frame out and set up the
principalls and chief parts which sustain and bear all the rest: so in the
spiritual Edifice, they are worthily to be commended, who skilfully handle
particular points of Divinity in their Learned and Religious Tractates,
whereby the judgment of the Reader is thoroughly informed in those divine
Mysteries, and the heart and will inclined to draw them into holy use; but, yet
none deserve better of the Church of God, nor ought rather to have their names
registered with red Letters in the Calendar of the worthiest Saints, then they
who in their Writings or Sermons, do skilfully contriue the whole building or
body of Divinity in a wel-framed plot, lay a sound and sure foundation, and
thereupon erect the chief Principles and most substantial parts which are the
strength and stay of all the rest. For if the judgment be once thoroughly
informed in these main points; then is it able to deduce from them innumerable
particular Conclusions for special information and direction in the
well-ordering of our lives in all singular actions; then may we with profit
and without peril of falling into pernicious errors, read the holy
Scriptures, when we are able to interpret them according to these infallible
Canons and Rules; then may we hear the Word preached with understanding, and
try the spirits of those who preach unto us whether they be of God or no,
when we have skill to examine their Doctrines according to this Analogy of
Faith, and can try them by this neuer-deceiuing Touchstone, whether they be
pure metal, or but reprobate silver, and counterfeit coin. Then shall we be
more strongly armed against all assaults of enemies and adversaries to the
Truth, false Seducers and subtle Heretics, and be better able to defend that
Verity which we profess, and convince them of their errors and lies; then
(wanting this help) if we should spend our whole time in reading of
Controversies, and even dim our eyes, and tire our brains in the perusing
and studying of Polemicall discourses. For, these many grounds of Truth do
yield from them such a clear light, that they do not only appear in their
own brightness, but also discover the blackness of error, and from one
Principle well understood, we infer the falsehood of innumerable contrary
Conclusions: whereof it is, that we shall very rarely observe any well-grounded
in the fundamental points of Religion, to fall into the snares of subtle
Seducers: whereas contrariwise we may commonly see, that those who are
ignorant of them, though never so sharpe-sighted in curious speculations, do
become an easy prey, and are quickly catched in the nets of their Sophistry.
In which respects it were much to be wished, that both Ministers would be
more frequent and diligent in laying these grounds in their Teaching and
Writing; and also that the people would receive this more solid and
substantial food with a better appetite. The which of both is too much
neglected, because how soever these grounds are most necessary, yet they do
not make so glorious a show as other points less substantial, because like a
sure foundation they are plain and unpolished; whereas the other being
beautifully garnished with wit and eloquence, do delight the sense, and more
pleasingly work upon the heart and affections. And yet we must acknowledge to
Gods glory, who has given these gifts to men, and grace to use them, that
there have not been wanting in these latter times many famous Worthies, who
have happily labored in this kind, and with great soundness and perspicuitie
have delivered and cleared these main points by their speaking and writing.
Among which (Christian Reader) I commend unto thee the Author of this Book, as
deserving justly to be ranked among the best, both for Method and Matter, sound
handling of the chief points of Christian Religion, and for clearing by the
way diverse hard places of holy Scripture. All which he performs in this
work with such learning, judgment, and piety, that had he herein respected
the praises of men, he might well have graced his Name with his Work, even as
his Work would have been graced by his Name, and not as one ashamed of so
beautiful an offspring have suffered it to come abroad into the World as an
Orphan, the Father still living, only under the name of an unworthy
Godfather. The which I write not to commend the Author, who as he is far
above my praises in the high pitch of his own worth; so does he not desire,
but rather shunneth them; and, as to the willing, an injury is no injury; so,
an officious duty is no benefit, but a kind of wrong, where (the party
nilling) it is forced and obtruded. Nor yet do I praise the work for the
Workers sake, which, though it comes abroad without the Fathers name, yet
will, I doubt not, in short time be famous in it own name and excellency;
but that I may with the weak thread of my censure draw thee to peruse it; and
so will it sufficiently commend it self, and give there just cause of praising
God for stirring up such Instruments of his Glory and thy good. The Lord make
this and all other the godly labors of his faithful Servants, effectual for
magnifying of his great Name, and the further Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
building up of the body of his Son, till we all come in the Unity of the
Faith and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect Man, and unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no
more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine,
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive: but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things
which is the Head, even Christ.

AMEN.
Thine in the Lord Jesus, JOHN DOWNAME.

An Advertisement to the READER.
THis Book, tending to explane another, entitled, The sacred Doctrine of
Divinity, wherein the whole body of Religion is set forth according to rules
of Art: it was thought necessary to place the Art in the Margent on the one
hand, and some principal Heresies and Errors, contrary to the Doctrines here
handled, as they arise, on the other. Also for thy better help, we have
herewithall printed the Art by it self, before the beginning of the Book; If
it differ in any thing from this at the Margent, follow that which is by it
self at the beginning. Difference in substance there is not any, but the
Copy: for that at the Margent was not altogether so perfect.

THE FIRST BOOK OF DIVINITY, OF GOD THE CREATOR.
CHAPTER I.
Of GOD the FATHER, the SON, and the HOLY GHOST.

Divinity is a Doctrine of glorifying God, whereof there be two parts: One,
that concerns God: The other, concerning Emanuel, God with us.

God is Jehovah, three Persons.

Jehovah, which is Being or Perfection it self, signifies a Nature that has
all good and perfect things in a most perfect and incommunicable manner.

The perfect things in God, beside Life, Understanding, and Will, (without
which no perfection can be) are Holiness and Blessedness.

Holiness is the purity of his Nature; from whence comes a Righteousness
in all his Ways, specially seen to us in four chief and principal Virtues,
which in the Scripture you shall find for the most part to go by couples or
payres.

The first couple are Kindness and Truth: Kindness, in being ready to bestow
all good things.

Truth, faithfully to perform whatsoever he speaks.

The other couple are Justice and Mercy, flowing from the former.

Justice, to render to every one his due.

Mercy, in being ready to help in time of need.

This is the Holiness of GOD, and his Righteousness coming from it;
Blessedness is his All Sufficiency of things that make one happy; and stands
in Kingdom and Power, or Glory.

Kingdom, is his Sovereignty of commanding whatsoever he will.

Power, his ableness to do whatsoever he commands.

Glory, comprehends all the excellencies of his Nature; as, Wisdom, and
other Graces of the mind, Strength, Comeliness and Beauty, Graciousnesse, or
an amiable and lovely Nature: a complete furniture of Riches, Honor, and of
all kind of Pleasures and Delights.

These are the Perfect themselves: His perfect and incommunicable manner of
having of them, is, Infiniteness and Eternity.

Infiniteness, whereby he is without circumscription, and therefore of a most
single Nature (that whatsoever is in God, is God himself) and therefore also
invisible and incomprehensible.

Eternity, whereby He is without beginning or ending; and therefore of
himself and unchangeable.

This is it we mean by JEHOVAH, who upon all that has been said, is, nor can
be but One.

The three Persons are each of them, that one Jehovah diversely subsisting; and
are the Father, and the Son, or the Holy Ghost.

The Father is a Person, who from all eternity has begotten the Son.

The Son is a Person, from all eternity begotten of the Father.

The Holy Ghost is a Person, eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son.

CHAP. II.
Of the Eternal Decrees of God.

GOD being thus in his Nature and Person most glorious, has further
embroidered himself in glory, by two notes of excellency, which he takes to
him, Kingdom and Honor.

Kingdom, is that whereby he does exercise an absolute Sovereignty toward
others. The order whereof, answerable to the relation between the Persons
themselves, is from the Father in the Son by the Holy Ghost: to whom is
attributed the immediate doing of them.

The Kingdom of God has two parts, Purpose and Works: Purpose is his Decree
before all times, of euerything.

CHAP. III.
Of Creation.

THe Works of God, are the execution of his Purpose; and are Creation and
Providence.

Creation, is his making all things of nothing, finished in six days; and was
of every Creature in excellency of perfection.

Of the reasonable Creatures, Angels, and Men, it was after his own Image and
Likeness, in Holiness and Happiness.

Holiness, in a mind enlightened with the knowledge of the whole Will of God,
and all the strengths of Nature conformed thereunto.

Happiness, in the fruition of Gods love, and (from thence coming) a
Conjunction and Communion with him.

Conjunction, is an inioying of his Personal presence.

Communion, is a participation, in some sort, of his Blessedness, both Kingdom,
Power, and Glory.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Providence.

Providence, is his governing of the things created.

CHAP. V.
Of the Moral Law.

SO much of the Kingdom of God; the honor due unto him, is, That the
reasonable Creatures (Angels and Men) do his Will, with that whole strength of
their natural integrity; Every thing with so much the greater strength, as
the duty does more excel, the doing whereof is termed Righteousness.

CHAP. VI.
The first Table, and the first Commandment.

Righteousness has two parts, Piety, and Justice. Piety, is of the
immediate duties to God, whereof this is the whole, that we have God to be our
God.

The parts are two: One to cleave unto him, Loving, Reuerencing, Feating,
Believing, Trusting, and Hoping in him; from whence arise Patience and
Humility.

The other to worship him: which worship comprehends all kind of Service
public and private. One principal part whereof is Prayer; both petition for
the obtaining of good things, or turning away of evil, and thanksgiving for
all we do enjoy. A piece also of this Service (when just cause requires) is
swearing and cursing by his Name, making our Vows unto him, and by lotterie to
commit into his hands the success of our doubtful affairs.

CHAP. VII.
Of the second Commandment.

TO the worship of God, two things do belong; a holy manner of worshipping
God, and a holy rest. The manner stands in Obedience and Reverence. Obedience
is the worshipping of him according to his Commandment.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the third Commandment.

Reverence is a religious affection in the service of God, whereunto are
requisite Preparation and Humiliation: and, when need is* both Fasting* to
quicken us to petition in the acknowledgement of our unworthiness and wants,
and Feasting, to express our thankfulness for his benefits.

CHAP. IX.
Of the fourth Commandment.

THis is the manner of Gods worship: A holy rest is a sanctifying of a time
unto his service; which (beside other times as occasion shall be offered) in a
Family or for ones self apart, ought ordinarily to be in the Morning and
Evening of every day: for Church-meetings on such Days and Times of the day,
as may stand with the conuenience of that Church.

But of necessity one whole day in seven, is thus to be kept holy, both with
public and private exercises: In which number the duties of brotherly love, as
distributing to the Poor, according to Gods blessing upon us, visiting the
Sick, helping our Neighbor, or any thing that is his, in their distress,
come also to be reckoned when they are done, as works of Mercy.

This Day, in the first institution, was the seventh Day from the Creation, and
called the Sabbath Day, beginning on the evening of the day before, when the
Creation of the World was finished.

CHAP. X.
Of the second Table of the Law, and of the fifth Commandment.

Justice follows, which is of the duties among our selves, and is honor or
the general duties of Love.

Honor, is a performance of duties in respect of a degree. First, among
unequals, from Inferiors to their Superiors, and contrariwise: As,

To all Superiors in years, knowledge, or howsoever else. Reverence, in
acknowledging the good things wherein they are preferred, and making our use of
them. The notes of which Reverence are, rising up before them, Giving them the
honor, and place of speaking first, etc.

To them in Authority, Subjection in a ready submission to their government,
and obedience, voluntarily to do what they command, or (when it cannot with a
good conscience be done) patiently to bear the punishment.

To public authority of Magistracy and the Ministry, supplying of Charges,
and other necessaries for the execution of their Office, and a defending of
them in the same.

Touching them in private Authority.

To Parents, not marrying without their consent, and in their necessities to
relieve them.

To Masters, faithful service.

To Husband and Wife, each from other mutual help and due benevolence. The
Wife also to represent her Husbands virtues, and to save that which he
brings in.

Again, from all Superiors, a good example of grave and wise carriage, and
using of the things wherein they are preferred to the others benefit.

From them in Authority, first, instruction of their Inferiors in the things
of God, and of their special callings. Then due recompense of good or evil
actions. And lastly, protection from wrongs.

From public Authority, that is to say, from Magistrates, maintenance as well
of true Religion, as of Peace and Honesty of life. From the Ministry public
teaching.

From private Authority, provision of Food and Raiment, familiarly to teach
their Inferiors, and in Prayer to go before them.

From both the Parents, to apply their Children to that they are fit for, and
to provide for them. The Father to name the Child, the Mother to nurse it.

From Masters, due respect of their Servants travails.

From Husbands, cherishing of their Wives, with all entire affection.

Secondly, it is of equals one unto another, in loving, honoring, doing of
good to all, but chiefly to such as by the bond of Nature, or profession of the
same Faith, are more nearly linked unto us.

And lastly, toward our selves the maintayning of our honest credit, and sober
esteeming of the graces we have received.

CHAP. XI.
Of the sixth Commandment.

THe general duties of Love, are those that are without respect of degree: And
respect the Person or the good things belonging to the Person: Person, as Mercy
and Chastity.

Mercy, is of the duties that touch the preservation of ones person. Where the
special virtues, that lead us by the hand, to the keeping of this
Commandment, are Meekness and Kindness.

Meekness, in a gentle and peaceable disposition, ready to depart from ones
right; slow to wrath, and patient to endure wrongs.

Kindness, in a loving disposition and helpfulnesse unto other, not only
forgiving offenses, but recompencing good for evil.

CHAP. XII.
Of the seventh Commandment.

Chastity, is of the duties that touch the purity of ones person, both soul
and body; and that as well in single life, as in the state of marriage, which
God has instituted, for a Remedy against Uncleanness.

The two preservatives of Chastity, are Modesty and Temperance.

Modesty, which keeps a comely Shamefastness in Words, Countenance,
Gesture, Apparel, and other things.

Temperance, which is a moderate and sober use of lawful Pleasures, especially
in Meats and Drinks, and in the use of Marriage.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the eighth Commandment.

THose that respect the good things belonging to the Person, are Uprightness,
and Contentedness; Uprightness, is to hold a lawful course in dealing about
them: and stands in Right, and Truth.

Right, which is in dealing justly. Both for the means of coming by them,
that it be by lawful Purchase, or Descent: and in the use of them, to do it
frugally and liberally, by a cheerful communicating of them all, both in
Giving and Lending: One Branch whereof, is Hospitality.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the ninth Commandment.

TRVTH, is in dealing faithfully. As Prudence in judging aright; Simplicity,
in speaking and doing the Truth; Charity, to take things in the best part, etc.

CHAP. XV.
Of the tenth Commandment.

THis is Uprightness: Contentedness, is to rest fully satisfied with that
which God bestows; rejoicing in another good, as in our own: which is the
top and perfection of Love.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Covenant of Works.

WIth the Creatures, who are thus to do his Will, it has pleased GOD to make
a Covenant, which is called the Covenant of Works: A Covenant of Life, to the
Doers; of Death, unto Transgressors: Both more, or less, as the Righteousness
or Sin abounds.

Life, is a continual Progress in Holiness and Happiness.

Death, is a Sinful and Cursed Estate.

Sinful, in Darkness, and a total corruption of the whole strength of
Nature, unto all Unrighteousness.

Cursed, in the Wrath of God, and all the evil that comes of it, contrary to
the former, Conjunction and Communion with him.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Fall of Angels.

THis Covenant, both Angels and Men (in our first Parents, Adam and Eve) kept
for a time: but left unto themselves, they quickly fell away.

First, of the Angels, some only fell; but a great multitude. One (the
Scripture names him Satan, or the Devil) the chief Ringleader of the rest.

The Curse upon them, is the fullness of Gods Wrath; which falling upon a bare
Creature, not able to bear the brunt of it, crusheth him down into Hell for
ever. And this estate is called Damnation, drawing with it the full height and
top of all Iniquity, hatred of God, obstiuate Unrepentance, final
Desperation, and such like. Notwithstanding, it pleases God many times to send
them some release out of that Dungeon, suffering them to dwell in the Air, and
to roame through out the World, that so they may be Instruments to work his
pleasure here among us. All this, till a Day appointed, which we call the
Latter Day, when they shall receive their last Doom, of an everlasting and
more dreadful Damnation, with Execution accordingly.

The Angels that fell not, are supernaturally vpholden from all danger of
falling.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Fall of Man.

AFter the Fall of Angels, by Satan's Temptation of Eve, and through her of
Adam, they, and in them, all Mankind did fall.

The punishment unto them (by the great patience and long sufferance of God,
and in his singular Mercy, to make a way for the Redemption of Mankind) is so
qualified that the uttermost and most extreme fury of it, is put off till the
Latter Day. Whereupon grow two Degrees of this sinful and cursed estate; for
either it is in part, only during this Life; or in the fullness of it, after
Death.

In part only as Sinfulness, not in the highest pitch. Touching their Cursed
estate: first, the Wrath of God upon them so far, that all things, not
Blessings only, but his very Graces, turn to their Ruin: Secondly,
separation from his Presence: Thirdly, loss of our former Sovereignty, and
consequently, of our Power; insomuch, as both the Creatures are become our
enemies, and we slaves to Satan: Fourthly, all kind of Calamities, Ignorance,
Shame, Infirmity, Sickness, and in the end, Death, which is the separation of
Soul and Body.

Yet in all this, some Relics of former D^gnitie do remain, namely, in the
Mind, common Principles of Good and Evil (sparks of that light of Nature)
and some Seeds of Conscience, which notwithstanding are wholly sinful, and
do but serve partly to keep Men from breaking forth, without all shame or
regard of honesty, partly to make them inexcusable: In the Body, a kind of
Majesty; in the whole Man, a certain Sovereignty, that keeps in awe the
brute Creatures.

The Creature here (through the Fall of Man) receineth an impair of his first
perfection.

So much of that which is in part.

The fullness of the Curse after Death, is Damnation with the Devil and his
Angels: In Soul presently, till the Latter Day; at what time, God for that
purpose raising up their Bodies, the whole Man shall receive the like Doom and
Execution accordingly.

A miserable Change to such Men as then are living, shall be instead of a
Death, and rising from it.

The Creature is then also subject to an utter abolition.

THE SECOND BOOK OF DIVINITY. Of EMANVEL, God and Man, our Redeemer.
CHAP. 1.
Of CHRIST.

THis is the sum of that Doctrine which we have concerning GOD. The other
follows, concerning Emanuel, GOD with us.

Emanuel (GOD with us) is in one Person, the Son of GOD, and very Man,
conceived of a Virgin by the Holy GHOST: Who is also CHRIST, or Anointed;
called of his Father, ever since the Fall of Adam, to be a Mediator between
GOD and Man; of a Covenant, to save through Faith in him (that is, by
apprehending of the Covenant) certain few Men, whom GOD his Father has chosen
from Eternity, and given unto him, to set forth in them the praise of his
Mercy.

This Covenant is called the Covenant of Grace: And ratified by the Death of
Him that made it, has also the Name of a Testament.

Being always one and the same in substance, it is nevertheless
distinguished, or distinctly to be considered in the Old and the New Testament.

The Old Testament was the Covenant, through CHRIST to come.

The New Testament, is the Covenant, through CHRIST already come; JESUS, the
Son of Marie.

CHAP. II.
Of the Priesthood of Christ.

OF the Office of Mediation, there be two parts, Priesthood, and Kingdom.

Priesthood, is in the things which he does to God for those Elect. The parts
are Oblation and Intercession.

Oblation, is the offering up of Himself for them. It stands in two things:

First, the sanctifying of his Humane Nature in all Holiness, from the very
first moment of his Conception, for the work of the Mediation.

Then, in the performing of the most excellent measure of Obedience to the Law
of God, that can possibly fall unto any Creature: One principal part whereof,
are his Sufferings; in taking upon him our Sins, and the whole Curse, both
that of this Life, and the fullness of it, due unto them after Death. All which
he fully satisfied. The Curse upon us here, in the whole course of his Life;
the fullness of the Curse, upon the Cross; and Death, by dying under the power
whereof he lay three days in the Grave.

This Righteousness, or Obedience, being the Righteousness of Him, who is
both God and Man, does consequently merit a like supreme measure of
Blessedness; evidently seen in the G(...)s that did follow his Sufferings,
and were in Soul, or Body, apart, or jointly in them both. In Soul he went
to Heaven, presently after Death: His Body he rayled from the Dead, glorious,
the third day, at the da^^ning of the Day: In his whole Person (Soul and Body
joined together) he ascended into Heaven the fortieth day after his
Resurrection, and there sits at the right hand of God; that is to say,
imoyeth all Sovereignty, Power, and Glory.

Hitherto of Oblation. Intercession is the continual presenting of his Merits
to God his Father, on the behalf of those Elect.

CHAP. III.
Of Christ's Government of the World in general.

SVch is the Priesthood of Christ; his Kingdom follows, Kingdom, is in the
things which he does from God for those Elect.

The Kingdom of Christ has two parts: One, whereby he governs all the
World according to their own Nature, since the Fall. In the Angels, perfect;
in Devils, and Men, corrupted; in the rest of the World, perverted.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Prophetical Office of Christ: And of his Word.

THe other, which is unto his Church; a Company of Men, culled out of the
World. This latter part contains his Prophetical Office, and that which the
Scripture, by excellency, terms the Kingdom.

Prophetical Office, whereby he has a Church unto himself, by his Word and
the Power of his Spirit.

The Word of Christ, is his publishing of the Covenant of Grace: Which of the
Old Testament, was called the Promise; of the New, is called the Gospel.

CHAP. V.
Of the outward Church.

HIs Church is the outward Church, or the Church of Gods Elect.

Outward, is of those that profess, to believe in Him.

Several Companies, that assemble for the Exercises of the Word, are so many
Churches and Members of the Whole: And in every of these, God has always some
that are His indeed.

Their Children also are of the Church.

Upon the outward Church, Christ bestows Gifts, both for the Churches common
good, and for a Man's own private.

For the common good* are first things committed to the Churches keeping; then,
Ministeries and Graces.

The things committed, are his Word (whereof we have spoken) to be preached,
Sacraments to be administered, and other holy Things.

Preaching, is an Instruction of the Church by lively Voice in the Word of
Christ; and that by Doctrine, or Exhortation.

Doctrine, in laying forth the Truth, and confuting of contrary Errors.

Exhortation, to apply it also to all good uses; of comforting, denouncing,
sti^^ing up, reproving.

A Sacrament is a sign and seal of the Covenant, either for our entrance, or
continuance in the Covenant.

The administration, is to deliver them, with declaring Christ's Institution,
and Prayer unto God, to make the same effectual, to the end for the which they
were ordained: Which the Scripture calls Blessing, or Consecration.

It follows to speak of Ministeries, and Graces.

Ministeries* are public Functions in the Church; specially for Preaching
(which includes the duty of offering the Churches Prayers) and Administration
of the Sacraments.

Among the Ministers of the Word, some have been (extraordinarily) inspired of
Christ, to deliver both by lively Voice and Writing (so as they could not err)
the whole Truth of Christ, and had power to work Miracles, for the confirming
of their Doctrine.

All other Ministeries are to fetch their Light from the Doctrine of those that
were so inspired.

Graces, are Gifts for the discharge of those public Functions.

Gifts for a Man's own private, are Knowledge of the Word of Christ, and a
Taste of the sweetness of it: Which being the highest Step that it is possible
for any Reprobate to ascend, changes after a sort Man's corrupt Nature* yet so,
as it may be lost again. But whosoever once of Malice falls from it, can never
be repaired.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Church under the Law.

THe Church is One, and cannot be divided: but having regard to the diversity
of Gods Dispensation, it may be distinguished into the Church under the Old
Testament, and the Church in the New.

That under the Old Testament, had diverse Rites, Ceremonies, and Sacrifices,
Figures of Christ, and of the good things we have in him; especially among the
Jews, his then peculiar People: Whereby the Dispensation of those Times was
more obscure, and less accompanied with Knowledge, and other Graces.

But of all these things, as also of their Sacraments, (which, in regard of the
outward Signs, were a part of the Legal Paedagogie) and likewise of the
Ministeries that were among them, both that of Prophets (inspired) by whom were
written the Books of the Old Testament, and of other, I have written at large,
in a Treatise entitled, The Old Testament, or the Promise.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Church in the time of the Gospel.

TO the Church of the New Testament, the Dispensation is in all cleerenesse and
perfection.

Touching the Sacraments, and Ministeries of the New Testament, there be two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Baptism, is a washing with Water, to assure our entrance into the Covenant;
the form whereof is thus, or to this effect:

I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

The Lords Supper, is a feeding with Bread and Wine, to assure our continuance
in the Covenant; the form whereof is thus, or to this effect:

For the Bread, Take ye, eat ye; This is my Body, which is given for you: Do
this in remembrance of me.

For the Cup, Drink ye all of this; for this is my Blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: Do this as often as ye
shall drink it, in remembrance of me.

The Ministers of the New Testament, were Apostles (inspired) (by whose
Ministry were written the Books of the New Testament) Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Church of Gods Elect.

THus far of the outward Church. The other is the Church of Gods Elect,
drawn to believe in Christ, ordinarily, by Preaching: Wherefore with these,
God makes indeed his Covenant. By virtue whereof, our Faith, albeit
apprehending Christ absent, it apprehend Him weakly; yet confirmed by the
Word, and Sacraments, Prayer, and other holy means, it never lets go the
Hold, but continually grows, till we come to see Christ in his glory: So as
Faith has always Hope, that is, an assured waiting for of that blessed Sight,
going with it.

CHAP. IX.
Of Regeneration.

HItherto of Christ's Prophetical Office. The Kingdom (by excellency so
termed) is that, whereby destroying the Old Man by the Power of his Death and
Sufferings, all that are of the Church of Gods Elect, He does regenerate, by
the Power of his Resurrection.

The Day of his Rising, which was the first Day of the Creation, is (for an
everlasting Remembrance of that Benefit) come in place of the Sabbath, and
called the Lords Day; beginning when he arose, and began to renew the World.

Regeneration, is our spiritual incorporating into Christ, every Member in his
due proportion; whereby being one with him, through him with God, and his
Spirit ours, we become Gods children by adoption.

Of a regenerate estate there be two Degrees, as it were two Ages, Infancy,
and Man's estate.

Infancy, which is during this Life, by Faith, and therefore by means of the
Word, and imperfectly sealed up in our own inward assurance of the Spirit, not
in the Worlds discerning of it; and growing according as our Faith does grow:
And this is called the State or Kingdom of Grace.

Man's estate, which is after this Life, by Sight, and therefore immediately by
Christ's Spirit, and in all Perfection: And that is called the State or Kingdom
of Glory.

CHAP. X.
Of Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

THe Spirit of Christ being ours, consequently does save us from our sinful
and cursed estate, to enjoy all the Good that is in him.

It stands in Illumination, and Justification, and (from thence coming)
Sanctification, and Redemption.

Illumination, Whereby expelling Darkness, he does inlighten our Minds with
the Knowledge of the Will of God in Christ; which the Apostle calls Wisdom.

Justification, Whereby forgiving our sins, by his taking them upon him, he
does account the Holiness of his Nature and Righteousness to be ours.

From whence (as I said) come Sanctification, and Redemption.

Sanctification, Whereby slaying Sin, he puts a new Life of Holiness into
us, to bring forth fruits of Righteousness. Wherein there is no more now
required, but that Sin bear not the rule in us: and our Works of
Righteousness, though all mingled with sin, are not only pleasing unto God,
through his forgiveness of the sin; but have beside, of Gods free Goodness,
looking upon them in the perfection of his Son, special Promises of Reward
made unto them, both in this Life, and in the Life to come.

Redemption, Whereby freeing us from the Curse, himself becoming a Curse for
us, he makes us blessed, by the participation of his Blessedness.

Our Blessedness in this estate stands,

First, in the Love of God anew: Whereby all things, not the Calamities and
Troubles of this Life, and also Death it self, but even our very sins turn
unto our good; and in the assurance whereof, we have Peace of Conscience, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, in that we are made near unto him, and have continual access,
with boldness, into his Presence.

Thirdly, in our former Sovereignty and Power over the Creatures; whereof
comes free liberty of using them all, and deliverance from the Bondage of
Satan. This also as a noble access added thereunto, that the holy Angels
themselves are made ministers for our good.

Fourthly, in a Spiritual Glory and Wisdom, and other Graces.

After this Life, comes the fullness of Blessedness, more or less,
according to the diverse measure of our Faith here. To the Soul in Heaven,
presently after Death, till the Latter Day: At what time our Bodies being
raised up glorious, the whole Man shall meet CHRIST coming to Judgment in
the Air, and there receive Sentence of all fullness of Blessedness for ever:
Which we shall enjoy; taken up into Heaven by the virtue of his Ascension.

Certain Men, upon our Savior CHRIST'S Resurrection, rose again, and are
already with him in Heaven.

So are Enoch and Elias both alive, assumed thither.

Those that are living at the Latter Day, shall suddenly be changed, after the
dead are once risen.

The Creatures also, for our sake, shall then be renewed into a Glorious
estate, not subject to Corruption.

A TABLE OF ALL THE principal Points handled in this BOOK.
The first Book.
CHAP. I.
THe scope and drift of the Doctrine of Divinity. Fol. 1. The Parts. 6. Of
God, his Being, Life, Understanding, and Will, Holiness, 1. Petition.
Kindness, Truth, Justice, Mercy, Blessedness, Kingdom, Power, Glory,
Wisdom, Infiniteness, singleness of Nature, Eternity, Unchangeableness.
7. That there is but one God. 26 Of the Persons in God. 27 The distinction of
Persons. 31 The three Persons, and one God. 31 The incommunicable Properties,
whereby they are distinguished. 34 The Godhead of the Son. 35 The Godhead
of the holy Ghost. 53
CHAP. II.
Of the Kingdom of God, and the order of administration thereof. 60 2.
Petition.
Of the Decrees of God; the eternity, cause, generality of the same. 61
CHAP. III.
Of the Creation of all Things. 64 The Matter, and Manner. 72, 73 Six Days
Work. 74 The perfection of the Creature. 75 The holiness and happiness of
the principal Creatures, Angels and Men. 75 Of the Law of Nature. 77
CHAP. IIII.
Of Gods Providence, extending to all Persons and Actions. 82 His free and
absolute Dispensation. 94 The inevitable necessity of the execution of his
Counsels. 101 The end both of Creation and Providence. 109
CHAP. V.
Of the Honor due to God, That his Will be done. 112 3. Petition.
Of the Moral Law, that teaches the Will of God, or the Duties we owe unto
him. 114 Five things which the Law of God generally requires, or which are to
concur in every Duty: 1. To do all that is commanded. 114 2. To do
whatsoever we do, as unto God. 114 3. That there bean Integrity, or right
frame and disposition of all the powers of Nature, both of the Soul and Body.
115 4. To do it with the whole strength of those Powers, Sincerity, Zeal,
Watchfulness, Diligence, and Perseverance. 128 5. To do every thing with so
much the greater strength, as the Duty does more excel. 139
The properties of the Moral Law. 143 Rules for the understanding of the Ten
Commandments. 145 The first Commandment. Of Love, Reverence, Fear, Belief,
Trust, and Hope in God. Of Patience and Humility. Of Prayer, and other
Services. 148
CHAP. VI.
The second Commandment. To worship God as he has appointed. Of Will Worship,
Idolatry, Superstition, etc. 159
CHAP. VII.
The third Commandment. Of Reverence in Gods Worship, Preparation, Attention,
Meditation. Of Fasting, and of a holy Feast. 162
CHAP. VIII.
The fourth Commandment. Of set times in Gods Service. 168 Of the Sabbath day.
The Duties it requires, the day for it in the first Institution, the
Morality. 169
CHAP. IX.
The fifth Commandment. Of Duties to Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters,
Husbands: and from them again. 175 Of Duties to Equals. 186 The due respect we
are to have to our selves. 187
CHAP. X.
The sixth Commandment. Of the Duties of Mercy. 188 Of Meekenes, Gentleness, a
peaceable disposition, putting up of Wrongs. 191 Of Kindness: Pitying and
helping our Neighbor in Distress, forgiving Offenses, ouercomming Evil with
Good. 194
CHAP. XI.
The seventh Commandment. Of Chastity, of holy Marriage, Incest, and
Polygamie. Of Contracts, of Matrimony, of Uncleanness, Buggerie, Adultery,
Fo^nication, Rapt. Of Modesty and Temperance. 198
CHAP. XII.
The eight Commandment. Of Just dealing, and the contrary; Theft, Oppression,
Extortion, Usury, etc. 207 Of Frugalitie, Liberality, Hospitality. 210
CHAP. XIII.
The ninth Commandment. Of Prudence, a righteous Sentence, Slandering, Hearing
of Iales, Flattering and Dissembling. 212 Of Deceit in Bargayning, Buying and
Selling, removing Bounds, fraudulent withholding of Goods, Gaming, and other
unlawful Trades. 214 Of taking Things in the best part, and the contraries,
evil Suspicions, and sinister Censures. 218
CHAP. XIIII.
The tenth Commandment. Of Covetousness, Self-love, Envy, etc.
CHAP. XV.
Of the Covenant of Works. Of Life and Death. 222 The Covenant of Works
serving (in this our corrupt estate) not to justify, but to lead us unto
Christ.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Fall of Angels and Men. The reason of their Fall. The time when they
fell. 227 Special to the Fall of Angels. Their Sin what it was. The number
that fell Their Captain and Ringleader. 228 Of the Deut^s damnation in Hell.
The Release which God does sometimes give them, and why. 230 Of their full
damnation in the latter Day. 232 Of the elect Angels, that did not fall. 232
CHAP. XVII.
Special to the Fall of Man. Their Sin what it was. The Actors that had a
hand in it. 233 In Adam and Eve, all Mankind did fall. 236 Of the total
Corruption of Man's Nature. 237 Of the Curses of this Life. 243 Of the Remn^nts
of Gods Image. 249 Of the impair of the Creature. 252 Of Man's Damnation. 252
Of the Abolition of the Creatures. 255
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Book.
CHAP. I.
OF Christ, the end of the Law. His Godhead, Humane Nature, Christ, the end of
the Law, whom the 3. last Petitions do respect.
the Union of them into one Person. And why all this was necessary. Fol. 267
Of Christ's Office of Mediation. Of his Appointment and Calling thereunto, when
it began. That it belongs to whole Christ, and is appropriate unto him for
whom he makes Mediation, and wherein his Mediation lies. 278 Of Gods
Covenant, the End and Fruit: The Substance, or Foundation: The Means, or
Condition: The extent of the Covenant. 283 The excellency of the Covenant of
Grace above the Covenant of Works. Of the Old and the New Testament. 307 Of
Predestination, both Election and Reprobation. 283 Of the words, Purpose,
Predestination, Prescience, or Foreknowledge. Of the number of Gods Elect: the
Cause, the subordinate Means, the Eternity and Immutabilitie, the end of Gods
predestinate Decrees.
CHAP. II.
Of the Priesthood of Christ. His Calling thereunto. The eternity of it. He
our only Priest. 311 Of the sanctification of Christ's humane Nature. 312 Of
Christ's Righteousness or Obedience. 314 Of his Sufferings. In what nature, and
what things he suffered. 315 Of Satisfaction. How it was, and when: The fruit of
it. 322 Of Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, Glorification. 326 Of his
Intercession. 330
CHAP. III.
Of the Kingdom of Christ. His Calling, and inuesting into it: the fruit of
it. 332 Of his Government of the World in general. The largeness of his
Power: the quality of Administration: the fruit of it. 334
CHAP. IIII.
Of Christ's Prophetical Office. 343 Of his Word. The Author, the Matter, the
Ministerial Instruments: the perfection of his Doctrine. 345 Of the Promise,
and the Gospel. 347 Of the outward Church. The Condition of it, to be subject
to error, to be mingled of good and bad. The privilege of the outward Church,
and of every Member thereof. 348 Of the Sacraments. 360 Of Ministeries.
Preaching of the Word: Public Prayer: Administration of the Sacraments. 366 Of
the Ministry of Men inspired: of a lively Voice: of the Scriptures: the
truth, holiness, authority, perfection of the same: and of Miracles. 368 Of
Graces for the discharge of public Functions. 377 Of Knowledge. 378 Of a Taste
of the sweetness of Christ: and of sin against the Holy Ghost. 379
CHAP. V.
Of the Church under the Law. 387 Of the Church in the time of the Gospel: of
the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. 391
CHAP. VI.
Of the Church of Gods Elect. 399 Of Faith: The nature of it: the persons to
whom it is appropriate: the causes principal, and isntrumental: the
prerogative of the Faithful: the weakness and degrees of it: the growth:
that it never can be lost: the fruit and effect of it. 401 Of Hope. 418 Of
Sight. 417
CHAP. VII.
Of a new World. 419 Of the alteration of the Sabbath: for the Day, Name, Time
of Beginning. 425 Of Regeneration. Of Christ the Head, and our union with him:
of 4. Petition.
the Spirit of Adoption: the Infancy of Regeneration, and Man's estate. 427
CHAP. VIII.
Of Salvation. 5. Petition.
Of removing the Veil of Ignorance: of Wisdom. Of forgiveness of Sins:
Imputation of Righteousness, Justification. Of Mortification, and
Sanctification. 1. Branch of the 6. Petition.
Of imperfect Sanctification, and the degrees thereof. Of the notes and marks
of Sanctification. Of the Lords Prayer. Of the Church Militant: The enemies we
fight against: the two Generals of the Field: the Weapons which both the
enemies and we fight withal: the Goal or Mastrie we fight for: The Issue of
the Conflict. Of Repentance. The Notes, or Signs: the Fruit, and whence we
have it, Of Fasting. The outward abstinence: the end, and true use: the time of
keeping a Fast: it is in the nature of a Sabbath. Gods acceptance of our
Works, and how. The reward due unto them: they no whit merit: the necessity
of doing good Works. Of Celestial Holiness, and of the Church Triumphant. Of
Redemption. 2. Branch of the 6. Petition.
Of the Blessedness of Gods children in this life. Of the state of the
faithful departed. Of the general Resurrection. Who shall rise: by what
power, and in what sort. Special things touching the resurrection of the
Elect. Of the last Judgment. The persons to be judged. The Judge, Christ. Of
his coming to Judgment: the place from whence he shall come: the signs and
manner of his Coming. The Place where the Judgment shall be. Of the Sentence.
The preparation to it: the order of the Sentence: the Sentence it self: the
Reason: the execution of the Sentence; and the order of execution. Of our
taking up into Heaven; and by what right we come thither. Of our full
Blessedness. The root and foundation of the same: the parts: the measure and
quantity: the degrees of Glory, and whence it grows: the eternity. Of
certain that rose upon our Saviors Resurrection. Of Enoch and Elias. Of the
sudden change of those that shall be alive at Christ's coming. Of the renewing
of the Creatures.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF DIVINITY, OF GOD THE CREATOR.
CHAP. I.
Of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

AS all other Sciences are Divinity is a Doctrine of glorifying God.
commended by their end, and every one esteemed so much the more eminent, as
the end does more excel; so it is the worthy praise of the Doctrine of
Religion, which is the same that we call Divinity, that it looks to such an
end as is incomparably most to be desired, most to be loved and embraced of us;
that is to say, the glory of God, Romans 11. 39.
From whom, and by whom, and to whom, are all things: And whose glory ought to
be a thousand-sold more dear unto us then our lives, yea* then the salvation
of our souls.

This therefore is the scope and mark Heresies and Errors.

A Theists, that say, There is no God; whom not only the Word of God, but all
the Things created, especially this goodly Frame and Workmanship of the World,
and even their own Consciences sufficiently confute: since they cannot but see
and understand hereby, that there must needs be some Divine Power, before all,
and above all, of whom these things were made, and by whom they are governed in
so wise and gracious sort, as the ^postle teaches, Romans 1. 20. For his
invisible Things, that is, his Eternal Power and Godhead, being understood by
the things created, are clearly seen by this Frame of the World, to the end
that men might be inexcusable. And therefore, these Wretches that strive
against their Conscience, to put out so clear a Light, which, will they nill
they, shines thus bright in their eyes, are to be left unto themselves, and
Gods just hand upon them, as utterly unworthy to be dealt with by any further
Arguments.

The whole Doctrine of Popery, which in all the points of their Religion
spoyleth God of his glory: for, 1. In stead of the true blessed God, they set
up an Idol of their own brain, one neither perfectly righteous, which
accepts an imperfect satisfaction; as whatsoever proceeds from man (whom
they will have able to satisfy for his own sins) must of necessity be; nor
perfectly merciful, if he do not freely forgive sin, but receive some part
of recompense at our hands, contrary to that of Esaias 43. 25. I, I, for my
self, that is, freely for mine own mercy and glory do away iniquities.

2. His incomprehensible and incorruptible glory, they transform into the
image of a corruptible creature, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 23. painting
him out sometimes after the likeness of an old man, sometimes in one shape,
sometimes in another, as if Time did wear him, or Age alter him, who is the
Eternity of Israel, and never changes.

3. Their prayers to He Saints and She Saints, and angels* which is a glory
proper unto God, Psalm. ^0. 15. Call upon ^^, and I will deliver thee: so shall
(...)fie me. And their bowing to Stocks and Stones, whereof the Lord says,
Esaias 4^. ^. I will not give my glory to another, nor my praise to carved
Images. 4. They teach, that the predestinating as well of the elect to life, as
of the reprobate to condemnation, is for their works foreseen, which the
Apostle, Romans 9. 22, 23. shows to be of his own free pleasure, to show forth
the riches of his might and glory.

5. Touching (...) ^^w of God* they are not only altogether ignorant of the
true use thereof, which is by a right humiliation of ones self, to prepare the
way, and to lead him unto Christ, but spoil God of the glory due unto him,
whilst they teach* That it is possible for a man to fulfill the Law himself,
and so falsify that golden saying of the Apostle, Romans 11. 32. God has sh^t
all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all.

6. The means of salvation, they attribute in part to the worthiness of men,
and to their due desert, which is the free grace and gift of God, that he that
glories, might glory in the Lord, 1. Cor. 1. 32. 7. Whereas the wonderful
glory of God, in his love unto mankind, has herein shined forth most
clearly, that when we were dead in sins, and enemies unto God, he has
quickened and reconciled us to himself, they contrarily imagine, that the
wound is not to deep, but that there remains still a kind of life in man,
and a disposition to receive the first grace of God, which they call Free Will,
and that God may be provoked by our merits to give us the second Grace, and to
make Man a worker together with God, in that great work of our new Birth:
which the Scripture in express terms appropriateth unto God, calling it his
own Workmanship, and a Creation, Ephesians. 2. 10. to exclude man, and whatsoever is
of and in man.


that the whole Doctrine of Divinity does directly aim and shoot at, and
whereunto the parts are all to be referred, as to their last and furthest end:
for albeit the several Doctrines have their several and proper uses, the Law
to humble us, the Gospel to give us comfort in the Saving Health, that through
Faith is reached forth unto us, Preaching to beget Faith, the Sacraments to
strengthen it, Discipline to retain in the obedience thereof, and so in the
rest: ye the last and uttermost, the most shining and glorious end, whereunto
not one, but (...)y part, and not the parts only, but the whole body and frame
of all tends, is this, of glorifying God. Which will appear most plainly,
if we examine all this Doctrine point by point, and go it throughout in order
as it lies: As,

1. The whole Treatise of the Godhead, both of his Nature and Persons, wherein
he shines so glorious, that the glory of GOD is often used in the Scriptures
for his Person and Presence. So Exodus 33. 18.
Moses beseeches him to cause his glory to pass before him: And in Ezech. 2.
22.
Ezechiel, the blessed glory of IEHOVA is said in stead of his glorious and
blessed presence.

2. His Eternal Councels, whether of saving those he chooses, or destroying
those whom he rejects: whereof the Wise man Pro. 16. 4.
teaches, that he made all for himself, that is, to the praise of his glory.
As the Apostle handling the same Argument, does expound it, Ephesians. 1. 6.

3. The Creation; which, if Men were as dumb as Stones, would of it self
sufficiently proclayme the glory of the Creator: And yet he that will see it
so set forth, as men may learn to admire it, let him read the 19. Psalm, The
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy-worke.

4. His Works; whereof the Psalm. 113. 4, 6, 7.
Prophet cries out, that he is exalted above the Earth, yea above the Heavens
themselves, in the glory of the same: Dwelling most high, but yet looking most
low* both in Heaven and in Earth, raising the poor out of the dust, the needy
out of the dunghill, etc. as follows in that Psalm.

5. The honor due unto him from all his reasonable Creatures, in Heaven and
upon the Earth; whose Matthew. 6. 10.
part it is to do his will, and to perform whatsoever he commands.

6. The Covenant of Works; whereby, in his Justice, he rewards the thorough
and perfect obedience of Christ his Son, and of the holy Angels, and
punishes all transgression and disobedience, as in the Angels that fell, and
in reprobate and wicked men.

7. The Covenant of Grace; which the Ps. 19. 8, 9, 11.
Prophet calls, The Restorer of the Soul, the Gladder of the Heart, the
Enlightner of the Eyes, more to be desired then Gold, yea, then much fine Gold,
sweeter then the Honey and the Honey-Combe: God having Romans 11. 32.
shut all (that is to say, all Men, and whatsoever is of Man) under sin, that
he might have mercy upon all whom he means for to save. This is it which
teaches 1. Cor. 1. 31.
Christ to be made unto us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, that as it is written, He that glories, let
him glory in the Lord: Because in him, as the same Apostle shows, 2. Cor. 1.
20.
All the promises of God are yea, and Amen unto Gods glory. Whereupon John
Revel. 14. 6.
in the Revelation teaches* That this is the true voice of the everlasting
Gospel, Fear God, and give glory unto him.

8. The collection and gathering of his Church, wherein, as Psalm. 29. 9.
David says, he utters all his glory. Some footsteps whereof were to be
seen in the peculiar choice. First, of a Family in Abraham, Isack, Jacob, and
the twelve Patriarchs, then of a whole Nation of the Jews, from the rest of
the people of the World. Therefore, does the Psalmist say, Psalm. 76. 2.
In Iewry is God famous, and his Name is great in Israel. But the full
accomplishment of this his glory (whereof the other was but a light precursion)
is upon the breaking down of the partition wall between the Jews and
Gentiles, and reconciling them in one body unto himself. In which sense, the
Apostle Ephesians. 3. 10.
affirms, that even to the Angels themselves, to principalities and powers is
made known through the Church, the diverse and manifold wisdom of God. And the
Psalm. 102. 16.
Psalmist long before had prophesied, that when Iehoua did build up Sion (by
the coming of his Son, the calling of the Gentiles, and the full repayring
of his Church universal) then should he be seen in his glory.

9. Sanctification of life, and the obedience of his Saints, wherein 1. Cor.
10. 31.
Whatsoever we do, we do all to the glory of God.

10. The salvation it self of Gods Elect standing in the participation of his
glory. As the Romans 3. 23. 13.
Apostle notes, when he says, All have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God, that is, of eternal life, which we are to seek and labor for; not so
much for our own good and happiness, as for his glory, from all which we
gather a rule to examine and judge of all Doctrines, That those are ever
soundest, which give to God the greatest glory, and contrariwise, whatsoever
sootheth up the proud spirit of man, or darkneth the glory of the living God,
that, if there were no more, is cause enough to make us to reject it. This our
Savior teaches, Ioh. 7. 18. He that seeks the glory of him that sent him,
he is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him, making it the certain
badge of all true and heavenly Doctrine, if it tend to glorify God. As by the
same argument, Paul avouches his Doctrine to be such, that an Angel from
Heaven preaching otherwise, were to be held accursed, for do I now (says he)
persuade men or God? tends my Gal. 1. 8, 9, 10.
preaching to set up man, or to pull down the pride of all flesh, that God
alone may be exalted?

Two parts we make of all this holy Doctrine: one properly Whereof there be two
parts. One that concerns God, the other concerning Imanuel, God with us.
concerning God the Creator, the other concerning Christ the Redeemer, the
true Emanuel, God with us. For so our Savior in that which we call the Lords
Prayer does divide it, speaking in the three former Petitions: first, of the
Nature, Persons, and properties of the Godhead, then of his sovereignty and
command, together with the duty of Allegiance, which we owe unto him, which if
men were able to perform as the Law of their Creation not enioyneth only, but
enabled them unto, and as the Angels do in Heaven, they need go no farther,
but should be blessed in the doing of it. But because that is a path which no
foot of man can tread, he propounds in the other three, to miserable man
fallen now away, the blessed Son of God, that peerless Pearl and
inestimable Treasure of the World, Jesus Christ the righteous, who has gone
the tracke for us, and regeneration, righteousness and sanctification through
him: more briefly, John 17. 3. he notes the perfect distribution of Divinity,
To know thee, the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

These two parts lacking apt names to express them, you may perhaps (till we
light upon some better) not altogether unfitly call Theology and
Christianity, for so Theology does in his proper and natural signification
sound: a Speech of or concerning God. The name of Christianity, taking it for
the Doctrine of Christianity (as is usual in words of art) may aptly be
deduced from diverse Act. 13. 26. and 26. 18. 1. Pet. 4. 16.
places of holy Writ, and is the same in sense, which the Col. 3. 16.
Apostle calls (...), the Word of Christ. But till these terms by custom
and use be worn and made familiar, and our ears better acquainted with them,
I think it not amiss to forbear the names, let the thing be understood.

To define God perfectly, as that great and Christian God is Jehovah, three
persons. Jehovah (which is Being or perfection it self)
Ramus in his Theology.
Logician said, we had need of Gods own Logic, whose nature known only
to himself, infinitely exceeds all thought and apprehension that can
possibly be in any creature: wherefore to keep us within the limits of
sobriety, not taking upon us to define that we know not, which were folly and
madness, much less attempting it in the Godhead, which were extreme
ungodliness, we must remember the answer that God made unto Moses, desiring
to see the Majesty of his presence, that he should see his hinder Exodus 33. 23.
parts, but his face could not be seen. There is then in God a forepart, and a
face, there is a hinder part and back. By his face, that is, his very Majesty
and Essence, no man or Angel is able to define GOD, but by those steps and
marks of his glory, whereby he has manifested himself in his Word and Works,
as it were by his hinder and back parts, we may in some sort describe him,
which what they are, appear in the next Chapter, when passing by Moses, (whom
he set in the hollow of a Rock, and covered with his hand till he were gone
by) he cried, Exodus 34. 6.
JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH, the mighty God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and
full of kindness and truth, preserving kindness for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and rebellion, and sin, by no means freeing the guilty, visiting
the iniquity of fathers upon children, and upon childrens children to the third
and fourth Generation. All which, and whatsoever notes of his glory else,
scattered here and there, in the whole Volume of the Scriptures, or shining
euery-where in the large Volume of the Heavens, are many times comprehended in
one only word, as Iah, Jehovah, or Ehieh, (that is to say, I am) as if you
would say, Being or perfection it self. For these three (coming from the same
(...)
root, and being in effect but one) are that essential and proper name of God,
whereby he calls himself, when he would paint out* men the excellency of his
Nature, and distinguish it from all other things that are in Heaven, or upon
the earth, or under the earth. So Exodus 3. 13, 14, 15. unto Moses, asking him,
When I shall say unto them, The God of your fathers has sent me unto you, and
they say to me, What is his name? what shall I say to them? JEHOVAH answered
MOSES, EHIEH ( or I am) for I am. And he said, Thus shall thou say to the
Children of Israel, EHIEH (that is, I am) has sent me unto you. Again, God
said to MOSES, Thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, JEHOVAH the God
of your fathers, the God of ABRAHAM, the God of ISACK, and the God of JACOB
has sent me unto you. This is my Name for ever, and this is my Memorial unto
all Ages. Of the other, we read, Psalm. 68. 5. Exalt him for his Name IAH.

It is most certain, that Plato in his Dialogue, entitled Cratylus
the name of a thing (if it be rightly given) serves to set out the true
nature and property of the thing, wherein consisted a great part of that
wisdom which was in Adam, who Genesis 2. 19.
gave apt and fit names to all the Beasts of the Field, and to all the Fowls
of the Air, according to their quality and condition: much more is the same to
be thought of, this Name which the most wise God takes to him, and is never
given to any Creature, Man, nor Angel, to Temple, Sanctuary, nor any holy
place else, not so much as in a Sacramental signification, if the places
seeming to serve for that purpose be rightly skanned. These words therefore do
truly and perfectly comprehend that back part of his, or (...). Romans 1. 19.
whatsoeeuer may be known of God, so far as our slender capacity is able to
reach. For first, hereby appears that all that is, is in him subsistence,
life, understanding, will, holiness, happiness, and whatsoever else: all
proper to him, all his, and comes from him: all essential unto him, and of
his nature: all infinite, eternal, and unchangeable. Or to speak more plain,
in that he is Being, first, he must needs have in himself the very life, soul
and perfection of all things that be, subsistence, life, understanding, will,
holiness, happiness, and whatsoever else. Secondly, all this he has
infinitely, for what can be imagined, where Being should be excluded? Thirdly,
nothing is in him but essential and of his nature, for all is his Being.
Fourthly, how can being it self otherwise be, then of and from it self?
Fifthly, Being can never leave to be, nor have beginning of his Being, and
therefore is eternal. Lastly, it is not possible that any thing should be,
whom Being does not make to be. In brief, God is being, life, understanding,
will, holiness, happiness, essentially, infinitely, eternally, causally, to
himself and others. And so does the Apostle at once expound all those names,
when he says, Romans 11. 36.
For of him and by him, and to him are all things.

But this needs some larger explication. Therefore it shall not be amiss,
more particularly to deduce these things, and to show from point to point what
this Being or Perfection does include. In a word, it shows, that he has all
good and perfect things in a most perfect and incommunicable manner.

The good and perfect things I mean are of two sorts, first, those, without
which the creature cannot be perfect. Of which kind are these three:

1. A being which God is Revel. 1. 4.
said to have, that he may be Signifies a nature.
known to be a thing truly and indeed subsisting, and in that respect is
opposed, as well to the imaginary course of nature, which some profane men have
made a god, as to the Idols of the Gentiles, which the Scripture calls Amos
2. 4. (...)
lies, Ier. 10. 15. (...) Acts 14. 14. (...).
vanities, and 1. Cor. 8. 4.
things of nothing. But principally he is said to Be, because he both has
his being of himself, and gives being to all other things, and namely, to his
Word, as well of promise, as of threatening, of judgment, as of mercy, which he
effects and causes to come to pass. This is it he means, Exodus 6. 3. I
appeared indeed to ABRAHAM, ISACK, and JACOB, in the name of the mighty One,
all sufficient, but by my Name JEHOVAH, was I not known of them: That is, I
did not make my promises indeed exist unto them, for otherwise both they knew
the Name Jehovah, Genesis 15. 8.
called upon it, and Genesis 13. 18 and 26. 25.
built Altars to Jehovah, and he himself Genesis 15. 7. and 28. 13.
by that Name sealed up the faith and certainty of his promises. For this
cause it is, that in Ezech. 5. 17.
Ezechiel, threatening the famine, the beasts and other plagues, he gives
credit to it by that Name, I JEHOVAH have spoken it, and in the seventh Ezech.
7. 27.
Chapter shuts That has all good and perfect things in a most perfect and
incommunicable manner. The perfect things in God. Beside life.
up all his threatenings with this, That they may find by experience, that I am
JEHOVAH. But most notable is that of the thirtieth of Jeremy, where in one
Chapter the Lord three and twenty times repeateth this Name of purpose, to
assure the peoples hearts of those comfortable and golden promises that he
makes unto them in that place.

2. Life: Eccl 9. 4.
for better is a living Dog then a dead Lion. But when we speak of the life
of God* we mean not only that he does truly and properly by himself and
of his own nature live, (and therefore is called the Psalm. 83. 2. and in many
other places.
living God, and that form of swearing so often used, as JEHOVAH Ier. 5. 2.
and elsewhere.
lives, which in Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
Deuteronomie he himself takes up, For I lift my hands to Heaven, and say,
that I live for ever. And in another Ier. 12. 16.
place makes it the proper note of his people, to swear by his Name, JEHOVAH
lives) but that from him proceeds life unto all his creatures. As it is
said, Act. 17. 28.
In him we live and move, and again, Act. 17. 25.
He gives to all life and breath through all things, that is, to all his
creatures. And in both these respects, it is that he is said to have life in
himself, John the Ioh. 5. 26.
fifth, As the Father lives by himself, yea, to Ioh 5. ^0.
be life it self, and Deuteronomy. 30. 20. He is thy life and the length of thy
days: Again, in the Psalm. 30. 10.
Psalms, With thee is the fountain of life: whereby it appears that this is
proper unto God.

3. Understanding and will: for as the Psalm. 94. 9. 10
Psalmist makes Understanding,
his dispute. The Planter of the ear, should not he hear? or the framer of
the eye, should not he behold? he that teaches knowledge, should not he
understand? and of his will we read: Dan. 4. 25.
All And will (without which no perfection can be)
the inhabitants of the earth are counted as nothing, but he does according to
his will in the Host of Heaven, etc. among the dwellers of the earth, neither
is there any that can restrain his hand, or say to him, What do thou? As if
he should say, They have no will at all to speak of, in respect of his. And
Iam. 4. 13.
James worthily reprehendeth those that say, To day and tomorrow we will go,
etc. whereas they should say, If the Lord will. Showing, that upon his will
depends the will of all his creatures. As the Apostle says, In him Act. 17.
18.
we live and move. So that he only is (...), only has a most absolute
freedom of will moving the will of all his creatures, and his own moved of
none, whose will no power nor force can hinder: for who, says the Apostle,
Romans 9. 19.
has resisted his will? But contrariwise, he himself does hinder the will of
every creature, as he does of the Angels and Devils, being otherwise mighty
creatures; whereof more shall be spoken, when we come unto his providence.

Of the second sort are those two things (wherein we are Holiness and
Blessedness.
place the goodness and perfection of the most excellent creatures,) Holiness
and Blessedness.

Holiness comprehends both the purity of his whole Holiness is the purity of
his nature,
nature, and the righteousness of all his ways. Habac. 1. 13.
Thou art pure of eyes, says the Prophet, so as thou can not behold
iniquity. And in Esaias 6. 3.
Esaias, the glorious Soraphins cry, Holy, holy, holy JEHOVAH of Hosts.

Of the righteousness of his ways, loving Holiness from whence comes a
righteousness in all his ways.
and righteousness and whatsoever good is, and contrariwise hating sin and
unrighteousness, and whatsoever naught is, the Psalmist Psalm. 45. 7, 8.
speaks, coupling them together. Thou love righteousness, and hate
iniquity: of each part he says, Psalm. 11. 1^.
The righteous God loves righteousness: and again, Psalm. 5. 5, 6.
Thou art not a God that takes pleasure in wickedness, with thee no evil
shall dwell. Thou hate all the workers of Iniquity.

Both these parts our Savior seems to note in God, when in one Ioh. 17. 11.
25
Prayer he calls him first, Holy Father, and then Righteous Father. And as
God is most absolutely good, so this goodness in all the parts of it is proper
unto him, in that he has it of himself, and is the Fountain from whence it
flows into other. Mat. 19. 17. None is good but God only.

Therefore, in the Law was written upon the High Priests Bonnet, Exodus 39. 30.
Holiness is IEHOVAHS, and it is the voice Revel. 15. 4.
of holy Angels: yea, the Song of Moses, the Servant of GOD, and of the Lamb,
that God only is holy.

The righteousness of God is to be seen in four chief Specially seen to us
in four chief and principal virtues, which in the Scripture you shall find
for the most part, to go by couples or payres.
and principal virtues, that have respect unto his reasonable creatures, in
the Scripture you shall find them for the most part to go by couples or
payres.

The first couple is (...) The first couple are Kindness and Truth.
kindness and truth specially to his Church, Exodus 34. 6. JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH,
etc. abundant in kindness and truth. Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of JEHOVAH,
are kindness and truth to them that keep his Covenant and his Testimonies.
Pro. 3. 3. Kindness and truth let them not forsake thee: and again, Prou 14.
22. Kindness, in being ready to bestow all good things.
Kindness and truth shall be to them that imagine good.

Kindness is that whereby he is ready to bestow all good things.

The kindness of God offers it self to be considered for the most part in
these degrees. First, his long suffering, whereby he is slow to wrath, and
goes (as it were) with a leaden heel unto punishment, and never is a God So
the Jewish Rabbines in their language elegantly say that God never is (...)
till he can no longer be (...)
of vengeance till he can no longer be a God of patience. So says the Apostle,
Romans 2. 4. That God shows forth the riches of his patience and long
sufferance to this end, that the kindness of God might lead us to Repentance.

And 1 Pet. 3. 20.
Peter gives, as for a most clear Looking-glass to behold this long
sufferance of God in, both his long patience and waiting for of amendment in
the days of Noe, whilst the Arc was preparing, an hundred and twenty years,
and 2 Pet. 3. 9.
his forbearing to destroy the World. Now, to the end that none of his may
perish, but all come to Repentance.

Secondly, His bounty and goodness, giving liberally all good things, as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 145 9.
JEHOVAH is good to all, and his kindness is over all his works. And again,
Psalm 36. 7.
Thou JEHOVAH preseruest men and beasts.

Thirdly, and specially, in his grace and favor, whereby he bestows all
these things, without respect of our worthiness or unworthiness, as our
Savior, Mat. 5. 45. teaches us to behold in the ordinary and daily course of
things. Hem^keth the Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and reigns on
the just and the unjust.

Truth is the faithful performance of whatsoever he Truth, faithfully to
perform whatsoever he speaks.
speaks, whether he promise good, or threaten evil. A virtue, then the
which, none can more beseem the Godhead: for as the John 8. 44.
Devil is a Liar from the beginning, and the father of lies; so is God the
Author of all Truth, yea, Truth it self, and true for evermore: True in his
words and promises, without subtilty or guile, true in the accomplishment and
performance, without coloring or deceit. He speaks, and it is; promises,
and it comes to pass; threatens, and it takes effect. Psalm. 89. 33, 34. 35.
I will not alter (says the Lord) that which is proceeded out of my lips, nor
falsify my faith. Titus 1. 2.
Nay he cannot lie, because he 2. Tim. 2. 13.
cannot deny himself. So natural it is unto himself to be Truth it self.
Therefore he is called, The Psalm 31. 6.
God of Truth, The Esaias 55. 16.
God of Amen. What is that else, but such a God, as is always one, and the
same, true in his words, firm in his promises, certain in his performance?
Whereupon the Romans 3. 4.
Apostle cries out, Let God be true, and all men liars.

The other couple are (...)
Justice and Mercy, flowing from The other couple are Justice and Mercy flowing
from the former.
the former: both specially seen in the saving or destroying of men and
Angels. Psalm. 116. 5. JEHOVAH is gracious and just, and our God is merciful,
Psalm. 14. 5, 7, 8. The memorial of thine abundant goodness they shall power
out, and thy Justice they shall sing, that JEHOVAH is gracious and merciful*
etc.

Justice is that whereby he renders to every one according Justice to render
to every one his due.
to his works: for else, Romans 3. 6.
as the Apostle reasons, If there were unrighteousness with God* how could
God judge the World? Therefore as a most righteous Judge, he severely
punishes the workers of iniquity, and graciously recompenceth those that
fear him* with that free reward which he has promised. So says 1. Pet. 1. 7.
Peter, that without respect of persons he judges every one according to his
works. And Ier. 51. 56,
JEREMY, The Lord that recompenceth, shall surely recompense. It is just, says
2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7
PAVL, with God, to render trouble to them that trouble you, and to you that
are troubled, rest with us at the Coming of Jesus Christ. And again, Romans 1.
8.
The wrath of God reuealeth it self from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. But of himself he says, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
There is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, that
righteous Judge, will render unto me in that Day. And 1. John 1. 9.
JOHN, If we confsse our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive them,
because of his promise sake.

Mercy is that, whereby he helps out of misery, Mercy, in being ready to
help in time of need.
whomsoever it pleases him. As he says to MOSES, Exodus 33. 19.
I will be gracious, to whom I will be gracious, and I will have mercy, on whom
I will have mercy. And the Lament 3. 22
Prophet in the Lamentations, It is the wonderful kindness of JEHOVAH that
we are not consumed, for his mercies fail not: yea, he wayteth, as the
Prophet speaks, Esaias 30. 18.
to show mercy to us, being full of compassion in all our miseries and
necessities. Psalm. 46. 2.
A help in affliction very ready to be found, as the Psalmist says. Thus he
tempereth his mercy with his Justice, as it were water to allay the heat of
his burning wrath. A virtue that above all other he appropriateth to himself,
and takes as it were most pleasure in: Neither does he so often call himself a
just and righteous, as he does a gracious and merciful God. Therefore, beside
his patience and long sufferance inuiting us to Repentance, he does humble
himself, as it were, to men's infirmity, using all the means and helps
whereby our coldness may be quickened, and our affections stirred up to seek
him. To this end he gives us his Word and Sacraments, confirms the same by
covenants, promises, oaths and miracles, pulls us unto him by chastisements
and corrections, censures and admonitions. To conclude, he spares nothing
that may serve for our good. And when all this preuayleth not, when none of his
disciplines and instructions is able to bow our stony hearts, nor to make them
fleshle and soft, that needs he must proceed to Judgment, Abac. 3. 2.
yet both in his wrath he remembers mercy. And where men's obstinacy makes
that there is no place for mercy, he punishes, as it were, unwillingly; and
Lam. 3. 33.
against his heart Ezech. 18. 23
delighting in no man's destruction, nor taking pleasure in the death of a This
is the holiness of God, and his righteousness coming from it. Blessedness
is his all sufficiency of things that make one happy,
Sinner, but rather that he may return from his ways and live: for I speak
not yet of that which is peculiar to his Church and chosen Children, toward
whom his Love does without all comparison infinitely excel: but whatsoever
comes that way to us from the favor of GOD reconciled in his Son, is to be
handled in another place.

The Blessedness of God, is his all sufficiency of things that make one happy,
wanting nothing that is good, having nothing that is evil: for 1. John 1. 5.
he is light, and darkness in him there is none at all. And stands in
Kingdom, and Power, or Glory. Kingdom, is his sovereignty of commanding
whatsoever he will.


It stands in three John in the Revelation, Revel. 1. 6. and Peter in his
first Epistle, 1. Pet. 4 11. and 5. 11. reduces them to two (...), (under
which they comprehend Sovereignty and Power, the word signifying both) and
(...), glory.
things, which our Savior in the conclusion of the Lords Prayer attributes
unto God, to magnify and set forth his most absolute and perfect blessedness.

First, Kingdom, which is his sovereignty of commanding whatsoever he will; 1.
Tim. 6. 15. Power, his ableness to do whatsoever he commands.
Being the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Secondly, Power to do what he commands: where, if there were no more but
that he is called Almighty, it were sufficient to declare the Infiniteness of
his power; but there lack not also clear and express testimonies: As where
it is said, Psalm 145. 3.
His greatness cannot be sounded: that is, none can reach the bottom of it:
And in Luke 1. 37.
LVKE, Nothing is impossible with God. That also of our Savior Christ, Matthew.
20. 26.
With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. For he
that can work any Miracle either in the height or in the Deep, in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or wheresoever else (as to convince Achas
infidelity, he wills him Esaias 7. 11.
which of these ways he would, to ask a sign) how can any thing be
impossible unto him, or how is not his power endless? Therefore it is possible
for him, he is able to do infinitely above that he does or will do. Matthew
3. 9. I say unto you, God is able of these stones to raise up children to
ABRAHAM. Mark 14. 36. Abba Father, all things are possible with thee.

But here we must take heed, lest ascribing in words power unto GOD, we take
indeed his true power from him: as they do, which, in stead of power,
attribute to him things of weakness and infirmity; and in stead of
omnipotency, things of impotency. Such are all those which are contrary to his
nature and perfection: for Titus 1. 2.
he cannot lie, as the Apostle says, He 2. Tim. 2. 13.
cannot deny himself: Iam. 1. 13.
he cannot be tempted of evil. Ier. 10. 7.
JEREMY speaking of his mighty power, which makes all Nations to stoop and
do him reverence, says, that the same rests in him. Whereby he does not
obscurely give to understand, that this is proper unto God, which the 1. Tim.
6. 15.
Apostle more plainly utters, calling him the only Potentate. Therefore the
Psalmist Psalm. 89. 14.
says, Thine is an Arm with strength: Appropriating it to him: And Psalm. 18.
32.
again, Who is Goa but JEHOVAH? and there is no Rock but only thou. And the
Lord in Esaias 44. 3.
ESAIAS, Is there any God besides me? Verily there is no Rock: I know not any.

Thirdly, Glory, that comprehends all the excellencies Glory comprehends
all the excellencies of his nature. As Wisdom and other graces of the mind.
of his nature: As

First, Wisdom and all the graces of the mind, both knowledge for the sound
understanding of things, and counsel whereby rightly to judge of them as the
Prophet Psalm 136. 5.
says, Jehovah made the Heavens by understanding. Ier. 51. 15.
JEREMY also in like manner. He established the inhabited World by his
Wisdom, and by his understanding stretched out the Heavens. And Job. 28. 25.
JOB, He sitted the Air by weight, and balanced the Water by measure: that
is, he ordered all his Creatures in weight and measure most wisely. And both
these he not only has, and that in an infinite measure, but the same are
also proper and peculiar unto him. So it is in the Proverbs, Prou. 8. 14.
Mine is counsel, and wisdom is mine. And in Job. 12. 13.
JOB, With him is wisdom, his is counsel and understanding. The Romans 11. 33.
Apostle to the Romans notably sets forth the Infiniteness of them both; O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! DAVID Psalm.
147. 5.
also in the Psalms, There is no number or measure of his understanding. And
when all things past, present, and to come; when the most inward and hidden
corners of men's secret affections are known unto him: and as it were numbered
before him; Heb. 4 13.
When there is nothing created which is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked and open to his eyes: must it not needs follow, that this
knowledge of God is infinite? and as it is infinite, so none but he can
challenge it: For he only is Romans 16. 27. 1. Tim. ^. 17. Jude verse 25.
wise, 1. Ki^. ^8. 9.
only knows the hearts of the sons of men: He alone has the honor of
fore-knowing things to come, whereby, as by a most certain and infallible
note, he sets forth himself to be discerned from all false gods, Esaias 44.
1, 2, 3. I am the first and the last, and besides me there is no God: For who,
as I, declares, and utters this before, or orders this unto me, since I
have set an everlasting people, that the signs and things to come might be
uttered unto them? Have not I from that time uttered it unto thee, and declared
it, and you are my Witnesses? Is there any God but me?

2. Strength. Strength. Comeliness and beauty. Graciousnes, or an amiable and
lovely nature. A complete furniture of riches, honor, and of all kind of
pleasures and delights.
3. Comeliness and beauty. 4. Graciousnesse, or an amiable and lovely nature.
5. A complete furniture of Riches, and of all kind of pleasures and delights.
God thus garnished and beset with whatsoever perfections the heart of man can
think, yea, infinitely above that, that men or Angels are able to conceive, is
alone happy and blessed, as the 1. Tim. 6. 15.
Apostle calls him, That blessed and only Potentate. Foolish men place
happiness in the good things, as they term them, of body, mind, and fortune.
In all these, how does the Lord excel, but after his own, that is, a heavenly
and unspeakable sort* A Body is commended by these two qualities, if it be
strong and fair. Psalm. 93. 1.
Jehovah, says the Psalmist, is clothed with glory, he has girt himself with
strength. Again, Psalm. 96. 6.
Glory and comeliness is before him, strength and ornament in his Sanctuary.

In another Psalm. 104. 1.
place, he cries out, O JEHOVAH, thou art exceeding great, thou have clothed
thy self with comeliness and beauty, covering thy self with light, as with
a garment. If any thing in the World be glorious and beautiful, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars and heavenly Planets are so without comparison. But Look
up, says Job 25. 5.
Bildad, in the Book of JOB, even unto the Moon, and it does not shine, yea,
the Planets are not pure in his eyes: that is, are exceeding dark, if they be
compared with him. Notable is that of ELIHV, Job 37. 20, 21.
Men cannot abide to look upon the Sun, when the golden light comes from
the North; but in God there is a more reverend kind of glory. To conclude, he
is (...).
the strong God, who 1. Tim. 6. 16.
alone has immortality, and only is Romans 1. 23. 1. Tim. 1. 17.
incorruptible, or not subject to decay. A thing that falls not into any Body
or nature besides, by it self, and of it self. What of the goods of Fortune
(fondly so called) where Honor and Riches have the preeminence? Phil. 2. 6.
He is rich, Genesis 17. 1.
all-sufficient, the possessor Genesis 14. 22.
of Heaven and Earth: needing nothing, but having all things, and ministering
abundantly unto those that need. Psalm. 24. 1.
The Earth is the Lords, and all that does replenish it. Mine, says Hag. 2. ^.
he, is Gold, and Silver is mine. Ps. 50. 10, 11.
Mine is every beast of the Forest, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. I
know all the Birds of the Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the field are
mine. This is he, whom men and Angels honor, worship, adore; yea, the Devils
themselves with trembling are forced against their wills to magnify, and the
proud Psalm. 66. 3. (...).
enemy counterfeits a subjection. Therefore, also his Name is great, and he is
famous throughout the World. And if pleasures come into this account, the Psalm.
^8. 5. (...)
triumphall Chariot whereon he rides, is sweetness and delight it self,
comeliness Psalm. 96. 9.
carries the Mace before him, and Psalm. 16. 11.
at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. Yea, what Psalm. 17. 5.
is our blessedness else, but to see him face to face? And when as joy Esaias
35. 10.
and gladness, mirth, and singing, are the portion of his Children: What shall
we think his fullness to be? But in the virtues of the mind, how he
glittereth and shines! Theoricke, practike, Moral, Intellectual, of the
understanding, and of the will. No ignorance can mis-lead him: no affection can
disquiet him: no passion can lay hold upon him: with Prou. 8. 14. Job. 12. 13.
him is counsel and wisdom, his is knowledge and understanding, he is wise
in aduising, just in decreeing, mighty in the executing of his counsels. As for
Holiness, Mercy, Truth, Kindness, they take up their dwelling in him; yea,
his very nature is nothing else but the perfection of them all. But does this
blessedness of God rest only in himself, and reaches it no farther? Yes
verily, he is not only in himself, and of himself, and by nature blessed,
but he is the Fountain of blessedness to other. He Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
makes blessed by giving righteousness, forgiving sins through his Son,
purging the conscience, sanctifying the heart unto obedience. Finally, by
making men and Angels partakers of his most gracious and blessed presence in
Heaven: To him be honor and praise for ever.

We have hitherto spoken of the good and perfect These are the perfect things
themselves. His perfect and incommunicable manner of having of them, is
Infiniteness and Eternity. Infiniteness, whereby he is without
circumscription.
things that are in God, His perfect and incommunicable manner of having of
them, stands in infiniteness and eternity. Both of them such as no man nor
Angel is capable of, nor can be communicated to any creature.

By infiniteness, I mean an unmeasureable Power, Wisdom, and Glory,
Goodness, Greatness, filling Heaven and Earth, and being euery-where present,
within and without the World, whereof there be many evident testimonies in the
Scripture: Jeremy 23. 25. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says JEHOVAH? Psalm.
139. 7. Whither should I go from thy Spirit? or whither should I fly from thy
presence? If I should climb the Heavens, thou art there, or lay my bed in the
Grave, behold, thou art present. If I should take the wings of the Morning, and
dwell in the uttermost part of the Earth, even thither should thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand lay hold upon me, Esaias 66. 1. Heaven is my Throne, and the
Earth is my Footstool. As for those places of Scripture, where God is said to
remove from one place unto another, as Genes. 11. 5. JEHOVAH went down to see
the City and the Tower which the sons of men had built: and Genes. 18. 21.
JEHOVAH said unto ABRAHAM, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is very much,
and because their sin is very great, I will go down to see, whether
according to the cry that is come up unto me, they have done things worthy of
destruction, if not, that I may know: This and whatsoever like, is spoken after
the manner of men, to descend to our capacity, not that truly and properly
there is any change of place in God. GOD therefore is is all places at once,
not only by his virtue and power, but in his whole infinite essence; yet we
must not imagine grosely of him, to think that either he is mixed with the
Creatures (for that is contrary to his most perfect, single nature) or that by
the filth and contagion of the creature himself can be polluted: (for that is
contrary to his most perfect holy nature:) but in such a sort he is present,
as is heavenly and spiritual, and incomprehensible. And albeit, by nature we
seek God in the Heavens, and our Savior Christ has taught us to say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, that is not in respect of his essence; and as I may
say, of his very presence, that he is rather in Heaven then in Earth, or
dwells rather in his Church, then in profane Synagogues; in the hearts of
his Saints, then in the wicked: but in respect of his working, and more
special grace, or of the cleerer manifestation of his glory, as he says, Esaias
66. 1.
In Heaven is my Throne. And the Prophet Psalm. 29. 9.
DAVID, In his Temple he utters all his glory. And that this
euery-where-presence does only belong to God, appears in that by this note,
he differenceth himself from all other Creatures. For when he says, Ier.
23. 23.
Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? he means, that none other does so. It is to
be observed, that he says there, Am I a God near at hand (says JEHOVAH)
and am I not a God far off? Do I not fill Heaven and Earth? As if he had
said that, which none but God can challenge. God therefore is only Infinite:
He only is that Circle, whose Center is every where, and Circumference no
where, who alone Esaias 40. 12.
measures the Waters in his fist, and counts the Heavens with a spanne. As
the Prophet would have us to understand, when he sets the same, as a spell
to any whatsoever, that foolish men shall dare to make like unto him.

From this infiniteness of God, three The Anthropomorphites, because the
scripture speaks of the eyes of God, his hands, feet, and other parts, (and
likewise, of his Love, Anger, Hatred, and such like) imagined God to have truly
and properly, Limbs, and parts of a Body, and the passions and affections of a
man: whereas these things are spoken out to our capacity, who cannot conceive
how the actions, which God is said to do, can be performed, without such
helps: not that truly and properly there are any members or passions in God.
And therefore of a most single nature (that whatsoever is in God, is God
himself,)
things may be learned. First, The singleness of his nature, admitting no
quality or other accident, for in that which is infinite, how can there any
thing have place, that is not of the essence? GOD therefore has neither
composition nor division, parts, or members, passions or affections, or other
accidents, but whatsoever is in God, is God himself, which is the meaning of
our Savior Christ, when he calls John 4. 24.
him a Spirit: not as if he were a Spirit, of like nature as the Angels are, or
the souls of men, for that were most erroneous and blasphemous for to think:
but because Spirits have a most single and unmixed nature: under the same word,
he represents unto us that most single and spiritual essence of GOD, which
of all things in the World the Spirits come nearest to. Now, that both this
holiness, and all other the good things whereof we have heard, are of the
very nature of God, the Scripture gives us to understand when it calls him,
Light, Charity, Eternity, etc. and when he himself speaking of his very nature
and essence, says to MOSES, Exodus 33. 19.
I will make all my goodness to pass before thy face, for this cause it is,
that in that most glorious description of himself, Exodus 33. before he come
to the particular virtues of Power, Goodness, Justice, he sets in the
forefront this name Jehovah, saying, JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH, the mighty God,
merciful, etc. And why does he so? Both to stir up Moses unto due reverence
and humiliation, before the presence of his Majesty, and withal to show, that
as he is Jehovah, that is, of himself, and in his most single essence, he is
Omnipotent, Merciful, Just, etc. yea, that his very nature is nothing else but
Power, Mercy, Justice, etc. Notable is that place of the Prophet ESAIAS. Esaias 43.
25.
I, even I am he that blotteth out thy rebellio^s for my else. He says not,
For my Mercy, but, For my self, to teach us that his Mercy, and his Goodness
is himself, and consequently, all essential in him, and nothing accidental.
Therefore, he can neither be tempted of evil, nor be the author of it. So
says James 1. 13.
JAMES, Let no man when he is tempted, say, I am tempted of God, for God cannot
be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man. And PAVL, 2. Tim. 2. 3.
Though we believe not, yet he remains faithful, he cannot deny himself.
And to TITUS, Titus 1. 2.
God that cannot lie. Again, it follows from hence, that his will is the
rule of all goodness, a thing being therefore good and holy, because he
wills it, not willed of him because it is good and holy. The Apostle teaches
us that Lesson, Romans 9. 22. What if God, willing to show forth his wrath, and
to make known his power, has suffered, etc. As if he should say, What have
thou, o man, to say against it, if it be his will and pleasure? This also does
our Savior shadow in the Parable, Matthew. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to
do what I will with mine own?

The other two things to be inferred from the infiniteness of God, are:

First, That he is invisible by the eyes either of the Body And therefore also
invisible,
or the mind, as the 1. Tim. 1. 17. To the King everlasting, immortal,
invisible, Col. 1. 15. who is the image of the invisible God, Heb. 11. 1^. for
he continued constant, seeing as it were him that is invisible: And
incomprehensible.
Scripture in many places terms him: whereupon it is said, 1. Tim. 6. 16.
That he dwells in light, which none can have access unto.

Secondly, that he is altogether incomprehensible of his creatures. So true it
is which Job 26. 14. Eternity, whereby he is without beginning, or ending. And
therefore of himself and unchangeable.
Job once spoke, How small a little piece do we hear of him?

We come to the Eternity of God, whereby he is without beginning and ending,
and therefore of himself, and unchangeable: for eternal we call that, that
has neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but remains for ever one
and the same, not subject to any change. As Melchisedek and his Priesthood are
typically set forth, Heb. 7. 3. Such a one in truth, does the Scripture declare
God to be. That he is without beginning, appears, Psalm. 93. 2. Thy Throne
is established before any time. Thou art from everlasting, Heb. 1. 2. The
Apostle says, he made all Ages, and the times, and courses of all things. Now
he that is the Maker and Beginner of Time, must needs himself be before all
Time, for which cause he is called, 1. Tim. 1. 17.
The King of all Ages, and courses of Time. That he has no end, Moses Exodus
15. 18.
declares in that Song, JEHOVAH shall reign for ever and ever. Therefore he
is called 1. Tim 1. 17.
the immortal GOD, who never perishes, or comes to any end, and is said 1.
Tim 6. 16.
alone to have immortality: of them both David Psalm 90. 2.
says, Before the Hi^^s were framed, or thou had fashioned the earth, and
inhabited the World: to conclude, from everlasting to everlasting, thou art the
mighty God.

The unchangeableness of his nature, remaining always one and the same
without alteration, is set forth, James 1. 17. when he says, that with him is
neither change nor shadow of turning: and Malach. 3. 6. I am JEHOVAH, and do
not change. All this the word Ehieh does include, being as much to say, as I am
or I will be. When therefore the Lord says, that he is or will be, he
means that he is without change, and so will continue ever: for I am or I
will be, shows that he is the cause of his own being, and therefore without
beginning. To which word, John Revel. 1. 8.
in the Revelation alluding, calls him Alpha and Omega; that is, the first
and the last, he that is, and that was, and that is to come, and Esaias 44. 6.
Thus says JEHOVAH, I am the first, and I am the last. Yea, 1. Sam. 15. 29. he
is called Eternity it self, for he that is the Eternity of Israel, will not
lie, etc. In the 102. Psalm, all three are joined together, first, propounded
in general, Verse 25. Thy years are from generation to generation: then
distinguished by his parts. The being before all time, Verse 26. Thou wast
before thou did found the Earth, and the work of thy hands the Heavens.
The continuing for ever, Verse 27. and the latter end of the 28. They shall
perish, but thou remaynest, they all wax old as a garment, but thy years
shall not fail. Last of all, his immutable nature, in the rest of the 27. and
28. Verses. As a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but
thou art (or continuest still) the same. Neither does it hinder, that which we
have said of the unchangeable nature of God, that he is said in many places to
repent him, as Genesis 6. 6. It repented God that he had made man. And Jonas 3. 3.
he is said to be such a one, that repents him of evil: for speaking
properly, that is true which Samuel 1. Sam. 15. 29.
says, The eternity of Israel is not as man, that he should repent him. And
Romans 11. 29.
PAVL, The graces of God are without repentance. Repentance therefore, is for
our understanding improperly attributed unto GOD in this sense, that when GOD
destroys that which before he made, as in that place of Genesis, and 1. Sam.
15. 11. and 16. 1. or brings not that judgment or punishment which he
threatens, as in that of Jonas, and Exodus 33. 14. and infinite other places;
he is then termed to repent, because men which change their counsel, or repent
them of that which before they have done, use the like. The same is to be said
of all the passions or affections attributed to God.

Last of all, the Eternity of God proves that he is of and from himself,
the cause of his own being, and consequently of all good and perfect things
that be. To which purpose, that of JAMES Iam. 1. 17.
is a most worthy saying, Every good and perfect gift comes from above from
the Father of Lights. Two things he teaches us in than speech; one, that in
GOD is all perfection, therefore he calls him the Father of Light, which is
as much or more then if he said Light it self. As where Christ is called Esaias
9. 6.
the Father of Eternity, it is most Emphaticall; to signify that he is
Eternity it self, and the author of it. Secondly, he teaches that this
perfection of the Godhead, is the cause of every perfect thing in us. To
conclude, the saying of James is in effect no more, but that which the Prophet
David Psalm. 36. 10.
had long before conceived, Because with thee is the fountain of life, in thy
Light do we (or let us) see light: and that from the wel-spring of Gods
infinite perfection, do flow the streams of whatsoever perfectness is in us.
We need not go far to prove, since Acts 17. 28.
in him we live, and move, and have our being.

From the Infiniteness and Eternity of God, both these two things do follow.
First, That to speak truly and properly, God only has whatsoever things are
good and perfect, for he only has them from himself, all other have from
him, he only essentially and of his mere nature, in other they be but
qualities, over and besides their nature: he only infinitely, all other but
in measure; he only unchangeably, all other have them subject unto change. In
regard whereof the Scripture says, that all Dan. 4. 25.
the Inhabitants of the Earth are accounted as nothing, Esaias 40. 17.
before him are nothing: yea, less then nothing, that Acts 17. 18.
in him we live, and move, and have our being, and that Deuteronomy. 30. 10.
he is our life, as if we in comparison had no life, motion, nor being at all.
Further, that he finds Job 4. 18.
no steadfastness in his Servants, nor puts light in his Angels. That Job.
15. 15.
he finds no steadfastness in his Saints, and that the Heavens themselves,
that is to say, those heavenly Spirits, are not clean in his eyes, meaning, if
they be compared with him. To conclude, that there is none good but God, he
only holy, only blessed, only mighty, only wise, only has immortality. As
of all these particulars, somewhat we heard before.

Secondly, That there is nor can be but This is it we mean by Iehonah, who
upon all that has been said, is nor can be but one.
Pagans and heathens, men that bring in a multitude of gods, and so upon the
matter make no God at all.
one God, for there can be but one only thing infinite, one only to exist of
and by it self, and to give existence unto all other things. Man's nature,
because it is imperfect, does therefore admit composition, and because it is
finite, may in part communicate it self. Whence it comes, that John and
Peter, and every singular man differ one from another in their essence and
nature, because the whole humane nature is not, nor cannot be in each of them,
but is part in one, and part in another, and therefore they are many men. But
God, because he is a most single and perfect, and infinite essence, to
whomsoever he communicates his nature (as he has before all times, to his
Son and holy Spirit) must needs communicate the same wholly, and perfectly,
and infinitely. So as there can be but one God: for if there be many, one must
differ from another in having that the other has not: so can they not be
perfect, much less can they be perfection it self, perfection being that
which both is perfect of it self, and gives perfection to all other things.
But being many gods, if one should give perfection to the other, that other
were not God. For he had not his Godhead of himself, if all had of
themselves, none should give to other: so none of them were God. And infinite
how can that be, which is distributed among many: for where there be many, all
must be circumscribed, because, where one is, there cannot be the other. But
our God is such a one as fills Heaven and Earth, and cannot be circumscribed,
therefore in traveling with a multitude of gods, they bring forth no God at
all.

But because, in so high and deep a point of Christian Religion, we are not to
rest upon natural reasons: leaving them, I come unto the undoubted Oracles of
holy Scripture: whereby it is most clearly and evidently confirmed, Deuteronomy. 6.
4. Harken, Israel, JEHOVAH thy Gods (meaning the persons in the Godhead) are
one Jehovah, or one divine Essence, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. See now that I am he, and
there is no God with me. For who ( Psalm. 18. 32.
says the Psalmist) is God beside JEHOVAH? Esaias 44. 6. Thus says JEHOVAH, I
am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. Again, Esaias
45. 5.
I am JEHOVAH, and there is none but I, beside me there is no God. And the 1.
Cor. 8. 4.
Apostle to the Corinths, We know there is no other God but one, for albeit
there be that are called gods, both in Heaven and upon Earth, as there be (in
the vain conceits of men) many gods and many lords, yet to us there is but one
God the Father, of whom are all things: and one Jesus Christ, etc. The same he
inforceth in the Ephesians. 4. 5.
Epistle to the Ephesians, There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God,
and Father of all, etc. which also is a notable reason: For if there were many
gods, there must also be many faiths, one believing in this god, another in
that god.

And here the sleights of Satan have from time to time been wonderful, who
not able to wring out of men's minds, the opinion of a God so strongly settled
in them, has cunningly abused the World, by bringing in an imaginary multitude
of gods, bewitching them to worship, partly, fained powers, partly, bare
creatures, neglecting the Creator blessed for ever, Amen. By how much The
three persons are, each of them, that one Jehovah diversely subsisting, and are
the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost.
the more we are to strive for the holding fast of this Truth, as the Pillar
of Faith, and ground of all Piety: howsoever it be a truth, of all other most
true and certain, that there is nor can be but one only God, for the causes
before alleged, ye the Scripture tells us, that in this most simple and
single essence there be three subsistences or persons, truly subsisting,
whereof every one is distinct from other, and each has the whole Godhead in
him.

The Father which eternally begat the Son. The The Father is a Person, which
from all eternity has begotten the Son.
Son eternally begotten of the Father. The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding
both from the Father and the Son. And these three Persons, are all one God,
or one Divine Nature.

The Scripture is wont to express them under the name The Son is a Person
from all eternity, begotten of the Father. The Holy Ghost is a Person,
eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son.
of Elohim (gods:) not as if there were more gods then one, but to note the
diverse subsistences in the Godhead, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Esaias 54. 5.
and in a number of other places, and therefore uses for the most part to
couple it with a Verb singular. We call them Persons, because they are living
and understanding natures, subsisting by themselves, which are the things that
make a Person. For first, brute creatures are no persons, because having life,
yet they want understanding. Secondly, every person must subsist, that is, be
some one particular thing, as John, Peter, etc. For the whole nature of man we
do not call a person, but a thing common to many persons.

Thirdly, this subsistence must be by it self, neither the part of another
thing, nor sustained of another thing, as the Soul of a man, whilst it is
coupled with the Body, subsisting all that while, not alone, but together with
the Body, is not called a person. And so we rightly say, that the humanity of
Christ consisting of a reasonable Soul and Body, as all other men do, yet in
him makes not a person (as it does in John and Peter) because it subsisteth
not alone, but in the Deity which supporteth it.

To prove the Son, and Holy Ghost, Samosetan' Seruetus, etc make the Son
and eternal Word of God, a bare Idea, and imaginary thing: The Holy Ghost
nothing else but an operation, or moving, whereby God works in his Children:
And so rob the Church of the true God, blessed for ever, Amen.
to be persons truly subsisting, endued with Judgment, will, understanding,
and a living nature, not bare qualities or actions, the place of Genesis Gen ^.
26,
is most clear and subject to no cavil, Let us make man according to our
Image. God the Father consulteth not there with his Angels (for the glory of
Creation he reserueth to himself alone, neither was man made to the Image of
Angels, but of God) he speaks not of himself in the plural number for
honor sake: (for that kind of speech you shall not find so ancient, nor
known to the former Ages) but he speaks and consulteth (after his manner
which is Divine, and Spiritual) with his Son and Holy Spirit, which, how
could it be, if they were not understanding substances?

So in the division of Tongues he takes counsel, Come, Genesis 11. 7.
let us go down and confound their speech. This was not with the Angels, but
with the Son and Holy Ghost: For straightway Moses adds, So JEHOVAH
scattered them.

Touching the Son, In the beginning was the Word, John. 1. 2. was, that is,
truly subsisted, for so is the nature of that word.

How could he be the John 1. 18.
only begotten Son of God, Col^s. 1. 15.
borne before any thing was created, if he were not a living person? He that
Dan. 9. 13.
knows all the secrets of his Father, as perfectly, as if they were numbered
before him, must not he needs be wise himself, and of an understanding
substance? And how can he else be tempted, as Paul 1. Cor. 10. 9.
says, that some of the Fathers in the Wilderness tempted him? To conclude,
what can be more plain, then that in the Pro^ 8. ^0.
Proverbs, where he is said, before the World was made, to have been the daily
delight of God, sporting before him, continually, and in John 17. 5. to have
been glorious with his Father before the World was? Whereunto add the effects
attributed unto him: he Genesis 32. 4. (...) with Moses, (...)
wrestled with Jacob, spoke and blessed him, came out from the Father, when he
John 16. 18.
came into the World, etc.

Touching the Spirit, although we grant this word to be often used by a
Metonymie of the cause; sometimes, for the motions and working of the Spirit in
the faithful, as when 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
Paul says, Quench not the Spirit: sometimes, for the grace and gifts
themselves, wrought by the Spirit, in which sense, Acts 2. 4.
the diversity of Tongues is called the holy Spirit: yet there want not
infinite testimonies, to prove the Spirit properly taken, not only distinct
from the graces which it works (which the Apostle does most 1. Cor. 12. 18.
evidently, saying, There be diversity of graces, but the selfsame Spirit)
but to be withal a living and understanding substance. Therefore to him is
attributed will, (and that a most free and voluntary will) 1. Cor. 12. 11.
He distributeth to every one according as he will: Knowledge. 1. Cor. 2. 11.
None knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God: Judgment. Acts 15. 22.
It seems good to the Holy Ghost and to us, hearing and declaring the same to
others. Ioh. 16. 14, 15.
Of mine shall he take, says Christ, and declare to you. Again, John 16. 13.
Whatsoever he hears, he shall speak. And if he were no living and
understanding substance, how could he be grieved, as the Prophet speaks?
Esaias 63. 10.
They grieved his Spirit. His actions likewise prove the same. Esaias 61. 1.
He anointed Christ, sent him to preach unto the poor, Esaias 63. 14.
led the people of Israel through the Wilderness. Luke 1. 35.
The Holy Ghost (says the Angel to MARY) shall come upon thee, and
ouer-shaddow thee: framing and creating out of thy substance, the flesh or
humane nature of Christ. Our Savior in John calls him John 14. 16. and 15.
26. and 16. 13.
a Comforter: he says not, comfort it self, but a Comforter, that is, a
living and understanding person, comforting Gods Elect.

The point of their personal subsistence being thus cleared, let us go on to
that which follows. There be in all four, things to be considered, touching
these persons.

First, That they are each distinct from other, Sabellius, who as the former,
robs us of these persons, but in a more subtle manner. So infinite are the
sleights of Satan, who to deceive and abuse the world, changes him self into a
thousand forms. For granting the Son and holy Spirit to be persons truly
subsisting, divine, eternal, and uncreated: yet he takes away all distinction
between the Father and them, and makes but one Person in the Godhead. As if
God were termed, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, no otherwise, then as
we term one and the same man to be wise, learned, rich, etc.
several and distinct persons. When JOHN John 1. 1.
says, that the Word was with God, that is, with the Father, as in another 1.
John 2. 2.
place he does expound it: if he did not mean that it had some thing proper to
it self, beside the essence common with them both, he had (which is to be
detested) mistaken his kind of speech: and hereunto it serves, that Christ
expressly calls the Father another then himself, John 5. 33. There is another
that bears witness of me. So of the Spirit, John 14. 16. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, the Spirit of Truth: as in
the John 15. 26.
next Chapter he does expound himself. And how else could the comparison
stand, That the Phil. 2. 6.
Son is equal with God, his Father, unless there be a distinction between
them? But among all other, that place is very John 8. 13, 14 15, 16, 17. 18.
notable, where, to the cavil of the Jews, excepting that the testimony of
our Savior Christ was not true, because he bare record of himself, he
answers, If I judge any thing, my witness is true, for I am not alone, but
there is I and the Father that sent me. Now, in your own Law it is written,
that the witness of two is true: there is, I bear witness of my self, and
the Father that sent me, bears witness of me, etc. manifestly making
himself and his Father two. As also of the Spirit, it does appear in the
Prophet ESAIAS, Esaias 48. 16.
JEHOVAH has sent me, and his Spirit.

The second point is, the Trinity of Persons, evident and clear by that which
has been said, yet, for further illustration, it shall not be amiss, to note
from the beginning, such places as serve undoubtedly to prove it, that it may
appear, by what degrees the wisdom of God has from time to time made known
so great a Mystery to his Church, which no reason can demonstrate, nor since
the fall could once have entered into the thought or imagination of man, if God
had not revealed it. In the first Chapter of (...). 1. 1, 2.
Genesis, MOSES (though more obscurely) lays down this same God, his Word
and Spirit, The Spirit of God moved upon the Waters. And GOD said* Let there
be Light, etc. whom anon he brings in, taking counsel together in the
making of man, division of Tongues, etc. as before we have declared. Long
after that, as it were in a middle Age, Esaias Esaias 63 ^, 11
does revive it, and speaks somewhat playner: I will declare the kindness of
JEHOVAH toward the house of Israel. The Angel of his face (Christ the
Mediator between God and man) saved them: but they rebelled and grieved his
holy Spirit, which he had put in the midst of them. Last of all, in the
conclusion and winding up (at it were) of the times of the Law, he manifests
it more fully by the hands of the Hag. 2. 5, 6.
Prophet HAGGAI, Now therefore, ZERVBBABEL and IEHOSHVA, and all the people of
the Land, be strong, and do the work, for I am with you, says JEHOVAH of
Hosts, with my Word, in whom I made a Covenant with you, when you came out of
Egypt, and my Spirit that abides among you. And thus far out of the Old
Testament. In the New, as all other Mysteries of God* so this especially is
more clearly revealed by that great Prophet which was to come into the World,
the High Priest and Apostle of our Profession, Mat. 3. 16, 17 and 2. Pet. 1 17.
Christ Jesus, upon whom, in his first imitation, to the work of our
Redemption (being himself the Son, one of these three Persons) the other two
showed themselves from Heaven. The Holy Ghost in his Gifts and Graces,
represented by the visible shape of a Dove: the Father by his voice from the
Seat of Glory. This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. In his
last farewell to his Disciples, being to leave the World, and to go unto the
Father, he left this Doctrine as a perpetual Monument religiously to be
observed of the Church, to the end of the World, willing to baptize all
Nations, Mat. 28. 19.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: That as in
other respects, so in this it is most worthily said, John 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he has revealed him. With these two Testimonies I
willingly content my self, as most pregnant of all the rest. And therefore I
pass over diverse other that might be alleged to this purpose, because these
twain may stand in stead of many. Only I will add that golden testimony of
his beloved Disciple: 1. John. 5. 7.
There be three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost. It is clear, that to the earthly witness or testimony of men in
the things which we feel and have experience of within our selves,
Regeneration, Righteousness, Sanctification, he opposes the heavenly
Witness or Testimony of these persons, greater in regard of the excellence of
the witnesses, but equal in the number whereby appears the clear evidence
of this place.

The third point is, that these persons Tritheites, who though they acknowledge
the three Persons to be every one God indeed, yet teach that they are not
only distinct, but severed and divided.
have every one the whole Godhead, and Divine nature, and are all three that
one only true and everliving God. For both the Apostle 1. John 5. 7, 9.
there calls them so expressly, and the testimony of all three he knitteth up
in one, when he says, If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of
God is greater. Even as Moses Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
also does, when from the multitude of the Persons, he calls them to the
unity of the substance. Therefore the Apostle Paul Col. 2. 9.
says, In him (Christ the Son of GOD, manifested in the flesh) dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that is personally, which is to be
extended to all the other Persons. For to whomsoever God communicates his
nature, he must needs communicate it wholly, as has been said. And this
mystery (how in that most simple and single essence of God, there be certain
substances or persons truly subsisting* three in one, and one in three,
differing, but not divided, several, but not sundred, many, and yet the same*
all one, for their nature all distinct for three persons) is a secret of all
secrets, passing all reach and understanding of man, rather reverently to be
adored, then too curiously to be searched into.

The fourth and last point is the incommunicable properties, whereby these
persons are distinguished in themselves.

To the Son, is proper to be begotten, to the Holy Ghost, to proceed, the
Father is of himself, neither begotten nor proceeding, but which from all
Eternity has begotten his Son, and he and the Son together send forth the
holy Spirit. Of the Father we shall not need to speak. But that the Sons
proper subsistence is to be begotten, as the name of Son imports (given
unto him of God, Mark 3. 17. This is my well beloved Son, and so called
before he took flesh, Psalm. 2. 13. Kiss the Son, lest he be wroth. But
most clearly in the Pro. 30. 4.
Proverbs, What is his Name or his Sons Name?) So the Scripture in many
places shows, John 1. 18. The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
the Father. And a John 2. 14.
little before, We beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of his
Father. The like we say of the Holy Ghost, who is sometimes called the Spirit
of God, sometimes the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9, 10. 11. But you are not in
the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, but if
one have not the Spirit of Christ, this man is not his. But if the Spirit of
him that raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised Christ from
the dead, will also quicken you by his Spirit dwelling in you.

Sometimes, he is said to be sent from the Father, or to proceed from the
Father, which is all one, sometime to be sent from the Son, John 1. 5. 26 The
error of the Greek Churches, who deny the Holy Ghosts proceeding from the
Son.
But when the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father,
the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father.

As touching the Godhead of Arius denied Christ to be of the same nature with
his Father, but as it were a secondary god; acknowledging he was an excellent
Creature, created before the World, by whom God created the World, and saved
Mankind, and therefore as a God in office to be adored, not in essence. The
like of the Holy Ghost. But since it is plain, that God made all things in six
days, both the Son and the Spirit, if they were creatures, must have been
comprehenced in that work.
these three Persons. Of the Father no man ever doubted. But the Godhead of
the Son, and Holy Ghost, some Heretics have called in question: wherefore to
confirm our faith herein, let us take Arguments for them both. For the
Godhead of the Son, we have these: He is IAH, JEHOVAH, EHIEH: that is to
say, being, or perfection it self. Psalm. 68. 19. Ascending on high, thou
leddest captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, even the Rebels, thou
dwelling there (that is to say, in Heaven) leddest captive, O IAH, God, meaning
Christ. To whose Ascension the Apostle does apply it, Ephesians. 4. 8. EHIEH he
calls himself manifestly, John 8. 58. Before ABRAHAM was made, I am. Not
made, but of my self, and from my self, without beginning: for that i^ the
force of am, elegantly opposed unto made. The name Jehovah is given him, Genes.
4. 1. This interpretation flows naturally from the Hebrew Text. Beside it,
there be two other which of all the rest seem most probable. One is Ieromes,
With or by ^ehouah, that is, by his goodness and blessing, (...). But in that
sense it should have been (...) not (...) The other is that of Tremellius and
Iunius (which is also the received interpretation.) I have gotten a man from
Jehovah, by an Ellipsis of the Preposition, (...) as Genesis 14. 4. and Deuteronomy 34.
1. But neither do these places, nor I think any other that you can bring,
warrant such an Ellipsis. And (...) the Verb here used, has always going
with it (...) or (...) or (...) and no Ellipsis of (...) at any time. As for
(...) of it self never signifies from. It is commonly the note of an
Accusative case (...) any times of an Ablative, and signifies with. Joined
with a never ^ll, it may stand for a Nominative, as 1. Sam. 17. 34. 2. King. 6.
5. So if it be joined with a Passive, as L^u^t. 13. 49 But none of these can
agree here: and in any other sense, I do not find that it is ever taken.
EVE conceived and bare KAIN and said, I possess the man JEHOVAH: that is,
GOD, by opening my womb, and making me the Mother of a goodly Child, has
put me in possession (as if now I had and held him in mine arms) of that
blessed Seed, which in the fullness of time he will send into the World; who
being the LORD from Heaven, shall tread down the head of the Serpent.
Prophetically spoken, like to that of JACOB, Genesis 48. 22 I give thee one
portion above thy Brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite, with
my Sword, and with my Bow: It was not taken till four or five Generations
after; but by faith he did apprehend it, as certain, as if it were then
won, and took upon him to dispose thereof, as of his own. Wherefore Kain
had that name, not for his own sake, nor was he the purchase or possession
the woman fixed her eyes upon. She lifted them up higher, and by so sweet a
Babe, such as the World had never seen before, she held her faith confirmed
in the expectation of the Messiah, God and Man, who, many years after, was to
come out of the loins of one of Eues Daughters. In effect she calls him,
The man JEHOVAH, in the same sense that God the Father, Zach. 13. 7. calls
him the man my fellow. Here therefore is a clear testimony of the Deity of
Christ: which I would not willingly lose the hold off, being not only so
plain and pregnant, and such a noble evidence of Eues faith, but withal an
Antiquity of such price, the first thing recorded after man was thrown out of
Paradise. Which adds, I know not how, a great weight and majesty to this
most sweet and gracious speech. And that Christ is euery-where called Jehovah,
may appear both by the Old Testament it self, and especially if it be
conferred with the New. For proof whereof, I lay before this ground, as most
certain and infallible, that wheresoever the true God Jehovah is said to have
appeared, in the likeness of an Angel or man, this was the person, not of the
Father, nor of the Holy Spirit, but of the Son, who appeared to the Fathers
as a man, to note out the great Mystery of his Incarnation, and is called an
Angel (not by nature; but by office) as in Malach. 3. 1.
MALACHY, The Angel of the Covenant, and him whom Zachar. 3 2.
Zachary calls The Angel of JEHOVAH, IVDE Jude verse 9.
cermeth Michael the Arch-angell, which is Christ our Savior. This foundation
laid, which cannot fail, I come to those places where the Name of Jehovah is
given to him: And first, to those where this Angel appeared as a man, Genesis 18.
Three men (being indeed Angels) appeared unto Abraham, of which three, one was
Jehovah, for so the very beginning of the Chapter has it, Further, JEHOVAH
appeared unto him in the plain of Mamre, for when he lift up his eyes, behold,
three men stood before him: and afterward, Genesis 18. ver. 13, 15, 17, 20.
Jehovah, one of them had communication with him and his wife. Again, of these
three men, two Genesis 19. 1.
went toward Sodom, who are called Angels. But Jehovah, still remained with
Abraham, till he had left communing with him. The very Genesis 19. 24.
next Chapter it is said, JEHOVAH powered down upon Sodom and Gomorrah, fire
and brimstone out of Heaven from JEHOVAH, that is, Christ from his Father. Genesis
32. 24 When Jacob was left alone beyond the River, after he had sent away his
Company, a man wrestled with him till the morning, whom JACOB calls The
mighty God: naming the place where this was done, Peniel, that is, The place
where he saw the face of the mighty God: whereby appears manifestly that it
was Jehovah: which in the Prophet H^sh* 12. 5.
H^sea is yet more evident, where Jehovah says, that at Bethel God found him,
that is, met Jacob, and appeared unto him, and there (says that JEHOVAH) he
spoke with us.

Joshua 6. IOSHVA being at Ierico, a man stood before him with a Sword drawn
in his hand. Joshua demanding who he was, he said, He was the Prince of the
Host of JEHOVAH: whereupon Joshua fell down upon his face, and worshipped him.
Then he bade Joshua pluck off his shoes from his feet; for the place where
he stood was holy. And afterward, Jehovah said to IOSHVA, Lo, I give Ierico
into thy hands, etc. Here the Epithere, Of the Prince of the Host of JEHOVAH,
the adjuncts of worship, belonging to GOD only, which the Angels do renounce,
and of plucking off the shoo, because the place is holy (a peculiar mark of
the Majesty of God) and lastly, the effects of giving Ierico into his hands,
prove this man to be Jesus Christ, the true Jehovah, and God alone.

He Judges 6. 21.
which appeared unto Gedeon, with a walking staff in his hand, and is called
The Angel of JEHOVAH, is also named Jehovah, and confirms Gedeon, that by
the power which he had given unto him, sending him and promising his presence
with him, he should save Israel out of the hands of the Midianites: whereby he
does manifestly declare himself to be the Lord of glory.

The Angel Judges 13. 8, 10, 22, 23.
of God which appeared to Manoah, and his Wife, by them both expressly called a
man, when he had declared himself wonderful, by his miraculous ascending in
the flame of the fire, that was upon the Altar, MANOAH said unto his Wife, we
shall certainly dye, for we have seen God. But his Wife said unto him: If
JEHOVAH had pleased to kill us, he would not have received at our hand a burnt
Offering, nor gift, nor have showed unto us all these things, etc. Here Manoah
calls him God, and his Wife Jehovah: so that this also must needs be the
eternal Son of God, the Angel of the Covenant.

Genesis 31. Genesis 31. 11, 13
The Angel of God which appeared to Jacob in a Dream, and bade him to return
into the Country of his Nativity, tells him, I am the mighty God of
Bethel, where thou anoyntedst a Pillar, and there thou vowedst a vow unto me.
But Vows are only to be made to Jehovah. And Moses in that Story had so
called him Genesis 28. 13.
before, yea, Jacob in the Vow it self had said, that Genesis 28. 20, 21.
JEHOVAH should be his GOD: and in his Genesis 32. 8.
Prayer, when he was afraid of his Brother ESAV, O God of my Father ABRAHAM,
and God of my Father ISACK: O JEHOVAH, which said unto me, Return Genesis 38. 1.
unto thy Country, etc. And to him he is afterward commanded to build an
Altar. This Angel therefore was Christ, the true Jehovah.

Exodus 3. There appeared unto Moses in the Mount of God, an Angel of JEHOVAH,
in a fiery flame, out of the midst of a Bush, and when Moses turned aside, to
see that great Vision, Jehovah seeing him, cried unto him out of the midst of
the Bush, and said, I am God of thy Father: The God of ABRAHAM, the God of
ISACK, and the God of JACOB. Anon he calls himself by the name of Ehieh, or
I am, and JEHOVAH. So that Christ is that true Ehieh, and JEHOVAH, the God of
ABRAHAM, ISACK, and JACOB; the proper name of the everliving God, as appears
by many places in the New Testament.

The comparing of the Old Testament with the New, will make this a great deal
playner. He that led the people to and fro in the Wilderness, was Christ. For
so the Prophet Esaias 63. 9.
says, The Angel of his face saved them, and setting them upon himself,
carried them continually. And 1. Cor. 10. 4.
PAVL, that Christ the spiritual Rock of his Church, figured by the Cloud, by
Manna, and the Rock that flowed out water to the People, went together with
them, conducting and leading them the way. But Moses expressly calls him
JEHOVAH: Exodus 13. 21.
JEHOVAH went before them by day, in a Pillar of Cloud, and by night in a
Pillar of fire. And this is that which the Lord himself tells them, Exodus
23. 20, 21. Behold, I send mine Angel before thee, to keep thee in thy way,
and to lead thee into the place which I have prepared. Take heed to thy self
of his presence, and harken to his voice. Provoke him not; for he will not
bear your rebellion, for my name is in the midst of him. As if he had said,
he is Jehovah, and not a created Spirit.

Likewise, he whom they tempted in the Wilderness, was God, and Jehovah: for
so Numb. 21. 5. 7. it is recorded, That the people speak against God, and
against MOSES: and afterward, pressed with the hand of GODS heavy Judgment,
that he sent upon them by flying Serpents, they came to Moses, and said, We
have sinned, in that we have spoken against JEHOVAH, and thee. To which Story,
Paul 2. Cor. 20. 9.
alluding, says, Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them tempted him, and
were destroyed of Serpents. In Zachary Zach. 3. 2.
(as in Genesis before) there is a plain difference made of two, whereof each
is, JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH said, JEHOVAH rebuke thee, Satan. And this Jude Jude verse
9.
expressly notes, to be the voice of Michael the great Arch-angell, which is
Christ, our Lord, the Angel of the Covenant, and the Mediator, and
Intercessor of his Church. So that which Esaias Esaias 6. 1.
says, I saw JEHOVAH setting upon a Throne, etc. JOHN John 12. 41.
refers unto Christ, These things said ESAIAS, when he saw his glory, and
spoke of him.

That in the 102. Psalm. 102. 26.
Psalm, Thou JEHOVAH, in the beginning made the Heavens, etc. the Apostle
Heb. 1. ^0.
to the Hebrews applies unto Christ, as pregnant testimony, to prove the
excellency of his Person above all Creatures; yea, above the Angels themselves.
Finally, the Apostle Romans 14. 10. 11
Paul cleereth this Doctrine, when to prove that all of us shall be presented
before the Tribunal Seat of Christ: he doubts not to allege the place of
the Prophet Esaias 45. 23.
ESAIAS, As I live* says the Lord, to me shall every knee bow: which are the
words of the great Jehovah, even there, where he does protest, there is no
other God but he. Whereby it is most manifest, that Christ is Jehovah, the true
and only God.

Secondly, The properties incommunicable to any Creature, Singleness,
Infiniteness, Eternity, are to be found in him, we have showed before: that
to be called Life, Light, etc. is proper unto God, for that it signifies as
much as to be perfectly so, and the cause of it to all other. Now, these
Epithites are given unto Christ. As in John 14. 6.
JOHN, I am the way, the truth (in which one, his absolute and perfect
goodness every way is understood) and the life, I am John 11. 25.
the resurrection and life. Again, this 1. John 5. 20.
Jesus Christ is the true God, and life eternal. Why life? Because he has it
of himself, and gives it to others. And thereof it is, that Acts 3. 15. (...).
Peter calls him the Prince of life. Hence it is, that the Evangelist John
John 1. 9.
calling him the true Light, adds the reason by and by: which lighteneth
every man that comes unto the World. Hence also it is, that in the Prophet
Esaias, he is termed Esaias 9. 6.
the Father of Eternity. And in the Pro. 1. 20.
Proverbs, not only Wisdom, but Wisdoms in the plural. W^s^ arms, says
Solomon, that is the Wisdom of all Wisdom. Wisdom it self, and the
Author of it, Jesus Christ, the very Wisdom of the most wise God, cries
abroad, etc. And that this is to be understood (not of a flitting and vanishing
speech, but) of Christ the eternal Wisdom of his Father, the whole course of
the eighth Chapter shows so manifestly, that it were in vain to stand upon
it. Moreover, he is Infinite, and in many places at once, Ephesians. 3. 17.
He dwells in the hearts of all the faithful. Being upon Earth, he was in
Heaven, as he says, John 3. 13.
The Son of man which is in Heaven: contrariwise, continuing now in Heaven,
yet he is upon the Earth, Matthew. 28. 20. I am with you to the end of the World.
And as he is without circumscription of place, so also he is Omnipotent in
Power, Infinite in Knowledge, and Goodness it self: for his Power, he is
expressly called Revel. 1. 8.
the Almighty one, and of the Infiniteness of his Knowledge, what more
honorable testimony can we have, then that of John 21. 17.
PETER, Lord, thou know all things: yea, things future and to come, as well
as others, which he declares before hand unto his Church? As the same 1. Pet.
1. 16.
Apostle says, The fore-witnessing Spirit of Christ declared the things that
were to befall unto him, and the glory that was to follow. And by this Argument
is his Godhead manifestly proved, Esaias 42. 22, 23, 26.
Esaias 41. where God provoking all false gods, and their worshippers, to bring
their proofs, and to use their strongest arguments, he says, Let them utter
and declare unto us the things that shall fall out. The former things what they
were, declare, that we may set our mind unto them, and know the end of them,
or the things to come, declare unto us, nay, (says he) declare but the signs
of the things hereafter, that we may know you to be gods. At the length he
concludes, There is none that can declare, there is none that can foretell,
there is none that can hear your words: A chief man in Sion, in whom behold,
behold these things, and to Jerusalem, a Publisher of glad tidings I will give.
The sum is, none can declare things immediately, nor at the length to come to
pass, nor give any incling or signification of future things: but all this
glory God takes to himself in Christ, yea, so infinite is this his Knowledge,
that even the secrets of all hearts (which God only discerns) are known
unto him: for that is it which the Euangestlist John Job. 2. 24, 25.
expressly notes, He committed not himself into the hands of the Jews, which
after a sort believed in him, because he knew all men, and had no need that
any should testify of man; for himself knew what was in man. In another
Matthew. 9. 4.
place he is said to have seen their thoughts: and Revel. 2. 14 to search the
hearts and the reins. Neither does this knowledge rest here, but it sounds
the bottomless counsels of God his Father, unsearchable of all his Creatures,
Revelation 5. The Book with seven Seals in the right hand of him that sat
upon the Throne, which none in Heaven, nor upon the Earth, nor under the Earth
was able to open, nor so much as to look upon it; this Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, the root of David, by his own Power prevailed to open. Hereof it is,
that in the Prophet Dan. 8. 13.
Daniel we find him set forth by the name of PALMONI: Then I heard (says he)
a certain Saint speaking, for the Saint said unto PALMONI the speaker, (that
is, to Christ, the Interpreter of his Fathers will) How long shall this Vision
be? PALMONI is a compound word, and signifies as much as to have all hidden
and secret things ready told, and as we use to speak, at ones fingers ends
most absolutely and perfectly known, which is the proper Epithete of our
Savior Christ, in whom are hidden all the treasures of Wisdom and
Understanding, and who is said to be in the Bosom of the Father: yea, who is
the very Wisdom of God, as manifestly appears, by conference of the two
Evangelists, Matthew and Luke: for that which Christ says in MATTHEW, Matthew.
23. 24
Behold, I send among you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes, etc. LVKE Luke
21. 49.
has it, Therefore also the Wisdom of God says, I will send among you
Prophets and Apostles, etc. Last of all, he is called Eternal, Psalm. 93. 2.
Thy Throne is established from before then (meaning any time, whereof a man may
say then) thou art from everlasting. And that this Psalm is spoken of Christ,
appears in the very first beginning, Jehovah raigueth. Solomon in his
Proverbs Prou. 8. 22.
does notably enforce the same, JEHOVAH possessed me in the beginning of his
way, before his works, before then. Before the World was I anointed, before
the beginning, before the first things of the Earth, when yet there were no
deepes was I brought forth, when there were no Fountains heavy with water,
when yet Mountains were not fastened, before the Hills was I brought forth, yet
he had not made the Earth, nor streets, no not the beginning, nor dusts of the
inhabited World. When he fitted the Heavens, there was I: when he appointed
the circuit upon the face of the Deep, when he fortified the Clouds above
when he strengthened the Fountains of the Deep, when he laid his Decree upon
the Sea, that the waters should not pass the commandment of his mouth, when
he appointed the foundations of the Earth. And hereunto serves that to the
Col^ssi^^s Col. 1. 15.
Begotten before all Creation, or before any thing was ^reated, and therefore
from everlasting. Agreeable whereunto is that whereby he calls himself in
the Revel. 18.
Revelation, Alpha, and Omega, the beginning, and the end, which was, and which
is, and which is to come. And in JOHN, John 8. 5, 8.
before ABRAHAM was made, I am. Again, John 17. 15.
Glorify me, O Father, with the glory which I had before the World was with
thee. That also to the Heb. 9. 14. Heb. 1. 2.
Hebrews, where he is said to have offered up himself, by his everlasting
Spirit, is very pregnant to prove his Eternal Deity. And when by him God
made all Ages, the times and courses of all things, must not he the Maker and
Beginner of Time, be himself before all Time? But that of all other is most
emphaticall, where he is called Esaias 9. 5.
The Father of Eternity, not only eternal, but Eternity it self, and the
Author of it.

Thirdly, being the Son and begotten, as before appeared, he must needs be
understood to be of his Fathers Essence. For he that begets, and they that
are begotten, are all of one nature, especially, he that has not the like, but
the same very Essence, and whole Godhead in him. As he is therefore
Consubstantiall, so is he coequall with his Father. A son is inferior to his
father, because his father is more excellent then he, in priority of Time, in
priority of Dignity: For his Wisdom and other parts, which the son by
instruction receives from him. Again, because he bestows freely this
benefit upon his son, to beget him: for fleshly Parents in gender voluntary
of their free will and election, not by nature. These things set aside, a son
(who has not the same, but the like nature with his father) were equal with
him. How much more therefore is this true in the Son of God, who is not of
the like, but of the selfsame nature and Essence with his Father, and in whom
none of the things before alleged can take place? Priority of Times there is
none, for all are Coeternall, nothing imperfect: for what is the Godhead, but
perfection it self? Neither does the heavenly Father like unto fleshly Parents
beget his Son voluntarily, so as he might have begotten him, or left him
unbegotten, or may beget more: but he begets him by nature, and therefore
him alone.

Fourthly, He sends forth the Holy Ghost out of his own substance, and
therefore is indeed and truth God, if (as shall be proved anon) the Holy
Ghost himself be God.

Fifthly, The works which only belong to God, Christ does the same, and that in
the same manner, as he says in John 5. 19.
IOHH, Whatsoever the Father does, the same the Son does likewise. And John
5. 18.
again, My Father works hitherto, and I work. Whereupon, truly and rightly
the Jews concluded, that he made himself equal with God. It were long to
go through all, but to select the chief and principal among all the works of
God, none is more near, and inward to the Sacred Majesty, then the Eternal
Election which is within himself, and known only to himself, and whereof he
alone does keep the Book. This is attributed unto Christ, John 15. You have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you that you might bring forth fruit, and
that your fruit may remain: which properly meant of the dignity and office of
Apostle-ship, whereunto Christ had chosen them, gives them withal this
comfort, that as they had this honor to be the Arch-Masons, and
Master Builders of the Church, which is the House of the living God: so
themselves were lively stones of that spiritual Building: and to have part in
the fruit, which by their Ministry, they should reach forth, for the
everlasting good of many, in 2. Tim. 4. 6.
saving of themselves, as well as others; without which, their joy had not
been full. And aptly does this follow, as the Root and Fountain of that most
Honorable Title, to be his friends; which he had vouchsafed to give unto
them immediately before. But more manifest is that, John 13. 18. I speak not
of you all, I know whom I have chosen. But it behooves that the Scripture
should be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel
against me. The circumstance, of exempting one of the Apostles out of the
number of the blessed, making his Election the cause of this their difference.
referring the same to his own secret knowledge: and finally, opposing to the
Chosen, him that should betray him, the John 17. 12.
son of destruction, as afterward he calls him (who yet in familiarity of
conversation, was a choice and special friend, eating bread continually at his
Table) show plainly, that he speaks of Election unto life. As other Mat. 24.
31.
where he does, when speaking of his second Coming unto Judgment: he says,
The Son of man shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, Who
shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, etc. And no marvel,
though he call them his Elect: for since he has power and authority to
Revel. 3. 5.
blot men's names out of the Book of Life, it cannot be chosen, but he must
have interest to write them in; for of contraries, there is one and the same
respect in nature. Therefore, to shut up this point, and to leave it without
question, the Book of Life in the Revel. 13. 8.
Revelation, is expressly called, The Lambs Book of Life. Come to that which
is more glorious in the World. And first unto the Creation, the proper mark of
the true God. As the Psalm. 124. 8.
Psalmist teaches, Our help is in the Name of JEHOVAH, that has made both
Heaven and Earth. And Ier. 10. 11.
JEREMY, The gods that made not Heaven and Earth, let them perish from the
Earth, and from under the Heaven. He it is that wrought with the Father, in the
creating of all things, John 1. 13. All things were made by him, and without
him was nothing that was made, not a jot of any thing. So says Paul to the
Col. 1. 16.
Colossians, By him were created all things, both in Heaven and upon the Earth,
things visible, and invisible, whether Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him, and for him.
Therefore he is called, The Revel. 3. 14.
beginning of the Creation of God, or the first and prime cause from whence the
Creatures take their beginning, being all made and formed by him. And notable
is that of the 102. Psalm, which the Apostle to the Hebrews Heb. 1. 10.
applies unto Christ, Thou, Lord, in the beginning laydst the foundation of
the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands. And By him, says the
same Heb. 1. 2.
Apostle, God made the Ages, that is, Time, and the course and succession of
all things: with this glory of Creation is coupled another, not inferior of the
cherishing and preserving of the things created. So Prou. 8. 30. he says, that
he is with God his Father, nourishing and gladding them continually. Hither
belong those Divine Works and Miracles, manifestly pointing out his Godhead,
He rebuked the Winds, and they obeyed him, raised up the dead, opened the eyes
of them that were blind, cast out Devils, had power to send them into Hell: to
their fearful place of torment, for Luke 8. 31.
they besought him, not to do it. And all this he did not as the Prophets and
Apostles, but by his own Sovereign Power. As the Evangelist Luke 5. 36.
notes, that hereupon fear came on all the people, maruelling what this might
be. For even, say they, with Authority and Power he commands the unclean
spirits, and they come out. And how must not this Power needs be his own,
when he takes upon him to give it to others? The Matthew. 10. 8.
Evangelist recording, that he gave power unto the twelve Apostles, to cleanse
Lepers, to raise the dead, to cast out Devils, etc. which authority, they like
faithful Servants did so pursue, as it might easily appear, they derived
their whole virtue from him alone. Hence is that of Acts 3. 6.
PETER, In the Name of Christ, arise and walk: and Acts 9. 34.
AENEAS, Jesus Christ does heal thee. I stand not here to press those
glorious works, whereby his Godhead shines most clearly in the Church, in
subduing the proud enemies thereof, and generally, all the Reprobates,
hardening their hearts, and delivering them up unto their own damnation. For
so, the John 12. 39, 40. 41.
Evangelist, when he had showed that the Jews could not believe, because ESAIAS
had said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, lest they
should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and I should heal
them; immediately adds, These things said ISAIAH, when he saw his glory and
spoke of him Contrariwise, he bestows upon his Children all good graces.
Therefore, the Apostle continually prays for Grace and Peace from him. He
sends the Holy Spirit unto them, The John 15. 16.
Comforter whom I will send. And John 20. 22. He breathed upon them, and said,
Receive the Holy Ghost. He gives Faith, as appears by that Prayer of the
Apostles, Luke 17. 5.
Lord, increase our Faith. Pardons and remitteth sins, and that by his own
Authority; He Luke 7. 48, 49
said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. And they that sat down with
him, began to say in themselves, Who is this that does also forgive sins? As
Luke 5. 21.
elsewhere, upon the like occasion, they said, He did blaspheme, grounding
themselves upon a certain truth, That none can forgive sins, but God only.
He washes and sanctifies the Church, as a glorious Spouse unto himself;
which because it is the proper work of God, is therefore expressly Romans 1. 14.
attributed to his Spirit, or Divine Power. And by this Argument, he confirms
his Godhead, Ioh. 5. 21. As the Father rayseth the dead (in sin) and
quickens, so also the Son quickens whom he will. This is he, which is to
judge the World, John 5. 22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Son. He rayseth up by his mighty voice, the bodies of the
dead, John 5. 22. John 5. 28.
For the time shall come when all that are in the graves, shall hear the voice
of the Son of man, and shall come forth. So in John 6. 34, 40
another place, And I will raise him up in the latter Day, Romans 1. 4. he is
said to have raised up himself. And in JOHN, John 10. 18.
I have power to lay down my soul, and to take it up again Yea, he is called
the John 11. 25.
Resurrection; to note that he does this of himself, and by his own
authority: who, were he not God, could not raise up himself, much less raise
up and quicken others. To conclude, as a Crown of all the rest, this is he,
which John 1. 12.
to as many as receive him, gives this dignity to be the Sons of God,
Revel. 1. 6.
has made us Kings, and Priests, to God his Father: and gives everlasting
life (which Romans 6. 23.
is the gift of God alone.) To Revel 3. 21.
him that overcomes, I will give to sit with me in my Throne. So John 10.
27, 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I
give everlasting life unto them.

Sixthly, marvelous are those marks, whereby, as by certain steps and
footings, we may trace out the Maiesticall glory of his Godhead. John 1. 14.
We beheld his glory, as the glory of the only Begotten, coming from the
Father. PAVL also calls him. The Lord of glory. 1. Cor. 2. 8. For had they
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. By which very phrase,
if there were no more, we may easily discern him to be selfsame mighty God,
full of Majesty, and of Power, whom Psalm. 24 9, 10
David terms, the King of glory, and forthwith adds, Who is the King of
glory? JEHOVAH of Hosts, he is the King of glory. In the Acts, Acts 7. 56.
when he showed himself to STEPHEN, the Heavens are said to have been
opened, as it were the Creature, to give place unto the Creator. He is the Col.
1. 15.
Image of the invisible God: The Heb. 1. 3.
engraven form of his Fathers Person, and resplendence of his glory, has one
Revel. 22. 1.
and the selfe-some Throne with his Father: whereby equal Power and Dignity is
meant: In John 1. 18.
JOHN, He is said to be in the bosom of the Father. Hither belongs that
Honorable Title which the Father gives unto Christ, when he calls him,
Zach. 13. 7. (...)
the man, my fellow; as it were, another himself, the representer of his
Person; as the Hebrew word does signify. The Elect and holy Angels are called
the Angels of God, and never the Angels of any Creature, as by way of noting
out any authority over them. But Christ is not only the Jude verse 9.
Arch-angell, chief Dan. 10. 13.
of the heavenly Princes, and I^sh 8. 2.
Prince of the Host of JEHOVAH: but further, they are said by name to be Revel.
12. 7, 8. Mat. 13. 4.
his Angels, and Heb. 1. 6.
willed to do him homage: Let all the Angels of God worship him. In the
Prophets you may every where see, how they minister to Christ, are sent by him,
and run at his Commandment, Ezech. 10. 6. The man clothed in linen, with a
Writers Inke-horne by his side (which was Christ the Priest, and Mediator of
his Church, sealing them to eternal Life, by the Blood of the New Testament)
being commanded of his Father, to fill his fists with coals of fire, from
between the Cherubins, and to scatter it upon the City. As Soon as he came and
stood by the wheels, one of the Cherubs (an Angel) took of the fire, and put
it into his fists: pressed and ready to serve him, as he was to obey his Father.
In Zach. 1 9, 11
Zachary, the Angel that spoke to the Prophet, being the same Verse 9.
Angel that stood between the two Myrrh-trees, called also the man that stood
between the Myrrh-trees, that it might be known to be meant of Christ,
takes of the other Angels, a reckoning and account of their doings. The same
Angel in the Zach. 2. 3, 4.
next Chapter bids another Angel, that came forth to meet him, as it were
to know his pleasure what he would command him, to run and inform the
Prophet, of those promises which there he makes to his Church. So Dan. 8. 16.
Daniel having seen a great Vision which he understood not, heard the voice of
a man, which was Christ* calling, and saying, GABRIEL, make this man understand
the Vision. But in the times of the Gospel, when the Prophetical Visions were
more clear, then under shadows of the Law: his also is more manifest: For in
the very beginning of the Book of the Revel. 1. 1.
Revelation, the things which Christ received from his Father, he is said, to
have sent and showed them by his Angel, to his Servant JOHN. And in the Revel.
2^ 16.
conclusion of the Book. again. I JESUS have sent my Angel to testify these
things unto you. The conference of which place* with Revel. 22. 6.
that which went immediately before, The Lord God of the holy Prophets has
sent his Angel, to show his Servants the things which must come to pass
shortly, notes him out plainly to be that JEHOVAH. The true God, which spoke
by the holy Prophets, We are Mat 28. 19. Acts 2. 38.
baptized into his Name. A form of speech* signifying that we dedicate and
consecrate our selves to him, as to our GOD and Lord. Whereupon, 1. Cor. 1. 14.
Paul worthily detesteth it to have been thought, as if he baptized any into
his own Name. God Mat. 4. 10.
only is to be worshipped. But this honor Christ also has: For both Stephen
gives it unto him, when he says, Lord Acts 7. 59.
Jesus, receive my spirit. And it is the Epithete of all the Church, that they
Acts 9. 14. 1. Cor. 1 2.
call upon the Name of Christ. JOHN likewise, in the Revel. 21. 22.
Revelation makes the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb* alike the Temple of
that holy City, the heavenly Jerusalem: meaning, that he is equally to be
worshipped, and with the same honor: Faith does only rest upon God, but we
are commanded to believe in Christ: Yea, John 16. 1.
believe in God, believe also in me. Further it is the pleasure Ier. 9. 24.
of GOD, that whosoever glories, should glory only in this, That he knows
him to be JEHOVAH. But Paul doubts not, to profess that he Gal. 6. 14.
gloried only in the Cross of Christ, and neither preached nor chose to know
any other thing, save 1. Cor. ^2.
only him alone. Christ John 17. 3.
also himself coupleth these two together: This is everlasting life, to know
thee the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. But what
stay I hereupon, when testimonies are so clear? upon the mark and notes, when
the things themselves are so evident and express: his Godhead being
euerywhere to be found in most plain and manifest terms? Which, that it may
the better appear, I will sort all the testimonies of this kind into three
Orders or Ranks. The first is, of such as attribute the spirit unto him: Not
as the spirit or soul of a man, but so as it appears plainly by the
Epithetes adjoined, to be the Divine Spirit, or GOD himself, 1. Cor. 15. 45.
The first man ADAM was made a living Soul, the latter ADAM a quickering
Spirit. As be notes out in Adam, the whole man, by the more excellent part,
the Soul; so does he in Christ, the whole Person, by that most excellent
Nature of the God head, bodily dwelling in him, calling him another Adam: for
that as Adam imparted fleshly life unto all that come from him: so does Christ
the Spiritual Life to all that are his. And that this may be the better
conceived, to be meant of his Eternal Deity in the seven and fortieth Verse,
he does more clearly frame the comparison. The first man out of the earth,
earthly; the second man, the Lord himself from Heaven. Therefore is his Spirit
or Divine nature, sometime called The Heb. 9. 14.
everlasting Spirit, (a thing proper to the Godhead:) sometime The Romans 1. 4.
Spirit of Sanctification, whereby he sanctifies all Gods Elect, and
sanctified his humane Nature, otherwise infirm and weak, and not able to
raise up it self. As in John 6. 63.
John he says, It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.
And 1. Pet. 3. 18.
Peter, that he was put to death as touching the flesh, but quickened as
touching the Spirit. Finally, the Apostle 2. Cor. 13. 4.
Paul expounding as it were this place, For though (says he) he were crucified
of infirmity yet he lives by the power of God. In the name of infirmity or
weakness manifestly alluding to the Hebrew, En^ch which signifies a frail,
or weak, and mortal man, and in the name Power, unto El, the mighty God: of
the second sort are those, where he is said, to have the Col 29. For in him
dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, that is, personally and
substantially.
fullness of the Godhead in him, to be Phil. 2. 6, 7. Who being in the form
of God, emptied himself, taking the form of a Servant, becoming in the
likeness of men, and in habit found a very man. Where, the form of a Servant,
noting a very servant and abject person, indeed shows that to be in the
form of God, signifies as much as to be really and essentially God himself.
in the form of God, to be John 8. 15. For this cause the Jews sought to kill
him, because he called God his own Father, making himself equal with God.
Phil. 2. 6. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
equal with God. And to conclude, to be Dan. 10. 13, 21.
Michael, of equal Power with the Almighty God. And this to be an honor
belonging unto Christ alone, and not to any created Angel, the Apostle Jude
Jude verse 9.
teaches expressly, when he so terms Jehovah himself, that in Zachary strove
with Satan about the Body of Moses, or the truth and perfection of the Law of
Moses; namely, the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, Remission of sins,
Imputation of Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; as in that
Chapter the Angel reasons of them all. But most manifestly this appears,
Reuelat. 12. 7. where MICHAEL and his Angels fought with the Dragon and his
angels. Against the Dragon, that is, the Devil, head of the malignant Church,
opposing Michael; that is, Christ; Head of Saints and Angels: and therefore
calling them his Angels, which agrees to God alone. Finally, the holy Ghost so
expounds it, Verse 10. Now is the Salvation, and Might, and Kingdom of our
God, and the Power of his Christ. In the third and last rank come those, that
call him expressly John 1. 1. The Word was God, 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in
Christ, reconciling the World, Luke 1. 16. 17. Many shall he (that is, John
Baptist) turn unto the Lord their God, and himself shall go before him in
the spirit and power of Elias. Where ( before him) being referred to Christ, as
it must, shows him to be the true and undoubted Lord God. And hither tends
the confession of Thomas* surnamed Didymus, my Lord, my God, John 20. 28. Of
this sort also is that, 2. Peter 1. 1. Through the righteousness of our God,
and Savior Jesus Christ. The coupling and context of the sentence without any
Article before ( Savior) which otherwise by the use of that tongue ought to
have been, showing plainly that the word ( God) can have no reference but to
Christ our Savior. M(...) plain is that Co^. ^. 2 Unto the knowledge of God,
both the Father and Christ. Where ( God) as a common antecedent is attributed
to them both.
God, The 1. John 5. 20. We are (...) true one, in his Son Jesus Christ. Th^^
is that true God, and life everlasting.
true God; The Titus ^. 13. Waiting for the blessed hope, and glorious bright
appearance of the great God, and Savior of us, Jesus Christ Where not only
the knitting of the sentence (as in the place of Peter before) but the phrase
of bright appearance (never spoken but of the Son) enforces that whole
sentence to be meant of him.
great God; The mighty Esaias 9. 6. To us a Child is borne wh^le name is called
Wonderful, The might^ God, Most strong, etc.
God; The only Jude verse 4 Denying the only God and Master, our Lord Jesus
Christ.
God; God Romans 9. 5. Of whom is Jesus Christ touching the flesh, who is God
over all, blessed for ever, Amen.
over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

To prove the Holy Ghost to be God: First, he also is Jehovah, for he that led
the people in the Wilderness, and whom they tempted so often, was Jehovah, as we
have observed. But Esaias Esaias 63. 14.
says, this was the Spirit of God. As a beast that goes down into a Valley,
the Spirit of JEHOVAH quietly led them: and Esaias 63. 10.
a little before, They rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit. The Heb. 3. 8, 9.
Author also to the Hebrews notes it to be the speech of the Holy Ghost,
Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, as in the day of temptation in
the Wilderness, where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.
Again, that which the same Esaias 6. 9.
Prophet speaks of JEHOVAH, that he had-him go and say unto this people*
Hearing, ye shall hear, etc. PAVL Acts 28. 25.
applies to the Holy Ghost, Well said the Holy Ghost by ESAIAS the Prophet, to
our fathers, saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, etc.

Secondly, the essential properties of the Godhead, are here likewise to be
found. He is termed Truth it self, to note the singleness of his Nature. 1.
John 5. 6. The Spirit is Truth, has an Immensity and Infiniteness of place,
dwelling at once in the heart of all the Elect. 1. Cor. 3. 16. Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
Romans 8. 9, 11. The Spirit of Christ that dwells in you. He lay over that
whole mass and lump, whereof the Heavens and Earth was afterward made. Genesis
1. 2. The Spirit of God lay upon the Waters, ouer-spreading it as a Hen does
her Chicken. He fills all things with his presence. Psalm. 139. 7. Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit? Has a free and absolute power of working after
his own pleasure. 1. Cor. 12. 11. He distributeth his gifts as he will: for
he is the very power of God. So called Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the most High shall ouer-shaddow thee. And for that
which Mat. 12. 14.
Matthew says, I will cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, Luke 11. 20.
LVKE has it, If I cast out Devils by the finger of God. Yea, he is the giver
of all Power and Virtue. Micah. 3. 8. But I am filled with Virtue from the
Spirit of JEHOVAH, with Judgment, and with Power: Is of infinite Wisdom and
Knowledge, even to foretell things to come. The John 16. 14.
things that are to come, shall he declare to you, says Christ, yea, to sound
the very bottom of the most secret things of God. 1. Cor. 2. 20. The Spirit
searches the depths of God. And all this he has from himself, and of
himself, as most elegantly the Esaias 40. 13, 14.
Prophet teaches, Who has instructed the Spirit of JEHOVAH, as a man of his
counsel taught him? with whom has he communicated counsel, that he might
instruct him, and teach him the way of Judgment, even teach him Knowledge, and
the way of Wisdoms, (most absolute and perfect Wisdom) make known unto
him. For of Goodness, what shall I need to speak? whose Name it self
proclaymeth his Holiness, and whose Gal. 5. 22. 23.
fruits are Lenity, Kindness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, and
whatsoever good is? Eternity is also his, in that, as shall be showed anon, he
is the Creator of all things, and therefore must needs be, before any thing
began.

Thirdly, not only his proceeding from God, but the very Name of Spirit
shows the Essence and Nature which he is of. For as the spirit of a man must
needs be truly of man's nature, and is the most formal and essential part of
man: so, and much more it must be thought of the Spirit of God; upon whom no
composition falls. This in effect is the Apostles own Argument, 1. Cor. 2.
11. For who of men knows the things of man, but the spirit of man that is in
him? So also none knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, who is in
him, and of his own Essence, and Nature, as the opposition shows plainly.

Fourthly, touching the Works which only belong to God, of the eternal
Decrees registered in the Book of JEHOVAH, the Prophet says, His Esaias 38. 16.
mouth has commanded, and his Spirit has collected them. Secondly, In the
Creation of all things, he wrought together with the Father and the Son, Genesis
1. 2. The Spirit of God lay upon the Waters, meaning, that as a Bird lying upon
her Eggs, and covering them under her wings, does by a natural warmth and
heat, which comes from her, hatch and bring forth her young ones: So did the
Spirit of God by his lively power and working, frame and fashion the World out
of that lump of Waters, Job 26. 13. By his Spirit he beautified (or
beautifully framed) the Heavens. Esaias 40. 1^. Who help the Spirit of JEHOVAH?
meaning* in the Creation, which he spoke of next before. Hence it is, that
Elihu Job 33. 4.
in the Book of Job, professes himself to be his Creature; and the
workmanship of his hands. The Spirit of the Mighty God has made me, and the
breath of the Almighty has put life into me. Thirdly, he governs and
administreth the things created, Zach. 4. 10. The seven Eyes (or Spirits) of
JEHOVAH roll up and down upon all the Earth. Fourthly, He hardens the
wicked, and delivers them into a reprobate mind. For so the Apostle Acts 28.
26.
notes it to be the voice of the Holy Ghost, which is said in Esaias 6. 10.
ESAIAS, Go, make fat the heart of this people, make their ears heavy, and
cloze up their eyes. Fifthly, he is infinite in variety of gifts, 1. Cor. 12.
11. All these things works that one and the same Spirit* distributing them to
every one a part as he will. John 16. 23. When the Spirit of Truth comes, he
shall lead you into all Truth. Hereupon, John in the Revel. 1. 4.
Revelation terms him, The seven Spirits of God, in regard of the manifold
graces which God by him gives unto his Church, Grace be to you, and Peace from
him, that is, and that was, and that is to come; and from the seven Spirits,
which are before his Throne, and from Jesus Christ: where, by the seven
Spirits, I make no question, the Holy Ghost is meant, and not the holy Angels.
First, because these seven Spirits stand before the Throne, are inserted mean
between the Father and the Son, the Apostle wishes Grace and Peace from
them; they are the Horns and Eyes of the Lamb: yea, of his own very Nature,
and being Consubstantiall, and Coessentiall things; not in the least degree
appertayning to the Angels. Further, let the Text be marked: It is Revel. 5. 5,
6.
apparent, that these seven Spirits, the Horns, and Eyes of the Lamb, are
noted to be that strength, and most absolute and perfect Wisdom, whereby this
Lion of the Tribe of Judah overcame, to open the Book and the seven Seals
thereof, which Revel. 5. 34.
none in Heaven, or Earth, or under the Earth, that is, no Creature could do.
And when all other Revel. 7. 11.
Angels and Revel. 4. 10. and 5. 14.
Elders are said to fall down and adore God only, these seven Spirits do it
not. To this, I add Prophecy of ZACHARY, Zach. 3. 9. and 4. 10.
That God will put seven Eyes upon one Stone, upon CHRIST the Rock and
Foundation of his Church: Being (I doubt not) the selfsame seven Eyes that
John Revel. 5. 6.
speaks of, which neither the Phrase will suffer to be spoken of Angels, nor
they can be said, The ingrauings of that Stone. It must needs be then, that
the Prophet there means nothing else, but that which Esaias 12. 2.
Esaias says, Upon him shall rest the Spirit of JEHOVAH, the Spirit of Wisdom,
and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel, and Power, the Spirit of Knowledge,
and fear of JEHOVAH, that is, an infinite store of all gifts and ornaments of
the Spirit. And that no man may doubt hereof, these Spirits that here are
called seven Eyes, are before Revel. 3. 5.
called seven Lamps, whereby yet more manifestly it is proved, to be that
one only Spirit; for so does the Prophet Zach. 4. 2.
Zachary, from whom this place is fetched, or rather the Angel to the
Prophet, precisely expound that Vision. After he had showed unto him a
Candlestick, all of Gold, with a Bowl upon the top of it, and his seven
Lamps therein, and seven Pipes to the seven Lamps, which were on the tops
thereof, and two Olive Trees over it, one upon the right side of the Bowl, and
the other upon the left side thereof: And being demanded of the Prophet, the
interpretation of all this; First, he delivers it in gross, This Zach. 4. 6.
is the word of JEHOVAH to ZERVBBABEL, not with Power, nor with Strength, but
with my Spirit, says JEHOVAH, of Hosts. Afterward, Zach. 4. 14.
expounding it piece by piece, he says in the end, The two Olives, are those
that continue with the Lord of all the Earth, that is, which are in Christ, and
by Christ largely powered upon his Church: as here Revel. 5. 6.
also Christ is said to have them, nay, that they be as Horns and Eyes in his
head. And this is that which seems to have been shaddowed in those seven
Candlestickes, Exodus 23. 31.
commanded in the Law to be made of one entyre matter, to note out the variety
and multiplicitie of Graces, proceeding all from one Spirit, as the 1. Cor. 12.
4.
Apostle says, There be differences of Graces, but the same Spirit: neither
let it offend any man (as unworthy of the Majesty of the Holy Ghost) that
these seven Spirits Revel. 5. 6.
are said to be sent forth into all the Earth, as if they were Ministers and
Attendants upon the Lamb: for both the word sending, is John 15. 26. and 16.
17.
many times spoken of the holy Spirit; and Zach. 4. 10.
Zachary has the phrase, of rolling to and fro upon all the Earth.

Sixthly, he calls and appoints to the work of the Ministry, and that by
an equal power, and as it were, a joint commission with God, Esaias 48. 16.
JEHOVAH has sent me, and his Spirit. Acts 13. 2. In the solemn Assembly at
Antioch, whilst they were ministering and fasting, the Holy Ghost said,
Separate me now SAVL and BARNABAS to the work whereunto I have called them.
So says PAVL, Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock,
whereof the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops. And this was the warrant that
Peter had of his calling to preach unto the Gentiles. Acts 10. 19, 20. Whilst
he doubted of the Vision which he saw, and made question of it, the Spirit
said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee, arise and get thee down, and go
with them, making no question at all: for I have sent them. Finally, that of
the same Apostle is general, 1. Pet. 1. 22.
Not by the will of man was Prophecy heretofore brought, but as they were led
of the Holy Ghost, did the holy men of God speak.

Seventhly, Regeneration, as also Justification, and Sanctification, (all the
sole John 1. 13. Who are borne not of blood, etc. but of God. To. 8. 33. It is
God that justifies.
and proper mark of God) come from him, John 3. 5. Unless one be borne of
Water, and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Titus 3. 5.
He has saved us by the Lauer of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
1. Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but you are washed from them, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirits of our God.

Eighthly, the marks also and steps of his Godhead are not obscure. First, We
are Mat. 28. 19.
baptized into his Name. Secondly, John Revel 1. 4. 3.
prays for Grace and Peace from him. Thirdly, when the Apostles Acts 15. 28.
do warrant the decree which they made by this Argument, it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and us; is it not plain that they give him a Divine authority and
the supreme Sovereignty of God himself? Fourthly, How much makes it for his
Godhead, that the sin committed Mat. 12. 13.
against him, that is, his special grace and working, can never be forgiven?

Ninthly, plain testimonies of Scripture calling him God, The mighty God,
etc. ESAIAS Esaias 40. 13, 18
having discoursed of the excellent and incomparable, both Power and Wisdom
of the Spirit, adds; To whom then will you liken the mighty God? manifestly
calling him the mighty God. As Peter Acts 5. 3.
also does, when asking ANANIAS, Why Satan had filled his heart to lie against
the Spirit of God, forthwith he adds, Thou have not lied to men, but to
God. Hither belongs that unto the 1. Cor. 2. 11.
Corinthians, For who among men knows the things of man, save the spirit of
man that is in him? So also none knows the things of God, but the Spirit of
God. Where, to make the comparison hold as it ought, you must needs say, that
as the Apostle expressly notes, none to know the things of man, but a very man:
So he means, that none know the things of God, but he that is GOD indeed. So
that this also is a most clear proof of the Godhead of the Spirit.

This is the sum of our most precious Faith, concerning the Godhead of the
Son and Holy Ghost, against Arrius, Seruetus, and all that hellish crew,
which either bring in a multiplicitie of gods (and so in truth make no God at
all) or imagine a secondary kind of God-ship, making them inferior to the
Father, or of the like, but not of the selfe-some essence: and against
whatsoever Heresies else, that Hell has forged, and Satan set abroch, to the
dishonor of these three Persons, the one only true and everliving GOD,
Coequall, Coeternall, and Consubstantiall, whom we only honor and serve.

CHAP. II.
Of the Eternal Decrees of God.

THE glory of God, which from all Eternity God being thus in his nature and
Persons most glorious, has further embroidered himself in glory, by two notes
of excellency which he takes to him, Kingdom and Hanour.

Kingdom is that whereby he does excite an absolute sovereignty toward other.

The order whereof, answerable to the relation between the persons themselves,
is from the Father in the Son, by the Holy Ghost; to whom is attributed the
immediate doing of them.


did shine in and to himself, it has further pleased him, both to manifest in
the exercising of a Kingdom, and to enlarge, by taking honor unto him.
Therefore, our Savior in the Lords Prayer, after the Name of God,
comprehending his nature and persons, which hitherto have been handled, adds
these other two: Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, etc. By the one he
rules, by the other his rule is obeyed. This, to speak properly, is not any
other Kingdom then that which he had before, but the actual exercise, and
putting into practice of that Kingdom or Sovereignty, which is of his very
nature, as our Savior does distinguish them, Matthew. 6. when saying, Thy
Kingdom come, etc. he adds by and by, For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

The order or the administration of it is in this manner: The Father is first
in Order, not in Power, nor in Time, is the supreme working cause, who does
whatsoever he does, in the Son, and they both by the holy Spirit: To whom is
attributed the immediate doing of them, nor as if either the Son or Spirit
were instruments to work by, but both of them be principal efficient causes
and they all, that one and the same God that works all in all. The place for
this diversity of working, is manifest ^n the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8.
11.
But if the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he
that raised Christ from the dead, will quicken also your mortal bodies by his
Spirit dwelling in you. Here (as you see) all is comprehended. The Father
quickening in Christ, by his Spirit that dwells in us; for to this end he
makes mention of Christ's raising from the dead. More clear between the
Father and the Son, is that to the 1. Cor. 8. 6.
Corinthians, But unto us there is one God, The Father from whom are all
things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things. From, he gives
to the Father as the Fountain of the Action: Through, to the Son, in regard
of the personal Distinction. So in the Epistle to the Heb. 1. 2.
Hebrews, Through his Son he made the World. Of the Holy Ghost also it is
said, By his Job 26. 13.
spirit he beautified the Heavens. And our Savior, John 16. 14. He shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you: whose proper
kind of working (as the next and immediate cause of all things) is most lively
set forth, 1. Cor. 12. 4, 5, ^, 7, ^, 10, 11.
1. Cor. 12. Now there are differences of gifts, but the same spirits, and
there are differences of Ministeries, but the same Lord. And there are
differences of working, but there is the same God who works all in all. But
to every one is given the manifestation of the Spirit to profit: for unto one
by the Spirit is given the Word of Wisdom, and to another the Word of
Knowledge, by the same Spirit, and to another, Faith by the same Spirit, and to
another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit, and to another the working of
Powers, and to another Prophecy, and to another discerning of Spirits, and to
another kinds of Tongues, and to another interpretation of Tongues. But all
these things works one and the same Spirit, distributing them severally to
every one as he pleases.

This Kingdom stands in three things, whereof the first are his Purposes, or
Decrees. Then his Creation, and The Kingdom of God has two parts, purpose and
works. Purpose is his Decree before all times of every thing.
thirdly, the Government of the World: the Apostle reduces them unto two,
purpose, and works, Ephesians. 1. 21. Who works all things after the counsel of
his will. In the Counsels and Works of God (putting them both together) five
things may be noted, one proper to the purpose of God, the other in common,
appertayning both to his Works and Purpose.

The first is, as touching the Eternity of this Decree, that it is before all
times, that is to say, from everlasting.

The second, is the generality of his Dispensation, that it stretches it
self to all things, to wit, to all kinds, and each particular of every kind.

Thirdly, the relation between his Purpose and Works, that he effects
nothing, which before he has not decreed, decrees nothing, which in time he
does not effect: whereupon follows the inevitable necessity of the execution
of his counsels.

The fourth is, touching the Lords most free and absolute stroke in this whole
dispensation.

Lastly, That all this is proper unto God, within the compass of one* of which
will fall whatsoever we are to speak, concerning the Government and Kingdom
of God. The Apostle in that one sentence elegantly comprehends all: for in
saying, Him that works, etc. meaning God, he shows the supreme cause before
assigned, and makes it proper to God, by calling him as it were by that name,
and saying all things, he leaves nothing free. Now where he adds; recording
to the purpose, and after the counsel: he gives to understand, that nothing
is wrought but that which is decreed, nothing decreed, but in time it is
effected. In which words, of purpose and counsel, the Eternity of this Decree
is also included, as fore-running all his Works, yea, the first work of
Creation it self. Lastly, the free will of God is expressed in adding, after
the counsel of his will: But for a better view to be taken of them all, let us
handle these three apart. Therefore to begin with his Purposes, or Decrees,
observe in them three things.

First, The Eternity of those Decrees: for as God himself is eternal, so are
his deep and unsearchable counsels, all of them written and decreed, or ever
the World was. And as Psalm. 93. ^.
He is from everlasting, so is his Throne and Kingdom, in the dispensation of
his great and glorious purposes, established before any time. In which regard,
the Psalmist Psalm. 78. 69.
says of the Land of Canaan, That he founded it for his people the Jews, from
everlasting: meaning, in his eternal counsel: and Esaias 45. 7.
ESAIAS: Since I disposed an everlasting people, the Church in the purpose and
appointment of God eternally elected. And when the Psalmist Psalm. 103. 17.
cries out, The kindnesses of JEHOVAH are from everlasting to everlasting,
does he not evidently point hereat? But more clearly to this purpose, serves
that of Paul, Ephesians. 3. 11,
commending the excellency of the Doctrine of the Gospel, in the gathering
together of the Churches of the Gentiles as well as Jews, in that it was
according to his everlasting purpose. As also 1. Cor. 2. 7.
in another place he says of the Wisdom of God, lying hid in the Mystery of
the Gospel, that God had fore-ordayned it before the World. And of Christ,
Peter 1. Pet. 1. 20.
says, that he was fore-appointed before the foundation of the World was laid.
The truth hereof not only shines forth in these and other great and high
points of our Faith, and namely, of Election, and Reprobation (which come
hereafter to be considered) but reaches farther, and has a place in all. So
Psalm. 193. 15. 16.
David speaks of his conception (an ordinary course of nature) When I was
secretly framed, and as it were curiously wrought and wouen together, thine
eyes did see my very lump, what time they were fashioned* yea, even then when
none of them was extant: that is, from everlasting. And the saying of James
Acts 15. 18.
has no exception, All the works of God are known to him from Eternity. In
this Argument, I find that the Prophet Esaias (from whom the Apostles, 2. Pet.
2. 3. (...).
Peter and Jude, seem Jude verse 4. (...).
to have taken it) delights himself much to set out the Eternity of Gods
Decrees by the Phrase of Long (...)
ago. In the two and twentieth Esaias 22. 5, 8, 11.
Chapter, Thou did look in that day, (when the enemy did besiege you) to
the Armor of the Forest, House, etc. But ye look ^^ot to the Author of it*
nor had respect to him that framed it long ago. Chap. 25. The Esaias 25. 1.
counsels long ago (eternally decreed, and in their time prophesied, and made
known to the Church) are Faith and Truth. And so himself does in another Esaias
37. 26.
place expound it, to import as much as from all Eternity.

Secondly, The cause why all things are so decreed, is not the knowledge or
foreknowledge of God, but his absolute will and pleasure, for causes resting
only in himself, although unknown to us, yet most just and holy, Ephesians. 1.
11. He works all things after the counsel of his will.

Thirdly, The generality, in that he has decreed all things, and all the
means and circumstances of every thing, Acts 15. 18. All the works of God are
known to him (that is, purposed and decreed of him) from Eternity. So that
whatsoever experience shows, or the Word of God confirms to come to pass
in Heaven, or in Earth, or in the lowest Hell, both the confounding of the
wicked, the Salvation of the Elect, and the things that pertayne to the
business and affairs of this life, the same are all eternally decreed of God;
and that for his own good pleasure only: the Ephesians. 11. 1.
Apostle bearing witness, That he works all things after the counsel of
his will.

CHAP. III.
Of Creation.

IN the Creation, which is the second thing The works of God are the execution
of his purpose: And are Creation and Providence. Creation is his making all
things.
wherein his Kingdom stands, I observe five things, which the Story of the
Creation penned by Moses, in the first and second Chapters of Genesis does
offer unto us.

First, The things which God made.

All things without exception: and in saying all things, it is manifest that we
leave nothing uncreated, excepting only him that did create them, no, not the
Angels themselves, the most glorious and super-excellent Creatures of God, of
who^ albeit Moses makes no mention in express terms, (no more then of their
fall) specifying only the visible works of God, in respect of the people to
whom he wrote, yet the Holy Ghost elsewhere concealeth not their Creation, for
when the Psalmist had exhorted the Angels and Host of Heaven; the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, the Heaven of Heavens to praise the Lord, he adds a
reason common to them all, Let Psalm. 148. 2, 3, 4, 5.
them praise the Name of JEHOVAH: for he commanded, and they were created. But
most manifest is that of PAVL, Col. 1. 16. By him were all things created,
which are in Heaven and upon the Earth, things visible and invisible, whether
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers. By which words it is most
certain, he understands the Angels.

This (all things) you may not unfitly divide into 1. Cor. 4. 9.
reasonable Creatures, Angels, and Men, and the World of them both; whereto
aptly serves the place of the Colossians before: and Moses in the very first
words of his Story has so divided it, In Genesis 1. 12.
the beginning God made Heaven and Earth: that is, both the utmost compass of
this universal World, together with the Spirits and Angels that inhabit it, and
that Chaos, or first lump and matter, whereout the Earth and Heaven, (as we
call Heaven) and all heavenly and earthly bodies were made. Moses therefore, as
Paul in that place, makes a most perfect division of all the whole frame of
Gods Creation, sundring it into two, Heaven, and Earth. The Air it self, the
Sun, the Moon, the Planets, and whatsoever in that whole Chapter is spoken
of, seems to be comprehended under the name of Earth. For so he does
proceed, resuming the latter member, And touching the Earth, it was unshapen,
etc. By Heaven is meant the place of blessed Spirits, and the Angels inhabiters
and dwellers in it. All which appears further in the next Chapter, Thus Genesis
2. 1.
were the Heaven and the Earth perfited, and all the Host of them: that is,
whatsoever is within the compass of the highest Heavens, unto the very bottom
and Center of the lowest Earth, things visible and invisible, Angels, or
whatsoever else, wherewith the Heaven and Earth are beautifully adorned.

The World of these two Creatures, is either the unseen World, Heaven, and
Hell, or the World visible, and subject to our eyes, which Moses in one word
terms Earth. But a better and more apt division to this purpose may be made,
to say, it is either the natural place and World for these two Creatures,
Heaven for the one, Earth for the other, or Hell accidently for either.

Heaven, we call the highest World, made for the Angels to inhabit. As our Mar.
12. 25.
Savior Those that phantastically teach that Heaven is euery-where.
teaches, They are as the Angels in Heaven. In Heaven Mat. 18. 10.
their Angels always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.

This is it which the Scripture calls, 1. King. 8. 27.
The Heaven of Heavens, for the excellency: The 2. Cor. 12. 2.
third Heaven, for the situation above the Air and the Sky, (both which have
the name of Heaven) and 2. Cor. 12. 4.
Paradise, for the pleasure, being the place of the residence of Gods glory.

Earth is the middle World, made for man, Psalm. 115. 16 The Heavens are
IEHOVAHS, and the Earth which he has given unto the sons of men.

Two things in it come to be considered, the parts and the ornaments.

The parts I call the four Elements: For the Philosophers agree that nothing
gives light, but that which has some fire in it: wherefore from (...) Light,
the Chaldees were wont to call Fire, Oru^, whom they worshipped for their god,
Fire, the uppermost Globe wherein was Light, an adiunct and quality of the
Fire: Air (or as Moses calls it, an Following the Greeks who name it, (...).
extent, we improperly the Firmament) comprehending all that void place
between the Clouds and the Earth, which gives breath of life to all things
that breathe: Water with all the Channels thereof, the Seas, the Floudes, the
Lakes, the Springs: And Earth, (or the dry ground) the Bottom and Center of
the World, for man to inhabit.

Ornaments, are the things wherewith these Elements are garnished and set
forth, being all things necessary both for the use and command of man. For his
use were made the Genesis 1. 11, 12 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
insensible things, Grass, and Trees continually fructifying in the Earth, the
Sun, the Moon, the Stars, placed above the Clouds, in the highest Globe,
in, or above the uppermost part of that extent, which Moses calls the (...)
extent of Heaven: that is to say, that part of the extent which is nearest to
the Heavens, and furthest from the Earth, where the Element of Fire is: and
these being the vessels, that now receive and send forth the Light (which it
seems most probable the Fire is it before, for the Scripture speaks of
Light before the Sun) have in that place of Moses a threefold use assigned
to them.

First, To distinguish Light from Darkness, that is to say, the natural Day
from the Night.

Secondly, To be signs, for the noting out of times and seasons. A thing
common to them all, as appears, Job 9. 9. Where ARCTVRVS, ORION, PLEIADES,
and the Planets of the hidden South, are used to note out the parts of the
Year, Autumn, Winter, the Spring, and Summer. But this nevertheless is
proper to the Sun and Moon, that by the running of their compass, they
after a special sort rule and govern; the Sun, the Day, and the Moon, the
Night; and make the difference of civil Days, Months, and Years.

Thirdly, They serve not only to enlighten the Earth, but by their influence,
to refresh and give growth to all earthly bodies.

For the command of men, were made the dumb and unreasonable Creatures, which
yet have a sensitive life and feeling. As in the Water, Fishes; in the Air,
Birds; in the Earth, Beasts, both going and creeping: all of them Male and
Female, for the propagation of their kind. Hell is the lowest World, a soul
Those that teach also that Hell is no certain nor local place.
and fearful place of punishment, made for Angels and men that should
transgress, Peter 2. Pet. 2. 4. (...).
gives it a name, which signifies as much as a place of terrible confused
darkness, whereof that which Job 10. 22.
Job speaks touching the grave, is much more to be verified, that there be
no orders there, no alterations of times and seasons, sometimes dark,
sometimes light, but whatsoever shines most, is as the shadow of death,
continual night, and a whole day, as a man may say, of darkness: for out of
the Kingdom of Heaven there is no light at all. Therefore are the heirs of
that Kingdom termed, The Luke 8. 31.
sons of Light. And contrariwise, this place the Mat. 8.. 12.
outer darkness, Luke Luke 8. 31.
calls it, The deep or bottomless Gulf, placed beneath, as a most deep
and dark Dungeon: a foul and hideous Prison, as Peter 1. Pet. 3. 19.
names it, when he says, that Christ by the power of his Godhead in the
Ministry of NOAH, preached to the spirits now in Prison. And again, 2. Pet.
2. 4.
that the Angels which sinned, are kept there in chains of darkness: or as
Jude verse 6.
IVDE has it, with everlasting bonds under darkness, as in a Jail, unto the
Judgment of the great Day.

We have done with the World, made for these reasonable Creatures. Come we
now to the reasonable Creatures themselves, and first, of the parts of reason,
come to them both, understanding and will. The understanding part in men (for
distinction sake, and our better conceiving of it) we commonly term the mind,
the will in them is properly called the soul; although the reasonable soul
comprehending both, be but one.

In the understanding part, two faculties are comprehended.

First, Knowledge, that teaches what we ought to do, and is the Fountain and
beginning not only of the other faculties, but of all the Actions and Motions
of our life. Under this, two other faculties are comprehended, Judgment, or
Wisdom, which is the top and perfection of knowledge for discerning of things
that differ, and conscience, which is a part of our understanding, determining
of our particular actions, either with them or against them; called therefore
Conscience; as if you would say, A knowing with or before God, upon a right
examination of our ways in his sight.

Secondly, Memory to lay up in our minds, the things which we know and
understand. The will is a faculty freely choosing whatsoever it self
pleases, and moving us to do it, and this has the sovereign command in
every one, for therefore we do a thing, not because we think it ought to be
done, but because we will do it: under the name of will I comprehend (in this
place) as well the desire only, which is before and without consent, as that
which most properly and in common speech, is only termed the will, when a
settled and full consent is come.

And here affections are the same, that conscience is in the mind. Not several
or distinct faculties, but parts or motions of the will, diversely inclining it
to this or that appearing good, according to the diversity of objects that are
offered, of Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, Anger, and such like.

Such a free will we may truly say there is by nautre, both in men and Angels:
for God has set the beginning of motion in themselves. Albeit, he only have
all absolute freedom in him, upon whom depends the will of all other
Creatures, which he holding the reins in his own hands, swayeth and rules
which way it pleases him. But to take freedom from the will, were to destroy
the will it self.

As touching the reasonable The Sadduces who said that there was neither Angel
nor Spirit, Acts 24. 8. but held good Angels to be only good thoughts and
motions stirred up of God in men, or happy success coming from God, and evil
angels to be evil lusts and affections, proceeding from the corruption of our
nature.
Creatures themselves: In the Angels generally I consider:

First, that they be Spirits, that is to say, invisible and incorporeall
substances, Persons living and subsisting by themselves: neither vpheld in any
other nor part of another thing, Heb. 1. 14. Be they not all ministering
spirits? The opposition that is made, Job 4. 18, 19. between the Angels and
men that dwell in houses of clay; whose foundation is in this dust, proves
them to be of no bodily or fleshly substance, nor of an earthly mould, but
spiritual and celestial. In Col. 1. 16.
the Epistle to the Colossians, they are termed invisible. And Luke 24. 39. A
Spirit has not flesh and bone, etc. The Prophet likewise opposes Spirit, and
flesh together, Esaias 31. 2.

Secondly, The spirit of Angels differs from the soul of man in kind; for
Christ's soul was no Angelical Spirit. He took not, says the Apostle, Heb.
2. 16. the Angels, but the seed of ABRAHAM.

Thirdly, I consider the properties of their spiritual nature, though common
in some sort to the soul of man, yet in them far more excellent, and are
these four:

First, An incomparable power and strength.

Secondly, Agilitie and nimblenesse, able in a trice to dispatch great matters.
All which the Prophet notes to be in spirits, Esaias 31. 3. The Egyptian is a
man, and not a mighty God, and his horses are flesh, and not spirit.

Thirdly, An excellency of Understanding, Reason, and other Graces, for which
the Apostle magnifieth the Angels, 1. Cor. 13. 1. If I speak with the tongue
of Angels, etc. Not that they have tongues or use of speech, but to note what
grace and excellency of discourse must needs be thought in them, if it might
be supposed that they should speak.

Fourthly, Immortality, which our Luke 20. 36.
Savior notes in the Angels, when he compares together in this behalf the
estate of them, and of the Blessed, after the Resurrection. They cannot, says
he, dye any more, for they are equal to the Angels.

In man I especially observe:

First, His person, Ecclesiast. 12. 7. 1. Cor. 2. 21.
consisting of a body, and a reasonable soul, being a spiritual, and
therefore immortal substance.

Secondly, The faculty of speaking, proper unto him: whereupon the tongue is
called our glory, because it is the instrument whereby we glorify God, and
excel all earthly Creatures, as may appear, if you confer Psalm 16. 9.
with Acts 2. 26. for that which the Psalmist says, Therefore my heart is glad,
and my glory rejoices, etc. PETER renders, And my tongue rejoices, etc. And
in this sense it is also taken, Psalm. 30. 12. and Genesis 49. 6.

Thirdly, The Genesis 1. 27.
two sexes that God created in this nature, Man, and Woman; Man the head and
chief; Woman the comfort and companion of his life, given for a help unto
him, as the words of God import, Genes. 2. 18 It is not good for man to be
alone: I will make him a help fit for him: and the manner of her Creation,
being out of the Rib of man: for which cause, Adam himself Genesis 2. 2. 3.
acknowledges, that she was a helper given of God unto him: But that man is
the head of the woman, the Apostle plainly speaks, 1. Cor. 11. 3, 7. where
he also calls him the Image and glory of God, carrying the mark of his
sovereignty and dominion not only over other Creatures, but in respect of the
woman her self, who is likewise said to be the glory of man, because it is
his honor, to have such an excellent Creature subject to him. This
soueraignety of the man over the woman, is declared in the Scriptures by diverse
Arguments. First, by the matter whereof she was made, being Genesis 2. 23.
taken out of man. As it is, 1. Cor. 11. 8. For man is not of the woman, but
woman of the man. Secondly, By the end of her creation, as it follows in the
same place: For man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man:
that is, for the solace and comfort of his life. Thirdly, by the time and order
of the Creation, 1. Tim. 2. 12, 13. I permit not a woman to take authority
over the man; for ADAM was first formed, and then EVE. Fourthly, By Genesis 2. 23.
Adams taking of authority to impose a name upon her. And lastly, by the very
name of (...)
woman which he gives, derived from man, out of whom she was taken.

Fourthly, That of either sex he created but one Adam, and one Eve, Genesis 2.
21, 22.
whom he joined in holy Marriage, for the propagation of Mankind.

The second thing to be observed Of nothing.
Those that held all or some of the Creatures, whether Angels or the souls of
men to be made or traduced (as they call it) out of Gods own essence.
is, ex quo, whereof they were made, viz. of nothing, only by his mighty
powerful Word. So as the things we see, were not made of things that do
appear, as the Heb. 11. 13.
Apostle says to the Hebrews, that is, were made of nothing. By Psalm. 33. 6.
the Word of JEHOVAH, as it is in the Psalms, the Heavens were made, and by
the breath of his Mouth all the host of them. So it is in the 148. Psalm. 148. 5.
Psalm, He commanded, and they were created. This appears evidently in the
History of the Creation, thorowout all the parts: God Genesis 1. 3.
said, Let there be Light, and there was Light: And so in the rest. God
therefore needed not (as silly men do) stuff or matter to work upon; he
needed not tools or other instruments, neither used he the aid or help of
any Assistant; as the Esaias 40. 13.
Prophet teaches us, when he cries out, Who help the Spirit of JEHOVAH? or
as a man of his counsel gave him Knowledge? And this being against the course
of nature, and contrary to the beaten axiom of all Philosophy, that of
nothing it is impossible any thing should come, is worthily made a fruit of
Faith for men to believe; the Heb. 11. 3.
Apostle bearing witness, that by faith only we understand it: for howsoever
many of the Heathen who knew not God, especially the wiser sort, have in a
kind acknowledged a Creation: Neither in truth can any be so blockish, as not
to see it, if he look but up to Heaven, and the frame of this World, which
have the name of their Workman and Creator written in their forehead: yet
never was there any, not so much as the wisest of them, that could attain to
this, How the World should be made of nothing. Here therefore all reason of
man must stoop, and be content to learn of him, in whose School it is
better to be Scholars, then Teachers and Professors any where besides; who
not only makes men wiser then the beasts of the field, as it is in the Job
35. 11.
Book of Job, but teaches his wisdom above the wisdom of the wise, and
guides them by paths, that no foot of vain Philosophy is able for to walk.

Thirdly, I note the order and manner how all this was effected.

First, The Angels, and their World, the highest Heavens, were without more
ado immediately made of nothing: But for men and the World which here we see,
it was somewhat in another sort.

For touching the World it self:

First, God minding to erect such a large and goodly Theater, wherein he would
make full demonstration of his incomparable both Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
Genesis 1. 1, 2.
framed first an empty an unshapen lump, without fashion, without form,
called Waters, for the vast hugeness of it; Darkness for the confusion and
lack of form; and the Deep, for the emptiness without bottom to rest upon,
which, lest it should vanish and come to nothing, having no steaddinesse to
uphold it, the Spirit of God lay upon it, and ouer-spred it, to keep it from
decay.

Secondly, Out of this lump and unformed confusion did God afterward
distinctly form this World, and all the parts of it. First, those four
Elements, called the simple bodies, by fetching one contrary out of another, as
Light out of Darkness, the Firmament out of emptiness, dry Earth out of
Waters: then the compound bodies out of the same Elements, and for the most
part, of all four unequally mingled together, every one principally out of the
same Element which they garnish or inhabit. As Grass and Trees out of the
Earth, The Sun, the Moon, the Stars wholly or specially out of the For it is
plain by Moses, that the Heavens themselves, and those celestial bodies, were
made not of any fifth essence, as Aristotle and some other dream, but of
elementary matter, namely, of the fire. Whereupon the very substance, and the
whole frame and compass of them all, which we call the Sky, is termed (...),
ether, from (...), which is to burn, for that al things there are fiery, as
Ana^ag^r. an old Philosopher did well derive it: Albeit Aristotle in his first
Book de C^lo, reject this Etymology and preferres another rather, from (...),
because it is in perpetual motion. But that seems neither so natural for
the Word, nor so apt for the matter.
fire, (as may not improbably be gathered Fishes) out of the Waters, Birds out
of the Air, Beasts out of the Earth. But men and women, as a piece of singular
work, he framed in a more artificial sort.

The body of man, by (...) Genesis 2. 7. whereunto Paul alludeth, 1. Tim. 2 1^.
(...).
forming and figuring it, as a Potter does his Vessels out of the Clay of the
Earth. And therefore heavy and lumpish, dead of it self, and without any sense
or feeling. Whereinto he breathed a soul, not as a part of the Divine Nature,
or of Gods own essence, (which to think were impious and absurd) but because
it was made neither of the Air, nor of any other elementary matter, but only
by his Word, and the power of his Spirit; and this he knit unto one person
with the body, to quicken and give life unto it, and to make it a perfect man.

The woman he framed and formed out of the Rib of man. And all this Moses
plainly expresses, Genesis 2. 4, 5, 6, 7

Finished in six days.
The fourth thing I observe in the Creation, is the time, which it pleased GOD
to take for the finishing of this work, in that he created not all at once and
in a moment, as he could have done, but took the space of six Genesis 1. 31. and
2. 1. 2. 3.
days for it, within which compass Heaven (the place of the blessed Angels)
together with the Angels themselves were made, as Moses plainly teaches, Genesis
2. 1, 2.

Therefore the first day God made, First, Heaven and Hell. For Hell, it is
probable to be supposed, he did then make, when Heaven, the other part of the
unseen World, was made: And that Heaven was the first work of all, is easy
to be gathered by the very order which Moses Genesis 1. 1. and 2. 1.
uses.

Secondly, The Angels, those Creatures of 2. Cor. 11. 4.
Light, the Tenants and Inhabitants of the highest Heavens, who in Job Job. 38.
7.
are said to shoute and sing forth the praises of God, when those heavenly
Bodies, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars were made, as astonished at the
excellency of their beauty. And therefore themselves were before that time
created.

Thirdly, That unfashioned lump. Fourthly, Fire. The second Day he made the
Air. The third Day. First, Water. Secondly, Earth, Thirdly, Grass and Trees.
The fourth Day the Sun, the Moon, the Stars. The fifth, First, Fishes,
Secondly, Birds. The last Day he made, First, Beasts, Secondly, Man and Woman.
A fifth and last thing to be observed in the Creation, is, And was of every
Creature in excellency of perfection,
that all the Creatures were made exceeding good, whether you consider them
singly and apart, or all of them together. As from God, that is, goodness it
self, nothing can come but absolutely good. For the further sealing up of
which Doctrine, we have the testimony of God himself, both in every special:
God Genesis 1. 4.
saw the Light, that it was good: and so in the rest: and in the general
conclusion of all, God Genesis 1. 31.
looked upon all that he had made, and behold, it was exceeding good.

This goodness in the Creatures generally, is the excellency of perfection,
according to that their nature is capable of: for goodness in that place, is
not to be taken as opposite unto vice, and to that foul deformity, which is
a breach of the righteous Law of God: but it notes that perfection and
excellency of estate, that every Creature was framed in, according as his
nature was fit and able to receive. No weakness or infirmity was then any
where to be seen. No corruption or decay, nothing out of frame or joint so, as
now we see the whole World to be. Man traveled without weariness, the
Beasts labored without irkesomenesse, the Earth brought forth of her self
Herbs, and Plants, the Trees, Fruits and Blossoms in abundance; every thing
ran his course, and did his work with cheerfulness, and labor to them was
not laborious.

In the principal Creatures, Angels and Men, that Of the reasonable Creatures,
Angels and men, it was after his own Image or likeness, in holiness and
happiness.
goodness is not only the perfection of those faculties, understanding and
will, and of all their powers, but especially perfect holiness and happiness:
The Image and similitude of Gods holy and blessed nature, Genesis 1. 26, 27 Ephesians.
4. 24. Coloss. 3. 10. 2* Cor. 3. 18.
after which man is said to be created. But all this, as I said before, is to
be understood according to that their nature is capable of; for

First, The Angels are capable of a far more excellent perfection then man's
nature can attain.

Secondly, Not only every nature is not capable of every grace, but there is
no Creature that can be either perfectly single, infinite, or unchangeable,
which are the proper Praise of GOD: for even those heavenly Spirits have some
things mixed and compounded in them, and being of finite nature, are not
capable of infinite Power, Wisdom, Holiness, or other graces, nor any way
can come near the excellency of the Creator. Beside, both Men and Angels were
framed of a mutable and changeable disposition, the more to set out that
constant and immutable nature which is in God: and therefore also of a nature
both subject to temptation, such as either their own thoughts, or outward
objects may offer to them, and of a will, though free, able to choose good, and
to leave evil: yet inclinable as well to evil as to good, though in their
estate of holiness, most unto good. Job 15. 15. Behold, he puts no
steadfastness in his Saints. And Job 4. 8. Behold, he puts no steadfastness
in his Servants.

The Angels Holiness I call the integrity of their nature, being first
enlightened with the perfect knowledge Holiness, in a mind enlightened with
the knowledge of the whole will of God: and all the strength of nature
conformed thereunto.
of the will of God, and of his most holy Law, written and engraven in their
mind by nature. Next, in a conformity of the whole strength of Nature,
Understanding, Will, Desire, Affections, and whatsoever else unto God, or a
power and ability in the reasonable Creature to perform the whole will of God.

Happiness is all that good, that can possibly fall upon the Creature.
Happiness, in the fruition of Gods love, and (from thence coming) a
conjunction and communion with him. Conjunction is an enjoying of his personal
presence. Communion is a participation (in some sort) of his Blessedness, both
Kingdom, Power, and Glory.


It stands in three things:

First, The love of God upon us: who is good it self, and the chief and only
good, from whence comes all the good of Men and Angels.

Secondly, The enjoying of his gracious presence, being always with him, and
seeing him face to face.

Thirdly, A communion and participation, in some sort, so far as our nature
can receive of all those excellencies that are in him, communicable to his
Creatures.

Our Savior, as we heard before, reckons them all, Matthew. 6. in the
conclusion of the Lords Prayer, Kingdom, Power, Glory.

Of his Kingdom we participate, by the dominion and sovereignty which he
gives us over the other Creatures.

Of his Power, by having strength of nature, and ability to exercise this
sovereignty, and to put it in execution.

Of his Glory, in being full of excellency within and without. Without, comely
and beautiful; within, glittering and shining in Virtue, Wisdom, and all
other Graces of the mind. A part also of this Glory are Riches, Honor,
Pleasures, and such like.

These things are now severally to be applied to both these Creatures,
beginning with the Angels, whom the Scripture is wont to call 2. Cor. 11* 14.
Angels of Light, and Luke 9. 2^*
holy Angels; to note the purity wherein they were created. Our Savior Mat.
22. 30.
also teaches, that the perfection of men after the Resurrection, stands in
this, that they shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven. Their very fall
implies as much: for in that they stood not in the Truth, as our Savior
speaks, John 8. 44. and as Jude has it, Verse 6. of his Epistle, left their
first estate; it follows, that in the beginning they were created perfect.

In this respect they are called the sons of GOD, Job 1. 6. When the sons
of God came to present themselves before IEHOVA, Satan also came in the midst
of them.

What an excellent measure they had of all kind of Grace, Wisdom and
heavenly Knowledge, the speech of Christ does show, celebrating their Divine
Knowledge of the Mysteries of GOD. Mark 13. 32. Touching that Day none
knows, no, not the Angels of God in Heaven. And the Apostle, Gal. 1. 8. If
we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you any other Gospel then we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. Therefore also they perform all
offices of Piety, and the service of GOD more cheerfully, readily and
gloriously, then any man did or could do; and are called Esaias 6. 2.
Seraphins: as if you would say, burning with zeal and the love of God, or
shining in all purity and holiness.

And as the measure of their Wisdom and Holiness did excel, so did the
measure of their happiness in like sort: whereunto the place where they were
set to inhabit, did much avail, they being celestial Spirits, and having
their abode in Heaven; we terrestrial, dwelling upon the Earth, and in Houses
of Clay. The like, though not in the like proportion, there was between the
Angels themselves, some being more glorious then the rest: It seems no common
dignity which is given Luke 1. 19.
to one of them to be GABRIEL, that is, the mighty Power of God to stand
before Gods presence. And PAVL, Coloss. 1. 16. reckons up Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, and Powers, as degrees of that their glory, which the
disjunctive particles, whether, and or it may well be thought, do import: and
hither may be drawn that of Paul to the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1^.
Thessalonians, that the Lord himself shall come down from Heaven, with the
voice of an Arch-angell; that is, of a chief and principal Angel. So was it
also between Eu^ and Adam, 1. Tim. 2. 12, 13.

To come therefore to the things wherein the happiness of the Angels stood.

First, That they had the love of GOD, there is no doubt, being his sons and
the prime of his Creation.

Secondly, In local conjunction they were most near unto him; beholding
always his face in Heaven, Matthew 18. 10.

Thirdly, For their Sovereignty and Dominion, they are called Romans 8. 38.
Thrones, Ephesians. 6. 12.
Principalities, Dominions, Governments, Chief Dan. 10. 13.
Princes, etc. 1. Pet. 3. 22. Ephesians. 1. 21. Col. ^. 16.


Fourthly, For their Power, the name it self of Power Romans 1. 38.
is given to them. And the Psalm. 103. 20.
Prophet by name does set it forth, Yea Angels, mighty in power. And to the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 17.
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his most mighty
Angels. The Angels, says PETER, in power 2. Pet. 2. 11.
and might greater then these. As if he would say* other manner of persons:
whereby he does insinuate their exceeding and incomparable power.

Fifthly, For their Glory, what it is; that one place may serve in stead of
many, where it is coupled with the glory of the Father and the Son. When the
Luke 9. 26.
Son of man shall come in the glory of himself and of his Father, and of the
holy Angels. In the Luke 2. 9.
second of Luke, when the Angel of the Lord stood before the Shepherds, it is
forthwith added, that the glory of the Lord shone round about them. Hither it
makes, that the Glory and Majesty which the Lord made to appear in the face
of Stephen, for the daunting of his Adversaries, is Acts 6. 15.
resembled to the countenance of an Angel. In the Vision which Esaias 6. 1.
Esaias saw, they are brought in with two of their wings covering their feet:
Thereby to meet with the infirmity of men, who are not able to abide the
brightness of their glory. DANIEL Dan. 10. 5, 6.
excellently describes this, in that great Vision which he saw by the Waters
of Chiddekel, Lifting up mine eyes, I saw, and behold, a man clothed with
Linen, whose loins were girt with excellent Gold of Vphaz, his Body was like
unto Sea-coloured blue (as if he would say, of an heavenly color) his face to
look to, like the Lightening, and his eyes like to Lamps of fire, and his
arms and feet like unto the color of polished Brass, glittering and
twinkling like sparkles of fire; the noise also of his words were like unto the
noise of a whole multitude: At whose appearance, the men that were with Daniel
trembled exceedingly, and flying, hid themselves; he also himself had no
strength left within him, but even his beauty and comeliness were turned into
corruption. And hither belongs their wonderful and admirable wisdom,
grown into a Proverb: As 2. Sam. 18. 14
the wisdom of an Angel.

The holiness wherein men were created, is recorded, Genes. 1. 26, 27. Let us
make man according to our own Image, after our own likeness. And wherein
this Image and likeness of God does stand, the Apostle does inform us, Ephesians.
4. 24. Put on the new man, which, according to God, is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Coloss. 3. 10. Putting on the new man, which
is renewed in knowledge, according to the Image of him that has created him.
And in this respect Adam also in his innocence is called, The son of God,
Luke 3. 38.

Touching the happiness of Adam and Eve in their integrity:

First, They were beloved of God, his sons and children.

Secondly, They enjoyed his presence, but upon Earth, which was their
habitation; and therefore less gloriously then the Angels did; but that they
also had it, is apparent by Gods familiar conference with Adam, Genesis 2. 29.

Thirdly, They had Dominion and Power over all the Creatures of the Earth, and
were set as the Monarchs of the World, Genesis 1. Let Genesis 1. 26.
us make man after our image, etc. and let them rule over the fishes of the
Sea, and over the Fowls of the Air, and over Beasts, and over the whole
Earth, and all creeping things that creep upon the Genesis 20. 19, 20
Earth. Which sovereignty of man is declared, Genesis 2. First, by Gods bringing
to Adam all the Beasts of the field, and all the Fowls of the Air, putting
him in seisin and possession of them, and making them to present themselves
before him, as subjects are wont to do at their Princes Coronation. Then by
the names he gave unto every one, that so he might know how to call for them,
whenever he should need them, to attend upon him, and to do him service.

Fourthly, They were endued with strength of nature, not subject to sickness
or other infirmities: Insomuch as their very labor was without all weariness,
pain or grief, which sin has brought upon us, as appears by the Curse,
Genesis 3. 17, 19.
Genesis 3. Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy Wife, and eaten of the fruit
of the Tree which I forbade thee, Cursed be the Earth for thy sake: In sorrow
shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life: In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat thy meat.

Fifthly, They were all glorious, both in their body, which being naked, had
an excellent dignity and comeliness in it, without the least unseemliness
that might make them ashamed, and in their mind furnished with all Graces, and
namely of wisdom, and knowledge, understanding the nature of all the
Creatures, and able according to their nature, to give apt names unto them.

Last of all, for a further increase of their happiness, they were seated in
Paradise, a place of al kind of pleasure, where for the exercising of man, to
labor in some honest and lawful calling, GOD gave him charge to dress and
keep the Garden.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Providence.

AFTER the everlasting Epicures, which deny all Providence of God. Those
Philosophers that held nature (That is, some Power or Virtue, Spirit or Mind,
as they term it, mingled and infused into the parts of the World, that holds
up and stirs all things) to be God. Whereas in truth, nature is nothing
else, but that course and order which God at the first Creation set in things,
and which he alters and changes at his pleasure, Deuter. 8. 3. Man lives
not by bread only, but by* every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
Jehovah.
Decrees of GOD, and Providence is his governing of the things created.
the Creation of the World, his Kingdom thirdly stands in governing the
things created: Both the course which at the first Creation he set in nature,
and the actions and events of things. Herein consider we first the generality
of this government, that it reaches to all in general, and to every thing in
particular, past, present, or to come.

To set forth this more distinctly, that so we may make the better use of the
generality of his Providence, it stretches

First, To all Persons and living Creatures, even the vilest and most
contemptible: The Psalm. 145. 15, 16.
eyes of all things look up to thee, and thou give to them their meat, thou
openest thy hand, and fillest every living thing with thy good pleasure. The
Psalm. 104. 21.
young Lions roar for their prey, seeking their meat from the mighty God.
He Psalm. 147. 9.
gives to the beasts their meat, to the young Ravens when they cry, who Job
39. 3.
prepares for the Raven his Prouender, when the young ones make a noise unto
the mighty God, wandering for want of meat. Are not Luke 12. 6.
five little Sparrowes sold for a farthing? yet one of them is not forgotten
before God.

Secondly, To all actions, whereof he is the supreme and first moving cause,
He Ephesians. 1. 11.
works all things after the counsel of his will: For Romans 11. 36.
of him, and to him, and for him are all things: In Acts 17. 28.
him we live and move.

Thirdly, To the particular disposition of every accident and small
circumstance, time, place, etc. So the wiseman Pro. 16. 36.
affirms of the whole manner of the Lottery, that it is from Jehovah. And
this was the sense of that old Proverb Genesis 22. 14.
In the Mount of JEHOVAH it shall be provided: meaning, GOD in time and place
will provide, as once in the Mount he did, whereunto tend these and the like
speeches, The Psalm. 145. 15.
eyes of all things look up unto thee, thou give them meat in due season. I
Ezech. 34. 26
will send rain in his time. Every Job 14. 5.
man's days are precisely determined, and the number of his Months. With thee
thou have set his appointed time, which he shall not pass. My Psalm. 31. 16.
times are in thine hands. I Esaias 60. 22.
JEHOVAH will hasten it in his time. When Gal. 1. 15.
it pleased God, who had separated me from my Mothers womb to reveal his
Son unto me. When Gal. 4. 4.
the fulness of time came, God sent forth his Son, Ephesians. 1. 10.
that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together
in one all things both which are in Heaven and which are in Earth, anew in
Christ. None John 8. 20.
laid his hands upon him: for his hour was not yet come. It Acts 1. 7.
is not for you to know the times and seasons which God has put in his own
power. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints. Wicked men ( because Psalm.
50. 21.
God holds his peace, deferring his vengeance, think him to be like unto
themselves, and because Eccles. 8. 11.
there comes no recompense of their evil quickly, therefore the heart of men
is full within them, and they imb olden themselves to commit wickedness. But
says Solomon, iudgeing aright, as the Spirit of God directed him, Though to a
sinner that does evil, a hundredth fold God should even prolong his days, yet
I know it shall be well to them that fear God: but it shall not be well unto
the wicked. Hitherto belongs that; The Genesis 15. 16.
wickedness of the Amorites is not yet accomplished, and God 2. King. 14. 27
had not decreed as yet to blot out the name of Israel from under Heaven:
therefore he saved them, etc. Also that of Abac. 2. 2.
Abacuck, The Vision is yet put off to the appointed time, which in his term
it will utter and not lie. If it linger, wait for it, for it will certainly
come, it will not stay.

These actions also, for the more variety of the Doctrine, may be considered
four manner of ways:

First, In the greatest and smallest actions, as well as in those of a middle
kind. Greatest: It is he that Dan. 4. 29.
translateth Kingdoms, Psalm. 10^. 40. Job 1^. 20.
powers contempt upon Princes, is Psalm. 76. 13.
terrible to the Rulers of the earth. Esaias 19. 4.
I (says God) will deliver Egypt into the hands of a strong Lord.
Nebuchadnezzar was seven years taking forth this Lesson. As Dan. 4. 29.
he walked in his Palace, and in the pride of his heart, said, Is not this
that great Babylon which I have built, to be for the Royalty and ornament of
my beauty, by the power of mine own strength? Whilst the word was yet in his
mouth, a voice came from Heaven, saying, To thee it is told, O King
Nebuchadnezzar, that thy Kingdom is gone from thee, and thou shall be driven
from men, to have thy dwelling with the Beasts of the field: there shall be
given thee grass to eat, as unto Oxen, and seven times shall be made to pass
over thee, till thou acknowledge the most High to bear rule over the Kingdoms
of men, and that to whom he will, he gives the same. He Psalm. 135. 7.
sends Lightnings, Tempests and Thunders, Psalm. 113. 7.
rayseth the poor out of the Dust, the needy out of the Dunghill, kills 1.
Sam. 1. 6.
and gives life. In this account come also to be reckoned the changes and
alterations which fall out in the World: whereof the Prophet says, The right
Psalm. 78. 11.
hand of the most High, brings great changes. A Psalm. 107. 14
fruitful Land he turns into saltness, for the sin of the Inhabitants
thereof. He Esaias 10. 46.
sends leanenesse upon the fat ones, makes Psalm. 113. 9.
the barren a glad Mother of Children, turns Psalm. 114. 8.
the Rock it self into a Poole, the Flint into a Fountain of Water. But
there being a GOD that rules the World, it cannot with any reason be thought,
that great things should be neglected of him. Let us therefore see how this
Doctrine may be made good, not only in those Actions that are of a middle
sort* but even in the smallest and of least respect, which Worldlings think
that God regards not, nor look not after. It was a profane speech of me 1.
Kings 20. 23
Aramites, that God is the God of the Mountains, and not of the Valleys. Yes,
our God is the God even of the Valleys also: he looks unto great things,
and neglects not the meanest. Can there be any thing of less account then a
Sparrow, to light upon the ground, or a hair to fall from our head? yet Mat.
10. 29.
none of these is done without him. The Pro. 16. 1.
Wiseman also most divinely teaches that the answer of the tongue is from
JEHOVAH: that is, managed and ordered by him, that one cannot so much as wagge
his tongue without his direction, howsoever his heart be full of thoughts.
David Psalm. 31. 16.
also acknowledges, My times are in thy hand. He says not, My whole time or
course of life, but, times, in the Plural, to show, that every point and
period of ones life, every turn and return depends upon God.

Secondly, Gods Providence is to be seen in the most casual things, which
foolish men ascribe to Chance and Fortune: The Pro. 16. 33.
Lets (says SOLOMON) are cast into the lap, but the event is from JEHOVAH. So
we are taught in Exodus, Exodus 21. 13.
that he whom men esteemed to be killed by misse-fortune, it is God that
delivers him into the others hands. Hither belongs the Example of 1. Kings
22. 34
AHAB slain by an Arrow that one shot in his simplicity, without any purpose
to hit Ahab; whose death notwithstanding in that Battle being foretold by the
Prophet, shows, that there is nothing so casual in the eyes of men, which
the secret hand of God does not direct. What may seem more casual in the
ordinary course of this life, then the sudden falling and rising of men,
either in their estate or honor? But yet it is most true which Pro. 22. 2.
Solomon says, that howsoever the rich and the poor meet together (one
coming in another stead) JEHOVAH makes them both. And for the other, that of
Psalm. 75. 78.
David is always to be thought of: Promotion comes neither from the East nor
from the West, nor from the Desert, (whereupon Judea bordereth North and
South:) but God is Judge, this man he throws down, and the other he lifts
up.

Thirdly, In the Actions not only of favor and kindness, without end or
number, so noted by the Psalmist crying out, Psalm. 33. 5. etc. 119. 64.
The Earth is full of the kindness of JEHOVAH. And, How Psalm. 104. 24.
full is the Earth of thy Possessions! but further also, as well of judgment
and vengeance, as of chastisement and correction for the trial of his
Children. Is Amos 3. 6.
there any evil in the City, which JEHOVAH works not? Out Lam. 3. 37, 38
of the Mouth of the Highest, does not every both good and evil thing
proceed? I Esaias 45. 7.
frame light, and create darkness, make peace, and create evil: I JEHOVAH do
all these things. He that would see more of this, let him read Deuteronomie
28. where all the Curses are heaped together, which the Lord threatens to send
against wicked Sinners. So he threatens, Deuteronomy. 3 2. Deuteronomy. 32. 2^, 23, 24.
A fire is kindled in my wrath, which shall burn to the lowest grave, and
shall consume the Earth, and the increase thereof, and shall set on fire the
foundations of the Mountains: I will spend my evils upon them, and consumemine
Arrows in them, wasted with famine, and eaten up with burning coals, and a
raging Pestilence: The teeth of Beasts will I also send, with the venom of
Serpents that creep upon the dust. And in Ezech. 14. 20
EZECHIEL he terms the Sword, Famine, the Evil Beast, Pestilence, his four
evil Judgments, because they are sent from him. Example hereof: among many
other, we have one most worthy of remembrance, Judges 2. When Judges 2. 14.
the Israelites left JEHOVAH, and served BAAL and ASHTEROTH, his wrath was
kindled against Israel, so as he delivered them into the hands of spoylers,
which spoiled them, and gave them unto their Enemies; whithersoeuer they went
forth, the hand of JEHOVAH was against them, for evil, and he distressed them
exceedingly. Infinite are the places of Scripture to this purpose. JEHOVAH 2.
Kings 8. 1.
has called for a Famine: Behold, Esaias 13. 17.
I will raise up against them the Mede. Look Abac. 1. 5, 6, 7
among the Gentiles, and behold; be amazed, and wonder: for a work I work in
your days, which you will not believe, though it be told: for behold, I will
raise up against them the Caldeans, a bitter and a hasty Nation, fearful and
terrible, from whom the judgment of this People, and their carrying away shall
come. And Verse 12.
presently after, Thou, O JEHOVAH, have set him for judgment (that is, for our
chastisement and correction, as the words following make plain) and, thou, O
Rock, have founded him to correct. So the same Abac. 1. 3.
Prophet teaches, that from him it is, that ungodly men prosper and flourish;
when as it is ill with those that fear his Name. Why do thou make me to
see iniquity, and make me to behold grief, and wasting, and desolation in
my sight?

Fourthly, In all sinful and wicked Actions, wherein he has a stroke, not as
a bare permitter, but as a powerful Agent and Worker, not only in the action,
but in the fault it self, and sin of the Action, to govern it, and dispose
of it to his glory, making singular use thereof: for his Job 12. 16.
is he that erreth, and he that leads into error. So God says, Exodus 21. I
will harden PHARAO'S heart. And in Ezech. 14. 9.
EZECHIEL, When a Prophet is deceived, I JEHOVAH have deceived him. Thus Deuteronomy.
2. 30.
Moses tells the people, SIHON, King of Hesbon, would not suffer us to pass
through his borders: for JEHOVAH thy God had hardened his spirit, and made his
heart obstinate, that he might give him into thy hands. Our Mat. 6. 13.
Savior also has taught us to pray, Lead us not into temptation. And John
12. 40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, lest they should
see, etc. So Esaias 29. 9, 10. They are drunk, but not with wine; they reele,
but not with strong drink: for JEHOVAH has powered upon you a spirit of
slumber, and has shut your eyes; the eyes of the prophets, and of the chief
oxes the seers has he covered: and in the Revel. 18. 7.
Revelation, it is said of that most foul Apostacy, that God had put into
their heart, with one consent to give their power to the Beast. Genesis 45. 8.
Joseph says, It is not you that have sent me hither, but God himself. Acts 2.
23. Him you have taken by the fore-determined counsel and foreknowledge of
God, and nailed upon the Cross. And Acts 4. 28.
again, HEROD and PONTIVS PILATE, with the Gentiles and people of Israel,
assembled together to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel had
foredetermined to be done. 2. Sam. 12. 11. Thus says JEHOVAH, I will raise up
evil against thee out of thine own house, and taking thy Wives before thine
eyes, will give them to thy fellow, who shall lie with them before this Sun;
although thou have done it privily, yet will I do this thing openly before all
Israel, and before this Sun. The contrary Doctrine of this, making God an
idle beholder, or a naked permitter, without having any stroke in these sinful
actions, for the ruling and disposing of them, takes away from him almost the
whole glory of the government of the World: for first, the Devils can do
nothing else but sin: Therefore if God should have no stroke in wicked
actions his Providence could not extend to them. Among men, the Ephesians. 2. 2.
Reprobate always, and Gods Elect, till they be regenerate, are wholly led by
the sway and swindge of Satan: yea, the Regenerate themselves, in how many
things does he carry them? as he did David, to Murder, and Adultery; Lot to
Incest; Noah to Drunkenness, etc. And the best of all their actions are
stained with some corruption that is his, and comes from him.

But is not God hereby made the Author of sin? God forbid. The Manichees
indeed, when they knew not how otherwise to excuse him, plunged themselves into
a foul and monstrous absurdity: for they made two beginnings of things; God,
from whom all goodness comes, and the Devil, from whom all evil, or (which
is all one) two gods, a good and an evil god. This is a horrible and a
fearful Blasphemy, and strikes at the very root of all Religion. But for
avoiding all danger that may grow hereby, it is necessary, first, to know how
and in what sense we say, that God has a stroke in unrighteous and sinful
actions; not because he instilleth or powers into his Creatures a poison which
before they had not; or inclines them unto wickedness: (for that were indeed
to make God the author of sin) but partly, in that he forsakes and leaves
them to their own natural corruption, either by taking away the grace they
had, or not bestowing new grace which they want, whereby they run headlong
unto evil: partly, that he lets Satan loose upon them, to be by him
blinded and misse-led, because they have refused to be ruled and governed by
Gods Word and Spirit. To the former, those places are to be referred, where he
is said to tempt or try them, as the Holy Ghost records 2. Chron. 32. 21
of EZECHIAS, that when he dealt with the King of Babylons Ambassador, God
forsook him, trying him what was in his heart. And Moses Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
in Deuteronomie, Remember all this way wherein JEHOVAH thy God has led thee
now forty years in the Desert, that he might afflict thee, in trying what was
in thine heart, whether thou would obey his Precepts or not. So afterward
Deuteronomy. 29. 3. 4.
he vpbraydeth the people, that notwithstanding these great trials, signs and
wonders which Jehovah had done for them, Yet he had not given them a mind to
know, eyes to see, and ears to hear: wherein we may not think God unjust, who
is indebted to none: For who Romans 11. 35.
gave unto him first, and he shall be reco^penced? And who, according to his
own free pleasure, bestows the measure of his graces how and where he will.
I Romans 9. 15.
will have mercy, upon whom I will have mercy. And is Mat. 20. 15.
it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Of the latter we have
an Example, 1. Kin. 22, 23. JEHOVAH has sent a lying spirit into the mouth of
all thy Prophets. And the 1. Sam. 16. 15, 16. An evil spirit from JEHOVAH
vexed SAVL. And that nothing herein falls from the holiness and Justice of
the Lord; as all men not forsaken of common sense, do easily discern (for
else, as the Romans 3. 6.
Apostle reasons, how should God judge the World?) So the Holy Ghost in many
places teaches very plainly; for when the Hosh. 13 9:
Prophet cries out, Thy destruction is from thy self, O Israel: does it not
follow of necessity, that the cause also of destruction, which is sin, is
wholly from our selves, and that GOD has no part in it? Which James 1. 13.
James more plainly utters, Let no man, when he is tempted, say, I am tempted
of God: for God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man. And 1.
John 2. 1. John 2. 15.
Whatsoever is in the World, as the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not from the Father, but is from the World. For
this cause sin is called. The 1. John 3. 8. he that commits sin, is of
the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning. For this cause was the
Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the work of the Devil.
work of the Devil. And our Savior Christ says, When John 8. 44.
he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own. The sin therefore of the
Action, is wholly to be ascribed to the depraved nature and corruption of men,
wherein God is no way to be blamed, Eccles. 7. 29.
Who made all righteous, but they have sought many inventions to themselves. To
illustrate this by one or two Similitudes; He that spurreth a lame Horse, is
the cause of his stirring, but not of his halting. The Sun that shines upon
a filthy carcass, makes the savor, yet it is no cause of any stench: for out
of sweet Flowers it brings a pleasant odor. Such is the work of God in the
actions of wicked men.

And the better to apprehend how God in all this remains without any touch of
sin, we must consider that sin has always three things going with it,
whereof it is impossible that any one should fall upon God.

First, To be subject to a Law: For Romans 5. 13.
where no law is, there is no transgression. And the 1. John 3. 4.
Apostle defines sin to be a breach of the Law. Now God, who made his Laws
for others, is not himself to be tied to them.

Secondly, Impuritie and corruption, a thing most contrary to the nature of
God, who is not only holy and pure, but holiness and purity it self, and so
far off from being evil, that he James 1. 13.
cannot be tempted of it.

Thirdly, An evil and a wicked end. Whereas GOD evermore seeks his own
glory, which is absolutely good, and the chief Good of all. Therefore beside
that the will of God is the Rule of all goodness, the difference in these
sinful actions between that he works, and the work of wicked men, lies
plain, as well in the cause that moves him, as in the end he sets before
him: and in the manner of doing all which, though they be in respect of wicked
men unjust and sinful, yet as they proceed from God, they are most just and
holy; for first, by reason of this diversity of the causes moving, and of the
diverse ends which these two Agents, God and wicked men, set before them, it
falls out, that the selfsame Action, which, in respect of the corruption of
wicked men, becomes unto them sinful and damnable, is as in regard of God
most holy and righteous, being led thereto for most gracious and just respects;
either to set forth the riches of his Justice or Mercy, or for the
chastizement and trial of his Children, or for some other cause, as he sees
good: which ends the wicked never set before them, but all the contrary; what
more blessed or glorious work, and of greater love to us was there ever, or
can possibly be, then the reconciling of the World by the death of his Son?
And what more just, in respect of God, then to inflict all these punishments
upon him, who was our surety, and took upon him the sins of all the Elect,
to satisfy for them by his sufferings? Whereof so holy and good it was, as
coming from God, both in respect of the causes, ends, matter, and manner of
doing, yet justly does the Holy Acts 2. 23.
Ghost call them wicked hands, by whom he was nailed to the Cross. And
worthily did Judas receive strangling Acts 1. 16. 17.
and the sheading forth of his bowels, as the reward of his iniquity, for
being guide to those that apprehended Jesus. They doing it to a wicked end, and
after a sinful manner, not as an act of Justice, but of Treason and Rebellion
against God, out of the maliciousnes of their corrupt natures. And that which
is said of this, may by the judicious Reader be easily fitted, and applied to
the Examples following. So it was a singular work of mercy, to send Joseph
into the Land of Egypt, to be a Father to his Fathers house, at that time the
only visible Church of God, to provide Genesis 45. 5. ^.
things for their sustenance, to keep them alive, by a mighty deliverance: So
did Genesis 50. 20.
God think it for good, to preserve alive a number of People: yet this is no
excuse to the Brethren of Joseph, who Genesis 50. 20.
thought it for ill against him, moved thereto through extreme Genesis 37. 4, 5.
hatred and Gen 37. 11. Acts 7. 9.
envy. The Lord, in so many crosses and afflictions as he lays upon his
Church, has a gracious end, Esaias 27. 10.
moderately to correct them, and in measure; not for their hurt, but Deuteronomy. 8.
16.
that he may do good unto them in the end. But Zach. 1. 15.
with an exceeding wrath, says he, am I wroth against those Nations, who when
I am angry but a little, help forwards unto evil, (that is) aggrauate the
affliction of his people with all their might and maine, doing it with a
revenging mind, Ezech. 25. 12. 15. and 25. 3.
vaunting of the desolation of Gods People, and only setting before their eyes
ruin and destruction. As notably is set forth in that proud King of Assyria,
Esaias 10. 5. 6, 7. We to Ashur, the rod of my wrath: although my Staff of
indignation be in their hand, and sending him against an hypocrite Nation, I
give him commandment against the people with whom I am wroth, that he might
take the prey, and spoil the spoil, and make him to be trodden down as the
clay of the streets. But he does not so imagine, neither does his heart think
so, but to destroy after his own mind, etc. to cut off not a few Na(...). And
the like does the same Esaias 47. 6, 7.
Prophet, in the person of God, vpbrayde unto the Babylonians; I was wroth with
my People, I profaned mine Inheritance, and gave it into thine hand; thou
shewedst no mercy unto them: against the old thou made thy yoke exceeding
heavy, etc. said, For ever I shall be a Lady: thou did never mind these
things, thou remembredst not the end of it.

Secondly, these evil actions, as in regard of the work of God, are holy and
righteous: for that which is a point of Justice and moral good, he thereby
punishes former sins, and one wickedness with another, delivering them up,
like a righteous Judge, to the lust and corruptions of their own heart; and to
Satan's power, as to the Seriants and Executioners of his wrath; that so they
should be tempted and led into new sins, for the punishment of their old, and
by both may aggrauate their condemnation.

This is it which he himself says, Psalm. 81. 13. Because my People harkened
not to my voice, nor Israel would none of me, therefore dismissed I them to
the fancy of their own heart, to walk after their own counsel. And the
Apostle to the Romans 1. 24, 25 26, 27, 28, 29.
Romans, Therefore God delivered them up unto the lusts of their hearts, unto
uncleanness, to defile their bodies among themselves, as those which changed
the Truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the Creature, neglecting
the Creator. For this cause God delivered them unto unclean affections: for
their women changed the natural use into that which is contrary to Nature.
Likewise also the male, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their
lust one toward another, Males with Males committing filthiness, and
receiving in themselves the recompense which was meet for their error. And as
they regarded not to acknowledge God, so God delivered them up unto a mind
void of all judgment, to do the things that were not seemly, filled with
all Unrighteousness, Malice, Whoredom, etc. Again, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. For
this cause (because they embraced not the love of the Truth) God will send unto
them effectual errors, that they should believe lies, that all might be
condemned which believe not the Truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness.
So does the Lord our God in his most just and provident dispensation Ezech. 3.
21.
set a stumbling block before them for their ruin, turning their iniquity
upon themselves, and Psalm. 94. 23.
cutting them off through their own wickedness. These things confidered, it
will appear, that howsoever we say with the Scriptures, that God powerfully
works in a sinful action, in such sense as before was showed; yet that
nothing impeacheth the purity and uncorruption of his most holy Nature,
neither does the least stain or specke of uncleanness cleave unto him: nay,
his wonderful Goodness and Wisdom come herein to be admired, who both
works good things by evil instruments, and makes sin it self to serve
unto his glory: So that albeit sin be evil of it self, yet that there
should be sin, it becomes exceeding good: Not that we reject the term of
suffering or permission, which it pleases the Holy Ghost himself to use, as
Romans 9. 22, 23. For what if God willing to declare his wrath, and to make his
Power known, has suffered with much long suffering the vessels of wrath, and
also to make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercies? And
in the Acts 14. 16.
Acts, In former Ages God suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways:
But so he is also said to permit that which is good. And this will we do, if
God permit, says the Apostle to the Hebrews. Chap. 6. 3.

The next thing to be considered Stoics which imagine an absolute necessity
of things in Nature, and tie God to the second causes.
in this Doctrine of Providence, is the free dispensation of Almighty God, who
deals herein, as a sovereign Monarch, by his own absolute will and
pleasure, without any the least compulsion or necessity: Psalm. 135. 6.
Whatsoever pleases JEHOVAH, he does in Heaven and in the Earth, in the Sea
and in all Deepes. Our Psalm. 115. 3.
God is in Heaven, he does whatsoever he pleases. Therefore he is not tied
to the second causes, nor enforced by any foreign power, but always and in all
things deals, according to his own good pleasure, how and which way he will;
by means, without means, adnulling and making void the means, and lastly,
contrary and against all means: of all which we have many and plentiful
testimonies in the Scripture. Of the means, 2. Kings 14. 27. He saved them by
the hands of JEROBOAM the son of IOASH. Judges 2. 16. He raised them up
Judges, which saved them out of the hands of their spoylers; And in a thousand
other places. Therefore the counsels of God, and the inferior or second causes
stand well together, and cross not one another: but to neglect (how much more
to despise the same?) when God gives thee opportunity, is not to rest upon his
Providence, but to tempt or mistrust his Goodness. He provides the means
for thee, to the end thou may be safe; thou, in contemning of it, castest
thy self away: his love and kindness comes to be admired, thy folly and
negligence is justly to be condemned. Paul Acts 27. 22. compared with the
Verse 31.
did not so in the danger of his ship wrack, when being assured of the issue,
that there should be no loss of any of their lives; yet tells them plainly,
Except these remain in the Ship, ye cannot be safe. MOSES had good experience
of the gracious conduct of God himself, the perfect Iethro of their Voyage,
Who by his Spirit, Esaias 63. 14.
and the Esaias 63. 9.
Angel of his presence, led them gently, as a Beast down a steep Valley, in
Exodus 13. 21.
a Pillar of a Cloud by day, and in a Pillar of Fire by night: By Numb. 9. 18.
the note and mark whereof they took their iourneyes, and by the note and
mark whereof they made their stands, his Numb. 10. 33
Arc, as a Harbinger, going before, to find a place of rest for them; yet how
earnest that holy man of God is with his Father-in-law, who knew all the turns
and windings of the vast and huge Wilderness, to be a Guide to conduct them in
the way! Leave Numb. 10. 31
us not (says he) I beseech thee, seeing thou know our camping Places in
the Desert, and thou shall be as eyes unto us. The Phisician is to be honored
for necessary uses: and the Lawyer to be retained for the pleading of men's
Causes. Who would not condemn a son, that in his fathers extremity lying
sick unto the death, should, under pretense of Gods Providence, destitute him
of convenient comforts for the succor of his life? And Acts 5. 38, 39.
Gamaliels sound and grave advice of letting the Apostles alone, because if
that counsel or work were from men, it would come to nothing; but if from
God, it could not be dissolved, meant to repress Ryots and disordered tumults,
if it be applied to the Magistrates lawful drawing of the Sword, for
preventing of mischievous plots and purposes, would prove very impious and
foolish Logic: for it is no argument that either men's labors and industries
should be needless, or counsel and deliberation of future things frivolous,
if all be decreed of God. The contrary whereof is rather true: for therefore
he gives unto us the good things of this life, wealth, credit and authority,
judgment to foresee dangers, and wisdom to prevent them, reason whereby to
gather what may be for our profit, by considering of things past, comparing of
things present, and gessing at things to come; that all might be as means to
serve his secret Providence. It was a worthy Message which Mordecai Ester 4. 14.
sent unto Q. Hester, Who knows whether for such a time as this, thou art
come unto the Kingdom? And Pro. 22. 2.
SOLOMON in his wisdom says, The Wiseman foreseeth the evil, and hides
himself, but fools pass on and are punished. Again, that it may the better
appear how these two, the Counsels of God, and men's consultations (as the
means that he has sanctified) are nothing at all repugnant; in Pro. 16. 9.
another place he makes them draw together: A man's heart advises his way, and
JEHOVAH establishes his peace.

But here we must take heed of another extreme: That in presumption of our
selves, and of the means, we Abac. 1. 16.
sacrifice not to our own Net, arrogating the praise and glory of the Action,
which God always reserueth unto himself. Sharply does the Lord (by his
Prophet reprove the proud King of Ashur in this behalf, and check his
insolent and vain bragges, as if his own arm had gotten him the victory.
But Esaias 10. 12.
when the Lord has accomplished all his works upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem,
I will visit the fruit of the heart of the proud King of Ashur, and his
glorious and proud looks, because he said, By the power of mine own hand
have I done it: because I am wise, therefore I have removed the borders of the
People, and have spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down the inhabitants
like a valiant man, and mine hand has found out as a nest, the riches of the
People, and as one that gathers Eggs that are left, so have I gathered all
the Earth, and there was none to move the wing, or to open the mouth, or to
chirpe. Shall the Axe boast himself against him that heweth therewith? etc. In
Esaias 31. 1.
another place he denounces a woe to them that go down into Egypt for
help, and lean upon Horses, which trust in Chariots, because they be many,
and in Horsemen, because they be multiplied, and look not to the holy one of
Israel, nor seek after JEHOVAH. AS A also a religious and godly Prince, is 2.
King. 16. 12
taxed, that in his sickness he sought not after JEHOVAH, but cleaued unto
Phisicians. God verily is to have the praise, whatsoever means he works by.
But when he uses vile, base and abject means, which upon the matter is no
means at all; when he chooses 1. Cor. 1. 27, 28
the foolish things of the World, to shame the wise, and the weak things of
the World, to shame the strong, and the base things of the World, and things of
none account, and which are not (to speak of, in men's opinions) to adnull the
things that are, then does his glory more appear. So he said Judge 7. 2.
to Gideon, coming at the first with a great Army to fight against the
Midianites, This people that are with thee, are too many for me to deliver the
Midianites into their hands: Lest Israel take to himself glory over me,
saying, Mine hand has brought me salvation. Anon, Verse 7.
when of all that number a few men were left, he tells him, By these three
hundred men will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thy hands. By this
persuasion 1. Sam. 14. 7.
Jonathan prevailed with his Armor-bearer, when they two were set upon a whole
Garrison of the Philistims. There is no let unto JEHOVAH, but that he may save
with many, or with few. A proof whereof is evident to be seen, 2. Chron. 24.
24. where notwithstanding the Army of ARAM came against IOASH, with a few men,
yet JEHOVAH delivered into their hands an exceeding great Army, because they
had forsaken JEHOVAH the God of their fathers. That of Amos 5. 9.
Amos is very memorable, He refreshes the distressed against the strong, that
distress it self should be able to scale a Fort; that is, men so wonderfully
spent and wasted, as if weakness and calamity were to be seen in their
faces. And Ier. 37. 10.
Jeremy bids the Jews not to deceive themselves, as if all were well,
because the Caldeans did a little give back; For though you should smite
(says he) all the host of the Caldeans that fought against you, so as there
were left among them but men thrust through, yet should they rise up every man
in his Tent, and burn the City with fire. As to the same Caldeans afterward
Ier. 50. 45.
he threatens, that the very least of the flock shall tear them in pieces.
And as he himself is able to work by slender means, so he disappointeth the
great and mighty means, blows upon it, and makes it unprofitable. Is it
not (says the Prophet Abac. 2. 13.
ABACVCK) from JEHOVAH of Hosts, that the People labor in the fire, and the
Nations weary themselves for nothing? And Ps. 33. 15, 16
David himself a King) A King is not saved by the multitude of strength. The
mighty man is not delivered by the multitude of power. A Horse is a vain
thing to save, and cannot deliver by the multitude of his strength. After whom
Solomon Prou. 21. 31.
his son, a worthy graft of so noble a Stock, heir of his fathers Virtue,
as well as of his Crown, led by the same Spirit, speaks in like sort, The
Horse is prepared against the day of battle, but salvation comes from
JEHOVAH. Take for Example the Psalm. 78. 9* 10
children of EPHRAIM, ( valiant and renowned Archers) turning their back in
the day of battle, because they kept not the covenant of God, but refused to
walk in his Law. Eccles. 9. 13.
SOLOMON by his own experience confirms this; I have seen, that not always
the swift gets the course, nor the strong prevail in war, etc. This is
that Judgment which threatens Leuit. 26. 26.
in the Law, I will break the staff of bread, by taking from it all power and
virtue of nourishment, that in the midst of abundance, they shall even dye
for famine. And in the Prophet Hosh. 4. 10.
HOSEA, Though they eat, yet they shall not be filled: though they commit
fornication, yet they shall not be multiplied. Over and beside all this, to
have it yet more manifest, that the whole virtue is to be looked for from him,
he deals sometimes utterly without all means, even in famine Psalm. 33. 17.
it self preserving his alive. So Moses Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
tells the people, that God in their hunger fed them with Manna, which they
nor their Ancestors never knew: to make known unto them, that man lives not
by bread only, but by every thing that proceeds out of the month of
JEHOVAH: that is, which God by his Commandments gives power unto to nourish.
And Esaias 38. 16.
EZECHIAS in his Prayer acknowledges no less: O Lord, by these things (which
thou speak and do) men do live, yea, in every one of these consists
the life of my spirit: by these thou make me whole, and keep me alive:
noting the miraculous deliverance from his sickness, only by the word that
proceeded out of the mouth of the Lord. Hence arises that most glorious
rejoicing of Faith, resting upon the Covenant and favor of God, in the midst
of the want of all worldly helps. Aba. 13. 17, 18
Though the Fig tree should not bud, nor no increase be in the Vines, the
work of the Olive lie, and none of the fields bring forth meat, the enemy
cut away the flock from the Fold, and no herd be of the Bullockes: yet I will
rejoice in JEHOVAH, and joy in the God of my salvation. Agreeable whereunto is
that of the Psalm. 20. 8.
Psalmist, These remember Horses; and they Chariots: but we will remember the
Name of JEHOVAH our God.

Lastly, hither do belong his glorious and magnificent works, done (as we
say) against the hair, and contrary to all means, yea, to the very course of
nature, that all men may know, that nature is nothing else but that order which
God has set in things, and which he alters and changes at his pleasure. 2.
Kings 20. 1
Ezechias sickness, by course of nature, was incurable: for it is noted to
have been deadly: and the Prophet told him, as from the Lord, Thou can not
live. But his power ouer-mastred the strength of the disease. He remooueth Job
9. 5, 6.
Mountains, so as men cannot discern so much as a step of them, when he
ouerturneth them in his wrath: he shakes the earth out of her place, that the
very Pillars thereof tremble. Esaias 50. 2.
At his rebuke he dries up the Sea, and makes the floods a Desert; even then
when they are in their prime: As he did to Josh. 3. 15. 16.
Jordan in the full Springtide, when his course was to ouerflow all the
Banks. The Earth how ponderous an Element it is, how gross and heavy! yet,
as if it were lighter then lightness it self, and not so much as the weight
of a Fether, Job 26. 7.
he stretches it upon emptiness, and hangs it upon nothing. Waters, which
naturally seek downwards, and the raging of the Sea, his mighty word so
bridleth, that though it be far higher then the Earth, it cannot ouerflow it;
Job 38. 10. 11
only because he has set his decree as a bar, and a double gate against it,
saying, Hither shall thou come, and no further, and here shall the shore set
it self against the pride of thy waves. How does the Prophet Psalm. 19. 6.
admire the excellency of the Sun, which comes forth as a Giant to run
his course! yet at his commandment it has stood Josh. 10. 13.
still; yea, (which is a wonder for to speak) at the request of a mortal man
he has made it go 2. Kings 20. 10, 11.
backwards. What more natural then fire to burn, which he notwithstanding,
as the Lord of nature, has so changed, that in a hot Dan. 3.
burning Furnace heated seven times, not so much as a hair of his Servants
head was touched, nor a thread of their Garments sindged, when at the selfsame
time the vehemency of the heat consumed the bodies of those that came to
throw them in? Of this sort are all his wonderful Miracles and miraculous
deliverances of his Church and Children; for whose sake he parted Exodus 14.
21. Psalm. 136. 13.
the Sea into heaps, that his people went over as upon dry ground, brought
waters Exodus 17. 6.
out of the Rock, rained Exodus 16. 36. Psalm. 78. 24, 25.
meat from Heaven to feed them in the Wilderness, by the space of forty
years together, etc.

With this absolute free will and pleasure of GOD, is coupled (which is the
third Doctrine of the Providence) the inevitable necessity of the execution of
his counsels; as also the Prophet joins them together, Psalm. 115. 3.
Whatsoever pleases JEHOVAH, he does. And Ephas. 1. 11.
PAVL: He works all things after the counsel of his will. Enquire, says
ESAIAS, Esaias 34. 16.
in the Book of JEHOVAH, and read: one of these things shall not fail, they
shall not miss one another: and in Ezech. 36. 3, 6
EZECHIEL, I JEHOVAH speak and do it. Again, Ezech. 12. 25
I will speak whatsoever word I mean to speak, and it shall be done. When I
work (as it is in the Prophet Esaias 43. 13.
ESAIAS) who shall turn it away? Whereunto serves that memorable sentence,
wherewith the same Prophet shuts up his burden against the Babylonians, to
procure credit to all that he had spoken; Esaias 14. 27.
For JEHOVAH of Hoasts determining, who can make it of none effect? and his
hand stretched out, who can turn away? Many and excellent are the speeches to
this purpose thorowout the holy Scriptures, especially in Job and in the
Psalms: Fear Psalm. 33. 8.
before him; for he says, and it is; he commands, and it stands. JEHOVAH
makes void the counsels of the Nations; he breaks the thoughts of the
People: but the counsel of JEHOVAH stands for ever; the thoughts of his
heart from generation to generation: when Job 34. 29.
he quieteth, who shall trouble? when he hides his face, who shall look upon
him? that is, resists him? Lo (says Job, in Job 12. 14.
another place) he does so throw down, that it is built no more; he so
shuts up about a man, that it is not opened. Yea, Balam himself was forced
to utter as much, Numb. 23. 19. Has he said, and shall he not do it?
Therefore Luke 1. 37.
the Angel says, With God nothing is impossible. And Romans 9. 19.
the Apostle cries out, Who has resisted his will? This is the reason why the
Decrees of God are compared to Zach. 6. 1.
Mountains of brass, for the firm and irresistable effects they bring with
them: For this cause he is furnished with all means and power to effect his
counsels: he is called The Lord of Hoasts, and has all the Host of Heaven and
Earth at his command. I saw, says MICA, 1. King. 22. 19
JEHOVAH sitting upon his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing before
him at his right hand and at his left.

First, are the holy Angels Colonels and principal Commanders in this Army,
whom he imployeth and sends forth, as a Master does his servants, to go
upon his errand, and to perform all that he inioyneth them, Daniel 10. 11,
12. The Angel tells the Prophet, that he was sent unto him; because his
words were heard before God. And in Luke: Luke 1. 19.
that he was sent unto Zachary, to utter unto him the glad tidings of his
Son. So it is anon Luke 1. 26.
added, In the sixth Month, was the Angel GABRIEL sent of God, to a City of
Galile, named Nazaret, to the blessed Virgin there. Therefore they are called
Angels, that is to say, Messengers, and are said to Dan. 7. 10.
minister unto him. This dispensation of God, by the hand of his holy Angels,
serves as well for the execution of his Justice, as for the declaration of his
Mercies. These he sends forth, to bring his plagues and punishments both upon
whole Countries and Cities, and upon particular persons. So 1. Chron. 25. 15.
God sent an Angel to Jerusalem to destroy it, Genesis 19. 13. Two Angels were
sent to destroy Sodom and Gomorah, 2. Sam. 24 16, 17. An Angel smote the
people of Israel with a plague, whereof died threescore and ten thousand men.
And the Prophet prays in the Psalm. 35. 5, 6.
Psalm, Let them be as the chafe before the wind, and the Angel of JEHOVAH
pursue them. These he sends forth to be Ministers of his love and favor in
the comforts of this life, both to the good and bad, as it is recorded in the
Gospel, John 5. 4.
that an Angel of the Lord came down at a set time, and stirred in the water,
and whosoever first went in after the stirring of the water, was made whole,
what disease soever held him.

Secondly, Not only he bears up his Mace in Heaven, but he carries it
also in Hell: for even the Devils themselves, struggle they never so much, are
forced to be subject to him, and to run at his commandment. When the sons
of God (the elect Angels) came to present themselves before JEHOVAH, Satan also
came amongst them, as it is in the Book of Job 1. 6. and 2. 1
Job. And 1. Kings 22. 18, 19, 20.
in another place, when he came to set upon his Throne, the unclean spirits,
will they, nill they, made up a part of the Host of Heaven, and were feign to
offer their service to him.

Thirdly, he has the hearts of all men in his hands, sitting at the stern,
and turning them hither and thither, whither-soeuer he will, as the Water-man
does his Wherrie: As in the person of the King himself, whose affections, of
all other, are most wavering and uncertain: like unto the Rivers of waters,
when they are tossed with contrary winds, as Prou. 21. 1.
Solomon gives us to understand. And in another Prou. 29. 26.
place, Many seek the face of the Ruler, but the judgment of every one
comes from JEHOVAH, bowing and bending the Rulers heart, which way it
pleases him. He gives favor in the eyes of men, as he did to Exodus 3. 21. 22
the Israelites in the sight of the Egyptians. And Prou. 16. 7.
when JEHOVAH delights in the ways of a man, he makes (says SOLOMON) his
very enemies to be at peace with him. Again, at his pleasure he takes
favor away, makes Rents and Breaches, Discords and Divisions; as he did
between Judge ^. 2, 3.
Abimelech and the men of Shechem. He Esaias 20. 14. ^. Cor. 1. 19.
destroys the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding of the prudent, that
their counsel is not able to do any thing. Therefore DAVID 2. Sam. 15. 31
prayed, O JEHOVAH, turn the counsel of ACHITOPHEL into folly. And ESAIAS Esaias
19. 11. 13
scorneth the great Counselors of the King of Egypt: Verily the Princes of
Tsoan are Fools, the wise Counselors of PHARAOH, their counsel is made
brutish. The Princes of Tsoan are become foolish. The Princes of Noph are
deceived, and have seduced Egypt unto the corner of the Tribes thereof, JEHOVAH
pouring into the midst of it a spirit of crookedness, etc. And this is it
which Job 12. 17. 19, 23.
JOB says, He drives Counselors into madness, and makes Judges Fools:
here moves the tongue from the eloquent, and takes away the understanding of
the Elders; he remoueth the hearts of the Rulers of the People of the Land,
etc. And of this sort is his infatuating of men, that they shall not harken to
wise advice. So it is in the Book 2. Sam. 17. 14.
of SAMVEL, JEHOVAH had decreed to make void the counsel of ACHITOPHEL, which
had been better (then that which Cushai gave) to the end that God might bring
evil upon ABSOLON. And of the sons of Eli it is recorded, 1. Sam. 2. 25.
that they harkened not to the voice of their father (with great gravity
reproving them of their sins) for God was pleased to kill them. Again, he
takes heart and courage from the strong, that when they come to fight, they
should not find their hands. So it is in Job 12. 20.
JOB: He weakeneth the strong Loine. And of the Egyptians Esaias Esaias 19. 3.
prophesies, Their spirit shall be spent in the midst of them, being quite
out of heart. Thus and diversely beside God does work, disposing so of every
thing, as best may serve to work and effect his counsels.

In one or two Examples all this may be very manifest; God had determined to
advance Joseph above his Brethren, and to make him the father of his fathers
house. See how he makes all things to concur hereunto: He uses first his
own Brethrens malice, after long consulation of taking away his life: in the
end, to resolve to sell him into Egypt. Being there, he opens him a way into
Potiphers house, a chief Ruler about the King: through whose wives inordinate
lust and forged complaint, he is unjustly thrown into Chains, and in Prison
finds favor with his Keeper, committing into his hands the charge of all the
Prisoners. The same time God brought into that place two of the Kings chief
Officers, his Butler and his Baker, for their offenses committed, thither. By
their Dreams, his knowledge and skill in the interpreting of hidden things
comes to be known. After which, God himself shows to the King a Famine
that was to come; but in a Dream dark and obscure, which only Joseph was
able to expound. By this means the Butler calling him to remembrance, when now
he seemed utterly to be forgotten, he is sent for, and presented to the King:
And by the wisdom which God had given him, declaring the Dream, and aduising
the best means in policy to prevent it, is made Ruler over the whole Land.
The Famine increasing, his Brethren first are driven into Egypt, and there
unwittingly do him homage. After, his whole fathers house came to be fed by
him; and so fulfill that which the Lord had purposed. See how he makes these
things one to hang upon another, that in the midst of the most contingent
Actions, his counsels should yet have a necessary effect. Take another Example
out of the Book of Ester, of the confounding of proud Haman, the enemy of the
Jews, and defeating of his cruel and wicked purposes against the Church, by
the Divorce of Vashti the Queen. God makes a way for the lifting up of ESTER
( not known to be a Jew) into her room. Mordecai he governs, to be
present when the Kings two Courtiers conspired against him; which by Esters
means was signified to the King, they executed, and a perpetual record made
of all this in the memorial of those times. When Haman had obtained an
inviolable Edict (as were the Decrees of the Medes and Persians, never to be
revoked) for the rooting out of the Jews, and to begin with, had prepared a
Gallows of fifty Cubits high, to hang up Mordecai a chief and a principal
man among them; the very night before this mischievous plot should have been
executed, God kept the Kings eyes restless, that all sleep departed from him,
and calling for the Chronicles, Gods secret Providence directed him to the
place where Mordecaies fact was registered. Thereupon willing to do him honor,
he commands Haman that came at the same instant, with a mind to hang up
Mordecai, to be the man to do him service. By that means God abated Hamans
pride, disappointed his cruel practices, and finally giving Ester favor in
the Kings sight, made her suit more gracious, so as not only Haman took
seisin of the Gallows, which Mordecai should have been hanged upon; but her
own and her peoples life were given unto her at her request, and that, with
liberty to exercise dominion upon their Enemies which would have tyrannized
over them. Mordecai, or whosoever was the Writer of that Story, penning it (as
we may conjecture) not only for the Church, but as a Monument to be laid up
among the Records and Yeere-bookes of the Persians, who would never have
abidden so religious an observation of the Providence of God, as the course of
that action worthily required, does not in words much insist upon it, (as for
the same cause it may be thought that he forbeareth so much as to mention the
Name of God in all that Book): But for the thing it self, there is no doubt,
he gives particularly and most notably to be observed the hand of God in
every circumstance. But how evident is all this to be seen in the Birth of our
Savior Christ, who, as the Prophet, many an hundred year before, had
prophesied, was to be borne at Bethlem the City of David? This how
wonderfully God brought about, it is a marvel to behold Marie his Mother, as
it seems, forgetting, and not so much as once thinking of it, when the Holy
Ghost had ouer-shaddowed her, that she conceived and was with child, she yet
dwelt at Nazareth a City of Galile, far from the Town of Bethlem; there
she continued, and there, as by the Story we may gather, she meant to be
delivered. Her time drawing near that she was even ready to lie down, there
comes an Edict from the Emperor Augustus (minding only his own glory, and
the increase of his Treasures) that all the World should be taxed, every one
in their own City: so as Mary being of the House and Lineage of David, was
enforced against her will to repair unto Bethlehem, there to be taxed with her
kindred, intending nothing less then that which fell out afterward; for it is
expressly noted, that she went with another mind, to obey the Edict of Caesar:
but contrary to her purpose, God fulfilled his, by leading her, as it were
blindfold, to the place where Christ should be borne. And so His counsel
took effect, where all counsel of man did fail.

As for those places which seem to cross this Doctrine of Gods free and
absolute working, and to carry a show, as if he were sometimes hindered of his
Creatures from doing his own will: as, I will Ezech. 33. 11
not the death of a sinner; and, How Mat. 23. 37
often would I have gathered you together, and you would not? The Luke 7. 30.
Pharisees and Lawyers made void the counsele of God toward them, etc. They
only teach what God is pleased with, and whereunto he inuiteth and calls all
men, not what he purposes to work in every one by his grace and holy Spirit.

Fourthly, The brute beasts and unreasonable Creatures serve to do his
pleasure: he stops the mouth of the Dan 16. 23.
Lions, when the prey is in their teeth, makes the silly and weak Grasshoppers
to be a strong Joel 1. 6.
Nation, a mighty Joel 2 2.
people, and as a huge Joel 2. 25.
Army, when they come to perform his Judgments.

Fifthly, Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is, are at his beck;
the Abac. 3. 10. 11
Winds, the Showers, the Storms, Fire and Hail, Ice and Snow are as his
Arrows, to scatter and consume his foes: yea, Hell and destruction are naked
in his sight, and give up their dead, when he calls for them. But albeit
whatsoever God wills must most certainly and necessarily come to pass,
because he wills it, yet that takes not away the freedom of will in the
reasonable Creature, nor the nature and property of the second causes, but
only bends them to run that way that he has fore-determined; they,
notwithstanding this necessity, not being compelled to do that which God
determines, but freely willing that which is done by them: So that if we
refer the action to GODS will, which is the supreme cause of all, it may be
said necessary; if to man's will, it may be said contingent and voluntary.
And thereupon effects and events of things are termed such as the second causes
are necessary: If they be necessary, contingent; if they be contingent,
voluntary; if the second causes be voluntary, although in respect of Gods
Decree all be necessary. When Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel stood in Ezech.
21. 19 20, 21, 22.
the head or mother of ways, where one way parting into two made him doubtful
which to take, either that unto Jerusalem, or the other that led unto Rabath, a
City of the Ammonites, it was a more uncertain and contingent matter whether
he would come against Jerusalem or not: for whithersoeuer the divination did
conduct him, thither was he bent: and what more uncertain then diuinations?
The vanity whereof Philosophers themselves have worthily derided. But for all
that, it could not be otherwise chosen, but that he should take the way that
led unto Jerusalem, to come, and to besiege it, the Lord having so ordained and
fore-spoken by his Prophet. Our Savior Christ, according to his Fathers will,
dyed necessarily, as Acts 13. 3.
Paul disputes to the Jews, That it was of necessity for him to suffer, and
to rise from the dead. And he himself: O ye Luke 24. 26.
fools and slow of heart, was it not of necessity that Christ should suffer
these things, and enter into his glory? Yet he dyed willingly: for so he
professes, John 10. 18.
No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self: And in his Mat.
26. 39.
Prayer to his Father, he resigneth it wholly to his good will and pleasure.
Therefore as the free and cheerful obedience of Gods Children, so renowned
Psalm. 110. 3. and elsewhere.
in the Scripture, receives no blemish or disgrace, because whatsoever they
do, was necessary to be done in respect of his Decree, no more can the wicked
fetch from hence any excuse or pretense for their wickedness, to say, I have
done nothing but that which God has appointed: and who can resist his will?
For first, God does not at all will sin, as it is sin: for this is
contrary to his most pure and just nature: nor does decree, that wicked
actions shall be done in respect of their wickedness and maliciousness; in
which sense only they are evil: but as there is some good in the action,
which is not at all intended or thought upon by him that does it. And secondly,
although in regard of Gods counsel, it be necessary that those actions which
are wicked and sinful, should come to pass, yet in thee the sin is
voluntary, and he disposes of that most justly which thou co^mittest
wretchedly, not serving his providence, but thine own vile affections: for
though thou willest and do the things that God has decreed, to make a holy
use of, and would have in some respect done, yet thy will is not carried with
an intent of obedience to his will. It 1. Kings 12. 15, 24.
was from God, that the Kingdom of Israel was rent in sunder, and ten of the
Tribes given to another, for the just punishment of Salomons sin: but the
sin as well of foolish 1. King. 12. 14
Rehoboam came between, following the rash and headdie advice of children, and
rejecting the sage and grave advice of the wise Counselors of his Father; as
of the people 1. King. 12. 20
themselves that set up Jeroboam, with a rebellious mind against the house of
David. In which respect God Hoshea 8. 4.
renounceth to have any part in this their Action. They set up Kings, but not
from me, they make Princes which I know not.

Lastly, all that hitherto has been spoken concerning this whole government
and dispensation is the peculiar praise of God, which he imparts not to any
Creature: For he Esaias 42. 8.
gives not his glory to another. Therefore the Jews, John 5. 17. 18.
when our Savior Christ said, My Father works hitherto, and I work; did
rightly conclude thereupon, that he made himself equal with God. This in one
particular is set forth, when the King 2. Kings 5. 17.
of Israel detesteth it as a blasphemy; Am I a God, to kill and to give life?
And Gen 30. 2.
Jacob, (his Wife bidding him to give her children, or else she should dye) Am
I in Gods stead, who has kept back from thee the fruit of thy womb? So in
Deuteronomie God himself says, Know Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
that I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill and restore to life, etc.
Which by proportion is to be understood of all the rest. And this is that
memorial, whereby this true God will be known from all false and counterfeit
gods, Esaias 40. 26. Lift up your eyes on high, and see who has created these
things. And Jeremy Ier. 10. 10.
cries out, JEHOVAH, he is the true God, The living God, The eternal King,
which made the Earth by his Power, established the inhabited World by his
Wisdom, and by his Prudence stretches out the Heavens: who uttering his
voice, the waters make a noise; in the Heavens he brings forth vapors from
the utmost part of the Earth, makes Lightning, together with the rain, and
brings the wind out of his treasures.

To conclude (says he) Thus shall ye say to the Idolatrous Gentiles, The Gods
that made not Heaven and Earth, shall perish from the Earth, and from under the
Heaven. And Psalm. 115. 15.
David sets it as the proper mark of the only God, Blessed be ye of JEHOVAH,
who has made the heaven and earth. So Esaias 44. 19. He takes to himself alone,
both the creation and administration of all things: I JEHOVAH stretch out the
Heavens alone: I stretch out the Earth by my self. And of them both the Esaias
40. 12.
Prophet says, Who has measured the waters in his fifth, and covered the
Heavens with a spanne, or in a measure comprehended the Dust of the Earth, and
weighed the Mountains with a Weight, and the Hills in a Balance? Who then is
like unto our God? or what, or who is he, that may be compared with him, Whose
Psalm. 36. 7.
kindness is up unto Heaven, his truth unto the Clouds, his righteousness as
the mighty Mountain, his judgments as the great Deep? who (by his
Providence) preserves both man and beast? Thine (says the Psalm. 89, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 16
Psalmist) are the Heavens, yea, thine is the Earth, the inhabited World, and
the things that fill it, thou have founded.

Then follows an enlargement by the parts; North and South thou have created,
Tabor (Westward) and Hermon (toward the East) which sing of thy Name. The
Government he partly touched before, and afterward more fully: Thou rulest
over the pride of the Sea; when the waves thereof rage, thou do repress
them. Upon all which he concludes, O, blessed is the People that are
acquainted with the shoute, walking in the light of thy countenance, O JEHOVAH:
that is, who acknowledge thee their Sovereign Lord and Captain, suffering
themselves to be led and guided by the shoute or noise of thy voice, in thy
most glorious Word and works, as by the Trumpet or Allarum of their General.

Now to make it evident, how the Glory of God shines and shows out, in all
which has been said of the exercise of his Kingdom: Generally it may be
seen,

First, That he is perfection it self, in giving all perfect things to other.

Secondly, his own Infiniteness in that their best, and put them altogether,
is but Esaias 40. 15, 17
a drop of that which is feafull in him.

Thirdly, his Eternity in being before all things were. More particularly he
manifests his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, both in the making and governing
the World.

In the making, he manifests his Power in creating things of nothing, only
by his command, in fetching one contrary out of another; as Light out of
Darkness, etc. and bringing forth whatsoever he would, even at the first,
without natural causes, giving light unto the World, before there was a Sun,
making Genesis 2. 5, 6.
Plants and Herbs to grow, and all things to be green and flourishing in the
Fields, when there was no man to till the ground, nor any mist or rain to
water it.

His Wisdom, in the artificial distinction of things. His Goodness, in
garnishing and replenishing the Earth with all good things fit for the use of
man, and that before their Creation; that so he might bring them into the
World, not as to an empty and barraine habitation, but stored first with
whatsoever was requisite both for the necessity and pleasure of their life.

In the governing, he manifests his Power, doing things not only by means,
but without means, above means, and contrary to all means and course of
nature. His Wisdom, in doing all things according to the counsel of his will,
in measure and weight most wisely; yea, like a most cunning Workman, procuring
good things by evil instruments, and making sin it self to serve unto his
glory. His Goodness, in being liberal and bountifll to all, as the Psalmist
Psalm. 145. 9.
says, JEHOVAH is good to all, and his Kindness is over all his Works.

CHAP. V.
Of the Moral Law, the first Table, and the first Commandment.

ALBEIT the Glory of GOD shine most So much of the Kingdom of God. The honor
due unto him, is, that the reasonable Creatures (Angels and men) do his Will.
clearly in all his Works, yet is this honor, which in the second place we
give him, very needful: for it was not enough for the illustration of his
glory, either to make the World, or by his Providence thus royally to govern
it, unless there were some that might both see, behold, admire, and confess
the excellency thereof, as well in themselves as others; without which, all the
other Creatures and Actions of God, how infinite matter soever they contain of
Gods Glory, could no whit increase his praise, which was the end of his
governing, and making of them, no more then all the skill and excellency of
the most perfect workman can purchase credit or commendation of his work, if
none but himself observe it. Therefore in his wisdom he saw it needful to
create Men and Angels, endued with knowledge, judgment, a reasonable soul and
will, and other excellent parts, to be the Trumpetters of his Glory. But
notwithstanding that in these God could glorify himself, though men and
Angels would stop their mouths, and conspire to root it out, he being able
either to destroy the Creatures he had made, and so to glorify his Power and
Justice in their deserved ruin, or against their will to wring from them a
confession of his Praise; yet as earthly Princes not only desire Sovereignty
and command, which the Rebels themselves are not able to withdraw, but love
especially that their people should obey and carry Subiectly minds unto them:
So it pleased God to add this one unto the rest, for the full making up and
perfecting of his glory.

This honor we define by the doing of his will, which is the proper office of
Angels and Men, and not of any other Creature: yet it is true, the rest of the
Creatures do the will of God also: yea, the wicked as well as the good, but not
in the same manner. The wicked do it, because they shall do it, will they
nill they: Gods Children, because they have a will and desire to do it.
Generally, all do his will and pleasure, that is, Psalm. 115. 3. and 135. 6.
whatsoever he in his everlasting counsel has purposed to be done. But that
is the secret and hidden will of God, which the wicked may do and perish; not
his known and revealed will, whereof we here speak, which cannot be done
but in obedience of reasonable Creatures; to the doing whereof a promise is
belonging. This distinction of a secret and a revealed will of God, Moses
teaches, Deuteronomy. 29. 30. The hidden things belong to JEHOVAH our God: but the
revealed things to us and our children, to do all the words of the Law.
Howbeit, for all that, they are not two wills, but one will, as God himself is
one.

The doctrine which thus reuealeth and sets forth his will, is called the
Law of God, commanding us in all things to serve and please him. The contrary
whereof is sin, being a breach of the Law; as the Apostle does define it, 1.
John 3. 4. And this law, I say, is given to the reasonable Creature, not only
men, but Angels also, respect being had unto their nature, which neither
admits actions that are to be done by the instrument of the body, nor is
tied to the things that belong to the necessities of this life. But that the
Angels are bound to the observation of the Law, our Savior would have us
learn, when he wills us to pray, Thy will be done, as in Heaven, so upon the
Earth.

But to leave the Angels doing the will of God gloriously in Heaven; we will
for more clear evidence apply the things that follow, as they are fitting to
our selves. First, it must be of all duties, without failing in any one; doing
all good, and abstayning from all evil. Therefore perfection, which is a
thorough doing of all, without falling of any whit, is the general virtue of
the whole Law of God. Contrariwise, the failing in any one jot, either of the
matter or the manner, is a breach of all. Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
Law, to do them. Iam. 2. 10.
Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet fails in any one point he is
guilty of all.

Again, all these things (not only in the Service of God, but in the duties
we owe to men) we must do as unto God, because it is his good will and
pleasure* serving him as well in the works of Righteousness, as of Holiness,
as the good Father Zachary speaks, Luke 1. 75. And hereof it is that the
Apostle commending to us many excellent points of brotherly love, and duties of
the second Table, wills us in them all to serve the Lord, Romans 12. 11. So
making a difference between Christian duties and Philosophical virtues. As on
the other side, all sins, even of the second Table, what injury soever they
offer unto men, yet are indeed bent in such a sort against the divine Majesty;
that the Psalm. 51. 6.
Prophet David fears not to say of those two foul sins of his, speaking as
in comparison, Against thee, against thee only (not against Vriah or his Wife)
have I sinned. This therefore is a virtue belonging to the whole Law, to do
whatsoever we do, in obedience unto God: As the Col. 3. 23.
Apostle says, Every thing, whatsoever ye do, work it from the heart, as to
the Lord, and not to man: submit 1. P^t. 2. 13.
your selves to all manner of ordinance of man for the Lords sake. Ephesians. 5. 22.
Wives, submit your selves unto your Husbands, as unto the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6.
Servants, obey your Masters according to the flesh, etc. as to Christ, not
with eye-seruice, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ; doing the will
of God from your hearts, with a good will, serving the Lord, and not men. So
that the contrary to this obedience is eye-seruice, when we do good things as
unto men, and not of conscience to God.

For the manner of the doing, first, it binds the whole With that whole
strength of their natural integrity.
Creature, the whole strength of the Creature, and in every thing requires so
much the greater strength, as the duty does more excel. These three must
concur for the making of perfect righteousness.

Under the term of Creature, I comprehend all ones natural powers, that is to
say, in Angels their whole spiritual nature: in us, the whole man, and
whatsoever is of and in man; which standing of two parts, the soul and the
body, in the soul (as we use by a general name to call it) the Scripture is
wont to note (when it speaks more distinctly) two faculties or powers; the
mind or the spirit, that is to say, the understanding part of man,
comprehending Knowledge, Judgment, Conscience, Remembrance, and the Soul
(properly so called) the seat of our Desire, Will, Affections. To all which the
Law of God extends, as may appear by that the Apostle writes, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
1 Thessalonians. 5. That your spirit, soul and body may be kept unblameable: for
the Laws of God are not like the Laws of mortal men, which look but to the
outward act, and are not able to reach the thoughts and intentions of the
heart: but God being a John 4. 24.
Spirit, his Laws are also Romans 7. 24.
spiritual, and bind the whole Creature within and without, from one end unto
another, even the least and smallest motion; so as there must be both an
Integrity of Nature, and a Righteousness of Action: Integrity of Nature, or
in a right frame and disposition of all those parts and powers; our minds to
be of aptness and ability to know, discern, make conscience of, and retain
the whole will of God, our souls prone, and inclining only unto good in our
desires, will and affections, the will being able of it self, and his own
inward, free, voluntary, and natural motion, to choose that which is good, and
to reject that which is evil: and this we call Free Will. Lastly, our bodies
to be apt instruments of offering good things to the soul, and of executing
and performing of them; which Integrity of Nature (when all our parts and
powers are conformable hereunto) the Apostle, Romans 8. 2. (...).
Romans 8. makes a part of the Righteousness of the Law, or one thing (among
the rest) of that which the Law requires. The contrary whereof is that
original sin or natural corruption, whereof we shall have cause to speak
hereafter.

Likewise all our actions inward and outward, proceeding from those powers,
must be holy and pure; the contrary whereof is actual sin. Our mind
therefore ought actually and indeed to know, discern, make conscience of, and
remember the things that are good: our soul both to desire to will, and to
effect them: our Body and all the Members thereof to practice and put them in
execution. All which, for the excellency of the Doctrine, and because here
especially the Scripture presses man's obedience, it is necessary to go through
in order, as they were propounded.

Knowledge is the first both in nature and worthiness, as that wherein we
must resemble the Divine Essence. Genesis 3. Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good
and evil: It stands chiefly in the knowledge of God himself; then of those
duties which he requires of us: Know Psalm. 110. 3.
that JEHOVAH he is God. Thou 1. Chron. 28. 9
SOLOMON my son, know the God of thy fathers and serve him* Behold, To. 2.
17, 18.
thou art named a Jew, and restest in the Law, and boastest of God, and know
his will. Be Ephesians. 5. 17.
not foolish, but understand what is the will of the Lord. The contrary whereof
is ignorance of God and of his revealed will: whither refer all Errors and
Heresies concerning either God, his Persons, and Properties, or any other point
of Christian Doctrine. But then Gal. 4. 18.
verily not knowing God, ye served those that by nature are no gods, Ephesians. 4.
18.
which are strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them. Fashion 1. Pet. 1. 14.
not your selves to the former lusts which you had in your ignorance.

Next, is judgment or wisdom, which is, as it were, the life of our
knowledge, and added by the Apostle as one degree higher: Thou Romans 2. 18.
know his will, and tryest the things that differ. So he prays for the
Philippians, that they may discern Phil. 1. 10.
things that differ. And to the Hebrews Heb. ^. 14.
he says, Strong meat belongs to them which are of age, who through long
custom have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil. A principal
branch of this, is the trying of Spirits: Dearly 1. John 4 1.
beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God.
Try 1 Thessalonians* 5. 21.
all things, and keep that which is good. Hereby Act. 17. 11.
are those noble men of Berea commended, that they searched the Scriptures,
whether the things that Paul said, were so or no. The contrary whereof is that
which the Apostle Romans 1. 28.
calls a mind void of judgment, and the Ephesians. 4. 17.
vanity of minds, wherein we all naturally do walk, esteeming Truth
Falsehood, and Falsehood Truth, whence it comes, that we Ephesians. 4. 19.
are carried away with every wind and puff of Doctrine.

With knowledge and judgment, a good conscience must be joined, whose
property it is, justly and rightly to bear witness of our Actions, in Romans
2. 15. Their Consciences accusing or excusing.
accusing or excusing them as it ought. The contrary whereof is an evil
conscience, either benumbed, or through hypocrisy seared, as it were, with a
hot Iron, that both it accuses not where it should, and excuses where it
ought not. To the Tit. 1. 15.
unfaithful, there is nothng pure, but both their mind and conscience is
polluted. For remembrance of holy things a Commandment is given, Numb. 15. 39.
that the children of Israel should wear frindges upon the edge of their
garments; that seeing the same, they might remember all the Commandments of
JEHOVAH, and do them, Ps. 119. 11. DAVID professes of himself: I hid thy
Word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. And Mary has her worthy
praise, Luke 2. 51. for that she retained all the things (there spoken of) in
her heart. The contrary whereof is forgetfulness: My Prou. 3. 1.
son, forget not my Law, but let thy heart keep my Commandments. I forget
Psalm. 119. 16.
not thy Word.

In the soul, first, is the desire, comprehending all inward thoughts and
motions that but once rise up within us, and come not so far as to have
consent unto them: And this desire is by nature a holy thing, The Gal. 5. 17.
spirit desires (or lusts) against the flesh. Hereof principally the Laws
of God are Romans 7. 24.
called spiritual* because they bind not only all the Creature his intents
and purposes, but his whole force and power, and all the thoughts and
inclinations of his heart.

The contrary is concupiscence or lust: The Papist, which teach, that the first
motions are no sin.
Put off Ephesians. 4. 22.
(says the Apostle) the old man, which is corrupted through deceivable lusts:
which he there opposes to renewing in the spirit of our mind. Walk Gal. 5.
16. 17
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: for the flesh
lusts against the Spirit. Let Romans 6. 12.
not sin reign in your mortal body to obey it through the lusts thereof:
that is, of the body: flying 1. Pet. 1 4
the corruption which is in the World through concupiscence. Every Iam. 1. 14.
man is tempted of his own lust. Sin Romans 7. 8.
taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all lust.

Of concupiscence or lust the Apostle James Iam. 1. 1 4
notes two degrees: First, The (...)
moving of the powers of nature out of their right and proper place, by
raising up wandering and wicked thoughts, which yet we never like of. Secondly,
The nibbling, (...)
as it were with some delight, at this bayte laid before us, though presently
we repel it: of which nature are vain, sudden wishes, and evil dreams,
though it be of things which a man misliketh when he is awake. And that all
concupiscence is unlawful, even that whereunto no consent of the will does
come, may appear by these reasons following.

First, Because the Root, from whence the least thought does spring, is naught,
our own inborne corruption: else it could never enter into us, farther then by
Satan's offering it to the senses and outward objects, as it was to our Savior
Christ, and to our first parents in their innocence. The sin whereof
appears in this, that we think not upon it with a detestation at the first:
but when it has once passed our thoughts, then we begin to detest it; which
in the vncorrupt estate of man, should have been quite contrary.

Secondly, James does tell us, that lust conceiving, brings forth sin. Can
lust conceive and be with child of sin, and be any other thing then sin?
Are fishes bred of Serpents? or is it possible, that the fruit and the Tree
should be not of one nature? Even so concupiscence, which is the spawne of
sin, the bed and bosom wherein it is conceived and hatched, must needs it
self be sin; even after Baptism, after we be regenerate, and after that
the guilt and the sting thereof is pulled out by Christ.

Thirdly, Philosophers and other heathen men, that never heard of the Law of
God, have condemned settled purposes to do evil. Therefore this must needs
be more close and secret, which Paul himself, so great a Doctor of the Law,
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, was altogether ignorant of, till he was
taught a better Lesson in the School of Christ: I Romans 7. 7.
knew not sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, Thou shall not lust.

Of the will, the Apostle says, It is Phil. 2. 13.
God that works to will in you: our Heb. 13. 18.
will is in all things to converse honestly: the flesh Gal. 4. 27.
hinders from doing the things ye would. The contrary whereof, is the will of
Ephesians. 2. 3.
the flesh, and of our own thoughts, called 1. Pet. 4. 3.
elsewhere, The will of the Gentiles.

The last thing to be considered in the qualities of the soul, are the
affections of it to be good and holy: Thou Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
shall love JEHOVAH thy God with all thy soul. The contrary whereof are those
dishonorable and foul affections, which the Apostle mentions, Romans 1. 26.
Therefore God gave them over to dishonorable affections. Again, Romans 7. 5.
When we were in the flesh, the sinful affections wrought in our members, etc.
They Gal. 5. 24.
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections thereof. The
particular affections, which the Scripture, above the rest does recommend unto
us, as Bellows to blow up, and increase spiritual Graces, and to carry us
forward to a high degree of Holiness, are these that follow: First, Love and
liking of that which is good, hatred and detestation of that which is evil, as
the Psalmist joins them together: Thou love Psalm. 45. 8.
righteousness, and hate iniquity. Love is the habit, as it were, and
perfection of the whole Law both of the first and second Table: Thou Mat. 22.
37, 38, 39, 40.
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. This is the first and great Commandment: and the second is
like it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments
hang the whole Law and the Prophets. And of the second Table Paul says, Gal. 4
13, 14.
Serve one another through love: for all the Law (meaning the whole second
Table) is fulfilled in one word in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. Again, Romans 13. 8, 9.
He that loves another, fulfilleth the Law: for this, Thou shall not commit
adultery: Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not stoale: Thou shall not bear
false witness: Thou shall not covet: and if there be any other Commandment,
it is summed up in this word, even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self. Generally 1. Tim. 1. 5. he says, the (end or) perfection of the
whole Law, is love, etc. And Coloss. 3. 14. he calls love, The bond of
perfection; because it knitteth and binds together all the offices we owe to
God, or one unto another. So as what duty soever we perform, be it never so
glittering and shining in the World, if it be not done in love, it is nothing
at all worth: As we are taught, 1. Cor. 13. yea, our love in this behalf
ought to extend it self, not to our friends only, and them that love us
again, but unto all men, to our Mat. 5. 44.
enemies and them that hate us. The contrary hereof, is hatred of God, our
Brethren, and of good things; Of God, because we see him just, to punish men's
offenses. A fault so monstrous, that one would think impossible it should fall
upon any Creature, to hate and abhor the Creator; but that the Apostle has
noted our nature to be tainted with it: Haters Romans 1. 30.
of God, and the Psalm. 37. 20. and 21. 9 etc. and 81. 16. and 139. 21.
Enemies or haters of JEHOVAH, are oftentimes spoken of in the Psalms, and 2.
Sam. 12. 14. 2. Chron. 19. 2.
elsewhere: Of the hatred of our Brethren the Apostle says, He 1. Ioh. 2. 9.
11
that hates his Brother, is in darkness. And again, He 1. Ioh. 3. 15.
that hates his Brother, is a Manslayer. Bloody Prou. 29. 10.
men (says SOLOMON) hate him that is upright. And 1. Kings 22. 9. it is the
voice of wicked Ahab, that he hated the Prophet of the Lord, because he never
spoke good unto him. With love is coupled a liking and allowance of that which
is good, after the example of God himself, of whom it is said, that be 1.
Chro. 19. 17
delights in the things that are right. Of this the Wiseman speaks in the
Proverbs, Prou. 16. 13.
Let the lips of the Righteous be acceptable unto Kings. The contrary whereof
is an approbation of evil in other, though it were so, that we our selves did
abstain from it. This fault the Apostle notes to the Romans 1. 32.
Romans, Who not only do so, but are fautors, and appro^uers of these that
die it. And David in the Psalms, Psalm. 50. 18.
When thou see a Thief, thou take pleasure in him.

The next, is hatred and detestation of evil, both evil persons, and things,
whereof the Psalmist says, O Psalm. ^7. 10.
ye the lovers of JEHOVAH hate the thing that is evil. And of himself he
professes, I Psalm. 26. 5.
hate the congregation of evil doers. I Psalm. 31. 7.
hate them that observe vain vanities. O Ps 139 21, 22.
JEHOVAH, do I not hate them that hate thee? I hate them with a perfect
hatred: they are in stead of enemies unto me: I Ps. 119. 104.
hate every evil way: I Ps. 119. 161.
hate lies, and abhor them. SOLOMON also in his Proverbs Pro. 8. 13.
joins together the fear of JEHOVAH, and the hatred of evil, as special
parts of the heavenly wisdom whereof he there treats. The contrary whereof,
is the love of evil things, when our Psalm. 141. 4.
heart (which the Psalmist prays to be delivered from) is inclined to them.
This DAVID Psalm. 52. 5, 6.
vpbraydeth unto DOEG, Thou love evil, rather then good; lying, rather then
to speak Righteousness: thou love it wonderfully: thou love all
pernicious words, O deceitful tongue. In the Psalm 4. 3.
fourth Psalm he cries out, Ye sons of men, how long will you love
vanity, seek lies, etc? And Solomon in his Prou. 1. 22.
Proverbs, How long, O ye Fools, will ye love foolishness, and Scorners,
long after scorning!

A second affection is, Cheerfulness and joy in that which is good, sorrow
and grief of heart, and an holy anger, when we see men to do evil. Of
cheerfulness, and joy in good things, David speaks in the Psalms: I Psalm.
119. 14.
rejoice in the way of thy Testimonies, as being above all substance. Thy Verse.
110.
Testimonies are the joys of my heart. I rejoice Verse. 110. 4.
in thy words, as one that finds a great booty. So is it said, 1. Chron. 29.
9. The people were glad, offering freely or cheerfully. And Verse 17. I with a
right heart freely have offered all those things, and thy people also that are
here present, do I see with cheerfulnes freely offering unto thee. By this
argument the 2. Cor. 9. 7.
Apostle exhorting to liberality, wills every one to do ( as he purposes
in his heart) that is, freely and of his own accord determines with himself:
For, says he, God loves a cheerful giver: And thereupon the Children of
God are euery-where called, A Psalm. 110. 3. Cant. 6. 9.
free-hearted people. Whereunto the same Apostle there makes grief and
necessity to be contrary. Grief, when we perform good duties heavily, and
with grudging; not of a frank and ready mind. Necessity, when we do them
indeed but against our will, only because we must needs do so, to save our
credit and reputation among men; whereas otherwise we would not do them. And
so does Peter also oppose these two, 1. Pet. 5. 2.

Of the other virtue we have a notable Example in our Savior Mark 3. 5.
Christ, who was angry and sorry withal at the hardness of the Jews hearts.
The contrary whereof, is unadvised anger: such as the Apostle speaks of,
Iam. 1. 20. The wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God: or that
which God prescribes. For this, Jonas is reproved of God, Jonas 4. 9. And Ahab
1. King 21. 4.
taxed, that he was discontented and angry, because NABOTH would not let him
have his Vineyard; The third affection, is fear of offending in any thing;
which Solomon makes the Badge of Gods Children: Blessed Pro. 28. 14.
is the man that fears always. And 1. Pet. 1. 17.
Peter does exhort us, If ye call him Father, which without respect of persons
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in
fear. The contrary is carnal security, when a man runs on in the
hardness of his heart without Repentance: for so Salomen does there oppose it:
But he that hardens his heart, shall fall into evil. Thou, says Romans 2. 5.
PAVL, after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest to thy
self wrath against the Day of Wrath. And Deuteronomy. 19. 19.
Moses in Deuteronomie, Take heed that there be not any among you, that when he
hears the words of this curse, bless himself in his mind, saying, Peace
shall be unto me, though I walk after the fantasy of mine own heart. So
adding a drunken soul to a thirsty one.

Lastly, our whole body, and all the members of it, ought holily to express
the inward holiness of our mind and soul. Ye are 1. Cor. 6. 20.
bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirits
which are Gods: present Romans 12. 1.
your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. Give your Romans
6. 19.
members servants unto Righteousness in Holiness. The unmarried 1. Cor. 7. 34.
woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body
and in spirit. And the Apostle Heb. 10. 22.
speaks not only of the sprinkling of our hearts from an evil conscience
but of the washing of the body, by the blood of Christ, with clean water. For
this cause our Savior Heb. 10. 5.
Christ coming into the World, says, Sacrifice and Oblation thou would
none of, but a body thou have fitted for me; wherein to yield your absolute and
perfect obedience, that is better then all Sacrifice. The contrary whereof, is
the dishonouring or defiling of our own bodies; whereof the Apostle speaks,
Romans 1. 24. And the giving of our Members servants unto uncleanness and to
iniquity, to commit iniquity, Romans 6 19. which is there opposed to the former
of giving themselves unto Righteousness in Holiness. In this part of the
Members of our body, the senses first are to be acquainted with good things,
especially the sight, and hearing: Incline Pro. 4. 20.
thine ears unto my words. Blessed Mat. 13. 16.
are your eyes: for they see: and your ears; for they hear. The contrary
whereof, is the abusing of them, as our first Genesis 3.
Parents did.

Next, is the Tongue; for by it, as the Apostle Iam. 3. 9.
says, bless we God. Of this it is said; Romans 14. 11.
Every tongue shall give thanks unto God, that every Phil. 2. 11.
tongue may confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father. The contrary whereof is, when the mouth speaks vain things, as it is
Psalm. 144. 8.

To the tongue belongs open profession of God and of all good duties: Be
ready 1. Pet. 3. 15.
always to make profession to every one that asks of you, an account of the
faith which is in you: Romans 10. 10.
for with the mouth men make confession to salvation. Ye Exodus 23. 13.
shall make no mention of the names of other gods, neither shall they be heard
out of thy mouth. Their Psalm. 16. 4.
sorrows shall be multiplied that endow another god. I will not power their
burnt Offerings of blood, nor take their names in my lips. And hither are to be
referred all outward marks of this profession; as in Gods service, The calling
upon of his Name; Bowing and kneeling, Lifting up of hands, eyes, etc. as the
people did, Nehem. 8. 16. answering all, Amen, Amen, with the lifting up of
their hands, and stooped and bowed down to JEHOVAH with their face to the
ground ward. In doing reverence to Superiors, Leuit. 9. 32.
uncovering our head, and rising up before them, etc. The contrary whereof is,
Open profession of wickedness, when a man need not to dig, to find out
their sins, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 2. 34. they are so plain and
manifest unto all: or as it is in Ezech. 24. 7.
EZECHIEL, When they set their sin upon the cliffe of the Rock (in the open
face and view of the World) and do not power the same upon the earth to cover
it with dust, loath it should be seen. Such is that, Esaias 3. 10. The obstinacy
of their face testifies against them, and they do not conceal, but utter
their sin, (openly, shamelesly, and obstinately) as Sodom, whose impudency
of sinning was such and so audacious, that the Ier. 20. 16.
Prophet says of them, God heard a cry in the morning, and a shooting at noone
day. And JEREMY, Ier. 2. 25.
When I said, Keep thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from being
athirst, thou said desperately, No: for I love strange gods, and them will I
follow. Again, Ier. 18. 12.
They say desperately, We will go after our own thoughts, and every one do after
the fancy of our own wicked heart. And hither Their error, which hold it
lawful to be present at Idolatrous service, keeping a man's Conscience to
himself. And where such bear themselves bold upon the example of Naaman the
Syrian, 2. King. 5. 17, 18, let them know, that the place has no such meaning
as they would fasten upon it, but quite the contrary: which according to the
Original, may truly be thus rendered: For thy servant will no more offer burnt
Offerings and Sacrifice to other Gods, but to Jehovah. in this matter, Iehouau,
be merciful to thy servant, at my Lords going into the house of Rimmon, to bow
down there: and he leaning upon my hand, that I also have bowed down in the
house of Rimmon: for my bowing down in the hou^e of Rimmon, Jehovah, now be
merciful to thy servant in this matter So craving pardon for his Idolatry
past, with promise from thenceforth to serve God alone. This Interpretation,
the faith and piety of Naaman truly converted, Luke 4. 27. the rule of
Charity; the nature and propriety of the Word being in the time past, and not
(but where necessity inforceth) to be taken futurely: the promise which he
himself makes, and the Prophets answer ( Go in Peace) do strongly confirm.
also belong all marks and badges of Superstition or other sin. But what
Romans 11. 4.
says the Scripture? I have rescrued to my self, seven thousand men, that
have not bowed the knee to BAAL. The Exodus 32. 6.
People s^te down to eat and drink, (before the Calfe which Aaron had made)
and rose up to play. So PAVL, 1. Cor. 8. 10. reprehendeth the sitting at the
Table in the Idols temple, even of them that knew, an Idol was nothing in the
World. And God by his Hosh. 13. 2.
Prophet, threatens ruin to those that kiss the Calves, which Jeroboam had
set up, Reu. 14. 9. 10. it is the Proclamation of an holy Angel, sounded with
a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast, or his image, and take a mark upon
his forehead, or upon his hand, even he shall drink of the Wine of the wrath
of God, and be tormented with fire and brimstone. The Esaias 30. 22.
Prophet also sets it forth as a fruit of true Repentance, to pollute the
Images of Silver, and the rich Ornaments of the Images of Gold, and to cast
them away as a menstruous cloth. Hence shall thou say unto it.

Thirdly, outward Actions come here also to be reckoned, which the Scripture
commonly attributes to the hands: Cleanse James 4. 8.
your hands, you Sinners, etc. It is many times called the doing Ephesians 6. 6.
Heb. 13. 24.
of the will of God: sometimes, the living 1. Pet. 4. 2.
according to his will. The contrary whereof, is the committing of gross
sins, which the Apostle calls, To work 1. Pet. 4. 3.
the will of the Gentiles, to do Ephesians. 2. 3.
the will of our flesh, and of our thoughts. JAMES Iam. 1. 15.
terms it, Sin perfited, and that though we do it in ignorance, not
knowing, or at the least, not making it to be a sin, which lesseneth the
heinousness of the offense. Therefore 1. Tim. 1. 23.
Paul professes, he did obtain mercy, notwithstanding he were a Blasphemer,
a Persecutor, and an Oppressor, because he did it ignorantly. And David Psalm.
19. 13.
prays, Cleanse me from my secret sins. But this kind of sin is greater,
when our will is carried contrary to our understanding, to do those things
which we know, and are persuaded to be evil, wherein notwithstanding a
difference is to be held: for if it be through the ouer-ruling of the flesh
and inordinate desires, either for fear of present danger, or by the bayte of
some false appearing pleasure, then is the sin the less. Hereof is that
complaint the Apostle takes up, Romans 7. 19. I do not the good I would, but
the evil which I would not, that I do. But if it be in a presumption of Gods
Mercy, bearing our selves bold upon the riches of his patience and
forbearance, that does much increase the sin; whereupon in the Law Number. 15.
30.
it is commanded, that the person that does presumptuously, should be cut off
from amongst his people, because he has despised the Word of JEHOVAH. And
that this wrong construction of the patience and long sufferance of God, is the
root of all presumption, the Wiseman teaches, Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the
Children of men is fully set in them to do evil. And the Apostle, Romans 2. 4.
Despisest thou the riches of his bounty, etc. not knowing that the bounty of
God leads thee to Repentance? But far greater it is, and comes near the
top of all iniquity, when men do willingly follow after sin, only for
their pleasure, and because they will do it, which our Savior notes in the
Jews, John 8. 43. The lusts of your father the Devil, you will (or you love
to) do. And of Ephraim the Hos. 5. 2.
Prophet says, that willingly they went after the commandment of JEROBOAM.

A further thing that the Law of God requires in the performance of holy
Duties, is, that in them all, whether the Actions be inward or outward, we
put forth our selves and the strength both of our soul and body, to perform
it with our whole force and might. That Commandment we have, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou
shall love JEHOVAH thy God, with thy whole heart (or mind) and with thy whole
soul, and with thy whole strength. Where, under the word ( strength) he notes
the whole power both of soul and body joined together, as our Savior Luke
10. 27. and Mark. 12. 30
does interpret it; using two words to express that one of strength, namely,
might, which more properly is referred to the body, and (...), which is the
strength, and power, and spirit, as it were of the whole soul, both of the
mind and will: and therefore may not unfitly be translated, the power of
reason or of discourse. PAVL is wont to call it, The spirit of our Ephesians. 4.
23. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind.
mind. This the Apostle touching the soul, exhorts us unto, when he says,
Doing Ephesians. 6. 6.
the will of God from the soul. Col. 3. 23.
Whatsoever you do, work from the soul. And of the body we have our Savior
Christ's own exhortation, Luke 6. 23. Skippe and be glad. An Example, Luke 10.
21. where he himself is said to rejoice in the spirit: that is, for very
spiritual joy and gladness, expressed by some bodily gesture, to break forth
into that Thanksgiving that follows in that place. So Exodus 39. 19.
Moses in a holy zeal flang the Tables of Stone away. The contrary whereof in
the former the Prophet Ezechiel touches once or twice, in the Enemies of Gods
Church, that with the joy of their whole heart, and from their very soul
rejoiced to do them mischief, Ezech. 25. 15.
Because the Philistims wrought vengeance, spoiling from their soul; Ezech.
36. 5.
Surely in the fire of mine indignation have I spoken against the remnant of
the Nations, and against all Edom, which have taken my Land for their
Possession, with the joy of all their heart, with spoiling from their soul. To
the latter it is contrary, When men run Romans 3. 15.
unto evil, and their feet are swift to sheade blood, when the Tongue
becomes a fire, Iam. 3. 6, 7.
the ornament of iniquity (for our wickedness and filthiness of heart, to
vaunt and set out it self, by) defiling the whole body, and setting on fire
the whole course of nature, it self being first set on fire of Hell. Thus did
Pharaoh foame out with his mouth, his blasphemous thoughts, and scorning of God
in his heart; Who Exodus 5. 2.
is JEHOVAH, that I should let Israel go? And 2. Kin. 18. 28
Rabshake that standing still, cried out with a loud voice in the Jewish
language, to the end that all the people might hear, and understand his
Blasphemies. An Example of them both together we have, Ezechiel 25. 6. Because
thou (speaking of the Ammonites) clappest the hand, and stampest with the foot,
and art glad from the soul, of all the spoiling upon the Land of Israel:
therefore behold, I will stretch out my hand against thee.

From this strength of the soul and body joined together, arise four
special Virtues, which are to concur in all duties both to God and to our
Brethren: First, Sincerity, or uprightness of heart; noting a singlensse
sm^^^^y
without any mixture: which Etymology the Apostle does not obscurely give in
one or two places: For 2 Cor. 1. 12.
this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in singleness
and sincerity of God, we have been conversant in the World. For 2. Cor. 2. 17.
we are not as the rest, those which play the Huxters with the Word of God:
but sincerely but as it came from God, in the sight of God, do we speak of
Christ: where sincere dealing is opposed, as you see, to that of Huxters, which
mingle their Wine and other commodities to deceive men for their gain.

For this virtue of being an upright man, JOB Job 1. 2.
is highly commended. By the same, 2. Pet. 3. 2.
Peter commends those to whom he wrote, I stir up your sincere mind. And
the Apostle prays for the Philippians, that Philip. 1. 10.
they may be sincere, and without offense, unto the Day of Christ, as 1. Cor.
5. 8. he does exhort us to it: Wherefore let us keep holiday with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Where this sincerity, he terms also
truth, as Ephesians. 4. 24. he calls that true Righteousness and Holiness,
which is sincere and unfeigned.

The Apostle 1. Pet. 1. 22.
Peter notes it out by purity, when commending brotherly love, he wills,
that from a pure, that is, a sincere heart we love one another. For this
purpose, the infinite knowledge of God being every where present, and sounding
the bottom of our hearts and reins, ought to be always before our eyes, to
hold us in all integrity. If our heart should but turn backward, says the
Church, Psalm. 44. 19, 21, 22.
Psalm 44. that we had forgotten God, though it were in secret, should not
God search this out, seeing he knows the hidden things of the mind? And
David in the 139. Psalm. 139. 2, 4, 13.
Psalm, Thou know my sitting and my rising, thou understand my thoughts
a far off, long before I think them, or before a word is in my mouth. Yea,
thou possessest my reyns, and thy Knowledge is more wonderful then that I am
able to discern: Therefore says he Verse 18.
afterward, I watch continually to be with thee; that is, night and day it is
my care, in all sincerity and uprightness of a good Conscience to cleave unto
thee. To this singleness of heart, the Apostle Peter in the place before
alleged, opposes hypocrisy: Purify your hearts unto brotherly love, without
hypocrisy. And Paul to the Romans 12. 9.
Romans, Let Love be without Hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is, when the heart and
inward affection is wanting either in the service of God, or in dealing with
our Brethren: as our Savior does define it, Mat. 15. 7. Hypocrites, well has
ESATAS prophesied of you, saying, This people draw near unto me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me.

And of this sort is outward Abstinence from meats, without any care and
conscience thereby to serve God more fervently, or to be better strengthened
against sin, Esaias 58. 4, 5, 6.
Ye fast not, as these times are, to have your voice to be heard on high. Is
this such a fast as I have chosen, that a man should afflict his soul for a
day, and bow down his head like a Bull-rush, and lie down in sackcloth and
ashes? call thou this a fasting, or an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not
this the fasting that I have chosen, To loose the bands of wickedness, to take
away the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and that ye take off
every yoke? So of the outward observing of the Sabbath, not regarding the true
piety of the heart. Therefore Esaias 1. 14, 15
the Lord tells the Jews, My soul hates your new Moons, and your
appointed Feasts: they are a burden unto me: I am weary to bear them. And
when you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and
though you make many Prayers, I will not hear: for your hands are full of
blood. The Pophet, Psalm. 12. 3. expresses this Hypocrisy in flattering and
deceitful dealing with our Brethren, by the Phrase of a heart and a heart,
that is, a double heart (contrary to that singleness without all mixture
spoken of before) when our heart in outward pretense seems to run one way,
but indeed and in truth is carried another. Our Savior Mat. 23. 13.
telling the Pharisees, they devoured Widows houses, under a show of long
Prayer, calls it a show only, without any truth or substance: for so are
truth and show opposed, Phil. 1. 8. The Notes of Hypocrisy are specially
these: First, To rest in outward obseruances, and to press them strictly and
severely, letting pass those things wherein true Piety stands. Woe be Mal.
23. 23, 24.
to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye tithe Mint, and Annise, and
Cummin, and leave the weighty matters of the Law, as Judgment, and Mercy,
and Fidelity. These ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other;
ye blind guides, that strain out a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell.

Hence come those speeches and rebukes of Christ, Ye Mat. 23. 25.
cleanse the outside of the Cup and Platter, but within they are full of
extortion and injustice. Also where he compares Mat. 23. 27.
them to whited Tombs, that without appear beautiful, but within are full of
dead men's bones, and of all corruption: and to Luke 11. 44.
Graves, that do not appear, that men which walk upon them are aware of. So
do they, under a Vizzard and counterfeit face of Holiness, cloak and hide the
inward filthiness that lurketh in their hearts. And to this place belongs
the pressing of men's Traditions, when no care is had of keeping the
Commandments of God: Well Mark 7. 9.
do you reject the Commandment of God, to establish your own tradition.

Secondly, Doing outward duties not with a right mind to glorify God, or to
edify their Brethren, but for out ward pomp and ostentation, and to be seen
of men: As our Savior speaks, Mat. 23. 5. and does particularly instance
Mat. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
elsewhere in all the duties they perform, whether Prayer and Fasting unto
God-wards, or giving of Alms unto the poor.

Thirdly, Being busy to observe other men's faults, without looking into their
own. Why Mat. 7. 3, 4.
see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and can not see the beam
which is in thine own? or how say thou to thy brother, Let me cast out the
mote out of thine eye, and behold, the beam is in thine own eye? Hypocrite,
first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou discern to
cast the Mote out of thy brothers eye.

Fourthly, Zeal; which as the Song of Cant. 8. 16.
Solomon does describe, It is as strong as death, as hard as the grave; the
sparkles of it, are sparkles, nay, a fire of the flame of IAH, that is, which
Iah the mighty God and Jehovah alone, by the powerful light of his Spirit
kindles in our hearts never to go out. Of this the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.
17.
It is good to be fervent in a good thing always. But in the service of God it
has a special use: The Psalm. 69. 10.
zeal of thy house has eaten me up. I am 1. King 19. 10*
exceedingly zealous for JEHOVAH the God of Hoasts, because the children of
Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, broken down thy Altars, and slain thy
Prophets with the Sword. So 2. Kings 10. 16. Iehu says to Ionadab the son of
RECAB, Come with me, and see the zeal which I have for JEHOVAH. The contrary
whereof is,

First, That which our Savior finds fault with in the Church of Laodicea, I
know Reu. 3. 15, 16.
thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou were either cold
or hot: but now because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it will
come to pass, that I shall spew thee out of my mouth.

Secondly, Greediness to sin; when men strive as it were for a masterie, to
go one before another in wickedness, and Ephesians. 4. 19.
being past all grief, give themselves up in wantonness, to the committing of
all vnclannesse with greediness.

Thirdly, Watchfulness: whereunto our Savior does so often and so effectually
persuade us; Take Mark. 13. 33, 36.
heed, watch and pray. And the things which I say to you, I say to all, Watch.
Watch Mat. 26. 41.
and pray, that you enter not into temptation. The contrary whereof, is that
sleepiness and drowzinesse of spirit, which there fell upon the Apostles, and
Mat. 25. 5. as well upon the wise as the foolish Virgins, whilst the
Bridegroom tarryed, and which the Church complayneth of in the Cant, 5. 1.
Canticles: I slept, etc. Whereupon our Savior saw it good to give us an Item
of it, Take Luke 21. 34.
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting
and drunkenness and cares of this life, and lest that Day come upon you at
unawares.

Watchfulness stands upon two parts: The first is, that which preuents all
occasions of doing ill, and this is, as it were, a fence or hedge set round
about, to guard Gods Commandments, that like wild beasts we should not break
in upon them.

The woman, Genesis 3. 3. had learned this Lesson, and held it forth at the first
valiantly, as a weapon of great strength to repel Satan's forces, when she
expounds the Commandment Genesis 2. 17.
of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, Thou shall not eat, to be as
much as if he had said, Thou shall not touch it. SOLOMON also in his Proverbs
Pro. 5. 8.
warns us not to come near the door or gate of an Harlot. And the Apostle
Romans 13. 13.
wills us to avoid, not only bodily filthiness, but chambering and
wantonness, as means that lead unto it; especially we are to take good heed
to our Senses, our Eyes, our Ears, etc. and to our Tongue, that may make us
not to offend. In which sort, Job professes of himself, If Job 31. 26.
looking upon the Light when it did shine, or the Moon and precious Sky, my
heart was deceived, and my mouth did kiss them, etc. And again, I have Job
31. 1.
made a covenant with mine eyes, that I should not look upon a Maid. Hereupon
the Wiseman Pro. 23. 31.
bids us not to look upon the Wine when it is red. And touching the Ears,
he says, He that turns Pro. 28. 9.
his ears from hearing the Law, his Prayer shall be abomination. Likewise of
the Tongue, we have in Psalm. 39. 2.
DAVID a worthy Example: I said, I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend
not with my tongue: I will keep a bridle upon my mouth, whilst the wicked is
before me. Therefore here are commanded as means and occasions of good
generally,

First, a lawful calling: Every 1. Cor. 7. 24.
man, wherein he was called, therein let him abide with God. According 1. Pet.
4. 10.
as every man has received, a gift, so let him administer to another.

The contrary whereof is no calling, or a sinning and unlawful calling: of
which sort is that, Acts 19. 19. Many of them which used erroneous arts,
brought their Books, and burned them before all men, and they counted the
price, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.

Secondly, Is commanded labor of body and mind, always doing of somewhat
that is good and profitable. In Genesis 3. 19.
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. The contrary whereof is
Idleness: for as it is said in common Proverb, and the Apostle does
insinuate, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. By doing nothing, men learn to do ill. Especially
this does for the most part lead us by the hand to those two foul sins,
Adultery, and stealth, as it brought DAVID, 2. Sam. 11. 2, ^
whilst idly he walked up and down in the Kings house, first, vnchastely to
cast his eyes, then to burn with lust, and in the end to commit the act of
filthiness with Vriahs Wife. And the Apostle gives this Rule as an excellent
means to avoid stealth, Let Ephesians. 4. 28.
him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his
hands the thing that is good. So 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11, 12. he says, We hear that
there are some which walk among you inordinately, that work not at all, but
are busybodies. Therefore them that are such, we warn and exhort you by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread.
And 1. Tim. 5. 13. he blames the Widows for being idle, and going up and
down houses.

Thirdly, Honest recreation: a thing that fitteth us for the service of God,
and of every good duty; as Shooting, Music, putting forth of Riddles, and the
like: for these the Word of God does by name speak of. So David, 2. Sam. 1.
18. to teach the children of Judah to handle the Bow, uttered that Lamentation
which is there extant of Saul and Jonathan. And himself, by the sweetness of
his Music, refreshed the troubled heart of Saul, 1. Sam. 16. 24. Of the other
we have an Example in the Riddle put forth by SAMSON, Judges 14. 14. Out of
the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness.

The contrary whereof is, first, the dulling of our selves by a continual
wearying of the mind and body, without intermission.

Secondly, An excessive use of lawful pleasures and delights, without
referring them to the right end. The Esaias 5. 12.
Harp and Violl, Timbrell and Pipe and Wine are in their Feasts; but they
regard not the work of JEHOVAH, neither consider the work of his hands, who
Amos 6. 5, 6.
play upon the Violl, as DAVID, they invent Instruments of Music, and drink
in Basins of Wine, and anoint themselves with the chief of Ointments, but are
not grieved for the affliction of JOSEPH. I Eccles. 2. 2.
said of Laughter, Thou art mad, and of joy, What is that thou do? Woe Luke
6. 25.
be to you that now laugh, for ye shall wail and weep.

Fourthly, Imitation of good Examples: first, and principally, of God himself:
Be Ephesians. 5. 1.
ye followers of God, as beloved children. And to the beholding of this
Example of God, our Savior does lift us up, when he says, Ye Mat. 5. 48.
shall therefore be perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. Be
Luke 6. 63.
ye merciful, even as your Father is merciful. The Lord also himself takes
us forth that Lesson, saying, Be Leu. 11. 44.
ye holy: for I am holy. And 1. Ioh. 33.
John makes it that perpetual strife and endeavor of GODS Children: Whosoever
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is also pure. And again, 1.
Ioh. 4. 17.
As he is, such also are we in this World; for therefore, says the Heb. 12. 10.
Apostle, God chastises us for our profit, that we might partake his holiness.

Next, is the example of Christ our Savior, God manifested in the flesh: For
1. Pet. 2. 21.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving unto us a prescript, that ye might walk
in his steps. Then of the holy Angels, as our Savior teaches us to pray, Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Likewise of Adam in his innocence,
unto whose Image the Apostle Colos. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.
every where wills us to be renewed.

Lastly, of good and holy men, that beholding the issue of their conversation,
we may follow their faith, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 13. 7. And again,
Heb. 6. 12. That ye be not Bastards, but followers of them, that through faith
and long sufferance inherit the promises, 1. Cor. 4. 16. he says, I beseech
you, be followers of me. Wherein notwithstanding we must take heed, because in
the best men much corruption is to be found, that we follow them no 1. Cor.
11* 1.
further then they follow Christ. The contrary whereof is the following of
evil and wicked examples: Job 31. 33.
If I have hid my sin as ADAM, or after the manner of men, especially of the
Devil the father of Lies, for which our Savior takes up the Jews, John 8.
44.

Fifthly, Society, and company with the good: for such as ones company is,
such lightly is ones self: I Psalm. 119. 63.
am companion to all them that fear thee, and keep thy Commandments. The
contrary whereof is, First, Leaving and lothing the company of the good,
forsake Heb. 10. 25.
not your assembling together, etc. Secondly, Society with the wicked, for
which the good King Iehosaphat is reproved by the Prophet, What? 2. Chro. 19.
2.
thou to help the wicked one, and to love the haters of JEHOVAH? But for these
thngs is hot displeasure toward thee from JEHOVAH. Ill 1. Cor. 15. 33.
company corrupts good manners. To this purpose Solomon in his Proverbs has
many excellent sayings, Make no Pro. 22. 24, 25.
friendship with an angry man, nor company with a furious man, lest thou
learn his ways, and get a snare for thy self. He Pro. 28. 7.
that keeps the Law, is an understanding child, but he that associateth
himself to Gluttons, shameth his father. Where opposing companie-keeping with
Gluttons, to the keeping of the Law, he shows how forcible a means ill
example is to lead us into sin.

Of this kind especially is the contracting of our selves in marriage with the
ungodly; for which, the same Kings son Iehoram is taxed: He 2. Kings 1. 18*
walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, as the house of AHAB did: for
AHABS Daughter was his Wife, and he did evil in the eyes of JEHOVAH: yea, this
is noted as the prime sin that corrupted the old World, and brought the
flood upon them, for that the Genesis 6. 1, 2.
sons of God, the professors of Piety and true Religion (of the Posterity
of Sheth and ENOSH) seeing the Daughters of men (who made no conscience of
serving God) to be beautiful, took them from any (indifferently without
respect of what Religion they were of) wives such as they chose. Therefore were
the Children of Israel precisely forbidden Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
to join affinity with those Nations (of the Land of Canaan) to give their
daughters to any of their sons, or to take any of their daughters for their
sons: for, says the Lord, They will certainly draw your sons away from
following me, to serve other gods.

The second part of watchfulness, is that which uses all diligence in that
which is good. Continue Romans 12. 12. Coloss. 4. 2.
in Prayer, or lie at it continually: Ephesians. 6. 18.
Watch thereunto with all assiduitie. The contrary whereof is negligence and
slacknesse. In Romans 12. 11.
doing service be not slack.

Hitherto of watchfulness, whereunto we are to couple (in the fourth and last
place) continuance and perseverance in well-doing, the crown and virtue of all
goodness. The Apostle notes this also common to all good duties: And 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13
ye, brethren, be not weary of well-doing. Doing Gal. 6. 9.
well, let us not be weary: for in the proper time we shall reap, if we
faint not. Which is a notable reason taken from the end and reward due unto it.
And the rather to persuade us to this virtue, the Apostle to the Heb. 12. 2, 3.
Hebrews bids us to look to the Captain and perfiter of our faith, JESUS,
who, for the joy set before him, endured the Cross, despising shame, and
sits at the right hand of the Throne of God. Consider therefore (says the
Apostle) him that endured such gaine-saying of sinful men against him, that
you be not weary and faint in your souls. The contrary therefore is, First,
To faint and give over, and to be weary of well-doing. Cursed Gal. 3. 10.
is every one that continues not in the things that are written in the Law,
to do them. Secondly, To slide back and fall away: from which the Apostle
does carefully dehort us, Take Heb. 3. 12.
heed, brethren, lest there be at any time in any of you a wicked heart of
unbelief, to depart away from the living God: for as our Savior threateneth,
He Luke 9. 62.
which sets his hand unto the Plough, and looks back, is unfit for the
Kingdom of God.

Now we must not think that this perfection here spoken of, is required of
all alike: for even among men it is just, Luke 12. 48.
to whom more is committed; of him to require more. The holiness and
perfection of the Angels far exceeded the holiness and perfection of Adam,
according as their nature was more excellent and perfect. Adam 1. Tim. 3. 6.
also excelled Eve, who as the weaker Vessel, even then when she stood in her
integrity, was first assailed by the cunning and slight of Satan: and both
Adam and Eve, if they had still continued in the state of Innocence, by time
and experience of Gods goodness, should have been better confirmed and grown
more and more in heavenly Graces, as our Luke 2. 52.
Savior did; so in men grown, and public persons, more is required then in
children or private men.

The last thing is, that as our mind, soul and body, Every thing, with so
much the greater strength, as the duty does more excel.
and all the strength of them must be carried both in nature and action, to
the performance of all good duties: so it must be to every one in his degree
and place: For a difference of duties must of necessity be holden: the
Commandments are some greater then other, and in every Commandment some
duties to be preferred before the rest.

For example: the duties of the first Table are greater then the duties of the
second, which besides the express words of our Savior Christ, calling it the
Mat. 22. 37.
first and the great Commandment, may be showed out of the Prophet first, and
then out of the Apostle, who both make the breach of the first Table, to be
the cause that men run headlong into all offenses against the second. Upon
Hosh. 4. 12.
the tops of the Mountains they sacrifice, and upon the hills; they offer burnt
offerings under the Oak, and Poplar, and Olive, because the shadow thereof is
good. Therefore do your daughters commit fornication, and your daughters in
Law go a whoring. And therefore Romans 1. 25, 26 28, 29.
God gave them up to their own hearts lust, unto uncleanness, to defile their
own bodies between themselves; which turned the Truth of God into a Lie, and
worshipped the Creatures, forsaking the Creator who is blessed for ever. For
this cause God gave them up to vile affections, unrighteousness, fornication,
etc. The duties of the first Table are greater then the second, as they are in
order before them.

And this is absolutely true, comparing like degrees, as moral duties of the
one, with moral duties of the other, not ceremonial of the first Table, with
the Moral of the second: for in that case it is true which the Hosh. 6. 6.
Prophet speaks, I am delighted with Mercy, and not with Sacrifice. So the
chief, middle and least duties of the first Table, are to be compared with the
like of the latter, deeds with deeds, words with words, thoughts with
thoughts, and not otherwise: for if you compare Murder with the least abuse of
the Name of God, or Adultery with the least breach of the Sabbath, these are
the greater sins.

For the measure and proportion to be observed in this difference;

First, in the service of God, our nature ought to be more prone, and apt unto
it, our knowledge greater, our judgment riper, our conscience tenderer, our
memory fresher, our desires and will earnester, all things to be done with a
greater Affection, Love, Approbation, Cheerfulness, Fear to offend,
Sincerity, Zeal, Watchfulness, and continuance both in Profession and
Action. In which regard, to show how all our Thoughts, Desires, and Affections
should thus be taken up, when we come to deal with God, it is said, Thou Mat.
22.
shall love the Lord with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength: As if this were proper to the Duties of the first Table, which
indeed does but principally belong to them, and is by proportion to be carried
to the rest. Therefore the glory of God ought to be dearer unto us, then the
saving of our own souls: As the examples of Moses and Paul do teach us;
Exodus 32. 32.
one desiring to be blotted out of the Book of Life, rather then that Gods
great Name should be blasphemed among the Gentiles: The Romans 9. 3.
other, for the glorifying of God in the saving of his Brethren the Nation of
the Jews, wishing to be anathema, accursed from Christ. But especially Christ
himself, as a most absolute and perfect example of all righteousness, does
herein go before us; when the hour being come wherein he was for our sakes
to drink up the full cup of the fierce wrath of his Father, and his soul
perplexed, that he knew not which way to turn him, yet he more regards the
glorifying of God, then the saving of himself from that hour, Now Ioh. 12.
27, 28
is my soul troubled. And What shall I say? Father, save me from this hour:
but for that cause am I come unto this hour. Father, glorify thy Name. And
hereupon it is, that in all our Prayers we are to set that in the first place,
as our Savior by the very order of his heavenly Prayer teaches: so as if it
could be imagined, that we had no need to ask for our selves (which we
always have) yet the only zeal of his glory ought continually to stir us
up unto this duty: and that much more forcibly then all our own necessities.
The contrary whereof is Love of the Creature above God. He Mat. 10. 37.
that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. They John 12.
43.
loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God. Whither belongs the
love of our selves and of worldly pleasures, of which kind of people the
Apostle says, Philip. 3. 14.
Whose god is their belly.

Secondly, When we come unto our selves, the soul is to be respected before
all worldly commodities. Mat. 6. 33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
shall as appendices be cast unto you. So in spiritual Graces, every one as it
is more excellent: Desire 1. Cor. 12. 31.
the best gifts, and I will show you a more excellent way. Follow 1. Cor. 14. 1.
after love, and covet after spiritual gifts; but more, that ye may prophecy
of outward things. The body is Pro. 22. 1.
to be esteemed more then raiment: a good name, more then great riches, and
grace and favor, better then silver or gold. And therefore in the things that
concern our own good, first, we are to ask those that belong to the saving
of our souls, and that without exception; next, the things for this present
life, so far as God sees them to be good for us. The contrary whereof, is
that which the Apostle speaks of, Phil. 3. 19. To mind earthly things: and
as he says in 1. Tim. 6. 5, 6, 9, 10.
another place, To embrace godliness, not for it self, but for lucres sake.

Thirdly, Circumstances also of time, place, person, and such like, ought to
enforce our strength and powers. Paul, though he carried himself in all
sincerity toward all, yet, 2. Cor. 2. 12. professes, he did it more
abundantly unto them.

Fourthly, In things that are indifferent, the less and fewer circumstances
must yield to the more and greater; upon this reason, Ezra being in a straight,
either to pass unto Jerusalem with danger of his own life, and of theirs that
went with him, or to give the King occasion to suspect the truth which he had
taught him, preferred that rather; I was ashamed (says he) Ezra 8. 22. to
ask of the King an Army and Horsemen, to help us against the enemy in the
way, because we had spoken to the King, saying, The hand of our God is upon all
them that seek him in goodness: But his power and his wrath is against all
them that forsake him.

In respect of all these things that hitherto have bin delivered, the Law of
God is called the Moral Law: for there is a fourfold consideration of the Law
of God. One as it is an absolute and perfect comprehension of al duties
whatsoever, whereupon it has the name of the Moral Law. Another, as it is the
Image and Sampler, whereunto men and Angels were created in all Wisdom and
Holiness at the beginning. And so it is properly termed the Law of Nature. The
third, as it contains the covenant of works. In which regard, Paul is wont
for the most part to term it the Law, and sometimes the Romans 3. 27.
Law of Works. The last, as it is a rule and direction for renewed Holiness,
or the works of Grace and Sanctification. And in that sense, John calls it
the new Law or Commandment, 1. John 2. 8.

But the Moral Law is it which here we treat of, whereunto for the Reasons
aforesaid, these properties are ascribed:

First, It is a Light unto our feet, and a Lantern unto our steps, as it is
in Psalm. 119. 104. Solomon Pro. 6. 23.
also in the Proverbs, For the Commandment is a Lantern, etc. the Law a
Light, guiding our steps aright in those straight ways wherein we are to
walk. And hereof the Commandments of God are said to be straight and right,
The Psalm. 19. 9.
Commandments of JEHOVAH are right; Therefore Psalm. 119. 126
I account all thine Ordinances right in all things. So does Solomon proclayme
in his Pro. 4. 11.
Proverbs, that by the words of Wisdom which there he utters, he will
guide us in the paths of rightnesse.

Secondly, It is a good and a holy Law, as the Apostle to the Romans 12. 2.
Romans calls it, That good will of God. And DAVID, Psalm. 119. 39.
Thy Laws are good. Being therefore good, it is in it self acceptable unto
God, and makes those that do it, accepted to him. Whereupon the same Apostle
Romans 12. 2.
there calls it, That acceptable will of God. Contrariwise sin peruerteth
the straight ways of the Lord, as Peter speaks, Acts 13. 10. And therefore
it is evil and naught. Know Ier. 2. 19.
and see (says JEREMY) that it is an evil and bitter thing, that thou
forsakest JEHOVAH. And this is the common Epithet which the Scripture gives
unto sin, which being naught, makes us odious and hateful unto God: Pro.
15. 26.
Evil thoughts are an abomination to JEHOVAH. Thou Psalm. 3. 6.
hate all the workers of iniquity.

Thirdly, It is a Iam. 1. 25.
perfect Law, commanding all good, and forbidding all evil.

Fourthly, It is an eternal Law, without limitation of time or place, giving a
most absolute and perfect direction for all ages and times of the World, before
and since the Fall, and binding to a perpetual observation of it. So in the
Revel. 21. 27.
Revelation we find, That no unclean thing, nor which does abomination or
lies, shall enter into the new Jerusalem. And Paul tells the Gal. 5. 21.
Galathians, They which do such things, (the works of the flesh there
reckoned up) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: for which cause the
definition not of Righteousness only, but of every Commandment is so fitted,
as the same may be a perpetual rule to serve all times and persons whatsoever:
for albeit some special duties of certain Commandments shall cease when we
come to Heaven; yet the substance of every one remains: there shall be no
Seventh day set apart unto Gods Service: for all Eternity of time shall be
taken up for it, and a Heb. 4 9.
perpetual Sabbath; no use of Marriage, but Mat. 22. 30.
purity and perfection, like to the holy Angels. And the like is to be said of
the other Commandments: for seeing the Image of God, witness the Coloss. 3.
10. and Ephesians. 4. 24.
Apostle, stands in Righteousness and Holiness, which are the two branches
of the Law, it must needs tie us with an everlasting love, who were first made
in that likeness, and whose perfection in Heaven is to be fully and perfectly
renewed thereunto: which perpetuity of the Moral Law was Exodus 34. 27. 2 Cor.
3. 7.
noted, by ingrauing of it in stone.

But where, will you say, is this Doctrine of Righteousness taught?

First, Nature it self does teach it, in that by our first Creation, we were
made and framed to the perfection of it, and yet retayn some notions thereof in
this our corrupt estate.

Secondly, The Image of this Righteousness being in manner quite defaced and
done away by the Fall of Adam, the same is, by the merciful providence of GOD,
for a more certain direction of our ways, and to humble us in seeing how
short we come of the performance of it, again renewed, and the sum of all
compendiously abridged in ten Words, Sentences or Commandments, written Exodus
34. 28.
by the finger of GOD in two Tables.

Thirdly, The same are expounded and handled more at large in the whole Volume
of the Scripture, where all this Doctrine is fully and absolutely taught. Of
both thse Laws, the Law of Nature, and the written Law, the Apostle speaks,
Romans 2. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not a law, do by nature the
things of the Law these having not a law, are a law unto themselves, as those
which declare the work of the Law written in their heart: their conscience
bearing record unto themselves, and their thoughts accusing or excusing them,
etc.

For the understanding of those ten Commandments, and the better to discern
the large spread of Righteousness which they contain, take these few Rules
that hold in every one.

First, They are uttered by a figurative speech of a part for the whole, under
one (and that commonly the greatest) comprehending not only every particular
duty, whatsoever may fall into the life of man, of the same nature with that
which is there commanded or forbidden, but the whole manner of performance,
that it be with all the powers of ones mind, soul and body; which belonging
to every Commandment, is once for all explayned in the definition I gave of
Righteousness.

Secondly, Commanding one thing, they forbid the contrary: forbidding one
thing, they command the contrary. Lastly, this withal is to be remembered,
that all the things before spoken of in the definition I gave Holiness and
Righteousness, pertayne and have their place in every Commandment, the
corruption of nature and desire being (as I think) forbidden in every one, not
alone in the tenth:

And that for these Reasons:

First, From the nature of God that gave the Law, who being a John 4. 24.
Spirit, and therefore piercing Heb. 4. 12, 13
into the most secret thoughts and intents of the heart, every Commandment of
his (not only the ten Commandments laid together) must needs be Romans 7. 14.
spiritual; to bind the whole strength of nature, and all the thoughts and
desires which the Scripture is wont to call the spirit of our mind, as before
was noted.

Secondly, Since it cannot be denied, but that this is so in the duties of the
first Table, the same reason and proportion carries it to those of the second
also.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ's interpretation of the seventh Commandment, is a
sufficient warrant, extending it to all kind of Lust, Math. 5. 28. As for the
tenth, it has another sense, as shall be seen when we come unto it. And that
which Paul says, Romans 7. 7. I had not known lust, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not lust: I take, under reformation of better judgment, to be meant
not of the tenth Commandment only, but of the whole purity that way, which
the Law of God thorowout requires, and that as well in the duties to God, as
to our brethren; which the Apostle soundly gathers to be commanded in the
Law, because the Law is spiritual. Neither does it follow, because he says,
Except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust, that therefore he must needs
point out the very words of one Commandment; or because he says many times (
that Commandment) that therefore he means a particular Commandment, one of
the ten: for the Law may as well be said to say, Thou shall not lust, because
in the general doctrine thereof it forbids all kind of lust, as in the like
case the same Apostle Ephesians 5. 14.
writes, that God says in the Scripture, Arise, thou that sleep, and
Christ shall shine unto thee. Which notwithstanding are not the precize words
of any one place of Scripture, but the general sum and doctrine of the
Gospel.

The name also of Commandment, comprehending the scope and substance of many
Commandments, you have so used, 1. John 2. 7, 8. And albeit Paul, Romans 13. 9.
do aptly and truly render the meaning of the tenth Commandment, by the same
very words which here he uses, that hinders not, but that in this place it
may have another sense, the word serving indifferently for So is (...) taken,
Luke 22. 15. Matthew. 22. 17. and 1. Pet. 1. 12. for a longing and earnest desire.
coveting, or for lusting, and the diversity of the Argument enforcing a diverse
interpretation of these two places.

The Ten Commandments, which summarily contain the whole doctrine of
Righteousness, whatsoever the Law or Prophets speak of, our Savior Christ in
his The doing whereof is termed Righteousness, and has two parts, Pietio,
and Justice.
infinite wisdom has contrived into two: The love of God, and of our
brethren: When unto the Lawyer, asking him which is the great Commandment in
the Law, he answers, Math. 22. 37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might. This is the first and great Commandment, and the
second is like unto it: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: on these
two commandments hang the whole Law and the Prophets. PAVL uses the very
terms of Piety and Justice, Romans 1. 18. For the wrath of God is manifest from
heaven against all impiety, and injustice of men. So he says, Tit. 2. 12. that
the Grace of God manifested by the Gospel, instructs us, that we should
live soberly, and justly, and godly in this present world. Where, before
Justice and Piety, which are the parts, he puts Sobriety or Soundness of
mind, as the form that is to hold in both, 1. Tim. 1, 2. he deuideth it into
Piety or Godliness and Honesty. Sometimes in stead of Piety, you shall find the
term of Holiness, which is all one: Luke 1. 75.
That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him in
holiness and righteousness. Put on Ephesians. 4. 24.
the new man, which according to God is created in true righteousness and
holiness: but Acts 3. 14.
ye have denied that holy and lust one. HEROD Marc. 6. 20.
did reverence JOHN, knowing he was a just and a holy man. Ye 1 Thessalonians. ^. 10.
are witnesses, and God, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we were
conversant among you that believe. He Revel. 22. 11.
that is just, let him become more just: he that is holy, let him become yet
more holy. According to this division of our Savior Christ, we commonly call
these two, The first and the second Table, as they were at the first delivered
of God to Moses.

The sum of the first Table is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart (or mind) and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And to this
Table the four first Commandments do belong. The sum of the second is,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And to this Table the six last
Commandments do belong; for all which, our Savior Christ himself is our
warrant, who calls these two, The Math. 22. 37.
first and second Commandments.

The sum of the first Commandment is, That we Piety is, of the immediate
duties to God; whereof this is the whole, that we have God to be our God.
have God to be our God. So it is expressed in the Commandment it self, Thou
shall have no other gods before my face. The first affirmative whereof is, Thou
shall have me to be thy God. The contrary of this having of God to be our God,
is, first, that which the Psalmist Psalm. 10 4.
notes, The wicked are so proud, they seek not after God. Against which, 2.
Chro. 15. 13.
Asa made a Law, that if any would not seek after God, he should die.

Secondly, Atheism, in denying God or his properties, as Providence, Wisdom,
Presence, etc. The fool Psalm. 14. 1.
has said in his heart, There is no God. Ye have said, Malach. 3. 14.
It is in vain to serve God, etc.

We have God to be our God, by cleaving to The parts are two: one to cleave
unto him.
him, and worshipping him. This Distribution Moses gives, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Thou
shall fear JEHOVAH thy God, and serve him. Thou shall cleave unto him, and
swear by his Name.

Cleaving, I call that straight and holy bond, whereby we are tied and glued as
it were to God, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 6. 17.
He that is glued to the Lord, is one spirit. Of this it is said, Josh. 23. 8.
Stick fast unto JEHOVAH your God, as you have done unto this day. He exhorted
Acts 11. 23.
all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave to the Lord. The contrary
whereof, is that which the Prophet speaks of, Ierom. 17. 5.
Cursed is the man whose heart departs from JEHOVAH. Their Esaias 26. 13.
heart is far from me. If any man Hebr. 10. 38.
withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. This cleaving to
God, grows from a respect of that absoluteness of all good things that are
in him, and has these parts:

First, to love him for his goodness, desiring nothing Loving.
more then to be joined unto him, delighting to think and speak of him, and
to do the things that are pleasing in his sight. By which notes and marks it
is easy for us to examine our love unto him: Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
Thou shall love JEHOVAH thy God, with all thy heart, etc. The contrary
whereof, is that hatred of God, whereof we spoke before.

Secondly, to reverence him for his Holiness, and the Reuerencing.
Majesty of his presence, before whom no unseemly thing may come. Eccles. 5.
1.
God is in Heaven, and thou art upon the earth, therefore let thy words be few.
And this as a bridle reyneth and keeps us back from committing either open
wickedness, or secret sins. Who would not be ashamed to spue in the face of
his Prince? How much more should we blush, to power forth our wickedness in the
sight or presence of this King of Kings, infinitely more glorious then all the
Princes of the world? Therefore does the Holy Ghost aggrauate the sin of the
old world: Genesis 6. 11.
That the earth was corrupted before God: and of the Sodomites, that Genesis 13.
13.
they were exceeding sinners before JEHOVAH, that is, without all reverence
daring in his presence, and as it were he looking on, to commit all kind of
filthiness. And the Wiseman Prou. 5. 21.
uses this as a most effectual Argument, to draw men from the enticements of
sin, under that one of the strange woman, comprehending all the rest, For that
the ways of every one are before the eyes of JEHOVAH. For the other, common
are the exhortations in the Scripture, Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me, and be upright: And Exodus 20. 3.
thou shall have none other gods before my face. ENOCH Genesis 5. 14.
is also commended, that he walked with God. And the Prophet Jeremy Ierem. 13.
23.
notably inforceth this reason, Can any man lie hid in darkness, and I not see
him, says JEHOVAH? Do not I fill Heaven and earth? The contrary whereof is
prophanenes of heart: Hebr. 12. 16.
Let there be no profane person, as ESAV, etc.

Thirdly, to fear him for his Power and Justice, not Fearing,
with a servile fear, which has pain and torture in it, and sets the
conscience, as it were upon a John 4. 18.
Rack: but with a filial and childlike fear: that is to say, not so much for
fear of punishment, as for fear of offending so good and so gracious a
Father. Thou Leuit. 19. 14
shall not curse the Deaf, neither put a stumbling block before the blind,
but shall fear thy God: I am JEHOVAH. Who Ier. 10. 7.
would not fear thee, etc. seeing Power rests in thee? Let Heb. 12. 28.
us labor to please God with reverence and fear: for even our God is a
consuming fire. If 1. Pet. 1. 17.
you call him Father, which without respect of persons judges every one
according to his work, pass your time of dwelling here in fear. If Mal. 1.
6.
I be a Father, where is my fear? Fear Esaias 8. 13. 14.
not the fear of this people, nor terrify your selves. JEHOVAH of Hoasts him
sanctify: let him be your fear, and let him be your terror. Where these
two kinds of fear are plainly distinguished: The contrary whereof is
contempt of God, like to Pharaoh, Who is Exodus 5. 2.
JEHOVAH, etc.

To believe him for his Truth and Faithfulness to Believing,
perform whatsoever he speaks, as he says in the Psalms, Ps. 89. 34, 35,
I will not alter that which is proceeded out of my mouth, nor falsify my
faith. The lack of this Grace bereaved those two worthy Saints of God, Moses
and Aaron, of that great blessing (which they so much desired) to conduct Gods
people into the Land of Promise, Because Numb. 20. 12
ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the presence of the Children of
Israel; therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the Land which I
have given them. The contrary of it is doubtfulnesse concerning the Truth of
Gods promises or judgments, whether present or to come. I Psalm. 116. 11.
said in my heart, All men are Liars. Whence comes tempting or God, when
through distrust and unbelief we seek signs of his Truth and Power: Mat. 4.
7.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: 1. Cor. 10. 6. 10
Neither let us tempt God, as they tempted him, and were destroyed of Serpents.

To trust and set our faith and full affiance upon him, Trusting and
in respect of his Power and Might, whereby he is able to do it. Hereof the
Romans 4. 21.
Apostle sets Abraham before us for an example, the father of the faithful,
who contrary to hope, believed under hope, being fully assured, that what God
had promised, he was able to perform. And of himself he says, 1. Tim. 1. 12.
I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep the
thing committed to him unto that day. Agreeable whereunto is the speech of our
Savior Christ, My John 10. 28.
Father is greater then all, and none shall be able to take you out of his
hand. And this may well be thought the cause why the Lord himself sets
that name in the forefront of his Titles, JEHOVAH, JEHOVAH, the mighty God,
etc. And why the Apostles Symbol, commonly called the Creed, comprehending in
sum all the Articles of our Faith, begins with this, I believe in God the
Father Almighty. For holding this, there is nothing so incredible to flesh and
blood, which we will not believe and depend upon: doubting of this, there is
none of Gods promises so clear and certain, which we are not ready to call
in question. Of this trusting in God we read, They Psalm. 22. 5, 6.
called upon thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded. God Psalm. 27. 1, 3.
is my light and my salvation: whom should I fear? God is the strength of my
life, of whom should I be afraid? And 2. Kin. 6. 16.
he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us, are more then they that be
against us.

Thus we must trust in God, not only when we see the means before us, but
without, and even contrary to all means; as Dan. 3. 17.
SHEDRACH, MESHACH, and ABEDNEGO did. The God whom we serve, is able to deliver
us out of the hot burning Furnace, and out of thy hands, O King, he can deliver
us. The contrary hereof is,

First, distrust in God; as the wicked Achaz, Esaias 7. 11.
being offered of God a sign, for the strengthening of his faith, disdainefully
does answer, I will not ask a sign, neither will I make trial of JEHOVAH,
by committing unto the hands of this Jehovah (whom thou talkest of) a matter of
such danger and importance to the State, as is the War now in hand.

Secondly, Confidence in the Creature, whether our selves and the good things
which God has given us, as Friends, Honor, Credit, Wisdom, Riches, or
whatsoever else: 1. Tim. 6. 17.
Exhort the rich men in this World, that they trust not in the incertainty of
riches, but in the living God, who ministers to all men abundantly, etc. Ier.
17. 5.
Cursed is the man that has his confidence in man, and makes flesh his Arm.
The Obad. v. 3, 4.
pride of thine heart has deceived thee. Thou that dwell in the cliffes of
the Rocks, whose habitation is high, that say in thy heart, Who shall bring
me down to the ground? though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and make thy
nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee down, says JEHOVAH, 2.
Chron. 16. 12. Asa a Religious Prince is taxed, that in the extremity of his
sickness he sought not to the Lord, but to Physicians.

Sixthly, To hope in him, and patiently to expect and Hoping in him
wait for all good things at his hand, because of his mercies, and the
unchangeableness of his nature, who never repents him of his promises: For
Romans 11. 29.
the gifts and calling of God are without Repentance. It is Lam. 3. 22.
the wonderull kindness of JEHOVAH, that we are not consumed: for his mercies
fail not. Therefore Esaias 30. 18.
will JEHOVAH wait to do grace unto you. And therefore will he lift up
himself to have mercy on you: for JEHOVAH is a God of uprightness and
judgment. Blessed are all that wait on him. Hereupon the Psalm. 37. 5, 7.
Psalmist does exhort us; Commit thy way unto JEHOVAH, and trust in him, and he
shall bring it to pass * wait patiently upon JEHOVAH, and hope in him: fret
not thy self for him that prospers in his way, and for the man that brings
his enterprises to pass. Commit Pro. 16. 3.
thy works to JEHOVAH, and thy thoughts shall be directed. The contrary
whereof is despair: I 1. These. 4. 13.
would not, Brethren, have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep, that
ye sorrow not, even as other which have no hope.

By this our cleaving unto God, two virtues come to be wrought within us:

First, Patience, in a cheerful undergoing of danger From whence arise
Patience and
and troubles, without repining or using unlawful means to be delivered from
them: and that by resting upon his Wisdom, who has the times when, and the
means how to send us help, numbered before him. Though Job 13. 5.
he kill me, yet will I trust in him. I was Psalm. 39. 9.
dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. The contrary whereof
is impatience in afflictions; as that of JEREMY, Cursed Ier. 20. 14, 18.
be the Day wherein I was borne, and let not the Day wherein my Mother bare
me, be blessed. How is it that I came forth of the womb, to see labor and
sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame? And the whole third
Chapter of Job bewrays his great infirmity this way.

Secondly, Humility, to acknowledge all we have, to Humility
come from God; and therefore in the conscience of our emptiness, and of his
bounty and goodness, to give all glory unto him alone; whereof the Apostle
says, Let him 1. Cor. 1. 31.
that glories, glory in the Lord. Deck 1. Pet. 5. 6.
your selves with lowliness of mind: for God resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble. Such an humble heart was in 1. Chron. 19. 11, 14.
DAVID: Thine (says he) O JEHOVAH, is greatness, and power, and glory, and
victory, and praise: for all that is in Heaven and in Earth is thine: thine is
the Kingdom, O JEHOVAH, and thou excellest as head over all. But who am I, and
what is my people, that we should be able to offer willingly after this sort?
For all things come of thee, and of thine own hand taken do we give unto
thee. The contrary whereof is pride or presumption boasting and glorying of our
selves. Now 1. Cor. 4. 6, 7.
these things, Brethren, I have figuratively applied unto mine own self and
APOLLOS for your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that no man presume above
that which is written, that one swell not against another for any man's cause:
for who separateth thee? and what have thou, that thou have not received? If
thou have received it, why reioycest thou, as though thou had not received
it? A notable example hereof is in Herod, whom the Angel of the Lord smote,
because he gave no glory unto God, Acts 12.

Worship must needs be a part of the first Commandment: The other to worship
him.
for whom we worship, him we acknowledge for our God. There is none so
brutish, that does otherwise. Contrary to this worship are, First, Blasphemy,
which is a reproach of God, and a flat contempt with a high hand against his
Majesty: Leu. 24. 15, 16
Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his sins, and he that blasphemeth the
Name of JEHOVAH, shall be put to death. Such was that of cursed 2. King. 19. 10
RABSHAKEH: Thus shall ye speak to HEZEKIAH King of Judah, and say, Let not
thy Goddeceiue thee, in whom thou trustest, saying, Jerusalem shall not be
delivered into the hand of the King of Asshur. Secondly, Worshipping of any
beside God: Thou Mat. 4. 10.
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And this has
under it diverse kinds:

First, Worshipping of the Devil, whether in direct seeking unto him,
coniuring and inuocating of him, or in Deuillish means, though pretending
other causes.

To the first, refer all using of the help of an unclean spirit, wherewith
one is possessed, or of some Familiar; As the Maiden, which in the Acts 16. 16.
Acts having a spirit of divination, got her Masters much advantage with
divining. Of these the Esaias 29. 4.
Prophet speaks, Thy voice shall be out of the ground, like him that has a
spirit of divination, and thy talking shall whisper out of the dust. Secondly,
Sorcerie and Necromancie, where the Devil is sought unto in the form of some
dead man, as in the Story of the Witch 1. Sam. 28. 11 13, 14.
of Endor, who raised up the Devil in the likeness of Samuel, like an old man
lapped in a Mantell: for that it was not the true Samuel, but a mere illusion
of Satan; beside many other, this one reason does euince, for that God had
Verse 6.
refused to answer Saul by Prophets, such as Samuel was. To the second belong
Sooth-saying, and Divination; by flying of Birds, looking into beasts
entrayles, as the King of Babel did, Ezech. 21. 21. who consulted with Idols,
and looked into the liver. Star-gazing, Charms, Mumbling of words, casting of
Figures, etc. MOSES, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. has all these together, Let none be
found among you that uses Witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, or a marker
of the flying of Fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that consulteth with
spirits, or a Soothsayer, or that asks counsel at the dead. Where the
pretense of doing good, which some Object, does no whit lessen the sin,
seeing the glory of God is alike impeached in them both. And therefore the
good Witch no less then the other Witch is abominable in his sight. And here
all going to Witches, Coniurers, and Soothsayers, and such like, is also
condemned: If Leuit. 20. 6.
any turn after such as work with spirits, and after Soothsayers, to go a
whoring after them, then will I set my face against that person, and cut him
off from among his people, 1. Chro. 10. 13. SAVL is said to have dyed for his
transgression principally, in that he sought, and asked counsel of a Familiar
Spirit.

To this seeking to Soothsayers and Witches, the Holy Ghost opposes a
Prophet, as the only lawful Minister of God, to know his will by: For Deuteronomy.
10. 14, 15.
these Nations which thou shall possess, harken unto those that regard the
times, and unto Sorcerers. As for thee, JEHOVAH thy God does not suffer thee to
do so: JEHOVAH thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from
among you, even of thy brethren, unto him ye shall harken. Esaias 8. 19, 20.
When they shall say to you, Inquire at them that have a spirit of Divination,
and at the Soothsayers which whisper and murmr; should not a people inquire
at their God, from the living to the dead? to the Law and to the Testimony?

Secondly, The Worship of false gods, as the Heathen did; Jupiter, Saturn, the
Sun, the Moon, etc. wherein, under a show of worshipping of God, the Devil
indeed is worshipped. 1. Cor. 10. ^0.
Those things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not
unto God. And I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils.

Thirdly, Attributing religious reverence The Papists teach that this religious
reuerenc is to be done to creatures, as to Angels, the souls departed, the
Cross, etc.
to any creature, man, or Angel, how excellent soever: which fault John so
holy an Apostle twice fell into, and is reproved of the Angel for it: I
Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 8.
fell down before the feet of the Angel, to worship him. But he said unto
me, Take heed thou do not; for I am thy fellow servant, etc. Worship God. So
Acts 10. 26.
Peter seeing Cornelius give him more then a civil honor, rayseth him up, and
tells him, I am also a man.

Under the name of worship, are comprehended generally Which worship
comprehends all kind of Service, Public and Private.
his whole service, and whatsoever he commands for the glorifying of his
Name, both public exercises of hearing the Word preached, partaking of the
Sacraments, etc. and private meditation of his Word and Works, etc.

More particularly, one special and principal branch One principal part
whereof is Prayer.
of this service, is Prayer, the Flower of all the rest, without which, we can
assure no blessing unto our selves of any good thing we do enjoy: For 1. Tim
4. 4.
every creature of God is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. A noble and
a worthy service; so acceptable unto him, that it is compared to Incense or
sweet Perfume, Psalm. 141. 2. Let my Prayer be directed in thy sight as Incense,
and the lifting up mine hands, as an evening Sacrifice; also to the drops of
Cant. 4. 11. Both Petition for the obtaining of good things, or turning away of
evil, and thanksgiving for all we do enjoy.
Honey dropping from the Honie-combe; It stands both in Petition for all
things needful, and Thanksgiving for all we have; especially such good
things as by Prayer we obtain of him. Call Psalm. 50. 15.
upon me in the Day of trouble: So will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. PAVL, 1. Tim. reckons up four kinds, Deprecations, Prayers,
Requests, Thanksgiving: But the first three are all comprehended under
Petition: Deprecation being a Petition to be delivered from hurtful things,
Prayer noting a Petition for some good thing; and Request, a Petition against
those that wrong us.

The contrary hereof, is praying to The Papists that teach Invocation of
Saints.
any Creature, Saints, Angels, or whosoever else, this being an honor that
belongs to God alone; for how Romans 10. 14.
can they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? And God in the Psalm
Psalm. 50. 15.
wills us, Call upon me in the Day of trouble.

Of the nature of Prayer, when the necessities of this A piece also of this
service (when just occasion requires) is Swearing and Cursing by his Name,
making our Vows unto him, and by Lottery to commit into his hands, the
success of our doubtful affairs.
life require, are, Swearing and Cursing by his Name, as a witness of the
truth, and a Revenger of all Lies, making our Vows unto him, and by Lottery to
commit into his hands the success of our doubtful affairs. Oaths and Curses
are both joined together, Nehem. 10. 30. They entered into the curse, and into
the oath, to walk in Gods Law, which was given by MOSES, etc. Swearing is
expressly commanded, as a part of Gods Worship, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear
IHOVAH thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name.

The nature of it the Apostle shows, 2. Corinthians. 1. 23. Now I call God to
record against mine own soul, that to spare you, I came not as yet to
Corinthus. Of Vows the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God praise,
and pay thy V^^es unto the most High. And of lots Solomon in the Proverbs, The
Pro. 16. 33.
lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is from JEHOVAH.

The contrary hereof are blasphemous The Papists allow these blasphemous Oaths.
and superstitious Oaths, Vows etc. when we swear by them which are no gods,
or by Idols, as by the Mass, our Lady, etc. How Ier. 5. 7.
shall I spare thee for this? Thy sons have forsaken me, and sworn by them
which are no Gods: They Ier. 12. 16.
taught my people to swear by BAAL. They Amos 8. 14.
that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, As thy God, O DAN, lives, and
as the God of the way of Beershebah lineth, even they shall fall, and shall not
rise any more.

CHAP. VI.
Of the second Commandment.

THE sum of the second The Papists strike out this whole second Commandment
most saor* legiously.
Commandment is, That we worship God, as he himself has commanded: Every
Deuteronomy. 1^. 32.
thing which I command, that shall you keep and do; Thou shall not add unto
it, neither shall thou take from it. 1. Chron. 15. 13.
Therefore, says the good King EZECHIAH, did JEHOVAH our GOD make a breach
among us at the first, because we sought him not according to appointment.
Whatsoever Exodus 23. 13. To the worship of God two things do belong; a holy
manner of warshipping God, and a holy rest: The manner stands in Obedience
and Reverence.
I say unto you, you shall keep.

Herein it differs from the former Commandment, Obedience, is the
worshipping of him according to his Commandment.
That commanded the Worship of God which is natural: This, the Worship
whatsoever the same be, which is by Divine Ordinance and Institution. To do
whatsoever God commands, is called Obedience: A virtue, as Samuel says, 1.
Sam. 15. 22, 23. better then Sacrifice, and wherewith the Lord is more
delighted, then with burnt Offerings. And, that Obedience is the sum of the
second Commandment, may appear by the opposition there made of them that love
God and keep his Commandments, to these words, Thou shall not make any graven
Image.

As therefore in the first Commandment the worship of false gods was
forbidden: so here is forbidden all false worship of the true God, which the
words plainly show, forbidding to make any carved Images to our selves, or to
bow down and worship the things which so we make. Now, there is none so
foolish, that judges the work of his own hands to be indeed and truly God,
or that worshippeth the very things that himself has made; but only in and
by the same does worship him, whom in his true or false conceit he holds to
be God. Therefore it is said, Mat. 15. 9. In vain they worship me, etc.

The contrary therefore of The Papists teach and command all manner of
Willworship, Idolatry, Superstitions, and their fabulous and sayned Traditions.
this Commandment is in one word Will Worship, when we worship the true GOD
falsely, that is to say, after our own inventions: Col. 2. 23.
which things have indeed a show of wisdom in Will Worship and humbleness of
mind, and in not sparing the body, but are not in any estimation, seeing they
are referred to the satisfying of the flesh. 1. Sam. 13. 13
SAMVEL said unto SAVL, Thou have done foolishly. Thou have not observed the
Commandment of JEHOVAH thy God. Willworship contains under it,

First, Idolatry: that is, the The Papists Idolatry, and their wicked and fond
distinction, as if the Scripture only condemned such Images as the Heathen
made for the worshipping of their false gods, which is manifestly confuted both
by the example of the Jews, Exodus 32. and by this Commandment of Moses, Deuteronomy.
4. 12, 15, 16 who, to restrain the people from Idolatry, opposes the voice of
God heard in the Mountain to all Images, even to the Image of God himself,
not only to the Image of Heathen gods; When Jehovah spoke unto you out of the
midst of that fire, ye heard the voice of his words, but saw no similitude,
save a voice: take heed therefore, etc.
worshipping of GOD in Images or Idols, whereof God gives so straight charge
Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16
Take heed therefore unto your selves, for you saw no similitude in the Day
that JEHOVAH spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire: That ye
corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven Image, the likeness of any
representation, etc. And the Esaias 40. 18.
Prophet cries out, Unto whom will ye liken the mighty God? and what
likeness will ye address for him? Hither belongs that, where he is said to
be a Esaias 45 15. (...)
God, that hides himself, that is to say, invisible, and not to be expressed
by carved Images: As the opposition there shows. Wherefore the Apostle in the
Catalogue of offenses worthily gives the first place hereunto: They Romans 1. 23
turned theaglory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the Image of
a corruptible man, and of Birds, and of foure-footed beasts, and of creeping
things. This was the sin of the Israelites in the Wilderness: for they
worshipped not the Calfe; as the Papists, to color their own Idolatry, do
affirm, but God in the Calfe; so themselves proclayme: Exodus 32. 5.
Tomorrow shall be the Holy Day of JEHOVAH: Let us make a Feast tomorrow to
JEHOVAH. And the Psalmist bears Psalm. 10^. 20.
witness, They turned their glory into the frame of an Ox that eats
grass. And yet this Calfe made to worship God in the form thereof, Stephen
calls an Idol, Acts 7. 41. These two kinds bowing down to Moloch, to serve
and worship him, and worshipping the true GOD in the bowing down to Moloch,
are plainly distinguished, Zophaniah, 1. 5. and Judgments there pronounced
against both sorts of such worshippers: for it is certain, that Idols and
Images are so far from being, as they seem (...).
glasses and representations to make men see God the cleerer, that contrariwise
they close and dawbe up men's eyes from seeing, and their hearts from
understanding. As the Prophet in plain words speaks, Esaias 44. 18. teaching
nothing indeed but vanity and lies. Their molten Esaias 41. 29.
Images are wind, and emptiness, or confusion. What Habak. 2. 18.
profits the carved Image, when the framer thereof has caruedit a molten
Image, and a teacher of lies? But Ier. 10. 8.
together (both Jews and Gentiles iumping in the same Idolatry) they are
brutish and become Fools, for the stock (or wood, that is to say, the Image
made of wood) is a doctrine of vanities. And again, Every Verse 14, 15.
man is not so brutish, that he knows not that every Founder is shamed by the
carved Image: for his molten Image is but falsehood, and there is no breath in
them: they are vanity, and the work of errors, what time these men (their
worshippers) are visited, they (their Images themselves) shall perish.
Wherefore all use of an Image devised by man's brain in Gods service, is
condemned: for when himself pleases to appoint them, as he did the Cherubins,
etc. under the Law, his Commandment makes it to be lawful. So the very words
of the Law do sound, Thou shall not make unto thy self (that is, of thine
own head, and out of the device of thine own brain.)

Secondly, Superstition, that is to say, all corruption of Gods Service, by
adding or taking from, be it in meats and drinks, observing of days and
times, ceremonies and ministeries invented by men or otherwise. Therefore Deuteronomy.
12. 32.
whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it; thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Mat. 15. 9.
In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

Thirdly, Traditions, to signify and represent any grace of God, otherwise
then he has appointed; for the which, Christ condemned the Pharisees washing of
hands and cups, etc. Ye Mark 7. 8.
lay the Commandment of God apart, and observe the traditions of men; as the
washing of pots and cups, and many other such like things ye do.

CHAP. VII.
Of the third Commandment.

IN the third Commandment, God would Reverence is a religious affection in the
Service of God.
have his Worship to be with all Reverence and Religion for the Name of God,
noting out this whole outward service, as that whereby God is made known unto
us: and taking it in vain, noting every abuse therein, show the reverent
manner of worshipping God, to be the subject of this Commandment, whether it
be in his public or private service, or in the using of his Names and Titles.
Of his public Service the Psalmist Psalm. 26. 6.
says, I wash my hands in innocence, and so compass thine Altar, O JEHOVAH.
Of private, the Law is given in the case of Vows, Oaths, etc. Numb. 30. 3.
When a man voweth a Vow unto JEHOVAH, or swears an Oath, he shall not
profane that he speaks. Touching the Reverend and Religious using of the
Names and Titles of God, a special commination is made, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. If thou will not fear this glorious and reverend Name, JEHOVAH thy God, etc. The
contrary hereof generally is, all lack of Reverence in Gods Service, and
contains under it,

First, Using Gods Name carelessly in common talk; as, Good Lord! O God! etc.
when we never think upon him.

Secondly, Jesting with the Scripture, or the Phrases of it, The Ier. 23. 34.
Prophet, or the Priest, or the People, which shall say, (in scorn and
derision) The burden of JEHOVAH, I will visit that man and his house.

Thirdly, Light passing over the Judgments of God that are seen in the World;
which, because it is a common fault, our Savior, Luke 13. 1. insisteth long,
to show the right use that is to be made of them: Were these Galileans, whose
blood PILATE mingled with their Sacrifices, or those eighteen upon whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, greater sinners then all other men,
because they suffered these things? Nay: but I say unto you, Unless ye repent,
ye shall all in like manner perish.

Fourthly, Abusing of the Creatures to the reading of Fortunes, Destinies,
Prognostications, and such like, contrary to the right use and end of their
Creation, which was not to foretell things to come, but to distinguish days,
months and years, as before was opened. Therefore does the Prophet Esaias
worthily scorn and deride this kind of people, Esaias 47. 13. Thou tyrest thy
self with the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, and Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from those things that
shall come upon thee. In the particular parts of GODS Service these things are
contrary:

In Oaths the contraries are, First, to swear falsely: It Zach. 5. 4.
shall enter into the house of him that swears falsely by my Name. Secondly,
to swear of matters either not doubtful or not of that weight that requires
an Oath, or when we know that he for whose sake we swear, will not rest in it.
All these, the Apostle, Heb. 6. 16. comprehends in one, when he says, that
an Oath among men for confirmation sake, is an end of all gainsaying.

Therefore Swearing in our common talk is unlawful: Let Mat. 5. 37.
your communication be Yea, yea, Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these,
comes of evil; Thirdly, not to perform that which we swear to do: Mat. 5.
37.
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but perform thine oath to the Lord. In
Curses it is contrary, when in bitterness or rage we curse our enemies, or
our selves: with which fault two Job 3. Ier. 35.
of the singular Saints of God, Job and Jeremy were stained.

In Vows. First, When they are of The Papists, which teach vows of things not
in our own power, as perpetual single life.
things not in our power, whereby the vow of perpetual single life appears
to be unlawful: for as our Savior says, Mat. 19. 11.
All are not capable of this, but they only to whom it is given. Secondly,
When we vow things too base to offer unto God; as if a Rich man, to obtain
some great mercy at Gods hands, would vow to give somewhat not worth the
speaking of, unto the poor. This Solomon wishes us to take heed of, when in
the matter of Vows he makes the fear and reverence of God, in not doing any
thing unworthy of his Majesty, one great and special point, Eccles. 5. 6, 3.
Thirdly, when we vow such things, as are not indifferent to do or to leave
undone: for as to bring the hire of a Whore, or the price of a Dog into the
House of God for a Vow, were to profane his Service, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. So to vow
that in token of a rare and extraordinary zeal, which without vow we are
bound to do, is rather to dally with God, then to offer any special service
to him. This is plainly taught, Deuteronomy. 23. 24. when it is said, If thou vow not
at all, it shall not be sin unto thee: but the sin is, in not performing
our Vow, when we have vowed it. And if we take a view of all the Vows of
Gods Children, we shall find them all for the most part (according unto this
rule) of things which otherwise without offense they might have left undone.
Such was that of Ps. 132. 3, 4, 5
DAVID, I will not go unto the Tent of mine House, nor climb up my Bed-stead,
nor suffer sleep in mine eyes, nor slumber in my eyelids, till I find out a
place for JEHOVAH, etc. an habitation for the mighty God of JACOB. And that of
ANNA, 1. Sam. 1. 11.
If indeed looking to the affliction of thine Hand-mayde, thou will remember
me, and not forget thine Hand-mayde, but give unto thine Hand-mayde a
man-child, then will I give him to JEHOVAH all the days of his life, and no
Razor shall come upon his head. Such also was Genesis 28. 20, 21, 22.
Jacobs Vow, If JEHOVAH God will be with me, and keep me in this journey
which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I
come again to my fathers house in safety; and finally, if JEHOVAH will be my
God; Then (there begins the Vow) shall this Stone, which I have set up as a
Pillar, be the House of God.

Fourthly, When we are slack to perform them: When Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
thou vowest a Vow to JEHOVAH thy God, thou shall not delay to perform it: for
JEHOVAH thy God will certainly require it of thee, and it shall be sin unto
thee. When Ecclesi. 5. 3.
as thou vowest a Vow to God, delay not to perform it: for God has no
pleasure in Fools. Yet for the performance of some greater duty, our Vow may
be put off for a time, as the example of the Rechabites Ier. 35. 7. 14.
does confirm, of whom the Lord himself bears witness, that they observed
the vow of IONADAB their father, charging them not to dwell in houses, but in
Tents continually; though for safety of their lives they came to dwell in
Jerusalem.

For the performance of the duties of this Commandment, Whereunto are
requisite Preparation,
are required in all, but especially in the public service of God; First,
Preparation of our selves before we come: by considering both the cause that
should move us to it, and how to perform it with greatest duty and respect;
as the Preacher does exhort us: Take Eccles. 47. and 5. 1.
heed unto thy feet, when thou go into the House of God: and be nearer to
hearken, then to give the gift of Fools, and sacrifice; for they know not that
they do ill. Do not confusedly speak with thy mouth, nor let thy heart make
haste to utter a word before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou art upon the
Earth: Therefore let thy words be few. To which purpose it is necessary, that
we use private Prayer beforehand, and take special view and examination of
our sins, that hinder our approach to God.

Secondly, Diligent attention. Being come, and trembling and Humiliation.
at the presence of God, before whom we stand; like unto that good woman Acts
16. 14.
LYDIA, whose heart God opened, that she attended to the things spoken by
PAVL. And as Cornelius did, Acts 10. 33. Now therefore all we are here
present before God, to hear all things that are enjoined unto thee of God.

Whereupon, every where in the Scripture it is made a proper mark of Gods
Children, to tremble at his Word: To Esaias 66. 2.
this man do I look, to him that is humble and of a broken spirit, and which
trembles at my words.

Thirdly, Meditation, and chewing as it were the cud, when we are departed; as
the men of Acts 17. 11.
Berhea did; who, after they had heard PAVL, searched the Scriptures whether
those things were so.

For the fitting of us to some more special parts of his And when need is,
both fasting, to quicken us to petition in the acknowledgement of our
unworthiness and wants, and feasting to express our thankfulness for his
benefits.
worship, are required both Fasting, and a holy Feast: Fasting, to quicken us
to petition in the acknowledgement of our wants; holy Feasting, to express our
thankfulness for his benefits. This use of Fasting, the King of Nineueh was
not ignorant of, when he gave Jonah 3. 9, 10
commandment by the Decree of the King and his Nobles, saying, Let neither Men
nor Beasts, nor Herds, nor Flocks taste any thing, nor feed, nor drink
water; but let Men and Beasts cover themselves with Sackcloth, and cry unto
God strongly, etc. Esaias touches the same in the 58. Esaias 58. 4.
Chapter of his Prophecy, Ye fast not as these times are, to make your voice
to be heard on high. But of Fasting, what it is, and of the true nature and
properties thereof, we shall have further cause to speak in the Doctrine of
Repentance. The contrary hereof, is that which the same Prophet reprehendeth in
the people, Esaias 22. 12.
In that day the Lord JEHOVAH of Hoasts called to weeping, and to mourning, to
baldness, and to girting with sackcloth, and behold, gladness and joy,
killing of Oxen, and slaying of Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking Wine. Let us
eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die: that is to say, in stead of
humiliation, they gave themselves to all kind of iollitie, and bathing of
themselves in pleasures.

The exercise of Feasting was taken up amongst Gods people, when they had
received some singular benefit, or deliverance from some notable evil, which
by Fasting and Prayer they had begged at his hands. In which Feasts, a more
liberal use of the creature is permitted, both for plenty and variety, and all
kind of honest iollity and pleasure. Go your ways, it is said, Nehem. 8. 11,
13. eat fat things, and drink sweet things, and send portions to him for whom
nothing is provided; for this day is holy to our Lord. So the people went to
eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to celebrate great gladness.
And in Hester 9. 19. They celebrated the fourteenth day of the Month Adar,
with gladness and bankettings and merriments, and sending of portions from one
to another. Generally, the Law thereof given, Deuteronomy. 16. 14. The Feast of
Tabernacles thou shall keep seven days: thou shall rejoice when thou keep
that Feast, etc. The contrary is in this Day of gladness to mourn and weep,
for which Nehem. 8. 10. 11. and 12.
Nehemiah and the Levites do reprove the people, Hold your peace: for this
Day is holy; be not sad therefore.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the fourth Commandment.

THE fourth Commandment enioyneth a This is the manner of Gods worship: A holy
rest is the sanctifying of a time unto his Service, which (beside other times,
as occasion shall be offered) in a Family or for ones self apart, ought
(ordinarily) to be in the morning and evening of every day.
sanctifying of some time unto his service, both other times, as occasion shall
require, and especially some set and solemn times, which first in a Family or
for ones self apart, ought (ordinarily) to be in the morning and evening
every day, as the Psalmist Psalm. 92. 2.
says, It is good to declare in the morning thy Kindness, and thy Truth in
the night. Therefore was the morning and evening Sacrifice instituted of God,
Exodus 29. 38, 39. Some men's zeal has carried them further, either in respect
of the public calamities of the Church, or their own more special and
private wants, to perform this duty both morning, evening, and at noone.
Evening, morning and at noone will I meditate and pray aloud, says DAVID,
Psalm. 55. 17. So Daniel thrice a day kneeled upon his knees, and prayed and
confessed before his God, Dan. 6. 11. which is there noted to have been his
continual course: or else this at noone happily may be thought, when they came
to receive their meat with Prayer and Thanksgiving.

Secondly, For public exercises and meetings of the For Churchmeetings on such
days and times of the day, as may stand with the conueniencie of that Church.
But of necessity one whole day in seven, is thus to be kept holy,
Church, we must do it on such days and times of the day, as may stand with
the conueniencie of that Church.

Thirdly, One whole day in seven is of necessity to be kept holy. This the
Scripture calls by excellency the Sabbath Day, without a difference, as it
were the elder brother to all the rest of the days of the week, which is
called Leuit. 23. 15. and 25. 8, 8. Mat. 28. 1. Acts 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2.
Mark: 6 2 9. Luke 24. 1. John 20. 1.
Sabbaths in the plural.

The parts of the sanctifying of this day are two: one, to rest from worldly
businesses, and from those works and duties of our calling, which at other
times are not only lawful, but expedient and necessary to be done. The
particular works that we are thus to abstain from, are of two kinds: First,
great as well as small, and small as well as great. A greater and more excellent
work can hardly be imagined, then the building of Gods own House, the
material and outward Tabernacle, yet even That the Lord by a strict and
precise caution does specially forbid upon this day, Exodus 31. 13. Yet, says
he, ye shall observe my Sabbaths: Not setting your hand in that day unto this
work, though it be most holy. Those holy women that had Odours, Ointments, and
all things in a readiness, yet in a religious observation of Gods Ordinance,
forbear on the Sabbath to embalme the precious body of our Lord and Savior
Christ, and are commended by the Holy Ghost for it. They Luke 23. 56.
rested, says LVKE, the Sabbath Day, according to the Commandment. Again,
how small a thing is it to gather a few sticks! But when one presumed to do
this, and with an high hand in profanation of the Sabbath, we know what his
doom was from the mouth of God himself, Numb. 15. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.

In the second place come things both necessary and delightful, of profit,
and of pleasure. In seed time and in harvest the fittest seasons for all
worldly commodities, thou shall keep Sabbath, says the Holy Ghost, Exodus 34.
21. Of this kind are travailing and iournying upon that Day; whereof the Law
is given, Exodus 16. 29. Tarry every man in his place: Let no man go out of
his place the seventh Day. Likewise Faires, Markets, and all kind of buying
and selling: for which cause Nehem. 13. 19 Read Verse, 15 16, 17, 18.
Nehemia that godly Magistrate, When the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark
before the Sabbath, commanded to shut the gates, and charged that they should
not be opened till after the Sabbath, and set some of his servants at the
gates, that there should be no burden brought in upon the Sabbath Day. Sporting
also, banqueting, and such like, which distract our minds from Gods Service,
are then to be avoided, which is that the Lord calls, Not to do our own
delight upon that Day, Esaias 58. 13. The doing of which things, or of any of
them, is contrary to this outward sanctifying of the Sabbath.

Yet can we not say, that all these things are utterly forbidden without
exception: certain cautions must be made:

First, Things of common honesty, and for necessary safeguard of that which
would otherwise perish, are lawful upon that Day. Our Savior takes that for
granted, even amongst those that most straightly urge the Letter of this Law,
What Mat. 12. 11
man is there among you, which has a sheep, and if it fall upon the Sabbath
Day into a Ditch, will not take it and pluck it out?

Secondly, Such are allowed as take us not away from the Service of God, but
serve for honest and needful recreation, to make us fitter for holy things.

Thirdly, Hither belong those labors and bodily works which are done for the
setting forth of Gods Glory, as he that being made whole, took up his Bed
Both with public and private exercises.
and carried it on the Sabbath Day, John 5. 8, 9.

The next part of the sanctifying of this Day, is, to employ it in the Service
of God, which is that whereunto the outward rest tends, Esaias 58. 13. If thou will turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thine own will upon mine
Holiday, and call the Sabbath delight, holy to JEHOVAH, and honor him, not
doing thine own ways, etc. Of this kind, are,

First, All religious and holy exercises, whereof these the Scripture notes by
name, as duties to be performed upon that Day:

First, To hear the Word preached, Acts 13. 14. 15. After the reading of the
Law and the Prophets in the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, the Ruler of the
Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and Brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation for the People, say on. Acts 15. 21. MOSES of old time has in
every City those that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath
Day.

Secondly, Public Prayer. Acts 16. 13. Upon the Sabbath Day we went out of the
City unto a River, where Prayer was wont to be.

Thirdly, To receive the Sacraments at the times appointed. Acts 20. 7. The
first Day of the Week, when the Disciples were gathered together to break
bread, PAVL preached unto them, etc.

Fourthly, Collections and gathering for the Saints: 1. Cor. 16. 2. The first
Day of the Week, let every one lay aside by him, treasuring up what he has
been prospered.

Fifthly, Private meditation, which was the exercise of John the Apostle, at
what time he was banished into the I Will Pathmos for the Word of God: Upon the
Lords Day he was ravished in Spirit, in sweet and heavenly Meditations,
Revel. 1. 10. wherein it is fit that by our selves, and in our Family we
confer together, and call to mind the things that in the public Ministry
we have heard, Acts 17. 11.
as the men of Berea did. And in this respect* lest by the travailing of our
beasts, men, who are necessarily to be employed about them, should be drawn
from Gods Service, we are commanded, that they should also rest: for whose ease
otherwise the Sabbath was not any way ordained.

Secondly, The duties of brotherly love, as distributing In which number, the
duties of brotherly love, as distributing to the poor according to Gods
blessing upon us, visiting the sick, helping our Neighbor, or any thing that
is his, in their distress, come also to be reckoned, when they are done as
works of Mercy.
to the poor, according to the good hand and blessing of God upon us, visiting
the sick, helping our Neighbor, his Ox, Ass, or any thing in distress,
when they are done, not for our own lucre, but as works of mercy and
compassion. Thus did Acts 20 9.
Paul upon that day restore him, that being overcome with sleep, while Paul
was preaching, the night of the Sabbath Day, fell down from the third Loft,
and was taken up dead, Acts 20. 9. And hither tends the saying of our Savior
Christ, Mark 2. 27. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
The contrary hereof is the outward observation, without respect of inward
godliness.

The Seventh Day thus to be kept holy, was in the Genesis 2. 3. Exodus 20. 10, 11.
This day, in the first institution was the Seventh Day from the Creation, and
called the Sabbath Day.
first institution the Seventh Day from the Creation, when God resting from his
own work of creating the World, which in six days he had finished,
sanctified that Day for a Day of rest, and named it the Sabbath Day, beginning
on the Evening of the day before, when Genesis 1. 31. Beginning on the evening of
the Day before, when the Creation of the World was finished.
the Creation of the World was finished, as Leuit. 23. 32.
all other Feasts under the Law did. To us Christians it is the first Day of
the Creation, as in his place shall be declared.

And this Seventh Day is all to be kept holy, from the beginning to the end,
rising up early in the morning for the sanctifying of it, after the example of
our Savior Christ, Mark 1. 35. continuing it till the night; and in the
night, as the Psalm. 92. 3.
Psalm made for the Day speaks, that so our very sleep may be the sweter
to us.

The observation of the Sabbath Day (which has a special Item given to it,
Remember the Sabbath Day that thou keep it holy) is a moral and a perpetual
Law, not only Ceremonial and for a time: for

First, It is the same which was Genesis 2, 2, 3.
instituted in Paradise, before any promise of Christ, whom all Ceremonies do
respect.

Secondly, It is written by the finger of God, in the Tables of the Covenant,
where there was nothing Ceremonial, but all Moral, and of perpetual
indurance.

Thirdly, Our Savior, Mat. 24. 40. willing them that long time after his death
should be alive, to pray that their flight might not be on the Sabbath,
shows, that it was not to have an end by that Sacrifice of his, whereby Dan 9
24.
all Ceremonies were abolished.

Howbeit, some way it was ceremonial, representing a spiritual rest: but that
was not of the Substance, nor in the first Institution, but afterward annexed
to it as a thing accidental, which had his end in Christ.

CHAP. IX.
Of the second Table of the Law, and of the fifth Commandment.

WE have done with the first Table: Come we Justice follows which is of the
the duties among our selves.
now to the second: The sum whereof we delivered before; To love our
Neighbor as our selves: by the Name of Neighbor, understanding every other
man, as our Savior teaches, Luke 10. 30. To the Commandments of the second
Table, 2. Rules do generally belong:

First, That they stretch (every one) as well to our selves as to another, so
in being commanded to honor our Parents, we are also willed to have a care of
our own credit and estimation. In being forbidden to covet other men's goods, we
are commanded to be content with our own.

Secondly, They Mat. 5. 43. 44 Ye have heard that it has bin said, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy. But I say unto you, Love your
enemies. Bless those which curse you. Do good to those which hate you, and
pray for those which molest and persecute you.
extend as well to our enemies, and them that hate us, as to our friends and
them that love us.

These Commandments are thus divided: They command And is Honor, or the
general duties of love. Honor is a performance of duties in respect of a degree.
honor, or the general duties of love: By honor, we mean the performance of
all duties, which the respect of any degree may require at our hands, commanded
in the fifth Commandment, which vp-holding the common order and comeliness of
life, and principally Magistracy and Government; without which, the whole
world would come to nothing, gives the precedence to this Commandment before
all the rest of the second Table.

To come to the fifth Commandment: It contains First, among unequals, from
Inferiors to their Superiors, and contrariwise,
first, the duties of Inferiors to their Superiors, and contrariwise.

Secondly, The duties of equals one unto another.

Thirdly, The due respect that we are to have unto our selves.

The duty that Inferiors owe to all Superiors, whether As to all Superiors
in years, knowledge, or howsoever else.
in years, knowledge, or howsoever else, is Reverence, both in acknowledging
the good things wherein they are preferred, and making our use of them, and in
all outward notes and marks of honor toward Reverence in acknowledging the
good things wherein they are preferred, and making our use of them.
them; the principal whereof are these that follow,

First, Rising up before them: Thou Leuit. 19. 32. The notes of which
Reverence, are rising up before them.
shall rise up before the hoarie hairs, and give honor to the face of the
aged.

Secondly, Giving them the place and honor of speaking first: I am Job 32. 6,
7.
the youngest in years, and ye are aged: Therefore I was afraid, and feared
to show my opinion among you; I said, Men of years shall speak, and the aged
shall declare wisdom.

Thirdly, To meet them coming toward us. So Genesis 18. 2. ABRAHAM lifting up
his eyes, and looking, lo, Giving them the place and honor of speaking first,
etc.
three men stood by him, and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the
Tent door. 1. King. 2. 19. When Bathsheba came to speak with King Solomon,
the King rose to meet her.

Fourthly, To bow unto them, as both Abraham and Solomon did in the places
above mentioned: ABRAHAM ran to meet them, and bowed himself to the ground.
The King rose to meet his Mother, and bowed himself unto her. Of this kind is
the bowing of the knee, Mark. 10. 17. When Jesus was gone out of the way, there
came one running, and kneeled to him.

Fifthly, To stand by them whilst they sit down. And of this also Abraham is
there set for an Example, Genesis 18. 8.
He took Butter and Milk, and the Calfe that he had prepared, and set before
them, and stood himself by them under the Tree, and they did eat: Exodus 18,
13.
Exodus 18. 13. When Moses sat to judge the people, the people stood about him
from morning unto even.

Sixthly, To give them the chiefest seats, as 1. King. 2. 19
Solomon did to his Mother, when himself setting down on the Throne, caused a
seat to be set for her, and she set at his right hand. So the Genesis 43. 33.
children of Jacob eating Meat in Joseph's house, sat before him; the eldest
according to his age, and the youngest according to his youth: Insomuch as the
Egyptians maruailed among themselves.

Seventhly, To use Titles of Reverence, when he talks with them, As 1. Pet.
3. 6.
SARAH obeyed ABRAHAM, and called him Lord, whose Daughters ye are, whilst
you do well. Ye John 13. 13.
call me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for I am so.

Eighthly, To keep silence in Courts and places of Judgment, till we have
leave to speak: which modesty is noted in PAVL, Acts 24. 10. who after that
the Governor had beckened unto him that he should speak (and not before)
answered, etc.

The contrary of this reverence, is,

First, Contempt, and Vnreuerent behavior in deriding or speaking evil, and
reuiling them: When Genesis 9. 22.
HAM the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father, he told his two
brethren without. The Pro. 30. 17.
eye that mocketh his father, and despises the instruction of his mother, let
the Ravens of the Valley pick out, and the young Eagles eat it. He Genesis 21.
17.
that curses his father or mother, shall dye the Death.

Secondly, Extolling our selves above our betters, as Abimelech did, who being
a Concubines son, would needs reign before the lawful sons of his
father, I udges 9.

To those in any Authority whatsoever, whether the To them in authority.
Subjection in a ready submission to their government, and Obedience,
voluntarily to do what they command.
same be public or private, does belong

First, Subjection, in a ready submission to their government;

Secondly, Obedience, in a voluntary doing of that commanded: For these two are
to be performed to all in authority: and that not only to the good and
courteous, but also to the froward, as the Apostle exhorts, 1. Pet. 2. 18.

First, It must be from Servants to Masters. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7.
Servants, be obedient unto them that are your Masters according to the flesh.

Secondly, Fom Children to their Parents. Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for that is right.

Thirdly, From Wives to their Husbands. Ephesians. 5. 22, 23. 4. 14.
Wives, submit your selves unto your Husbands as unto the Lord: for the Husband
is the Wives head, even as Christ is head of the Church, and the same is the
Savior of his body. Therefore as the Church is in subjection unto Christ,
even so let the Wife be to her Husband in every thing.

Fourthly, From the People to the Ministers. Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves: for they
watch for your soul, as those that must give an account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief: for that is vprofitable for you.

Fifthly, From Subjects to Magistrates, both the supreme Magistrate and
subordinate ones. Submit 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14.
your selves unto all manner erdinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King, as unto the Superior, or unto Governors, as unto them that
are sent of him. Let Romans 13. 1.
every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.

Contrary to this subjection are First, Contempt, as that of Genesis 16. 4.
Hagar, Sarahs Handmaid, who when she saw her self to conceive, her Mistress
was set light by in her eyes.

Secondly, Shaking off the yoke of subjection to Princes, as the Papists do.

Thirdly, The resisting of lawful power, whereof the Apostle Romans 13. 2.
says, Whosoever resists authority, resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment. Contrary to the other,
is disobedience, which is one of the sins the Apostle reckons up, Romans 1.
30. disobedient to Parents. But this obedience is not absolute, without bounds
or limits: It must be Or (when it cannot with a good conscience be done)
in the Lord: for that which the Apostle writes unto Children, Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord, reaches farther, and has a place in
all. Therefore Coloss. 3. 22. he makes the fear of God, the Rule of Servants
obedience: Servants, obey your Masters, etc. fearing God. And the like is to be
said of Magistrates, as we are taught, Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to obey you rather then God, judge ye.

What must be done then, if they command things unlawful, such as with a good
conscience we cannot yield unto?

Verily in such cases we are patiently to abide the punishment: patiently to
bear the punishment.
In which doing, we no way violate the obedience due unto them. To this patient
suffering of the punishment, the Apostle does exhort us, 1. Pet. 2. 19, 20. For
this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully: for what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, you take it patiently? But if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and
take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. The contrary whereof is,

First, Answering again, when we are reproved, which the Apostle condemns,
Let 1. Tit. 2. 9.
Servants be subject to their Masters, and please them in all things, not
answering again.

Secondly, Flying from them, as Hagar Genesis 16. 6.
did. The duty we owe to Magistrates and Ministers are,

First, Ministering of charges and other necessaries for To public authority
of Magistracy and the Ministry. Supplying of charges and other necessaries
for the execution of their office,
the execution of their Offices: Give Romans 13. 7.
unto all men therefore their duty: tribute, to whom you owe tribute; custom,
to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom ye owe honor. The 1.
Tim. 5. 17, 18.
Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, specially they which
labor in the Word and Doctrine: for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzel
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn: and the Labourer is worthy of
his wages. Have 1. Cor. 9. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14.
not we power to eat and drink? Or have we not power to lead about a Wife,
being a Sister, as well as the rest of the Apostles, and as the Brethren of the
Lord and CEPHAS? or I only and BARNABAS, have not we power not to work? Who
goes a warfare any time at his own cost? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats
not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk
of the Flock? Say I these things according to man? Says not the Law the same
also? for it is written in the Law of MOSES, Thou shall not muzzell the mouth
of the Ox that treads out the Corn? Does God care for the Oxen? Either
says he it not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes (no doubt) it is
written, that he which eareth, should ear in hope, and that he that thresheth
in hope, should be partaker of his hope. Do ye not know, that they which
minister about the holy things, eat of the things of the Temple? And they
which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar! So also has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

Secondly, A defending them in their good and honest and a defending of them in
the same.
Actions, as the people did 1. Sam. 14. 45.
Jonathan against the cruelty of his father Saul, telling SAVL, Shall JONATHAN
dye, who has so mightily delivered Israel? God forbid. As JEHOVAH lives,
should one hair of his head fall to the ground, since he has wronght with God
this day? So the people delivered JONATHAN that he dyed not. The like did the
Princes unto Jeremy the Prophet, Ier. 26. 24.

The Duty of Children to Parents, is Touching the^ in private authority. To
Parents, not marrying without their consent,


First, That they marry not without their consent, which the light of Nature
teaches. And the 1. Cor. 6. 36, 37, 38.
Apostle gives this honor to Parents, to have power to keep his Virgin, and
not to give her forth to Marriage.

Secondly, When need requires, to relieve them. If any 1. Tim. 5. 4. and in
their necessities to relieve them.
Widow have Children, or Nephews, let them first learn to show godliness
toward their own house, and to recompense their Parents: for that is an
honest thing, and acceptable before God. This was Joseph's Genesis 45. 9, 10, 11.
Piety, who sent word unto his father, Come down to me; tarry not: And thou
shall dwell in the Land of Geshen, and shall be near me, thou and thy
children, and thy childrens children, and thy sheep and thy beasts, and all
that thou have. Also I will nourish thee there: for yet remain five years of
famine; lest thou perish through poverty, and thy household and all that thou
have. Contrariwise, our Mat. 15. 5, 6.
Savior taxes the Scribes and Pharisees, for the violating of this Duty: But
ye say, Whosoever shall say to father or mother, By the gift that is offered
by me, thou may have profit; though he honor not his father or his mother,
shall be free. Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of no authority by
your tradition.

To Masters is due faithful service; whereof we have To Masters faithful
service.
two worthy Examples; one, of Genesis 24. 33, 36.
Abraham's Servant sent to get a Wife for his Masters son, who would not so
much as eat, till he had done his Message: and when but some stay was made of
the Maidens going with him, Hinder Verse 56.
me not, says he, seeing JEHOVAH has prospered my journey; send me away,
that I may go to my Master. The other of Jacob, Genesis 31. 38, 39, 40.
who speaks thus of himself to LABAN, This twenty years I have been with
thee, thine Ewes and thy Goats have not cast their young, and the Rams of thy
Flock have not I eaten: whatsoever was torn of Beasts, brought I not to thee,
but made it good my self; of mine hand did thou require it, stolen by day,
or stolen by night: I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the
night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. The contrary whereof is
deceitfulness and wasting of their Masters goods, which the Tit. 2. 10.
Apostle specially bids Servants to take heed of, not to be Pickers, but to
show all good faithfulness, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior in all things.

Between Man and Wife are due,

First, mutual help: The woman, as 1. Pet. 3. 17.
Peter says, being subject to her Husband, and the Husband living with his To
Husband and Wife each from other mutual help,
Wife, as a man of knowledge, giving honor to the woman, as to the weaker
vessel, both being heirs together of the grace of Life.

Secondly, due benevolence: Let 1. Cor. 7. 3. and due benevolence.
the Husband give unto the Wife due benevolence, and likewise also the Wife
unto the Husband.

The Wife, she owes this to her Husband:

First, that she represent his virtues, being therefore called, 1. Cor. 10. 7.
The Wife also to represent her Husbands virtues,
The glory of man, as man is the image and glory of God.

Secondly, to save that which he brings in: whereupon the 1. Tim. 3. 11. and
to save that which he brings in.
Apostle wills them to be faithful in all things.

The duty of all Superiors to their Inferiors, is,

First, Good example of grave and wise carriage, The Tit. 2. 3, 4. Again from
all Superiors A good example of grave and wise carriage.
elder women, let them be in such behavior as becomes holiness, not false
accusers, not given unto much wine, but teachers of honest things, that 1. Pet.
5. 3.
they may instruct the younger women to be sober-minded, that they love their
Husbands, that they love their children: Not as though ye were Lords of Gods
Heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. Job 29. 8.
The young men saw me, and hid themselves, and the aged rose and stood up; his
wise and grave carriage procuring reverence and credit to him.

Secondly, Using of the things wherein they are preferred, And using of the
things wherein they are preferred to the others benefit.
to the others benefit, being content to yield unto them when they are in the
right, as to their brethren. So Deuteronomy. 17. 20. it is specially commanded to the
King, That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren. And Job 31. 13.
Job professes his care to practice this Lesson, If I did condemn the
judgment of my Servant, and of my Maid, when they did contend with me.

Thus did 2. King. 5. 13, 14.
NAAMAN harken to the advice of his Servants, and returning, washed in Jordan
and was made whole.

The Duty of such Superiors as are in authority, From them in authority.
First, instruction of their Inferiors, in the things of God, and of their
special callings.
whatsoever the same be, is*

Instruction of their Inferiors in the things of God, and of their special
callings, as Joshua did the Josh. 24.
Israelites. And in this respect Job Job 29. 15.
says of himself, that he was eyes unto the Blind, and feet unto the Lame.

Secondly, Due recompense of good or evil actions; which Peter 1. Pet. 2. 14.
Then due recompense of good or evil actions.
shows, to be the cause why Magistrates are erected: for the punishment of
evil doers, and praise of them that do well. And To. 13. 2, 3, 4
Paul says, that Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil.
Will thou then be without fear of the Power? Do well: so shall thou have
praise of the same: for he is the minister of God for thy wealth. In Col. 4. 1.
another place, Ye Masters, says he, do unto your Servants that which is
just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven.

Thirdly, Protection from wrongs: for whither should And lastly, protection
from wrongs.
the eyes Psalm. 123. 2.
of the Servant look, but to the hand of the Master? and the eyes of the
Maiden, but to the hands of her Mistress? Hereupon, Genesis 20. 16. Abimelech
tells SARA, that ABRAHAM her Husband was the covering of her eyes, and the
man that was to protect her. Josias also, Lam. 4. 20. is said to be unto the
people, the breath of their nostrils.

The Duty of Magistrates From public authority, that is to say, from
Magistrates maintenance as well of true Religion, as of peace and honesty of
life.
Anabaptists, which reject Magistracy.

The Papists, which teach that it belongs not to the Magistrate to deal in
matter of Religion: And also exempt their Clergy from the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate.


is,

First, Maintenance of true Religion.

Secondly, Maintenance of peace and honesty of life: for to him has God
committed the maintenance of both the Tables. So the 1. Tim. 2. 2.
Apostle teaches, that the Civil Magistrate is raised up of God unto that
high estate of Dignity, that we might live under them a peaceable and a quiet
life in all godliness and honesty. A part of this Duty is the deciding of
Controversies between man and man, and the true ministration of Law and
Justice, as Moses did, Exodus 18. 13.

For the performance of both these, God has furnished him with power, and to
this end put the Sword into his hands, which he may not suffer to rust in the
Scabbard, but must draw it out to punish all offenders. Romans 13. 4.
If thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the Sword for naught: for he is
the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil.

In all which punishments, a proportion is to be observed; That every one be
according to the nature and quality of the offense: Those against the first
Table, most severely and sharply, after the example of God himself, whom the
Prophet Ier. 5. 7.
brings in, saying, How should I spare thee for this? Thy children have
sworn by them that are no Gods.

In the second Table, Murder, Incest, Rape, with death; Trespass, with the
recompense of the hurt, etc. In all which, the Judicial Laws of Moses (albeit
we are not tied to the precise and strict form of that Commonwealth) are
notable precedents to go before us for the equity and substance of them. The
contrary whereof is, the not punishing, or light censuring of capital crimes,
and letting them escape, whom God brings into our hands.

Of the first we have a Law, Numb. 35. 31, 33. Ye shall take no recompense for
the life of the Murderer which is worthy to dye, but he shall be put to death:
for blood defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. And 1. Kin. 20. 42. A
Prophet tells the King of Israel, as from the Lord, Because thou have let go
out of thy hands a man whom I had appointed to dye, thy life shall go for his
life, and thy people for his people.

For the second, ELI is reproved, 1. Sam. 2. 23. who for foul and shameful
faults committed by his sons; such oppressing of the people, as made men
abhor the Service of the Lord: lying with the women that assembled at the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, etc. reproved them only with a
few words, and that in a mild sort: Why do you such things? for of all this
people, I hear evil reports of you, Do no more so, my sons: for it is no
good report which I hear of you, that you make the Lords people to trespass.

Take here-with-all some cautions,

First, That the Magistrate being Gods Romans 13. 1.
Minister in this behalf, do all things holily and reverently as in his
presence; whereof we have Joshua Josh. 7. 19. 25.
for a worthy pattern, who said unto ACHAN, My son, I beseech thee give
glory to JEHOVAH the God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and show me
now what thou have done: hide it not from me. Afterward, when the fact was
confessed by him, IOSHVA said, In as much as thou have troubled us, JEHOVAH
shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel threw stones at him, and burnt them
with fire, and stoned them with stones.

Secondly, He must propound a right end before him, that is to say, first, the
parties good and reformation, not his shame and destruction: for that the Pro.
20. 30,
Wiseman teaches us to be the scope and mark that all corrections ought to
level at, The bluenesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the
stripes within the bowels of the belly.

Secondly, The terrifying of others to commit the like offenses, which God in
the execution of his Laws has a special eye unto, That Deuteronomy. 13. 11.
all Israel may hear and tremble.

Lastly, concerning Magistrates: Let it be known, that the use of the Sword
stands also in lawful and just War, in fighting the Lords Battles, as
she speaks 1. Sam. 25. 28.
unto DAVID: For JEHOVAH will certainly make for my Lord a sure House, if my
Lord fight the Battles of JEHOVAH, and evil be not found in thee all thy
days.

The Ministers Duty is to attend public teaching, and From the Ministry
public teaching
to be diligent therein. I Esaias 62. 6.
have set Watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which all the day and all the
night shall not cease; the Romans 12. 7. 8.
teacher let him continue in his teaching; the exhorter in his exhortation,
etc. The 1. Pet. 1. 2.
Elders among you I exhort, etc. Feed the Flocks of God that depends upon
you. Take Acts 20. 28.
heed to your selves and to all the Flock, wherein the Holy Ghost has made
you Bishops, that you feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his
own blood.

The contrary whereof are,

First, Idol shepherds, that cannot teach at all, such as the Prophet
complayneth of, Their Esaias 56. 10.
watchmen are all blind, they have no knowledge, they are dumb dogs, they
cannot bark.

Secondly, Negligent Preachers, which, as Esaias there says, lie and sleep, and
delight in sleeping. Wherefore God tells Ezech. 3. 17, 18.
EZECHIEL, Son of man, I have appointed thee a Watchman to the House of
Israel, and thou shall hear the Word out of my mouth, that thou may give
warning unto them from me: when I say unto the wicked man, Thou shall certainly
dye, and thou do not give him warning, nor speak to warn the wicked man of
his evil way, to keep him alive, that wicked man shall dye by his own
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand.

The Duty of those that have any charge or government, From private
authority. Provision of Food and Raiment.
is,

First, Provision of food and raiment, whereof the 1. Tim. 5. 8.
Apostle says, If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his
own house, he is worse then an Infidel. For this, does SOLOMON commend the
virtuous woman, Prou. 31. 15. Rising whilst it is yet night, she gives meat
to her household, and the ordinary to her Maids. And Verse 21.
again, She fears not the Snow for her Family: For all her Family is clothed
with double clothes. And Pro. 27. 27. he says not only, Let the milk of the
Goats be sufficient for thy food: but further also, for the food of thy
Family, and for the sustenance of thy Maids.

Secondly, Familiarly to teach their Inferiors, as the Ephesians. 6. 4. Familiarly
to teach their Inferiors,
Apostle exhorts fathers to bring up their children in instruction, and
information of the Lord: for which, Abraham Genesis 18. 19.
is highly commended of God, I know, says he, that he will command his Sons
and his Family after him, to keep the way of JEHOVAH in doing righteousness
and judgment.

Thirdly, To go before them in Prayer: so did Genesis 25. 20. and in Prayer to
go before them.
Isack pray unto JEHOVAH, ouer-against his Wife, that is, in her presence, and
together with her, and for her, because she was barren.

The Duty of Parents more particularly is, From both the Parents.

To apply their children to that they are fit for.




First, To apply their children to that they are fit for: Pro. 22. 6.
Instruct a child after the manner of his way, even when he is very old, he
will not depart from it. ADAM, Genesis 4. 2.
in the first beginning of the World, practiced this Lesson: for having two
sons, CAIN and HABEL, HABEL was a Shepherd, and CAIN an Husbandman.

Secondly, To provide for them: For 2. Cor. 12. 14.
Children ought and to provide for them. From the Father to name the Child.
not to store up for Parents, but Parents for their Children.

Special to the Father is, to name the Child: which authority, Zachary,
Father of John Baptist, took upon him, when the Mother of the friends Luke 1.
62, 63.
striving about the name, he decided the Controversy, and called him John.

Of the Mother another Duty is more specially to be From the Mother to nurse
it.
observed, that she nurse the Child. Holy women have always reckoned this to
belong unto them. Genesis 21. 7.
Sarah a great Princess, makes no doubt, but that having a Child, she was to
give it suck: Who would have said to ABRAHAM, SARAH shall certainly give
suck? for I have borne a Son.

In like sort 1. Sam. 1. 23.
Anna is recorded to have given suck to Samuel, as was the common course then
of religious and godly Matrones: whereupon the 1. Tim. 5. 10.
Apostle requires this in the first place, as one of the most special good
works, which he would have that woman to be well reported for, that should
be associate into the number of Widows, that she have nursed her Children.
From Masters, due respect of their Servants travails.


The Duty of Masters is, to have a due respect of their Servants travails,
whereof there is a special Law: Deuteronomy. 15. 12, 13, 14.
When thou sendest out free from thee in the seventh year thy brother an
Hebrew, that has served thee six years, thou shall not let him go away
empty, but shall give him a liberal From Husbands cherishing of their Wives
with all entyre affection.
reward of thy Sheep, and of thy Corn, and of thy Wine, etc.

The Duty of Husbands is, that they cherish their Wives with all entyre
affection. Ye Ephesians. 5. 25. 29.
Husbands, love your Wives, eue^ as Christ has loved the Church: for no man at
any time has hated his own flesh, but nourishes it and cherishes it.

The Duty of Equals one unto another, is, Secondly, it is of equals one unto
another, in loving, honoring, and


First, To love and to honor each other: Be Romans 12. 10.
affectioned to love one another with brotherly love. In giving honor, go one
before another, submitting Ephesians. 5. 21.
your selves one unto another in the fear of GOD. Wherefore, we are to
testify that our love and respect to others, by all holy tokens and outward
signs of salutation, or otherwise; Greet 1. Pet. 5. 14.
ye one another with the Kiss of love: Salute Romans 16. 16.
one another with an holy Kiss. The Churches of Christ salute you. Thus it is
said of Exodus 18. 7.
Moses, that he went out to meet his father in Law, and did obeisance and
kissed him, and each asked other of his welfare. And of Ruth 2. 4.
Boaz, that he coming from Bethlehem to his Reapers, said unto them, JEHOVAH
be with you. And they said unto him, JEHOVAH bless thee. The contrary whereof
is, preferring our selves before them. Let Philip. 2. 3.
nothing be done through contention or vain glory, but in meekness of
mind, let every man esteem other better then himself.

Secondly, To do good to all, but chiefly to such as doing of good to all, but
chiefly to such as by the bond of nature, or profession of the same faith, are
more nearly linked to us.
by the bond of Nature, or profession of the same faith, are more nearly
linked to us. If 1. Tim. 5. 8.
any provide not for his own, especially those of his own house, he is worse
then an Infidel. Gal. 6. 10.
Let us work that that is good to all, but especially to those of the Household
of Faith.

Lastly, the due respect we are to have unto our selves, is,

First, To maintain our honest credit; as the Apostle does exhort, Phil. 4. 8.
Whatsoever things are of good report, if And lastly toward our selves.

The mayntayning of our honest credit,


there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things. The
contrary whereof is, the obscuring of Gods Graces in us, by our dissolute and
careless life. So did the foolish Virgins, that Mat. 25. 2. 16.
took not Oil with them in their Lamps, and he Mat. 25. 16. 18*
that having received one Talent, went and dug in the ground and hid his
Masters money.

Secondly, A sober esteeming of the Graces we have and sober esteeming of the
graces we have received.
received, neither arrogating that we have not, or boasting of that we have.
The contrary whereof is, an ouer-co^ceit of our selves. Romans 12* 3.
Paul to the Romans in one sentence has them both: For I say, through the
grace that is given unto me, to every one that is among you, that no man
presume to understand above that which is meet to understand, but that he
understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to every one the measure
of faith.

CHAP. X.
Of the sixth Commandment.

AMong the general Duties of Love, those The general Duties of Love, are
those that are without respect of degree, and respect the person or the good
things belonging to the person. Person, as Mercy and Chastity. Mercy is of
the Duties that touch the preservation of ones person
are the greatest, that touch the preservation of ones person, that is to say,
of his life, health or safety both of soul and body, which is the sum of
the sixth Commandment, comprehended by our Savior Christ, under the name of
Mercy, Mat. 23. 23.

The safety of the Soul, by seeking to win them to God and to all
goodness, Even as I, says the 1. Cor. 10. 33.
Apostle, please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many, that they might be saved.

And this is principally performed,

First, By encouraging them in godliness, as that good man Acts 11. 23.
Barnabas did, Who when he was come to Antiochia, and had seen the grace of
God, was glad and exhorted all, that with purpose of heart they would clean
unto the Lord. Whence comes that Apostolical speech, Heb. 10. 24. Let us
consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works: whereunto it
much avails by our own example to go before them, when our Mat. 5. 16.
light so shines in the eyes of men, that they may see our good works, and
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. The contrary whereof are scandals, or
the giving of any offense either in life or doctrine: Woe Mat. 28. 7.
be to the World, because of offenses; it is necessary that offenses should
come, but woe to them by whom they come. Give 1. Cor. 10. 32.
no offense neither to the jews nor Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. 1.
Cor. 8. 13.
If meat offend my Brother, I will not eat flesh whilst I live, that I may
not offend my Brother. It Romans 14. 21.
is not good to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any thing whereby
thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

Secondly, Admonishing and rebuking them when they offend: We 1. These. 5. 14
desire you, Brethren, admonish them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, bear with the weak, be patient toward all men. Leuit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy Neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Have Jude verse 22. 23.
compassion of some, in putting difference, and other save with fear, pulling
them out of the fire, and hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. Brethren,
Gal. 6. 1.
if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest
thou also be tempted.

The contrary whereof is, the disclosing of men's secret sins especially such
as are committed of infirmity: If Mat. 18. 15.
thy Brother sin against thee, go and rebuke him between him and thee
alone. He Pro. 11, 13.
walks as a slanderer, that discloseth a secret: but he that is true of
spirit, concealeth a manner.

But if for all our admonitions they amend not, we are then to make their
fault known to others that may reform them; following the Example of Genesis 37.
3.
JOSEPH, who brought unto his Father the evil behavior and demeanor of his
Brethren: and of those of the house of Cloe, 1. Cor. 1. 11.
of whom the Apostle says, It has been declared unto me, my Brethren, of
you, by them that are of the house of CLOE, that there are contentions among
you. And this counsel our Savior gives us, Mat. 18. 16. If he hear not
thee, take with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three Witnesses
every word may be confirmed.

The Duties that concern the body, are of two sorts: the first, to provide by
all means for men's safety: for which cause the Israelites were Deuteronomy. 22. 8^.
commanded to make Battlements upon their houses, lest any falling from the
top, they should be guilty of blood. The contrary whereof is Murder,
Manslaughter, and the procuring of ones death any way. He Genesis 9. 7.
that sheadeth the blood of a man, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the
Image of God made he man.

Secondly, Fighting, beating, mayming, etc. When Leuit. 24. 19, 20.
a man maymeth his fellow, as he does, so it shall it be done to him, Eye for
Eye, Tooth for Tooth.

Thirdly, The doing or suffering of any thing whereby danger may grow; as if
Exodus 21. 29.
a man's Ox have been wont heretofore to goare, and the Master being told of
it, have not looked unto him, so as it kill a man or woman, the Ox shall be
stoned, and his Master also shall be put to death.

The principal means to procure this safety of the body, is, using of
Physic and other good means to preserve and recover health, as the woman
did, Mark 5. 26. and Asa 2. Chron. 16. 22. Whose seeking to the Phisicians in
his disease, being good, only his not seeking first to God, is condemned.

The contrary whereof is, giving or our selves to sin, whereby we pull evil
and affliction upon our selves: Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee. Ye Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24.
shall not trouble any Widow or Fatherless Child: if thou vex and trouble
such, and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry: then shall
my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the Sword, and your Wives shall
be Widows, and your Children Fatherless. He Pro. 7. 22, 23.
follows her straight-wayes, as an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a
Fool to the Stocks for correction, till a Dart strike through his Liver, as a
Bird hastes to the snare, not knowing that he is in danger.

Secondly, The casting of our selves into unnecessary dangers, whereunto the
Devil tempted Christ, Mat. 4. 6, 7. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy
self down: for it is written, that he will give his Angels charge ever thee,
and with their hand they shall lift these up, lest at any time then should
dash thy foot against a stone. But JESUS said unto him, It is written again,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Thirdly, Surfeiting. If Pro. 25. 16.
thou have found Honey, eat that is sufficient for thee, lest thou be
ouer-full and vomit it up.

Fourthly, Eating out of time. Woe Eccles. 10. 16.
to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning.

Fifthly, Spending of our selves by unchaste behavior: for that the Wiseman
gives us a watchword, Pro. 5. 11. Lest thou mourn at thy latter end, when
thou have consumed thy flesh and thy body.

First, Giving place to another fury, as Jacob did to Esau, by his Mothers
counsel, Genesis 2. 7, 44. Tarry with my brother LABAN a while, until thy
Brothers fierceness be assuaged.

Secondly, By a just defense of our selves when we are assaulted, though it be
with the hurt or killing of our Adversaries, where Numb. 35. 22
otherwise we cannot escape, and we our selves have no desire or purpose of
Revenge, but 2. Sam. 14. 7. 10.
only to save our selves.

The other Duty that concerns the body, is a comely Burial of the dead,
whereof we have a worthy Example, Acts 8. 2. Then certain men fearing God,
carried forth STEPHEN among them to be buried, and made a great lamentation
for him.

The special virtues that lead us by the hand to the Where the special
virtues that lead us by the hand to the keeping of this Commandment, are
Meekness and Kindness. Meekness in a gentle,
keeping of this Commandment, are two: Meekness and Kindness: Of Meekness,
we read, Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek in spirit. And for the same, Moses
is commended, Numb. 12. 13. that he was an exceeding meek man, above all the
men upon the face of the Earth.

Meekness is seen,

First, In gentleness of nature, or a harmless mind. The contrary whereof
is, the using of any of GODS Creatures hardly, even the poor beast: A
righteous man regards the life of his beast, says SOLOMON, Pro. 20. 10.
but the mercies of the wicked or cruel. The Law Deuteronomy. 22. 6.
of God that says, If thou find a Birds Nest in the way, in any Tree or on the
ground, whether they be young or Eggs, thou shall not take the Damme with the
young; was grounded upon this equity, to forbid a hard and unmerciful heart.

Secondly, In a peaceable disposition, He 1. Pet. 3. 11.
that loves and peaceable disposition,
to see good days, etc. let him seek peace and follow after it. If Romans 12.
18.
it be possible, as much as lies in you, have peace with all men.

The contrary whereof is frowardness or vneasinesse to be reconciled; one of
the offenses reckoned, Romans 1. 38. Men that can never be appeased. Of this
peaceable disposition there be three steps or degrees:

First, A readiness to depart from ones right: As Abraham ready to depart from
ones right,
Genesis 13. 9.
was content to do to LOT. If thou take the left hand, then will I go to the
right; and if thou go to the right hand, then will I go to the left. Mat. 17.
25, 26. Christ the Son of God gives a notable president of this, who, though
he were the Son, and therefore free, yet paid tribute, to avoid offense. The
1. Cor. 6, 7.
Apostle to the Corinths sharply takes them up for lack of this virtue: Why
do you not rather take wrong? Why do you not rather suffer loss? The
contrary is, that which he there 1. Cor. 6. 8.
adds, Nay, ye your selves do wrong and do harm, etc.

Secondly, When one is slow to wrath: Pro. 19. 11.
The discretion Slow to wrath,
of a man deferreth his anger. The contrary whereof is unadvised Anger,
condemned, Mat. 5. 22. This unadvised Anger shows it self two manner of
ways; First, in hastiness, when it is either without cause, or for small
cause, which Solomon opposes to the former virtue, Pro. 14. 29. He that is
slow to wrath, is of great wisdom: but he that is of an hasty mind, stirs
up folly: for anger upon just cause is a good and holy thing, and was in our
Savior Christ, Mark 3. 5. The Ephesians. 4* 26.
Apostle also says, Be angry, but sin not.

Secondly, When our anger being upon just cause, yet we pass measure, as 1.
Sam. 25. 13, 33.
David did in the matter of Nabal, or dwell too long upon it; whereof we have
a precept, Ephesians. 4. 6.
That the Sun go not down in our wrath.

The fruits of this kind of peaceable disposition are notable: First, the
preventing of all occasions whereby Anger may be kindled: and for this cause,
it is lawful to make covenants with Infidels and Heathens, so far as they
tend only for preservation of peace; as Genesis 21. 23.
Abraham, and after him, Isack Ge. 26. 28, 29.
made with Abimelech, Genesis 31. 52.
Jacob with Laban, and many other recorded in the Book of God.

Secondly, The appeasing of it being kindled, whereof Abigal, in David's fury,
gives a worthy president, 1. Sam. 25. 18. etc.

It is wrought,

First, By ouer-passing some wants and infirmities in men's words or deeds: As,
It is the Pro. 19. 11.
glory of a man to pass by an offense.

Secondly, By covering them with silence, and keeping secret the offense of our
Neighbor, where Christian love does not compel us to disclose it: for Love
will 1. Pet. 4. 8.
cover a multitude of sins. And the Wiseman tells us, He Pro. 17. 9.
that covers a transgression, seeks Love: But he that repeateth a matter,
(by rubbing up the memory of it, when it is gone and past) does separate a
Prince: that is, makes even the greatest friends to fall out. The contrary
whereof are complaints one of another; as that of the Pharisees, Mark 7. 3.
to our Savior Christ, against his Disciples, for eating bread with unwashed
hands. This vice Jude v. 16.
Jude notes in his Epistle, These are Complayners, etc.

Thirdly, By courteous answers in word or deed: A soft Pro. 15. 1.
answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. Take Gedeon
for an Judge. 8. 1, 2, 3
Example, whose kind speech and usage pacified the fierce wrath of the
Ephraimites. As on the other side we read, 2. Sam. 19. 44. that the insolent
and proud answer of the men of Judah, caused revolt from the King, that
followed in the next Chapter. The contraries are,

First, Bitterness in speech taxed, Romans 3. 14. Whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness.

Secondly, Brawling and chiding, as that of the Ephraimites, Judge. 8. 1.
Crying, which is an unseemly lifting up of the voice, whereof we have an
Example, Acts 22. 23. As, They cried and brake their Garments, and cast dust
into the Air. And again, Acts 23. 9. Then there was a great cry, and the
Scribes on the Pharisees part contended, etc.

These three the Apostle has altogether, Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all bitterness,
and rage, and wrath, and crying, and evil speaking be taken from you.

Fourthly, Lowering, or frowning, as Genesis 4. 5.
Kain, who being exceeding wroth, his countenance fell down. So 1. Sam. 18. 9.
Saul is said to eye (or look a-squint upon Psalm. 10. 5.
David.)

Fifthly, Snuffing: whereby David painteth out a wicked man. He snuffeth, says
he, at all his Adversaries. And in another Psalm. 12. 5.
place God is brought in, saying, For the desolation of the needy ones, for
the mourning of the poor ones, I will up now, says JEHOVAH, and set at
safety him whom the wicked man snuffeth at.

The third step of a peaceable disposition is, suffering and patient to endure
wrongs
of wrongs patiently, lest they break forth into further mischief. Take,
says JAMES, James 5. 10.
for an example of suffering wrongs, and of long patience, the Prophets, etc.
The contrary whereof, are grudges growing from impatiencie, though something or
other happily keep it from breaking sorth. Grudge James 5. 9.
not one against another. Jude v. 16.
These are Murmurers, or Grudgers, Complayners, etc.

Kindness, the other virtue, stands in two things: Kindness, in a loving
disposition,


First, In a kind and brotherly affection from one unto another, in as much as
we are all the Creatures of one God, and the natural children of one father,
ADAM: Rejoice Romans 12. 15.
with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. They Amos 6, 5, 6.
play upon the Vial, drink in Basins of Wine, and anoint themselves with the
principal Ointments, but are not grieved for the affliction of JOSEPH. The
contrary whereof is, Insulting over men in adversity; Thou Obad. v. 12.
sheuldest not (says the Prophet) have seen the day of thy Brother, the day
when he was made a stranger: Neither should thou have been glad at the
children of Judah, what time they perished, neither should thou have
enlarged thy mouth in the day of Adversity.

Of this nature, are first derision and scorning, as it is said Genesis 21. 9.
of the son of Hagar the Egyptian, that he mocked Isack. David in the
Psalms Psalm. 69. 13.
complayneth of it: They that sit in the Gate, talk of me, and the Drunkards
sing of me. As if he should say, I am their common byword. This derision is
many times expressed by a scornful nodding of the head, They Mat. 27. 39.
that passed by, rayled at him, nodding their heads, and saying, Thou that
destroyest the Temple, etc. save thy self.

Secondly, Railing with contemptuous terms, as Raca, Mat. 5. 22.
Fool.

Thirdly, Mocking and taunting our Brother, and making our selves merry with
him upon his wants, either of mind or body: Thou Leuit. 19. 14.
shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind.
Cursed Deuteronomy. 27. 18.
is he that makes the Blind go out of the way: especially if it be for
godliness sake; as the little children of the Idolatrous City Bethel did unto
the Prophet, ^. King. 2. 23. Ascend, Bald-pate, Ascend, Bald-pate.

Secondly, It stands in three noble fruits that flow and helpfulnesse unto
other.
from this kind of affection:

First, To pity our Neighbor in his distress, lending our helping hand unto
him, and ministering unto him in his necessity the comforts that God does
bless us with: If he be an hungry, to give him meat; if thirsty, to give him
drink; if a stranger, to lodge him; if naked, to clothe him; if sick, to
visit him; if in Prison, to come unto him: as these particulars are reckoned
up, Mat. 25. 35, 36. 1 John 3. 17.
For he that has this Worlds goods, and seeing his brother in want, shuts
up his bowels from him, how does the love of GOD dwell in him? Let Job, a
mirror of all virtue, be ever before our eyes, to stir us up to this duty,
who Job 31. 17, 19, 20.
testifies of himself, I ate not my morsel alone, but the fatherless ate of
it. If I saw one ready to perish for lack of clothing, and a poor man that
had nothing to cover him, his loins blessed me: for he warmed himself by the
fleece of my Lambs. For this cause, in the Law they were commanded, both
before the Vintage or Harvest, to suffer the poor, for satisfying of his
hunger, to gather Grapes, or pluck Ears of Corn, and in the Vintage to leave
an after-gathering for the poor. Of the first, you have a Commandment, Deuteronomy.
23. 24, 25. When thou come unto thy Neighbors Vineyard, then thou may
eat Grapes at thy pleasure, as much as thou will, but thou shall put none in
thy vessel. When thou come into thy Neighbors Corn, thou may pluck the
Ears with thine hand, but thou shall not move a Sickle to thy Neighbors
Corn.

An Example thereof is extant, Mat. 12. 1. At that time JESUS went on a Sabbath
Day through the Corn, and his Disciples were an hungry, and began to pluck
the Ears of Corn, and eat.

Of the second, you have a Commandment, Leuiticus 23. 22. When you reap the
Harvest of your Land, thou shall not rid clean the corners of thy Field when
thou reapest, neither shall thou make any after-gathering of thy Harvest, but
shall leave them unto the poor and to the stranger. I am JEHOVAH your GOD. An
Example you have, Ruth 2. 8. Then said BOAZ unto RVTH, Hear thou, my
Daughter? Go to none other Field, to gather, neither go from hence, but abide
here by my Maidens. The contrary whereof is Ex. 22. 21, 2^
unmercifulness to the Stranger, Fatherless, Widows, Poor, Impotent, etc.
As,

First, In not paying the poor Labourer his wages, and that speedily, Thou
Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15.
shall not oppress the hired poor, or needy one of thy Brethren, or of the
stranger that is in thy Land. At his day shall thou give him his hyre, the
Sun shall not go down before he have it. Behold, Iam. 5. 4.
the hyre of the Workmen that have reaped your Fields, which is kept away by
you, cries, and their cries are come up unto the ears of the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, In not restoring the pledge of the poor, whereof we have a Law,
Exodus 22. 26, 27. If thou take to pledge thy Neighbors garment, before the
Sun go down thou shall restore it to him.

Thirdly, In keeping from them such commodities, whereby their life should be
sustained: He Pro. 11. 26.
that withdraws Corn, the people will curse him: but a blessing shall be
upon the head of him that sells his Corn.

To forgive offenses: Be Ephesians. 4. 31.
toward one another kind, not only forgiving offenses,
full of compassion, forgiving one another, as Christ also forgave us; If Mat.
6. 14.
you forgive men their offenses, so also will your heavenly Father forgive you.
This is it which we are taught in the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Thirdly, To overcome evil with good. The contrary but recompencing good for
evil.
is Revenge, whereof Paul Romans 12. 19, 20, 21.
says, Revenge not your selves, beloved, but give place to wrath: for it is
written, Mine is vengeance, I will repay, says the Lord. If therefore thine
Enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink: for so doing, thou shall
heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of that which is evil: but
overcome evil with good.

Not that by this Doctrine all going to Law is to be condemned, or that we are
to find fault with the execution of Murderers and others, or with War leauied
by Princes against Tyrants abroad, or Rebels at home. No: for to these purposes
God has erected the sacred and high estate of civil Magistrates, as we have
showed before in the fifth Commandment.

CHAP. XI.
Of the seventh Commandment.

THE seventh Commandment requires, Chastity is, of the duties that touch the
purity of one person, both soul and body; and that as well in single life, as
in the state of Marriage, which God has instituted for a remedy against
uncleanness.
that we be chaste, and pure, in soul and body, 1. These 4. 3, 4, 5
Possessing our Vessel, as the Apostle wills us, in Holiness and Honor,
what estate soever we be in, whether single life, or in the estate of holy
Marriage.

I call the lawful conjunction of a Anabaptists and Nicolaitanes that would
have wives to be common.
man and woman into one flesh: (for out of this estate of Matrimony, there is
no honest copulation, nor Mal. 2. 15.
seed of God, as the Prophet terms it.)

Holy Marriage, I say, First, for that it is a holy remedy, instituted of God
for such as otherwise cannot contain to keep their Vessel in honesty and
honor, it being 1 Cor. 7. 9.
better to marry then to burn: wherefore for 1. Cor. 7. 2.
avoiding of fornication, let every man have his Wife, and every woman her
husband, says the Apostle. Again, Heb. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable among all, or in all things, and the Bed undefiled: But
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

Secondly, Because here especially that rule holds, which we are to observe
in all duties whatsoever: That it be 1. Cor. 7. 39.
in the Lord.

All sorts of men may The Papists that restrain their Priests from Marriage,
which notwithstanding (ridiculously) they make a Sacrament.
indeed lawfully contract Matrimony, neither is there any state or condition
of persons exempted from it: for as the disease is general, so the remedy
belongs to them all: Therefore we are told, Marriage Heb. 13. 4.
is honorable among all, and the Bed undefiled. For 1. Cor. 7. 2.
avoiding of Fornication, let every man have his Wife, and every woman her
Husband: yet I add in the third place Lawful conjunction, to show that it
must be between such persons, as by no degree of Consanguinitie or Affinity
are prohibited to contract it, which to do is Incest.

Those degrees you have all reckoned, Leuit. 18. and are these that follow:

The Leuit. 18. Verse 7, 8.
Son to marry the Mother, or the Stepmother: The 9.
Brother, the Sister of the whole or the half blood, and whether borne in
lawful wedlock or otherwise.

The 10.
Father, his Sons Daughter, or his Daughters Daughter; the Son 11.
to marry the Daughter of his Father, borne by his Stepmother:

One 12, 13.
to marry his Aunt being his Father or his Mothers Sister, or to 14.
marry his Uncles Wife:

The Father 15.
to marry his Sons Wife:

The 16.
Brother to marry his Brothers Wife:

A 17.
Man to marry his Wives Daughter, or his Wives Sons Daughter, or his Wives
Daughters Daughter.

All which degrees are in like sort, and by the same analogy and proportion
forbidden to the Woman: and in the right line either ascending or descending,
the same prohibition reaches in a manner infinitely.

All which Rules are perpetual, not for the Jews only confirmed by the Law
of Nature: for the breach of this common honesty is reckoned Le. 18. 27, 28
amongst those abominations, for which the Land of Canaan did vomit up her
Inhabitants.

In the fourth place, I say, a man The defenders of Polygamie.
and a woman, because Marriage is between two, Every 1. Cor. 7. 2.
man to have his proper Wife, and every woman her proper Husband.

Two Mat. 19. 5.
(says our Savior) shall be one flesh.

The contrary whereof is Polygamie, that is, the having of more Wives then one
at once: which, howsoever it pleased God for a time to tolerate in the Jews,
and in the Patriarchs, before them, for the increase of the World, but
principally of his Church; yet was always a corruption of holy Marriage and
unlawful (without special dispensation from God himself:) for

First, God Genesis ^. 22.
in the first institution of holy Marriage, coupled together but one man and
one woman, Adam and Eve, and created only two from whom all Mankind should
come; when yet all other spirits were his also, as the Prophet disputes, Mal.
2. 15. This reason our Savior yields, Mat. 19. 4. Have ye not read, that he
which made from the beginning, made them one male, and one female?

Secondly, Hereby there comes a seed of God, or a holy seed acceptable unto
him, in the restraint of all rouing lusts: for Mal. 2. 15.
why made he one? Because he sought a seed of God, says the same Prophet.

Thirdly, The words of the Law rightly understood, are expressed, Leuit. 18. 18.
Thou shall not take one Wife to another to vex her, etc.

Lastly, If a man may measure the childs goodness, by the Fathers virtues,
the first Polygamist and corrupter (this way) of Gods Ordinance, was Genesis 4. 19.
Lamech, a vile wretch, of the posterity of wicked Cain.

Fifthly, I say, Into one flesh; For that by Marriage those that were two
before, are now become but one. So was the first institution, Genesis 2. 24.
They shall be one flesh. And Matthew 19. 5. Our Savior accordingly
concludes, Wherefore they are no more two, but one flesh.

Whereof it follows, that Marriage is a perpetual bond, so as Whosoever Mat.
19. 9.
puts away his Wife, except it be for fornication, and marryeth another,
commits adultery: and he that marries her so put away, commits adultery.

Howbeit, if one of the The Popish Bygamy, which accounts him to have two
Wives that marryeth again, after the first Marriage dissolved, or has married
a Widow.
parties dye, the other then is at liberty to marry again: For the 1. Cor.
7. 39.
woman is bound by the Law as long as her Husband lives: but if her Husband
dye, she is free to marry whom she will.

Lastly, concerning Marriage, this one thing is to be added, that it is
convenient that a solemn contract of the parties married should go before.

By contract, I mean a promise of both the parties to marry the one with the
other, if in the mean time there appear no just cause to the contrary:
whereby it is easy to discern, what is the right use and end of a contract,
namely, that before that indissoluble knot do come, the parties may thoroughly
acquaint themselves together, that so any lawful impediment to hinder their
meeting, may in time be discovered, before it proceed further; and this is
convenient;

First, Because it is warranted by the example of Gods Children As may be
seen, Deuteronomy. 22. 23. Mat. 1. 10.
in all times, and by the light of Nature among the very Heathen.

Secondly, God himself approves it, in providing for the chastity of a woman
so contracted, no otherwise then as if she were his wedded Wife; that he Deuteronomy.
22. 23, 24.
which lies with her, shall dye the death.

The contraries of this purity, which hitherto have been spoken of, are

First, Inward and in the mind, the lusts of 1. Cor. 7. 9. It is better to
marry, then to burn.
concupiscence, as the Apostle does oppose them, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. Let every man
know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, not in the lusts of
concupiscence, as the Gentiles that know not God: Which lusts of concupiscence
elsewhere he calls burning, for that thereby godly motions as with fire are
burnt up and consumed. Of these, Christ speaks, Mat. 5. 28. Whosoever looks
upon a woman, to lust after her, has already committed adultery with her in
his heart.

Secondly, All bodily pollution and uncleanness, as the sin of Onan, for
which the Lord slew him, Genesis 38. 8. The like whereof is that, Deuteronomy. 23. 10,
11. when it comes from immoderate diet or unchaste thoughts.

More particularly is condemned all unlawful copulation in the several kinds
thereof; Buggerie, Adultery, Fornication.

Buggerie (a sin not to be named) is a copulation against nature, whether
with beasts, dishonouring our own Sex, or of men or women in the same Sex
committing filthiness: Thou Leuit. 18. 23, 24.
shall not lie with a male, as a man lies with a woman, that is abomination.
Thou shall not lie with any Beast, to pollute thy self therewith. Neither
shall a woman stand before a Beast, to lie with it; that is confusion. Cursed
Deuteronomy. 28. 21.
be he that lies with any Beast. For this Romans 1. 26. 27.
cause, God delivered them up into dishonorable lusts; for even the Females
changed the natural use, into that which is contrary to nature: likewise also
the Males, leaving the natural use of the Female, burned in their desire one
unto another, Males with Males committing filthiness.

This was the sin of Sodom: Genesis 19. 5.
Bring forth the men unto us, that we may know them.

The other two are Adultery and Fornication.

Adultery, when one or both are marrryed to another.

Fornication, when two unmarried persons commit it: Of both which, the Apostle
says, Heb. 13. 4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. The Gal. 5. 19.
works of the flesh are Adultery, Fornication, etc. And our Savior, Mat. 15.
19, 20. Out of the heart come Adulteries, Fornications, etc. These are the
things that defile a man. And here, if in any of these, force be used, it is
called Rape, and makes the sin more heinous. But the party Deuteronomy. 22. 26, 27.
forced, is to be held guiltless.

There be two especial means both to set and to The two preservatives of
Chastity, are Modesty and Temperance. Modesty, which keeps a comely
shamefastness in words,
hold us in the purity both of soul and body, whether we be sole or married;
Modesty and Temperance.

Modesty is that, which keeps a comeliness and decency in things.

First, Our words to be modest and shamefast, even when we speak of things
that sin has made shameful, as we see the Holy Ghost every where to do
Genesis 4. 1. ADAM knew EVE his Wife. Genesis 29. 22. He took LEAH, and brought her
unto JACOB, who went in unto her. 1. Sam 24. 3. SAVL went to cover his feet.
The contrary whereof are,

First, Lewd speeches, and much noise; whereby Solomon describes the unchaste
woman, Pro. 7. 11. and 9. 13 Secondly, filthy speeches: whither refer
Loue-Songs, amarous Books, filthy Ballads, Enterludes, etc. comprehended under
the name of filthiness, foolish speaking, and jesting, which are not things
comely, Ephesians. 5. 34.

Secondly, Our eyes and countenance to be chaste, Countenance,
making, as Job Job 31. 1.
did, a covenant with our eyes, not to look upon a Maid. The contrary
whereof is

First, a whorish Pro. 7. 31.
countenance.

Secondly, Eyes, which the Apostle 2. Pet. 2. 14.
calls full of Adultery, feeding them either with another beauty, (whereof
our Savior says, Mat. 5. 28.
He that looks upon a woman, to lust after her, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart) or with wanton Pictures, Lascivious
representations of Loue-matters in Plays and Comedies, etc. for all which, the
Rule of the Apostle is general, Abstain 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
from every evil show.

Thirdly, Our ears to delight to hear honest things. The contrary whereof
is, when they delight in that which is filthy and unclean.

Fourthly, Our hands and all our parts to be instruments of holiness. The
contrary whereof is, the reaching of them forth to any filthy and unseemly
Act, as in that mentioned, Deuteronomy. 25. 11, 12.

Fifthly, Our whole gesture to be sober and good. Contrary Gesture,
whereunto, is wanton dancing, and all other effeminate gesture and behavior:
which wantonness, Paul Gal. 5. 19.
makes a work of the flesh. The Esaias 3. 16.
Prophet Esaias in his third Chapter, does notably express this sin: Because
the Daughters of Sion are lostie, and walk with a stretched out Neck,
twinkling with their eyes, continually mincing it as they go, and keeping pace
with their feet: therefore the Lord will make bald, etc.

Sixthly, Our Apparel to be sober and comely, such Tit. 2. 3.
as Apparel,
becomes Saints. The contrary whereof is, too curious trimming and decking
of our selves, forbidden even unto women: who yet (it may be thought) for the
pleasing of their Husbands, might of all other best use it. Therefore the
Apostle 1. Pet. 3. 3.
says, Whose trimming let it not be that outward trimminig of frizzling of
hair, putting of golden things about them, or putting on of apparel, but the
hidden man, etc. Likewise 1. Tim. 2 9, 10.
also women, let them adorn themselves in modest garments with shamefastness
and sobriety, not with frizzling, silver things, or gold, or pearls, or
costly apparel. But (which beseems women professing godliness) with good
works.

Secondly, Whorish, riotous and lascivious apparel, such as the Prophet
taxes, Esaias 3. 18. By this note, Solomon Pro. 7. 11.
in his Proverbs painteth out an Harlot: A woman came forth to meet him in
whorish attire. The comeliness to be observed in apparel, stands in these
four things.

First, That it be according to our sex, where Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
the man wearing woman's apparel, or the woman, man's, is condemned, as being
both an abomination to the Lord.

Secondly, That it be fitting to our Age: for which cause the Apostle Titus 2.
3.
wills the elder women to go in long garments, Titus 2. 3. and 1. Sam. 13.
18. the Holy Ghost notes, that young Virgins, the Kings Daughters, were wont
to go in a Gown of diverse colors. Such a one Jacob made for Joseph, being a
child of seventeen years of age, Genesis 37. 31.

Thirdly, That it be agreeable to the custom of the place where we live.
Contrary whereunto is newfangled apparel, against which Zophanie the Prophet
thundereth, I Sophon. 1. 18.
will visit the Princes, and the Kings sons, and all that clothe themselves
with strange garments, after the manner of foreign Countries and Nations.

Fourthly, That it be according to our place and calling: They Math. 11. 8. and
other things.
that wear soft raiment, are in Kings houses. Some other point, of modesty
may be noted; as to have a regard of shamefastnes, even in that case which the
Law of God provides for, Deuteronomy. 23. 12, 13. But that and whatsoever else, may
not unfitly be reduced under some of the former heads.

Temperance is a moderate and a sober use of lawful Temperance, which is a
moderate and sober use of lawful Pleasures, especially in meats and drinks,
pleasures, especially in Meats and Drinks, and in marriage matters. In meats
and drinks:

First, By abstinence and fasting oftentimes, whereunto the Apostle by his
example does inuit us, 1. Cor. 9. 27. But I beat down my Body, and bring it
into subjection, lest by any means, after that I have preached to others, I my
self should be reproved. The contrary whereof is, to fill the gorge every
day, as the rich Luke 16. 19.
man did in the Gospel.

Secondly, By a moderate and sober diet, so as the body may receive strength,
and be more fresh and lively to perform the actions of godliness: Take Luke 21.
34.
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and lest that day come on
you unawares. Prou. 23. 29. 30.
To whom is woe, etc? Even to them that tarry long at the Wine, to them that
go seek mixed wine. Prou. 25. 16,
If thou have found honey, eat that is sufficient for thee, lest thou be
ouerfull and vomit it. It Prou. 31. 4.
is not for Kings, O LEMVEL: it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes to drink strong drink. The contrary whereof is first, Gluttony and
Fulness of bread, one of the Sins of Sodom, Ezech. 16. 49.
whereof the Apostle has a commandment, Romans 13. 13. Walk honestly as in the
day, not in Gluttony and Drunkenness, etc.

Secondly, Too much daintiness for the quality and variety of fare,
especially of those meats and drinks which provoke most unto the Sin of
uncleanness. This the same rich man is taxed with, That he Luke 16. 19.
was clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and fared well and diliciously every
day. Solomon Prou. 23. 1, 2, 3
in his wisdom gives us a rule to bridle our intemperate desires this way:
When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is before
thee, and put thy knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to the appetite.
Be not desirous of his dainty meats: for it is a deceivable meat. Howbeit
this is not so strictly to be taken, but that either for the wel-comming of a
friend, or for our own refreshing, we may, and it is sometimes lawful to
furnish our Table with store and variety of dishes: as Genesis 21. 8.
Abraham made a great feast that day Isack was weaned: and in the use of
marriage.
so did Leui Luke 5. 29.
to our Savior Christ, inuiting withal (for his better entertainment) a
great number of guests to bear him company. The Psalm. 104. 15.
Psalmist also notes, that Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with giving thanks, of them which
believe and know the Truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing
ought to he refused, if the received with thanksgiving.
God of his bounty gives us not only bread or meat, that strengthens the
heart of man, but wine to cheer it up, and to make his face shine more then
with oil.

Wherefore Marie, at the Supper was made unto Christ in Bethania, is Ioh. 12,
2. 3.
recorded to have taken a pound of ointment of spikenard very costly, and to
have anointed Jesus feet, that all the house was filled with the savor of the
ointment.

Temperance in marriage-matters is, when we use it soberly and with
seemelinesse, rather to suppress, then to satisfy the flesh, which is one
part of the 1. These. 4. 4.
possessing of our vessel in holiness and honor. For this cause it is, that the
Apostle 1. Tim. 434.
teaches us, our marriages and the liberty that God has given us therein, are
to be sanctified by prayer and thanksgiving. The contrary whereof among other,
is, that forbidden in the Law, Leuit. 18. 19. and reckoned up as one of those
sins that bring Gods heavy wrath, Ezech. 18. 16.

CHAP. XII.
Of the eighth Commandment.

THE three Commandments following, Those that respect the good things
belonging to the person, are vprightnes and contentednes: Vprightnes is, to
hold a lawful course in dealing about them, and slandeth in right and truth.
concern one common subject or matter which they all bend unto, that is to
say, the outward good things of this present life, of what nature soever the
same be; Lands, Possessions, Goods, Good name, Credit, or the like: wherein,
because the greatest part of our life is spent, in tumbling and tossing about
them, it has pleased the wisdom of God to allot unto them three
Commandments, as men for the most part three manner of ways offend in them,
comprehended by John the Baptist in one Verse, Luke 3. 14. in his answer to
the Soldiers, Shake no man (in his estate, by pilling, polling, rapine, or
other violence,) nor circumuent by guile, and be content with your wages.

The two former (which are the nearer in affinity) David has twice in Psalm.
111. 7, 8.
one Psalm, in two several Phrases applied unto God. First, in the Phrase of
(...)
Truth (or Faithfulness) and Judgment: then, by (...)
Truth (or Faithfulness) and Rightnesse.

The first of those three ways, wherein men so offend, Right, which is in
dealing justly.
is, by mere wrong, forbidden in the eighth Commandment; whether the same
have force and violence joined with it: in which case, the difference between
this and the Commandment following, is easy to be discerned: or though it be
without force and violence, yet by mere wrong and injury without colorable
shows and shifts, or other disguisings to hide it by; whereby it is also
distinguished from the ninth Commandment, though the difference in this point
lies not so plain.

In the eighth therefore we are The Anabaptistical community of goods.
commanded. First, To deal uprightly and justly in all things concerning
goods, both for the means of coming by them, and in the using of them.
Wherefore our Savior, Mat. 23. 22. notes out this Commandment, by the name
of judgment or right, in doing that which is just and equal between man and
man, as the word (...)
( Judgment) in the Hebrew Phrase does signify. And David does so interpret
it, Psalm. 111. where that which in the seventh Verse he calls Judgment, in
the next Verse he calls Rightnesse (or Equity, as we commonly translate
it.) The contrary whereof is mere wrong, in such sort as before was opened.

The lawful means of coming by goods, is double, First, Lawful purchase, as
Ge. 23. 14, 15 Both for the means of coming by them: That it be by lawful
purchase,
Abraham purchased of Ephron the Field and cave of Macpela, for the full value
that it was worth, which Ephron himself had set: And David 1. Chron. 21. 22,
23, 24, 25. or Descent.
bought of ORNAN the threshing floor, to build an Altar to JEHOVAH for
sufficient money.

Secondly, Descent, when by course of Inheritance it is cast upon us; whereof
we have a Law: Le. 25. 45, 46
Of the children of the strangers that are soiourners among you, of them shall
you buy and of their Families that are with you, whichthey beget in your Land.
These shall be your possession. So ye shall take them as inheritance for your
children after you, to possess them by inheritance; ye shall use their labors
for ever. When Number. 27 8, 9, 10, 11.
a man dies, and has no son, ye shall transfer his inheritance* to his
Daughter: and if he have no Daughter, ye shall give his possession to his
brethren: and if he have no brethren, ye shall give his possessions to his
fathers brethren: and if his father have no brethren, then shall you give hi^
possession to his Kinsman, the next unto him of his Family, and he shall
inherit it. The contrary to these two are,

First Theft: He Ephesians. 4. 28.
that steals, let him steal no more, but rather let him labor, etc. The
special kinds of these, are Sacrilege, when it is of things consecrated to
God; in which sort Josh. 7. 7. etc.
Achan offended. And of this the Wiseman Pro. 20. 25.
speaks: It is a snare for a man to devour that which is sanctified* and
after vows to inquire. Robbery by the highway: The company Hosh. 6. 8, 9.
of Priests is like unto Troops that wait for one by the highway side.
Piracie upon the Sea: Burglarie in the night, breaking of houses, etc. If Exodus
22. 1.
a Thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he dye, no blood shall be
shed for him. Stealing men's servants or children: which sin the Apostle 1.
Tim. 1. 10.
wrappeth up in the number of those things that are contrary to wholesome
Doctrine: filching, or pilfering the least Pin or Point.

Secondly, Oppression: But Esaias 3. 14, 15
ye have eaten up the Vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
What ayle ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the
poor?

Thirdly, Extortion: as Luke 3. 14.
Soldiers not content with their wages, Counselors with their Fees, etc.

This was the sin of Elies sons* of whom it is said, 1. Sam. 2. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17
Now the sons of ELI were wicked men, and knew not JEHOVAH: For the Priests
custom toward the people was this; when any man offered Sacrifice, the
Priests Boy came while the flesh was a seething, and a flesh-hooke with three
teeth in his hand, and thrust it into the Kettle, or into the Caldron, or into
the Pan, or into the Pot: all that the flesh-hooke brought up, the Priest took
up for himself. Thus they did unto all the Israelites that came thither to
Shiloh; yea, before they burnt the fat, the Priests Boy came and said to the
man that offered, Give me flesh to roste for the Priest: for he will not have
sodden flesh of thee, but raw. And if any man said unto him, Let them burn the
fat according to the custom, then take as much as thine heart desires: then
he would answer, No, but thou shall give it now; and if thou will not, I will
take it by force. Therefore the sin of the young men was very great before
JEHOVAH: for men abhorred the offering of JEHOVAH.

Fourthly, All injurious and wro^gful dealing in matter of contract, buying and
selling, and such like: As first, excessive prices of things, not observing a
proportion and equality in the contract, to be according to the need and
profit of the buyer, as the Law does specially provide: When Leuit. 25. 14, 15,
16.
thou sellest ought to thy Neighbor, or buyest at thy Neighbors hand, ye
shall not oppress one another: But according to the number of years after the
Iubile, thou shall buy of thy Neighbor: also according to the number of
years, thou shall increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of
years thou shall abate the price of it: for according to the number of
increases does he sell unto thee.

Secondly, Usury condemned, Psalm. 15. 5. He that gives not his money to
usury. And hereof also there is a Law, Exodus 22. 25. If thou lend money unto
my people; that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as a Usurer unto
him; ye shall not oppress him with Usury.

Thirdly, Monopolies, Engrossing, Fore-stalling, etc. Esaias 5. 8.
Woe to them that join house to house, and field to field, till there be no
more place, that you may be made the only dwellers in the midst of the Land.

The lawful use stands in two things; Frugalitie and And in the use of them to
do it frugally,
Liberality.

Frugalitie, I call a keeping together of that which God has given us, for the
better bestowing of it, to good and profitable uses, that 2. Cor. 8. 14.
our abundance may supply other men's wants, as the Apostle speaks. Our
Savior in his own example does herein go before us, when he bids, John 6.
12.
Gather together the fragments, that nothing be lost. Which Lesson Judas the
Traitor had learned of his Master, though he used it but ill-fauouredly, as an
Hypocrite, to serve his own turn: To what end, says Mat. 26. 8, 9.
he, is this waste? for this ointment might have been sold for much, and given
to the poor. The contrary is,

First, Unnecessary and causlesse suretiship. He Pro. 11. 15.
shall certainly be crushed, that is surety for a stranger: But he that hates
sureties, is safe. Be Pro. 22. 26.
not thou of them that clap hands, of them that are surety for Debts.

Secondly, In wastfulnesse: when a man in diet, apparel, furniture of his
house, building, or such like, goes beyond his degree or calling: He Pro. 21.
17.
shall be a poor man, that loves i^llitie; he that loves wine and ointment,
shall not be rich.

Liberality is a cheerful communicating of our goods, and liberally, by a
cheereful communicating of them all both in giving and lending.
by giving or lending as the case requires: Communicate Romans 12* 13.
to the necessities of the Saints. If Leuit. 25. 35.
thy brother be impouerished and fallen in decay with thee, thou shall relieve
him. The Psalm. 37. 19.
righteous man is merciful and gives. Lend, Luke 6. 34, 35.
looking for nothing thereof again: that is to say, though it be with loss of
the principal: wherefore these works of beneficence are in the Scriptures called
Pro. 11. 18. 2. Cor. 8. 9.
Justice: for then does God in thy brothers necessity make him in right the
owner of thy goodst, and thee only the Steward and Distributer. So saih
SOLOMON, Hold Pro. 3. 27, 28
not back goods from the owners thereof: meaning those that have need of it.
When it is in the power of thine hands to do them good, say not unto thy
Neighbor, Go, and come again tomorrow, I will give thee, if thou now have
it. For this cause the Romans 15. 27.
Apostle tells the Romans, that albeit the Macedonians Alms, which they
bestowed upon the poor Saints at Jerusalem, were voluntary and free, yet it
was such, as by the Law of brotherly love they did owe, and were debtors of
unto them. And to this duty of liberality we are the rather to be
encouraged, by that which our Savior is reported to have Acts 20. 3^*
had as a common saying in his mouth, It is a more blessed thing to give, then
to receive.

One special branch of this well employing of our One branch whereof is
Hospitality.
goods, is Hospitality. Therefore it follows in that place, Romans 12. 13.
Follow after Hospitality. And 1. Pet. 4. 9.
Peter says, Be harbarous one unto another without grudging. The contrary is
Niggardliness: He Pro. 11. 24.
that spares more then is meet, it only sorteth to poverty.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the ninth Commandment.

THE second way that men offend in the Truth, which is in dealing faithfully.
things of this life, is, by falsehood, fraud, deceit, subtlety, cunning shifts
and devices, which is forbidden in the ninth Commandment.

To understand that Commandment, as commonly men do, of our Neighbors good
name and credit, not of his outward goods, as if those were spoken of only in
the eight, is too much to straighten the bounds of this Commandment; and, in
mine opinion, faulteth two manner of ways: for first, the greater and weighter
Commandment should so come behind, A Pro. 22. 1, 2.
good name being more to be desired then great riches.

Secondly, The words, Thou shall not bear false witness, are borrowed words,
taken from the Courts of Justice, where Lands and Possessions do oftener come
in question, then men's names and credits; and therefore cannot, without
violence, be restrained to the Letter.

The ninth Commandment then would have us to deal truly and sincerely in all
things concerning goods, whether ones outward estate and worldly riches, or his
name and credit. Our Savior, Mat. 23. 22. calls it Faithfulness, or Faith:
meaning truth and constancy both in our words, and in all our bargains and
agreements, which Psalm. 15. 2, 16. is made one special note of him that shall
dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, that he speaks the truth as it is in his
heart. The (...)
Hebrew word whereby David sets it forth, Psalm. 111. 7, 8. signifies
indifferently Faithfulness or Truth. The contrary whereof is all kind of
falsitie, namely,

First, Open untruth or Lies: Therefore Ephesians. 4. 25.
putting Their error, that hold officious or sporting lies, as they call them,
to be lawful: all which the Apostle here condemns, and are all of them
contrary to the nature of God, (to whose Image we ought in every thing to be
conformed) who is the God of Truth, Psalm. 31. 6.

Neither ought any pretense of doing good unto our Neighbor, draw us to any
officious lie, seeing the rule of the Apostle is general, Not to do evil,
that good may come thereof, To. 3. 8. And those holy men and women that this
way have offended, it is their faith, not their lying (which through infirmity
they fell into) that the Spirit of God so much commends.


away lying, speak the truth every one with his Neighbor: for we are one
another members.

Secondly, Fraud and deceit: DAVID, Psalm. 10. 1, 7. joins them together: He
shall not dwell in mine house, that deals deceitfully: he that speaks lies,
shall not remain in my sight.

Special virtues to be As, Prudence in judging aright;
reckoned in this part, you have two; prudence and simplicity: which goodly
mixture our Savior Mat. 10. 16.
requires of all that are his: Be wise as Serpents, and innocent (or simple)
as Doves. And the Romans 16. 19.
Apostle to the Romans: I would have you wise in that that is good, and
harmless in that which is evil.

Prudence is a virtue, to discern and judge of things aright, whereunto we
attain by searching out the things which it behooves us to know, as Job Job
29. 16.
did. The contrary whereof is that, which the Psalm. 82. 5.
Psalmist reprehendeth in Judges and Rulers of the Earth, When these men know
not, nor give themselves to understand, but walk in darkness, all the
foundations of the Earth are moved.

Simplicity is, to deal sincerely in the things we discern Simplicity in
speaking and doing the truth;
and judge of.

And this has under it two other branches:

First, Speaking and performing the truth: These Zach. 8. 16.
are the things which you should do: speak the truth every one to his fellow,
and let judgment of truth and peace judge in your gates. The contrary whereof
is,

First, Every unjust sentence: When Amos 5. 6, 7.
men turn judgment into Wormwood, as the Prophet speaks.

Secondly, Briberie: Giving sentence for reward: Thy Esaias 1. 25.
Princes are rebellious, and compainons of Thieves: every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards: they judge not the Fatherless, neither does the
Widows cause come before them. Where, though the sentence be just and
upright, yet taking of rewards is wicked, when men do not Justice for Justice
sake. To this first branch certain special virtues do also belong: some
whereof are in the things that concern ones good name; some in those that
concern worldly goods.

In the things that concern ones good name: To acknowledge the goodness that
is in him, and to speak of it with a love and liking of that they do. So does
PAVL, 2. Cor. 9. 2. For I know your readiness, whereof I boast to the
Macedonians, telling them that Achaia is furnished a year since. Wherein
notwithstanding we must take heed, that our love and liking of the party draw
us not to an allowance or winking at his faults, no more then the Holy Ghost
does in the due commendation of the most choice and excellent men: as of DAVID:
He 1. King. 15. 5.
did right in the eyes of JEHOVAH, and departed not from any thing that he
commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of VRIAH the
Hittite: and of IOTHAM, He 2. Chr^. 27. 2.
did uprightly in the eyes of JEHOVAH* according to all that his father did,
only he entered not into the Temple of JEHOVAH, but the people did yet corrupt
themselves. The contrary is,

First, A humor of speaking evil of men, which the Apostle would have all to
take heed of.

Secondly, Slandering or open forging of tales, or privy devising of them,
fayning or adding any thing to them: Thou Leuit. 19. 16.
shall not walk about with Tales among the people. Prou. 26. 20. Without wood
the fire is quenched, and without a Talebearer strife cease. And again,
Verse 22. The words of a Talebearer are as flatterings, and they go down
into the bowels of the belly. Romans 1. 29. 30. Among the sins that naturally
stick unto us, are reckoned Whisperers, Tale-bearers, etc. And the 2. Cor. 12.
20.
Apostle says, Let there not be strife, etc. backbyting, whispering, etc.
among you. Whither belongs all wrongful accusation, whether utterly false,
as that of the two wicked men against 1. Kin. 21. 12.
Naboth, relating the bare words, but not the sense and meaning: wherein the
two Mat. 26. 60, 91.
Witnesses that testified our Savior Christ should say, I can destroy the
Temple of God, and raise it up in three days, are said to be false Witnesses:
for John 2. 21.
he spoke of the Temple of his body.

Or lastly, accusing of a truth, with an intent to hurt: for it was a truth,
that 2. Sam. 22. 9.
Doeg told of David's coming to Abimelech, and his asking counsel for him of
the Lord, and giving him victuals and other things: yet because his end was
wicked and naught, justly does the Spirit of God say of him; Ps. 52. 2. 3, 4.
Thy tongue imagines mischief, and is like a sharp Rasor that cutteth
deceitfully. Thou do Love evil more then good, and lies more then to speak
truth.

Thirdly, Receiving tales we hear of others, or evil reports that are cast
abroad by whisperers, talebarers, etc. Thou Exodus 23. 1.
shall not receive a false tale, nor put thine hand with the wicked, to hear
false witness. Wherefore David 1. Sam. 24. 10.
worthily charge SAVL, Wherefore give thou an ear to men's words that say,
Behold, DAVID seeks evil against thee? And Solomon Prou. 25. 23.
in his Proverbs says, that as the North wind drives away the rain, so does
an angry countenance a Slandering tongue.

Fourthly, Babbling talk, which the Apostle 1. Tim. 5. 13.
reprehendeth in certain young women, that were not only idle, but also
Prattlers and busibodies, speaking things which are not comely.

Fifthly, Flattery, praising one above that we know in him. He Prou. 27. 14.
that prayseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it
shall be accounted unto him as a curse. With fair Romans 16. 18.
speech and flattering they deceive the hearts of the simple.

Sixthly, Foolish and arrogant boasting: Let another praise thee (says Prou.
27. 2.
the wiseman) and not thine own mouth.

Seventhly, Dissembling: when men say one thing, and mean another, Psalm. 82. 3.
speak peace with their friends, but mischief is in their heart.

The virtue occupied in the things that concern worldly goods, is plain and
sincere dealing. The contrary whereof is all deceit in bargaining, buying, and
selling: Whereof the wiseman says, The Prou. 12. 17.
deceitful man shall not roste that he takes in hunting.

Of this kind are selling countrefeit for good, as Copper for Gold, and
mingling any wares bad, with good, making show only of the good: Hear Amos.
8. 4, 5, 6
ye this, ye that swallow up the poor, saying, When will the new Month be
gone, etc. that we may sell the refuse of the wheat?

Also, When the buyer concealeth the goodness of the thing, or the seller the
fault, and blindfoldeth the truth with counterfeit speech; It Prou. 20. 14.
is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he is gone apart, he
bosteth.

Thirdly, False waights and measures: Thou Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14.
shall not have in thy bag two manner of waights, a great and a small, but thou
shall have a just and a right weight; a perfect and a just measure shall thou
have. Ye Leuit. 3. 35, 36.
shall not do unjustly in judgment, in line, in weight or in measure. Ye
shall have just balances, true waights, a true Epha, and a true Hin. Hear
Amos. 8. 4.
this, ye which make the Epha small, and the Shekell great, and falsify the
waights by deceit, Mica. 6. 11.
shall I justify the wicked balances, and the Bag of deceitful waights?

Secondly, Remoouing ancient bounds, to encroche upon other men's possessions:
Prou. 22. ^8.
Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds which thy fathers have made. Hosh.
5. 10.
The Princes of IVDAH are like them that remove the bound: Therefore will I
power out my wrath upon them like water.

Thirdly, Fraudulent withholding of things found, if the Owner may be heard
of, Likewise, of things lent, pawned or pledged: Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3.
Thou shall not see thy brothers Ox nor his Sheep go astray, and conceal
thy self from them, but shall bring them again unto thy Brother. And if thy
brother be not near unto thee, or if thou know him not, thou shall bring it
into thine house, and it shall remain with thee until thy brother seek after
it. Then shall thou deliver it to him again. In like manner shall thou do
with his Ass, and so shall thou do with his raiment, and shall so do with
all lost things of thy brother, which he has lost: if thou have found them,
thou may not conceal thy self. Psalm. 37. 21.
The wicked (says DAVID) borrows, and pays not again: but the righteous
is merciful and gives. In Ezech. 18. 7.
EZECHIEL it is made one note of a righteous man, that he has restored the
pledge to his debtor.

Fourthly, Gaming, and all unlawful Trades that either make gain of things
naught and unprofitable for the Church or Commonwealth, as the trash or
Merchandise mentioned, Revel. 18. 11, etc. or set to sale the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, and other spiritual things, which was the sin of SIMON MAGVS, Act. 8.
18, 19, 20.
Who when he saw, that through the laying on of the Apostles hands the Holy
Ghost was given, offered them money, saying, Give me also this power, that on
whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. But PETER said unto him,
Thy money perish with thee, because that thou think the gift of God may be
obtained with money. Of this nature is chopping and changing of Benefices,
which is called Simony.

The second branch of good and sincere dealing, is the Charity, to take things
in the best part, etc.
taking of things, that may be doubtfully construed, always in the best and
most favorable part, which the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. 5, 7. shows to be the
property of true love; Love thinks not evil, it believes all things, it
hops all things. So did Mat. 1. 19.
Joseph construe to the best, (as far as might be) the fact of the Virgin
Mary, whom, being found with child before they came together, he judged
rather to have offended before they were made sure, then after; and therefore
minded rather privily to put her away, that he which had done the wrong, might
marry her, as the Law Deuteronomy. 22. 28.
of God provided, then by pursuing his own right, in bringing her forth to
judgment (that so being found no Virgin, she might be stoned, which the same
Deuteronomy. 28. 20, 21.
Law gave him leave to do,) to make a public example of her. The contrary
whereof is,

First, Evil suspicions condemned, 1. Tim. 6. 4. Such was that of Eliab, 1.
Sam. 17. 28.
David's eldest Brother, Why came thou down hither? I know thy pride, and the
wickedness of thy heart; that thou art come down to see the Battle. When
David indeed came thither about other business, sent from his Father. So did
they of Acts 28. 4.
Miletum deal with Paul, seeing a Viper hang upon his hand, they said among
themselves, Surely this man is a Murderer, whom, though he be escaped from the
Sea, yet vengeance will not suffer to live.

Secondly, Hard censures and sinister judgments: when either a good or
indifferent action is interpreted to the worst, or a light offense is made
heinous through ill will, without all desire either to amend or cover the same:
As Eli 1. Sam. 1. 13.
thought Annah to be drunken, when she prayed in the bitterness of her soul
unto the Lord, only because her lips did move, but her voice was not heard.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the tenth Commandment.

THE third way that men offend in these This is uprightness: Contentedness is
to rest fully satisfied with that which God bestows.
outward things, is, by coveting and longing after that which is another man's,
when yet we would not either by wrong or cunning means have it from him, but
in an inordinate sort desire it for our money, as Ahab did Naboths Vineyard;
not considering whether our Neighbor be willing to forgo it or no, but only
because our teeth water at it; whereas GOD blessing our Neighbor with any
thing that is good, and wherein he takes comfort and delight, Christian love
requires, that we should be as glad in his behalf, as if we our selves
inioyed it. And this sin is forbidden in the tenth and last Commandment.

The sum therefore of the tenth Commandment is, that every one rest fully
pleased with that portion which God sees good to bestow upon him, rejoicing
and taking comfort in it, whether it be great or small. Let Heb. 13. 5.
your conversation be without covetousness, being content with that you have:
for he himself has said, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Having 1.
Tim. 6. 8.
meat and drink, and clothing, let us therewith be content. I Philip. 4. 11.
have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content. I know how
to be brought low, and how to abound, every way, in all things, I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to want. The
contrary whereof is covetousness, longing after that which is our Neighbors,
or none of ours, though it be without any seeking of unlawful means to come
by it, as Ahab did, 1. King. 21. 2. Give me thy Vineyard, that it may be a
Garden of Herbs for me, for it is near my house: and I will give thee a
better Vineyard then it; or if it seem better in thine eyes, I will give
theemony to the full value of it.

He that is so effected, will rejoice in another good, Rejoicing in another
good as in our own, which is the top and perfection of love.
as in his own, Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with
them that weep: which is the top and perfection of love. And hereupon I take
it, by conference of both the Evangelists, MATTHEW and MARK, that our Savior,
Mat. 19. 19. notes out the tenth Commandment by these words, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self. Which elsewhere is made the whole sum of all the
second Table.

The contrary hereof is, first, Self-love: In 2. Tim. 3. 2.
the latter days men shall be lovers of themselves.

Secondly, Envy: maligning the good things of another, condemned, 1. Tim. 6.
4. He is puffed up, and knows nothing, but doteth about questions, and strife
of words, whereof comes Envy, Strife, Raylings, evil Surmises, etc.
1. Tim. 6. and the first of 1. Pet. 2. 1. Wherefore laying aside all
maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil
speaking.
Peter 2.

Thirdly, Rejoicing at his hurt. The Psalmist complayneth of this, Psalm 70.
34. Let them be turned backward and confounded, that delight in my hurt, let
them go backward for a reward of their shame, that say, There, there. And
Obad. v. 12.
OBADIAH reprehendeth the Edomites for it: Thou should not have been glad
of the day of thy Brother, (meaning his affliction;) the day when he was made
a stranger: neither should thou have rejoiced at the Jews what day they
perished.

This Commandment has commonly another sense of forbidding only the first
lusts and motions of sin, but the reasons to confirm the Interpretation
which I have given, I take it (under reformation) are plain and pregnant,
which notwithstanding I offer; without prejudice of other men's opinions,
submitting my self and them to those that can better judge.

First, The plain evidence of the words: Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
house: which is to be enforced by the conference of the rest of the
Commandments: Honor thy father and thy mother: Thou shall not kill: Thou
shall not steal: thou shall not commit adultery: thou shall not bear false
witness: having all of them a common and a familiar understanding, such as
every man at the first hearing does conceive. This therefore must have the
like. And it is a thing in this point worthy to be observed, which the
Talmudists cite so often. The (...)
Law, they mean the Scripture, speaks according to common use. Now, let any
man, endued only with reason and understanding, be asked what this should
mean, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house; he will certainly answer, We
must be content with our own.

Secondly, The word that Moses has in Deuteronomy. 5. 27. (...) Thou shall not long
after thy Neighbors house, etc.
Deuteronomie, signifies, To long after a thing, and, To have ones teeth water
at it: for so you shall find it used, Match. 7. 1. and in many other places.

Thirdly, The particular instances, Thy Neighbors House, Wife, Man servant,
Maid, Ox, Ass, or any thing that is his, declare manifestly, that goods and
possessions are the proper subject of this Commandment: for which cause,
Exodus 20. 17. the Wife of our Neighbor (his most Pro. 19. 14.
precious possession) comes not in the first place, but is set in the midst
of other possessions, that by the very marshalling of the words, it might
appear, that this Commandment reaches not to the desiring of ones Wife for
filthiness and uncleanness sake.

Fourthly, The order of the Commandments, going by degrees from the greater to
the less, and so continually falling, till you come to this sin of covering,
which is the first step and beginning of all wrong and deceit, and yet
differs in nature from them both.

Fifthly, Add hereunto that which I hold as a certain ground, and is proved
before at large, that the corruption both of nature and desire, is forbidden in
every one, so as this cannot be restrained to a several degree of sin, but a
differing and distinct kind of sin from those that went before.

Sixthly, and lastly, our Savior Christ, the best Interpreter of the Law, does
so expound it, Mark 10. 9. when reckoning up all the Commandments of the
second Table, in stead of Thou shall not covet, he says, Thou shall not
deprive (or bereave a man of ought he has) that is, covet or desire to have
any thing that is his, though it be neither by wrong nor fraud, which two are
forbidden in the words next before, but rest in that which God has given thee,
which in effect is to love our Neighbor as our self, as Mat. 19. 19.
Matthew has it. For that this must needs be the sense of that place, Mark
10. 19. I gather first, because (no doubt) our Saviors purpose was to reckon
up all the Commandments, without leaving out any one.

Secondly, Else in so few words he should make a superfluous repetition, and
not only so, but also speak darkly and obscurely that, which was more
clearly taught before: for Thou (...).
shall not bereave, cannot be brought to explain, Thou shall not steal: Thou
shall not bear false witness: it being a great deal more questionable what
is meant by that word, then by the other two.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Covenant of Works.

THE whole Doctrine of Righteousness in With the Creatures, who are thus to
do his will, it has pleased God to make a Covenant, which is called the
Covenant of Works: A Covenant of life (or blessedness) to the doers: of death
(or of a curse) unto transgressors.
the several parts and branches of it, has hitherto been declared, which is
indeed the perfect rule and directorie of all duties whatsoever, which either
we owe to God, or to our brethren for his sake. Now if a man shall ask but
what good comes to us by the keeping of these Commandments? This, if there
were no more, is abundantly sufficient, that God is thereby glorified. So as
if it were possible (which notwithstanding cannot be) that doing his will, we
should perish everlastingly, yet ought we as cherefully, and with as ready
minds to obey, as if we were to gain Heaven by it. But see the exceeding
bounty and goodness of God, that will not have us serve him for naught. He is
pleased for the perfect keeping of his Law, and the Righteousness by him
enjoined, not only to promise a recompense of reward, but to contract and
covenant with us, and under certain conditions, as it were, to bind himself
unto it, which is the same that we call the Law or Covenant of works; the
first Covenant that ever God made with his Creatures. The sum whereof is in
few words, He Romans 10. 5.
that does these things, shall live by them. As on the other side, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all the things that are written in
the Book of the Law to do them. For this Covenant requires works done by
the strength of Nature, and according to the Law of our Creation, answerable to
Gods Justice, the express Image whereof is in the Moral Law: And therefore
the nature of Men and Angels, beautified in their first Creation with
Holiness, and the light of Gods Law written in their heart, is the ground and
foundation of this Covenant: for otherwise it could not have stood with the
Justice of God, to require these things at their hands, unless the Law of GOD
had been stamped and signed in them, and their nature made holy and pure, able
by Creation to do the same.

The Covenant therefore of Works, has those two parts before remembered: for
the Law of God, as all other Laws that are but streams and shadows of that
everlasting Law, is vpholden by two things, reward and punishment; without
which, there would be neither care to observe, nor fear to break it.

This reward comes from Gods free and undeserved goodness: for what can the
Creature deserve at the Creatours hands, doing nothing but that which the Law
of his Creation binds him unto? Wherefore our Savior, Luke 17. 10. does
admonish, when we have done all things that are enjoined us, we must say, we
are unprofitable servants: for we have done nothing else but that we ought to
do.

And therein lies a main difference between the reward and punishment: for
the punishment is in Justice, and sin has indeed a merit belonging to it,
the merit of Gods heavy wrath and indignation as it is said, Luke 12. 48.
He that does things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten, etc. And again, The
Romans 6. 23.
wages and due desert of sin is death. From this reward it follows, that
the exact observation, of the Law of God, has always a good conscience joined
with it.

A good conscience I call that, which bears record to us, that we do well in
all things, and therefore are to be rewarded; whereof our Savior speaks,
John 8. 29. The Father has not left me alone, because I do always the
things that are pleasing to him, called therefore good; because telling us we
do well in all things, it assures us of good. The fruit of this good
conscience, is perpetual joy and comfort, as the Pro. 15. 15.
Wiseman says, A good conscience is a continual Feast. And therefore this is,
as it were, the gate that leads into the possession of the promised
happiness.

Again, from the punishment it follows, that contrariwise, sin has
attending upon it, guilt and an evil conscience.

Guilt is an estate, that, by reason of our sin, binds us over unto
punishment, and makes us subject to the wrath of God, as our Savior does
express it, Mat. 5. 22. He that says to his Brother, Fool, is guilty of
Hellfire, Genesis 4. 7. It is compared to a Curre, or a Mastiffe Dog, which
is always arring and barking against us: If thou sin, sin lies at the
door, ready to fly in thy face, and to take vengeance on thee. Heb. 10. 22.
An evil, conscience, (so called by the Apostle, from the effects) is that,
which, by reason we have sinned, tells us of the punishment we are guilty
of, and which abides for us.

The fruit of an evil conscience, is perpetual fear and horror, as
appears by Genesis 4. 13.
CAIN: Mine iniquity (the guilt and punishment which through the same I am
subject unto) is greater then I can bear. And in the King of Babel,
BELSHASSER, whose Dan. 5. 6.
Royalty was all changed, his thoughts perplexed him, the girdings of his
loins loosed, and his knees dashed one against another, when he saw the Bill
of his Indictment drawn. Felix Acts 24. 25.
also is said to have been afraid, hearing PAVL dispute of Righteousness and
Temperance, from which he was so far, and of the Judgment that was to come,
which he trembled to think upon. Such a terror does the guilt of an evil
conscience strike into a man: and therefore is, as it were, the Hangman to
lead him by the hand to the place of execution, as it is said, Job 18. 11.
that terrors terrify him round about, and cast him down, following him at the
heels, and leave him not, till they have brought him before the terrible King.

But neither the reward nor punishment are alike to every Both more or less,
as the righteousness or sin abounds.
one; it is to some more, to some less, as their righteousness or sin
abounds: For 1. Cor. 3. 8.
every man says the Apostle, shall receive his own hire, or measure of
glory, according to his own work. And the same is to be said of the other
member: for as the sin increases, so does the punishment, as our Savior
says, He John 19. 11.
that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin, both for the guilt and
punishment which he shall sustain. And Mat. 11. Mat. 11. 21, 22, 23, 24.
It Life is a continual progress in holiness and happiness.
shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon at the Day of Judgment, then for you.

The reward, as we heard, is life: Leuit. 18 5. Ezech. 20. 11. Romans 10. 5. Gal
3. 12.
He that does these things, shall live by them. Life, the greatest good that
can possibly come unto a Creature, the full blessedness and perfection of his
nature: for by it is meant a continuance, with growth and increase in all
Holiness, Happiness, Honor and immortality. And what more sweet then life,
wherein all pleasures are inioyed?

The punishment is death, Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou Death is the contrary
to them both.
eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall dye. Death therefore is the reward
of sin: death both spiritual, in a subjection to the power of sin; and
real, in an estate subject to destruction. Thus the Apostle Paul does expound
it, Ephesians, 2. 1, 2, 3. when he teaches, that by nature we are first, dead
in sin, the sons of disobedience: and then, the children of wrath and
condemnation. Wherefore this is the most fearful punishment that can be
thought of, comprehending the whole Curse of the Law, wherein all miseries are
enwrapped: Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them. Which because in our corrupt estate, it is
impossible for men to do, therefore this Covenant is said to engender children
unto bondage, Gal 4. 24.

Here therefore is threatened the utter ruin and destruction Namely, in stead
of holiness, darkness, and a total corruption of the whole strength of nature
unto all unrighteousness: in stead of happiness, the wrath of God, and all
the evil that comes of it, contrary to the former conjunction and communion
with him.
of the Creature; a sinful and damnable estate: Contrary through-out and in
all the parts, one to the holiness, the other to the happiness before
described. Sinful, both in blindness of mind, or darkness of understanding,
and in a total corruption of the whole man, and of all the strength of nature,
to the working of all unrighteousness: Damnable and wretched, in the wrath of
God, and all the evil that comes of it: Separation from his presence;
Slavery to sin and Satan; Weakness and Infirmity; Shame, Ignorance, and
such like. But all these things we shall more particularly set forth hereafter.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the fall of Angels.

WE are now to speak of the fall of these This covenant both Angels and men
(in our first Parents Adam and Eve) kept for a time: But left unto themselves,
they quickly fell away.
two creatures, who were not able to weld so great a happiness as they were
created in: for many of the Angels, and all men in Adam and Eve, the root of
Mankind, did miserably fall away, sinning against God; as of the Angels it
appears, John 8. 44. He (the John 8. 44.
Devil) was a Manslayer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. 2.
Pet. ^. 4.
2. Pet. 2 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, Jude verse 6.
Jude ver. 6. The Angels also, that kept not their first estate, but left their
own dwelling, he has reserved in chains, etc. And of the fall of man, the
Story is set down, Genesis 3.

For albeit they were created holy, yet being Creatures, consequently they were
of a changeable disposition, and therefore subject to temptations, and to be
overcome of them, if they were not vpholden by the supernatural grace of God,
which neither in Justice he needed, nor in his wisdom and goodness saw it fit to
do, disposing of their fall for the better setting forth of his glory.

The reason that actually they fell, was, For that they were left unto
themselves: whereby it came to pass, that in their own free will, and of
their voluntary choice, they leaned unto evil: albeit by the integrity of
their nature, they were able to have kept themselves upright: As the Apostle
James 1. 13.
does pronounce, that God tempts no man, but every one is tempted, being
drawn away, and entised by his own lusts. And Eccles. 7. 29. God made all men
righteous, but they themselves have sought many Inventions, other then
according to right. And this was neither by chance, God not knowing of it, nor
by a bare and idle permission, or against his will, but rather according to the
counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. All Acts 15. 18.
whose works are known unto him from all eternity, but yet without
approbation of the sin.

The time when they fell, was anon after the Creation; but how long after, the
Scripture says nothing: howbeit, till the sixth Day was passed, it seems they
continued in their first integrity: For Genesis 1. 31.
then God saw all that he had made, and it was exceeding good. Beside,
touching man, the Commandment for the Sabbath was given to him in Paradise
after the sixth Day. So the Story Genesis 2. 2, 3.
tells us, When God had perfected his Work that he had made, the seventh Day
he rested, and blessed the seventh Day, and sanctified it, because in it he had
rested from all his work. The fourth Commandment has it a little playner: In
six days JEHOVAH made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that is in them, and
rested the seventh Day: therefore JEHOVAH blessed the Sabbath Day and hallowed
it: By his own example enioyning on that Day, a perpetual Rest to us:
wherefore the three first Verses of the second Chapter of Genesis, as it
seems, should not be divided from the former Chapter, that contain a
Iournall of the first seven days, which being finished, Moses takes up a new
Prooeme to begin a new narration. The fall now and punishment that came of
it, is to be considered in each of these Creatures distinctly and apart.

In the fall of Angels, these things are remarkable:

First, They were the first that fell: whereupon the First, of the Angels.
Devil is called the first founder of sin, John 8. 44.

Secondly, Their special sin what it was, appears not so evidently in the
Scripture. IVDE says, They left their own habitation. And PETER, that they
sinned. Our SAVIOVR, that they continued not in the truth: meaning, the first
integrity wherein God had set them, which is all the Scripture in express
terms and proper delivers of their fall. As for the place of Esaias, Isay 14.
12:
it is but a wresting, to apply it unto the fall of Lucifer; the Prophet
speaking of Belteshatzer the king, who shined once as the glorious morning
star. Howbeit by that which is written, 1. Timo. 3. 6. 1. Tim. 3. 6.
Lest being puffed up, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil: we may
safely gather, that pride was either the sin it self, or mixed with it, in
that, by their wisdom and understanding discerning of a more excellent
condition then their own, they both in Judgment approved, and in will
affected and desired to have the same: for thereunto afterward they tempted
man. Wherefore the fall of Angels was more grievous then the fall of man, in as
much as having a more excellent measure of holiness, they were more able to
resist, and fell without temptation, and therefore were the sole instruments of
their own fall; not that God had no stroke therein, (who moderating all things
that come to pass Some only fell, but a great multitude:
in the world, in so great an action as this, could not but have some hand,
disposing of it to the manifestation of his own glory,) but because they fell
without any outward temptation, save only such as their own thoughts did More
then 12. Legions.
suggest unto them; there being none but God to Dan. 7. 10. Ten thousand
thousands.
tempt them, who Iam. 1. 13.
as he cannot be tempted of evil so himself tempts none.

Thirdly, That not all the Angels fell, but some certain Heb. 12. 23.
Infinite thousands.
ones only: as may appear by all the places of Scripture mentioning their
fall.

Fourthly, The number of them which sinned, which was exceeding great: for a
whole Legion of devils is mentioned, Luke 8. 30.
Luke 8. 30. but the certain number is no where expressed in the Scriptures,
nor whether more did stand or fall; albeit the number of the holy Angels do
far Matt. 26. 53.
exceed the greatest number of Devils that is Which is one Legion only, Luke
8. 30. One (the Scripture names him Satan, or the Devil) the chiefest
Ringleader of the lest.
mentioned in the Scriptures.

Fifthly, The order of their fall; one being the chief and Ringleader of the
rest in this offense, whom the Scripture from the qualities common to them all
in this their corrupt estate, names Satan Revel. 12. 9. The great Dragon, the
old Serpent, which is called the Devil and Satan.
or the Devil, as it were by excellency above the rest of the Devils, who are
said to be his Revel. 12. 9. And his Angels were cast out with him. Matthew. 25.
41. Which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.
Angels and ministers, and he their head and prince, exceeding them all in
malice.

(...)
Satan he is called, that is, an Adversary, the capital enemy of God and of
Mankind. (...).
Devil, that is, a calumniatour and a slanderer: for he did not stick to
calumniate God himself to Eve, and Job 1. 9. and 2. 4, 5.
us he does calumniate continually to God.

Sometimes he is set forth by many other terms, to note his primacie: 2. Cor.
4. 4.
The God of this World, Job. 16. 11.
The Prince of this World. The Scribes and Pharisees, from that horrible Idol
of the Philistims, whom they worshipped at Revel. 12. 10.
Ekron, called him Matt. 12. 24.
Belsebub the prince of the Devils.

Thus much of the fall of Angels.

Their punishment, is the fullness of Gods wrath, The curse upon them is the
fullness of Gods wrath, which falling upon a bare creature, not able to bear
the brunt of it, crusheth him down into hell for ever.
which instantly fell upon them, as soon as they sell from God, and crushed
them down into Hell forever. So says PETER, 2. Pet. 2. 6.
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but throwing them into Hell, delivered
them unto Chains of darkness, to be kept unto judgment. And Jude verse. 6.
IVDE, The Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has kept with everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great Day. Our Savior likewise tells us, that everlasting
fire is the portion allotted to them, Mat. 25.

This fearful estate is called Damnation, and draws And this estate is
called Damnation; drawing with it the full height and top of all iniquity,
hatred of God, obstinate unrepentance, final desperation, and such like.
after it the full height and top of all iniquity, hatred of God, obstinate
Unrepentance, final Desperation, and such like. Wherefore the Ephesians 6. 12.
Apostle, to express the sinnefulnesse of these damned Spirits, calls them
Spiritual things of Wickedness; that is, the spirits wholly drowned and
swallowed up in wickedness. And our Savior Christ, John 8. 44. The Devil is a
Liar, and the father of Lies; and when he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his
own. Finally, he calls sin, The doing of the lusts of the Devil. As 1.
John 3. 8.
John does, The works of the Devil: telling us, that (...).
he sins continually (for that is the force of the presenttense from the
beginning, ever since the World was made. Therefore he is called The Mat. 12.
43.
unclean spirit, The Mat. 13. 9.
wicked one, yea, The Mat. 4. 3.
Tempter: not only vile and wicked himself, but tempting and soliciting
other to it: for as they fear not to oppose themselves directly against the
most high Majesty: so toward men they cease not to use all means that may
be, both force and fraud, to draw them away from God.

Hence he is called Mat. 13. 39.
The Enemy. And 1. Pet. 5. 8.
Peter says, Your Adversary the Devil walks about, like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. Yet even among these also, many are to be found
naughtier, and more vile and wicked then the other, as our Savior Christ
teaches, Mat. 12. 45. When the unclean spirit goes out of a man, etc. then
he goes and takes with him seven other spirits more naught then himself. I
doubt not but our Saviors meaning there, is by a figurative speech, to note
out sundry othervices fouler and more detestable then the former: but withal
(putting the cause for the effect) he does not obscurely give to understand,
that there be certain Devils which have the government as it were, and
attendance over some certain special sins, to egg men thereto: whither
tends also that in another place, Mat. 17. 21.
This kind of Devil is not cast out but by Fasting and Prayer.

But notwithstanding they were delivered up, as before Notwithstanding, it
pleases God money times to send them some release out of that dungeon,
is said, unto chains of darkness, and thrown into Hell, yet it pleases God
many times to ease them of their torments, sending them out of that place of
darkness, to walk here up and down: for where the Devils in the Luke 8. 31.
Gospel beseech our Savior Christ, that he would not throw them into that
Deep, the Gulf of Hell, which they so fear and tremble at; and in Mat. 8. 29.
another place expostulate with him, that he came to torment them before the
time; from thence may be gathered, that some release they find of torment,
whilst they roame here up and down, which in those Prisons of darkness is
more hardly laid upon them: Therefore suffering them to dwell in the Air, and
to roame thorowout the World,
they dwell in the Air, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 6. 12. when he says,
The spiritual things of wickedness, which are in the heavenly places, meaning
in the Air that is above us. And Ephesians. 2. 2. he calls Satan, The prince
that has power in the air: That from the place it self and the advantage
which he has by that, we might learn the rather to take heed of him.

And to this end, is God pleased thus to release them, that so they may be
instruments to work his pleasure here among us
that so he may use them as instruments to work his good pleasure here among
us: either for the comfort of his children, (though they labor all they can to
the contrary,) or the plaguing of the wicked.

This is their estate, till a set and solemn day appointed All this, till a
day appointed which we call the latter Day, when they shall receive their last
doom of an everlasting and more dreadful damnation, with execution accordingly.
of God for bringing them unto Judgment, which we call the latter Day, when
they shall undergo the whole extremity and fullness of Gods wrath, in a
greater and more fearful manner.

That they are then to be brought unto judgment, it appears out of that
which Peter and Jude do speak: Agreeable whereunto is that of PAVL, Do you
not know, we shall judge the Angels? 1. Cor. 6. That till the Day of Judgment,
the extremity is some way mitigated, the same Apostles teach: 2. Pet. 2. 4.
one, in saying, They are delivered unto chains of darkness, to be kept unto
judgment: the Jude ver. 6.
other, that God keeps them with everlasting chains under darkness, unto
the Judgment of the great Day. Whereby it is manifest, that the judgment
which they yet lie under, is not so fearful and terrible as that which
abides for them.

So much may suffice for the Angels that fell. The Angels that fell not, are
supernaturally vpholden from all danger of falling.


The Angels that sinned not, are supernaturally vpvpholden from all
possibility of falling. Therefore our Savior, Mark 12. 25. compares the
state of Gods Children in the Resurrection, when all shall be firm and stable,
unto the state of the holy Angels as now they stand: In the resurrection they
neither marry, nor are married, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. 1. Tim.
5. 21. They are called, The elect Angels: secretly opposed to those that fell,
Reprobates and Cast-awayes, for whom hell fire was prepared, Mat. 25. 41.

But I say, This holding up is supernatural: they have it not from their own
virtue or excellency of nature, (for why then should not the rest have had
it?) but by the mere favor and goodness of God. Wherefore it is said, Job 4.
18. In his Angels he put no steadiness: as we have showed before, that to
be unchangeable, and not subject to temptation, is the proper praise of God.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the fall of Man.

IN the fall of MAN I observe, After the fall of Angels.


First, That their sin was the eating of the forbidden fruit, as the Story
specifieth, Genesis 3. 1. unto Verse 8.
Genesis 3. whereunto they came by these degrees: first, they Genesis 3. 6.
beheld it, then they they desired the beauty of it, thirdly, they took, and
lastly, did eat of it. Neither was this the only sin: it was accompanied
with a multitude of other sins, drawing them to this actual and open
disobedience of the Commandment of GOD, whereby the foulness of their
offense does the more appear: As first, Infidelity in a doubting of the truth
of God, and falsifying of his Word: for he had said, What day ye eat thereof,
ye shall certainly dye. EVE recites to the Serpent, Lest peraduentre ye dye:
speaking doubtfully, as of a thing not certain.

Secondly, A crediting of GODS enemy and theirs, and so preferring the Devil
above GOD.

Thirdly, A false opinion in their heart of God, that he enuyed their good
estate.

Fourthly, Intolerable Pride and Ambition, in desiring to be equal with God.

Other circumstances there are further to increase their sin:

First, That it was against their knowledge and conscience, though Satan had in
some sort blinded the eyes of their understanding.

Secondly, that having but one only Commandment, and that so easy to keep,
as to abstain from one only fruit in so great plenty and variety of other,
yet they brake it.

The next thing to be observed in their fall, are the Actors themselves, or at
least, such as had some part in his business.

First, God may be said an Actor, or rather, Ouerseer and Orderer of the act
done, who for the manifesting of his Justice and Mercy, purposed from
everlasting, by leaving our first Parents to themselves, and the use of their
own free will, through his infinite Wisdom, Power, and Providence, so to rule
and dispose of their fall, that it should tend both to his own glory, and to
the good of his Elect.

Secondly, Satan was the principal Actor, who having By Satan's temptation
lately before fallen in: a desperate hatred of God, and envy of Mankind,
tempted them unto it. In which respect our Savior says, he was a Murderer
from the beginning, John 8. 44.

The manner of whose temptation is to be considered,

First, In beginning 1. Tim. 3. 6.
with the woman the weaker of Eve.
vessel, and that, when she was away from her Husband.

Secondly, in the instrument that he used, the Serpent, not only the
subtillest of all the beasts of the Field, which were to be kept out of the
Garden, but the nimblest and slyest, as the (...). For it comes of a root
which signifies to make naked or bare, as men use to do, when they would go
nimbly about a thing.
word does also signify: and therefore fittest to creep in and out, till he
had done his feat, with whom (as it seemed) the woman talked, without suspicion
of fraud, or astonishment to hear a dumb creature speak, because not then
knowing of the fall of Angels, she thought some Angel had spoken in the
Serpent.

The fetches and devices which he had to draw her into his Nets, are worthy to
be considered:

First, He plays the Questionist, Has God, etc. knowing that under the Mask
of a Question, it was more easy for him to find a vent for his deuillish and
mischievous design.

Secondly, He makes a wonderment, Has (...) Is so taken interrogatiuely, Job
39. 30.
God indeed, etc? As if it were so strange a thing for the Creator to inioyne
a Law unto his Creature at his pleasure, especially one only Law, and that so
mild, so moderate, so easy to be observed.

Thirdly, He proceeds by Equivocations and Sophistical Elenches, that you
may easily know the father of all Equiuocators; but yet carrying it closer, and
in a more subtle manner then his Scholars, our gross Equiuocators do.

For first, he makes as if God had forbidden them to eat any of the fruit at
all, which being so monstrous an untruth, that this father of lies, for all his
impudency, durst not speak out, yet he lispes and minces it with ambiguous
words, and mental reseruations, using These words (...) Ye shall not eat of
all (or every) Tree of the Garden in the Hebrew phrase do ordinarily import,
as much as, Ye shall eat of none, As Psalm 143. 2. (...) Every living creature
shall not be justified before thee. The meaning is, No living creature.
a speech that in the Phrase of that tongue imports the one or the other;
either that they might not eat of all, or not eat of any at all: at the
least, he would fasten so much upon her, as to make her to believe, that to
forbid to eat of any one, was in effect as much as to forbid them all: which
doubtfulnesse of speech Eve well enough understanding, answers him to both.

Secondly, Perceiving by her answer, that her faith began to waver in making
a peradventure of GODS threatening, which was so certain, he catches hold of
that, and for fear of bewraying himself too soon, if he should directly
contradict that which God had said, he thinks it enough to snatch at her own
words, to infer some doubt of the matter: Ye He does not say, (...) that is,
Dying, ye shall not dye, or, It is certain ye shall not dye; which had bin
directly contrary to Gods threatening, but (...) Ye shall not dye, in dying:
that is, Ye shall not certainly dye: or It is not certain ye shall dye: for in
the Hebrew Tongue, there is as much difference between these 2. kinds of
speech, as there is in English between this, Certainly ye shall not dye: and
this, Ye shall not certainly dye: which latter being more nice and ambiguous,
is that the Devil here uses: and, through her, of Adam they, and in them, all
Mankind did fall,
shall not dye in dying. As if he should say, Then it is not certain that ye
shall dye.

Thirdly, When he sees she held her ears open to his Charms, and that he
had once wound within her, then he begins to show himself in his colors.
Now he sticks not monstrously, audaciously, impudently, and like himself, to
belie God unto his face, appealing to him for the justifying of a most foul
and horrible slander against his own Majesty; he scoffs Adam and Eve with
his Equiuocatio^s, that their eyes should be opened, they should be (for sooth)
as Gods, etc. he makes a sophistical Interpretation of the name that God had
given to the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. This sin, fearful at the
first, and ashamed to show the face, when it gets strength, and grows unto
a height, it becomes most insolent and intolerable.

A fourth thing in this temptation of Satan, is, that he used the woman as an
instrument to seduce the man. The last Actors were Adam and Eve themselves, who
through weakness, but voluntary, and of their own free will, gave place to
this temptation.

The third thing I observe in the fall of man, is, That in Adam and Eve all
Mankind did fall, he being considered not as one private man, but as the father
of all men, and sustayning the public person of Mankind. And therefore we
all have part in his transgression: As the Apostle says, Romans 5. 12. In whom
all men sinned: because we are his Offspring and Posterity, and were in his
loins when he offended. According whereunto, Heb. 7. 9, 10. Leui is said to
have paid Tithes, because Abraham, in whose loins he was when he met
Melchisedeck, paid Tithes unto him. Which makes Adams sin the greater, in
that he murdered not himself, but all that come from him. And this is the
first sin of all Mankind, that Adams eating of the forbidden fruit, with
all the sins that did accompany it, is our eating, and we guilty of the
same offenses, which is a sin foraine and without us.

Thus far of the fall of man.

Their punishment by the great patience and long sufferance The curse unto
them, (by the great patience and long sufferance or God, and in his singular
mercy to make away for the Redemption of Mankind) is so qualified, that the
uttermost and most extreme fury of it, is put off till the latter Day:
whereupon grow two degrees of this cursed estate; for either it is in part
only during this life, or in the fullness of it, after death: In part only as
their sinfulnes, not in the highest pitch.
of God, and in his singular mercy to make a way for the Redemption of the
World, is so qualified, that the uttermost and most extreme fury of it is put
off unto the latter Day: whereupon grow two distinct degrees of this sinful
and cursed estate. The first is that, which is in part only during this present
life; wherein our sinfulness is indeed a through and a total corruption of the
whole strength of nature, and of all that integrity wherein we were created,
to the committing of all unrighteousness, though not in so full and high a
pitch as shall be afterward.

I term it total, because The doctrine of Free Will, which Pelagius, and
after him the Papists teach. Semipelagians, that imagine in a man unregenerate
some ability to do well, but weak and insufficient of it self, unless it be
helped of God: And so take part of Gods honor from him, abusing to that
purpose those very places which the Apostle professedly does write to give the
whole glory unto God.
we are wholly tainted and defiled with sin; that, as Oil, it soketh into
our bones, and as rottenness it goes through every part and power both of
soul and body, as well to the corruption of our whole nature, as (which
follows necessarily thereupon) to the deprauing of all our actions and ways;
and that in both the parts of Righteousness, Piety and Justice: for as the
Apostle bears record, God has shut up (...).
all, that is, all men, and whatsoever is of man, under sin, Gal. 3. 22.
Whereupon 1. Cor. 4. 7. he cries out, What have thou, O man, (regenerate and
borne again) that thou have not received? wholly and every whit from the free
Grace of God? It is therefore termed total in three respects:

First, In respect of all the powers and faculties of the mind, soul and
body, which, as a Leprosy, it has in every part infected, and as a general
flood it has wholly ouer-flowne: As God himself speaks of the heart, that
the whole Genesis 6. 5.
frame of it is only evil continually, Genesis 6 The mind (...).
first, the Queen and Lady Mistress of all other faculties, which the
Philosophers so much extol, is reckoned amongst the most corrupt parts of man,
1. Tim. 6. 5. and 2. Timoth. 3. 8. Men corrupted in their mude. So Romans 1. the
Apostle attributes to all men by nature, an Romans 1. 21.
heart without understanding, and a Romans 1. 28.
mind void of judgment. Wherefore, Romans 12. 2. he does exhort us, Be
transformed in the renewing of your mind. And Ephesians. 4. 23. Be renewed in
(...).
the spirit of your mind. So calling the very power and strength of our mind,
or that which is most inward in the mind: The mind, as it were, of the mind
it self, to show, that in those parts that of all other ought to be the
soundest: and where the force of reason should be greatest, here this
corruption has taken fastest hold. Wherefore in another place he speaks of
that most excellent (...).
power and faculty of the soul, whereby we reason, and discourse, and draw
one thing out of another; That Ephesians. 1. 18.
the eyes of your discoursing part may be enlightened; as being of it self full
of darkness, as Ephesians. 4. 18.
other-where he says. And Romans 1. 21. he reckons up in the number there
set down, Men vaize in their reasonings; and the will of the flesh and
reasoning part are joined together, as both corrupt and naught, Ephesians. 2. 3.
Neither is the mind only, but the conscience also is defiled: for so the
Apostle testifies, Titus 1. 5. To the unclean nothing is pure, but both their
mind and conscience is defiled.

Albeit there remain, in this part of our mind and conscience, some relics
(as we shall sheare anon) to make us inexcusable, but in the other part all
are corrupt and naught, and we utterly gone and dead in sin: for first,
touching our desires, all whatsoever rises up within Genesis 6. 5.
us, is only evil continually: for 2. Cor. 3. 5. (...).
We are not, says the Apostle, meet of our selves to think any thing, as of
our selves, but that we are meet, it is of God. Therefore, Ephesians. 4. 22. he
wills us to put off the old man, which is corrupted through deceiuable lusts.
And Romans 1. 24. The lusts of our own hearts: or as Iam. 1. 14.
James has it, our own lusts are put in stead of fleshly and wicked lusts.
Touching the will; albeit the same still remain free (else were it no will at
all) yet the freedom of it stands only in this, to be carried wholly, and
freely, and willingly into evil; and therefore to be a slave and servant unto
sin. Whereupon 1. Pet. 4. 3.
Peter uses the will of the Gentiles, in stead of a Deuillish and wicked will;
to show, that such is the will of us all without Christ. The affections also,
that it may appear how they are wholly drowned and taken up of sin, are
called by the Apostle sinful affections, or affections of all kind of sin,
Romans 7. 5.

And lastly, to show that this contagion sticks to our whole body, and all
the parts and members of it, the same Apostle expresses sinful lusts, by the
name of the lusts of the body, Romans 6. 5. Because they stick in our flesh,
and the soul by these lusts moves the body, as the body again by them
solliciteth and provoke the soul. This corruption of all our parts, quite
estranged from the life of God, the Apostle elegantly sets forth, and
particularly does enumerate, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. our minds to be vain and
ignorant, our discoursing part to be darkened, the heart, which there he
puts for the desire, will, affections, to be hardened, benumbed and
greedily carried unto sin; our selves, that is, our bodies, to be fit
instruments of all uncleanness. This therefore I say and testify in the Lord,
that ye walk no more as the other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their
mind, darkened in their discoursing parts, being estranged from the life of
God, through the ignorance which is in them, by the hardness of their own
heart, which after they have cast off all sorrow, have given themselves to
wantonness, to work all manner of uncleanness with greediness.

Secondly, It is total, in respect that both our nature is wholly corrupted,
and all our actions perverted by it: for touching our nature, it is not only
decayed, and in part hurt and wounded by the fall of Adam, but utterly dead in
sin: neither do we sin by custom and imitation, but are borne Sinners by
nature, which we use to call Original sin, that is, a natural corruption of
all our parts and powers from our conception, void of all good, and inclining
to all evil, unable to conceive and judge aright of heavenly things, by our
own strength and industry, or to keep in remembrance the things which are
taught unto us; bent and ready (without the supernatural work of Gods Spirit
changing us) to lust after that which is evil, and to abhor that which is
good; to a disorder in all our affections; and lastly, in our body, to the
offering of all occasions of sin unto the soul, and to an executing of the
things are offered, Psalm. 51. 7. I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my
Mother conceived me, Esaias 48. ^8. A transgressor from the womb, from the very
time thou wast first conceived and borne, art thou called. This is the estate
of all men in themselves, even of the best, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 2.
3. we (even we the Jews, with whom the promises were made, and not Gal. 2. 15.
sinners of the Gentiles, as he speaks in another place, that is, such as
can do nothing else but sin, being aliens from the Covenant yet) even we
were by nature the children of wrath, as are also other men, and dead in
trespasses and in sins, as he said Verse 1. and 5. C^l. 2. 13.
a little before. Ephesians. 4. 14. he shows the sum of the Gospel to be
nothing else but this, Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, that
Christ may shine unto thee.

Wherefore, of our wisdom it self, wherein we beasted so much, and think we
so excel, the Scripture speaks evidently, that 1. Cor. 2. 14.
the natural man is not capable of the things of the Spirit of God: for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. And the Apostle James 3. 15.
James makes natural wisdom all one with that which is earthly and
Deuillish. Whereby we may easily understand, what is to be said of the
inferior parts. And therefore Jude Jude verse. 19.
opposing natural men to them that have not the Spirit, shows every inch of
us, before we be regenerate, to be a lump of earth, and a part of Satan's
brood.

In regard of which general contagion, and the better to set forth how our
whole man, and whatsoever is in man, within and without, from the top, to the
toe, is by nature nothing else but a lump and mass of all uncleanness; the
Scripture calls us Flesh, John 3. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 50. 1. Pet. 4. 1. Romans 7. 5,
25.
wherein Romans 7. 17, 18, 20.
no good thing, but all sin does dwell fleshly, sold under sin, Romans 7. 14.
which being there opposed to the Law of God, which is spiritual, that is,
requires heavenly perfection and integrity of nature, as concerning all the
parts and powers of our soul and body, shows by flesh, which is the
Epithete given to us all, and to Paul himself, so far as he is unregenerate,
the quite contrary to be meant. Further it calls us, The Romans 6. 6. Ephesians.
4. 22. Col. 3. 9.
old man, The 2. Cor. 4. 16.
outward man, The Col. 3. 5.
members, The Law of the Romans 7. 25.
members, The body Romans 6. 6. and 7. 24.
of sin, or sinful body, wherein sin so sticks, and the Col. 2. 11.
sinful body of flesh.

By which words, it means not this outward body only, subject to our eye,
but all the parts and powers of man without exception. Therefore the mind it
self, and soul, and all the faculties of them both, are termed Flesh, A mind
Col. 2. 18.
of flesh, The Romans 8. 6, 7.
understanding of the flesh, Fleshly 2. Cor. 1. 12
wisdom, Fleshly 1. Pet. 2. 11.
lusts, The Ephesians. 2. 3. Gal. 5. 16, 24. 1. John 2. 16.
lusts of the flesh, The Ephesians. 2. 3.
will of the flesh, The Gal. 5. 24.
affections of the flesh. All these parts before reckoned the Apostle
comprehends, Ephesians. 2. 3. First, generally naming the flesh, or the whole man
unregenerate, which he afterward deuideth into two kind, The flesh; so calling
by the general name, that part of the soul wherein the lust and will and
unbridled affections are, and our discoursing parts, or the very strength of
the Mind, of Knowledge, Judgment, Memory, Conscience. Among whom even we all
did once converse in the lusts of our flesh, doing the will of the flesh, and
of the discoursing parts.

All which he calls not half dead, but thoroughly and wholly Verse. 1. (...)
dead; leaving nothing unto man, which sin has not defiled. Showing further,
that we have this by (...).
nature, not by custom or example, as elsewhere Romans 5. 13, 14.
he proves by the death of little Infants, which never transgressed
actually, as Adam did, dying as soon as they were borne, and yet sinners by
nature: for otherwise they could not dye, until the Law for sin was in the
World: for Death reigned from ADAM unto MOSES, even upon them which had not
sinned, according to the likeness of the transgression of ADAM: for, as our
Savior John 3. 6.
says, That which is borne of the flesh (such we are all by nature) is flesh,
and, Who (says JOB) Job 13. 4.
can give a clean thing out of that which is unclean? Not one.

This natural corruption, the Scripture calls sin, Romans 7. 17.
because it is the sink and puddle of all other sins, and the Law Romans 7. 23.
of sin, which, as utterly perverting the whole strength of nature, and
contrary thereunto, has an elegant addition given unto it, Heb. 12. 1. (...).
Sin that is so well fitted, to gird us in, as a curb and a bridle, holding
us back, that we are not able to run the course that is set before us.
Thereof it is, that all our actions are corrupted and naught. Romans 3. 12. There
is none that does good, no not one. Romans 7. 5. When we were in the flesh,
sinful affections wrought in our members, to bring forth fruit to Death: which
fruits he sets down, Titus 3. 3. For even we also were foolish,
disobedient, serving lusts and diverse kind of pleasures, leading our life in
malicousnesse and envy, hated and hating one another. And how can it otherwise
be chosen, but that all our fruits must needs be unsavory and bad, when as
the whole Tree and all the twigs and branches of it are rotten and naught?

Thirdly, and lastly, it is called total, in respect of both the parts of
Righteousness, Piety, and Justice, which with all the powers of our soul and
body, both by nature, and in all our actions, we do nothing else but
continually transgress. Therefore PAVL, Rom 1. 18. pronounces of all men,
that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven upon all impiety and injustice
of men, as those that withold the truth (or those small sparks of light that
God has left them) in unrighteousness, meaning, that by reason thereof they
rush forth unto all unrighteousness. And Ephesians. 4. 24. he wills our
renewing to be in both these parts of Holiness and Justice, as being corrupt
in both by nature.

All men by nature are thus alike sinful, neither does face more answer unto
face, then one man's corruption answers to another: but the fruits of sin
are in some more abundant: for as he that is sick of the Dropsy, the more he
drinks, the more he may: so men, by long custom of sinning, come at the
length to such an habit, that they are not afraid to lash forth openly,
audaciously, and impudently into all evil; casting off all fear of God, and
reverence of man, as he shameth not to profess of himself in the Luke 18. 4.
Gospel, and so come to be Monsters and prodigious in all kind of
wickedness. Of these the Apostle speaks, Ephesians 4. 19. Who casting off
all grief, have given themselves to wantonness, to work all uncleanness,
even with greediness.

So much for their sinfulness.

Touching their miserable and cursed estate: albeit For the rest.
the wrath of God be fully and wholly powered forth upon 1. The wrath of God upon
them.
all that sin, yet is it not so presently: for being in his wisdom and
goodness pleased to make a difference between Angels and Men offending, both
for that their state and case does differ, and for the Elects sake, whom he
meant to take out of the Race of Adam, he purposed with himself not to
ouer-whelme them at once, with the weight of his Justice, as he would the
Angels that did transgress, but in his mercy to spare them for a time, that
so a way might be made for his, to come unto Repentance. This time is the whole
course of their life* wherein they bear not the full burden of their sin
that presses down to Hell, but feel only some light beginning of that heavy
Judgment which hereafter is to seize upon them, if by turning unto God, they
do not repent, and turn the same away. Therefore the Apostle Act. 27. 26, 27
says, that God has made of one blood all Mankind to dwell upon the face of
the Earth, determining the oportunities of times which he has fore-set, and
the set bounds of their habitation, that they may seek the Lord, if so be by
groping after him, they may find him.

This is the reason why the whole course of our life is termed that Day, John
9. 4.
wherein we must do good, before the night come, when none shall be able to
work: that time of Gal. 6. 8, 10.
sowing, either to the flesh or Spirit; the Harvest whereof shall be death or
eternal Life: for such as the hour of death finds us, such shall our doom
be, and with Heb. 9. 27.
Death, the irreuocable sentence comes. None shall rise again to better the
things he has done in the days of his flesh, whether they be good or evil.
No Sacrifice any more for sin, no intercession for the dead, no Purgatory to
make them clean. But whosoever by Christ's purgation are not in this life
washed from their sins, shall after this life lie and rotte in their sins
forever.

The sum is, that albeit God in his mercy, for the cause before remembered,
do thus forbear all, yet even during John 3. 18.
this life, such as have no part in Christ, that is to say, all men in
themselves considered, are indeed and truly, though not fully, accursed: for so
the Scripture speaks, He that believes not, is already condemned. And Genesis
4. 11.
GOD tells CAIN, Cursed art thou even whilst thou now art alive.

In this estate I consider three things:

First, The guilt of sin, whereof the Romans 3. 9.
Apostle witnesses, that all the World is subject to the just punishment of
God. And again, Heb. 2. 15.
that all men naturally and in themselves considered out of Christ, are subject
unto bondage.

Secondly, As before, whilst they stood in their integrity, inioying the
comfort of a good conscience, they had peace and quietness of mind: so man
had no sooner fallen, but fear and terror came upon him. As we see in Adam,
Genesis 3. 10. I heard thy voice, and was afraid. And as it may be seen in all
the sons of Adam, who in respect of sin, Heb. 2. 15.
are in a perpetual fear of death all their life long. Wherefore the Romans 8.
15.
Apostle notes it the general condition of all Mankind, before they be
renewed, to be possessed with the spirit of bondage unto fear: The fruit
whereof is, the drawing us from God, and to make us fly from him, as from our
Enemy, as Adam Genesis 3. 8.
fled from the presence of God, and hid himself among the Trees of the Garden.

Thirdly, The particularities of this cursed and miserable estate, which all
the sons of Adam do welter and lie in all their life, are manifold, and of
diverse kinds, comprehending Deuteronomy. 28. 61, and 29. 20.
all the plagues and punishments that may be thought of, written and not
written: but the chief and principal of every sort, as they lie in order,
opposite to the happy and blessed estate before described, are these that
follow:

First, The wrath of God: for so the Holy Ghost says, John 3. 36.
He that believes not the Son, the wrath of God (now) abides upon him. But
this is not the full cup of his wrath, So far, that all things, not blessings
only, but his very graces turn to their ruin.
the dregs whereof the wicked shall drink hereafter: for that no man can
endure, and live: but qualified and mixed, that it breaks out, yet no further
then this, to turn all things to their ruin, not only outward blessings,
wherein God lifts them up, that he may with a greater force cast them down;
but even the good graces of God, and gifts of his holy Spirit, which all,
through their own fault, work unto their evil, Christ is to them a Rock 1.
Pet. 2. 7.
of offense, and set Luke 2. 34.
for a stumbling block; all Esaias 28. 13.
the wholesome instructions which he uses, his chastisements and corrections
to reclayme them, by their wickedness are to make them fall to be snared and
in trapped; the 2. Cor. 2. 6.
Gospel is a savor of death unto death unto them; the To. 2. 4, 5, etc.
bounty and long suffering of God serves to the hardening of their
unrepentant heart. And this is contrary to that love, wherewith God before
embraced man:

Secondly, Separation from the fellowship of God, as 2. Separation from his
presence:
Adam was cast out of Paradise, the visible testimony of his presence. In
regard whereof, the Apostle Ephesians. 4. 18.
says, We are estranged from the life of God, are Ephesians. 2. 19.
strangers and forainers, and Ephesians. 2. 17.
far off from him.

Thirdly, Loss of our sovereignty, and consequently, 3. Loss of our former
sovereignty, and consequently, of our power, insomuch as both the creatures
are become our enemies,
of the power we had to rule and to command: In so much as the Creatures that
before were subject to us, shaking off the yoke of their obedience, are,
through Adams fall, armed to our destruction: the wild beasts of the field
ready to devour us, and all the creatures to rise up against us. Wherefore
the Job 5. 22, 23.
Holy Ghost notes it a fruit of our reconciliation unto God, Not to be afraid
of the beasts of the Earth, but to be in league with the stones of the field,
and to have the beasts of the field in peace, as being otherwise at war and
at defiance with us.

More then that, a thing most opposite to our former and we Slaves to Satan.
sovereignty and dominion, Satan himself, the most vilest and most basest of
Gods Creatures, and the same our utter Enemy, is become our Lord and Master,
insomuch as he rules and reigns over us after his own pleasure, haleth and
pulls us which way it pleases him, and holds us fast bound, as it were in
chains, to do his will, being therefore called, The 2. Cor. 4. 4.
God of this World, that blinds the minds of the unfaithful; the Prince
John 12. 31. and 16. 1^.
of this World, the Ephesians. 2. 2.
spirit that works effectually in the children of disobedience, in 2. Tim. 2.
26.
whose snares we are, and holden captives of him. Whereupon the Apostle says,
that by the ministry of the Gospel, We Col. 1. 13.
are delivered out of the power of darkness, and freed Heb. 2. 15.
by Christ, from the bondage, which through fear of death we were all our
life subject to. And hereof it follows, that the Reprobate having, beside the
sinfulness of their nature, the Devil, by whose swindge and sway they are
wholly led, so ready to kindle the coals; and to blow the fire of their own
corruption, can do nothing else but sin.

Fourthly, A heap and multitude of all manner of evil, 4. All kind of
calamities.
and calamities of all sorts, which the Holy Ghost Deuteronomy. 28.
Deuteronomy. 28. does reckon up as fruits of sin; first, in body to be Verse 25.
smitten before the enemies, 25, 48.
captivity and serving of the enemy in famine, and in thirst, and in nakedness,
and want of all things, and in 50.
great disgrace, and to be 64.
dispersed and scattered into the furthest parts of the earth. In mind, a 65,
66, 67.
trembling and heavy heart. In the morning to say, I would it were evening. To
be 28, 29.
smitten with madness, and with blindness, and with astonishment, that they
shall grope at noone day, as a blind man gropeth in darkness.

Then, foraine in our possessions: first, wife and children, and then, in our
goods: A 30.
wife shall be espoused, and another shall lie with her; sons 32.
and daughters given unto a strange people, and go 41.
into captivity. Touching goods in the Land, first, and the fruits thereof: to
30.
build a house, and another to dwell in it; to plant the Vineyard, and another
to eat the fruit; the 23.
Heavens to be brass, that no rain shall fall, and thereby the Land to be
Iron, that no fruit shall grow; the seed 38.
that shall sow the ground, to be consumed by the Locust; the 39.
Vineyard by the Worm; all the 42.
Trees and Fruits of the Earth, by the Caterpiller; the 40.
Olive Tree to cast her Olives. In goods: the 17.
basket, and the Dough, the 18.
increase of the Kine, and the flock of the Sheep to be accursed; that which
29, 33.
one has, to be taken from him by Rapine and Fraud; his 31.
Ox to be slain before his eyes, and he not eat of it; his Ass taken away,
and come no more to him; his Sheep to be given to his Enemies, and none to
keep him from this violence: And thus, for 48.
outward sustenance, to be brought to extreme penury and want of all things;
that 44.
he must be driven to borrow, and not able to lend. In estate and honor, the
43.
Stranger amongst them to climb aloft, high, high, and they to come down,
low, low, the 44.
Stranger to be the head, and they the tail. In ones name, fame and
estimation to be a 37.
taunt, a byword and a Prouer be unto all people, and to get 20.
shame and rebuke in whatsoever they set their hand unto. Particularly, of this
kind are,

First* Ignorance, losing all that excellency of Wisdom, Ignorance.
Knowledge, and understanding, that was in Adam, and in stead thereof, a
putting on a contrary habit of blindness and error; a manifest fruit of
sin, and so noted, Deuteronomy. 28. 28.

Secondly, Shame, coming from that nakedness Shame.
whereby we are stripped of all the ornaments of our Glory, for that by
sin, shame entered into the World, it is plain, in that Genesis 2. 25. compared
with Genesis 37.
before, Adam and his Wife were naked, and yet not ashamed.

Thirdly, All kind of pain, weakness, and infirmity; the Genesis 3. 19.
woman in sorrow to conceive and bear; the man Genesis 3. 19. Infirmity,
Sickness.
in the sweat of his brows, to eat his bread. Again, Deuteronomy. 28.: 1, 22, 27,
35.
hunger, thirst, weariness, sores, itches, sickness, etc. And that these and
such like are the fruits of sin, appears also by the warning our Savior
gave to him that he had healed of his sickness, John 5. Iehoua shall make the
pestilence clean unto thee, until be has consumed thee. Iehoua shall smite
thee w^^h a Consumption, and with the Fever, and with a hot burning Ague, and
with a fervent heat Iehoua shall smite thee with the Botch of Egypt, and with
the Eme^ods, and with the Scabs, and with the Itch. Iehoua shall smite thee in
the knees, and in the thighs, with a sore Botch, that thou can not be
healed, even from the sole of thy foot, unto the top of thy head. and in the
end Death, which is the separation of soul, and body.
14. Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee. Therefore, Mat. 9. 2. when he was to heal the man sick of the palsy,
he said unto him, Be of good comfort, son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Fourthly, Death, the separation of the soul and body. So the Apostle tells
us, Romans 5. 12. Through death sin came into the World: which bodily death is
a part of that death threatened at the first, Genesis 2. 17. What day thou eatest
of it, thou shall dye. And this is, as it were the last and uttermost period of
all our former miseries, in which one they all are comprehended: for in death
our shame, weakness, and dishonor is most apparent, as the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 15. 42, 43. that our body is sown, that is, buried and committed to the
ground, in corruption, in dishonor, and in weakness.

And of this nature is a 1. Co 15 51, 52. 1. These. 4. 15, 16. Yet in all this,
some relics of former dignity do remain, namely, in the mind.
miserable change like to death, which shall befall them that are alive in the
latter Day.

But in all this, God has been pleased to use a temper, leaving still some
relics of our dignity and first condition. That part indeed of his image,
which stands in righteousness and true holiness, is quite and clean
abolished, that not so much as any steps or fragments do remain; the Ephesians.
2. 1.
Apostle bearing witness, that we are borne dead in sin: but the Image of
GOD stands also in the excellency of man, above other Creatures; of which
dignity or excellency, but not of holiness or Innocence, some relics we
carry yet about us,

And they are, first, in the mind or body alone, and by themselves
considered, then in the whole man: In the mind.

First, Common principles of good and evil, which Common principles of good
and evil, (sparks of that light of nature)
the Romans 1. 18.
Apostle calls Truth, that is, some seed of the eternal Truth, both for
knowledge of God, and of our duties to our brethren, as that there is one God,
and that the same God is to be served; that he rewards those that keep his
Law, and punishes the transgressors; that men must reverence their Superiors,
and not harm their Neighbors, nor do injury one unto another. And from this
light that every one carries about him, and is borne and bred together with
him, comes the Law of nature, that nature, which now we have since the fall
of Adam: therefore, John 1. 9. it is said, that every man coming into the
World, is lightened therewithal.

And this serves notably for the collection and gathering of his Church out of
the wicked World: for if all common honesty, all seeds of comeliness and
virtue were utterly extinguished and put out, how could either the Church be
gathered at all, or preserved, or kept when it is once gathered?

Secondly, A conscience when we do amiss, whereof and some seeds of
conscience,
naturally some seeds are left in every one, the better to repress the
unbridled course of our affections, howsoever some struggle to shake them off,
Romans 2. 15. their conscience accusing or excusing.

Now, this light of Nature and seeds of conscience which notwithstanding are
wholly sinful,
left in man, are good and holy things in themselves, and of their own nature,
but in us utterly corrupt and naught: All whose parts and powers are wholly
tainted and defiled with sin; that truly the Titus 1. 15.
Apostle says, Both our mind and conscience is defiled:

Therefore they serve not at all to justify us, as though and do but serve
partly to keep men from breaking forth, without all shame or regard of
honesty, partly to make them inexcusable.
by our own Wisdom, Reason, Will, Desire, or Affections, we were able to
do or to endeavor that that is good, but partly to keep men from breaking
out, without shame, unto an ouer-bold and audacious defiance of all godliness
and honesty, partly to make us inexcusable in the sight of God, Romans 1. 20.
For first, those seeds of Truth and Light, which we have of God, are so far
from being our guide to lead us unto Heaven, the same being the proper office
of Christ, Who Ioh. 14. 6.
is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, as contrariwise they convince us every
mothers child, both of impiety to God, and injustice to men; in that we show
not forth the power thereof in our lives, but restrain and keep it back
unjustly, to do quite the contrary: Insomuch as men naturally knowing Romans 1.
19, 20
God, both his eternal Power and Godhead, yet they glorify him not as God,
but wax vain in their reasonings and disputes, and rush forth into all
unrighteousness against men, as the Apostle there at large declares. And the
like may be said of the conscience also, that it tends only unto this, to
take away all excuse from us, Romans 2. 15. So as our Desire, Will, Affections,
retain now no part of our former conscience, but are wholly brutish, sensual,
and slaves unto sin, as we heard before: Not that hereby we take away all
freedom of will from man, but we teach, that the same has place only in the
natural inclinations common to all living Creatures, which naturally seek
their own good, life, nourishment, maintenance, preservation, propagation, etc.
or in the outward actions of this life for matter of manners, government of
Houses, Families, Commonwealth, Cities, etc. but not to do the things that
are good and pleasing unto God.

The relics of our former dignity that yet remain In the body a kind of
majesty:
in the body, are Genesis 9* 6.
Majesty and comeliness of person, which bring men many times into a love and
admiration of us.

In the whole Genesis 9. 2.
man there is a certain sovereignty, that keeps in awe the brute Creatures,
insomuch as In the whole man, a certain sovereignty, that keeps in awe the
brute creatures. The creature here (through the fall of man) receives an
impair of his first perfection
many savage beasts, that far excel man in strength, do willingly yield
themselves to be tamed of him.

Lastly, the punishment of man's transgression rests not in man alone, it is
of a more large extent, and reaches, for man's sake, to the other creatures:
for as they were for his service and command made in all excellency of
perfection: So by the fall of Adam he has not only undone himself and his
posterity, but even the brute beasts and all the dumb creatures are impayted
by it, and groan under that impair: for so God pronounces, Genesis 3. 17. Cursed
be the earth for thy sake. And again, Verse 18. Brambles and Briars shall it
bring forth unto thee. And the Apostle, Romans 8. 22. The whole Creation (that
is, all the things created) groan and travail together, unto this present
time. And that, he calls there vanity, or a vanishing and a flitting estate
subject to corruption and decay, they having a part in the punishment of man,
to agrieue his curse, and to make it more appear how fearful his
transgression was, whereof all the Creatures, and the whole frame of the
Creation does feel the smart, as Rom 8. 20.
Paul says, They are subject unto vanity for him that subdued them, that is,
to obey the Creatours pleasure, who by casting them into this vanity, would
leave it testified, how much he is offended with man, for whose good he had
created them in a far more excellent condition. So much of that which is in
part. The fullness of the curse after death, is damnation with the Devil and
his angels.


This which you have heard, is that miserable and wretched estate which sin
has drawn upon all the sons of Adam, so long as they live in this World.
That which we call full cursednesse, is a sorer and a more grievous punishment,
the full cup of Gods heavy indignation, insupportable of all his Creatures: No
Angel, no man, not all the Angels or men of the World able to before it, or to
endure the least brunt of it: but forces miserable man, upon whom it lights,
down into Hell, that horrible place of darkness, where they endure
everlasting torments with the Devil and his angels; such as no tongue can
express or utter: And therefore it is called, The 2. These. 1. 9.
destruction of the creature, The second Revel. 2. 6. and 21. 8.
death, 1. Cor. 11. 32.
damnation: and there is said to be Mat. 22. 13. and 25. 30.
weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth: for first, they are separate and
quite cut off from the gracious presence of God. Present indeed they find and
feel him by experience; but that presence separated from his favor, is an
increase of their fear and horror: not only so, but the wrath of God
sensibly pursuing them, gives no rest unto their souls, but as a Worm biteth
and gnaweth on them continually; the fearfulness of which torment what heart
is able to conceive? But to give some glimpse of it, the Scriptures use diverse
names, The Mar. 9. 43, 44 45, 46, 47.
Worm that never dies, Hell fire, Unquenchable fire, The Revel. 19. 20. and
20. 10, 14.
burning Lake. Therefore wretched and fearful is their condition, yea, thrice
miserable are they, and happy had it been for them, if never they had been
borne, as also our Mat. 26. 24.
Savior Christ does say.

Two circumstances there are, whereby these torments insupportable in
themselves, are made yet more grievous.

First, By the place, Hell, where they are kept fast bound in chains and
fetters of darkness. In regard whereof it is called Outer Mat. 22, 13. and 25.
30.
Darkness.

Secondly, By the eternity of the punishment, Mat. 18. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Dan.
19. 2.
being everlasting, without all hope of ransom: no strong nor mighty man to
be looked for, that may break this Prison, and let the Prisoners loose; no end
of punishment, nor hope of any end; always dying, and never seeing an end of
death; Their Esaias 66. Mat. 9. 44, 45, 46, 48.
Worm never dies, their Fire never goes out; they find not so much as one
Luke 16. ^4.
drop of cold water at any time to quench their thirst. A pain otherwise not
so grievous, if it have no intermission, nor hope of any ease, is worse then a
thousand deaths. O how much more then does this exceed, which with the first
weight thereof breaking the very bones, and all the veins and sinnewes of
their heart, must needs in the everlasting continuance of it infinitely be
increased.

The sinfulness annexed to this estate, is hatred of God, final desperation
and the full height and top of all iniquity, as in the damned spirits we saw
before.

Further, to this estate three things are proper: In soul presently, till the
latter Day.


First, it lights upon men, one by one, presently after death. So has the
wisdom of God ordained, that when the course of this life is run out,
Judgment should then begin upon the souls both of the Elect and Reprobate,
presently departing into their place of joy or of torment: a third place there
is not any. So says Peter 1. Pet. 3. 19.
of the wicked, disobedient in the time of NOAH: That their spirits are in
Prison, chayned with the fetters of darkness. And the Rich man, as soon as he
dyed, was cast into Hell: for ( being in Hell) says our Luke 16. 23.
Savior Christ, in torments, he saw ABRAHAM a far off, and LAZARUS in his
bosom.

For men, in this most excellent part of theirs perish not like bruit beasts,
as the Sadduces of old, and now-adayes the Libertines do teach: neither
Sadduces and Libertines.
does their soul vanish in the Air, or dye with the body, till the time of
the restoring of all things, which is contrary to the property of that
spiritual nature, but it still lives and continues either in pain or
comfort, Mat. 10. 28. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul.

Secondly, Their soul only feels this heavy torment, their bodies resting
in the grave, till the time of the dissolution of all things.

Thirdly, The condition that men also must undergo in the end, is the whole
extremity and fullness of Gods wrath to seize then upon them, many degrees
heavier then the punishment they felt before: that Judgment going before the
great and solemn Day, wherein all flesh is to be presented before the Judge
of all the World, as it were a petty Sessions before the grand Assizes.
Wherefore the Apostle calls the last Day, in respect of the wicked, Romans 2. 5.
A Day of wrath, because then God will tread out the full Wine Press of his
wrath: and 2. Pet. 2. 9.
Peter by excellency, A Day of Judgment, whereto the wicked are reserved to
be punished. And again, 2. Pet. 3. 7.
A Day of Judgment and destruction of ungodly men.

For to this purpose will God raise up their bodies in the latter Day, that so
their body and soul which have both sinned together, may be both together
punished: whereof they shall then receive their sentence and last doom, with
execution accordingly. But of these two Doctrines, the Resurrection and the
last Judgment, we shall have just cause to speak more fully and at large
hereafter.

A miserable change to such men as then are living, A miserable change to such
men as then are living. shall be in stead of a death, and rising from it. The
creature is then also subject to an utter abolition
shall be in stead of a death and rising from it.

The creature also, to make the curse of man the greater, is then subject to an
utter abolition, having in the mean time their being and continuance for the
Elects sake, as the 2. Pet. 3 9.
Apostle Peter teaches, when to the wicked Scorners, that make a mock of the
Coming of Christ, and of the end of the World; for that all things continue
hitherto, as they were from the Creation; he opposes the patience of God,
deferring the same because of the Elect: for whose sake he holds up the
World, till their number be fulfilled, that none of his might perish. And so,
that saying of Solomon, Pro. 10. 25. may not unfitly be interpreted, howsoever
another sense serves very well, That the just man is the foundation of the
World: yet true it is, the Creature shall not at the last Day be in fact
utterly done away; but that is not long of the desert which the sin of man
had brought upon them, but by a further mercy of God toward the Elect, for
whose comfort in Christ they shall stand, and be renewed: an evident proof,
that, otherwise, in the damnation of all flesh, they should utterly have been
abolished.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF DIVINITY, OF IMMANVEL, GOD AND MAN, OUR REDEEMER.
CHAP. I.
Of Christ.

BEfore we enter upon This is the sum of that Doctrine which we have
concerning God: The other follows, concerning Immanuel, God with us.
this part, because Christ (the subject it treats of) Romans 10. 4.
is the end of the Law, somewhat would be said as an inducement to the
principal, concerning the power, efficacy and use of the Law of GOD: for if
such be the condition of all Mankind, as we have hitherto left them in, what
shall we say? Is there no means by any thing we can do, to attain unto
salvation? No verily, there is not any: for Ephesians. 2. 13.
we are borne dead in sins, and are by nature the children of wrath: accursed
every Mothers son, and unable of our selves, or by our own strength to get
out of that curse. It is true, the Law or Covenant of works, is of sufficient
power and ability in it self to justify; for by it the Holy Angels that kept
their first estate, are justified in the sight of God, and by it our Savior
Christ was justified: and so should Adam and all his posterity have been, if
they had continued in the obedience thereof: but in respect of our weakness,
who are not able to perform it, it is now become Romans 8. 3. Gal. 3. 21.
impossible for the Law to save us. Wherefore the Romans 3. 20: Gal. 3. 11.
Scripture every where proclaymeth as a thing evident (...).
and clear, that by the Law no man is justified before God: for, says the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 17. 18. The Law which was four hundred and thirty years
after cannot disanull the Covenant that was confirmed before of God, in respect
of Christ, that it should make the promise of none effect. The meaning is,
Abraham, four hundred thirty years, before the giving of the Law, was
justified by faith in the promise or covenant of Grace, which could not be
made void by the Law coming so long after; as it must, if the Law should
justify.

To what use then does it serve for us that are fallen? It serves for a
threefold use:

First, To show and discover sin, Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the works of the
Law no flesh shall be justified in his sight: for by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin, Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin but by the Law; for even
lust I had not known, if the Law had not said, Thou shall not lust.

Secondly, Through corruption of our nature, who are sharpest set to do things
forbidden, to increase and stir up sin within us, Romans 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. But
sin taking occasion by that Commandment, wrought in me all lust: for without
the Law sin was dead, but I lived without the Law once: But when that
Commandment came, and was truly understood of me, sin revived, and I dyed:
And the Commandment which was for life, was found to me to be unto death: for
sin taking occasion by that Commandment, deceived me, and thereby slew me.

Thirdly, By pronouncing against us the judgment and condemnation Romans 3. 9.
due unto sin, to drive us to seek Righteousness, and thereby Salvation in
another, that is to say, in Christ, For Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. So, Gal. 3. 22, 23, 24.
The Law shuts all men under sin, not that they should perish, but that
the promise by Faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to those that believe. And
thus are we led by the hand to the second part of this most holy Doctrine, the
Doctrine concerning Christ, and the joyful and glad tidings of Salvation in
and through him.

In speaking of Christ, we are to handle both his Person Immanuel (God with us)
is in one person,
and his Office. And first, his Person: In regard whereof, the Scripture gives
him the Name of Esaias 7. 14. Mat. 1. 23.
Immanuel, God with us, or God-man: The true Jehovah, Coessentiall and
Consubstantiall with the Father and the holy Spirit: true man, of our very
nature and substance.

Wherefore in his Person are to be considered,

First, The two distinct natures.

Secondly, The union of them into one Christ.

The two distinct natures, the Son of God.
Samosetanus held, that Christ was not before he took flesh. Patropassians
held, that the Father took flesh and suffered.
are his Deity, and Humanity, his Godhead or Divine Nature, being not the
Person of the Father (who was not incarnate) nor of the Holy Ghost, but of the
Son; as it is confessed by all, (as many as admit the distinction of persons)
and evident by the Scripture, Gal. 4. 4. When the fullness of time came, God
sent down his Son made of a woman, etc. John 3. 16. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. This is also the confession of
PETER, Mat. 16. 16. Thou art the Son of the Living God, and infinite other
places. Whatsoever therefore is disputed before, concerning the Godhead of the
Son, and his eternal Deity, falls into this Man Christ Jesus.

And this nature does of it self make a person, supporting and holding up the
Manhood, that wholly is and subsisteth in the person of the Godhead. Wherefore
that which is said, John 1. 14. The Word became flesh, is expounded, Heb. 2.
16. to be, by taking it to his Godhead, therein to have the being and
subsistence, and of the same to be supported and holden up for ever.

The other nature is his Humanity, and very man.
Marcian and Valentinus taught, that Christ took his body from Heaven, and
passed through the Virgin, as water through a Pipe, or that he took it out of
the Air; and so denied the truth of his humane nature.
in that he was perfect man, of the very flesh of Marie. So we read, Romans 1.
3 Made of the Seed of DAVID according to the flesh: that is, his humane nature:
and Heb. 2. 16. He took not to (his Godhead) the nature of Angels, but the
Seed of ABRAHAM. Again, Galat. 4. 4. he is said to be made of a woman: the
Preposition ( of) noting her very substance and flesh. And this is it that was
prophesied long before, that Genesis 3. 15.
the seed of the woman should tread down the head of the Serpent. And that
Psalm. 132. 11. Acts 2. 30.
of the fruit of DAVID'S Loins God would raise up Christ, as touching the
flesh. Wherefore to make this more manifest, he is called Shilo, that is, the
Afterbirth of IVDA, Genesis 49. 10. and is said to have opened the Virgins womb,
Luke 2. 23. He was therefore made of the Seed of David, and was a Plant of the
Root of Iesse, a perfect man (consisting as all other men do) of a body and
soul, endued with the faculties of understanding and will. That he had a
body, it is plain, Heb. 10. 5. A body thou have fitted for me. That it was
a true body, flesh and bones, appears, Luke 24. 39 even after his
Resurrection. See mine hands and my feet: for it is I my self, handle me and
see: for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye behold me to have.

Of his soul Mat. 26. 38.
the Holy Ghost says, His Apollinaris thought that Christ took a body only,
and not a soul, but that his Godhead stood in stead of a soul.
soul was heavy unto death. And he himself, Father, Luke 22. 46.
into thy hands I commit my spirit. And when he had said so, he dyed. Now this
could not possibly fall into the Godhead, which is not subject to any passion,
was not, nor could not be severed from the body, seeing it is euery-where.
Therefore it must needs be meant of that part of man's nature, which properly
we term the soul. According whereunto he attributes Monothelites, which
hold there was but one will in Christ.
unto himself a will, and that distinct from the will of his Father, Not Mat.
26. 39.
as I will, but as thou will. So he is said to have an Understanding, Luke 2.
47. They maruailed at his answers, and at his understanding.

And in both these parts was he subject to Heb. 4. 15. and 2. 14.
all humane frailties and imperfections, without sin; In his body to Mat. 4.
2.
hunger, Mar. 4. 38.
sleep, John 4. 6.
weariness, Mark 3. 9.
wringing, John 20. 25. and 19. 37, 38.
piercing, wounding, and death it self; Luke 2. 52.
growing in height and stature as other men's bodies grow; finite, and
circumscribed Vbiquists, that would have his body to be euery-where. Papists,
that would have it to be in many places at once.
in place; that when he was in one, he was not in another, but John 20. 19.
removed from place to place, being Mark. 16. 19. Acts 1. 9. Luke 21. 27.
taken up, and corporally ascending into Heaven, from Mat. 25. 31. Acts 1. 11.
whence he shall corporally come down again. In his mind he was subject to
ignorance of some things (but not sinful ignorance:) for he grew Luke 2. 52.
and increased by degrees in Wisdom: Heb. 5. 8.
He learned obedience by the things he suffered; yea, of some things he had
no knowledge at all, as it may be probably gathered out of Mar. 11. he had not:
Mar. 11. 13.
of the Fig Tree, whether it had any fruit or no: Mar. 13. 32.
of the day and hour of Judgment: in his soul he was subject to all kind
of natural passions, John 11. 4, 35
not sinful: love, Heb. 5 7.
fear, Mar 3. 5.
grief, anger, Mat. 9. 36. and 14 14.
pity, John 11. 15.
joy, Mar. 10. 14.
indignation, John 11. 33.
trouble of heart, Mat. 8. 10. Mar. 6. 6.
wondering, John 11. 27.
perplexity, Mat. 26. 37.
heaviness, Mar. 14. ^3.
amazement.

The difference of Christ's Hebion, Cerinthus, and others said, he was conceived
by ordinary procreation of man and woman, as other men are.
humane nature from all other men's, stands in this, that he was not
conceived according to the ordinary procreation of man and woman, but of a
Virgin: and therefore by the immediate power of the Holy Ghost, not begetting
him of his own substance, as fathers do their children, but by his Almighty
Power framing and fashioning the same, after a wonderful manner miraculously,
and without man's help, in the womb of Marie.

That she was a Virgin, the Story is plain, Mat. 1. 23.
Mat. 1. according as it was Esaias 7. 14.
long before prophesied: Behold, that Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son.
The (...).
word in both the Tongues signifies one hidden and unknown unto a man. And
fondly do the Jewish Rabbis pretend the place, Pro. 30. 19.
Prou. 30. to delude the truth of this Interpretation, which indeed does
confirm and give strength unto it: for when Solomon says, The way of a man in
a (...)
Maid: Is it not plain, that he speaks by an Ironie, meaning a Strumpet,
of that brazen forehead and so impudent, as notwithstanding her filthiness,
will needs go for as good a Maid as the best? Therefore he adds in the next
Verse, She eats, and then wipeth her mouth, saying, I have done none
iniquity: yea, this seems, though more obscurely, to have been pointed at
in that promise, The seed of the woman shall tread down the head of the
Serpent: for in saying, the seed of the woman, and not of the man, who in the
ordinary course of generation has the first and chiefest place; what can else
be meant, but a wonderful and strange conception of a woman, without the
help of man? And of this interpretation, Esaias may be the Author, who does
not say simply, A Virgin shall conceive: but that Virgin; that is to say, that
Virgin, so famously and so long before spoken of to Gods people, of whom, as
touching the flesh, Christ should come: which no other Scripture but this does
warrant.

Last of all, the efficient and worker of this so wonderful by the Holy Ghost.
a conception, is expressed, Mat. 1. 20. That which is conceived in her, is of
the Holy Ghost. And l^st you should take ( of) here, for the material cause,
which is repugnant to the Divine Nature of the Spirit of God, and overthrows
the true humane Nature of our Savior Christ; the Angel, Luke 1. 35. declares
the whole order and manner of this conception, The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the most High shall ouer-shaddow thee.

Next is the union of Who is also
these two Natures: Nestorius divided the Person, and made two persons; one,
God; the other, man.

Eutyches confounded the two natures, and made them but one, attributing to the
Manhood all the properties of the Godhead; as to be uncreated, omnipotent,
euerywhere, etc. and to the Godhead; to be subject, to suffer, and whatsoever
else belongs to the humane Nature.


Both which, in the first moment of his Conception, inseparably knit together,
and still remaining in substance, property, and action distinct one from
other, and each keeping his several and proper qualities; make one Person,
Jesus Christ, as the soul and body personally conjoined, make one man. A
Mystery of all Mysteries, that a man should make one Person with GOD, whom the
glorious and blessed Angels are not able to behold, and yet clearly and
manifestly taught in the Scriptures, (...).
Heb. 2. 16. For he took not to an Angellike nature, but he took to the Seed
of ABRAHAM.

This taking to, which must needs be meant unto his Godhead, does it not most
manifestly show a distinction of the Natures, not a drowning or swallowing up
of either, against Eutyches, and again, a personal union of them in an
unspeakable sort, against Nestorius? The place to the Col. 2. 9.
Coloss. 2. 9. as it spoke before for the Godhead of Christ: So it speaks
for the unity of his natures. For in him, (that is, in Christ, whom he
opposes to those traditions of men) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. When he says, In him dwells the Godhead, he distinguishes two
Natures; one, the Godhead dwelling; the other, the man, in whom it dwells.
By which phrase of dwelling, also he notes not an abode for a time, but a
perpetual habitation; for which cause he uses the present time. And adding
bodily, he signifies, that the same is not by communication of his power and
virtue, (in which sense, God is said to dwell in all his Saints:) nor in a
Sacramental manner (as God is said to dwell in his Temple;) but by a
substantial and personal union of both Natures making one Christ. Therefore
Paul unto the Romans, speaking of both apart; his Manhood first, and then his
Godhead, afterward knitteth them in one JESUS CHRIST; Romans 13. 4.
concerning his Son, made of the Seed of DAVID, according to the flesh,
mightily declared to be the Son of God, as touching the Spirit of
Sanctification, by rising from the dead, even JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Again,
Romans 9. 5.
that CHRIST, as touching the flesh, came from the Father, being also over all
God to be blessed for ever. And 1. Peter 3. 18. CHRIST was put to death, as
touching the flesh, and quickened, touching the Spirit.

To conclude, this was plainly foretold by the Prophet Esaias 7. 14. that he
should be EMANVEL, that is, God with us. Wherefore that of John 1. 14. The Word
became flesh, and whatsoever other speeches like to that, may not be understood
of a confusion, but of an union of the natures: and as the natures themselves
are not mingled, no more are their properties, it being impossible that the
properties of one nature should agree unto the other; for as the Godhead
cannot die, no more can the Manhood be infinite, omnipotent, euery-where, etc.

By reason of the union of these natures into one person, these two things
follow:

First, Beside that touching the Deity, he is the Son of God by nature, (In
which respect he is indeed most properly called the Son; the Heb. 7. 3.
Apostle witnessing that He was without Father, according to his Manhood, and
without Mother, according to his Godhead) he is also in his humanity, the
Son of God by this personal union, Luke 1. 35. That holy One that is borne
of thee, shall be called, The Son of God. And yet for all that, there is but
one only Son of God, not two, though the same, by reason of this personal
Union, be in two respects the Son.

Secondly, Hereof it is, that he is to be adored of all his Creatures, even
the holy Angels, Heb. 1. Let all the Angels of God worship him. Phil. 2. 9.
Therefore God did also exceedingly exalt him, and gave unto him a name above
all names, that all the Name of JESUS, every knes should bow, of things in
Heaven, and upon the Earth, and under the ground.

Thirdly, Hence grows a borrowed manner of speech, which the Learned in other
Professions call Synedoche: Divines for the most part, The (...).
communication of properties: whereby sometimes that is attributed to whole
Christ, which agrees to him but in respect of one of his natures: As when we
say, 1. Cor. 15.
Christ suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, we mean it of his Manhood
only, not of the Godhead, which could not suffer, when he says of himself,
John 8. 58.
Before ABRAHAM was, Iam; this is to be understood of his Godhead only, not
of his Manhood which came of the Seed of Abraham.

Sometimes it is spoken of some one nature, which agrees to his whole person,
as that of the Apostle, There 1. Tim. 2. 5.
is one Mediator between God and men, the Man CHRIST JESUS, meaning he which
is so God, as he is also Man.

Sometimes of one nature, which fitteth not that, but the other: As when the
Apostle says, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
God was taken up in Glory. 1. Cor. 2. 8.
If they had known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Acts
20. 28.
God has purchased his Church by his blood. And when our Savior says, Mar.
13. 23.
The Son himself knows not of that Day of Judgment; who sees not, that it
is spoken of Christ, by the Name of God, which belongs but to his Manhood?
Again, in saying, John 3. 13.
The Son of man which is in Heaven, he gives to himself, as Man, that
which appertains to the Godhead.

But note this phrase of speech, or communication of properties, has place in
the Name of The Learned say, in concreto, not in abstracto.
(God) and (Man) not of the Godhead, and Manhood: Therefore as it is most
certain, against Nestorius, dividing the person, that the Man Christ was God,
and therefore eternal (not in his Manhood, but in his Godhead) that Christ
God was also Man; and therefore crucified, taken up into Heaven, etc. not in
his Godhead, but in his Manhood: So it is most wicked and blasphemous to say,
that the Manhood of Christ is his Godhead, uncreated, omnipotent,
euery-where, etc. or that his Godhead is his Manhood, subject to suffer, etc.
as Eutyches did, confounding the natures.

Thus far of the person of Christ, who it was necessary should indeed be man.

First, That God might be pacified in that nature that had offended.

Secondly, that he might undergo the punishment due to sin, which the
Godhead, free from all suffering, could not: And therefore also it was
necessary he should have a soul, and not his Godhead stand in stead of a
soul: for our souls must have perished everlastingly, except his soul had
suffered for them.

Thirdly, That he might be a fit Intercessor for us, having tasted of our
miseries. All this the Apostle teaches, Heb. 2. from the tenth Verse, to the
end of the Chapter, setting forth most notably the rich and plentiful comfort
that we reap from hence, by many goodly Arguments. And Heb. 4. 15. he says,
We have not an High Priest that cannot suffer together with us in our
infirmities, but one that was tempted in all things like unto us.

Again, it was necessary he should be God:

First, Because none but God could reveal unto us the will and pleasure of
God: For none has ascended into Heaven, but the Son of man that descended
from Heaven, and is in Heaven, John 3. 13. that is to say, No man ever did, nor
by nature can attain to the true knowledge of heavenly things, but he that is
also God, to wit, the Son, the eternal Wisdom of the Father, as John also
says, No John 1. 18
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son of God, which is in
the bosom of the Father, that is, of one nature and essence with him, he has
revealed him.

Neither had he been able to sustain the infinite wrath of God due to our
sins, much less to overcome it, if himself had been but a finite nature.

Yea, meet it was he should be the Son of GOD: for being so by nature, he
is able to bestow this privilege on those that believe, to be the sons of
GOD by adoption, John 1. 12.

The Union of both natures into one person was also necessary.

First, That in him God and Man, we might see and behold the Father: for
seeing God in his own essence and nature is invisible, and no conceit can
possibly be framed of him: the Apostle shows, that for the staying of our
faith, and that our mind and understanding might have somewhat to rest upon,
we have Christ Col. 1. 15.
the Image of the invisible God, the Heb. 13.
brightness or resplendence of his Glory, and the engraven form of his
Person, whom whosoever sees, sees the Father also, as he himself speaks,
John 1. 2. For the Son being 1. Tim. 3. 16.
God himself, the second Person in Trinity, manifested in the flesh, is as a
Glass, in whose substantial and visible Glory, as he was made Man, the
Father gives us to see, and almost to grope and feel his own infinite
Majesty and Love that cannot be comprehended; without whom if we look upon
God, we see indeed some small sparks of Glory to terrify and amaze us; but
in Christ God and Man, we behold the lively and express face of God, not any
more as a fearful and terrible Judge, to affright us, but as a most gracious
and loving Father, to comfort and refresh us.

Secondly, That thereby the obedience of Christ performed in the Manhood,
might be of infinite merit, as being the obedience of God himself, 2. Cor. 5.
12. Him that knew not sin, he made to be sin for us, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

After the person of Christ, follows his Office of Christ or Anointed.
Mediation, to set us at one with God, whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 2.
5. There is one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus.

In this Office of Mediation, three things may be considered.

First, The persons both of the Mediator and of those for whom Mediation is
made.

Secondly, The point and property of the office of Mediation.

Thirdly, The means to effect it.

The Mediator is Christ, the Son of God, whom his Father in his infinite
Wisdom, Goodness and Mercy, providing a means, when there was no other
means left in Heaven or upon the Earth to save us, sent down his own Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh, to save all Believers: whereupon it is not
only said, that Christ died, but that he was Romans 4. 25. and 8. 32.
delivered up to death for us: the exceeding measure of whose Mercy and Love
in this behalf, is commended in the Scripture by two circumstances; one is,
the giving of his Son, his only Son, his beloved Son, for our
Redemption. 1. John 4. 9.
In this, says the Apostle, was the love of God manifested toward us, that he
has sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we should live by him.
And our Savior Christ in John 3. 16.
JOHN, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

The second, is the time of this giving of his Son for us, even then, when we
were his enemies. This the same Apostle joins with the former: John 4. 20.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son a Propitiation for our sins.

But most notably does Paul unto the Romans enlarge this circumstance: Romans 5.
6, 7. 8, 9, 10.
For Christ, when yet we were of no strength, in his time dyed for the ungodly.
Verily for a righteous man one would scarce dye: peradventure for a man that
has been beneficial and good unto him, some man would endure to dye. But God
commmendeth his love to us that when we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us:
for if being enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son,
how much more being reconciled, shall we be saved? Wherefore Called of his
Father,
he thrust not himself into this Office of Mediation, but had the warrant of a
lawful calling for it: for John. 6. 27.
him (as he speaks of himself) has God the Father sealed. And the Apostle
to the Hebrews, Heb. 5. 4, 5, 6,
No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
AARON. So also Christ did not take this Honor to himself, to become a High
Priest, but he that spoke unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, gave it him; as also in another place he says, Thou art a Priest for
ever, after the order of MELCHISEDECH, for this cause he is called an Apostle,
Heb. 3. 1. and the Angel of the Covenant, Malach. 3. 1. And Nicodemus, though
he knew him not aright, acknowledges that he was a Teacher come from God,
John 3. for how else might any man presume to set his hand unto so great a
work? Therefore the Prophet says, Ier. 30. 31.
His Noble one shall be of him: And I will make him to approach, that he may
come near unto me: for who is he that can promise in his heart to draw near
unto me, says IEHOVA? that is, (as the Apostle speaks to the Hebrews) Heb.
5. 4.
Who can take this honor to himself, but Christ, who is called of God, and
made our King and Priest?

It stands (as every other lawful calling does) on two parts:

First, Gifts, and Graces necessary for the discharge of his Office, which God
never seuereth from his callings.

Secondly, A solemn inuesting of him unto his place. Both which concur in
Christ, Esaias 61. The Spirit of the Lord IEHOVA is upon me: therefore IEHOVA
has anointed me, to preach unto the poor: he has sent me, etc.

Of his Graces the Psalmist says, Psalm. 45. 8. Heb. 1. 9.
God has anointed thee with Oil of gladness above thy fellows: for being
the Pro. 8. 12.
Wisdom of God, and in the John 1. 18.
bosom of his Father, how can he be without any Grace requisite for him that
should be a Mediator?

And necessary it was he should thus be called and appointed, that we might
be out of doubt of GODS acceptance of that which Christ has done for us,
being his own ordinance and appointment, and of his good pleasure to save us
through him: whereupon the Apostle calls him Ephesians. 5. 1.
an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God: without which,
all his sufferings had been in vain.

But albeit his Office of Mediation in Gods appointment were before all
eternity, yet actually it began ever since the fall of Adam,
upon Adams fall coming after the Covenant of works, which was from the
beginning, as soon as Angels and men were made, when as yet the purpose of God
to save us through Christ, lay hid within himself, which first he revealed in
Paradise as soon as man had fallen: The Genesis 3. 15.
seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent.

Hereupon we find him invested into the place, not only after he had taken
flesh, when a voice came from Heaven, saying, Mat. 3. 17.
This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, but before his coming
into the World, by him that swear, Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 5. 6.
Thou art a Priest forever, after the order of MELCHISEDECH: And again, Psalm
2. 7. Heb. 1. 5.
Thou art my Sin, this day begat I thee.

In regard partly of his calling to the Office of Mediation, partly, of the
Graces that God his Father did adorn him with, he is named Christ, that is to
say, Anointed: and because also of Gods everlasting Decree, it is said,
Proverbs 8. 23. He was anointed before the World.

This Office of Mediation belongs to whole Christ, to be a Mediator.
not to any one several nature, in that great work of our Redemption, the
Manhood being assisted of the Godhead, and the Godhead in an unspeakable
manner working by the Manhood. So whole Christ is called Heb. 3. 2.
The Apostle and high Priest of our Profession, Ephesians. 2. 13, 14
our Peace, 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30
our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, and finally, Romans
1. 4.
Our Lord and Ephesians. 1. 20, 22
Head of the Church. An Office so appropriate unto him, that there neither are,
nor can be any more: the Apostle telling us, that he has a Priesthood, Heb. 7.
24.
which cannot pass unto any other, but remains in himself for ever. And
Acts 4. 12. There is no other name given us under Heaven, whereby we may be
saved. Therefore he proclaymeth of himself, I am John 14. 6.
the Way, I am John 10. 7.
the Door.

Touching the parties for whom Christ is a Mediator; between God and men,
this benefit is proper to Mankind: Neither the Angels that fell, are redeemed
by him, whose fall being with a high hand, presumptuously and without
temptation, can never be repaired: and therefore our Savior says, Mat. 25.
41. that Hell fire is prepared for the Devil and his angels, neither are those
that stand, vpholden by Christ as Mediator: for he took not their seed or
nature: wherefore those places, Ephesians. 1. 10. That he might gather into one
body all things in Christ, both the things in Heaven, and the things upon the
Earth. And Colos. 2. 10. It pleased God to reconcile through him all things
unto himself, both the things upon Earth, and the things in Heaven (...) not
to be understood of the Angels, but of the Sa^^^^ and blessed Spirits now
deceased.

Mediation, as the Apostle does define it, Gal. 3. 20. is to set at one,
parties that are at variance. Wherefore the very point and property of Christ's
Office of Mediator, or that wherein it stands, and whereunto all the parts
do tend, is the reconciling of the World, to bring them again into favor
with God his Father, and to the recovery of his former love, as it is said, 2.
Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself. And Romans 5.
10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his
Son. This was the foot of the Angels Song, Glory to God in the highest
Heavens, on Earth Peace, Good will toward men, Luke 2. 14. It was the Acts 10.
36.
sum of our Savior Christ's Embassage, Coming, he preached Peace unto us,
Ephesians. 2. 17. And thereupon the Gospel is called, 2. Cor. 15. 18, 19.
The Word or Ministry of reconciliation, Ephesians. 6. 15.
The Gospel of Peace, etc.

The means whereby he works our Peace, is by of a covenant,
making of a Covenant between God and us: whereupon he is called, The Mediator
of the New Testament, Hebrews 12. 24. and The Angel of the Covenant, Malachie
3. 1.

In this Covenant I observe the end and fruit, the substance or foundation, the
means or the condition, and the extent of the Covenant.

The end or fruit, is the saving of our souls: So the to save,
Apostle does express it, Heb. 9. 5. Therefore is Christ the Mediator of a new
Covenant, that through death coming between for the redemption of the
transgressions that were in the former Covenant, they that are called, may
receive the promise of an everlasting Inheritance.

Christ himself is the foundation and groundwork through faith in him,
of this Covenant, Esaias 49. 8. and the substance of all the Gospel, as the
Apostle defines, Romans 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. and in (...)other places.

The means to make the Covenant effectual unto us, (that is, by apprehending
of the Covenant)
is Faith, the condition of the Covenant; Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 31.

Touching the extent of the Covenant, all Mankind certain few men, whom God
his Father has chosen.
are not partakers of this benefit, but some certain men only: which certain
men, though we cannot certainly define the number, are but a handful, in
respect of the great multitude of those that perish, being elect before the
World was, and given unto Christ: that in time, through faith incorporated into
him: and becoming one with him, they might, as members, make that Body,
whereof he is the Head: and so be quickened by his Spirit unto everlasting
life. And this election of some, necessarily implies the rejecting of other
some. Wherefore here the whole doctrine of Gods holy Predestination is
summarily comprehended: A matter above all other, most religiously and soberly
to be dealt in: not so much for any hardness that is in it (which if we keep
within the bounds and limits of the Word, is easy enough to be conceived) as
in regard partly of the curiousness of men, prying without all reverence into
the secret Counsels of God, and climbing up by other steps then himself has
hallowed, and partly of their own corrupt affections, who either swelling with
Pride, or cast down with fear, can hardly keep along the coast of this
Doctrine, without wrecking themselves, either at the Rocks of Presumption, or
the Flats of desperation. Wherefore, to avoid both these extremes, we are to
hold such a middle course, as may not be after the random of our own wit, but
at the direction of God in the wisdom of his Word: for as for them that
think this Doctrine is not at all to be taught unto the people, it is
manifest that they err very grossly, this being, as the rest, one part of the
reueiled will of GOD, whereof Deuteronomy. 30. 29.
Moses speaks to the people, T(...) things belong to JEHOVAH our God, but the
reueiled things to us and our children for ever. And, as the Romans 15. 4.
Apostle says, Whatsoever things are written, are written for our profit, that
by patience and comfort of the Scriptures (which cannot be without knowing of
them) we might have hope. This being written by the singer of GOD in the Table
of his Word, must needs have a place in that number amongst the rest. And the
speech John 5. 30.
of our Savior Christ is general, willing us to search the Scriptures for
whatsoever things they bear record of. What? That the Apostle Paul, writing to
the Chap. 9. 10, 11
Romans, doubts not to debate this Argument at large, discoursing of all the
secrets and mysteries thereof, the causes, effects, etc. And in the Epistle to
the Ephesians. 5.
Ephesians, he lays it as the foundation and groundwork whereupon to build
the Doctrine of Faith and Holiness of life: Nay, Moses himself, who, for the
gross conceit and rudeness of the Jews, kept back the creation of the
Angels, and their fall, and many other Mysteries; yet how Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 7,
8, 9, 10. 14. and 73. 5.
often does he deal with this? The Disciples of Christ were not John 16. 12.
able to bear many things, which he was to utter unto them; yet he passes
not by this Doctrine, when Luke 10. 20.
he bids them to rejoice that their names were written in Heaven: yea, and
both the points of Election and Reprobation he plainly sets forth, Mat. 25.
34. and 41. This will be yet more evident, if we call to mind the manifold
use of this Doctrine, being the Root of all Piety, and the Base of all our
comfort, then the which, none more highly exalts the glory of God in his
Mercy and Justice, nor throws down the pride of man more low, as in the
process (Christ assisting) more fully shall appear.

Wherein, for a better light of that which follows, it is necessary I should
first define Predestination. Predestination is one principal branch of Gods
purpose, or eternal Decree concerning the final estate of the most excellent
creatures, Angels and men: The parts whereof are, Election and Reprobation:
Election, which is of some certain ones unto Salvation: of men, but few, in
respect of those that are to perish. Reprobation, which is of some certain
ones unto damnation. The weight and degree of both, as well of glory as of
shame, to some in a less, to some in a greater measure.

To explain this a little better, God, who only is eternal, the Father,
Son and holy Spirit, purposing before all times the glorifying of himself,
as is most meet, and the declaration of those wonderful things that are in
him, which by no other way then this could be made known, appointed first,
beside the setting forth of his power, patience, hatred of sin, love of
righteousness, and other virtues, to manifest the riches of his Mercy in
certain both Angels and men, known unto himself who should be saved; and in
like sort, the greatness of his Justice in certain, both Angels and men to
be condemned: wherein, in looking to nothing else either present or to come,
within us or without us, in Heaven or in Earth, but to himself alone, he
chose us of his free good-wil and pleasure. After which (for men themselves,
the All-wise God much more, advise of nothing but they set the end before them,
and first the end, then the means concurring to it.) After this therefore, in
order of the causes, not in course of time (all his purposes being from
eternity, and none before or after other) he purposed to create them both
holy and righteous, like unto himself, who having free will to embrace either
good or evil, and a nature subject to temptation, should of their own accord
voluntarily fall away, thereby subiecting themselves to his wrath and
indignation.

First, of the Angels, those only appointed to destruction, whom he never
would repair. The rest he did decree to establish by his Grace, that they
might not lose their standing, but abide fast for ever in that integrity which
at the first he gave them.

Touching Mankind, who were wholly to fall in Adam, for those whom he did
select and separate to be saved by his Mercy, he purposed in the love he bare
them, not to spare his own only Son, the Son of his Love most dear unto
him, but to send him into the World, to take upon him our flesh: In whom
adopting us for his sons, being by faith in graffed into him, and made one
together with him, he would in his good time bestow freely, through Grace,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. The rest he did
decree to leave in their sins, and deservedly to harden: and so their
destruction to come from themselves; the others Salvation from him and from his
Mercy.

So have you in general the state, and as it we (...), the project of this
Doctrine.

But before we proceed Those which make the name of Predestination proper to
the Elect, as though God had not predestined the Reprobate, but only
foreknowne that they should be such, whereas Predestination is spoken of
wicked actions, Acts 4. 28. and the word equivalent thereunto (...) (
fore-appointed) is used for reprobation, Iuae 4. The word prescience or
foreknowledge, is missevnderstood of many for a bare knowledge in God of all
things that shall be, especially of the qualities that God foresaw would be in
men, whereby he was led to choose or reject them, as Faith or Infidelity, good
or evil works: And so they make it a cause by it self severed from his
Decree; teaching that the Reprobate are only fore-knowne, not predestinate:
wherein is a double error (beside the mistaking of the word Predestination)
for,

First, Prescience or foreknowledge is never separate from the Decree of God,
but always taken for an ordayning and fore-appointing, when it is referred to
him: and therefore his bare knowledge, whereby he understands all things that
shall be, comes not within the compass of this word.

Secondly, It points out the free favor of God, and therefore has place
only in the Elect.


to the further unfolding of it, let us, for our better understanding,
distinguish these words, Purpose, Predestination, and Prescience, or
Foreknowledge, a word which in this Argument we often meet withal.

Purpose, is Gods general Decree of all things, for the manifesting of his
Glory.

Predestination is one branch of this Decree, to glorify himself by the
salvation of some, and destruction of other some; in the one, to show his
Justice; in the other, to set forth his Mercy.

Prescience or Foreknowledge is restrained to that part of his Decree, which
concerns those that shall be saved; signifying a Decree with a love and
liking, and when you apply it to the persons, is always spoken of the Elect,
never of the Reprobate, as Romans 8. 30. Whom he did foreknow, he did
predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 11. 2. God has
not rejected his people whom he fore-knew. 1. Peter 1. 2. Fore-knowne before
the foundation of the World. So that where the Apostle, Acts 2. 23. tells the
Jews, that by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, they had
stain and crucified Christ: then the which there was never a fouler deed, nor
more hateful to God, committed upon the Earth, he does purposely make choice
of this word, to show that GOD not only decreed this Action (so foul and
detestable in the Jews) which determinate counsel notes: But howsoever in
Judas and the Jews he hated it, yet as it was the means of redeeming of the
World, he loved and embraced it: and therefore says, He was delivered or
given up of God unto them in his special grace and goodness. These three
words therefore, Purpose, Predestination, and Prescience or Foreknowledge, are
every one more special then other: for Romans 8. 29. which may seem to make
Predestination subordinate to Foreknowledge, speaks not of Predestination
unto life, which in regard of us is the extreme and end; but of Predestination
to be adopted in Christ, that is, of Predestination to one subordinate means,
as we shall hear anon.

The words being cleared, let us now open the particular Doctrines that arise;
wherein I shall not need to meddle with the Angels, having spoken of them in
the former Book.

First, That there is a Those which teach that God has not from everlasting
purposed any such Decree, but that it lies in the hands of every one to
purchase unto himself life, if he will believe; or death if he lie in sin.
Those which hold, that God has predestined all unto salvation, but the
unfaithfulness of many to be the cause, that God either cannot effect that
which he purposed, or alters his counsel.
Predestinate decree and appointment of GOD both unto life and unto death, to
punishment and to glory, wherein all men are not chosen to life, nor all
ordained unto death, but some to the one, and some to the other.

Acts 13. 24.
They believed, (says the Holy Ghost) as many as were ordained to life. This
is that Book of Life so often spoken of in the Scripture. The Ex. 31. 32, 33
Book of JEHOVAH, to be Psalm. 69. 28.
written amongst the just, and in the Ezecl. 13. 9.
writing of the house of Israel.

Again, of the Reprobate, Jude Jude 4.
says, Which were before appointed to this damnation. And 2. Pet. 2. 3.
PETER, For whom damnation since of old lingreth not, and their destruction
does not slumber. 1. These. 5. 9.
PAVL to the Thessalonians comprehends both: for when he incourageth them by
this Argument, that God had not appointed them for wrath, but to the purchasing
of salvation through JESUS CHRIST, he manifestly notes some ordained to
Salvation, other to destruction, as many as come not to have their part in
Christ. But that to the Romans 9. 21, ^2
Romans is more manifest, Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one Vessel for Honor, and another to dishonor? And what if
God, willing to show forth his wrath, and to make known his power, has borne
with much long suffering the vessels of wrath framed for destruction, and that
he might make known the riches of his Glory upon the vessels of Mercy, which
he has before ordained unto Glory.

Behold, how he calls them here, the one Vessels to Honor, Vessels of
Mercy, prepared unto Glory; the other, vessels to dishonor, vessels of
wrath, framed for destruction: which selfsame phrase Vessels to Honor, and
to shame, or dishonor, he keeps also in the Epistle to 2. Tim. 2. 20.
TIMOTHY: Now in a great house there are not only Vessels of Gold, and
Vessels of Silver, but of Wood also, and of Earth, and some verily for Honor,
some for dishonor. This shall yet further appear, if we cast our eye unto
those means, whereby this predestinate Decree of God is brought unto effect:
for since it is manifest, that some believe the Gospel, and testify the same
by the fruits of their conversation, other are obstinate and stubborn, and
given up to their lusts, blinded with infidelity and hardness of heart;
thereof we may conclude, that some are ordained unto life, other unto
destruction.

Notable also to this purpose, is that unto the 2. These. 2. 9.
Thessalonians, The coming of Antichrist shall be with all power to them that
are to perish: but we ought always to give thanks to God, who has chosen us
to Salvation, and called us by the preaching of the Gospel: where these two
sorts are manifestly distinguished: as also John 17. 19. I pray not for the
World, but for those whom thou have given me out of the World. The very scope
of the Apostles disputation, Romans 9. 22. drives here unto in the person of
Ismael and of Isack, children, one of the flesh, the other of the promise. And
again, in Isacks two sons, one loved, the other hated; to set before us the
general state of all Mankind: yea, God has not only predestined men to
joy or to pain, but to the measure of it more or less: according as there be
degrees both of glory and of punishment. Mat. 20. 23. upon the request of the
Sons of Zebedy, our Savior Christ granting a difference of Glory, says, It
shall be theirs for whom it is prepared of his Father. And of the Reprobate,
the place in IVDE Jude v. 4.
is manifest: Which long ago were appointed to this damnation. In saying this,
he notes not a common, but a rare, and as it were, an extraordinary Damnation:
for so I refer the word Damnation, to the end, as well as to the means: to the
judgment it self, as to the sin and disobedience, which was the cause of it.

The truth here of is evident in Judas the Traitor of whom Acts 1. 25.
Peter says, that he turned aside from the lot of his Ministry, whereunto
Christ had called him, to go unto his own place. In the words his own he
notes his proper degree of punishment, and calling it, his place, shows that
it was reserved for him and allotted from Eternity.

Secondly, Every particular person is thus predestinate: So as both the number
how many, and the persons who they be, are before all Eternity most certainly
known to God. Therefore our Luke 10. 20.
Savior says, Their names are written in Heaven. And in John 10. 3.
JOHN, A good Shepherd calls his sheep by Name. And hither belongs that in
2. Tim. 2. 19.
TIMOTHY, The foundation remains firm, having this seal, God knows who
are his. Agreeably whereunto, our Savior Christ says, I John 13. 18.
know whom I have chosen.

This number of Gods Elect, in comparison of the Reprobate, is but small: for
Mat. 20. 16.
Many are called, but few are chosen. If but few even of those that have an
outward calling: how much more few, if you consider the rest of the World
beside? And this may teach us the rather to admire Gods goodness to our
selves, as nature and reason do instruct us, to set more by that which is
common but with a few.

Thirdly, The cause of this difference, is the The Papists teach, that those,
who God foresaw would willingly believe the Gospel, and do good works, them he
chose, though not by reason of their works, but freely of his Grace; yet so,
as he had respect to the good things would be in them Whereby they make Gods
free election, in some sort to have his cause in man and in his goodness,
which in truth is but an effect coming from that Election.
free will and pleasure of God, without any motive to it, but in and of
himself: Which the name of Predestination speaks, that the Will and Decree
of GOD, not in time only, but in the very order and nature of causes, is
first, and before all other things. And the Apostle Ephesians. 1. 11.
says plainly, He works all things after the counsel of his Will. God
therefore, notwithstanding any thing that has been ^^id, is no respecter of
persons, nor moved by any qualit^ that is in man, but by his own free will.
No foreknowledge of faith, or infidelity, good or evil works, were the
cause of this Decree: for they are but Ephesians. 1. 4. Titus 2. 12.
consequences that follow and depend upon it: but all here is free: the root
it self and all the branches. Election free: therefore the Apostle calls it
Romans 11. 5.
The election of Grace. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
Calling free: Phil. 1. 29.
We believe freely through Grace. Are Romans 3. 24.
freely justified through Faith. Our Ezech. 36. 37
Sanctification free, and Titus 3. 5.
eternal life, the free gift of God, through Jesus Christ. Election therefore
comes from the only will and pleasure of God: for above this, or out of
this, it is impiety Romans 6. 13.
Luke 12 32.
for to go. Therefore the Apostle wrappeth up all in sin: He Ephesians. 1. 6.
chose us in himself according to the free pleasure of his will. And the sole
and only cause both of Election and Reprobation, of one, rather then another,
is his own good will and pleasure, for causes unknown to us; but yet most holy,
and just, and righteous in themselves. So he says to the Romans, Whom Romans 9.
^8.
he will, he pittieth, and whom he will, he hardens. Exemplifying both the
parts of this division by two most singular and famous examples, one in the
Family of Abraham, who having two sons, Isack and Ishmael, Isack only was
accounted, for his Seed, and that by Gods own appointment, to make it appear
that the Fountain of Predestination is the pleasure of God, not the goodness
of man. The other of two Twins in the Family of Isack, Jacob and Esau both
borne of the same father, of the same mother, and at the same conception;
whereas nevertheless only Jacob was chosen, Esau rejected, and that before
their birth; that neither any good thing in Jacob, could be the cause of the
choosing of him, nor any wickedness in Esau, of his rejecting, but the only
will and pleasure of God: for if men were not more brutish then the beasts
themselves, their own sense would teach them, that since the Will of God is
God himself, a higher and a further reason then his own Will cannot be sought
for, unless there were some higher then he to go unto. And when Christ
himself, the Wisdom of GOD, rests in this reason, Even Mat. 11. 26.
so, O Father, because so is thy good pleasure: why should we wretches enquire
any further? Worthily therefore does the Apostle there conclude, What To. 9.
2^, 23.
if God, willing to show forth wrath, etc. have suffered the vessels of wrath
framed to destruction, and to make known the riches of his Glory upon the
Vessels of Mercy, which he has before prepared unto Glory? As if he should
say, What have thou, O man, to do with it, if such be his pleasure?

But if cursed men will needs ransacke the secrets of the blessed God, and
inquire a reason of his most holy counsels, let them hear how the Apostle Romans
9. 14, 15 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
answers these Cauillers, clearing the Lords Justice; First, in regard of the
subordinate means which he has appointed to bring those his counsels to
pass, namely, toward the Elect, Mercy comprehending an effectual Calling
through faith, whereby they attain Righteousness and Sanctification: unto the
Reprobate hardening, the fruits whereof are Incredulity and sin, the proper
and immediate causes of their Damnation: so that no way can the Lord be accused
as unrighteous, either in saving the Elect, upon whom he first bestows Faith
and Holiness of life; or in destroying the Reprobate, whose incredulity and
sin does come between. And if he should deal with all men so, who could
complain of wrong?

Again, if you look to the end of Gods counsels, in the damnation of the
wicked, the Apostle says, it is not absolutely and simply their destruction;
as if God were like an unmerciful and a cruel hard-hearted Tyrant, that
takes pleasure in other men's ruins: but it is (as he sets out in the
example of PHARAOH) to show forth his power, and to have his Name published in
all the Earth, making his Glory to shine in their deserved punishment, whilst
thereby he does declare himself an Enemy, and Revenger of sin, Mighty in
the execution of his Judgments, Wonderful in the riches of his Mercy toward
the Elect; as one contrary does set forth another.

Lastly, for the through justifying of Gods most righteous Decree, especially of
Reprobation, which profane Dogs do most of all bark against, he both
alleges the Will of God, as the rule of all Righteousness, and his
Sovereignty as the Lord and Creator of all things; in whose hands we be, as
Clay in the hands of the Potter, to deal with us as seems good in his own
eyes, and to conclude his wonderful lenity and mildness, not only in so
long suffering and forbearing of the wicked, but besides, in the abundance of
blessings, wherewith he loadeth them, which bring upon them a more just
Damnation. Wherefore that which some object out of the Prophet, that God will
not, that Ezech. 18. and elsewhere.
is, delights not, nor takes pleasure in the death of a Sinner, has a
ready answer: for God, so far forth as it is the overthrow and destruction
of his Creature, has no pleasure in it, but as it is a punishment of sin,
and a means to declare his Justice: Neither can God therefore be said first,
and of himself to hate his Creature; for he hates none which have not in
themselves the cause of hatred, even their own sin being that, for which alone
he actually hates any thing: and his Decree to destroy them, was not because
he hated them: for the cause of this Decree is his own most holy pleasure,
that so he might manifest in them the glory of his Justice.

Fourthly, Predestination is from everlasting, Ephesians. 1. from eternity.
4. He has chosen us before the foundations of the World were laid. And of
Romans 9. 11.
Jacob and Esau it is said, that before that they had done good or evil, or
before they were, the one was hated, the other loved. In the Epistle to
TIMOTHY, 2. Tim. 1. 9.
that the purpose and grace of God to save us, was given to us (that is,
prepared for us in Christ) before the everlasting times, meaning the whole
course of years which has run on ever since the beginning of the World: in
one word, before the World was; Which, says he, is now made manifest unto us
by the appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ: Therefore it is called
Predestination; as if you would say, The fore-determinate counsel of God. When
before? Even before all ages. So Paul Romans 9. 23.
says, Whom he has before prepared unto glory. And Jude v 4.
Jude adds, that the Reprobate are before of old everlastingly ordained to
Damnation. 2. Pet. 2. 3.
PETER also, that Damnation since of old expects for them.

So then, our Election being from Eternity is certain and immutable, so as
none of the Elect can ever come to perish, no more then a Reprobate can ever
come to be saved; the Decrees The Papists make Gods Predestination mutable.
of God being all unchangeable, as he himself is. So does Paul strengthen the
Ephesians. 1. 4.
Ephesians in the assurance of Gods love toward them, in that being eternal,
it was not subject to any change: Who has chosen us (says he) before the
foundation of the World.

This Doctrine is plentifully laid down in the Scripture, comfortable is the
place, Romans 9. 12.
Before they had done good or evil (that the purpose of God might remain
firm) according to the election, not by works, but by grace, it was said, The
elder should serve the younger. As many words, so many Arguments for the
unchangeable hold of our Election; first, because it was the Decree and Purpose
of. Whom? Of God, particularly made of Jacob and Esau. For what cause? Not of
works, but of his own grace. Therefore does the Lord, after a most wise and
wonderful manner, cause all things to fall out unto the best to those that love
God, which are called according to his purpose: by afflictions, and by diverse
lets keeps the^ from sinning, and after sins committed, draws them home
again. So he says in Hosh. ^. 5.
Hoshea of his Spouse which purposed to follow after Idolatry, He would hedge
her way with Thorns, that she should not bring her desire to pass, and by
that means would bring her to Repentance, that voluntarily she should say, I
will go and return unto my former Husband. And then he says, He will
receive her home unto himself. Lo, the certainty of the Salvation of Gods
Elect, through those certain means and remedies, whereby they are led forward
into Salvation, not violently compelled, but by the sweet instinct of Gods
Spirit returning willingly to the Lord; whereas contrariwise, unto the
Reprobate all things serve for the hardening of their hearts.

To conclude, particularly of Election it is said, The 2. Tim. 2. 19.
foundation of God remains firm, having this seal, The Lord knows who are
his. Why does he set a Seal and a Badge upon it, but to close it up firm and
immutable unto the Day of Judgment? Again, The Romans 11. 29.
graces of God are without Repentance: So as Ier. 31. 3. John 13. 1.
those whom he loves, he loves to the end. And our Savior John 17. 21.
says, Of those whom thou have given unto me, none perish, but I will raise
him up. So Romans 11. 29. the Apostle takes this same, as a most sure principle,
whereupon to build the whole truth of the rest of the Doctrine: for, to prove
that the Lord had not generally rejected his own people, the whole Nations of
the Jews, he relyeth upon this, as a most strong reason among the rest, That
it is not possible that God should change his mind, to reject those whom he
once has chosen. Romans 11. 2.
God has not (says he) cast off his people whom he knew before,
predestinating and appointing them to life: And afterward To. 11. 28, 29
concludes, that God has mercy in store for them which once were the people
of God; because the calling and graces of God are without Repentance. Wherein
although the Apostle speak of the Jews, in general, not of the singular
persons, yet the ground which he takes, is universal, and properly belongs
to this we have in hand. And therefore in this confident assurance does Romans 8.
36.
Paul cry out, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? And our Luke 12.
31.
Savior bids his little Flock (the whole Church and every member of it) not
to fear; because (says he) it has pleased your Father to give unto you a
Kingdom. And Mat. 24. 24.
again, that notwithstanding all the false christ's and false prophets that
shall arise, all the signs and wonders that they shall show, yet it is not
possible the Elect should be deceived.

This is to us the foundation of all our comfort, that our Election being
grounded upon this brazen Hill of Gods eternal love, can never be shaken, but
remains fast for ever. If it stood in our selves to be the cause of our
own, either Salvation or Damnation, we should all undoubtedly perish. Now that
it wholly and alone rests in God, who is most mighty to bring his counsels
to pass, notwithstanding all resistances; we have a matter of firm comfort,
that in vain does Satan labor, in vain does the World rage, and our own
corruptions rise up against us: for he to whom we are given to keep, is
stronger then all, who will keep us to that Day. For this cause, Christ is not
content to say, John 15. 16.
I have chosen you: but adds also, You have not chosen me: showing that
herein indeed our comfort stands, that GOD, whose Counsels are unchangeable,
has first elected us.

Against this Doctrine, in vain do men object that which is said concerning
the Book of Life, out of which Exodus 32. 32.
Moses desires to be blotted out; and Romans 9. 30.
Paul to be an accursed: and Christ promises, Revel. 3. 5.
I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of Life: for the speech of our
Savior Christ tends not to show, that any, whose name is once genealoged in
this Book, may be blotted out; but it is a phrase taken from the manner of
men, as where Repentance, Anger, and such like are attributed unto God. As for
the example of Paul and Moses, we are not to esteem that holy affection
peculiar unto them, though they had it in a more abundant measure, but a common
duty of all Christians to be followed, to whom the Glory of God ought to be
dearer then the Salvation of their souls: They therefore in a matter so nighly
concerning the Glory of God, and the Salvation of many souls, as it were
forgetting, and rapt beyond themselves, wished to be accursed and blotted out
of the Book of Life; or which is all one; to be Cast-awayes, and damned
Creatures, to save (as they thought) the glory of God. Not but that they knew
the same was impossible; but carried with zeal, they did as it were forget it.
So Christ prayed that the Cup might pass from him; yet he knew full well it
was impossible. And this vehemency of spirit oftentimes appears not only in
speeches which are sudden, but in writing, which is more deliberate. Although
conditionally, as I said, this ought to be the stayed affection of us all,
that if it were possible, Gods Glory could be put in balance with the loss
of our souls, their saving must be thought but light, that he may have praise.

Now, if any man shall think this to be a Doctrine to Gods Children, of
Security; because howsoever they live, it is impossible they should perish;
and to the wicked of despair; because whatsoever they do, they can never come
to be saved, whereby all good endeavors should be in vain; he mistaketh the
matter; the case is far another: For no Doctrine more then this awakeneth
man's security, none more amazeth the dissolute and careless liver, since
Faith and Sanctification be ordained for those that are themselves ordained
unto Glory, and none can be assured he is elect, but he that is assured he
walks in faith and newness of life.

Contrariwise, this Doctrine serves not to throw any man into despair: for
none is so wicked nor sins so grievously, to whom God offers not Grace, if
with an unfeigned heart he seek it. And if thou say it is impossible to seek,
where the Lord has once rejected: yet thou must remember that Gods counsels
are known unto himself, and he has not communicated the secrecies of
Reprobation so plentifully, as he has of his Election; considering that there
is no certain note of Reprobation, either to a man's self or others, save
only That one sin against the Holy Ghost, which lays hold but upon a few.
And the reason is plain and manifest: for he that to day is obstinate and
froward, an enemy to God and to all goodness, tomorrow may be altered: and
so long as this life continues, so long there is a space left for Repentance:
many are called at the eleventh hour, at the winding and shutting up of the
day, in the last act of their life. And so was the Luke 23. 40.
Thief upon the Cross. And our Math. 21. 31.
Savior tells us, that Publicans and Harlots, vile and despised persons,
oftentimes enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, before many that carry a fairer
show: Thou ought therefore, using the means, and setting still at the feet
of Christ, to esteem God faithful, that when he offers thee grace, he
means it for thy good; and that howsoever now thou feel no working of it,
yet the moments of time are in his hands, who calls how and when he will, and
still to have comfort, and never to despair.

Fifthly, as Predestination is either to Life or Death: and given unto him,
so it is to those subordinate things, whereby God has purposed to bring his
determinate Counsel to pass, both in the Elect and Reprobate.

And those are: To the Elect, an appointment of Christ to be their Mediator,
and of them to be in Christ, which in Gods good time comes to be wrought by
an effectual calling, through faith in him; that being justified and
sanctified by his Spirit, they may so in the end be glorified.

To the Reprobate, hardness of heart, not to believe the Gospel, that so they
might lie in their sins without repentance, until the wrath of God come upon
them to the uttermost.

Touching the former, the Apostle in one Romans 8. 29, 30
sentence has all the lincks of that golden Chain* for whom he fore-knew,
and chose unto life, (which is Election) them also he predestined to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the first* borne among many
brethren. (Here is the first step:) as if the Apostle should say, For them he
purposed that his Son should die, that Christ might be their Head, and they,
through him, the adopted sons of God and whom he predestined, thus to be his
sons, This is everlasting life, to know thee the true God, and whore thou
have sent, ^es^s Christ. The perfect distribution of all Divinity, Math. 22.
38, 39, 40. He divides the ten Commandments, into the first and second
Table, and the whole Scripture then extant, that is to say, the old Testament,
into the Law and the Prophets, (...) 6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and
his righteousness: where he seems to abbreuiate the Lords Prayer.
and that his Son should be theirs, them he also called effectually to
believe in him (which is the second step:) and whom he called, them he also
justified, or made righteous through Christ: from whence does proceed (as an
effect from the cause) Sanctification or holiness of life (the third and the
fourth steps:) and whom he justified, and made righteous in Christ, them he
also glorified, which is the end and last step of all. Our John 6. 37.
Savior (as he is John 17. 3.
wont in all his doctrines) shortly reduces them unto two: giving unto Christ,
and coming unto him. But to speak of all these things apart.

The first and the fundamental ground of all unto the Elect, hidden in the
secret counsel of God is Christ himself, 1. Pet. 1. 20.
foreknowne or predestined, and Revel. 13. 6.
slain for us in his eternal purpose, before the foundation of the World was
laid: and we in like sort elect Ephesians. 1. 4.
in him* that is, that being by faith united unto Christ, we might be saved by
the merit of his death and sufferings: And again, Ephesians. 1. 5.
predestinate to be the adopted Sons of God, by Jesus Christ. This is that
our Savior says, Ioh. 17. 6. I have manifested my Name to the men whom thou
have given me out of the World: for that by giving, he does not mean the
manifestation of his Election by an effectual Calling through faith in Christ,
but the very purpose of God to adopt us in him, appears, Ioh. 6. 36. All
that my Father gives me, shall come unto me. Where he does manifestly
distinguish between these two, making Gods giving unto Christ the cause why in
their time they come unto him: Christ therefore is Mediator, nor any thing that
God so respects in him, is not the first cause of his Election, but only a
subordinate means unto it, unless (which were absurd) a man will say that the
disease is not in nature to be thought of, before the remedy; nor the fall,
before the means of raising up again: Our Savior Christ himself for this
may be our warrant, John 17. 6. where having said, I have manifested thy name
to the men whom thou have given me, out of the World, that they should be
adopted in and through me. By and by he rises up a degree higher, Thine they
were in thine everlasting purpose, for causes only known unto thy self,
higher and above any consideration or respect of me written unto life: and then
(keeping the respect of order and not of time) Thou gave them unto me. The
Apostle likewise to the Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
Ephesians, showing we are elect in Christ, in the very next words does
explain it, to be meant of predestinating to adoption through Christ in
himself: that is, only for causes resting in God himself, not in Christ as
he is a Mediator.

This is it which (as we have heard) the Apostle teaches in the Epistle to the
Romans, Romans 8. 29, 30
Whom he did foreknow (or predestinate unto life) them he did predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of his Son; What is that? Verily, the same (albeit
the Apostle specially apply it to afflictions) which we heard before of giving
unto Christ: and so the words following do import, That he might be the first
borne among many brethren: through whom, by faith, which is the next degree,
and first manifestation of this counsel, being incorporate into him, and made
one together with him, we obtain Righteousness and Sanctification, which are
the immediate steps whereby we ascend to glory.

Now that men are predestinate unto both these, it is very plain: for so the
Apostle tells the ^. These. 2. 13.
Thessalonians, that God had chosen them to Salvation, through sanctification
of the Spirit, and the faith of Truth. Of faith particularly our John 8. 47.
Savior says, He that is of God, hears the Word of God: you therefore do
not hear, because you are not of God. So it is in the Acts, Acts 13. 48.
They believed, as many as were ordained unto life. And for this cause faith is
said to be Titus 1. 1.
proper to Gods Elect.

Concerning Sanctification of life, and the fruits thereof, the place is very
evident, Ephesians. 2. 10. We are created in Christ to good works, which God has
before prepared, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us
to be unblameable and undefiled before him in love. And John 15. 16. I have
chosen you, etc. that you might bring forth fruit.

Here is the comfort of the Saints of God, who labor to walk as new
Creatures, that they have the same as a most certain Badge and Mark of their
Election. Whereto the exhortation of 2. Pet. 1. 10.
Peter tends, willing us to make our Election sure by our good works. This
use the Apostle teaches, Romans 9. 24. etc. when having established the Doctrine
it self, to the end we should not seek the testimony of it in the secret
counsel of God, but by the calling which is set forth and made manifest in the
Church, he lays before us the example of the Jews and Gentiles, not of
every one, but of so many as by faith apprehended the outward calling, and
thereby made it effectual to themselves: That he might make known the riches
of his glory upon the Vessels of his Mercy, which he has before prepared
unto Glory, even us (says he) whom he has called, not of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles. And who those Called ones be of the Jews and
Gentiles, he tells us, Verse 30. As many as have attained to the
righteousness of Faith. So in the tenth Chapter, by an excellent gradation he
teaches how and which way we climb up to the consideration of this
wonderful hidden mystery, showing that true invocation and calling upon Gods
Name (or a sound and sincere profession of the truth, whereof he had spoken,
Verse 9, 10.) is a testimonine of true Faith; true Faith, of a true and sound
Calling by the Ministry of the Word, and that, an undoubted argument of our
Election to be saved: Whosoever Romans 10. 13, 14, 15.
shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved: but how shall they call
upon him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear, without a
Preacher?

This is the means, whereby we may most surely and infallibly persuade our
souls, that we are of the number of Gods Elect, and those that undoubtedly
shall be saved; for which we shall not need to slye to Visions and
Revelations, God himself in his Word has tracked the path for us. Otherwise,
our Savior Luke 10. 20.
would never will us to rejoice, that our names are written in Heaven, unless
we had certain rules to be assured of it. Again, that God has appointed to
destitute the Reprobate of his Grace, and leaving them in their sins, to
bring them to perdition, is evident by 1. Pet. 2. 3.
PETER, that those which stumble at the Word, and are disobedient, were
ordained thereunto. And Acts 27. 28. it is said, HEROD and PILATE, with the
Nations, and people of Israel, came together to do whatsoever the hand and
counsel of God had fore-determined to be done: that is, to condemn Jesus.
And Luke 2. 34. Christ is set for the fall and rising of many, and for a mark
to be gainsaid. For this cause GOD sends the Ministry of his Word to
some, and from some he does withold it. Paul was forbidden by the Holy Ghost
to speak the Word of God in Asia, in Bithynia, etc. Contrariwise he was
commanded to preach in Macedonia, at Corinth, etc. And Acts 18. 10.
why? Because, says the Holy Ghost, I have much elect people there.

Again, in those that hear; of some, he touches their hearts, and opens
their understanding; of other some, he dawbeth and closes up the eyes, Mat.
11. 25. I give thanks unto thee, O Father, because thou have hidden these
things from the wise, and men of understanding (meaning the Reprobate) and
revealed them unto Babes (these are the Elect) Luke 8. 10. To you it is given
to know the Mysteries of God: but to other in Parables, that seeing, they
should not see, and hearing they should not understand.

The Objections against all this that hitherto has bin said, are of no value.
God (say some) would have all men saved, 1. Tim. 2. 4. and none to perish, but
all to come to Repentance, 2. Pet. 3. 9. And Christ is a Propitiation for the
sins of the whole World, 1. John 2. 2. But they understand not that those
general speeches are to be restrained to the subject there in hand: for the
Apostle shows in the first of those places, that howsoever that be true,
which elsewhere he teaches, that not many noble, not many mighty ones, not
many of account are called to the profession of the Gospel: yet there is no
estate so high, or great, nor any estate or sort of men at all, but God has
his among them; for whom we are to pray, that in his good time he would
vouchsafe to bring them to the knowledge of the Truth. And so is this particle
all in sundry places applied to every sort and kind, and namely, Mat. 4. 23.
where our Savior Christ is said to have healed all diseases, that is, all kind
of diseases. That of Peter is plainly meant of the Elect alone. And John
shows, that our Savior dyed, not for the Nation of the Jews, or those that
lived in his time only, but for all the Elect of Jews and Gentiles out of
every Kindred, Tongue, Nation and People, as it is said, Revel. 5. 9. and of
all ages from the beginning of the World. And so is this place notably
expounded, John 11. 51, 52. that Jesus was to dye for that Nation, and not for
that Nation only, but that he might gather into one the Children of God
dispersed. According whereunto you must take the name of World, John 1. 29. The
Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the World. And John 4. 42. This is
of a truth that Christ the Savior of the World; and in other such like places.

As for that dotage, that Christ should dye for all, absolutely and without
restriction, it is absurd: for Christ died not for them for whom he vouchsafes
not to pray, nor is a Redeemer, where he is no Intercessor. Now he himself
says, he John 17. 9.
prays not, he is no Intercessor for all. Therefore we may conclude, he dyed
not, he is no Redeemer of all. Nay, the very distinction so common in the
Schools, between the sufficiency of Christ's death, and the efficiencie of
it; as though his death, or one drop of his blood (as some are not afraid to
speak) were sufficient for the salvation of all, though it effect not, nor
work salvation unto all; is too light and carries no weight with it, if it
be waighed at the Lords Beam: for the sufficiency of Christ's death is not to
be measured by our own conceit of it, but by the Ordinance and Decree of GOD.
The Messiah was never promised but only to the Church: Therefore he was never
destinated but unto them alone. To Genesis 3. 15.
the rest the seed or children of the Devil, as he calls them, John 8. 44.
he is the Seed of the woman, to bruise and tread down their head in perpetual
enmity and defiance with them, not a friend to dye and suffer for them, being
that wherein he does so much Romans 5. 8.
commend his love. Christ, indeed, gave an infinite merit to all his Actions,
to the end whereunto he purposed them, and suffered in weight and measure a
proportionable punishment for the Redemption of all Gods people. But the
Scripture speaks evidently, that Gal. 2. 21.
Christ dyed not, he suffered nothing in vain, nor more then was of necessity,
for the saving of his Church. And when Prayers and Intercession which he
offered not for all, are one part of his Priesthood, and consequently of that
sufficiency which it was requisite he should perform to Godward for us, it
is manifest that in the Ordinance and Decree of God, his death, without the
same, had not been thoroughly sufficient for the saving of the Elect themselves,
much less of all the World. And why should we imagine a half sufficiency
wrought for them in his death and sufferings, when the other part of his
Prayers and Intercession, without which there is no complete nor perfect
sufficiency at all, cannot be drawn unto them?

No better is the Dream of universal Grace in Christ, offered unto all, and
that for the unbelief which God foresaw would be in some, he has decreed to
reject them, which beside the Word of God, common sense and experience does
control; since it is plain, and stands proved before at large, that all men
are not called, no, not without an outward call.

Sixthly, The end of all is the setting forth of his Glory: to set forth in
them the praise of his Mercy.
specially in Election, to show the riches of his Mercy; in Reprobation, the
severity of his Justice, as the Wiseman says, Pro. 16. 4.
God has made all for himself, that is, for his Glory sake; even the wicked
unto the day of evil. The end therefore of these Decrees is not simply the
saving of the one, and the destroying of the other: but a farther and a far
more excellent and precious end, to manifest the Glory of God in them both.
His Wisdom, Power, Truth, Lenity, Patience, Long sufferance, Hatred of
sin, love of Righteousness and other Virtues, as has appeared before out of
the ninth to the Romans: But especially his Mercy and Justice here shine
forth, and carry away the praise. His wonderful and severe Justice, in
punishing transgression, and inflicting wrath, which end the Apostle teaches,
Romans 9. 22. What if God willing to show wrath, etc? The riches of his Mercy
and Goodness, in helping out of misery (in, and of, and by, and for himself)
poor silly and wretched man, whom otherwise salvation it self had not been
able for to save.

This end the Apostle there teaches plainly, That Romans 9. 23.
he might make known the riches of his Glory, upon the vessels of mercy,
which he has before prepared unto glory. And Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. He that
predestined us to be his adopted sons, through Jesus Christ, to the praise
of the glory of his grace: That so no flesh 1. Cor. 1. 29.
might rejoice before him; but every Phil. 2. 11.
tongue might confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the praise of God the
Father.

To return to the Covenant mediated by Christ. Because This Covenant is called
the Covenant of Grace.
the same comes from the only mercy and favor of God in his Son, it is
called the Covenant of Grace.

Here therefore is another Covenant that God has made with man, over and
beside the Covenant of Works, which he made before: A Covenant of another and a
quite differing nature: for

First, it is grounded upon the free mercy of God in Christ; otherwise it is
in the Covenant of Works, where Christ or the Grace of God in Christ, was no
part at all of the Covenant: for there needed then no Mediator, because in the
beginning God and man were not at odds.

Secondly, the conditions of these two Covenants differ: the Law or Covenant of
Works offers salvation, under condition of perfect obedience: The Gospel or
Covenant of Grace, under the condition of faith, that is to say, if we believe
in Christ, who has done it for us.

Of both these Covenants, the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace,
Jeremy Ier. 31. 31.
speaks in his one and thirtieth Chapter, and Paul to the Gal. 4. 24.
Galatians shows, how they were shadowed by two women, as by two types, that
is to say, by Hagar the bond, and Sara the freewoman: for these women (says
he) are the two Covenants. You may see further touching them both, Phil. 3 9.
That I might be found in him (that is) not having mine own righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the
righteousness which is of God, through Christ.
Phil. 3. Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. What shall we say then, that the Gentiles which
followed not righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of faith? Put Israel, which followed the Law of
righteousness, could not attain unto the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore?
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law.
Romans 9. Romans 10. 3, ^, 5, 6, 7. For they being ignorant of the righteousness
of God, and going about to establish they own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God: for Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes: for Moses thus describes
the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does these thinks
shall live thereby. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this
wise: Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? That is to bring
Christ from above. Or, Who shall go down into the deep? That is to bring up
Christ from the dead.
Romans 10. Gal. 3. 11, 12. That no man is justified by the Law in the sight of
God, it is evident: for the just shall live by faith. Now the Law is not of
faith, but the man that does these things, shall live by them.
Gal. 3. And these two being the only means, whereby true happiness may be
attained, are so contrary one unto another, that where the one is, the other
cannot be: neither can salvation come in part by the one, and in part by the
other. Whereupon the Apostle uses to dispute that we are justified by works
only, or by faith alone. This is the sum of his whole Argument in the three
first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans: Either we are justified by Works
or by Faith. But not by works, neither of the Law of Nature, nor of the moral
Law, neither Gentile, which is without the Law written, nor Jew which has it.
Therefore by Faith. So he says, Gala. 3. 17. For if the inheritance be by the
Law, then is it not any more by promise, making it impossible and absurd, that
both should concur together in the act of Justification.

That we might be the more in love with the Covenant of Grace, it is
gloriously commended and set forth above the other Covenant many ways.

First, by the excellency of the matter, as is before declared.

Then, by the nature of the thing, being an Esaias 55. 3. and elsewhere.
everlasting Covenant safe and sure, that never can be altered, more fixed in
his Son, than the Sun and the Moon are fixed in the Heavens.

Thirdly, by the solemnity of the Covenant: for

First, it is uttered in form of Law, Indenturewise, between him on the one
part, and his Church on the other part: Ier. 31. 33.
This is the Covenant which I will make with the House of Israel, the speech of
Iehoua.

Secondly, it is registered and enrolled in the Records of the Court of Heaven,
as a perpetual monument to endure for all eternity.

Thirdly, to put us out of all danger and fear of losing it, we have a
Duplicate left unto us, Heb. 8. 8. etc. (as Lawyers speak, an Exemplification
or a Constat.)

Fourthly, Psalm. 79. 4. Heb. 5. 13.
he has bound himself both by word and oath, to make it good, That by Heb. 5.
21.
two immutable things wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might
have strong consolation.

Fifthly, Not content with all this (as knowing well our incredulity and
hardness of heart) he fetches instances and confirmation from Genesis 15. 5.
Psalm. 79. 3.
Heaven above, and from the Earth beneath, and all the Host of both, from the
Ier. 31. 35, 36
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, from the courses of the day and night, from
things present, and things Esaias 66. 22.
to come, from the Ier. 31. 37.
height, and from the Deep, of all which we cannot now stand particularly to
discourse.

Lastly, it is sealed with the great Seal of the blood of and ratified by the
death of him that made it, has also the name of a Testament.
his only Son: A Seal that he never set upon any other Letters Patents:
whereupon, ratified by the death of him that made it, it has also the name of
a Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17.
Testament.

This Covenant or Testament was always one and the same from the beginning,
Heresies and Errors.
Being always one, and the same in substance,
as Jesus Christ, the substance thereof, was Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, and to day the same, and for ever. Wherefore, Reu. 1^. 8. he is
said to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. The power of
whose death is not to be measured by the time of his suffering; as if it were
available only for those that should come after: but all the faithful from
the beginning are alike saved by the virtue of it, as well before as since his
coming: for Abraham, says he, rejoiced to see my day, he saw it and was
glad, John 8. 56.

Howbeit, according to the difference of the times, it it is nevertheless
distinguished, or distinctly to be considered, in the Old and the New
Testament: The Old Testament was the Covenant through Christ to come: The New
Testament is the Covenant through Christ already come, Jesus the Son of Marie.
has a diverse name given unto it: Before the coming of Christ in the flesh,
the Covenant being through Christ to come of the Seed of a Virgin: when he was
once come, (Jesus, the blessed Seed of Mary) Iudaisme, that acknowledges not
Jesus the Son of Mary, to be the promised Messiah: nor the Messiah to be yet
come.
the Covenant then was through CHRIST already come. Whereby the former being
Heb 8. 13.
abrogated, and done away, this that succeeded was called Ier. 31. 32. 33, 34.
the New Testament. In regard whereof, the other has the name of the Old
Testament.

But had the Fathers, that lived before his coming, as full a participation of
Christ and all his benefits as we have? I, they had the very same in
substance: for they drank of the Spiritual Rock, which is Christ, 1. Cor.
10. 4. And to them also were the promises made, Genesis 17. 7. I will be the
God of thee and of thy Seed after thee. And Acts 15. 11. By the grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ they did believe to be saved, in the same manner as we do.
Only the dispensation of the times did differ.

CHAP. II.
Of the Priesthood of Christ.

THere be Psalm. 1 10. Ier. 33. 17, 18. Zach. 6. 13. Heb. 7. 23.
two parts of the Mediation Of the Office of Mediation there be two parts;
Priesthood and Kingdom: Priesthood is in the things which he does to God for
those Elect.
of Christ, Priesthood and Kingdom; being both together fully complete and
perfect for the whole work of our Redemption: for in the one is comprehended
all sufficiency of matter for our Regeneration, Righteousness, and the
blessedness belonging to it: in the other, all power to effect and work it; the
one is in Humility, the other in Glory: one in all things between God and
him that should be our Mediator; the other in all things that from God are
through him conveyed down unto us. To conclude, the Priesthood of Christ
purchases our Redemption: his Kingdom does apply it.

The things generally spoken before of his whole Office of Mediation, may here
be considered in his Priestly Function, whereunto it pleases the Holy Ghost,
for our comfort, more specially to apply them, all differing from the
Leuiticall Priesthood which was under the Law.

First, His calling, having two properties; Heb. 7. 16.
one, that it was by the Law of the power of life, whereas the Priests of Leui
were appointed by the Law of the fleshly commandment: The other, Heb. 7. 20,
21, 22.
that where they were made Priests without another, he was appointed by his
Father by an oath, to show that he is the surety of a better Testament.

Secondly, The Heb. 7. 21, 23. 24, 52.
eternity of his Priesthood that (...).
cannot pass from one to another, either by succession or descent, as theirs
did, but is personal, and everlastingly abides in himself: Thou art a Priest
for ever, after the order of MELCHISEDECH: whereas in the Leuiticall
Priesthood, both the persons dyed, and the Priesthood it self changed, being
translated to the Tribe of Judah: whence our Lord sprang.

Thirdly, That this is The Popish Priesthood, whose very institution is, to
offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead.
Heb. 7. 28.
proper unto Christ, and that there be no Priests now under the Gospel, to
offer any propipitiatorie Sacrifice. Indeed, the name of Priest is often used
in the New Testament, but given to all Christians alike, for that all of us
communicate with the Priesthood of Christ, and are Priests to God, to 1. Pet 2.
5. Revel. 1. 6.
offer spiritual Sacrifices; First, our selves, as Paul says, To. 12. 1 in
the denial of our own lusts, then, the Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving,
Alms and other Christian The parts are, Oblation and Intercession. Oblation is
the offering up of himself for them. It stands first, in the sanctification
of his humane Nature and Righteousness: then, in his sufferings, with the glories
that did follow. The sanctification of his humane Nature is, the consecrating
of it in all holiness, from the very first moment of his conception,
duties, whereof the Apostle speaks, Heb. 13. 15, etc.

In the parts of his Priesthood, we put first, the offering of himself to God
his Father for us: I say, for us, because Christ is to be considered, not as
one private man, but as a public person, representing all men that are to come
to life eternal, as Adam did all his Posterity: for so the Apostle does
compare them, Romans 5. 14.

From the virtue of this Oblation, comes the full matter of our peace with
God. In it we are to consider four principal heads, whereunto all may be
referred: first, is the sanctification of his humane nature, to be a fit
instrument to work our reconciliation unto God: wherein two things are
comprehended,

First, That the Manhood or humane Nature, by the wonderful work of the Holy
Ghost, was sanctified in the Virgins womb, from all kind of sinfulness, and
endued with an habit of most perfect Sanctimonie and Holiness, in the very
first minute and moment of his conception. In which regard, the Luke 1. 35.
Angel unto Marie calls him, That holy thing that shall be borne of thee,
etc. wherein he differs from all the sons of Adam, as well as he does in
the manner of his conception.

Secondly, It was made a fit instrument for the whole for the work of the
Mediation.
work of the Mediation, that is to say, not only for his own performance of
the Priestly Offices, but both for our incorporating into himself, and for the
quickening and giving of Life, and Righteousness, and all good things to those
that are incorporate, and that by the power of his Godhead sanctifying the
Manhood, as he says, John 17. 19. For their sake do I sanctify my self.

It is not therefore the Godhead only that quickens us, but the humanity
also, as an instrument or Conduit whereby he does it. And this is that our
Savior says, John 5. 26. As the Father has life in himself. As if he should
have said, With God indeed is the fountain of Life, and Grace, and all good
things: but that which is locked up and buried in his inaccessible Light, he
has powered upon the Son manifested in the flesh, that from him, as from the
Head, it might flow to every member of the Church; yea, hither drives the
whole tenor of his disputation, John 6. 53, 57, 63. concerning the true cause
of our eternal Happiness. After he had said, Unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you, he adds, As
I live by the Father, so he that eats me, he also shall live by me. And
anon; It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. When he
says himself (meaning his Manhood, which was it only which the Jews beheld
in Christ) lives by the Father, that is, the Godhead dwelling in him (which
for the Jews sake he utters under the name of his Father, rather then of
himself) he shows the fountain of his Life, that is, of his quickening
power, to be that essential union of the Godhead to his humane Nature, in
regard whereof the Father was (...)lled before, The Living Father. Again,
where he (...) The flesh profits nothing; and yet had said before, (...) ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you: he distinguishes two things most manifestly; First, that his humane
Nature, whether you consider the essence of his Soul or Body, or any created
virtue, or quality inherent, has not of it self any quickening virtue in it,
which is only proper to his Godhead, (then that the same is nevertheless not
unprofitable, but a most necessary instrument, which being first it self
quickened by the Godhead, whereunto it is personally knit) does from the
Godhead power life into as many as by faith are united to him, without whose
flesh the Spirit never quickens, no more then the soul makes a man to
understand, but by the brain. Therefore is the Manhood aptly compared to a
Fountain, which sends forth most sweet and comfortable streams of water of
life unto all his members, and the Deity to the Wellhead, or to a Spring that
ministers continually unto this Fountain.

The second head is the performing of through Righteousness The Righteousness
of Christ, is his performing of the most excellent measure of obedience to the
Law of God, that can possibly fall into any Creature: and being the
Righteousness of him who is both God and Man, consequently it meriteth a like
supreme measure of Blessedness.
for us, being in all his Actions supernaturally vpholden from all possibility
of sinning, and performing the most exact and perfect obedience of the Law,
John 8. 29. I do always the things that are pleasing to my Father.

Supernatural, I say, because being a true Man, and having all the infirmities
of the sons of men, sin only excepted, he was as all other, in his own
Nature subject to temptation, and of a mutable disposition to embrace evil, as
Adam did, if it had been possible for the Godhead (to the which he was
personally united) to have left him.

In this part I consider the measure, First, of his Righteousness, and then of
the Blessedness which he merited: both of them in the highest and most
supreme excellency that can be; more then, I say, not men, but all the Angels
of heaven are capable of, being the righteousn^^ of him which is both God and
Man: and therefore (...) The 1. Cor. 4. 21.
Righteousness of God, which notwithstanding as a quality inherent to the
humane Nature of Christ, is to be distinguished from that essential
Righteousness of his, that he has as God, which is the very Godhead.

To the third head, are to be referred the sufferings of Suffering (one
principal part of that obedience) is
Christ, a principal part of his obedience, as he took upon him the Office
of Mediator, but in nature and consideration of the Doctrine to be
distinguished from the former. And herein especially stands that offering of
himself up to God his Father for us. As the Apostle The abomination of the
Popish Mass, wherein the Priest offers up Christ every day unto his Father.
testifies, Hebrews 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of CHRIST, who by
his everlasting Spirit has offered up himself to God, etc?

In this part of his Oblation, the sufferings which he did endure, observe,

First, That Christ himself performs all the parts, his taking upon him
and his whole person has a stroke in it: for both he is the Sacrifice, or
thing it self offered, the Priest, or the Offerer, and the Altar, or that
which sanctifies the offering: whereupon in his whole person as GOD and Man,
he is said to be our Priest, Heb. 5. 6.

First, As Man, he is the Sacrifice, his whole humanity suffering (both Soul
and Body) which was the Tabernacle of his Deity, wherein he performed this
Sacrifice; whereupon the Apostle calls him, The Heb. 8. 2.
Minister of that true Tabernacle, which the Lord pight, and not man: and, that
Heb. 9. 11.
Christ being come an High Priest, by a better and more perfect Tabernacle, not
made with hands, that is, not of this building, which the earthly Tabernacle
was of, but even by his own blood entered into the holy Place. Wherefore the
Scripture attributes the remission of our sins by this oblation, sometimes
to his whole person, sometimes by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole, to
his Body, flesh or blood, and sometimes to his Soul, Who 1. Tim. 2. 6.
gave himself a ransom for all, who Titus 2. 19.
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us, by Heb. 10. 10.
the which we are sanctified even by the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ
once made: 1. Pet. 2. 14.
he bare our sins in his Body, on the Tree; he Col. 1. 22.
reconciled us in the Body of his flesh: through his Death he Col. 1 20.
reconciled us, making Peace, by the blood of his Cross; he Esaias 53. 10.
made his Soul sin, or a Sacrifice for sin. The Mat. 20. 28.
Son of man came to give his Soul a ransom for many. Else must our souls
have perished. This Mark 10. 45.
was both prefigured in the Law by the blood, which is the soul of the brute
creature, and otherwise by the Holocaust, or whole burnt Offering, and is
signified in the Sacrament of the Gospel: for the Ceremony of breaking bread,
used in the Lords Supper, cannot be so properly referred to his Body, which
had not a bone broken, as to his Soul, most specially Esaias 53. 5.
bruised and broken in pieces with heaviness and sorrow.

Secondly, As God, he is the Heb. 13. 13
Altar, or the Sanctifier We have an Altar, etc.
of his Manhood, which he offers, by giving it power to overcome: for that
is the property of the Altar, to Mat. 23. 17.
sanctify the gift. God, says PAVL, Acts 20. 28. has by his own blood
redeemed the Church. As if he should have said, It was indeed the Man Christ
Jesus, that shed his blood: but of small effect had that been, unless he had
been God, whereby his blood obtained strength and power, to sanctify those
that are his. And in the Epistle to the Heb. 9. 14.
Hebrews, How much more shall the blood of Christ, which by the everlasting
Spirit offered himself unblameable unto God, purge your conscience from dead
works, to serve the Living God? Laying the whole virtue and efficacy of
Christ's death upon the eternal Spirit, that is, the fullness of the Godhead
which dwells in him: So that in a sort God himself, who is not subject unto
suffering, did suffer, when he suffered that was both God and Man. Whereupon
the Apostle says, that even in respect of his Godhead he emptied himself,
etc. Philip. 2. 7.

The difference of this part of Christ's Priesthood, from that of Aaron, stood
in these points:

First, He himself was offered here, there other Oblations and Sacrifices.

Secondly, They offered many times, himself being here the Sacrifice, could
be but once offered: whereof the Apostle has many notable speeches in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, By Heb. 10. 10.
the which will we are sanctified, even by the Oblation of the Body of Jesus
Christ once made: but he having offered one Sacrifice for sins, sets for
ever at the right hand of God: for by one Oblation he has consecrated for
ever those that are sanctified. And in the ninth Chapter, Christ Heb. 9. 26.
being once offered in the end of the World to bear the sins of many, etc.

Thirdly, He Heb. 7. 27.
did it for us and our good only; for, for himself he needed not. The Priests
of Aaron offered; first, for themselves, and then for the people.

In the second place are to be observed the things he of our sins,
suffered and took upon him, to wit, First, our very sins all laid upon
Christ, as our Pledge and Surety: otherwise we must needs have remained in
them: whereupon he is called, Heb. 7. 22.
The Surety of the New Testament.

And hereof it is, that the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5. 27.
Him that knew no sin, he made to be sin for us, in regard of our sins
cast upon him, and imputed to him.

Secondly, taking our sins, he took with-all the and the whole curse
guilt, and the whole Curse, and punishment due unto them. By reason of the
guilt there befell him fear and horror from the sense of his Fathers wrath,
Heb. 5. 7. Sorrow, trouble of mind, astonishment, heaviness unto death, Math.
26. 38. Which specially appearing toward the end of his days, when he was to
enter into the lists, and to fight the great combat, hand to hand with his
angry Father, did withal stretch it self in some measure to the rest of the
parts of his life. Of the Esaias 53. 5.
other we read, The chastisement of our peace did lie upon him. For this cause
he is said Math. 20. 28. Mark. 10. 45.
to have given his soul a Ransom for many, and to be a 1 Timothy 2. 6. (...).
Ransom equivalent for all. Therefore he is called 1. John. 2. 2. (...).
the Propitiation for our sins, and is said to be Romans 3. 25.
set up of God for a Propitiatory, by allusion as it seems to the cover
which was upon the Arc of the Covenant, called the (...)
Propitiatory covering: a type of the Propitiation wrought by Christ, and
manifested in and through him, when he brake down the veil of Ceremonies that
stood between God and us. To this E^^hu Job 33. 23.
does allude, when he brings in the Minister of God praying for the
deliverance of the afflicted person, because God has elsewhere found an
expiatorie Propitiation, which is Christ his Son. For this cause we are said
to be Romans 3. 25.
redeemed by him, and that Heb. ^. 3.
by himself he has made the purgation of our sins. And hereupon Daniel 9.
14.
Daniel uses the Phrase of purging sins, in stead of the pardoning and
taking them away by Christ's purgation and the price which he should pay.

But shall we then make Christ the Beloved and Blessed one of his Father, to
be accursed? Verily, the Apostle, as he called him Sin before, so in the same
sense fears not to say, that he was made a Curse Gal. 3. 13.
for us, by imputation of the curse due to our sins.

The curse that our sin deserves, being of two both that of this life,
Kinds, both that of this life, and the fullness of it due unto us after
death, Christ endured both. Touching those of this life generally, the Apostle
to the Hebrews faith, Heb. 4. 15. and 2. 14.
He was tempted, and had experience of our infirmities in all things like to
us, without sin.

But to number them in order answerable to our own, they are these that follow.

First, Satan himself molested him with his temptations: to whose halings and
pullings, carrying and recarrying, he subjected his sacred Body (if we follow
the literal sense, and understand the Evangelists words properly:) and his
holy and innocent Soul to his temptations, Math. 4. 5, 8. Then the Devil
took him into the holy City, and set him upon a pinnacle of the holy Temple.
Again, the Devil took him into an exceeding high mountain, and showed him,
etc.

Secondly, the creatures were his enemies, and armed to do him hurt; Mark 4.
36, 37, 3^.
the winds, the storms, and the waves of the Sea did rise up against him.

Thirdly, he took upon him the infirmities of our nature; Matthew. 4. 2.
Hunger, John 4. 6.
weariness, weakness, sickness, etc. Esaias 53. 3, 4. and Math. 8. 17. He
has endured our diseases, and horn our sorrows.

Fourthly, Baseness, contempt, abiection, humbling himself, who was Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and in the form of God, and equal with his Father, not
only to come down into the lower parts of the earth, but emptying himself,
to become of none account, and to take the form of a servant, that is, of a
poor contemned person, that the people and Rulers did abhor him; whereupon
worthily does the Prophet call him, Esaias 49. 67.
Him whom every one despises, whom the Nation esteems as abominable, a
servant to the Rulers, etc. And again, Isai. 53. 2, 3, 4.
There is in him no beauty, nor comeliness, and when we look upon him, there
is no show why we should desire him; A contemptible person, and an Abject among
men, a man of grief, and acquainted with infirmity, contemned so, as we do
not esteem him.

Fifthly, Infinite calamities; as Smitings, Lyings in wait, Spittings,
Scourgings, Poverty, al kind of wrongs, Contumelies, Slanders, Reproaches,
Blasphemies, Scoffings. Esaias 50. 6. My back I expose to the Smiters, and my
checkes to the Nippers; my face I hide not from contumely and from spittle: As
in the holy Story it is recorded, they pitifully scourged him, crowned him
with Thorns, scoffed and spit at him. Particularly of Poverty we read, 2.
Cor. 8. 9. He became poor for our sakes: Insomuch that as he Mat. 8. 20.
professes of himself, He had not where to lay his head.

Sixthly, Bodily death, and that a reproachful one; to be hanged, Phil. 2. 8. He
humbled himself unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. All which were
properly in him the Esaias 53. 34. Mat. 8. 17.
punishment of our sins.

Touching the full cursednesse due unto us after death, and the fulness of it
due unto them after death.
which we affirm that he endured, the meaning is not, that he felt the very
estate and condition of the damned, but the whole and full severe wrath of God
due to sin, equal to the very Hellish torments in vehemency of pains and
sharpness: which may appear; First, because he suffered the very sorrows and
pains for sin which else we should have borne, as the Prophet says, Esaias
53. 4. (...)
He bare our iniquities, and our very sorrows he sustained, neither could he
otherwise have been the 2. ^^m. 2. 6. (...).
price of our Redemption, nor our Heb. 7. 22.
Surety, if he had not paid the very sum.

Secondly, The sorrow and trouble of his mind, before he came to
handie-gripes, whereof he himself says, John 12, 27.
Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour, but therefore came I unto this hour: my Mat. 26. 38.
soul is every way compassed with sorrows to death: his fear and fright
because of this bitter Cup being so terrible, that Mar. 14. 33, 34.
Angels were feign to be sent down to strengthen and encourage him, that his
body, as yet without all harm, Luke 22. 44.
trickled down with clots of blood, in stead of sweat, which was never heard
of in any man besides, show that it was more then bodily pains, even the whole
Cup of Gods wrath which he so Heb. 5. 7.
feared, in fearing felt, and feeling, was delivered from. Else he had not
been so strong as ten thousand Saints and Martyrs, that fight but by his
strength.

Thirdly, It appears by the main battle fought three whole hours upon the
Cross, all which time, tugging in the fearful dark, with him that has the
power of darkness, to hide from the eyes of the World the fire of his Fathers
wrath, which in that hot skirmish burnt up every part; and to give to the
Enemy full scope and advantage, he cried out at the last in the extremity of
his anguish, but yet as one that had now overcome the uttermost of the brunt:
My Mat. 24. 45, ^6.
God, my God, why have thou (all this while) forsaken me?

Fourthly, The Apostle expressly says, that Gal. 3. 13.
Christ was made a curse for us.

And it cannot be, that he means that curse, but of a shameful and
ignominious death only: for he speaks of the curse due to every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them: from which, Christ redeemed us, himself being made that curse for us.
Neither does the reason which the Apostle renders, As it is written, Cursed is
every one that hangs upon the Tree, prove that our Savior Christ was no
otherwise accursed, then as every other Male factor is, or as the Thief upon
the Cross, whose soul notwithstanding went to Paradise: but his reason
serves for the contrary, to prove that this kind of death was by way of
Type and Ceremony accursed in the Law, prefiguring the curse that was to light
upon our Savior Christ, in whom all the Ceremonies of the Law had their
accomplishment and perfection.

But how (will you say) could this fear in Christ be without sin? Because it
grew not from weakness of faith, much less from desperation: for even when
he cried out in the anguish of his soul, Why have thou forsaken me? yet he
cease not to call him his God, of whom he complayneth himself to be
forsaken; but it grew out of a mere humiliation: for howsoever, as touching
his Divine Nature, he were equal with GOD the Father, yet he found in his
humanity, wherein he was to pay our ransom; an exceeding inability to
satisfy Gods Justice, unless he might be pleased favorably to accept the
Sacrifice of his Body, not as the Sacrifice of a man, but as the Sacrifice of
his only begotten Son; and what was wanting in the weakness of his humane
Nature, to account sufficiently made up in the worthiness of his Godhead.
Besides, he feared not an utter desertion or forsaking, which to fear were
desperation, but lest his humane Nature should for a time be left alone without
any comfortable assistance of the Godhead, fearing in that distressefull
agony of his, and the very confusion of the powers of his nature, how long it
might hold him, and how infinitely more it might increase upon him, seeing that
he was not yet come to the greatest of his Passion, from whence by a mere
natural desire abhorring pain, which may well be without sin, he would have
gladly been released: And therefore praying it might pass from him, yet
presently submits himself unto it, Mat. 26. 39. O my Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. And again, Verse 42. O my Father, if this Cup cannot pass away from
me, but that I must drink of it, thy will be done. Mar. 14. 36.
MARK has it thus: Father, all things are possible to thee; take away this
Cup from me: Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will,

The third thing to be observed in his sufferings, is, All which he fully
satisfied,
that by the power of his Godhead he did endure and went through with them,
and did not take the foil: for as a huge stone falling upon a piece of britle
glass, grindeth it all to powder: but if it light upon a thing as huge as it
self, it is not able for to wagge it: so the infinite power of his Godhead,
strengthened the humane Nature of Christ to endure the brunt of the infinite
wrath and displeasure of his Father in such sort, as it did not ouer-whelme
him, but that in the midst of all his sufferings, he did in a manner conquer
and overcome, laying in his humility the beginning (as it were) and foundation
of his Glory, and of his Kingdom, in his low estate.

Whereof it follows:

First, that in the midst of his most bitter sufferings, he was freed from
hatred of God, final desperation, and such like, which are not of the
substance of the punishment, but lamentable and fearful effects in those that
are overcome of it.

Secondly, That he was not, nor could not be crushed with the weight of it,
into Hell, the place of the damned.

Thirdly, That making satisfaction, he did not lie for ever under it.

But how then did he pay the ransom of our sins which is Hell fire, the
second Death, everlasting condemnation, if he neither were in Hell to suffer
there, and came so quickly out of his suffering here?

These things, as has been showed, are no part of the punishment, but
effects, and things annexed to it, when the punishment it self is not able to
be endured, and has no place where that is borne and satisfied. And yet it is
more, that Christ the only begotten Son of God, yea, God himself, should
for a small while thus bear the Curse of the Law, then if the whole World had
suffered eternal punishment in Hell fire.

The fourth thing is, how and which way he satisfied our cursednes here, in the
whole course of his life.
all this, and when.

First, Our cursednesse here, he satisfied in the whole course of his life, as
Mat. 8. 16, 17
the Evangelist out of the Prophet notes, He healed all that were sick, that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, saying, He took
our infirmities, and bare our sickness.

Secondly, the infinite wrath of God his Father, he our full cursednesse, upon
the Cross,
satisfied upon the Cross; for thither does the Scripture ever call us, 1. Pet
2. 24.
Who bare our Sins upon the Wood, that Ephesians. 2. 16.
he might reconcile both in one body unto GOD, through the Cross, killing
enmity through it; Coloss. 2. 14.
blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was
secretly contrary to us, he took it away, nayling it to the Cross.

Thirdly, Death in the grave, where being solemnly and death, by dying: under
the power whereof he lay three days in the grave.
buried, to assure us, his death was a true death, and not counterfeit, nor
feigned, he lay three days under the ignominious dominion of it.

The fifth and last thing is the end, which is also the use and fruit of his
sufferings: Forgiveness of sins, Mortification or Abolishing of our sinful
lusts, and the Freeing of us from death and condemnation, as shall appear
hereafter.

To come unto the last of those four heads: our Saviors The glories of Christ
that followed his sufferings
humbling of himself, so far, as to be obedient unto death, the death of the
Cross, it pleased God to crown with an infinite weight of bliss, as the
Apostle teaches, Phil. 2. 9. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Prophet Esaias
53. 10.
Esaias, Seeing he gives himself an Oblation for sin, he shall see a seed,
and prolong his days. And Revel. 5. 12, 13. It is the voice of infinite
thousands of holy Angels applauded by all the creatures in heaven, and upon the
earth, and by the four living creatures and the four and twenty Elders,
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise. In which two, 1. Pet.
1. 11. Psalm. 22.
the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that did follow, the whole substance
of the Gospel stands, as he himself teaches his Disciples, Luke 24. 26.
Must not Christ have suffered these things, and so enter into his glory?

But had he no glory at all, before he had finished his sufferings? Indeed
during the time of his humiliation, which was all his life long, whilst he
bare the infirmity of our natures, and the punishment due to the same, the
great happiness belonging to him, was smothered in some sort, that it did not
so appear, neither was the time for the full manifesting thereof yet come:
Howbeit, even then he did not obscurely make ouerture of it many ways: For
first, in that weakness of his flesh, he gave so lively tokens of his glory,
that the 1. Tim. 3. 16.
Apostle fears not to say even then, When he was manifested in the flesh, he
was justified in the Spirit. And Acts 2. 22.
PETER calls him a man approved of God, by the excellent Deeds, and
miracles, and signs which God had done by him. Which, as John 2. 11.
John notes, were to manifest his glory. In regard whereof he says, John 1.
14
We saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God. But yet
sometimes more gloriously then at other, he was pleased in an extraordinary
manner to reveal it, as in his Transfiguring upon the Mount, when Matthew. 17. 2.
his face shined as the Sun, and his garments were made white as the light:
In his John 2. 15.
whipping of the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple: In his John 18. 6.
causing of them that came to apprehend him, only by the power of his Word, to
fall unto the ground, etc. yea, in the very midst of all his sufferings, and
even upon the Cross it self, how did his glory shine? taking upon him to
Luke 23. 42, 43.
dispose of Paradise, the kingdom of heaven, at his pleasure, and making
heaven and earth, the living, and the dead, to work together for the
celebrating of his greatness. When the Sun ashamed of their doings Matthew.
27. 45
pulled in his beams, and refused to give them Light; when at Matthew. 27. 50,
51, 52.
his voice and the noise of his roaring, the Earth trembled and shook, the Vale
of the Temple rent a sunder from the top unto the bottom; Rocks flew in
pieces, the Graves were opened, and the Bodies of many dead Saints did arise;
when he wrung out of the Matthew 27. 54
Centurions mouth a confession of his person, and made the John 19. 19, 20, 21,
22.
hands of Pilate imbrued with his blood, to be the instruments of the
publishing of his Office, and to lift up the Standard of his praise to all
people, Latins, Greeks, and Hebrews, that not without just cause, does the
Coloss 2. 15.
Apostle say, that He spoiled Principalities and Powers, and led them in open
show, triumphing upon the Cross. So as the shameful and ignominious Cross
was, contrary to its nature, so altered and changed by Christ's Divine Power,
that it served now for a Trophee, and Monument of his Victory, being as a
Chariot, wherein he rode more glorious, then any Emperor or Potentate of the
World, in the midst of his greatest Triumph, and had all the enemies of our
Salvation, Satan, Sin, Hell, and Condemnation led after him, chayned and fast
bound with all their weapons pulled from them, as men taken captives.

But this Glory of his afterward shined forth most were in soul or body
apart, or jointly in them both: In soul, he went to Heaven presently after
death.
clearly in four steps or degrees.

In the first place may be reckoned (though it were not conspicuous to the
World) that he went in soul unto Heaven after death. So he Luke 23. 43.
says to the Thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. And after,
being ready to give up the ghost, Verse 46.
Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit. Which to be meant of his present
going to God his Father, is manifest by other places, where the like phrase is
used, as Acts 7. 59. in the Prayer of STEPHEN, Lord, receive my spirit.

The second step is his Resurrection, when in the His body he raised from the
dead,
Chambers of death he conquered death it self, and being a Morsel that the
grave was not able for to swallow, arose from the dead, and made thereby a
perfect conquest of all his foes, and full demonstration of his Glory, as the
Apostle says, Romans 1. 4.
He was mightily declared to be the Son of God, as touching the spirit of
Sanctification, by rising from the dead.

In his Resurrection I note these six things:

First, The cause of his Resurrection, which was by his own Divine Power.

Secondly, The manner of his rising mightily and powerfully, not bound hand and
foot as Lazarus came forth; but like Samson, he Acts 2. 24.
brake the bands of death and of the grave in sunder.

Thirdly, What body he rose withal; a Body freed glorious,
from all infirmity, hunger, thirst, weariness, etc. and endued with
immortality, strength, nimblenesse, agilitie, Behold my hands and my feet. It
is even ^ touch me and see me. A Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see
me to have. Acts 2. 32. Acts 3. 13, 15.
able to move upwards, as well as to go downwards, glorious and shining: and
therefore called Phil. 3. 21.
A body glorious. Howsoever it Vbiquists, that teach, Christ's body since his
Resurrection, to be Omnipotent euerywhere.
remain a Luke 24 39.
body still to be handled, touched, felt, having length, breadth, etc. with
all other essential properties belonging to a Body, and locally comprehended
in one certain place.

Fourthly, The time when he rose; which was the the third day at the dawning
of the day.
Mat. 16. 21. Luke 24. 7. 11. Acts 10 40. 1. Cor. 15. 4.
third Day early in the morning.

Fifthly, The fruit and benefit in all those good and excellent things; which
are to be remembered, when we speak of the Kingdom of Heaven.

The third step is, his most blessed and glorious Ascension: whereby, in stead
of the lower part of the In his whole person, soul and body, he ascends into
Heaven,
Earth, whither for his great love unto us, he did willingly come down, God
has taken him up, and set him above the highest Heavens, as the Apostle
notes, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11. Now this that he ascended, what is it, but that he
first descended into the lower parts of the Earth? He that descended, is the
selfsame that ascended far above all the Heavens, etc.

Of this is the Story recorded, Mark 16. 19. Luke 24. 51. and more fully,
Acts 1. 29. that whilst they looked, he was lifted up: or, as the Angel
calls it, Acts 1. 11. taken up from them into Heaven, that is, his humane
nature, by the power and virtue of his Godhead, was truly and locally
translated from the Earth, into the highest Heavens of the Blessed, where it is
to remain in all glory and excellency, till the latter Day, as the Angel
tells his Apostles, Acts 1. 11. This Jesus, that is taken up from you into
Heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him going into Heaven. And Peter more
plainly, Acts 3. 21. Whom Heaven must contain, till the times of the restoring
of all things.

For where our Savior says, Mat. 28. 20. I am with you always to the end of
the World: and a Mat. 26. 11.
little before had said, Me you shall not have always among you; it appears,
that the manner of his presence is to be distinguished: for he is present
indeed always with his Church, but by the power and comfort of his Spirit,
whereby he does communicate himself, and all he has, unto us, not in any
corporal or bodily presence.

The time that he thus ascended both in Soul and the fortieth day after his
Resurrection.
Body, was forty Acts 1. 3.
days after his Resurrection, during all which time he was conversant with
his Disciples, teaching and instructing them as well in all points of Christian
doctrine, as in those that belong to the Policy and Government of his Church:
whereupon the Heb. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Apostle says, He was faithful in all the House of God, after a more
excellent sort then Moses was.

The fruit of Christ's Ascension into Heaven, is our coming thither, as shall
appear more at large hereafter. And this entry into Heaven to purchase full
Redemption for us, belonged to his Priestly Function, whereof the High Priests
entering into the Holy of holies once a year, was a type or figure, Heb. 8. 7,
12.

The fourth and last step, is his John 7. 39. Acts 3. 13.
Glorification, or the and there sits at the right hand of God: that is to
say, enjoys all Sovereignty, Power and Glory.
enriching of him after he was ascended, with an unspeakable and
incomprehensible (though not an infinite measure) of all Happiness, Joy,
Wisdom, Knowledge, Excellency, more then all men and Angels have: whereof the
Psalm. 45. 8. and Heb. 1. 9.
Psalmist speaks, God, even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Therefore this is called also his Acts 2. 33.
Exaltation or Phil. 2. 9.
Superexaltation: having, in stead of shame and contempt, (which for our sakes
he did willingly undergo, becoming subject unto death, the most ignominious
death of the Cross) all and all manner of excellency, both Kingdom, Power,
and Glory bestowed upon him; and this is that which figuratively is meant by
his sitting or standing at the right hand of God his Father, Heb. 1. 3. Having
by himself purged our sins, he sits at the right hand of Majesty in the
highest places. Mark 16. 19. The Lord, after he had spoken these things, was
taken up into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God. Acts 7. 55. He
being full of the Holy Ghost, looked steadfastly up to Heaven, and saw the
Glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. A phrase or form
of speech taken from earthly Princes, who are said to set them at their right
hand, whom they are pleased to Mat. 20.
advance into the principal place of Honor, and Administration of their
Kingdom.

First, touching his Government and Dominion, both the Apostles so expound this
Phrase, when that which Psalm. 110. 1.
David says, JEHOVAH said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make
thine enemies thy footstool. The one 1. Cor. 15. 25
renders thus, He shall reign, till he have put all his enemies under his
feet. The Acts 2. 36.
other infers upon it: Let all the house of Israel therefore know for a
certain, that Him God has made both Lord and Christ. For power and dominion
both, that serves, Ephesians. 1. 10, 20, 21. According to his mighty power which
he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his
right hand in the heavenly Places, far above all Principality, and Power, and
Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named, not in this World only, but
also in that that is to come, and has made all things subject under his feet.

Of his Glory the same is manifest, in that this very setting at the right
hand of God is Acts 3. 13.
called his Glorification; and the Acts 7. 55.
Story of Stephen coupleth them together: He saw the Glory of God, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God.

The fruit of his setting at the right hand of God is very great, and in a
manner all in all, both for his Intercession and Kingdom, as we shall have
occasion to note hereafter.

All that hitherto has been said, concerns our Saviors Hitherto of
Oblation: Intercession is
offering of himself: we come now to the other part of his Priesthood,
standing in his Intercession. A thing most necessary to be added to the rest:
for in vain were all his Offerings and Oblation, if by his Prayers and
Supplications to his Father, and the continual presenting of his Merits he
did not purchase Grace, that the same should be made effectual for us.
Wherefore this, as one step higher, is added to the former, Romans 8. 34 Who
shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed, nay rather, which is risen, who also is
at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us.

In his Intercession I observe,

First, that it is the proper Office and Honor of Christ, by whom only we come
unto God, Heb. 7. 25.

Secondly, That it is the requesting and entreaty of the continual presenting
of his Merits to God
his Father, the continual presenting of himself, and the Merits of his Death
and Passion, whereupon he is called our 1. John 2. 1.
Advocate, or Spokesman, and is said to Heb. 9. 24.
appear on our behalf before the face of God, and to make If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ that righteous one.
Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. his Father,
Intercession for us. The word appearing, being a word taken from the Courts
and Seats of Justice, as we use to say, when the Plaintiff or Defendant is
called: Who is here to appear for him? Christ therefore is, as it were, our
Attournie, to appear for us before his Father, I make mention of the Father
only, because the Father is the first of the three Persons in order, who being
appeased, the Son and Holy Ghost are also pleased; they all being one, as in
essence and nature, so in will and agreement.

Thirdly, When and how he performed this Intercession, namely, whilst he was
upon Earth, in so many, so sweet, so heavenly and so fervent Prayers, as he
powered forth from time to time for the Salvation of his Elect, especially that
most solemn and sacred one above the rest, John 17. wherein being anon to be
offered, he did consecrate both himself, the only and eternal Sacrifice,
and us in and through him, unto his Father: by the power and force of which his
Prayer, the Church of God has ever stood, and shall stand unto the end: And
what he did then upon the Earth, the same he does, though not in the same
manner, now in Heaven, not with knees bowed, and hands stretched out, but yet
in such sort as is fit for him to give, and fit for his Father to receive.

Fourthly, That he makes Intercession for all the Elect, on the behalf of
those Elect.
and for them alone; (not for the Reprobate and Worldlings, John 17. 9. I pray
not for the World, but for those whom thou have given me.

Fifthly, For what things this Intercession is made. Not for some one or few
benefits, but that we may be partakers of all the good things that he has
wrought; Faith or Vocation, Union with himself, that is to say, Regeration,
Righteousness and Sanctification through him, Constancy and Perseverance in
the estate of Grace, and finally Eternal Happiness: for all these parts are
particularly set down, John 17. as namely, Verse 20. 21. I pray for all that
are to believe in me by their Ministry, that all may be one, as th^^, Father,
in me, and I^n thee: So, that they also may be one with us* that the World may
believe that thou have sent me. Verse 17. Sanctify them by thy Truth. Verse
11 Holy (...)er, keep them in thy Name. Verse 15. I pray not that thou (...)
them out of the World, but that thou keep them from th(...) one. Verse 13.
That they may have my joy fulfilled to them. Verse 24. Righteous Father, whom
thou have given unto me, I desire that where I am, there they also may be, that
they may behold my Glory which thou have given me. And Verse 26. That the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be upon them. So he does express the
Intercession he made for Peter, to be, That his faith should not fail, Luke
22. 32.

Intercession therefore of our Savior Christ, is, as it were, a continual
plaster for the curing of the manifold slips, frailties, and sins, whereunto
the faithful, through infirmity, do continually fall, that so by a special
and continual application of his Merit, our persons may remain just, and our
works acceptable to God, 1. John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate,
etc.

Sixthly, That as in his humanity he desires all these things for our
Salvation, and the applying of his Merits and death unto us: so by the power of
his De^^e he does indeed apply them: whereunto his being in Heb. ^. ^4.
Heaven, and in the sight of God, his Romans ^. 34.
sitting at the right hand of his Father, and his Heb. 7. 25.
everliving do much (...)le, making that Intercession of his, as in it self
more glorious, so for us more gracious and acceptable, and able perfectly to
save them that come to God by him.

Seventhly, That Romans 8. 26.
making Intercession for us, he teaches us also by his Spirit to make
Intercession to God, with Prayers, sighs and groans that cannot be expressed.

CHAP. III.
Of Christ's Government of the World in general.

AFter the Priesthood of Christ, next follows Such is the Priesthood of
Christ: his Kingdom follows.
his Kingdom, which is euerywhere spoken of in the Scriptures, and most
honorable and glorious promises made unto it, Esaias 9. 7. A Child shall be
borne unto us, and a Son given to us, upon whose shoulder the Dominion shall
lie. Esaias 32. 1. Behold, a King shall reign in Righteousness. And Ierem. 23.
5. A King shall reign and prosper.

Generally, in his Kingdom, I observe three things: Kingdom,


First, A calling of Christ by God his Father to it: for as he intruded not
himself into the Office of a Priest, but expected the calling of his Father:
so he took not upon him to reign, before he had a Kingdom given him.
Therefore, Psalm 2. 6. God is brought in saying, I have appointed my King over
Sion my holy Hill. And Dan. 2. 44. it is said, In those days shall the God of
Heaven raise up a Kingdom. So, Luke 1. 32. the Angel tells MARIE, The Lord
shall give unto him the Throne of his Father DAVID. And PETER Acts 2. 36.
Him has God made both Lord and Christ.

Secondly, The inuesting of him into the Princely Honor and Administration of
his Kingdom, whereof he had full seizin, and was put into the actual and
real possession of it, when he ascended into Heaven, which a man may call his
going up unto his Coronation. Daniel Dan. 7. 13, 14
in his seventh Chapter has a notable description of it, seeing in a Vision,
Christ, God and Man, coming out of Heaven into the lower parts of the Earth,
to work the mystery of our Redemption; and, that done, ascending into Heaven
to the Ancient of days (God his Father) to present himself before him. And to
him, says he, was given Dominion, Glory, and a Kingdom.

Thirdly, The fruit and end of all this, the same whereunto is in the things
which he does from God for those Elect:
the whole work of his Mediation tends, which is our Ephesians. ^. 16.
Peace and Reconciliation with God, in and through him: Therefore he is called
The Esaias 9. 6.
Prince of Peace, Heb. 7. 2.
The King of Righteousness, and The King of Peace, figured by MELCHISEDECH
King of Shalem. And hereupon the Romans 14. 17.
Apostle says, that the Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace, and loy in
the Holy Ghost.

More specially to treat of this his Kingdom; It parts The kingdom of
Christ has two parts.
it self into three main Arms or Branches, rising by so many steps or
stayres; one is his Government of the World in general, taking things in such
sort as the Fall did leave them, without vouchsafing any further favor. And
this may be called the footstool of his Kingdom. Another stands in the
bestowing of his Word, and the fruits thereof, matters of special grace,
though such as fall upon the Reprobate: and this may be called the Scepter of
his Kingdom.

The third, Is the giving of his Spirit; whereby, of carnal, he makes us
spiritual and heavenly Creatures: and this may be called the Seat and Throne,
or rather the Life and Power of his Kingdom: as these three parts are so
distinguished, and in the same order, Psalm. 93.

The first words of which Psalm in a holy triumph, and reioycing-wise express
the general argument, that Jehovah, which is Christ our Lord, reigns, and
not reigns only, but has his Reign accompanied with two Noble Adjuncts;
Glory and Power. Then he comes to distinguish the parts; First, his
Government of the World, considered in two degrees: One, the stay and
sustentation of all things, the same which the Heb. 1. 3
Apostle so highly magnifieth to the Hebrews: for whereas Adams sin had
turned vpside down the whole frame of Nature, and, according to the curse,
What day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall certainly dye, had
brought man and all the Creatures, for man's sake, to utter ruin and
desolation, Christ the Mediator steppeth forth, and there begins his
Kingdom, in holding up the World, which otherwise had instantly come to
nothing. This you have in the latter end of the first Verse: The inhabited
World is settled, it shall not be removed.

And that so wonderful a thing as this, a work of such admiration, might have
a reason suitable, to make it not seem strange, the Prophet tells us, that
He, which upon Adams fall began his Mediation, had a Being long before, and
together with his Father and Holy Spirit weilded a greater Scepter, being the
Lord and Creator of Adams self, and of the whole World besides, and the great
King, out of whose Throne proceed those everlasting counsels, that rule and
moderate whatsoever is or shall be, Thy Throne is established before any time:
thou art from everlasting.

The other degree is in the tayming, and bringing down of the proud enemies of
his Kingdom, whose rage and fury he compares with the loud noise of mighty
waters, when the Waves and Surges of the Sea arise: Christ's Dominion, that
sits aloft, as Lord Paramount, with the stilling and ouer-ruling of them.

Then follows the second main Arm and Branch of his Kingdom, in the
Scepter of his Word: Thy testimonies are exceeding true.

And lastly, the everlasting Righteousness, which, by the Spirit of
Sanctification, he bestows upon his Church: In thy House is comely
holiness, O JEHOVAH, for evermore.

The first of these is properly called his Judicature, or Office of a Judge:
the second is his Prophetical Office; the third is wont by excellency to be
called The Kingdom: All most glorious and noble effects of his Ascension into
Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God, as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians.
4. 8. Ascending on high, he led captivity captive: (whereby he means the
absolute power given unto him for the government of the World, seen specially
in the subduing of the proud enemies of the Church. And gave gifts unto men:
which Verse 10.
by and by he interprets to be as much, as to fill all things, that is, the
whole body of his Church, and all the parts of it, with the variety of his
Graces. Not that Christ had not this excellency, or did not reign at all
before his Ascension into Heaven: for John 1. 49.
Nathaniel tells him, Thou art the King of Israel. And John 18. 37.
he himself, when Pilate asked, Art thou a King? answers, Thou say true:
for I am a King. But the full and real manifestation of this Kingdom, in his
flesh or humane nature, did then first begin.

To prosecute now these parts in such order, as we One whereby he governs
all the World according to their own nature, since the fall.
did propound them.

The first is that, which extends generally to all the World, and to the
whole government, and administration of it, which he himself is wont to call
his Iudgeship, or Office of judging, John 5. 27. He has given unto him
dignity to execute judgment, as he is the Son of man, And John 5. 22. The
Father judges no man, but has given all judgment to the Son; where that it
may appear how large his Power in this behalf extends, he calls it all
judgment. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Apostle, Heb. 1. 3. where he is
said to sustain all things by the power of his Word. Therefore, John 5. 17. he
makes this general proclamation, My Father works hitherto, and I work,
without restraint of time or place, or of the subject or persons toward whom
it is wrought. God therefore, who before governed immediately and by himself,
has, ever since the fall of Adam, appointed Christ his Vicegerent, and
Lieutenant general, in whose person he would afterward rule the World: Not
that himself sits idle in heaven, as Joseph's Master did, when he had
committed unto Joseph the Administration of his house: but being in him, and
with him, and working all things by and through Christ, who again uses to
that end, beside his Spirit, and the power of his Word, the service also and
the ministry of his holy Angels: all which is figured by many excellent and
goodly Similitudes, in the Vision of Ezech. 1.
Ezechiel, where the four living Creatures representing the innumerable
company of Angels, whose Ministry extends unto all the four parts of the
Earth, have under their feet four wheels; noting the whole uncertain course
of this changeable and unconstant world, which move when they move, and rest
when they stand still. And when the living creatures lift up themselves from
earth into heaven, to receive from God new Commandments, the wheels also, as
it were, do follow them, and cease from wheeling, to wait their direction.
Above which Angels is a Curtain, or Extent between God and them, all of
Crystal, clear and transparent: through the which as he beholds these
inferior creatures, so they, both Angels and men, according to their
mediocritie, are able to see him, and the brightness of his glory. Over that
Extent, higher than the highest heavens, is a most glorious Throne erect:
whereupon does sit the likeness of the Son of man, Christ the blessed Lord
of glory, God and man, whom all obey, and stoop at his command. All this for
the good of his Church and people, for whose sake it was necessary he should
be armed with so great a Command and Power.

In this part of his Kingdom, I note

First, The largeness thereof, in that it reaches every where, and no place
exempted from it: I will give the Nations Ps. 2. 8.
for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession. Zach. 9.
10.
His dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River, unto the ends of
the earth. Dan. 7. 14.
And to him was given Dominion, and a Glory, and a Kingdom, that all people,
nations, and tongues should serve him. Ps. 72. 8. 11.
He shall bear rule from one Sea unto another, and from the flood, as far as
the ends of the earth. All Kings shall bow down unto him, and all Nations
shall serve him. Math. 28. 18
All power is given me in heaven, and upon the earth.

Secondly, In this Kingdom Christ alone perfecteth all things, not like to
other Kings and Potentates, who rule by deputies; but here he himself does
all: for though there he used instruments, yet all comes from his strength
and virtue, and he himself is euery-where present by his Spirit: Whereupon
his Kingdom is called Esaias 9. 6.
Wonderful, because the effects and working of Gods Spirit are strange and
marvelous.

Thirdly, the virtues and properties of this our King, arming and inabling him
for the effecting of those great things, are two; Counsel, to advise of things
wisely, and Strength, to put them in execution, being both the stays and
props of a Kingdom, as it were the two pillars, Iacin and Bohas, whereupon 1.
King. 7. 21.
Salomons Porch was built. Therefore Rabshake, to discourage Hezekias, vanteth
of these two, as of the things whereon the hope if battle stands; as if
Hezekias were not in them to be compared to the King his Master: Esaias; 6. 5.
Say (yet they are but lip words) that thou have counsel and strength for the
war: yet in whom do thou trust? And Solomon, though he prefer the one,
makes both, the stays of a Kingdom, Eccles. 9. 16.
Eccle. 9. I say, wisdom is better then strength. Both these the Prophet
notes in this our King, Esaias 9. 6. Thou shall call his name, Wonderful, The
Counselor, The mighty strong God. And Zachar. 3. 9. The Lord making promise
of his servant the Bud, calls him a Stone, in respect of his strength and
might, governing and disposing all things for the defense and safety of his
Church: Upon which one stone; he says he will set seven eyes: meaning, he
would give unto him most absolute and perfect wisdom. His wisdom first, as of
a most grave and sage Counselor is noted, Revel. 1. 13, 14. when he is said to
have a long Stole, and a white head. Of his power the Apostle speaks, Heb. 1.
3. He bears up all things by the Word of his Power; or his powerful Word and
Command. And these two aptly answer to the two weapons, wherewith the Church is
by the enemies thereof from time to time assaulted, Force and Fraud: for by his
wisdom, he knows how to meet with all their subtilties and devices, by his
strength and power he is able to scatter all their forces. Therefore the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 72. 14.
From guile and violence he shall deliver their souls.

Fourthly, the quality and manner of his administration, is in Esaias 11. 5.
justice and truth: for the justice of it, the Ps. 4. 5.
Psalmist says, and out of him the Heb. 1. 8, 9.
Apostle to the Hebrews, Thy Scepter is a righteous Scepter. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity. Ps. 72. 2.
Again, He shall judge the people with righteousness, and the poor ones with
judgment. The like says the Prophet Esaias 32. 1*
Esaias, Beheld, a King shall reign righteously. Again, Esaias 9. 6.
He shall establish his Kingdom, and hold it up by Judgment and by Justice.
The justice of his Kingdom stands first in being a shelter to his subjects,
then, destroying Rebels: What a shelter he should be to his subjects, Esaias 32.
2.
Esaias did foretell: That Man (Christ the King) shall be as a hiding place from
the Wind, and a Refuge from the Storm, as Rivers of waters in a dry place, as
the shadow of a great Rock in a ground weary with very thirst: for, as the
Ps. 72. 21. 13. 13.
Psalmist says, He shall deliver the poor when he cries, and the needy which
has no helper: He shall spare the needy and the poor, and save the lives of
the poor from guile and violence: he shall deliver their soul, and dear
shall their blood be in his eyes.

Contrariwise, of the Rebels and those that lift up themselves against him, the
same Ps. 7^. 9.
Psalmist says, Before him shall the Inhabitant of the Desert (rough and
unruly people) bow down themselves, and his enemies shall lick the dust. Ps.
110. 1.
So Ps. 110. Sit at my right hand, till I have made thine enemies thy
footestoole: where the triumph over his foes is in the end of the Verse. 5. 6. 7,
Psalm described, O Lord, he that is at thy right hand, shall dash Kings in
pieces in the day of his wrath: He shall judge the Nations, filling them with
carcases, breaking the head in many Countries: (that is to say every where) of
the brook in the way shall he drink: like a most Noble General, that
follows hard the victory, and gives himself not so much times as to eat
and drink, whilst his enemy is in the chase. Therefore shall he lift up his
head, in token of victory and of Triumph, So it is said, Dan. 2* 44. This
Kingdom shall destroy all other Kingdoms that shall oppose themselves unto
it. Both these parts the Psalmist Ps. 72. 4.
has together. He shall sue the children of the poor, and crush the
oppressor, for the truth that is the sincere administration of his Kingdom,
Esaias 32. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Esaias speaks at large in the two and thirtieth Chapter of his prophecy.

Fifthly, The fruit of this administration is peace, that is to say, all manner
of blessings and good things unto his people, Psalm. 72. 3. The hills shall bring
forth Peace unto the people, and the little hills through righteousness. What
and how wonderful that Peace should be, Esaias does foretell, Chap. 11. 6, 7,
8, 9.

For the beter understanding of the former Doctrine, In the Angels perfect:
concerning the generality of Christ's government over all the creatures, and
for a more comfortable use of it, consider we the distribution which he
himself gives of the creatures, over whom he so commands: When he says,
Math. 28. 18.
All Dignity, that is to say, Power, Preeminence, Rule, and Authority, is
given unto me in heaven, and upon the earth, meaning over Angels, men, and all
other creatures.

His government of the Angels stands in these points.

First, He is the Lord, and they his vassals, whom he commands and rules at
his pleasure: whereupon they are called, Reu. 19. 10. and 22. 19.
our fellow-seruants.

Secondly, He teaches and informs them the will of his Father, which they by
their own strength or industry are not able to reach unto: Wherefore in Dan.
8. 13.
Daniel, the Angel desires to learn of him, how long the vision shall be:
Reu. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
for none in Heaven, nor the most glorious Angels there, nor upon the earth,
nor under the earth, are able to open the Book with seven seals in the right
hand of him that sits upon the Throne, but this Lion of the Tribe of Judah
only.

Thirdly, He holds them up in that integrity and perfection of Nature wherein
they stand, never to fall away; for which cause they are 1. Tim. 5 21.
called Elect, being elect indeed of and by him, as he is the Son of God,
but not in and through him, as he is the Mediator for his Church; considering
that if man had never feign, and consequently, if Christ had never been, yet
the Angels election had been firm and stable, and GOD in their election had
no regard of a former corruption, as he had in man; yet that nothing hinders,
but that they stand now by him as the Mediator, John 13. 3.
into whose hands God has committed all things.

Fourthly, He uses their ministry and service in the Government of the
World, as we noted before out of the Vision of Ezech. 1.
Ezechiel.

This Government reaches unto the Devils, the Angels In Devils*
that fell also: for

First, He shuts them up in perpetual hardness of heart, unto the
Judgment of the great Day, which may well be gathered by that he does to
John 12. 39, 40, 41.
reprobate and wicked men.

Secondly, Either for the trial of his children, or plaguing of the wicked, as
to himself it seems best, he gives them sometimes release of their
torments, and loses them out of those chains and fetters of darkness
wherewith they are held fast. Hence it is, that Luke 8. 32. they besought this
Jesus, not to charge them to depart into the Deep. And this benefit the Devils
themselves have from Christ, for the good of his Church, and the working of his
glory.

Thirdly, He restrayneth and bridleth them, that notwithstanding all their rage
and malice, they cannot exceed the bounds that he has set, and when they have
done all they can, they bring to pass but his good will and pleasure. So Mat.
8. 31. The Devils could not so much as take their pleasure of the poor Herd of
Swine, before they had begged leave of Christ.

Fourthly, The subduing and conquering of them: for 1. Co. 15. 24, 25
he shall abolish all Principality, and all Dignity, and Might, being to
reign till he have put all enemies under his feet. As Psalm. 110. 1.
David had said long before, and as the Genesis 3. 15.
promise was in Paradise: The seed of the woman shall break the Head of the
Serpent and of his seed.

Fifthly, The judging of them in the latter Day, which the unclean spirits
themselves acknowledge and confess: when they expostulate the matter with him,
Art thou come to torment us before the time, Mat. 8. 29.

Touching his Government over Mankind, this is and men corrupted:
common that he bestows upon them all, the light of Reason, and those seeds
and ornaments of GODS Image, which they carry yet about, John 1. 9. This is
he that lighteneth every man that comes into the World.

Specially toward the Reprobate is the same in all points, that is to Satan
their head, that is to say:

First, A perpetual obduration and hardening of their hearts unto final
unrepentance: for so the John 12. 39, 40, 41.
Evangelist John, when he had showed that the Jews could not believe, because
Esaias had said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, lest they
should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and I should heal
them. Immediately he adds, These things said ESAIAS, when he saw his glory,
and spoke of him.

Secondly, The restrayning and bridling of them, that notwithstanding all their
rage and fury, they cannot go beyond his appointed Lists, as we see in Acts
9. 1. etc.
Saul, who breathing out threatening and slaughter after the death of Stephen,
went with full swindge to Damascus, to cast into Prison all that called upon
the Name of Jesus: but he in the very way meeting with him, restrayneth his
malice, and changes his heart, to profess the Truth which before he
persecuted. And this is it the Psalm. 76. 11.
Psalmist says, The rage of men shall turn unto his glory.

Thirdly, His conquering and suduing of them, Psalm. 2. 9. Thou shall crush them
with a Scepter of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. Luke
19. 31. Those mine enemies that would not I should reign over them, bring
hither and slay them before me.

Fourthly, That he is to judge them in the latter Day: for this Acts 10. 43.
is he that is appointed of God the Judge both of the living and the dead. And
as Paul says, Acts 17. 31. God has set a Day wherein he will judge the World,
by the man whom he has appointed.

To the rest of the Creatures this belongs: In the rest of the World,
perverted.


First, That now he keeps them from running and falling unto nothing.

Secondly, That hereafter he will renew them into an excellent and glorious
condition. Both Psalm. 96. 10, 11, 12.
which are the work of Christ, and that for his Elects sake.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Prophetical Office of Christ, and of the outward Church.

WE have done with CHRIST'S Office of a The other, which is unto his Church: a
company of men culled out of the World, who believe or profess to believe in
him. This latter part contains his Prophetical Office, and that which the
Scripture by excellency terms, The Kingdom.
Judge in the general government of the World: The second Arm or Branch of
his Kingdom, is the Prophetical Office. A part I make it of his Kingdom, not
of his Priesthood.

First, For that all his Priestly Functions are between God and Him, as the
Apostle defines them to be in matters to Godwards, Heb. 5. 1. But these of his
Prophetical Office, as the rest of his Kingdom, are unto his Church.

Secondly, Because those wherein the Prophetical Office Prophetical Office,
is thought to consist, Teaching, Preaching, Ministering of the Sacraments,
Discipline and such like, whereunto Miracles come also to be annexed, are
matters of Authority, and of Power derived from his Kingly Office; and his
Word is called, The Mat. 13. 19.
Word of the Kingdom: yea, the preaching of the Gospel, and the outward
Church collected and gathered by the same, has the name of Mat. 13. 24, 47, 52.
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thirdly, Since the Ministry of Christ has always going with it, an
effectual and lively working of his Spirit, as one special part of this
Prophetical Office, his Ministry must needs be a Noble and a Royal
Dignity, that is accompayned with so great a force and power.

Fourthly, It is by virtue of his Kingly Office, that he sends forth Prophets
and Apostles, and all other Ministers, proved Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12. where Paul
describing the Royalty of his Kingdom, that he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men, immediately adds, He therefore gave some to be Apostles,
some to be Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pasters and Teachers, for the
knitting together of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the
building up of the Body of Christ. But this, all must grant that he does, as
the Head of the Prophets. Therefore the Prophetical Office, is one part of his
Kingly bounty.

And albeit Teaching may seem a part of the Priestly Function, by that which
is written, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. They teach JACOB thy Judgments, and Israel thy Law;
yet the essential point of the Priests Office, which stood in Sacrifices and
Oblations, must be distinguished from that common, to the whole Tribe of Leui,
as in that very place the words following do distinguish them: They put
Incense before thy face, and Sacrifice wholly to be consumed upon thine Altar:
for as Priests they went no further then to do, and to be types of those
things which before were assigned unto the Priesthood of Christ.

Their Office of teaching and instructing the people: they had another calling
for common with the Tribe of Leui, which the Prophets else, who were not of the
same Tribe, yet took upon them being raised up (extraordinarily) for that
purpose, from whom this part of Christ's Office took the name, and not from the
Priestly Function, though they were also called of GOD unto it.

The Prophetical Office of Christ respects a Church Which is to the Church
of Professors: it stands in an outward calling and gifts: An outward calling,
when by his Word, that is to say, his publishing of the Covenant of Grace.
and people, in bestowing upon them his Word, and the fruit it brings forth
by the working of his Spirit: for these three, Prophet, Word, and Church, have
a perpetual relation one unto another. Wherefore in handling the Prophetical
Office, the Word of Christ is first to be spoken of, and then his Church.

The Word of Christ is all the holy Doctrine that he has taught from the
beginning, concerning our salvation through him:

Wherein observe,

First, Christ is the matter, and only subject, and substance of the Word. In
that regard, himself is called, The John 1. 1.
Word, or Revel. 19. 13.
The Word of God: Because of him, and of him alone it is, that there are in the
Word so many glorious and excellent speeches, and the Doctrine of the Gospel
has the name of the Word of Christ, Col. 3. 16. So as it is not any natural
knowledge that this Doctrine teaches, but heavenly and supernatural which was
not in Adam before his fall, though he were perfectly holy, and endued with all
manner of natural understanding.

Secondly, He himself, as he is the matter, so he is the Author of the Word.
In which respect the Scripture gives these names unto him.

First, He is called Hamedabber, or the Speaker, and Interpreter of his Fathers
Will, Dan. 8. 13. To which place, it may be, the Apostle Heb. 12. 25.
has some eye, when he says, Take heed ye reject not him that speaks, or
the Speaker, meaning Christ.

Secondly, A Doctor, Mat. 3. 10.
or a Teacher.

Thirdly, A Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Acts 3. 22.
Prophet, the head and Lord of the Prophets.

Fourthly, an Heb. 3. 1.
Apostle.

Fifthly, The Mal. 3. 1.
Angel of the Covenant.

And that we may know with what Graces our Savior Christ is furnished, for
Col. 2. 3.
so great a work, all the treasures of Knowledge and Understanding are hidden
in him, yea, he is Wisdom 1. Cor. 1. 24.
it self, or Luke 11. 49.
the Wisdom of God, and called, as by a proper name, Dan. 8. 13.
Palmonie, that is, one that has all hidden things numbered before him, or
ready told, and as we say, at his fingers ends, which as occasion does serve,
he utters to his Church.

Wherefore here is the Touchstone of all Truth, and there is no truth
concerning God and our Salvation in Christ, but in the Word, our Savior
himself bearing record, John 17. 17. Thy word is Truth.

Touching the outward instruments which it has pleased him to use in the
delivery of this Word; sometimes he spoke by his own voice from Heaven;
sometimes by the Ministry of his holy Angels: But specially this outward
Ministry is either his own which he executed personally himself, when he
was upon the Earth, (described Esaias 42. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. in regard whereof
he is called a Minister, Romans 15. 8.
The Minister of Circumcision, and a Esaias 42. 1.
Servant:) or it is of his Servants from the beginning of the World, of whom
he says, He Luke 10* 16.
that hears you, hears me; and he that rejects you* rejects me. Of
whose Ministeries and Functions we shall have cause to speak hereafter.

Therefore Christ's Office of a Teacher did not first begin when he took our
flesh upon him: for his Spirit it was that spoke in the Prophets, long before
he came into the World, as the Apostle bears record, 1. Pet. 1. 11. The
forewitnessing Spirit of Christ that was in the Prophets, declared the
sufferings that should befall Christ, and the glory that was to follow. And
that which is in the Psalms, Psalm. 95. 7.
To day if ye will hear his voice: the Apostle Heb. 3. 7.
to the Hebrews refers to the voice of Christ.

Thirdly, I note the perfection of this Doctrine, that Christ has opened the
whole will of his Father fully and perfectly in every Age, and never left his
Church without a full and perfect direction of all things necessary for their
salvation: for Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30. 15.
Behold, I set before you this day life and death: which he could not have
said, unless there had been a certain direction to lead them unto life. And
when he charge Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Not to add to the words that he gave them in Commandment, nor to take from
them, does it not prove that the same was perfect?

Fourthly, The subject of the Word being Christ, it is more particularly the
Covenant made in him, which by the Word is promulged and offered unto all, and
his Spirit makes effectual to as many as receiving the same by faith, make
themselves worthy of it.

The which Covenant being distinguished by the Old (which being of the Old
Testament, was called The promise; of the New, The Gospel)
Testament and the New, as before has been declared, the publication of the
Old Testament in and through Christ to come, was called Acts 13. 32. Gal. 3. 17.
The Promise; when he was exhibited and come indeed, that worthy and welcome
Message was termed Acts 13. 32. Mark 1. 1.
The Gospel, or good news, and glad tidings.

But it is the glory of Christ's administration, whether in his own person when
he was among us, or by his and by the power of his Spirit,
Servants, that the outward dispensing of the Word is accompanied with an
inward working of the Spirit: of both which parts his Prophetical Office
stands, herein differing from all other Ministers, who only preach the Word,
set Mat. 3. 11.
on the outward Element, 1. Cor. 3. 6.
plant and water: but the whole blessing does come from him: for he teaching,
opens men's minds, Luke 24. 45.
that they may understand the Scriptures, and bestows other graces which the
Word brings forth, even in the wicked, by a general working of his Spirit,
as we are taught by the Mat. 13. 24.
Parable of the Sower, and have Mark 6. 20.
Herod and the John 5. 35.
Jews for an example.

It follows to speak of the Church. That which we he draws men to that
Profession.
call Church, signifies in (...).
Greek, a select company gathered, called, culled, picked out from other men.
In English it has the name derived from that which in Greek signifies (...),
Lord, because they belong to Christ the Lord, and are separate to his Service;
be it by an inward whereof comes the word Church: or as the Northern
pronounce, Kirk.
or an outward separation. But the outward Church is it which we are to
begin withal, which is in general the whole number of men professing
Christ. Concerning which take these few things,

First, Grace is not universal, nor all do not receive it, no, not so much as
the offer of Grace, (nor an outward calling.) Many, Mat. 20. 16.
says our Savior Christ, are called: he says not all, but many. And so the
Mat. 22. 3, 4
King which made a Marriage Dinner for his Son, sent his Servants to call,
not all, but those that he had called: that is, those whose names he had set
down in a Calender or Roll to be his Ghests, although of those also some Ver.
11, 12, 13
were none of his. Neither does it hinder this which is said after, Ver. 9.
Go into the highways, and bring in as many as ye shall find. For the scope of
the Parable shows, that by those that were first bid, are meant the Jews,
into whose place came the Gentiles, that before were alieus and strangers; so
that by calling of the Jews only at the first, it is proved that all men are
not made partakers of the outward calling. And this, if we had no word at all
for it, experience it self might teach us; for how many has death ouer-taken
in their Cradles, before they could be called? how many of riper years does
darkness cover, that they never can see the Light? Paul verily Acts 14. 15.
saying, that in the ages passed, God suffered all Nations to walk in their
own ways, shows, how many Millions of souls have perished, that never
heard of Christ.

But it is the glory of Christ's administration, whether in his own person,
when he was among us, or by his servants, that the outward dispensing of the
Word is accompanied with an inward working of the Spirit: of both which parts,
his Prophetical Office stands, herein differing from all other Ministers,
who only preach the Word, Mat. 3. 11.
set on the outward Element, 1. Cor. 3. 6.
plant, and water, but the whole blessing does come from him; for he teaching,
Luke 24. 45.
opens men's minds, that they may understand the Scriptures, and bestows
other graces which the Word brings forth, not only in his Children, but even
in the wicked.

Secondly, It is the instinct and motion of Gods Spirit, that draws a man to
this Profession, Genesis 9. 27. God persuade IAPHETH, that he may dwell in the
Tents of SHEM: for all the natural Wisdom of the World is not able to lead
us by the hand to Christ, nor to teach us the knowledge of heavenly things. I
say not, the saving knowledge of Gods Elect, but not so much as that outward
knowledge and profession, and those common graces which many of the Reprobates
do attain unto. No man, says JESUS, is the Lord, but by the Spirit of God,
1. Cor. 12. 3. that is, the grace even but outwardly to profess him, is a
work of the Holy Ghost. And so does the Apostle there go through the rest of
the parts; Gifts of knowledge, Faculties and Ministeries: All which, he says,
one and the same Spirit works. And what need we much to labor herein, when
the very hiding of this sacred Doctrine so many years, from all the deep and
wise men of the Earth, whilst the Jews had it alone; and at this day, from so
many famous Commonwealths and Kingdoms to whom we are not superior in
Learning, Wisdom or other Gifts, show, that all the wit of the World cannot
make us so much as think one thought of Christ, till God by his Spirit give us
light?

And this which is the first and meanest of Gods favors, is yet a favor not
to be contemned, it being an excellent and a glorious thing to be (though but
outwardly) Professors of Christ: for

First, Hereby they are severed from Turks, Pagans and Heathen men, and in
name are become Christians: for that title the Acts 11. 26.
Holy Ghost gives to all Professors.

Secondly, They are now received into the LORDS House, and are said to be
within: 1. Cor. 5. 12, 13
whereas all others What have I to do to judge them that are without? But
those that are within, do you judge. But those that are without, God will
judge.
that are not of the Church, are said to be without.

Thirdly, Being members of the visible Church, dwelling with and among them,
they are made partakers of many goodly graces, and benefits, which God powers
upon his Church; even upon the Reprobate and wicked, for the Elects sake that
are among them, as the Psalmist says, that Psalm. 29. 9.
in his Temple he utters all his Glory.

The third thing is, it suffices for the making of a Church, if they be
Professors only, this being but a bare outward calling common to the Reprobate.

Fourthly, They must be Professors of Christ, professing that in words, the
having whereof indeed makes men truly Christians. So the Apostle defines it,
Ephesians. 1. 1. where, in stead of naming the Church of Ephesus (for to the
outward Church he writes) he uses this Periphrasis to the Saints that are in
Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: and 1. Cor. 1. 2. To the Church
of God which is in Corinth, sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling. In
regard whereof, the same Apostle calls Christ, The foundation even of the
visible Church, 1. Co. 3. 11. And this is the right Touchstone to examine al
Churches by, for what The Papists make three notes of the visible Church;
Antiquity, Unity, Universality, most fondly and ridiculously, when as all
these are to be found in the malignant Church, and in the most wicked
assemblies and societies

Errors have bin ancient, as long as since the Apostles time: for even then the
mystery of iniquity began to work, 2. These. 2. 7. 1. John 5. 3. and then were
there many Antichrists, 1. Ioh. 2. 13

Thieves are as unity among themselves, and so are the Devils one with
another, else their Kingdom could not stand, Mat 12 25. 26. And Revel. 17. 17.
it is said that God put into their hearts, with one consent to give their
Kingdom to the Beast.

As for Universality, that is so far from being a certain badge of the true
Church, that contrariwise Paul tells us when Antichrist shall be revealed,
there must be a general Apostasy and defection from the Truth, 2. These 2. 3.
And in the Revel. we read, that all the World went wo^dring after the Beast,
and worshipped the Beast and the Dragon that gave him power, Reu. 13. ^, 4.
Howbeit we say, the Church of God is Catholic or Universal, but in a far
other sense then they mean by their universality which they intend of a
general spreading of itself, without any great opposition to the contrary in
beauty and much bravery, and multitudes of men glittering and shining in the
World, whereas we say, The true Church of Christ is Catholic or Universal,
because it is not tied to any one particular place or Country, as sometimes
among the Jews it was; but in every Nation God has those that fear him, and
belong to his Election. Not always visible, and to be seen with the eye, but
members through faith, of the true Catholic and invisible Church of Christ.
The Papists which say the Church cannot err.


Church soever in such sort professes Christ, as the members truly holding
that they do profess, are thereby made members of the Mystical Body of
Christ, the same, what imperfections soever it have beside, and how unsound
soever it may be in many parts, yet it has the heart and life of a Church:
otherwise it cannot be said a Church. For albeit the Church of God be not
subject to fundamental errors, that take away the life and being of a Church;
for then how could it be any Church at all? yet in other points, not of
manners only, but of Truth and Opinion, it does and may err, both particular
Congregations and the whole Church Universal did not the whole Church of the
Jews err. And even they that heard our Savior, Christ so long, when they
dreamed of the Kingdom of the Messiah, to be an earthly Acts 1. 15.
Kingdom, and that it should come in bravery and ostentation. And was it not
the Acts 10. 34. and 11. 2.
common error of all the Church, and of the Apostles themselves, after his
Ascension, that they thought the Gentiles to be unclean, and that the Gospel
pertayned not to them?

Fundamental errors I call these two especially:

First, When the Doctrine and Profession of the Gospel is corrupt in
substance; as the Papists do corrupt it three manner of ways;

First, Denying Justification by faith alone in the only Merits of Christ, and
seeking to be saved by their own Merits or Righteousness, for which cause
the Apostle casts off the Jews, Romans 10. 3. and 11. 20. and threatens
as much to the Galatians, Gal. 5. 2. If ye be circumcised (joining
Circumcision, or the works of the Law together with Christ in the matter of
Justification) Christ shall profit you nothing.

Secondly, Denying the sole sufficient Sacrifice of Christ, and setting up in
their blasphemous Mass, a daily real sacrifice of his body for the quick and
the dead; whereas Christ's Sacrifice must either be a perfect Sacrifice once
for all, never to be iterated nor repeated, or else it is no Sacrifice at all,
as the Apostle teaches at large in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Thirdly, Denying the true and only Head-ship of Christ, by placing Antichrist
in his room, which is a main and fundamental Heresy, not to hold fast the
head, Col. 2. 19.

Secondly, Idolatry, when the Worship of God is corrupted in the very
substance of it: In which sort, the old Church of the Jews corrupting
themselves, Exodus 32. 7.
became no more the People of God; and had their Exodus 33. 3, 7, 11.
Bill of Divorce for it, Exodus 32. 30 31, 32, 33, 34.
till at Moses intercession upon the public Repentance of the people, it
pleased God to be reconciled to them. And herein also the Papists do offend as
grievously and more grossly then ever the Jews did, in worshipping of Images,
of Saints deceased, and of their breaden god in that their Idolatrous Mass.

By all which it is evident, that the Church of Rome is a corrupt and unsound
Church, if a Church at all. For touching the Sacraments, and other holy things,
or rather the Prophanations of the same which are to be found among them (for
in truth, out of the Church there are not any Sacraments rightly administered)
they can no more make a true Church, then the bare writing and setting to of a
Seal, can make a Deed, without the parties delivery: for God never delivered
his Sacraments to any out of his Church, though they presume to take them, and
to set, as it were, his Scale to them. And where the Apostle says, 2. These. 2.
4. that Antichrist must sit in the Temple or Church of God, he means that
which once was the Church of God, though now it be not. Like to the speech of
our Savior Christ, Mat. 24. 15. When you see the abomination of desolation,
standing in the holy place, that is, the place which once was holy, whilst it
was a figure of Christ and of his Church: but so was it not, when this which
he fore-telleth should come to pass. But what are we to do in these cases?
Surely where the error is dangerous, and overthrows the foundation, we are
there to sever our selves, and to have no fellowship with them, as we are
taught in the case of erroneous doctrine, 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is puffed up; from such
separate your selves. He himself that taught this Lesson, made no bones to
practice it, Acts 19. 9. When certain men at Ephesus were hardened, and
disobeyed, speaking evil of the way of God, he departed from them, and
separated the Disciples. And the like he did at Rome, Acts 28. 28. Of the
other, that is to say, Idolatry, we have a Commandment, 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15.
16, 17. Be not unequally yoked with Infidels: for what fellowship has
Righteousness with unrighteousness, or what communion has light with
darkness? or what concord has Christ with BELIAL? or what part has the
Believer with the Infidel? or what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves, says the
Lord.

So did the Priests and Levites come to Judah and Jerusalem to serve God, when
Jeroboam had set up Idols in Israel, 2. Chron. 11. 14. Worthily therefore in
both these regards, and by good warrant from the Word, have we separated our
selves from the Church of Rome, as from a Strumpet and a Harlot, not in any
respect the true Spouse of Christ.

But for other blemishes or corruptions that only stayne and disfigure the
Church, but strike not at the heart and root, there to make separation, is a
grievous offense, and the sin of Schismatikes.

Fourthly, Being but the Church of them that are called with an outward
calling, there are among them oftentimes many Hypocrites, as the Apostle
teaches, 1. John 2. 1, 19: They went out from us, but they were not of us: for
if they had been of us, they would have abidden with us. But this is to make
it manifest, that all are not of us.

Upon all that has been said, it follows, that the Church which now we
speak of, is a Church visible. I call it not visible, as if the Church of GOD
were always to be seen and known in the The error of Popery, that would
have the Church of God, to be always visible in the World.
World: for as the Moon is sometimes eclipsed, sometimes at the full: so the
Church, sometimes lifted up above the Mountains, is other sometimes thrust
into the Wilderness, Reu. 12. 6.
that no true Professors seem to be remaining. So 2. Chro. 15. 3. Israel, by
which is meant not the ten Tribes only, but Judah and Benjamin, as the sequel
of the Chapter shows, is said to have been a long time without the true God
without Priest to teach, without the Law. And Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. tells of
a general defection and falling from the Truth, that no face of a visible
Church should be discerned: Antichrist should so universally set up his throne,
which in the height and fullness of Popery we see to have bin accomplished:
Although that God has, and always had some that are his, as appears by that
which the Lord Romans 11. 2, 3.
answered to Elias. But I call it a visible Church, because it may be seen and
known who are such Professors, though the Church of the Elect cannot be seen.
This outward Church universal, is further Several companies that assemble for
the exercises of the Word, are so many Churches and members of the whole.
to be considered in the beauty it receives by companies and assemblies,
drawn by the power of Christ's Spirit, to associate and join themselves
together in the profession of his Name: which is a singular ornament and a
marvelous gracing of the whole, thus to be distinguished into particular
meetings, as it were, the field of the Lord into several closures, or a garden
into several beds or alleyes. Whereby Gods glory is much the more conspicuous.

Such a Church or Congregation (for so in ordinary sense the Scripture uses
the word Church) neither stands of one or two, nor a few in a corner, but of
many, enough to perform all services of the Church, and those publicly
assembling. So the Apostle speaks of the 1. Cor. 11. 18.
Corinths, Coming together to the Church: and to the Hebrews, Heb. 10. 25.
Leave not your assembling together, as the manner is of some.

But not every assembly of Professors does forth with make a Church, but their
assembling in the name of Christ, for Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments,
or other spiritual matters, whereby the Church is distinguished from the
Commonwealth and civil meetings. And this badge or mark our Savior sets
upon it, Matthew. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name.
And Paul 1. Cor. 1. 5. 4. 5. I have decreed, when you and my Spirit are
gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan. So we read in the Acts,
that the first day of the Week the Disciples gathered together to break
bread, Act. 20. 7.

And not in vain do the Churches so assemble. God And in every of these has
always some that are his indeed.
has made unto them this large and ample promise, that he will be always
effectual to renew some of them by the power of his Spirit unto everlasting
life; for the ministry of the Word, with the use of the Sacraments, and the
exercise of true discipline, sounding in every Church, Math. 13. 3, ^, 5, 6, 7.
never returns empty; but howsoever much of it fall by the way, or upon
stony places, or among the thorns; yet some always lights upon good
ground, and brings forth fruit in that measure that God has appointed. A
promise anciently made to the Church, as appears, Esaias 9. 251. This shall be
my Covenant with them, says JEHOVAH, My Spirit that is in thee, and the words
I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says JEHOVAH,
from this time forth for evermore. Which promise our Savior has also renewed,
Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Go therefore and gather Disciples of all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
teaching them to keep all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And behold,
I am with you always unto the end of the world.

Hereof it is, that so many things are generally attributed to the Churches
professing Christ, because the same is always true in some that are among
them. As where they are called Ephesians. 1. 1.
Faithful ones, Ephesians. 1. 1.
Holy, 1. Cor. 1. 2.
Sanctified; and the Jews in general, Exodus 19. 5, 6.
A holy Nation, A peculiar people, etc. So Deuteronomy. 32. 15. They are called
leshurum, that is, The righteous people: for that all being called to that
honor, many of them were such indeed, although of a number it were also true,
that they Verse. 5.
were none of his sons.

Another noble Prerogative belongs to the outward Their children also are of
the Church.
Church, that they purchase not only this dignity for themselves, by the
profession of their faith, but their children also are borne free Burgesses of
this City; as the promise is made to Genesis 17. 7.
ABRAHAM, I will be the God of thee, and of thy seed: for as the Apostle says,
The gifts which Christ bestows upon the outward Church, are for the Churches
common good, or for a man's own private: for the common good, are first things
committed to the Churches keeping: then Ministeries and Graces. The things
committed, are his Word, (whereof we have spoken) to be preached: Sacraments to
be administered, and other holy things:
Romans 11. 16. If the Root be holy, so are the branches also. Elsewhere does
the same Apostle, Gal. 2. 15. oppose Jews by nature to sinners of the
Gentiles, but to show that from the very birth, the children of believing
parents, are within the outward Covenant of the forgiveness of sins. And
this is not to be restrained to such children only, as are borne of both
parents believers, but if any one of them be of the Church, so is the child
likewise: for the unbelieving man is sanctified by the believing wife, and the
unbelieving woman is sanctified by the believing husband, so far, as to make
our children that otherwise were unclean, to be holy, 1. Cor. 7. 14.

Christ not only gathers a Church unto himself, a precious possession out
of the world, and the delight and joy of the earth, but he garnisheth it also,
and sets it forth with many goodly ornaments and rich endowments, which the
Apostle calls Gifts, Ephe. 4. 7, 8. Some for the public, some for a man's
own private.

Of these, the first are certain rich Jewels, of inestimable price and value;
his Word, Sacraments, and other holy things, which Christ has laid up in the
Arc of his Church, and committed to their care, as a treasure which he will
trust none but his Church withal. As under the Law, in the Holy of holies
(wherein was the Arc) were kept the Heb. 9. 3.
Tables of the Testament, (the Word) the golden pot that had Manna (a
Sacrament) and Aarons Rod that had budded (for (...) ^7. 10 1. Cor. 4. 21.
a sign against the rebellious.) His word to be preached: Sacraments and other
holy things to be administered. Here Matthew. 16. 19
therefore are the lively notes and marks of a Church. The Scripture styles
them by the name of the Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
keys of the kingdom of Heaven.

The prime and principal is his Word (whereof we have spoken already) the
Treasure of all heavenly Knowledge. Romans 3. 2.
This, says the Apostle to the Romans, is the chief (of those excellencies
which the Jews had above other men) that unto them were committed the Oracles
of God: Or (as the Hosh. 8. 12. (...)
Prophet speaks) the excellencies of the Law. Wherefore Gods Word and
Precepts, David does many times call Whereunto it seems Paul does allude, 1.
Tim. 6. 20. and 2. Tim. 1. 14 in (...).
(...) things deposited. In regard whereof, the Church is said to be 1. Tim.
3. 15.
the Pillar and S^ate of Truth: for the Truth of God is no where to be found
but there. It is Error, Lies, Superstition, and Deceit, whatsoever comes not
from hence. The Church only is the golden Candle-sticke figured in the Law,
which holds up the eternal Truth of God, to give light unto all the World,
and there light is to be had, when darkness covers the whole face of the
earth beside. Preaching, for the form and manner of it, is an Preaching is an
instruction of the Church, by lively voice
instruction by word of mouth, opening and interpreting the Scriptures,
rendering the sense thereof, drawing the doctrines that are to be gathered from
them, making use and profit of it, for the edification and building up of our
faith; which the Apostle, by a Metaphor from the Sacrifices of the Law, calls
2. Tim. 2. 15.
Cutting aright the Word of Truth. It stands not in the bare and naked
reading of them. And that you may see, Nehe. 8. 8, 9. where the people abiding
in their standing, the Levites taught them the Law, first, reading it
distinctly, then, rendering the sense by the Scripture it self. So Luke 4. 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. Our Savior coming into the Synagogue, there was given him the
Book of the Prophet Esaias; which when he had unfolded, and read a portion of
that Scripture, he folded the Book, and gave it again to him that waited, and
sat down; and the eyes of all in the Synagogue, being fastened on him, he
began to say unto them, To day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.

And of this instruction by word of mouth, it pleased God to make choice,
rather than of reading, for that it pierces deeper into the heart and mind of
man, and more does affect him, and that through the blessing of God, who uses
the zeal of the speaker, for the quickening, and putting of life into that
which is spoken. The argument, matter, or subject must be of and concerning in
the Word of Christ;
Christ, by teaching our own corruption and impotencie to fulfill the Law; and
therefore the necessity we have to fly to him, who is made unto us of God,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, that he that glories, might
glory in the Lord. Wherein it differs from the ministry of Moses or of the
Law, as the Apostle does oppose them, 2. Cor. 3. 6. Who also has enabled us to
be Ministers of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. So
Romans 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. he shows, He was called to be an Apostle, and set apart
to preach the Gospel of God, concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and
Romans 10. 8. This is that Word of faith that we preach.

In like sort it is said of Philip, when he came down unto Samaria, that he
preached unto them, Christ, Act. 8. 5. PETER also, Act. 10. 43, 44. declares
the sum of all that, which he was charged of God to preach unto the people, to
be this, that by his Name should every one that believes in him, receive
forgiveness of sins.

And that by Doctrine or Exhortation. Doctrine, in laying forth the Truth, and
confuting of contrary Errors.

Exhortation, to apply it also to all good uses of comforting, denouncing,
stirring up, reproving.


The parts of this instruction of the Church, are Doctrine and exhortation:
both comprehended, Romans 12. 7, 8. Doctrine, by laying forth the Truth, and
confuting of contrary errors; that so the purity of faith may always
remain sound and vncorrupt in the Church. Exhortation, which sharpeneth the
Word, and sets an edge upon it, by applying the same, and making use of it,
as the necessity of the people requires. And these two aptly answer to the
two parts of the soul of man; his mind or understanding, and his will and
affections. Both which by this means God provides for.

Sacraments or outward Signs and Seals of the Covenant. A Sacrament is
It has the name Sacrament, from the Military Oath that Soldiers took to
do faithful service to their Captain: for in like manner we in the Sacrament
swear our Allegiance to Christ, and to fight under his Banner, against the
World, the Flesh and the Devil. It is also called a Mystery, or hidden thing,
because beside the outward Sign, there is somewhat inward and Spiritual.

In the definition of a Sacrament, I observe,

First, They are outward and earthly things to be seen and felt, serving for
the help of our weakness, which if we were all Spirit, we needed not.

Secondly, They are Signs, as it is said, Genesis 17. 11. a Sign
and Romans 4. 11. The Sign of Circumcision. PETER calls them Types and
Figures, 1. Pet. 3. 21. Therefore they serve as badges, to distinguish true
Professors from Infidels and Heathen men; and as Monuments to bring heavenly
things to our remembrance. So says our Savior Christ, Luke 19. 22. Do this
in remembrance of me. And the Apostle to the 1. Cor. 11. 26.
Corinths, As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye publish the
Lords death till he come.

Thirdly, The end why God does give them, is, to be and Seal of the Covenant,
not Signs only, but Seals and Pledges for the persuasion of our hearts, and
to confirm and assure unto us those spiritual and heavenly things, which
already we have and do enjoy, that is to say, Christ himself, and
consequently, Justification and Sanctification, and withal Salvation through
him, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 4. 11. After, he received the Sign of
Circumcision, as a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had when
he was uncircumcised, Acts 10. 47. Can any man keep water away, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? From
whence we gather a noble use of the holy Sacraments proper to the faithful:
for where the visible and outward Sign is common unto all, yet being to other
but bare and naked Signs, dead and fruitless Ceremonies, that profit nothing,
because they are not mixed with Faith in those that do receive them: in the
faithful they seal up and ratify the very substance and effect of the Grace
signified, the Holy Ghost performing that in truth within us, which the outward
Ceremony, joined with the preaching of the Word, represents to our eyes.

But albeit these things are, all of them, in every Sacrament either for our
entrance or continuance in the Covenant.
set before us, yet it is in several and distinct manner: for of the
Sacraments, some serve to seal up and assure our first ingraffing into Christ,
and participation of Gods Covenant: some, our continuance and growing up in
him. In which two, all Graces are comprehended.

Fourthly, They are to be administered, that is to say, to The Administration,
be given and delivered to the Church, and by the Church to be taken and
received, Mat. 26. 26, 27. As they eat, JESUS took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat,
etc. And taking the Cup, and having given thanks, he gave unto them, saying,
Drink ye all of it, etc. Whereupon a Sacrament is not only a Sign and a
Seal, but a work and an action.

This Administration of the Sacraments stands not is to deliver them with
Prayer unto God, to make the same effectual, to the end for the which they
were ordained: which the Scripture calls Blessing or Consecration.
only in reaching forth, and ministering the outward Element, but as is fitting
for so holy an action, to consecrate the same by the Word of God and Prayer;
teaching and declaring the end, the use, the nature, the institution of the
Sacrament, with Prayer made before, that God would bless them for the help of
our weakness, to which end they were ordained.

This is it which is meant by blessing or The Papists which hold Consecration
to be the making of the Sign of the Cross, and the mumbling of a few words,
whereby as by a Magical Incantation, the Bread and Wine should be
transubstantiate.
consecration, as may appear both by Mat. 26. 26, 27. Mar. 14. 22, 23.
Matthew and Mark, who after they had said, JESUS took the bread and blessed,
immediately add, and he took the Cup and gave thanks, making one of these
words to expound the other. The like is to be seen in Luke 22. 17.
Luke, who leaving the word of blessing, contenteth himself with that of
giving of thanks. Paul 1. Cor. 11. 24.
also reciting the Institution, treads in Lukes steps. And so this word of
Blessing is taken in diverse Mat. 14. 19. Mar. 6. 41. Luke 9. 16. 1. Cor. 11.
26, 27, 28.
other places: we must not therefore imagine, that this Consecration alters
the nature or substance of the Sacrament, it only changes the quality, in
separating them from a common to a holy. Paul, to make that out of question,
does in one 1. Cor. 11.
Chapter, after the Consecration, thrice call it Bread.

The Administration of the Sacraments being a Ministerial action, so
religiously to be performed, all the Congregation have their part in it. So it
was under the Law, Exodus 12. 6. In the fourteenth day of this month, let all
the Assembly of the Congregation of the Children of Israel kill the Passover
in the twilight, Luke 1. 59. The eighth day the Neighbors and the Kinsmen of
ELIZABETH came together to circumcise the child. Our Savior, in the Sacraments
of the New Testament, does observe the same, Mat. 26. 27. Drink ye all of
this. And the Apostle does command, 1. Cor. 11. 33. When you come together, to
eat the Supper of the Lord, wait one for another. Wherefore it is fit, that
the place of their celebrating be the Church, or place where the Congregation
usually meets, and the time the Lords Day. So the Apostle (for the place)
does sharply rebuke the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. 22. opposing the Church, as
the only place for Gods Sacraments to be administered, unto private houses:
Have you not houses to eat and drink in? or despise you the Church of God?
And for the time, we find the practice of the Church recorded, Acts 10. 7.
that the first day of the week the Disciples assembled together to break
bread.

From all that went before, these things may be gathered:

First, The resemblance and similitude and (in all faithful Receivers) the
inseparable conjunction of these Signs and Seals, with the Graces signified
and bestowed, whether you compare the things, or the Actions.

The things, that is to say, the Element, or sensible and outward matter, with
Christ and his benefits.

The Actions, to wit, the delivering of the Elements by the Minister, and our
taking of it, which is the outward Action, with Gods bestowing his Son upon
us, and all good things, and our (by faith) receiving of him: by reason of both
which, the Apostle says, that in Baptism Gal. 3. 27.
we put on Christ, and that by 1. Cor. 12. 13.
one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, and made to drink into one
Spirit.

And hence comes an ordinary and usual Phrase in the Scripture, giving to
the Sign the name it self of the Grace signified, as when Genesis 17. 10.
Circumcision is called the Covenant; the Exodus 12. 11.
Lamb, the Passover, etc.

To the end they might not be basely esteemed as ordinary and common things,
but holily and religiously thought of.

Secondly, The outward The Papists teach, that the very work wrought, is
sufficient to do away sin.
Elements being only Signs and Seals, they signify, not confer Grace,
having no inherent force and power to sanctify, as some kind of waters have
to cure Diseases. And the Ministers which deliver them, give that which is
outward only. The whole power of sanctifying, comes from the Holy Ghost,
Mat. 3. 11. I baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he that comes after
me, is stronger then I; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire.

Thirdly, They are The Papists imagine a necessity of participating the
Sacrament of Baptism, as if children dying without Baptism, could not be
saved; whereas such are as well within the Covenant of Grace as those that are
baptized.
not of such absolute necessity, as if there could be no Salvation without
them, seeing they are but Signs and Seals of the things already had: and
therefore not the want, but the neglect and contempt of the Sacraments, makes
men offenders: which the Lord teaches us by his Prophet Ezech. 11. 16
Ezekiel, when he promises to be a Sanctuary to his people, that being led
captive, could not come to the visible Sanctuary to worship there before him:
Though I have, says he, driven them into other Nations, and dispersed them
into diverse Countries, yet I (the Truth of the Sanctuary, of whom that is but
a Sacrament and Figure) am a Sanctuary unto them.

Fourthly, Great preparation is required to the receiving of them, both to
understand what we do, through a true knowledge of our own wretchedness, and
of the Covenant of Grace in Christ, to feel the fruit and the comfort which
they bring, and to desire and affect to be made partakers of it. Great
reverence and attention in the receiving of them, by comparing the Signs and
Spiritual things together. Great thankfulness after to God, for his mercies
offered unto us in them. All which being necessary in the hearing of the Word,
is by so much the more necessary here, as God by them does offer a greater
grace, and comes more near unto us: wherefore the 1. Co. 11. 28, 29
Apostle says, Let a man examine himself, and so eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup: for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks condemnation to himself, not making a difference of the Lords Body.

Fifthly, Those that come unto them; not only to the Lords Table, but (if they
be of riper years) to the Sacrament of Baptism, are publicly to testify
their Faith and Repentance. So we read, Mat. 3. 5. Then came forth to him
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Country round about Jorden, and were
baptized of him in Jorden, after they had confessed their sins. And Acts 8.
36, 37. As they went by the way, they came to a certain water, and the EVNVCH
said, Lo, here is water: what hinders that I should not be baptized? And
PHILIP said, If thou beleeuest with thy whole heart, thou may. Then he
answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is that Son of God. Then he baptized
him. And this is the general rule given concerning the Passover, which was as
the Supper of the Lord with us. If Exodus 12. 48.
any Stranger soiourne among you, that would celebrate the Passover of
JEHOVAH, let every Male of them be circumcised: whereby he may testify his
consent in the same Faith and Religion with you, and so let him come to
celebrate it. None uncircumcised shall eat thereof.

Sacraments differ from Sacrifices (besides other differences) maynly in
nature, for

First, Sacrifices were given, offered, and presented unto God: Sacraments are
taken and received of God, by the hand of the Ministers of his Word.

Secondly, Sacrifices were Signs and Figures of good things Heb. 10. 1.
to come.

Thirdly, Sacraments are Signs and Remembrances of good things already come.

The next head is a holy Ministry, which Christ has It follows to speak
of Ministeries and Graces. Ministeries are public Functions in the Church.
given to his Church, Ephesians. 4. 12.
for the perfecting of his Saints, for the building up of his body: for this
power is derived from Christ, as from the Head and Lord of the Prophets, as we
read, Mat. 23. 34. Therefore behold, I (Christ Luke 11. 49.
the Wisdom of God, as Luke has it) send unto you Prophets and Wisemen.
Ephesians. 4. 11. He therefore himself (Christ) gave some to be Apostles, etc.
Mat. 16. 19. I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: And
from him have all the Ministers, every one since the World was, fetched their
authority. By his Spirit it was, that they spoke, as we heard before out of
1. Pet. 1. 11.
Peter. Wherefore, Revel. 22. 6. he is called, The Lord God of the holy
Prophets: as may appear if you compare that place with Revel. 1. 1^.

The difference between his Ministry and theirs, stands in these two
things:

First, That he their Head and Lord executed all the parts of his Ministry
in another sort, and with greater authority and power then any Minister
before, or after him, Mat. 7. 28, 29. and Mark 1. 22. They were astonished at
his teaching: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the
Scribes.

Secondly, The Prophets and the Ministers whom he sent, spoke from him, and in
his Name. But he speaks from himself, and in his own name, Mat. 5. 2^, 28
32, 34, 39.
I say unto you.

Of these Ministeries many things might be spoken, full Specially for preaching
of great variety, and of deep and difficult questions, concerning their
Calling, Election, Ordination, The keys of the Church committed into their
hands, Their power of binding and loosing, and the whole Order and Government
of Gods House: But I will leave them all and hold me only to that of Preaching
and Administering of the Sacraments.

Preaching therefore is the work of the Ministry, and of those whom God has
lawfully called to execute that public Function in the Church; for Romans 10. 15.
How can they preach, except they be sent? So that the handling of the Word by
any other that has no calling for it, how well soever he handle the same, and
how truly soever he expound it, is not that preaching which Christ has
ordained to bring men unto salvation by.

Not that it is unlawful for private men to deal with the holy Scriptures,
and to open and expound the same, so every one keep him within the bounds and
lists of his Calling, and look what is fit for him, according to the gifts and
graces he has received: but that is of the Master in his Family, and within
his private walls. This which we speak of, is public in the Congregation and
in the Church of God.

The duty of Preaching carries with it, and has, as (which includes the
duty of offering the Churches Prayers)
it were, enclosed in the nature and bowels thereof, another duty of offering
the Churches Prayers, which can never be separated from the duty of Teaching.
Samuel joins them together, 1. Sam. 12. 23. Moreover touching me, God forbid
that I should sin against JEHOVAH, in ceasing to pray for you: yea, I will
instruct you in the good and right way. And the whole College of the Apostles,
Acts 6. 4. But we will always continue in Prayer, and in ministration of the
Word.

Public Prayer is, for the Minister to offer unto God the Prayers and
Supplications of the Church; that as in Preaching he is the Mouth of God unto
his people, so in Prayer he is the peoples mouth unto God: for the Church or
Congregation is the place of public Prayer; and if one list to do it by
himself, he has his house to pray in, but in the Church all are to attend
the Minister, which is in CHRIST'S place unto them.

And that which he, one man does offer, well appears to be the Prayers of the
Church, by the peoples giving of consent to that he prays, and saying Amen
unto it, which appears to have been the laudable use of the old Church,
Nehem. 8. 7. Where EZRA blessing JEHOVAH the great God, all the people answered
Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands, and stooped, and bowed down
themselves to JEHOVAH, with their faces to the ground-ward.

The Primitive Church in the Apostles time did retain the same, as appears,
1. Cor. 14. 14, 15, 16, 17. in that the Apostle by this Argument condemns
those that in the Congregation pray in a strange Language, there being none for
to interpret it: For then, says he, how shall he that supplyeth the place of
an unlearned man, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, forasmuch as he knows
not what thou say?

To the Ministers also belongs the Administration of and Administration of
the Sacraments.
the Sacraments: for in that they have power to deal with the Word it self;
the dispensation of those holy things, which are but Seals and Pledges of the
Word, and of the promises made in Christ, cannot be denied them; the Sacraments
being, as it were, a visible Word; in which respect they are said to have a
Exodus 4. 8.
voice: wherefore our Savior, Mat. 28. 19. coupleth them together, Teach all
Nations, baptizing them, etc.

The Ministers of the Word being some of them extraordinarily Among the
Ministers of the Word, some have bin (extraordinarily) inspired of Christ.
raised up of God, other coming in by the ordinary calling of the Church: in
those of the former sort we are specially to consider the Ministry of
certain select persons, inspired of GOD to deliver the truth of Christian
Doctrine, both by word and writing, which were the Prophets of the Old
Testament, and the Apostles of the New. Whereupon we are said to be Ephesians. 2.
21.
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the head corner stone. And Peter 2. Pet. 3. 1.
stirs up those to whom he writes, to remember the words spoken before of
the holy Prophets, and the Commandment of us, says he, the Apostles of the
Lord and Savior. So it is said, Revel. 21. 14. The wall of the City, new
Jerusalem, had twelve foundations, and upon them the twelve names of the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb. And in that sense Peter and the rest may well be taken
to be that Mat. 16. 18.
Rock, upon which Christ does build his Church.

In this point of the Prophetical and Apostolical Ministry, I observe four
things:

First, That they spoke, and wrote by Divine Inspiration: for Prophecy in
times past, says the Apostle, 2. Pet. 1. 21. came not by the will of man, but
as they were moved by the holy Spirit, did the holy men of God speak. And
Paul 2. Tim. 3. 16.
to TIMOTHY, All Scripture is inspired of God, and is profitable to teach, etc.

Secondly, The manner how they delivered this Doctrine, to deliver both by
lively voice.
which was in two sorts; by lively voice, or writing.

The lively voice was ever in the Church, from the beginning, to the death of
the Apostles: All which time there was almost no Age, wherein at the least some
holy man of God was not extraordinarily stirred up, to deliver the Doctrine of
Truth, from the immediate mouth of God, although there were many times
intermissions, as the History does show. And the Church complayneth in the
Psalm. 74.
Psalms: yea, this Doctrine was oftentimes corrupted and adulterated, but by
new Revelations restored again and kept in the first Integrity.

In limiting the lively voice to the time of the Apostles, it must not so be
taken, as if the lively voice of the Ministers of GOD did not continue still in
the Church: but that is of Pastors, and Teachers, who are, and always were to
fetch their light from the direction of the Prophets and Apostles; it is not of
extraordinary men inspired of the Holy Ghost, as the Prophets and Apostles
were.

The reason why a lively voice, continuing so long as from the beginning of the
World, until the Apostles time, should cease with their death, does appear,
Heb. 1. 1, 2. where it is said, that God in many pieces, and after diverse
fashions, of old spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets: but in these latter
days he has spoken unto us by the Son. For so long as the Word was
delivered but by parcels, and that there remained something still behind, more
clearly and manifestly to be revealed (which was till he spoke fully and
lastly by his Son) so long a lively voice was necessary, wherewith every new
Revelation does begin: but longer there can be no use of it; for that should
plainly argue, that the Revelation of the Mystery of Christ by Christ
himself, were not yet perfect.

By writing they did deliver it in the Canonical and writing
Books of the Old and New Testament, which by way of excellency we call the
Scriptures, or the written Word; begun by Moses, and continued during all the
time beforementioned, even to the death of the Apostles.

Those Books are in the Old Testament, Genesis, etc. In the New, Matthew, etc.

As for the Books commonly called Apocrypha, we acknowledge therein many
profitable things contained, and good for moral instruction; especially in
Ecclesiasticus, and in the Book of Wisdom, and some things also necessary
for the understanding of the Story of the Church: yet because they carry not
the print of Gods Spirit, which the spiritual man discerns, they are not
equalled or matched with the Scriptures. And because in many of them, flat
untruths and contrarieties may be found, and in one and the same Story,
contradictions with the true Story penned by the Holy Ghost, and in most of
them diverse things either frivolous and absurd, or manifestly false and forged,
or Doctrines taught and commended, which the Word of God condemns; we cannot
without impiety lift them up into the Chair of Truth.

Beside, They were neither written in the Hebrew, nor received of the Jews,
Romans 3. 2. and 9. 4.
to whom were committed all the Oracles of God, under the Old Testament.

But that those which we call Canonical Scriptures, were inspired of God, is
to be proved by arguments and reasons taken from the Books themselves.

As first, the Majesty of the Word in so great simplicity, and so familiar
and plain a style, so piercing and effecting the conscience, which all the
eloquence of the world (and lay it all together) is not possibly able to do,
although there lack not also eloquence in the Word, but heavenly and divine.

Secondly, The harmony and consent of so many persons, writing at several
times, in several places, and ages, of several arguments and matters, all
iumping and concurring in one, as led by one and the same Spirit.

Thirdly, The holiness of the matter it self, not sauouring of the world, but
leading us by the hand, out and from, above the world.

Fourthly, The prediction of future things, many hundred, yea, thousand years
before they came to pass, which all fell out accordingly.

Fifthly, The secret and hidden things there discovered, which no wisdom of the
earth, no wit of man was able to reach unto. Some few sparks whereof (stolen
from hence) have cast such a light in the writings of Heathen men, as has made
them to seem divine.

Sixthly, The faithful and sincere dealing of the Penmen whom God has used,
that have not spared to lay open their own nakedness and shame, the
nakedness and shame of their Wives, Children, Families, and Tribes of whom
they came.

Seventhly, The end and drift of all, which is, to give glory unto God, and to
beat down and abase the pride of man.

A second sort of argument, is from the authority of the Church, which may
move and well persuade us of them.

The third and last (without which, all the rest, whether humane testimonies,
or other arguments, are nothing) is the testimony of the Spirit it self,
bearing witness of them, Esaias 59. 21. My Spirit that is in thee, and my Word
that I have put in thy mouth. Therefore, Esaias 54. 13. the faithful are said to
be such as are taught of God. And PAVL says, The spiritual man discerns all
things, 1. Cor. 2. 15.

Therefore it is not the judgment of the Church, which makes us believe the
Scriptures: but the Church is the same to the testimony of the Spirit, that the
Ioh. 4. 39, 40, 41, 42.
woman of Samaria was to the preaching of our Savior Christ; because of whose
words, many of the Samaritans were brought to believe in Christ: but when he
himself came and preached amongst them, they tell her plainly, Now we
believe no more, because of thy speech: for we our selves have heard, and
know, that this is of a truth, That Savior of the World, That Christ. So the
judgment of the Church may well be a motive at the first, and also bring
great stay and confirmation to a mind that is once enlightened, but the maine
strength of all depends upon the testimony of the Spirit.

Thirdly, In the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, (so as they could not
err)
I observe the quality of their doctrine, thus delivered by divine inspiration.

First, It was not subject to error; for howsoever they were men subject to
sinful infirmity, and in part only regenerate, whose service it pleased God
to use for this purpose; yet in the delivery of the Doctrine, they were so
extraordinarily governed and inspired with his Spirit, that they Ioh. 16. 13.
could by no means err.

Secondly, It is holy, both the whole and every part, whereupon grow these
speeches, 2. Pet. 1. 21.
The holy men of God, 2. Pet. 3. 2.
The holy Prophets, Ephesians. 3. 5. Reu. 18. 20.
The holy Apostles, 2. Pet. 2. 22.
The holy Commandments, Romans 1. 2.
The holy Scriptures: whereas all other books and speeches of men are
profane, further then they fetch some holiness from hence.

Thirdly, That both their Sermons, and these Books written by the Spirit of
Christ, are of sovereign authority in the Church of God, and have the sole
pre-eminence for the deciding of all controversies, the judging and discerning
of all sayings, and writings of men: for unto them the holy Ghost does always
call us, Esaias 8. 20.
To the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this Word,
it is, because there is no light in them. And this is it which Christ used as
the weapon to foil Satan, Math. 4. So the Apostle Paul, 1. Corin. 15. 3, 4.
makes the Scriptures to give credit to his doctrine, I have delivered unto
you, that which I have received; that Christ dyed for our sins, according to
the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he was raised the third day,
according to the Scriptures, etc. The men likewise of Berhea, Acts 17. 11. are
commended for examining by the Scriptures the things which Paul taught.
Therefore our Savior John 5. 39.
Christ refers us to the Scriptures, as to the Touchstone of all truth,
Search the Scriptures; and in Matthew. 22. 25
another place, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures: For the authority of
these Books is greater than the authority of the Church, as the authority of
God, who cannot err, must needs be greater than the authority The Popish
Doctrine, which hangs the authority of the Scriptures, upon the Church.
of men, that may and do err. Again, the Church has her life and being from
the Word, inasmuch as faith, which makes a Church, cannot be without the
Word: So has not the Word from the Church.

Thirdly, It is above the authority of the Angels of heaven, Gal. 1. 8, 9.
who, if they preach any other doctrine, are to be held accursed: How much
more, above the authority of the Church?

Fourthly, Our Savior Christ attributes this excellency to his Word, which
men or Angels cannot challenge, that in the latter Day, it is That which shall
judge him that does not receive it, John 12. 48.

But why then is the Church called the Pillar of Truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15? Surely,
because the Truth of God dwells no where else; and there is always Truth
sufficient to salvation; Not that the Church either bears and brings forth
the Truth of God, or is the chief and fundamental ground to hold it up: for
she her self has another foundation to stick unto, from whence she fetches
all her Truth, which is the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20.
1. Cor. 3. 11. Esaias 28. 16.
Christ himself being the head Cornerstone; and is not the Mother, but the
Nurse of the Truth of God, that cherishes and preserves the same, and gives
testimony thereof unto the World.

To the true meaning of the Scriptures, we are to reach by the Scriptures
themselves, the same Spirit that indicted them, suggesting and opening the sense
unto us. So did the Levites (that taught the people, Nehem. 8. 9.) render the
sense, and give the understanding of it by the Scripture it self. Our Savior
also, Matthew. 4. being set upon by Satan, that clipped and wrested the
Scriptures, to serve his own turn, confuted his false glosses and expositions
of it, by the conference of other Scriptures.

The means we must use for this purpose, are these: First, we must come with a
mind to profit, and to be made the better by them, not to read them for
knowledge only, or vain ostentation, much less to cavil at them.

Secondly, Prayer is to be used to God, to open and enlighten our hearts, that
we may see the wonderful things that lie hid therein.

Thirdly, We are to frequent the House of God, and to give diligent attendance
upon the Ministry and Preaching of the Word, whereby the Doctrines delivered
in the Scriptures, are beaten out and made familiar, and plain unto us: the
same being also the ordinary means, by which the holy Ghost does use to work
in our hearts all true and spiritual wisdom.

Fourthly, the true sense and nature of the words, every one apart, and the
construction of them all together, must be waighed.

Fifthly, We must always take the proper and natural sense, if the matter it
self will bear it.

Sixthly, The sum of the matter, the scope and drift of the place, the
Arguments and their coherence, the method, and the order of the Text must be
respected.

Seventhly, We must confer it with other places of the Scriptures, the dark
and obscure ones, with those that are more lightsome.

Eighthly, We must always hold the analogy or proportion of faith, never
framing any exposition to our selves, that alters or declineth from that.

The fourth and last quality is, that in every age the the whole Truth of
Christ
whole Truth of God was delivered by a lively voice, as touching the substance
of the Doctrine, although in greater cleerenesse, upon the coming of Christ,
then ever it was before, and lastly and perfectly (wherein we are now to rest,
both for their substance and manner of revelation) it is fully and absolutely
comprehended in the Scriptures: So as we shall not need to fly either to
Visions, and Revelations, Anabaptists and Libertines, that bring in Visions and
Revelations, as if the Word of God were imperfect.
or to men's Traditions and Inventions, Papists, that supply it by men's
Traditions, and Inventions, Unwritten Verities, Sentences of Fathers, Canons of
Councels, etc.
to Unwritten Verities, Sentences of Fathers, Canons of Councels, etc. for to
help us: but all is to be had in the written Word: for when our Savior says,
John 5. 39.
Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, he manifestly teaches, that all Truth
is to be learnt from thence. And the 2. Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17.
Apostle commends the Scriptures as being able to make us wise unto
salvation: for the whole Scripture, says he, is inspired of God, and is
profitable unto Doctrine, unto Reproof, unto Correction, unto Instruction
which is in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, perfectly
fitted to every good work. Which four things (comprehending all that can be
necessary) seeing the Word of God is able thoroughly to furnish a Minister
withal, who is to disclose the Acts 20. 27.
whole counsel of God unto the people, it must needs be able to inform a
Common Christian unto salvation. John John 20. 31.
also gives this testimony of the Scriptures, that they are written, to the
end that believing, we might have everlasting life. And the Book of the
Revelation he shuts up with this most earnest protestation, If any man add
to the words of the Prophecy of this Book, God will add unto him the seven
plagues written in this Book: and if any man take away from the words of the
Book of this Prophecy, God will take away his part of the Tree of Life, etc.
Reu. 22. 18, 19. Which if it be true in that one Book alone, how much more
shall it hold in all the Books of the Scripture set together?

Fourthly, In the Ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, and had power to
work Miracles, for the confirming of their doctrine.
I observe, that they had the power of working Wonders for the confirmation and
sealing up of their Doctrine, being innobled of God with a rare and Heroical
Spirit, for the working of mighty and powerful things: As first, touching the
Prophets, what great and wonderful matters God wrought by their hands, the
Stories euery-where do testify; when Elias, as it were a petty God, could
fetch 2. Kings 1.
fire from Heaven, by his Prayer, 1. Kings 17. 1 James 5. 17, 18.
shut up Heaven, that no rain should fall, but at his word, (as the Minister
of the Lord before whom he stood) and by his Prayers open them again; when
those that escaped from the hand of Iehu, 1. King. 19. 17
Elisha could cause to dye; when Exodus 4.
Moses with his staff was able to turn the waters into blood, etc.

The Apostles also have their Commission in this behalf recorded, Mark 16.
15. Go into all the World, and preach the Gospel, etc. and these Signs shall
follow them that do believe: In my Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall
speak with new tongues, they shall destroy Serpents: and if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; upon the weak they shall lay their
hands, and they shall be well.

And this is it which the Apostle says to the Hebrews, Heb. 2. 4.
that God himself gave testimony to the preaching of the Apostles both by
Signs and Wonders, and many powers, or powerful things, and distributions of
the Holy Ghost. Wherefore Miracles (wherewith it pleased God to grace the
extraordinary Ministeries Heresies and Errors.

The Papists, which make Miracles a note of their Church, are 2. ways faulty:

First, The Miracles they so brag and boast of, are false and feigned.

Secondly, They use their Miracles (such as they be) to a wrong end, for
advancing of erroneous and lying doctrines, and to shake the truth of the
Gospel, for confirmation whereof all Miracles ought to serve. In which case
their pretended Miracles (though they should be admitted true) are of no worth,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. for the Truth of God shines of it self so bright,
that no Miracles to the contrary are of force to obscure it. But added for
confirmation, as they were by Christ and his Apostles and by the holy Prophets,
they make the same more glorious.


of the Prophets and Apostles, are All other Ministeries are to fetch their
light from the Doctrine of those that were so inspired.
long since ceased, neither could they nowadayes serve to any use, the truth
being long ago abundantly confirmed by Christ and his Apostles.

Lastly, all other Ministeries in the Church are and always were to fetch
Graces are Gifts for the discharge of those public Functions.
their light from the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles that were so
inspired.

To the Ministry CHRIST has added Gifts: Gifts 1. Cor. 12. 7.
for profit, as the Apostle speaks, that is, for the Churches common good,
which is another of those rich endowments, and necessarily coupled with the
former: for the Largess of Christ unto his Church had not been so bountiful
in the several sorts of Ministeries, unless he had withal bestowed upon them
graces, and ability to discharge the same for the glory of God, and
edification of his people; by giving them knowledge to teach the Doctrine of
Christ out of the Scripture, by laying forth the Truth soundly, and confuting
of contrary errors: Wisdom, to apply it also to all good uses of comforting,
casting down, stirring up, reproouing; which in one word we term exhorting,
and other the like graces: for these also we have not from our selves, but all
2. Cor. 3. 5.
our sufficiency to be Ministers of Christ unto other, is from God.

The Apostle calls these kind of Gifts, by the name of (...).
Graces, that make men apt and fit for the work of the Ministry, 1. Cor. 12.
4. 5, 6. Now there be differences of Graces, but the same Spirit: and there
be differences of Ministeries, but the same Lord. And there be differences of
operations, (or faculties to work great and wonderful things) but the same
God there is, that works all these things in all. And so I distinguish those
words in the question of the High Priests unto the Apostles, Acts 4. 7.
By what power, or by what name have you done this? As if they should have
said, By what Gifts or Calling? notes the Gift and Grace: the other the
Function or Calling it self.

Of gifts that are for a man's own private, is one knowledge Gifts for a man's
own private, are knowledge of the Word of Christ,
and understanding of the Word of Christ. An excellent and a goodly grace: for
howsoever knowledge of it self, without further The Popish assertion, that
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion: which the Apostle makes the Mother of
Pride, and of Rebellion against God, Romans 10. 3.
grace, be not of power to reform the heart, yet it is so necessary, that the
holy Ghost pronounces, Pro. 29. 2.
Without knowledge the heart cannot be good. And this also is the proper work
of Christ: for, John 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of his Father, he has declared him.

But knowledge, as I said, a man may have, and yet be and a taste of the
sweetness of it, which being the highest step that it is possible for any
Reprobate to ascend.
never a whit the nearer to his Salvation, nor have made one pace unto the
heavenly Kingdom, as touching any reformation of the heart. That which
follows, brings a change and alteration with it, which the Heb. 6. 4.
Apostle calls A tasting of the good Word of God, etc. meaning the sweet
promises of the Gospel, and is the furthest step that it is possible for any
Reprobate to go.

Wherein I observe four things;

First, That it is a peculiar work of Christ, and comes not but from him,
and Heb. 10. 29.
the Spirit of his Grace.

Secondly, That it is not a counterfeit show of holiness, or in hypocrisy
only* but a matter of truth, and an excellent grace of GOD wrought indeed in
them, touching and affecting their hearts, as the Apostle Peter plainly
shows, 2. Pet. 1. 8. They beguile those, that (...).
indeed had escaped from them that were conversant in error.

Thirdly, I observe the neerenesse and affinity that it has with the saving
faith, and the fruits of this with the fruits of that: in which respect it
pleases the Holy Ghost to call them both by one and the same name; for they
are said to be Heb. 6. 4.
enlightened, to Heb. 10. 29.
receive the Spirit of Grace, to Luke 8. 13. They believed for a time. John 2.
24. Many believed, and yet he would not commit himself unto them, because he
knew them all, and what was in them. Acts 8. 13 Then Simon also himself
believed.
have Faith, to believe that the Mat. 12. 43.
unclean spirit is gone out of them, to fly 2. Pet. 1. 20.
the pollutions of the World, to be 2. Pet. 2. 22.
washed, to be Heb. 10. 29.
sanctified by the Spirit, to be made Heb. 6. 5.
partaker of the Holy Ghost. And the main sin committed here-against, is
termed in the Scripture, Mat. 12. 13, 32
Sin against the Holy Ghost.

So that these men come to the skirt of the Holy Land; and as Moses did from
Mount Nebo behold it from afar, or rather are at the very gate of the Kingdom
of Heaven, though for lack of Faith they cannot enter in.

In nature it comes so near, that they taste the changes after a sort man's
corrupt nature;
sweetness and excellency that is in Christ, as we showed before out of Heb.
6. 4.

In the fruits and effects; that a great and wonderful change is wrought in
them, in all their parts and powers, their Understanding, Will, affections,
Ways.

For touching their Understanding; they are Heb. 10. 26.
enlightened to the Knowledge and acknowledgement of Christ.

Touching their Will; they desire to be like Gods Children, and to be saved,
as Balaam did, Numbers 23. 10. O that my soul might dye the death of the
Righteous, and that my last end might be like theirs!

For their Affections; to omit those that coming from the Law and Covenant of
works, may be in such as never heard of Christ, as terror and pricking of
conscience for their sins, which Acts 24. 25.
Felix had, when Paul disputed of Righteousness, Temperance, and of the
Judgment to come, to be sorry for them, as Heb. 12. 17.
Esaias, that with tears sought the blessing; and Mat. 27. 35.
Judas, that repented him, and in the anguish of his soul hanged himself.
Those that properly belong to this place, are, First, An embracing of the
Truth; whereupon they are said to Heb. 10. 25.
receive the Word, and to receive the acknowledgement of the Truth, as it were
taking it in their arms, and embracing it.

Secondly, Joy and Gladness in the sweet promises of the Gospel: They Heb. 6.
4, 5.
taste the good Word of God, and the powers of the life to come; they Mat. 13.
20.
receive the Word by and by with joy. So did the John 5. 35.
Jews, who willingly rejoiced for a while in JOHN'S light. And Mark 6. 20.
Herod, that heard him gladly.

Thirdly, Zeal, which was in the Galatians, Gal. 4. 15.
that received Paul as an Angel, and would have plucked out their eyes to have
done him good, and yet afterward fell away. So was 2. Kin. 10. 16.
Iehu zealous for Gods cause, in the defacing of Idolatry, and yet a 2. Kin.
10. 31
wicked man.

Fourthly, Reverence of the Ministers, as HEROD Mark 6. 20.
reverenced JOHN, knowing him to be a just and a holy man, and observed him.

Changes in their actions and ways (Beside a confession of their faults with
Exodus 9. 27.
PHARAOH, I have sinned this time: JEHOVAH is most just, but I, and my people
are most wicked. And 1. Sam. 15. 24 and 26. 21.
SAVL, I have sinned now, etc. And a conforming of themselves in the outward
duties of holiness, as to hear the Word preached, which Mark 6. 20.
Herod did, to Prayer, etc. They have these,

First, Vexation in themselves, and disquietnesse of mind, before they commit
sin, and fear to commit it. So Mark 6. 26.
Herod was sore grieved to grant Herodias request, when she asked John
Baptists head: and Mat. 27. 24.
Pilate much troubled in mind, before he condemned Christ, and sought all
means to put it off.

Secondly, Repentance, and a kind of humiliation for sins committed; as 1.
Kings 21. 27, 29.
Ahab, that rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon him; and fasted, and went
softly, in token of mourning.

Thirdly, Amendment of Life in many things, Flying 1. Pet. 2. 11.
the pollutions of the World.

To come to the fourth point: therein I observe the great difference that is
between this Grace and Faith, both in the nature of the things, and in the
fruits and effects that come from them, how like soever in show they seem to
be.

In nature they differ two manner of ways:

First, Here is but a taste only, not an apprehension and laying hold of
Christ, to make him ones own, like unto a Cook that tastes of the meat, and
spitteth it out again, or as he that washes his mouth with water, but lets
it not go down his throat: hereupon it is, that they are said to Mat. 13. 21.
want a Col. 2. 7.
root which the faithful have.

From whence I gather, that their faith is but a general and confused faith,
whereby they are persuaded, that God will bestow many great and glorious things
upon those that are in Christ, but never wrestle with their own souls, to
apply and appropriate the same unto themselves; they know not what it means
to have Christ's Righteousness theirs, or their sins to be laid upon him:
they feel no testimony of reconciliation to God, no assurance that all things
are for good unto them, no peace of conscience, no hope of eternal life, the
excellency whereof they are ravished withal, and admire to behold in others,
as Balaam the false prophet did, but find in themselves no comfort of it, no
more then a man does of the Sun, when it shines not in his own Horizon.

The second difference between the nature of faith and it, is, that this taste
(whatsoever the same be) is not of Christ himself, whose Mat. 9. 21. 22
least touch has a saving virtue joined with it, but of some sweetness that
comes from him; no more then the Cook that licketh his fingers, can be said
to eat of the meat prepared for his Masters Table: So as their estate may be
likened unto those, who coming out of a close Dungeon, where, in all their
life, they never saw the Sun, as soon as they come into a more open place,
upon the first casting of the beams, are ravished with the excellency of the
Sun, though yet they see not the Sun it self: for the Reprobate only see
a glimmering of the light of the Sun, at the dawning of the day, before it
arises; whereas the Elect have the 2. Pet. 1. ^9.
Day Star, even the Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus rising in their
hearts, the comfortable heat whereof does quicken and revive them, as it is
said, the Luke 1. 72.
Dayspring from an high does visit them, the Esaias 60. 1, 2.
glory of God does arise upon them: or they may be likened unto a Stranger
that travailing a far Country, sees the state and magnificence of the Court,
and is admitted into the Presence Chamber, which greatly does affect him,
though he himself have no part, nor interest in the King.

Touching the fruits and effects; the through change wrought in Gods Children,
differs from this kind of change, which falls upon the Reprobate many
ways.

First, In the things themselves; for their reformation is not a whole and
sound conversion unto God, but amending some one or few faults, they hold some
other still, which they can never be brought to leave. As Mark 6. 20.
Herod, who did many things, and yet would not part from his Brothers Wife:
whereas the godly do not some things, but all they are commanded.

Secondly, In the manner; for their affections are but yet so, as it may be
lost again:
vanishing, and flitting motions, that suddenly go out, like unto a blaze of
fire, or else for want of cherishing by Prayer, hearing of the Word, and other
holy means, as it were of putting Oil in their Lamps, in time it comes to
be quenched, or else when they are touched to the quick, that they see the
following of CHRIST, cannot stand with the satisfying of their own delights or
other matters which they are resolved to keep; they choose rather to lose him,
then to forsake themselves, and so for pleasure, profit or fear of men, they
vomit up all again.

Thirdly, In the end; for both they desire to be saved, not to glorify God,
but only because they are afraid of Hell, as may be seen in Balaam: and they
confess their faults, and leave and forsake sin, not because they hate and
dislike it, but for fear of judgment; whereas the godly are sorry and
grieved in heart, because they offend a loving and most gracious Father.

Fourthly, In the means; for lacking says, it is impossible that they should
ever come in true Repentance unto God, or ask pardon of their sins, and so
to be made partakers of the promise, Mat. 7. 7.
Ask and it shall be given unto you: Seek and you shall find: Knock and it
shall be opened unto you.

Now follows the sin most opposite to this Grace, But whosoever once of malice
falls from it (which we call Sin against the Holy Ghost)
which we call sin against the Holy Ghost: when a man falls of malice from
this Grace once received.

To explayne this more fully:

First, It is an act done, and a sin which may be discerned and known; else
the Apostle 1 John 5. 16.
John would not forbid us to pray for such persons: no, Paul 1. Cor. 16. 22.
wills us to execute the curse of the Church upon them; it is not a continual
going forward in sin without Repentance.

Secondly, It is no legal sin (if I may so say) against the duties
(properly) either of the first or second Table, but Evangelical, directly
against Christ in the point of his Mediation, Heb. 10. 29.
accounting his blood but as common blood, and of no more power to sanctify,
then the blood of another man: Therefore no sin against good manners, as
Murder, Adultery, and the rest, or though it be immediately bent against God
himself, and the duties of the first Table, can be drawn within that
compass; as Idolatry, Witchcraft, Coniuring and the like, though they should
hap to be committed of such as profess the Gospel.

Thirdly, It is of those that have received the 2. Pet. 2. 20.
knowledge of the Truth: So as all Reprobates come not to this high pitch of
sin, nor any that sin of ignorance: therefore 1. Tim. 1. 13.
Paul's blasphemy was a sin that might be pardoned, in as much as he did it
ignorantly. And our Savior Luke 23. 34.
uses this reason for the Jews that put him to death: Father, forgive them;
for they know not what they do. So the Apostle PETER says, Acts 3. 17. And
now, Brethren, I know that ye have done this ignorantly, as also your Rulers.
Meaning the multitude and general number of them, which were 1. Cor. 2. 8.
not able to discern of the Godhead of Christ, lying hid under the veil of
his flesh, not of every one in particular; for some wittingly and willingly,
and contrary to their own conscience, went against him, knowing what he John
7. 28.
was, and wher^e he came; which gave our Savior occasion to handle this
Argument, Matthew 12. Mark 3. Luke 12.

Fourthly, It is a sin not simply against knowledge, but against the light of
the Spirit, or that sweetness and comfort which once they felt in Christ: And
so it appears, that many of the Jews offended, of whom our John 5. 36.
Savior says, that they did with cheerfulness rejoice for a time in the
Ministry of John Baptist, preaching Christ unto them; and yet afterward John
5. 38.
fell back and had no John 5. 40.
list to come unto Christ. This inlightening is Mat. 12. 43. 2. Pet. 2. 20, 23.
Heb. 6. 5. and 10. 29.
a divine and supernatural work of GODS Spirit changing a man's corruption,
and entering him into the highway that leads to Regeneration: So that I
cannot think that either the sin of Angels, if you consider their first fall
(though then they were most glorious Creatures, and Children of Light, and
their fall presumptuous) or yet their sin, being now become Devils, (though
they Mat. 8. 29.
know Christ to be the true Messiah, the Son and the Holy One of God, and he
of whom they must be judged, and yet with all their might and main oppugn
him) can be said (properly) the sin against the Holy Ghost, in that sense
which the Scripture speaks of it; though I deny not, but it is at the least,
equivalent, or rather much beyond it: for both at the first they sinned against
that natural light only, that they had by their first Creation, which also
was immediately bent against the Majesty of God, without the respect of a
Redeemer, and since that time, they are not vouchsafed grace to have any taste
at all of the sweetness in CHRIST, nor possibly can have, seeing he Heb. 2. 16.
came not for a Savior unto them.

Fifthly, It is a witting and Heb. 10. 2. 6. (...).
voluntary sin, freely, without compulsion, or other, not cause only, but
color or show of cause.

Sixthly, It is of mere malice against that which their own conscience tells
them to be so good, and against Christ, the Author of it, Heb. 6. 6.
crucifying him in their hearts, and making a mock of him: because, if they
will be his, they see they cannot enjoy those Pleasures, Profits or Preferments
which they dote upon, and are resolved to hold, though they lose their own
souls for it; whereof comes a persecuting and blaspheming of things they
have believed, and of all that do profess the same, an utter Heb. 6. 6. and
10. 29.
revolt from Christ, and open war against him. It seems, the Holy Ghost
notes this sin, to have been in Saul, 1. Sam. 22. 17. Kill the Priests of
IEHOVA. He says not simply, Kill the Priests: but the Priests of JEHOVAH: as
if he should have said, I? Has Christ indeed served me so, not only to turn
me out of my Kingdom, and to give it to my servant; but will he now, by his
answers and Oracles, teach him how to rise up and lie in wait against me?
Well, though my malice cannot reach to him who is in Heaven, yet I will wrack
it upon his Darlings the Priests: Go, kill me all his Priests, etc. It is not
a falling of frailty and infirmity, though wittingly as that of Peter's was.
By all which may appear, that this being a hidden and a secret sin lurking
in the heart, is most hard to be discerned, save when it pleases God
himself, as it were, from Heaven to reveal it: which in the time of the
Apostles, to whom the extraordinary Graces of his Spirit were more plenteous,
he did now and then, as appears in those that seduced the Galatians, and
further, by that alleged out of Paul and John before, but in the succeeding
Ages more rarely, whereof notwithstanding Julian the Apostata may be an
example, against whom the Prayers of the Church were simply to cut him off.

Seventhly, It is an utter revolt, not from Christ, or any good thing we have
in him, upon which Rock, whosoever is firmly built, the gates of Hell cannot
prevail against him, though they may sorely shake him; but from a love and
Mat. 13. 20, 21
joy in some sweet thing which yet never had root in their heart. Therefore
they that once believe in Christ, and by faith are rooted in him, can never
come within the compass of this sin.

With this sin against the Holy Ghost, a Heb. 6. 6.
final can never be repaired.
unrepentance is unseparably joined; so that they which commit it, can never
come to Faith and Repentance, nor ever be in Christ, which makes it Mat. 12.
32.
unpardonable.

CHAP. V.
Of the Church under the Law:

And

CHAP. VI.
Of the Church in the time of the Gospel.

THE Church is one, and cannot be divided. The Church is one, and cannot be
divided: but having regard to the diversity of Gods dispensation, it may be
distinguished into the Church under the Old Testament, and the Church in the
New. That under the Old Testament had diverse Rites, Ceremonies and Sacrifices:
Figures of Christ, and of the good things we have in him. Especially among the
Jews, his then peculiar people, whereby the dispensation of those times was
more obscure, and less accompanied with Knowledge and other Graces. But of all
these things, as also of their Sacraments (which in regard of the outward
Signs were a part of the Legal Paedagogie) and likewise of the Ministeries
that were among them, both that of Prophets (inspired, by whom were written the
Books of the Old Testament) and of other, I have written at large in a
Treatise entitled, The Old Testament, or The Promise. To the Church of the New
Testament, the dispensation is in all cleernesse and perfection.
But according to the difference of times, it is to be distinguished into the
Church under the Law (I mean the Ceremonial Law, whilst the promise was
afoot) and the Church in the time of the Gospel; differing only by the
diversity of dispensation before and since his coming.

God, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, in many pieces, y Heb. 1. 1, 2.
and after diverse fashions, of old spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, but in
these latter days he has spoken unto us by his Son. The manner therefore
and the measure of the Revelation of Christ did differ:

First, For the manner, it was unto them in diverse Rites, Ceremonies, Types and
Figures, and therefore dark and obscure; To us all things are plainly without
any shadows, the body being come, which is Christ.

Secondly, Though the substance of the doctrine it self was always full and
perfect, yet as touching the measure and cleernesse of Revelation, there was
something still behind more fully to be manifested, till he spoke lastly, and
perfectly by his Son upon his own coming in the flesh. And this the silly
woman of Samaria may teach us, to have been a doctrine which evermore sounded
in the Church; John 4. 25.
When the Messia comes, he will teach us all things, clearly and in all
perfection. Wherein, that the Church was not deceived, appears by his own
testimony, John 15. 15. Whatsoever I have heard from my Father, I have made
known unto you. And John 8. 26. The things which I have heard from him, (that
sent me) those do I speak in the World.

Upon these two differences it must follow, that whilst the Church was in her
infancy, under the Rudiments of the Law, the Fathers seeing by that dark and
dim light, neither could their knowledge be so perfect, nor were the Graces
dealt unto them so plentiful, and so many. The Evangelist teaches it
excellently, John 1. 14, 15, 16, 17. comparing the Ministry of Moses which
stood in Rites and Ordinances, with Christ and his Ministry. The Verse 14.
Divine Majesty, says he, that shone in Christ, the Resplendence of his
Fathers Glory, even as we consider him clothed in our flesh, was conspicuous
to the World in two eminent Virtues, Grace and Truth, which he had, not in
measure, nor by participation, but the whole nature and fullness of them. Verse
15.
Whereunto John Baptist himself bare record, highly magnifying the Person and
Office of Christ above his own: Who, though he were in the number of his
Auditors, and did follow him, (as Scholars use to come behind their Master)
yet had the precedence, and was infinitely preferred before him; for so his
worth and excellency, far beyond John's, did require. But both these virtues,
really residing in himself, he has been pleased to communicate unto us in
large and abundant manner: first, touching Grace: Verse 16.
From, the fullness of Christ anointed with the substance of it, we receive
grace for grace: the same very grace, and all the graces that are in him,
though not in the same measure, as the Wax does the print of the Seal, print
for print: and the child the fathers lineaments, limme for limme. Verse 17.
Whereas the Law (the Ceremonial Law) delivered by Moses, having but a shadow
of good things to come, was not able to set a lively print, and to stamp grace
upon them, Heb. 10. 1.

Secondly, For Truth: Verse 18.
He, only He, one with his Father, and of the same nature and essence, has
euidenced him, and made him visible, who before was hidden under the shadows
and Ceremonies of the Law. The Apostle to the Corinths, handling the same
Argument, has in effect the same Metaphore, 2. Cor. 3. 13, 14, 18. In the Old
Testament, a veil or covering kept away the clear Light, that their eyes were
rather dazeled, then able to look into the bottom of Moses Ministry. But
now, in these times of the Gospel, wherein we behold the Glory of the Lord,
in his Son manifested in the flesh, as in a Glass or Mirror, the beams of
his Glory reflecting, leave an Image or print behind them, to make us also
glorious by a secondarie kind of Glory. Hereunto it makes, that the state of
the Church under the Messiah, has the name of The Mat. 3. 2. and 5. 19.
Kingdom of Heaven, because therein shines the brightness of heavenly
glory: first, in the person of Christ and the blessings upon him; then, in the
good things which he bestows upon his Church. All which are called heavenly
things, Heb. 8. 5 and 9. 23. Not shadows or figures of heavenly things to
come, but themselves the true heavenly things, which those under the Law were
Types and Samplers of.

This bounty of Christ, to fill all things with the rich Graces of his Spirit,
the Scripture makes an effect of his Glorification, or sitting at the right
hand of GOD, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8. To every one of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. Therefore, he says, Ascending on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. So John 7. 39. The Holy Ghost
yet was not, because Jesus was not yet glorified. And Acts 2. 33. Being
therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received the promise of
the Holy Ghost, he has powered out that which you now see and hear. Not that
Christ did it not before: for he gave from the beginning all spiritual
blessings to his Church and people. But it is spoken comparatively, because
then indeed (upon his Ascension or Glorification) he set open, as it were, the
Windows of Heaven, to rain down all the showers of his graces in a far
more excellent manner and measure, then ever he did before. As Peter, Acts 2.
16, 17, 18.
Acts 2. confirms out of Joel 2. 28.
Joel, applying it to those present times: It shall be in the latter days,
that I will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons shall
prophecy, and your daughters, and your young men shall see Visions, and your
old men shall dream Dreams: Yea verily, upon my Men-seruants and
Mayd-seruants will I power forth of my Spirit, and they shall prophecy. Which
notwithstanding is to be understood of the common and ordinary dispensation
of God, in the general government of his Church, not of particular persons;
seeing among the Fathers there are so many to be found, that went far before
the best of us, in faith, knowledge, and all other Christian virtues, whose
names the Scripture celebrateth as mirrors and examples for us to follow.

But of the whole dispensation of God toward the Fathers, full of so great
variety of matter, because it would ask a Volume, and is too large for this
place and our purpose, you have a treatise by it self, entitled, The Old
Testament, or, The Promise: Let us now come to the Sacraments of the New
Testament, and the several sorts of Ministeries.

There be two Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptism, Touching the
Sacraments and Ministeries of the new Testament: There be two Sacraments,
Baptism and the Lords Supper. Baptism is a washing with water,
and the Lords Supper, as the Apostle reckons them, 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 12,
13, 14.

Baptism is a washing with water, to assure our incorporating into Christ.

Where the outward sign is double: first, The Element or matter is Water, and
not any other Liquor, Matthew. 3. 11. I baptize you with Water unto Repentance.

Secondly, The action and form of Baptism, as the Ministers washing of the
baptized person, which in the East and hot countries was wont to be by the
dipping and diuing, as it were, of all the body into the water; whence
Baptism has his name: with us, it is by sprinkling; to assure our entrance
into the Covenant
for that young childrens bodies are not able to bear the other. And here a
threefold Ceremony is to be observed.

First, The sprinkling: secondly, The lying, as it were, under the water:
thirdly, The rising out of it: all which, the Apostle notes, Romans 6. 3, 4.

The grace signified, is our incorporating into Christ: And therefore it is
called, Tit. 3. 5. According to his mercy he has saved us by the Lauer of
Regeneration.
The Lauer or Sacrament of Regeneration: and thereupon we are said in
Baptism, Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.
to put on Christ. Whereof follows,

First, That it is the first Sacrament of the Church, as birth is the first
beginning of our life.

Secondly, Children of believing Catabaptists, that deny the baptism of
Children.
parents, in that they are members of the Church, and partakers of the
Covenant, cannot be shut from Baptism, which is the Sacrament thereof, no
more than they might from Circumcision. Wherefore our Savior Mark. 10. 14.
says, Suffer little children to come unto me: for unto such belongs the
Kingdom of God.

Thirdly, that is to be done The Donatists and Nouatians that hold
Rebaptization.

The Papists teach, that Baptism has only force to purge sins past.

The Nouatians deny forgiveness of sins to them that fell after Baptism.


but once only, as men are borne but once; yet it assures us of our union with
Christ, not once, but all the days of our life, and testifies the
forgiveness of all sins, past, present, or to come: And therefore is said to
save us, 1. Pet. 3. 2.

Fourthly, Hereupon we are said to be baptized into the name of the Math. 28.
29
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; because by Baptism, we being
consecrate to God, are joined to him, to bear his name, as the wife bears
the name of her husband.

Fifthly, It is a Sacrament also of our uniting into the Church. Therefore Gal.
3. 27.
Paul, after he had said, As many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ, immediately adds, For all you are one in Christ Jesus.

Sixthly, Being a seal of Regeneration, consequently it seals up the fruits
thereof.

Justification and Sanctification: He has saved us, says Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7.
PAVL, by the Lauer of Regeneration, and of the renewing of the holy Spirit,
which he has shed forth upon us richly, through Jesus Christ our Savior;
That being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs in hope of
everlasting life.

A seal it is of Justification in this sort: first, Of the hiding and covering
of sins, by the covering of the childs face with water.

Secondly, of Christ's accomplishment of the Law, making us righteous, by the
water washing and making clean the Body.

It is a seal of Sanctification thus:

First, The water lying upon the childs face, declares that the old Adam in
the baptized person, is buried with Christ our Savior.

Secondly, As after the water shed from the Body, the Body appears white
and clean: so do we rise and appear in newness of life; and hereof it is
called a Mark. 1. 3.
Sacrament of Repentance. John baptized in the Wilderness, and preached the
baptism of Repentance unto the forgiveness of sins. Matthew. 3. 11. I baptize
you with water unto Repentance. The form whereof is thus or to this effect, I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.


All these uses, both for Justification and Sanctification, and the distinct
parts of every one, the Apostle notably sets forth, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. Know
ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his Death? We are buried then with him by Baptism into his
Death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead, unto the glory of the
Father; so also we should walk in newness of life. For if we be grafted
with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude
of his resurrection; Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him,
that the body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve Sin.

The form of Baptism which the Minister is here to use, is this, Matthew. 28. 19
I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost.

The Lords Supper is a receiving of Bread and Wine, to assure our growing up in
Christ, where the outward sign is double, as before in Baptism. The Lords
Supper is a feeding with Bread, and Wine,


First, The matter, both Matthew. 26. 26, 27.
bread Papists, by their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, take away the signs
in the Supper.
and wine, of which Elements God made choice, because they are the chiefest
means of nourishment. And of them both, to show how plentiful and assured a
Redemption we have in Christ.

The kind of Bread must be The Popish Wafercakes.
ordinary Bread, according as our Savior Christ took such as was used at the
common table at that time.

Secondly, The action, which is the Ministers breaking of bread, and pouring
forth The Superstition of the Papists, which will have it thrust into their
mouths.
of wine, with his delivering of them both, and the peoples receiving of them,
Matthew. 26. 26, 27. As they did eat, Jesus took Bread, and when he had
blessed, he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, etc.
Also he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them
saying, Drink, etc.

And of this Wine all are to The sacrilege of Popery, robbing the people of
the use of the Cup.

Their private and Corner-Masses.


drink, as well the people as the Minister, so expressly provided, Matthew. 26.
27. Drink ye all of this, which is more than he said of the Bread.

The graces signified, are our growing up in Christ, to assure our continuance
in the Covenant.
wherein is noted our continuance in him with increase, and consequently,
justification and holiness of life: for in the elements themselves, the Bread
and Wine set before us the Body and Blood of Christ, Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28. He
brake the Bread, and said, Take eat, this is my Body. Also, he took the Cup,
and said, Drink ye all of it: for this is my blood of the New Testament, that
is shed for many. Their nourishing of our Bodies, signify his spiritual
feeding of our Souls, 1. Cor. 12. 13. By one Spirit we are all made to drink
into one Spirit, which quickneth and puts life into us.

In the Actions, the Bread broken before our eyes, does represent Passion and
sufferings, 1. Cor. 11. 24. (...). As Matthew. 23. 38. Behold, your house is left
((...)) unto you desolate. That is, most certainly shall be left, and that
shortly.
He took the Bread, and brake it, and said, Take, eat: This is my body which
is broken for you. By broken, meaning the tearing, brusing, and tormenting both
of his soul and body, as it is also taken, Esaias, 53. 5. which here he
utters in the present time, for the certainety of that which should anon
follow.

The Wine powered out, represented his Blood, trickling and streaming down of
all parts of him to the ground, Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is (that is to say) shall certainly and that anon be shed for
many.

The Ministers delivering of Bread and Wine, signifies Gods giving of Christ
to all believers: our taking of Bread and Wine, the apprehending of Christ by
faith, and applying him to our selves. Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28. He gave the Bread
to his Disciples, and said, Take eat: this is my Body. Our eating and drinking
of the Bread and Wine, the continuance and increase in that holy union and
fellowship which we have with him, 1. Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Eating all of one
Bread, and drinking of one Cup, signifies the unity of Christ's mystical
Body, whereof we are all members. 1. Cor. 10. 17. Because it is one Bread,
we that are many, are one Body: for we all partake of one Bread. And
therefore it is also a Sacrament of love; for testification whereof, the first
times of the Church had their solemn Banquets, which they called, Jude ver. 12.
Loue-feasts, annexed to it; till the same growing into abuse, the Apostle by
his authority did abolish them, 1. Cor. 11. 20, 21, 22.

But here arises a great and difficult question, whether the Bread and Wine
remain after the consecration.

I say, it does: for

First, it were else no Sacrament, if there be no sign left of a thing
signified.

Secondly, It overthrows the truth of CHRIST'S humane nature, to make it in
many places at once, to be invisible, without color or accidents. All which
must be admitted, if CHRIST'S very flesh be there.

Thirdly, It is contrary to the express authority of the SCRIPTVRE, which
says, Acts 3. 21.
Heaven must contain him, till the time of the restoring of all things.

Fourthly, If the bread be Christ, then in the first Institution there were two
Christ's; one, that gave the bread (for that Christ himself did:) another that
was given. And as he which is Truth it self, says, This is my body: So he
Luke 22. 10.
says, that the Cup is the New Testament, which must needs be understood
figuratively for the Wine, to be a seal of the New Testament: as Baptism is
called, The new Titus 3. 5.
birth, and washing Acts 22. 16.
of sins. And the like is commonly to be seen in the Old Testament, as we
heard before of Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb, which gave occasion to
our Savior Christ, speaking by the same Spirit, to use the same course of
figurative and borrowed speeches, being oftentimes more lightsome then the
other, and better fitting the nature of a Sacrament, and that near conjunction
which is between the sign and the thing signified, Christ himself being
indeed and truly given in the Sacrament, but spiritually by Faith, not in a
carnal or fleshly manner.

The form which the Minister is here to use, is in delivery of the Bread: 1.
Cor. 11. 24.
Take ye, eat ye: This is my Body which is given for you: Do this in
remembrance of me. In delivery of the Cup, Mat. 26. 27, 28 1. Cor. 11. 25.
Drink ye all of this: for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. Do this as often as ye shall drink
it, in remembrance of me.

These are the The Papists dream of five other Sacraments, Matrimony, Orders,
Penance, Confirmation, and Extreme Unction; whereof Confirmation and Extreme
Unction are utterly their own inventions without any warrant of the Word. The
other three have foundation in the Word, but not for any Sacraments: for
touching Matrimony and Penance, neither of them are Ceremonies, but Matrimony
a moral duty, and Penance, (as they call it) the grace it self promised in
the Gospel. In Orders or Imposition of hands, there is indeed a Ceremony, but
neither common to the whole Church, nor instituted for the assurance of our
Reconciliation with God in Christ, which is the end and the nature of all
Sacraments. The reason of the Papists to make Matrimony a Sacrament, (for that
the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 32. says, This is a great Mystery: which the old
Interpreter translateth, This is a great Sacrament) is ridiculous: for First,
Paul says, Mystery only. And if as often not only as the word Mystery is
used, but as the old Interpreter translateth the same ( Sacrament) we should
forthwith have a new Sacrament, there would be no end of Sacraments. Then the
calling of the Gentiles must be a Sacrament; then the Will of God must be a
Sacrament, and many more: for so the old Interpreter translateth this word,
Ephesians. 1. 9. and 3. 9. and Colos. 1. 27. Secondly, Paul in that place to the
Ephesians does plainly expound himself, under the name of Mystery, to
comprehend not the conjunction of man and wife; but the spiritual Conjunction
which is between Christ and his Church. To speak nothing, how fond is it to
make that a Sacrament, which is the Ordinance of God, not for his Church only,
but for those which are without, and which they themselves by their doctrine
bar their holy Shauelings from?
two Sacraments, and all the Sacraments that are of perpetual use in the
Church of GOD, for the strengthening of our Faith:

For first, these are only commanded, Mat. 28. 19. Go, baptize all Nations.
Mat. 26. 27, 28. Take, eat, etc. Drink ye all of this.

Secondly, By them, all the graces of Regeneration are perfectly assured, and
sealed up unto us. In Baptism, our first entrance and ingraffing into Christ.
In the Supper, our continuance and growing up in him. And that is it that the
Apostle means, when he says, that by those two we partake of whole Christ
his Body and Spirit, 1. Cor. 12. 13, 14. By one Spirit we have all been
baptized into one Body (there is our incorporating) and been all made to
drink into one Spirit, that quickens and keeps life within us (there is
the increase and growing up in Christ.)

Thirdly, The same Sacraments have been in substance to all Gods people, from
the beginning of the World, and never any more. 1. Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Now I
would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that all our Fathers were under the
Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and all were baptized, coming unto
MOSES, with the Cloud, and with the Sea: And all did eat the same Spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same Spiritual drink: for they drank of the
Spiritual Rock following them; and the Rock was Christ.

The difference only is:

First, In the outward Signs.

Secondly, In that the Sacraments of the Old Testament were signs of Heb. 10.
1.
future good things, which Christ should perform: ours are signs and
remembrances of good things already done and performed by him.

The Ministers of the New Testament were first Apostles, The Ministers of the
New Testament were Apostles (inspired, by whose Ministry were written the
Books of the New Testament) Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc.
inspired of Christ, as is aforesaid (by whose Ministry were written the
Books of the New Testament:) then Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers,
etc. These five you have so reckoned up, Ephesians. 4.

CHAP. VII.
Of that which the Scripture by excellency terms, The Kingdom; and of the
Church of Gods Elect.

OF the three great Arms or Branches of Hitherto of Christ's Prophetical
Office. That which the Scripture by excellency terms, The Kingdom, is to
the Church of Believers. It stands in an effectual Calling, and the ruit
that comes from it. An effectual Calling, whereby he draws as many as are
elect to believe in him.
Christ's Kingdom, two have been already opened: His general Government of
the World, whereby he swayeth all things, and the favors which in the
Largess and Royalty of his Prophetical Office, he bestows upon the Church
in general the bad among them as well as the good; all sworn unto him, and
called by his name, and all for the Elects sake, being so many steps and
stayres to lead those whom God has chosen, to far more eminent and
surpassing Graces, now to be spoken of in this third part, which the Scripture
is wont to call, by way of excellency, Mat. 13. 38. Luke 4. 43. Acts 20. 25.
The Kingdom, Romans 14. 17.
The Kingdom of God, or Col. 1. 13.
The Kingdom of his Son, and Mat. 13. 44, 45.
The Kingdom of Heaven. For though the same, as we have showed, be specially
spoken of the Reign of the Messiah when he came into the World, yet for the
truth and substance, it holds in all times from the beginning: that being
Citizens of that Kingdom, we have as it were, a Heaven here on Earth, and
Heaven indeed hereafter: for in it are all the glorious things which God
communicates with his people.

We begin with that excellent and precious gift of Faith, the saving
Knowledge of GODS Elect: Which stands in the embracing and laying hold on
Christ: the highest step of Grace that in this life is possible to be
attained, whither the Reprobate never can ascend.

Also it is the life and soul of the true Church on Earth, as Profession is
outward: for the proof whereof, I refer you further to that which is spoken
there, wherefore the number or Ephesians. 3. 5. (...).
Family, as Paul speaks of Gods Elect, effectually called to the knowledge
and participation of Christ, makes the whole company of those that belong unto
him, and are indeed and truly his: which therefore by excellency is wont to be
called Ephesians 1. 22. and 5. 23, 32. Col. 1. 18, 34. (...). Mat. 16. 18.
The Church, or as we use to speak, and as the Symbol of the Apostles has
it, The holy Catholic Church, wherein these qualities come to be observed.

First, The Church is but one: whether they be on Earth, drawn by the Word of
Christ, and the Grace of his holy Spirit to believe in him; or in Heaven, there
enjoying his blessed presence (so the Apostle does Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 3. 15.
many times divide it) they make all but Ephesians. 1. 10, 23 Col. 1. 18.
one body, whereof Christ is the Head.

Secondly, Catholic or Universal The Papists ridiculous, to call the Roman
Church (which if it were admitted a true Church, is but a particular Church) by
the name of the Catholke Church.
it may be called, having regard both to persons, places and times: Persons, as
comprehending all GODS Elect, who in their time are all gathered into the
bosom of this Church. Wherefore, Gal. 4. 26. the Catholic Church, Jerusalem
which is above, is said to be the mother of all.

In regard of place: because it is not tied to any Region or Country in
particular, but scattered throughout the World.

For the times: In all Ages of the World, God has ever some that are his
indeed, members of the true Church through faith in him.

Thirdly, The true Church is called holy, because they are indeed and truly the
sanctified members of Christ, regenerate and borne again, in whom he dwells
and reigns by his Spirit, being washed, justified, sanctified through him,
and hereafter for ever glorified. So as out of this Church there is no
Salvation: for there is no Faith, no Christ, but there: and hereof the 1. Pet.
3. 20, 21.
Arc was a Figure, wherein all that were not, perished.

Fourthly, The true Church, whilst it remains here on Earth, is invisible,
because their Faith, which only makes them members of the Church, cannot be
known or seen of any but of those that do receive it. And if the true
Catholic Church might be seen, then were it no Article of our Faith to
believe it. Howbeit at the last Day they shall be all seen.

To speak of Faith, which makes men members of the true Church: Properly it
is a virtue and holy quality of the Mind and Will, powered into us by the Holy
Ghost, for the knowing and apprehending of Christ. But as the Scriptures take
it, and Divines commonly define it, by the work of Faith, it is a knowledge
and apprehension of Christ now absent, with all his benefits offered in the
Word to be ones own. Howbeit, in so great a matter to use somewhat a more
large description, and in one view to lay forth whatsoever is necessary to be
known of Faith; Faith proper to Gods Elect (for I meddle not here with
Historical Faith, which 1. James 2. 19
James calls the faith of Devils, nor with Mat. 13. 21.
temporary Faith, or the Faith of 1. Cor. 13. 2.
working Miracles; these are but in name only and abuse of speech, or if
properly Faith, yet not saving Faith: but true and saving Faith, is a special
gift and grace of God, wrought in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, and that
ordinarily by the preaching of the Gospel, nourished by the Word and
Sacraments: Joined it is with Knowledge, not a general or confused knowledge,
but the saving knowledge of Gods Children, that apprendeth Christ, and applies
him to every true Believer: But apprehending Christ absent in his Word, it is
mixed with much weakness and unbelief, yet still holds fast and lets not
go the hold, but continually grows, till we come to see Christ in his
Glory; and therefore is perpetually waited upon by Hope, the sure Anchor of
our souls.

Now to open more largely the parts of this description, there be eight main
points lie obuious before our eyes:

First, The nature of Faith.

Secondly, The persons to whom it is appropriate.

Thirdly, The causes efficient, both primarie and secondarie, principal and
isntrumental, the begetting and the preserving causes.

Fourthly, The prerogative of the faithful.

Fifthly, The qualities or adioynts of Faith.

Sixthly, Of sight, the full perfection of it.

Seventhly, Of Hope the sister and companion:

And eighthly, the fruits or effects.

The nature of Faith is to know Christ, to lay hold upon him, and with
confidence and assurance to apply him to ones self. Wherein we are to
consider, both the Object of Faith, and the Actions.

The Object of Faith is Christ: for albeit Faith sometimes take hold of a
particular promise, as the Mat. 15. 29.
blind men did for the opening of their eyes, yet it rests not in that
particular good: but through it looks at the general good, which is Christ.
But Christ is the Object of Faith, not as he is in himself and present, but
absent in his Word. Whereupon it is called 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
The Faith of Truth, or that which imbraceth and lays hold upon the Word and
Truth of God, that is to say, the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and Christ himself
in and by the same. And this Word is the Word of the Covenant, the Word of
Reconciliation, published and preached, and sealed up by the Sacraments: in
regard whereof, it is also called Phil. 1. 27.
The Faith of the Gospel.

So that to speak properly, Faith sees not so much Christ himself, as a
certain Image and Picture of Christ in his Word and Sacraments, wherein we
behold him, but as it were, in a Looking-glass. So Paul tells the Galatians,
Gal. 3. 1. that by the Gospel which he preached unto them, Jesus Christ was
pictured out before their eyes, and among them crucified. And hereof are the
speeches, 1. Cor. 13. 22. We see now as it were in a Glass, in a Riddle, 2.
Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord, etc.

The Actions are three, to know, to apprehend, to apply.

First, Faith has her seat in the mind and understanding of man: for without
knowing of Christ, how can one embrace and lay hold upon him, since no Ignoti
nulla Cupido.
man longs for that he knows not? This is apparent by those titles which
are given to Faith euery-where in the Scripture, as where it is called
Knowledge, Understanding, Sight, John 6. 40. Every one that sees the Son,
and believes in him, shall have everlasting life. Wherefore, 1. John 4. 16.
these two are joined together, We know, and believe.

Faith and other Knowledges differ thus: Knowledge is by Reason, or from the
Testimony of the Senses; Faith grounding upon the authority and truth of him
that promises, gives a Heb. 11. 1.
being to things that are not, or be invisible.

Secondly, In Faith there is an assent of the mind, and certainty or
assurance, that the promises of the Gospel are true and good, not only in
general, but especially to and of ones self: for there is a double knowledge
of Christ, one, a general knowledge, which the Iam. 2. 19.
Devils have, and tremble, the other proper to the faithful, which is an
apprehending Knowledge, or knowing apprehension, When John 6. 40. and 12. 44,
45.
men see and believe in him. And this assurance every one that believes, has,
(for seeing Faith whereby we enjoy Christ) is nothing else but to lay hold upon
him, and to receive him as our own, how weak soever ones hold be (for that
makes not a difference of Faith from other things, but only of the measure
and degree of Faith) it follows, that every man's conscience* may assure him,
whether he believe, and so have Christ or no, as his senses can tell him,
whether he reach forth his hand or no. Therefore the Apostle says, 1. John 5.
10.
He that believes, has this testimony in himself.

Howbeit, we cannot say, that assurance is an inseparable companion of Faith
always and at all times; for as a hand that is benumbed, may hold a thing,
though it does not feel nor discern the hold it has: so may it be in Faith,
That though indeed and truly it apprehend Christ, yet sometime by the rage and
violence of sin, that lulleth us asleep, and sometimes by other means it
may fall out, that we shall have no sense nor feeling that we have him.

Thirdly, The peculiar and special property wherein the very point of Faith
does lie, is in the heart and will, particularly applying to one self that
which he judged to be so true and good; for Faith is the hand of the soul, to
apprehend Christ, and lay hold upon him, as the hand of the body apprehends
outward things, and lays hold upon them: And therefore hereby we apply
Christ unto our selves, and receive him for our own. And this to be the nature
of Faith, the Evangelist expressly teaches, when he says, John 1. 12.
As many as received him (or laid hold upon him) he gave them this dignity, to
be the sons of God, even to those that believe in his Name. And again, John
6. 35.
He that comes unto me, shall never hunger; and he that believes in me,
shall never thirst. Where coming unto Christ, is expounded by the words
following of believing in him, and that this carries with it a particular
application, as the word it self does show. So the Apostle 1. Pe. 1. 2.
Peter The Papists teach, that Faith lays hold only upon a general mercy
propounded generally to the Church, and not offered particularly to the
several members thereof.
does more expressly declare, when he calls it The sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, particucularly and specially applied to our souls, for the washing and
scowring of them; for albeit the promises of the Gospel are general, Ioh. 3 16.
Whosoever believes in the Son, shall not perish, but have life everlasting:
yet the same are to be understood singularly and particularly, as if they were
spoken to thee and me, and to every one by himself in several: Otherwise,
what should our faith differ from the faith of the Luke 4. 41.
Devils* who knew him and proclaimed him to be that Christ, that Holy one of
God? Hence are these speeches so common in the Scripture, Psalm. 17. 15.
I in righteousness shall see thy face: I shall be satisfied, when I awake,
with thy likeness. Job 19. 25, 26.
I know, my Redeemer lineth, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not any other for me: Gal. 2. 20.
Who has loved me, and given himself for me. 2. Cor. 5. 1.
We know, that if this our earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a Building
from God, a House, not made with hands, everlasting in the Heavens. 1. Ioh. 3.
4.
We know, that we are translated from death, unto life, because we love the
brethren. Matthew. 9. 2.
Son, be of good comfort: thy sins are forgiven thee. 1. Tim. 1. 15.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. As if
he should say, One, and a special one. Giving to understand, that he himself
was one of those, whom Christ came into the world to save.

Lastly, This is proved by both the Sacraments, the seals of the Covenant of
grace, which are given and offered to every particular man. Therefore the Ephesians.
3 17.
Apostle assigns it, as a fruit of faith, that thereby Christ dwells in our
hearts, which, without a particular application, cannot be. From this part,
Faith is termed a special confidence, (...).
affiance, or trust; for the nature of Faith is chiefly seen in it, when the
will and heart is not so much in expectation and hope, as it does in present
apprehend some good, and depends thereupon, and rejoices as if it had it;
which affiance is of the nature of Faith both derived from one (...). Romans 8.
38. Phil. 1. 6. 2. Cor. 5. 11. (...).
word that signifies to persuade.

Another kind of confidence there is, which is but a consequence and a fruit of
faith, whereof we shall speak hereafter.

Touching the subject or persons to whom it is appropriate, Faith is the proper
and peculiar gift of Gods Elect, which only differenceth them from the rest of
the World; for all other graces, be they never so bright, or shining, are
common with the Reprobate; but faith, with the fruits thereof, is proper to the
godly. Whereupon Tit. 1. 1. it is called, The faith of Gods Elect: for only
they, and of them all and every one, are in their time, by virtue of Gods
Covenant, brought to believe, Ioh. 6. 37. Every one that the Father gives
me, comes unto me. Else, in what better case are we now, then when the
covenant of Works did hold us, seeing it is as impossible of our selves, and
by our own strength, to repent, and believe the Gospel, (which is the condition
of the Covenant of Grace) as it was to fulfill the Law?

Wherefore we must understand, that God, to speak properly, does not require
the same, as a mutual res^ipulation of our part, as it was in the former
Covenant, where nothing is imposed which man's nature could not weild: But here
it is rather a declaration of his pleasure, what he would have us do, and
whereunto he will enable us: not a condition to endanger the Covenant, but an
assurance that he will give us strength to keep it. So as the whole Covenant
properly and in truth rises of his part, and lies upon him: Like his other
Covenant Ier. 31. 35, 36.
(brought to confirm this) with the Sun and Moon and Stars, whom (otherwise
unable of themselves) he makes to run their course: But howsoever, Ier. 32.
39. Ezech. 36. 26, 27.
all come from his only grace and virtue, yet to us that are not stocks and
stones, but endued with a reasonable 2. Cor. 5. 17, 18.
soul, understanding, will, and other faculties, this Covenant is wont to be
expressed, sometimes by words Romans 10. 9. Romans 8 13.
conditional, sometimes in Ezech. 18. 31.
commanding wise; that the greatness of the peril, and the difficulty of the
precept might make us to bestirre our selves, to use with care and conscience
the means that he appoints, for the attayning of that precious gift, and to
work together with God, when we are once wrought upon by his Spirit.

And herein lies one other maine difference between the Law and the Gospel, or
the covenant of Works, and this covenant of Grace: The Law only commands
obedience, but gives no power to obey; and therefore is called, 2. Cor. 3. 3,
6, 8, 9.
The dead Letter, written with Ink, and in Tables of Stone, ready indeed to
be read and seen, but having no life in it to change the heart, which
remains as stony as before. The Gospel not only commands, but gives
faith and newness of life; and is therefore said to be written in our hearts,
and called The ministration of the Spirit, because it gives the Spirit of
Christ, and righteousness through him.

The Law therefore pronouncing nothing but Judgment and condemnation against
us, as that which commands things impossible, by reason of our weakness,
terrifieth and amazeth the conscience: In which respect it is called, 2. Cor.
3. 7, 9.
The ministry of death and condemnation.

Contrariwise, the Gospel bringing glad tidings of peace and reconciliation,
quieteth and appeaseth the conscience, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Both parts of this
difference are found, Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. For MOSES thus describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does these things, shall
live thereby. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise,
Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? That is to bring Christ
from above. Or, Who shall descend into the deep? That is to bring Christ
again from the dead. But what says it? The Word is near thee, even in thy
mouth and in thine heart. This is the Word of Faith which we preach.

But if God bestow faith upon all and every of his Elect, what shall we then
say of Infants that dye in the Mothers Womb, or as soon as they are borne, who
cannot, as it seems, properly be said to have faith, and yet nevertheless
we cannot deny but the Mat. 19. 14.
Kingdom of God does appertain unto them? If it be clear that Infants have
no faith, then we must needs say, the Spirit of God in some other
unspeakable manner unites them unto Christ. But (yielding all due respect to
other men's opinions) I should think that were rather a quaere, then a ruled
case: for

First, As they have knowledge and other faculties of the mind, without which
no reasonable soul consists: so I do not see but they may have
supernatural Grace, some seeds of the habit of faith for the apprehending of
Christ, that are of the nature of faith, and faith it self in a kind (which
how small soever, suffices to salvation) does the weakness of the Organ of
the body make it impossible for God to work supernaturally in their soul?
and to give to little children whom his purpose is to save, at the least so
much illumination of the mind (more then is ordinary for that age) as may be
fit to receive the Grace of Christ? Those, whom in a moment, and at an instant,
as soon as they are taken up into Heaven, he fills with a whole Sea of
Knowledge and Understanding of Christ, more then all the Prophets and Apostles
had whilst they lived upon the Earth, can he not immediately before, sprinkle
them with one jot of Knowledge, as much Faith as the grain of a Mustard Seed;
and make them by the tip of the hand of the soul, and, as it were, the fingers
end, to touch him, whom they shall immediately have the full fruition of?

Secondly, The example of Jacob is very forceable for his, and his brothers
rushing together in the Womb, or dashing one against another. Jacobs holding
of Esau by the heel, the Prophet Hosh. ^2 3.
interprets to be a kind of striving with him for the Grace and Blessing.

Thirdly, Ier. 1. 5.
Jeremy was sanctified before he came out of the Womb: and Luke 1. 15.
John the Baptist filled with the Holy Ghost, being yet in his Mothers belly:
shall we think, that in the Womb they were in Christ, and so sanctified one
way, and when they came to years of understanding, by another?

Fourthly, Forasmuch as there is but one way of joining us to Christ, when we
come to Heaven, which is 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Sight, whereunto our faith now is answerable, being of the same nature and
quality, only differing in the measure (for faith is nothing else, but to
John 6. 40. and 12. 44, 45.
see and to behold him;) I cannot make my self believe, but the same way which
serves here for all the rest of Gods Elect, especially being of such near
affinity with that we shall have then, and rather to be termed a kind of 1.
Cor. 13. 21.
sight, then a divided member from it, does serve for children also, that as
there is but one life John 5. 24. and 6. 47.
begun here and perfected in Heaven, so there should be but one line to
lead unto it, namely, the light of the mind, to see and behold Christ, now,
in a Looking-glass; hereafter, face to face.

Fifthly, Of any other way or means for Infants to come by Righteousness or
Salvation, but by believing (the condition of the Covenant of Grace, as doing
is of the Covenant of works) the Scripture (so far as I can learn) speaks
not a Word; but to the contrary gives general and universal rules, without
any incling of exception, as John 17. 3. This is life everlasting, to know thee
the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Therefore some
spark of knowledge cannot be denied to these, who having the Son, 1. Ioh.
5. 11, 12:
in whom this life is, must needs be confessed to have everlasting life.

Again, John 6. our Savior defining first, what it is to come to him, John 6.
35.
He that comes to me, shall not hunger; and he that believes in me, shall
not thirst, immediately adds, Verse 37.
Whatsoever the Father gives me, (meaning all those whom God in his
everlasting counsel has appointed to be Christ's) shall come unto me, or
believe in me. The opposition that is made, Gal. 3. 22. The Scripture has
shut up all things (that is, all men, and whatsoever is of and in man) under
sin, that the promise by Faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those that
believe, proves, that Faith, which is the remedy, must needs be as general
as the disease that spreads over all. So the similitude, which our Savior does
enforce, John 3. 14. As MOSES lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must
the Son of man be lift up, that every one which believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. The brazen Serpent was figure of Christ, and
as none were helped by the Serpent, but those that looked upon it: No more does
any virtue come from Christ, but to those that believe in him.

Lastly, Gal 3. 7.
Those that are of Faith, they are the sons of ABRAHAM, for Romans 4. 16.
to all his seed, the promise is firm by Faith, and his title is Romans 4. 11.
The father of the faithful. But the Scripture makes him, Romans 4. 16.
the father of us all, and that all Romans 9. 8.
the children of the promise, that is, the whole number of Gods Elect (for of
that primarie cause of our salvation, Gods holy Election, Paul there disputes)
are reckoned in his seed: for since the cause why we are said the seed of
Abraham, is Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 16.
signed to be for the interest we have in that blessed seed, in whom Abraham
and all his posterity are partakers of the heavenly Inheritance. To exclude
Infants from being Abraham's seed, were as much as to bar them from having
part in Christ: whereupon it follows, and so the Apostle does conclude, Gal.
3. 8, 13, 14. that in the same manner as he obtained the blessing (which was by
Faith) so do all Nations of the World, Jews, and Gentiles, and every
particular person, all and as many as lay under the curse before.

But of this enough: we come unto the causes.

Faith comes not from our selves; it comes from the Holy Ghost, and is the
special work of the Spirit of Christ's, a may appear by the Prayer of the
Apostles, Lord, Luke 17. 5.
increase our faith; and by him that said, Mark 9. 24*
I believe, Lord, help my unbelief.

This work of the Spirit making us so to believe, is termed A drawing of us to
Christ, John 6. 4. Cant. 1. 3. A Calling, Romans 8. 30. but in a more strict
signification then the calling spoken of before, and many ways differing from
it: for

That is but a Calling to the Profession of Christ; and therefore outward and
external only: This, to the participation and enjoying of Christ himself;
and therefore a true and effectual Calling.

That but to the visible Church: This to be a member of the true Catholic and
invisible Church of God. The cause that moves God to bestow this gift of Faith
upon us, is his own special Grace, and the good pleasure of his Will. So
says the Apostle, Phil. 1. 29. To you it is freely given to believe in Christ.
and Acts 28. 27. He did much help them that had believed through Grace. We
come therefore to apprehend Christ, only because through his Grace and
Goodness we are apprehended of him. wrought (ordinarily) by preaching.


The only instrument that God uses ordinarily to beget faith, is the
preaching of the Word, as the To. 10. 14, 17.
Apostle says, How can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and
how can they hear, without a Preacher? concluding; Therefore Faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the Word or Ordinance of God. And 1. Cor. 1. 21.
again, Because in the wisdom of God (this Frame and Government of the World,
wherein the wisdom of God shines so clearly, the World yet by that Wisdom
knew not God) it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save those
that believe: as in another Romans 1. 16.
place he says, that the preaching of Christ is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes. And JAMES James 1. 18.
Because he would, he begat us by the Word of Truth: for this cause he
calls James 1. 21.
it, The ingraffed Word, because by the Ministry thereof, God changes us
anew: and the Scripture Mat. 13. 4.
elsewhere compares it to seed, that as no Harvest can be without sowing of
the Ground, nor no Generation without the seed of our fleshly Parents, no more
Mat. 13. 23.
can any Faith without hearing of the Word, nor any Regeneration, without the
Seed of the Word of God. 1. Pet. 1. 23, 24. Being borne again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible. That is the Word of God, who lives and
abides for ever, which makes much to commend the excellency and necessity
of GODS holy Ordinance of Preaching.

Not that preaching has this fruit and effect by any natural virtue or power
that is in it, but by the Romans 10. 17.
Ordinance and Blessing of God, who uses to hide and conceal his own
supernatural work in our conversion, as it is the Glory of God to hide his
counsel, Proverbs 25. 2.

Neither in saying so, do we tie God unto the means, as though without
Preaching it could not be wrought at all: for as in the things of nature, he
is not tied unto the means, being himself the* Lord of nature: no more must
we judge him in this work above nature, wherein he takes glory to himself,
to deal how and which way he will in an extraordinary sort. Sometimes in
respect of the times, sometimes, in respect of the persons.

In the ruinous estate of the CHVRCH, when there wants a set and stablished
form of government, it pleases him many times to bless the very sound of the
Word, though it be but read or talked of, and sometimes other means so far
as to make it effectual for the planting of faith in the heart; as John 4. 39.
many of the Samaritanes were brought to believe in Christ, only upon the
woman's words, which bare record of him. And the Romans 10. 18.
Apostle to the Romans shows, that all the World was without excuse, to
pretend that they had not heard, seeing the sound of the Apostles Doctrine was
gone abroad into all the Earth. The Wisemen also, Mat. 2. were led by a
Star, as it were, by the hand, unto the true knowledge of Christ. And Revel.
12. 6. it is said, that the woman which fled into the Wilderness, had a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand, two hundred and
threescore days.

Of the extraordinary work, in respect of the persons, we have an example in
the course which it pleases him to take with Infants that are not come to
years of discretion and understanding, as also with men of age, which have not
capacity; be it natural fools, mad men or deafe-borne, in whom the Spirit
of God works immediately without this outward Ministry.

To the faithful this prerogative does belong, that wherefore with these God
makes indeed his Covenant.
God not only offers, but makes with them his Covenant. In the Scripture it
is called, A striking, smiting, or as the word does signify, (...)
A Cutting off a Covenant. The phrase seems to be taken from the custom of
old-time, in making of solemn Covenants, which was, to cut a beast in twain,
and to pass between the parts of it, Genesis 15. 17, 18. Ier. 34. 18, 19.

The qualities or adioynts of Faith are three.

First, Apprehending Christ now absent only in his By virtue whereof our
Faith, albeit apprehending Christ absent, it apprehend him weakly:
Word and Sacraments, the knowledge and apprehension must needs be feeble and
weak.

Wherein notwithstanding there are distinct degrees: neither are the faithful
that lay hold on Christ, endued all with the like measure of Faith: for there
is a weak and a slender hold, as it were, by the fingers end; there is a
strong and a fast hold, as it were, with the whole hand.

The first of these is called Mat. 8. 26. (...).
A little Faith, and Mat. 17. 20.
Faith as much as a grain of Mustard Seed. But how weak soever, the Lord
accepts it, and promises not to quench so much as the Esaias 42. 3.
smoking Flax: yea, he accepts the very desire to believe (which is the
beginning and least step of Faith) for faith it self. And this kind of Faith
is to be seen in the father Mat. 9. 24.
of the child that cried with tears, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief.

The other by a Metaphore taken from a Ship, that comes into the Haven with
full Sails, is called Plerophoria, or a full assurance, whereof we have R^. 4.
20, 21.
Abraham for an Example, Who was not weak through unbelief, but was
strengthened in the Faith, and gave glory to God, being fully assured that what
he had promised, he was able also to do.

Our faith being weak, is through the gracious operation yet confirmed by the
Word and Sacraments, Prayer and other holy means,
of the same Spirit that first wrought it, strengthened and supported by the
Word and Sacraments, which are the nourishing and preserving causes; that so
long as here we live, we have a continual need of the Ministry and all
other holy means. Whereupon Paul bidding the Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20.
not to quench the Spirit, immediately adds, Despise not Prophecies.

Another thing proper unto Faith is this, that where it never lets go the
hold
all other Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, if they have not Faith (which is the
Root) may wither and come to nothing, this never can be lost, but grows to
the end.

Wherefore out of this one Root, two branches, as it were, do spring. And
because they are both worthy of special consideration, it shall not be amiss
distinctly to speak of them.

One, (which is the second quality of Faith) that he which once has this
Faith, is sure to have it still. So says our Savior Christ, Luke 22. 31. in
the person of Peter, giving a perpetual comfort to all that are his, I have
prayed for thee, that thy Faith should not fail. In another place he says,
John 6. 35.
He that comes unto me, shall never hunger, and he that believes in me,
shall never thirst. Agreeable whereunto is that of JOHN, 1. John 2. 19.
They went out from among us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of
us, they would have abidden with us. For this is that sweet and everlasting
promise that God has made unto his Church, Ier. 32. 39, 40
I will not put my fear into their hearts, that they shall never depart away
from me all the days of their life. And excellent to this purpose is the
speech of our Savior Christ, John 10. 27, 28, 29, 30.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give
everlasting Life unto them, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pull
them out of my hand. My Father which has given them me, is greater then all;
and none can pull them out of my Fathers hand; I and my Father are one. And
again, John 6. 37, 39, 40.
Every one that the Father gives me, comes unto me, and him that comes
unto me, I will not cast out, but I will raise him up in the latter Day.

To conclude that which is said, Mat. 16. 18. that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church, must needs be true of every one which by Faith is
made a member of the Church. So that our faith, how weak soever it be in it
self, yet it is firm and strong, in, and through him that has promised to
hold it up: so as all adversary powers shall not be able to root it out; which
is the fullness of excellency purchased for us by Christ; that being quickened
from death, and a spiritual life put into us, we are no more at our own hand,
left to keep our selves, and so in danger to lose all again, as Adam did; but
have the promise of a continual support and stay, by the mighty working of
Christ's Spirit, till we come to his heavenly Kingdom, where is nothing but
Eternity: And therefore he that once believes, is said John 3. 36.
already to have eternal Life, to Ephesians. 2. 6.
be raised up, and seated in heavenly places, Romans 8. 30.
glorified, etc. for the certainty and undoubted assurance of it. And Romans 5.
1.
being justified by Faith, says the Apostle, We have peace with God; which
could not possibly be, if we were not sure to continue in the state of Grace.

As for those exhortations so common in the Scripture, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
He that thinks he stands, let him take held lest he fall. 2. John ver. 8.
Look to your selves, that we lose not the good things which we have wrought,
but that we may receive a full reward. Revel. 3. 11.
Hold fast that thou have, that no man take away thy Crown. Heb. 12. 15.
Take heed that no man fall from the Grace of God. 1. These. 5. 19.
Quench not the Spirit: and such like, whereby it seems that the Spirit of
Adoption and Sanctification, proper to Gods Children, may be lost:

The answer to them, and all other of that kind, is short and ready: They
serve to stir us up to watchfulness and diligence; and as the Apostle
speaks, to work our salvation in fear and trembling; not to teach what is
possible for true Believers to do: for as God does assure the faithful, that
they shall persevere and hold on unto the end: so he has appointed Exhortation
and the Preaching of the Word, as a means whereby he will nourish this holy
fire in us.

But do not the sins and grievous falls of GODS Elect impeach the truth of
this Doctrine?

Not a whit: for the 1. John 3. 9.
seed of God abiding in them, makes that they cannot sin totally and
finally, without recovery: but are at the length raised up again; and in the
mean time, their Faith and Grace is not extinct and gone, how sore soever it
may be shaken; as is evident to be seen in Peter, whose sin being of that
nature, that (the sin against the Holy Ghost except) a greater can scarcely
be imagined, yet his Luke 22. 32.
Faith, supported by the Prayer of our Savior Christ (who has John 17.
prayed in like sort for all that are his) in all that conflict did not fail.
And David, after his fact with Vriahs Wife, and the murdering of her Husband,
prays, Psalm. 51. 13.
Take not thy holy Spirit from me. Therefore he had not lost it.

The other point, which is the third quality of faith, but continually grows,
is, that continually it grows. Therefore the Romans 1. 17.
Apostle says, that by the preaching of the Gospel, the Righteousness of God
is reueiled from Faith to Faith: That is a Faith that grows and increases
continually, being nourished and helped by meditation of the Word of God,
serious and faithful Prayer, and other means which God has sanctified, to
keep this holy 2. Tim. 1. 6.
fire still within us, that it never should go out, but flame forth more and
more.

Faith, even when it cease to be Faith (for as we till we come to see
Christ in his Glory:
read, 1. Cor. 13. 13. Now and no longer, abides Faith) yet even then we
cannot give her lost, since she grows into a greater and a far surpassing
light to see Christ in his heavenly Kingdom: for Faith is in this life, and
sight in the World to come, as the Apostle does distinguish them, 2. Cor. 5. 7.
We walk by Faith, and not by Sight. And 1. Pet. 1. 8.
PETER, Whom though ye see him not, yet ye believe in him. Sight therefore
has place in the next World, and apprehends Christ, as he is in himself
then present, without this Glass of the Word and Sacraments. 1. John 3. 2.
When he shall be manifested, we shall see him as he is. 1. Cor. 13. 12. Then
(after this life) we shall see him face to face.

And both these are in nature and essence one: for even Faith is a kind of
seeing Christ, John 6. 69. and 1. John. 4 16. Every one that sees the Son,
and believes in him, shall have everlasting Life: only they differ in measure
and quantity. In Faith this seeing of Christ, the knowledge and apprehension
of him, is feeble and weak, 1. Cor. 13. 12. Now we see in a Glass. In sight
it is full and perfect, as it is said there, But after that which is perfect is
come, etc.

With Faith, Hope is always joined. By Hope, I So as Faith has always Hope,
that is, an assured waiting for of that blessed Sight going with it.
mean the blessed expectation and waiting for of eternal Life. But because
Hope is commonly taken as of things doubtful and uncertain, that to hope for
salvation, seems no more, then to stand in suspense, and questionable whether
one shall be saved or no, it is good we understand the very nature of this
Grace. Hope therefore (to speak in general) is an expectation and waiting for
of some good thing, not present, but promised, and to come: Romans 8. 24, 25
for hope which is seen, is no hope: for how can a man hope for that which he
sees? but if we hope for that we see not, we do wait for it with patience,
says the Apostle to the Romans. Therefore according to the nature of the
promise, so does Hope take hold doubtingly, where either there is no special,
and certain promise, or the faith and credit of the Promise-Maker may be
called in question. But that hope which the Scripture speaks of, and which
here we deal with, respecting celestial Happiness, and eternal Glory in
Heaven, which Titus 1. 2, 3.
God, that cannot lie, has promised in his Word, apprehends the same most
certainly, without all exception; and therefore is said, Romans 5. 5.
not to make ashamed; being a Noble and a Royal Virtue, and of a Divine
Offspring, the Daughter of Faith, and Mother of Patience, Daughter and
inseparable Companion of Faith: for what is Faith else, but Heb. 11. 1.
the groundworke or foundation, and subsistence of things hoped for?

Again, it is the Mother of Patience, as we heard even now out of the Epistle
to the Romans: If Romans ^. 25.
we hope for that we see not, we do wait for it with patience. Therefore the
Apostle elegantly terms it, Heb. 6. 19.
The Anchor of our souls, to stay us in the midst of the storms and
troubles of this life, til we ariue at the haue^ of all our rest.

Faith and Hope do thus differ: Faith imbraceth Christ, as present, and in him
all Happiness in general: Hope looks at one certain Happiness to come,
which is the inioying of the glorious presence of God, of CHRIST, and of the
holy Angels in Heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Regeneration.

THE fruit and glorious effect of Faith, that The fruit of an effectual
calling is, that destroying of the old world, that is, our sinful and cursed
estate, by the power of his death and sufferings, he makes
is, of Christ by Faith apprehended of Gods Elect, is this; that destroying in
them the old World, that is, our sinful and cursed estate by the power of his
death and sufferings, as the Apostle teaches, Gal. 6. 14. and in other places:
he makes of the true Church, a new, a heavenly World, giving his Son unto
them, and Righteousness, Holiness, and life everlasting in and through him.

Many points of great weight, and singular use, arise from hence, seriously to
be attended.

First, Here is the real and royal performance of the Covenant, which God,
that cannot lie, not only offers unto all, to whose ears the sound of the
Word does come, and strikes hands with such as by Faith make it theirs, but
gives and performs the very truth thereof, when they are once entered into
the society of the Covenant: wherefore it is called, (...)
The exhibiting of the Covenant, a putting into possession, as it were, by
liuerie and seisin, Ezech. 20. 37. and Paul says, Gal. 3. 23. The promise by
the Faith of Jesus Christ, is given to those that believe. So we find
recorded, Ier. 31. 34, 34. This is the Covenant which I will make with the
House of Israel, I will put my Law in their mind, and write it in their heart,
and will be their God, and they shall be my people: I will be favorable to
their iniquities, and their sins will I remember no more. And again, Ezech.
36. 25, 26, 27. I will power upon you clean waters, and ye shall be clean
from your pollutions, and from all your abominations will I cleanse you, and I
will give unto you a new heart, and a new Spirit will I put in the midst of
you: and I will take away the heart of stone out of your flesh, and will give
unto you a heart of flesh, and my Spirit will I put in the midst of you, and
make that ye shall walk in mine Ordinances, and my Judgments ye shall observe
and do.

Secondly, This Covenant is exhibited but to a few, of the true Church, Ier.
31. 33.
the House of Israel, Gods faithful people; whereas all mankind was partaker
of the former Covenant: for in Adam all were made righteous: Wherefore Faith is
the only means and instrument, whereby God in this life gives his Son, or
Christ gives himself unto us, and is made ours by spiritual Regeneration; as
the Apostle witnesses, 1. Ioh. 5. 1.
Every one that believes that Jesus is that Christ, is borne of God. And
again, Ioh. 1. 12.
As many as received him, he gave unto them this dignity, to become the sons
of God, even to those that believe in his name, who are not borne of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Gal. 3. 26.
All ye, says the Apostle to the Galatians, are the sons of God, through
faith in Christ Jesus. This alone puts us in possession of Christ, and of
all the good things we have from him: for Ephesians. 3. 17.
he dwells in our hearts by faith: and there is Ioh. 6. 35.
no way to feed upon him, but by believing in him: no way to life, but by
feeding on him. Otherwise we cannot have his Spirit, which Gal. 3. 14.
we receive by faith only, nor Act. 26. 18.
have our sins forgiven us, or Christ's righteousness imputed to us, which is
every where called, Romans 4. 11, 13.
The righteousness of faith, Romans 9. 13. and 10. 6.
The righteousness by faith, Romans 3. 22.
The righteousness of God by faith, Romans 4. 5, 9.
Faith imputed for righteousness. And Faith said to be that, whereby we
Abacuc. 2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 10. 38.
are righteous, whereby we Romans 3. 26, 28. and 5. 1. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 8, 24.
are justified, (not for any inherent quality that is in Faith, more than in
Love, Hope, or other virtues; but because it apprehends Christ, and makes
him ours, who is our only righteousness) our hearts cannot else be purified,
for Act. 15. 9.
that Faith does alone: Else can we not be partakers of the promised
bessednesse Gal. 3. 9.
which is given to the faithful only. So wonderful is the work of Faith.

Thirdly, Here is the very life and power of the Kingdom a new,
of Christ, and that wherein his glory shines incomparably, most of all, in
that he frames and fashioneth us from above, to be new Creatures; of natural
men, spiritual heavenly men; of carnal, Psalm. 102. 19. So Ephesians. 2. 10.
a people created again, as the Psalmist speaks, whereby he makes a new
face of things, and as it were, another world: Esaias 65. 17.
I make new heavens, and a new earth. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away,
behold, all things are become new. The Author to the Hebrews terms this
excellent condition and estate, Heb. 2. 5.
The world to come, in opposition to this present world, whereof the Apostle
says, that Gal. 1. 4.
Christ has delivered us out of this present evil world. Wherefore by the
world to come, is not meant (as in our common speech it is, and as some Luke
18. 30. Mark 10. 30.
other where the Scripture takes it) the life that shall be hereafter, but
the world here restored, in, and through Christ, even from the first promise
made in Paradise, and fully to be perfected, when God shall be all in all: for
the world corrupted by the sin of ADAM (that whereof all men naturally are
members) goes under the name of the old world: 2. Pet. 3. 15.
this wherein righteousness dwells, of the new.

To note more expressly the quality of this new world, a heavenly World,
I call it heavenly, as the Scripture does in diverse places, opposing it to
that which is terrene and earthly. This is not, says Iam. 3. 15.
JAMES, the wisdom that comes from above, but earthly, natural, deuilish.
And the Apostle to the Colossians, Coloss. 3. 1, 2, 5.
Seek the things which are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of
God: mind the things which are above, not which are upon the earth: Mortify
therefore your members which are on the earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, etc
So to the Philip. Phil. 3. 19, 20.
Whose end is destruction, which mind earthly things: But our conversation (or,
if you will, Free-burgesship) is in Heaven. Wherefore the City, whereof we are
thus Free Burgesses, is called, Reu. 3. 12.
The City of God, Reu. 21. ^. and 22. 19.
The holy City, Reu. 3. 12. and 21. 2.
New Jerusalem, which comes down from God out of Heaven, Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem above, which (as it is there said) is the mother of us all.

The World therefore thus formed and fashioned anew by the power of Christ's
Spirit, is An everlasting World, the Citizens and Free Burgesses, Esaias 44. 7.
An everlasting people, Christ the Prince, Esaias 9. 6.
Father of eternity, and the Kingdom it self an everlasting Kingdom, that
shall not have any end. So says DANIEL, Dan. 2. 44.
It shall destroy and consume all other Kingdoms, but it self shall stand for
ever: Dan. 7. 14.
His dominion is a perpetual Dominion, that cannot pass, and his Kingdom, a
Kingdom that cannot be destroyed. And the Prophet MICA, Micab. 4. 7.
to the same purpose; JEHOVAH shall reign over them, in Mount Sion, from this
time forth for evermore.

This is it which the Luke 1. 33.
Angel tells MARIE, He shall reign over the house of JACOB for ever, and of
his Kingdom there shall be no end.

For where it 1. Cor. 15. 24.
is said, that this Kingdom must have an end, and that he shall deliver it up
to God his Father: We must understand, that the Kingdom of Christ is two
ways to be considered; one, as he rules and reigns in the hearts of the
faithful, and is the head of his Church, which cannot have any end; for he
must continue the Head of his Church for ever. Wherefore the word which is
commonly translated ( End) may perhaps in that place rather signify
Perfection; this Kingdom of his being so far from having an end with the end
and dissolution of the world, that contrariwise it shines, and shows it
self most, when all his enemies shall be subdued under his feet, that he may
reign glorious in his Saints, who being then wholly led and governed by his
Spirit, shall not so much be subject to him, as knit and united with him. But
the Kingdom of Christ is also taken for that government, which for the
Churches sake, and to bring men to faith and obedience of the Truth, he has
over all the world beside, brideling and subduing Satan, Sin, and all the
enemies of our salvation, which then shall cease, when having finished the
whole work of our full and perfect Redemption, he shall crown with
immortality those that are his.

Our Savior Christ comparing the Kingdom of weakly here by Faith, and
therefore by means of the Word (ordinarily) which is called the Kingdom of
Grace.
Heaven to Math. 13. 31.
a grain of Mustard Seed, which being at the first the least of all seeds,
becomes very great: and to Math. 11. 33.
Leaven, which at the first is in some part of the dough, but in time spreads
it self over the whole lump; teaches us the order and manner of Gods
proceedings in the things that have been handled. The beginnings weak and
tender: all perfection reserved till we come to heaven. Whereupon this part of
Christ's Kingdom is distinguished into the Kingdom of Grace, h Esaias 59. 21.
and the Kingdom of Glory.

The Kingdom of Grace, which is, and stands by faith, and therefore by the
Word (the subject of faith) ordinarily, that in the Church of believers the
Word and the Spirit do always go together, the Church never destitute of the
Spirit, the Spirit never separated from the Word. As the Prophet joins them
by an everlasting Covenant, Esaias 59. Esaias 59 21.
This is my Covenant with them, says JEHOVAH: My Spirit which is in thee, and
my Word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed; nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
this time forth for evermore.

So vain a thing it is, whilst we live Anabaptists and such like fanaticall
spirits.
in this World, to dream of a Spirit without the Word. The Spirit of Christ
therefore working by Faith, the work it self must needs be of the nature of
Faith, weak and imperfect, as that is.

But in the Kingdom of Glory coming to see perfectly hereafter by Sight,
(and therefore immediately by Christ's Spirit:) and that is called the Kingdom
of Glory.
Christ, all things shall be wrought by the present beholding of him, the
vision of his face, and the immediate working of his Spirit. There shall then
be Reu. 21. 22, 23.
no Temple; but the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple: for when
the Faith whereby now we walk, must cease, then the preaching of the Word, and
the administering of the Sacraments shall also cease. The 1. Cor. 13. 9, 10
Apostle telling us that whether prophesying and interpretation of the
Scriptures, or speaking of strange Tongues, (which God in those beginnings of
the Gospel graced his Church withal, for the winning of men to the obedience
of the Faith) or knowledge and instruction of other, (being the ordinary way
whereby we attain here to knowledge) they shall cease and be abolished: for
when in God himself we shall behold all things, then to no purpose shall these
helps serve, which now we use either to teach, or to be taught.

Wherefore here is all and all manner of perfection: 1. John 3. 2.
When he shall be manifested (says JOHN) we shall be like him: for we shall
see him as he is.

This so great a work, to make the World anew, the by the power of his
Resurrection.
Scripture commonly does attribute to the virtue of his Resurrection, whereat
because the Glory of his Kingdom did actually begin, though the efficacy
thereof were ever since the fall of Adam, it self obtayneth the name of the
Kingdom Mat. 16. 28.
of the Son of Man, being the groundwork and foundation of our 1. Pet. 1. 3.
Regeneration, Romans 4. 24.
Justification, Romans 6. ^, 5.
Sanctification, and 1. Cor. 15 20. 1 Thessalonians 4. 14.
rising from the dead, yea, and of the 1. Pet. 3. 21. The day of his rising,
saving of our souls, as in the particulars hereafter shall be seen.

A worthy fruit indeed of our Saviors Resurrection, and (no doubt) I may
truly say, a greater and a more noble work then the first Creation: whereupon
the Day wherein he arose and renewed the World again, being the Mat. 28. 1.
Mark 16. 9. Luke 24. 1. John 20. 1.
first day of the Creation, which the Scripture is wont to call, The first day
of the week, because it began next after the Jews Sabbath, is, in
perpetual memory of that benefit, become the Day which we Christians do
keep holy; the Day being changed, but not a Day of rest abolished.

And that the Day was so changed, is easy to be proved which was the first day
of the Creation, is (an everlasting remembrance of that benefit) come in the
place of the Sabbath,
out of the Scriptures: for first, on this Day the Apostles John 2. 19, 26.
Acts 2. 1.
kept their solemn Assemblies and (...).
Congregation-meetings, on this Day they came together to Acts 16 13.
Prayer, Acts 20. 7.
preaching of the Word, breaking of bread, etc. on this Day were 1. Cor. 16. 2.
collections and gatherings for the poor: And Revel. 1. 10.
John on this Day gave himself in a special manner to spiritual Meditations.
Paul Acts 20. ^, 7.
likewise having election of seven whole days; wherein he abode at Troas, made
only choice of this.

Secondly, Our Savior Christ himself gave testimony to this Day, gracing it
with his Mark 16. 1^ Luke 24. 21. John 20. 19, 26.
apparitions, Acts 2. 1.
distributions of the Holy Ghost, etc. For the Leu. 23. 15, 16
Feast of Pentecost fell always upon this first Day of the week. But you will
say, We read no where of any Commandment given for such an alteration.
Neither is it necessary: the constant practice of Christ and his Apostles and
of the Churches then generally without exception, is a rule to bind all Ages
in perpetuity, seeing the Apostles did nothing of their own heads, but as
they were taught of Christ during those forty days that he abode with them
after his Resurrection: And yet if a Commandment were needful, is not that an
express Commandment, 1. Cor. 16. 2. Touching the gathering for the Saints, as
I have appointed in the Churches of Galatia, so also do ye? Every first Day
of the week, let every one lay aside, etc. which is a special duty of the
Sabbath Day.

I verily think, the Psalmist so long before pointed at it, when he says,
Psalm. 118. 24.
This same Day (wherein Christ, the Stone which the builders refused, is, by
his rising from the dead, become the head of the corner, Psalm. 102. 19.
Prince of a new created people, and Lord of the Heb. 2. 5. etc.
World to come) JEHOVAH has made, that is to say, magnified and made famous,
to be celebrated with Praises and Thanks. giuings in his Church for ever: As
the word ( made) is taken, 1. Sam. 12. 6. Esaias 43. 7. and in diverse other
places.

And what marvel though the Day suffered a change, when the whole World it
self was changed?

This, besides the change of the Day it self, brought and
with it two other notable changes also:

First, Of the name: from the Sabbath, to be called called the Lords Day,
by a greater and more honorable Title, Revel. 1. 10.
The Lords Day, consecrated to his Service. So as the very name is become a
Badge of our Christian and holy Profession, seuering us from Jews, Turks, and
other Enemies to the Name of Christ. Neither shall you find in all the New
Testament, that the Day which the Churches celebrate, was, at any time after
Christ's Ascension, called The Sabbath Day.

Secondly, In that it begins not on the Evening of beginning when he arose,
and began to renew the World.
the Day before, as the Jewish Sabbaths did, but at the dawning of the Day,
when Mark 16. 9. John 20. 1.
our Savior began the work of his Resurrection.

Now, that the Day which we are to sanctify, begins at that time, is made
good by the practice of Saint Paul, who tarrying at Troas seven whole days,
preached upon this Day, and continue in his Sermon unto midnight, spent the
rest of the night in holy conference unto the dawning of the day, and then
departed, Act. 20. 7, 11.

Proceed we now to the rest that follows, concerning This great work has
two parts; Regeneration and Salvation.
the excellency of Christ's Kingdom. The beginning when(...) Regeneration by his
Spirit: the fruits or qualities whereunto we are regenerate, Wisdom,
Righteousness and Sanctification: The end and accomplishment, Happiness and
Immortality: for so our Savior teaches, John 3. 3, 5. Unless a man be
borne again, he cannot see (or enter) into the Kingdom of God.

Regeneration being first, and the groundwork of Regeneration is
the rest, we are to see what Regeneration is.

I define it to be our spiritual incorporating into Christ; between which
and the work of Sanctification, the difference lies plain: for as Creation
is distinguished from the qualities wherein men were created: so is this Now
Creation from the qualities whereunto we are regenerate. And as Generation is
one thing, and the corruption that Parents beget us in, another: so is our New
birth, one thing; and the Holiness or Sanctification which we have thereby,
another. This appears manifestly, 1. John 5. 8. where Spirit, Water, Blood,
that is to say, Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification, are distinguished.
And 1. John 3. 1, 2, 3. where purifying of our selves, is made an effect of
being the sons of God. So our Savior says, John 3. 6. That which is borne
of the Spirit: whereby he means our part regenerate, is Spirit, that is to
say, wholly spiritual, holy and sanctified: As that which is borne of the
flesh, (meaning all of us by fleshly Generation) is flesh, that is to say,
carnal in every part, and in all the powers both of body and soul, impure
and unclean, and subject to the wrath of God. Peter also, when he says, 1.
Pet. 1. 22, 23.
Having your souls purified by obeying of the Truth, through the Spirit, unto
brotherly love, without hypocrisy, from a pure heart, love one another
fervently, being borne again, etc. makes a difference between these three,
Regeneration, Sanctification, and the fruits thereof, in loving one another.
This is yet more evident, in that Regeneration is that which John 1. 12, 13
makes us the sons of God: but To. 8, 9, 10, 11
Sanctification is the work of Gods Spirit, when (...) once his sons,
although these things in time cannot be severed, but in order and nature only.

I make therefore Regeneration to be the whole work of our being in Christ, and
the means of those two notable Graces that we have from him, Justification
and Sanctification; as Generation is the means of that corruption that from
our fleshly Parents comes down upon us: so our Savior takes it in the John
3. 3.
place before named, propounding this as the sum of Christianity, Unless a
man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And this Regeneration
is indeed a great and a wonderful work of God, a Miracle of all Miracles, and
the only Miracle which now adays he works ordinarily in his Church,
raising men from death to life: (a more excellent life then we lost in Adam)
whereupon it is called A quickening, Ephesians. 2. 5.

To proceed then to the opening of the former definition:

First, The work of Regeneration is altogether heavenly o. ^ spiritual
and spiritual, as in Generation all things are fleshly and carnal; whereupon
it is called, The Seed of God, 1. John 3. 9. This deceived that great Doctor
Nicodemus, that when our Savior taught him, Unless a man be borne again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God; he answered, How John 3. 4.
can this be? Can a man that is old, enter into his Mothers womb, and be
borne again? Not understanding that all things here are spiritual. The
begetter not a man, as our Parents according to the flesh, are; but the Spirit
of God himself: That John 3. 6.
which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, John 1. 13.
which are not borne of blood, nor of the will of man, but of GOD. 1. Cor. 12.
13.
By one Spirit we are of the will of the flesh, all baptized into one Body,
etc. The seed wherewith we are begotten, is the 1. John 3. 9.
seed of God, not corruptible, but immortal; the work it self spiritual:
For that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, John 3. 6. And thus does the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 45. compare our heavenly and spiritual condition that we
have by Christ, opposing it to that we had in Adam, who, though he were made
perfectly holy, yet was made only natural: The first man ADAM was made a
living soul, (or a natural person) the last ADAM was made a quickening
Spirit. Again, Verse 49.
Such as the earthly one is, such also are those that are earthly, and such as
the heavenly one is, such also are those that are heavenly. And as we bear the
Image of the earthly one, so shall we bear the Image of the heavenly one.

Secondly, I note the dignity of those that GOD incorporating into Christ.
vouchsafes the honor of a new Birth unto, that it is a translating of them
from the rotten stock of their Parents according to the flesh, and an in
graffing of them into the noble Stock of his Son Christ Jesus; that as we
are of one fleshly mould and substance with our Parents, so are we spiritually
of one nature and substance with Christ, and are truly and indeed; (but in a
heavenly and spiritual manner) bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, as
the Apostle says, By 1. Cor. 12. 13.
one Spirit we all are baptized into one Body, and are made to drink into
one Spirit; that is, are incorporate into Christ, and made partakers of his
whole person both of his body and soul. And hereupon we are said to be 2.
Cor. 5. 17.
in Christ, to Gal. 3. 27.
put on Christ, that Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ dwells in us, and that we are his Heb. 3. 6.
House and 2. Cor. 6. 16.
Temples, etc. This near conjunction, our Savior expresses by the similitude
of a Vine and the branches, John 15. 1, 2. The Apostle, of a Body and the
members, 1. Cor. 12. 12. and again, of a man and wife in wedlock, Ephesians. 5.
23. The husband is the wives head as Christ is the head of the Church.

Thus the Prophet also speaks, Hosh. 2. 18. I will espouse thee to be mine
for ever. The Song of Solomon, and the five and fortieth Psalm are wholly
spent in the celebrating of this spiritual Marriage. And Ezechiel in his
sixteenth Chapter does notably declare it from the eighth Verse, unto the
foureteenth, I stretched the wing of my garment over thee, taking there for my
Wife: and being thy Husband and Redeemer, I covered thy nakedness, and swear,
and entered into a Covenant with thee, that thou might be mine. I washed thee
with water, and washed away the abundance of blood from thee, and anointed thee
with Oil, as great Princes were wont to have their Wives to be, before they
came together: meaning the anointing of the Spirit, whereby she was regenerate
and restored to her beauty. To conclude, says he, I clothed thee with
broydered work, and shod thee with Badgers skins, and I girded thee about
with fine Linen, and covered thee with Silk: I decked thee also with
Ornaments, and I put Bracelets upon thy hands, and a Chain on thy neck, and I
put a Frontlet upon thy face, and Earings, in thine ears, and a beautiful
Crown upon thine head: that is, I gave thee all things both for necessity and
delight, crowned thee with beauty and great honor, and made thee a Queen by
thy match with me.

The man thus borne again, or so much of him as is regenerate, is called 1.
Cor. 5. 5. Gal. 5. 17.
Spirit, A Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 20.
new man, or a man new created, The Romans 7. 22, 25.
mind, The Romans 7. 22. Ephesians. 3. 16.
inner man, The Spirit, principally in regard of the Author and Efficient of
it, the Spirit of God, and of that whole heavenly and spiritual work, whereof
we heard before, A man new created, to show both the excellency and
difficulty of the work: the excellency, as being all cast into a new mould,
that our fleshlinesse may be put off: the difficulty, in that it is no less
a piece of work, then to make the World again, that so we may learn to
ascribe the Glory of it unto God alone: For Psalm. 100. 3.
he has made us, and we have not made our selves to be his flock, and the
sheep of his pasture. And as the Apostle says to the Ephesians. 1. 10.
Ephesians, We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works.

Lastly, Because in our m(...)e and inward parts, this renewing does specially
show it self, as our natural corruption does, specially in the flesh; thereof
it is, that it has the name also of the mind and inner man. All which,
together with the work of Regeneration, comprehend also the qualities wherein,
or whereunto we are regenerate: for these things, though they be
distinguished, yet cannot be sundred or divided.

From this our incorporating into Christ, four things do follow:

First, In that we are so incorporate as is aforesaid, Christ himself must
needs be the Head of this Incorporation, and we the body, members of Christ
our Head, and members one of another, as the Apostle speaks in many places,
He Ephesians. 1. 22.
has made him Head over all unto the Church, which is his Body, the fullness
of him that fills all things in all: for 1. Cor. 12. 12, ^7.
as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body
which is one, they being many, are one body: so is Christ. Now ye are the
body of Christ, and members particularly. We Ephesians. 5. 30, 32
are members of his Body, of his flesh, and of his bones. I speak of Christ
and of his Church. Col. 1. 24.
I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ, for his Body which is the
Church. We Romans 12. 5.
being many, are one Body in Christ, and every one one another members.

The (...).
The Papists, which teach that the true Catholic Church of Christ consists
of wicked and good together.
Church, and every member of it, is quickened by his Spirit, and lives by his
life, as Gal. 20. 20.
Paul says, It is no more I that live, but Christ lives in me. Whereupon,
because CHRIST reigns there so gloriously by the power of his Spirit, this
true Church is many times called, The John 3. 5.
Kingdom of God.

And as there is but one Christ, no more can there be but one Church. There is
one Body, and one Spirit, says Ephesians. 4 4, 5, 6
Paul to the Ephesions, (...)n as ye were called in one hope of your vocation;
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, etc. And to the
Corinths, Because the bread (that Loaf and holy Sacrament whereof we all eat,
the Badge of our conjunction with Christ) is one, therefore we that are many,
are one 1. Cor. 10. ^7.
Body. Thus also does Solomon sing in his Divine Song, My Cant. 6. 6.
Dove is one.

And as there is but one Church, no more there is but one Head, Hosh. 1. 11.
that is, Christ, one Sheepfold, and one Shepherd, as he himself speaks,
John 10. 16. And this Title of Head of the Church, the Apostle gives him, as
it were by excellency, above all other creatures, Colos. 1. 18. He is (...).
that The Papists will have the Pope to be the head of the Church, and so make
of it a Monster with two heads.

And where they pretend the Pope to be only a Ministerial head, it is
ridiculous: for

First, If they deny him that property, and those offices which belong unto a
head, then they make him no Head at all.

Secondly, Christ himself being always effectually present in the Church by
his Spirit, as he says, Mat. 28. 20. I am with you always, unto the end of
the World, has no need of a Deputy or Vicar, nor can have any: for by the
rule of all Law and reason, Commissions and Deputations have no place in the
presence o^ the party. The Pope therefore bearing himself as head of the
Church, and taking upon him most sacrilegiously all that belongs to the Head,
is that Antichrist, the man of sin, of whom we read, 2 Thessalonians 2. 3. etc.
for Paul there speaks nor of one particular person, as the Papists fondly
surmise, but of the whole body and succession of that Antichristian Sect;
which kind of phrase is common in the Scripture* as Esaias 2^. 15. Tyrus shall
be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one King: that is,
during all the time that the Babylonian Kings shall flourish from
Nebuchadnezzar unto Cyrus, which lasted seventy years in the succession of
diverse Kings. So Dan. 7. 3. it is said, Four great beasts shall rise out of
the Sea, which in the seventeenth Verse he interprets to be four Kings,
that is, four Monarchies or Kingdoms. And so does the Apostle use the phrase
in this very place, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. He that (...)h, or which now rules
(meaning the Roman Emperor) shall let till he be taken away. But one
Emperor did not, nor could live so long as from Paul's time, to the translating
of the Empire of Rome. He means therefore the succession of Emperors, and
here the sucession of the Papacy. And that the Sea of Rome is the seat of
this iniquity, appears, beside other arguments, in that it must be the Lady
Ci^ie of the World, Reu. 17. 18. situate upon seven Hills, Reu. 17. 19. which
agrees to Rome alone.


Head of the Body of the Church. Therefore it is blasphemy and impiety, to
make any other Head of the Church but him.

Yet in this our spiritual Every member in his due proportion.
incorporating into Christ, a proportion is to be observed: For even as among
the members of a man, all are not of like dignity and preeminence, (for if all
were one member, where were the Body? if the whole body were the eye, what
should become of the hearing? if all hearing, where were the smelling?) but the
difference of the members makes a more excellent agreement in the Body. So is
it not only in the outward Church, but in the true Catholic Church of Christ,
Christ himself the Head, the rest; some Arms, some Legs, some Feet, etc. as
best may make for the beauty and dignity of the whole. So we are taught,
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Let us grow up in him in all things who is the Head, even
Christ, by whom all the Body coupled and knit together by every joint,
furnished according to the effectual working in the measure of every
particular part, makes an increase of the body, etc. 1. Cor. 12. 14, 15, 27.
The Body is not one Member, but many: if the foot shall say, Because I am not
of the head, I am not of the body, is it not therefore of the Body, etc? Now
ye are the Body of Christ, and members particularly: And these God has set
in the Church, first, Apostles, etc.

Secondly, As the Vine and branches are of one whereby being one with him and
through him with God.
nature, the man and wife one flesh, the head and the members one Body: so we
are one with Christ, and consequently one, one with another, as a Syens
ingraffed on the arm of a Tree, is both one with the Arm, and with the Tree
it self. This our Savior teaches most sweetly, John 17. 21. That all may be
one, as thou, Father, in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.
And by reason of this union which the members have with the head, and every
member one with another, it is that the whole body (that is to say, Christ
himself the Head, and all the Church which are his members) are called 1. Cor.
11. 12.
Christ, as we heard before. And so taking Christ together with his Elect the
Catholic Church is called, The Mother of the Spouse himself, Cant. 8. 2. and
the Church (that is, all the Elect) his Sister, Cant. 4* 9. and 8. 8.

The third thing is Adoption, or the making of us the we become children by
Adoption,
sons of God by grace, being regenerate, and borne again in Christ, who is
the Son of God by nature: as it is said, John 1. 12. 13
To them that received him, he gave this dignity, to be the sons of God:
Gal. 3. 17.
for all of you are the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 4. 4.
When the fullness of time came, God sent forth his Son, etc. that we might
receive the Adoption.

Fourthly, Being one with Christ, we also have his and have his Spirit to be
ours.
Spirit to be ours: for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his, Romans 8. 9. Because ye are sons, says the Apostle, Gal. 4. 6. God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

And hereupon the Spirit of Christ, whom we receive, is called, The Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8. 15.

Now let us in a few words recapitulate the sum of all we are to know
concerning Regeneration, for so we shall make a better passage to that which
follows.

First, It is a mere Psalm 102. 18. Esaias 65. 18. B^t ^e glad, etc. ye whom I
create, Ephesians. 2. 10. Gal. 6. 15.
Creation. God finds no more matter to work upon for the making of a man
anew, then when he made that lump whereof heaven and earth were framed.

Secondly, the manner of this Creation is by a new birth, when a hollow person,
(one as empty and void of heart, as the hollow of a tree is of substance) is
made to have a heart, and a wild Asse-Colt borne, a man, (by spiritual
Regeneration) as Tsophar speaks, Job 11. 12. A maruailous and a strange
birth, wherein there is no more matter to beget him of, then there is in the
hollow of a tree, to fetch out heart of Oak.

Thirdly, Therefore this Birth is not natural, as parents beget their
children; but legal, as Iechonias begat Salathiel, whether he adopted him, or
rather, that as next of DAVID'S line, without adoption, he succeeded in the
government. But howsoever it were in the case of Salathiel, we speak of that
which is adoptiue.

Fourthly, There is a difference of this Adoption from all other: for men adopt
children when themselves are childlesse. God having a Son of his own, adopteth
us unto him, and therefore all Adoption Ephesians. 1. 15.
is in and through Christ.

Fifthly, Because GOD was purposed to bring many children this way unto glory,
it pleased him to found a most noble Incorporation, whereof all other bodies
politic are but counterfeit. Of this Incorporation, Christ, God and man, is
the Head, all being adopted by him, and incorporated into him, the members are
every one Kings and Priests; two of the most sacred and venerable things that
ever were in the world: even among the Heathen, the bone and ligament that
tyeth all together, is the holy Spirit; the soul, as it were of this
Incorporation: That where other Corporations are said to consist of a body
without a soul, this has the Spirit of God himself to be the soul of it.
So the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 12. 13. By one Spirit we are all baptized
into one Body, and all made to drink into one Spirit. Again, Ephesians. 4. 4.
There is one Body, and one Spirit that knitteth all the parts together.

Sixthly, Therefore also we live Gal. 5. 25.
all by one Spirit, the same Spirit that quickened our Head, quickening also us
that are his members, in that whosoever is Christ's, has his Spirit, Romans 8.
11. The very words of the promise imply as much, Ezech. 36. 27
I will put my Spirit in the midst of them. And thereupon is the Gospel called,
2. Cor. 3. 8.
The ministry of the Spirit. And Gal. 3. 2.
PAVL says, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing
of faith? And as certainly and verily as the natural man lives by his
reasonable soul, so certainly and verily does the Regenerate man live by the
Spirit dwelling in him, being now no more a natural man (so far as he is
Regenerate) but having all his life from and in that Body politic: Gal. 1.
20.
I live no more, I, but Christ lives in me. Coloss. 3. 4.
When Christ which is our life shall be manifested, etc. Therefore is the whole
Body (comprehending both the Head and members) called 1. Cor. 12. 12.
Christ; and every particular, John 3. 6. 1. John 5. 8.
Spirit: because, as he is begotten of the Spirit, so he lives in and by the
Spirit.

This is the sum of all; whereunto let me add

First, Where the Spirit is, it Acts 15. 9.
purifieth and cleanses the heart, makes all whole and clean, as a griffe set
into a Stock, does alter and change the nature of it: wherefore Sanctification
of the whole man, is an inseperable companion of the Regenerate estate; John 3.
6.
That which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, heavenly, and spiritual.

Secondly, That living in the Spirit, it is as natural for us (so far as we
do live in the Spirit, that is to say, are Regenerate, and consequently
sanctified) to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, etc. as
they are reckoned, Gola. 5. 22. as it is for fire to burn, for the wind to
blow, etc. which is it the Apostle says there, Gal. 5. 25.
If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk by the Spirit. And so are the
graces of the Spirit distinguished from the Spirit dwelling in us, as the
effects from the cause, in the very same manner, as the work of reasoning and
disputing is, from our reasonable soul it self.

But of these two things (the worthy fruits and effects of Regeneration) we
are to speak in that which follows.

Of a Regenerate estate, there be two degrees, as it Sealed up during the
infancy of Regeneration,
were two ages; Infancy, and Man's estate: of both which the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 4. 14. Till we meet all together in the unity of Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age
of the fullness of Christ, that we may be no more children, etc. And 1. Cor.
13. 10. When that which is perfect shall come, then that which is in part,
shall be done away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I reasoned as a
child. But when I became a man, I put away the conceits of a child.

The Infancy of Regeneration, I call that weak inception which is in us
during this present life, wherein we are yet as little children scarce come out
of the shell: 1. Pet. 2. 2. (...).
Newborn babes, as PETER calls us, Romans 8. 23.
which receive but the first fruits of the Spirit, or only, 2. Cor. 1. 22.
a pawn or pledge, the earnest penny of the Spirit: for as in the natural
birth of a man, his body comes not into the world so great and strong as
afterward it proves, but small, weak, and impotent: so in the spiritual
birth of Regeneration, the soul of man is not at the first moment endued with
perfection, but must grow and go on forwards to it. (which is all our life long)


I mean not that this Infancy is the first act of our Regeneration: for there
be some that are borne (in respect of others) strong in Christ, and Giants the
first day, as was the Apostle Paul. But I mean the whole progress also, and
continuance all our life, even in the best: And so does the Apostle, 1. Cor.
13. 11. bring the similitude of childe-hood and man's estate, not to note the
beginning and proceeding in Christianity, but to set forth the excellency in
heaven, above that which we attain unto being here.

To this estate, these four things are proper: First, In every man
Regenerate, there be, as it were, two men divided; the old, and the new man.
The old man, called also the outward man, the flesh the members, (for we carry
about us a whole body of sin) is so much of us whatsoever it be, within or
without, that is natural and left yet unregenerate. The new man, called also
the inner man, the Spirit, the mind, is our part Regenerate and borne again,
wherein being freed from sin, we begin to bring forth fruits to God. And that
both these are in one and the same man, we are taught, Math. 26. 41. The Spirit
is ready, but the flesh is weak. 1. Cor. 5. 5. Deliver such a one to Satan,
to the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the Day of
the Lord Jesus. Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh, that ye cannot do the things you would. Romans 7. 25.
Therefore I my self in the mind serve the Law of God. but in the flesh the
law of sin: and in a number of other places.

Thirdly, That it is not a work to be seen and in our own inward assurance
of the Spirit, not in the Worlds discerning of it;
known of men, as that other shall be manifest unto all. But every man's
conscience must assure him for himself, and of other in whom there be signs
and likelihoods, we are to hope the best; wherefore the Apostle, Col. 3. 3.
says, That our life is hid with God in Christ, not to be manifested till
Christ our Life do manifest himself. For 1. John 3. 2.
this cause, says another, the World knows us not, because it knows not
him. Beloved, now are we the Children of God, but it is not yet made manifest
what we shall be.

Fourthly, In this infancy there is yet a continual and growing,
growth, till we come to the full measure of a perfect man in Christ: And that
is it which the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4. 16. that the inner man is renewed
daily; as he does more largely declare it, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Being sincere in
love, let us grow up in him in all things, who is the Head, even Christ, of
whom all the whole body knit together and compact by all the joints, furnished
through the power within, working of Christ, our Head, quickening all the
parts, as the Soul does the Body, according to the measure of every member,
receives an increase fit for the body, to the building up of it self through
love, Colos. 2. 19. By whom, or from whom, that is to say, from Christ the
Head, all the Body furnished and knit together by joints and bands, increases
with the increase of God. And hither those two Parables before, Mat. 1^. seem
to tend.

Fifthly, That the measure and proportion of our according as our Faith does
grow.
growth, is the measure and proportion of our Faith, as the Apostle shows
there, Ephesians. 4. 13.
that the unity of Faith brings the perfection of the Body of Christ. So as
the greater we be in Faith, the stronger we are in Christ; if of small Faith,
then weak Babes in Christ.

The full perfection and accomplishment of Regeneration After comes that
perfect Regeneration, which the Scripture calls man's estate.
shall then be, When we have attained the mark, and are made perfect, as the
Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 12. Therefore this degree is termed, Man's estate:
and sometimes by a note of excellency above the other, has the name of
Regeneration appropriate unto it, as appears by conference of Mat. 19. 28.
with Mark 10. 30. where that which Matthew names Regeneration, is called The
World to come: for then indeed does our Spiritual Marriage begin, all our
life here being, as it were, Cant. 4. 7, 8.
the bidding, or as the betrothing of a Wife. The Church in the Canticles
sets it forth, by Cant. 7. 6.
bringing of Christ into the House of her Mother.

CHAP. IX.
Of Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

THE holy Angel telling Joseph of a Son Salvation wrought by the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in us.
to be brought into the World, whose name should be called JESUS, renders
this reason of the Name: Mat. 1. 22.
For he shall save his people from their sins. That Salvation, the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in us, and being ours by Regeneration, effectually does work:
for it washes us from our sins, it justifies our persons, and sanctifies
our hearts, slaying sin in our mortal bodies, and quickening our souls to a
living hope, through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and shall hereafter
quicken both our bodies and our souls unto everlasting Glory. Thus the
Apostle writes to the Corinths, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
But ye are washed from (the sins wherein they formerly wallowed) but ye
are justified, but ye are sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. And to the Rom 8. 11.
Romans, If the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you,
he that raised Christ from the dead, will also quicken your mortal bodies by
his Spirit dwelling in you. As on the other side John 6. 53.
Christ says, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you: for without an Union with Christ, there
can be no true partaking of his gifts unto Salvation, no more then a woman can
be partaker of the riches and honor of some great man, except she be joined
with him in Marriage, so that they become one body and one flesh; or then the
members can draw life from the head, if they be not knit unto it.

The work of this saving Grace that is brought unto us by the coming of our
LORD and Savior Jesus Christ, has been pointed at in general.

First, To destroy the old ADAM, or the old man; that is, the sinful and
wretched condition, which by nature every Mothers Child brings into the
World, and is as old as since Adam fell, to be under the power of Satan,
slaves of sin, and children of destruction. Then the bestowing of a new, a
blessed, and a happy estate, opposite to the former. The Heb. 2. 15.
Apostle to the Hebrews comprehends both, that through death he might
abolish him that has the power of death, that is, the Devil, and might set
free his Children. So in the Epistle to the Col. 1. 13.
Colossians, Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
into the Kingdom of his Son. And our Savior, Acts 26. 17, 18. To whom now I
send thee, to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness unto Light,
and from the power of Satan, unto God, that through Faith in me, they may have
remission of sins, and an inheritance among has two parts, Illumination and
Justification.
the sanctified ones.

Paul, 1. Cor. 1. 30. brancheth all the benefits we have by Christ, into
four: Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, or Holiness
and Blessedness. Such a train of Noble Graces does attend Regeneration: for
as man by Creation was made holy and happy: so by this new Creation we obtain
a repair of our first estate: not as some Relic or Remain of that Image of
God, according whereunto we were created in the beginning: but as a new work
of Gods Spirit forming the same in us, after a heavenly and divine manner out
of nothing, by the power of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And in every of
these good things is employed the remoouing of the contrary. Wisdom stands
not with Ignorance and Blindness: Righteousness puts away the guilt of
sin: Sanctification, the power and dominion of sin: for where one of these
is, the other cannot be. Redemption speaks more clearly of freeing us from
wrath, and the curse of the Law.

Wisdom and Righteousness (from the which the other two do flow) were, for
their surpassing excellency, figured in the High Priests Vrim and Thummim; as
you have it taught in the explication of the Ceremonies of the Law. But to
handle these four apart:

The first benefit which we have by Christ, is the taking Illumination,
whereby dispelling darkness,
away of the veil of ignorance, the blindness that naturally possesses our
souls; as in that place of the Acts it is first named. And Esaias 25. 7. He will
swallow up the veil of the face, the veil that is upon all people, and the
covering that is upon all Nations. So 2. Cor. 3. 16. When their heart shall be
turned to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away: for where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is does enlighten our minds with the knowledge of the will of
God in Christ which the Apostle calls Wisdom.
Freedom.

But this is not all. In stead of the Light of Nature (turned through sin
into palpable and gross darkness) we have now another manner of light, an
heavenly and Spiritual Wisdom. A grace distinct, not only from Knowledge
that went before, which was common to the Reprobate, whereas this is the
peculiar of GODS Heritage: but even from Faith, though the same include
Knowledge in it: for Faith is the Instrument of Regeneration, John 1. 12. and
therefore before it in nature: but this Wisdom comes in nature after
Regeneration; for so the Apostle says, Ye are of God in Christ, who is made
unto us Wisdom, and Coloss. 3. 20. Renewed (...).
unto Knowledge, (which is this Wisdom.) Therefore in nature it comes after.

I take it to be that Light of the Mind, of which the Scripture speaks so
often, comprehending under it, by a Synechdoche, the whole work of our Renewing,
Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were once darkness, but now are light in the Lord, 2. Cor. 4.
6. God, which commanded that light should shine out of darkness, is he who
has shined in your hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. In this regard we are said to be illuminated
or enlightened, Heb. 10. 32. to be translated out of darkness, into his
wonderful light, 1. Pet. 2. 9.

Wisdom and Sanctification or Holiness (both inherent in us) seem to differ
thus: Holiness is the Renewing of us into the state of Innocence, which we
had by Creation. But this Wisdom is of a far more excellent mould then the
light of Knowledge that Adam had: for Adams mind was indeed enlightened to
understand all moral duties, but ours to the knowledge of things that 1. Cor.
2.
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, nor have entered into the heart of
man, 1. Pet. 1.
Which the Angels themselves desire to stoop down and look into, namely, one
Mysteries of the Gospel revealed from above: wherefore that was according unto
nature: this is Divine and supernatural, wherein after the veil of Ignorance
taken away, that our eyes are once made able to behold the Light; Christ, the
Image of God, does shine unto us, 2. Cor. 3. 17. Such a Light as man by nature
(when it was at the best) could never comprehend: And hereby we come to have
all the secrets, and the whole will of God in Christ Jesus, made known unto us
by his Spirit. A maruailous benefit, sensibly to be seen even in this life,
that dull and ignorant men become able on a sudden to conceive the hidden
Mysteries of Christianity. It is that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. 15. The
spiritual man discerns all things, in that we have the mind of the Lord
manifested unto us through Christ.

Howbeit the illumination of our minds in this life, has withal much
darkness: for growing wholly by the means of the Word, as the Apostle says,
Coloss. 3. 16. Let the Word of Christ dwell richly in you in all Wisdom: and
to TIMOTHY, 2. Tim. 3. 15.
Thou have known the Scriptures, that are able to make thee wise: we can know
but weakly and imperfectly, because the way and means whereby we come to
knowledge by the Ministry of man, is weak and imperfect: for in part we
know, says the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. 9. and in part we prophecy: that
is, we learn but imperfectly, because our Teachers teach and instruct us after
a lame and imperfect manner. But then, says he, (when that which is perfect
comes) I shall know as I shall be taught to know. Having so excellent a
Master, as Christ himself for our Teacher, of whom we shall hear things,
which it is not possible for any mortal man to utter, and for the way of our
Instruction, the beholding of him and the presence of his face, from whose
immediate Spirit all is to come, our knowledge also shall be perfect.

The second benefit is Righteousness. The Apostle Justification, whereby
forgiving our sins
distinguishes two parts of it: Forgiveness of sinne^ and Imputation of
Righteousness, whereby we are justified in his presence, To. 14. 25, Who was
delivered up for our offenses, and raised for our Justification, 2. Cor. 5. 19,
21. God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing unto
them their offenses. And by and by, For him that knew not sin, he made to
be sin for us, that we might become the Righteousness of God in him.
DANIEL also Dan. 9. 24.
in his ninth Chapter speaks of them both, Seventy weeks are determined
touching thy people, to seal up sin, and to purge iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness.

Forgiveness of sins I call it, when the guilt and fault of our offenses are
taken away, pardoned, and forgiven us, as if we never had committed them; so as
they come not once in account or reckoning before the Judgment feat of God
against us; which being a benefit of all benefits, the Scripture is wont to
express by many forms of speech, Forgiveness of sins, that is, the doing
and taking of them away: 1. John. 1. 9.
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us the
sins. Romans 4. 7.
Blessed are those whose sins are forgiven them.

Secondly, The free remitting of them: Coloss. 2. 13.
You that were dead, has he quickened, freely remitting unto you all
transgressions.

Thirdly, The sealing; by which is meant the hiding and the covering of them:
Dan. 9. 24.
Seventy weeks are determined to seal up sin.

Fourthly, Gods casting of them behind his back, and into the botome of the
sea, as that good King Hezekia speaks in his Prayer, Esaias 38. 1^.
Thou have cast behind thy back all my sins. And Mica the Prophet, Mica. 7. 19.
Thou will cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea. Of which sort is
that, Psalm. 103. 12. As far as the East is from the West, has he set far
from us all our transgressions.

Fifthly, A passing by of them, Mica. 7. 18.
Who is a mighty God like unto thee, forgiving iniquity, and passing by the
transgression of the remnant of his inheritance?

Sixthly, The forgetting and blotting of them out: Esaias 43. 12.
I, I for my self blot out thy transgressions, and remember not thy sins.
Beside a number more, as that, Number. 23. 25.
He beholds not iniquity in JACOB, nor sees frowardness in Israel; and
such like. David in the 32. Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
Psalm, sets it forth by three Metaphors.

First, of a heavy burden and load, that does press and keep us down:
Blessed is he that is eased of his sin.

Secondly, Of a menstruous and filthy cloth, or sluttish corner that men will
be careful to hide, and to cover: and whose sin is covered.

Thirdly, of a Debt or Obligation, cancelled or forgiven: Blessed is the man,
to whom JEHOVAH imputes not iniquity.

And thus the guilt of our sins being pardoned and forgiven, the punishment
must also needs be abolished and done away.

In all which, God cannot be said unjust, that remitteth by his taking them
upon him:
thus offenses, because he has laid them upon Christ, and set them upon his
Score, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
Who not knowing sin, became Sin for us, washing us from the same by his
blood. Reu. 1. 5. which is one great use and benefit of his sufferings.
Wherefore PAVL says, Coloss. 2. 14, 15. that He nailed upon the Cross, the
handwriting of Ordinances, that was closely against us. Where he compares God
the Father, to a Creditor; and us, unto Debtors, as by bill or writing under
our hand, which bill or writing is both the moral Law, so far forth as it is
a covenant of Works, and that by it Justification and Salvation should be
sought; and also the Law of Ceremonies, a privy and a secret enemy, that
carrying a show of the discharge of our debt, did indeed hold us faster bound
and served for nothing else but for an evidence against us; of our filthiness
and uncleanness, by the legal washings and purifications; of the death we do
deserve, by the Sacrifices, etc.

This Debt, says the Apostle, (which we had never been able to come out of)
Christ, our Surety, paying by his death to the uttermost farthing, cancelleth
the bond, which is, the Law; and nayleth it to the Cross, and so has set us
free.

Imputation of he does account
Osiander taught, that to be justified, is to be endued with the essential
Righteousness of God himself; And so makes our righteousness to be God
himself moving us to do well.

Papists teach, that our first Justification is not by that Justice which was
inherent in Christ, but which he infuseth into man, specially Hope and
Charity, and that there is a second Justification, whereby men of just are
made more just, the cause whereof is Faith, joined with good works.


righteousness, is the reckoning and accounting of all the holiness and
righteousness that was in Christ, to be ours, as truly and verily in the
presence of God, and before his Judgment seat, as if we our selves had wrought
it. For as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one man, many are made righteous, Romans 5. 18. Hereupon he has the
name of Ierem. 23. 6. and 33. 16.
JEHOVAH, our Righteousness. And Esaias 45. 25.
Esaias says, In JEHOVAH shall the whole seed of Israel be justified. PAVL
likewise exhorts, Romans 13. 14.
Put on the Lord JESUS, clothed with his Righteousness: for those are Revel.
3. 18.
the white garments spoken of in the Revelation: Reu. 7. 9.
The long white Robes, washed and Reu. 7. 14.
whited in the blood of the Lamb. And again, Reu. 19. 8. 2. Pet. 3. 11.
It was given unto her to be arrayed in fine linen, clean, and bright: for
the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the Saints: Which (saving better
judgment) I do not understand of a double righteousness; one before God, by
faith; the other before men, by the fruits of Sanctification, wrought by the
Spirit: But to be an Hebraisme (such as the New (...)
Testament uses often) by the plural Righteousnesses, noting the most absolute
righteousness which we have in Christ: for so, Esaias 45. 24, you shall find
this very word to that purpose in the Matthew. 22. 11
plural. And John here places wholly in the robe that the Saints put on (the
2. Cor. 5. 21.
marriage garment Christ Jesus) not in themselves: but the Romans 1. 17. and 3.
21. 22.
brightness whereof is not meant of shining before men, but in the eyes of God:
wherefore in many and elsewhere.
places it is called, The Righteousness of God; as that which may boldly offer
it self in Gods sight, and abide the strict examination of his Justice, being
the Righteousness of him that is God himself.

But what use (will you say) is there of the imputation of righteousness, if
our sins that sever us from God, be forgiven and taken from us? Yes
undoubtedly, very great and singular, as may appear by those parts of
happiness, whereunto otherwise, then by this, we are able to lay no claim.
And therefore the Apostle, Romans 5. handles professedly this Doctrine of
imputation of Righteousness, as without which, the other of forgiveness of
sins had not been perfect. And where in Romans 4. 6, 7.
another place he defines Happiness by the forgiveness of sins, Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are pardoned; it is no
full and exact definition numbering all the parts, but by a Synechdoche, naming
one best fitting his present purpose, he gives to understand the rest, as in
diverse other places Blessedness is diversely defined, by those things which yet
in truth are but branches of the true and perfect Blessedness: Blessed Psalm.
1. 1.
is the man that has not walked in the way of sinners. Blessed Luke 11. 2^.
are they that hear the Word of God and keep the same.

The reason whereof is, because all the parts of happiness are so linked and
joined together, that he which has one, must needs have all.

The parts (if I may so call them) of this righteousness the holiness of his
nature,
imputed to us, are first, the perfect Sanctification of Christ's humane nature,
whereby our original, and natural corruption not imputed to us, our nature it
self is accounted holy in the sight of God: whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans
8. 2, 3. The Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me
from the law of sin and of death; for, which was impossible to the Law, for
that it was weak by reason of our flesh, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, for sin has condemned sin in the flesh, that
that which the Law requires might be fulfilled in us, where the Law of the
Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus he calls that perfect and
allsufficient Sanctification of our nature in him, whereby he coming in the
likeness of sinful flesh for sin, that is, to abolish sin it self in our
nature taken upon him, condemned, or which is all one, abolished sin in the
flesh; meaning in his own person, through whose perfect Sanctification of
nature made ours, the relics of sin, that our corrupt nature is tainted
with, are not imputed to us; and therefore we be free from death and
condemnation, being wholly restored, even in our nature, to a greater
integrity then we lost in Adam. All which the Apostle shows, was in respect
of the weakness of the Law, being of no strength by reason of the flesh, or
part unregenerate, which hinders the work of the Law, otherwise most perfect,
and is opposite thereto, that it neither can, or will be subject to it: So as
to the end we might fulfill that, which the Law requires, which is, to be
righteous not in our Actions only, but in our very nature, it was necessary
so to have it sanctified in the person of Christ, not supplying that which ours
wants, but wholly and altogether sanctifying us in himself: And by this
means it comes to pass, that we are, after the most precise and exact rule
of the Law, righteous before God, having the perfect integrity of our nature
absolutely in Christ: for which purpose he says not, might be fulfilled of
us, but in us; speaking of Christ's own Sanctity imputed to us.

Secondly, The through and perfect obedience which and Righteousness, to be
ours.
he performed in the whole course of his life, both in the duties to God his
Father, and in respect of men, with whom he was conversant here on Earth:
whereby all our vile and filthy actions not coming into account, our whole
life is reckoned most absolutely good and holy, not only void of sin, but
full of perfect Righteousness, as the same Apostle teaches, Romans 5. 12. to
the end of the Chapter.
Romans 5. setting it forth by an excellent comparison of our Savior Christ with
Adam, both in the things wherein they agree in this point, and in those wherein
they differ. They agree in this, that each conueyeth his own to those that are
his, (whom the Apostle therefore calls many; opposing them to that one, whom
he considers as their Head) Adam, he conuayeth both guilt and sin unto
condemnation; Christ, Righteousness and Obedience unto Justification; they
differ in this:

First, Adam deriueth it down by nature upon all his posterity; Christ
bestows it by grace and favor, and free imputation.

Secondly, Adams one sin condemed all; CHRIST justifies from many sins
(not that one only, but all other.)

Thirdly, Christ's Righteousness is more available, and of greater power to
save, then Adams sin was to condemn: for that indeed threw us down from the
state of Innocence, but Christ has raised us to a more excellent state, unto
the heavenly glory.)

And hereof comes our Justification, properly so called, that is to say, Gods
censure and Judgment of us, approouing us for holy and righteous before him,
and as having that Righteousness, that is able to abide his presence. So as
even by the sentence of God himself, and in his most exact Justice, we are
freed, and absolved, and declared righteous, and worthy of everlasting life:
which is that the Scripture opposes to the sentence of condemnation, Romans 8.
33, 34. Who shall lay accusation to the Elect of God? It is God that
justifies, who can condemn? Thus the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 18. As by one
offense guilt came upon all men unto condemnation; so by one (...), signifies
the matter of our Justification: (...), Justification it self:
fulfilling of Righteousness (that is, by Christ's perfect fulfilling of the
Law) the benefit came upon all unto Justification of life, or to the declaring
and approouing of us just before God, whereby we obtain everlasting life.

This so noble a benefit comes to be wrought by the Resurrection of Christ,
as the Remission of our sins came by his death and sufferings. So writes the
Romans 4. 25.
Apostle to the Romans, He dyed for our sins, and rose for our
Justification. Not that his death had no hand in justifying, but because our
Justification begun in his death, was perfectly made an end of, when he rose
from the dead.

From Justification two things do follow: Sanctification, from whence comes
Sanctification and Redemption.
and Redemption, or Holiness, and Blessedness. Holiness as the fruit;
Blessedness the reward, Romans 6. 22. Being freed from sin, and made servants
unto God, (which he said before, Verse 18. to be servants unto
Righteousness) You have your fruit unto Sanctification, and the end
everlasting life.

And as death before comprehended our sinful and cursed estate, whereunto
these are contrary: so the Scripture is wont to note them both in one word of
Life everlasting begun on Earth, and perfected in Heaven: for that the
Righteousness of Christ made ours by Faith, is effectual in us unto eternal
Life, by the Spirit of CHRIST, who sanctifies and quickens us.

By Sanctification, I mean, the renewing of us to Sanctification whereby
Holiness, and Righteousness by his Spirit dwelling in us, when Romans 6. 18.
being freed from sin, we are made servants unto Righteousness, and not
only, Esaias 1. 17, 18.
Cease to do evil, but Learn to do good; nor be only, R^^ 6. 11.
Dead unto sin, but living unto God, through Jesus Christ, which the Apostle
Peter calls, To 1. ^et. 2. 24.
foregoe sin, that we may live unto Righteousness: and again, to be 1. Pe^.
4 6.
condemned as touching men in the flesh, and to live as touching God in the
Spirit.

The former of these two is commonly called Mortification, slaying sin,
or the slaying and beating down of the lusts of sin; when through the power
of the Spirit of Christ, they are not repressed only, and kept from breaking
out, but subdued and conquered within us, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 6. 6,
7, 12, 13, 14. Therefore it is called, A crucifying of the flesh, A doing away
of the body of sin.

And to the end we may know it must be thoroughly done, the Scripture not only
speaks of our dying unto sin, but that the old man must be buried also,
Romans 6. 4.

This abolishing of our sinfulness or mortification of sin within us, does
Paul ascribe to the power of the death of Christ, when he says that Romans 6.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
we are baptized into the death of Christ, buried together with him, and
engraffed into the likeness of his death, that our old man might be crucified
together with him, and the body of sin done away, that we might no more
serve sin: for he that is dead, is free from sin. And to the Hebrews, Heb.
9 14.
that it is the blood of Christ, shed and and powered forth for us, which
purges our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. To the Gal.
6. 14.
Galatians, he says, that by the Cross of Christ the World is crucified unto
them, and he unto the World. And, Colos. 3. 3, 5. Because we are dead with
Christ, he gathers that we are to mortify our members, that are upon the
Earth.

The latter is called Vivification or Quickening.

And here are two most precious linkes of the Golden Chain of our Salvation:
the imputed Righteousness we have in Christ, and (as in some sort it may be
called) 1. John 3. 7
renewed Righteousness in our selves.

But these two are distinguished, the 1. Cor 6. 1 1. Cor. 1. 30.
one is wont to be called Righteousness, or in respect of the work of
Christ's Spirit, Justification: the other, Holiness or Sanctification: which
noble complement holds up the whole frame of Christian building, and are as it
were the two posts of the house that Samson shook, whereupon all the building
stood. And as the Elm and Vine flourish and fall together: so fares it with
these twain; that where the one is, the other must needs be: for this is one
part of the Covenant which God has made with us, not only to be our God, but
that we should be his people; and not alone to be merciful to our sins,
and to remember our iniquities no more; but withal to write his Laws in our
hearts, to do them: whereupon it is, that the Apostle says, Follow Heb. 12.
14.
after Holiness, (or Sanctification) without which no man shall see God.

In the Doctrine of Sanctification, these things I consider,

First, We have hereby he puts a new life of Holiness into us.
Pelagians, that make grace natural.

Semipelagians, that make the first grace to concur with nature, and only to
be a help to weak and infirm nature.

The Papists in like sort call this work of the Holy Ghost, not the Creation
of any new Creature which was not before, but the stirring up of some Goodness
and Sanctity lost in nature (as they dream) after the Fall, which they call
also Freewill, and say it was not lost in the Fall, but weakened. And therefore
define Sanctification to be Gods preventing grace, quickening the Freewill: or
an external motion, standing as it were without, and beating at the door of
the heart.


a new life of Holiness put into us. A total change from that which is
natural, to that which is not only supernatural, but even opposite and
contrary to our corrupt nature, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 23. Titus 3. 5.
renewing us unto the state of our first Creation, or unto that former
integrity which we lost in Adam. Whereupon we are said to be Ephesians. 4. 24.
Created again according to God, unto true Justice and Holiness: and to be
Col. 3. 10.
renewed unto knowledge, according to the Image of him that created us.

Hence it is that the work of Sanctification is termed, A Psalm. 55. 20.
change; An after-mind, or a change of the mind, and that to the best, which
we commonly translate Repentance: A Ier. 4. 1. and in diverse other places.
turning, etc. And in this respect also, considering the qualities whereunto we
are renewed, as the work it self of our renewing, we are said to be new
creatures, 2. Cor. 5. 17. and Gal. 6. 15.

Secondly, From hence proceed the fruits of Righteousness, to bring forth
fruits of Righteousness*
that very Righteousness prescribed in the Law. Therefore Ier. 31. 33.
Jeremy calls it, The putting of his Law in the midst of us. And Paul
exhorting hereunto, lays down both the parts of this Righteousness,
Holiness and true Justice, Ephesians. 4. 24. so that whatsoever was said before of
Righteousness in general, and all the notes and qualities thereof, are to be
referred hither, being all of them such as ought to be in every man that is
sanctified.

Thirdly, This Righteousness is inherent, and in our selves, wrought within us
by the Spirit of Christ: for this Ier. 31. 33.
Jeremy recites to be one part of Gods Covenant with his people: I will put
my Law in the midst of them, and in their heart will I write it. Answerable
hereunto is that of Ezech. 36. 26, 27. 1. John 2. 8.
EZECHIEL, I will give you a new heart: and a new Spirit I will set in the
midst of you, and I will take away the heart of stone out of your flesh, and
I will give unto you a heart of flesh, and my Spirit will I put in the midst
of you, and make that ye shall walk in mine Ordinances, and observe and do
my judgments; whereby this Holiness is distinguished from imputed
Righteousness, which is without us, and in another (that is to say) in Christ.

And from both these arises the third and last consideration of the Law of
God, as it is qualified and corrected, and has another nature set upon it by
Christ our Savior, turned now into 1. John 2. 8.
a new Commandment, as the Apostle speaks, or a Law Euangelized, and of
another temper, serving no more for death and condemnation to those that are
his, but for help and direction, for Psalm. 119. 106
a Lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our steps, to teach us how to walk
when we are in Christ. Therefore Luke 1. 6.
Zachary and Elizabeth are both commended as righteous before God, because
they went in all the Commandments of the Lord. Iam. 1. 25.
JAMES also calls us hither: He that stoopeth down into the perfect Law of
Liberty, and abides in that, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of
works, shall be blessed by his doing. And our Savior, Matthew. 5. 17. bids
us not to think that he came to dissolve the Law, and the Prophets: I came
not to dissolve them, but to fulfill them: for which cause also the right
understanding of the Law is needful; for unless we know our Masters will,
how shall we frame our selves to do it?

Fourthly, The new life put into us, which we call Vivification, or Quickening,
comes from the power of Christ's Spirit, which rayseth us up from the sleep
and death of sin, to awake to live righteously, that Romans 4. 5.
as Christ was raised from the dead, by the glory of his Father: so we might
walk in newness of life: for if we be ingraffed into the likeness of his
death, verily so shall we also be unto the likeness of his Resurrection.
Wherefore the Coloss. 3. 1, 2.
Apostle says, If ye be risen together with Christ, seek the things which
are above, not the things which are upon the earth. Teaching, that it is by the
power of his rising, that we are renewed unto righteousness, as by his death
we obtain power to mortify sin.

Fifthly, Touching the manner of the The Papists say, that in Freewill there is
a liberty or strength to receive or reject the grace that should quicken it,
which they call, Preventing Grace: and so part the slakes between Grace and
man's Freewill.
working: there is a difference between the grace it self of Sanctification,
and the fruits that come from it. In the grace it self, as in the work of our
new birth, man stands mere passive before God, having no power or virtue in
him to work with Gods Spirit, or to help the work of Grace, yet he is not
in this first renewing of his soul, as a trunk or a dead stock, for that he
has both reason and faculties, or powers fit to receive the Grace of God, when
his Spirit does work upon them. But in the fruits of Sanctification, The
Papists make not the Holy Ghost, but their own Free Will, the principal agent
in this second grace; which Free Will, they say, goes before, and disposes
and prepares us to a Justifying Grace, in believing, in hoping, in repenting,
etc.
the principal Agent is indeed the very Spirit of Christ, who after the first
grace, and new Creation, abides and dwells in us; not idly, but ever
working some good in us, and by us, as it is said, Romans 8. 26. The holy Ghost
makes intercession for us, with sighs, which cannot be expressed: But a second
Agent, working with Gods holy Spirit, is the very soul of man, or rather, the
new man, or new creature in the soul, and all the faculties thereof: So that
in this second Grace, which is the action, or work of faith, we stand not as
mere passive, but being moved by the holy Ghost, we work our selves, by
his Spirit working in us. Whereupon we are called, 1. Cor. 3. 9.
The fellow-workers with God, 1. Cor. 3.

Touching the distinct degrees of Sanctification: In wherein there is no more
now required, but that sin bear not the rule in us: and our works of
Righteousness, though all mingled with sin,
the estate we now are in, there is a difference between it and legal
Righteousness, in that perfection is there required, without failing in any
jot, either in matter or manner. Whereas our Sanctification in this life is
evermore imperfect, failing much, and has always sin mixed with it, not as
Chafe or Darnell is mixed with Whear, but as water is mingled with wine, that
there is no drop of wine, but it is water also: and that is by reason our new
birth is imperfect. So that Donatists, and Nouatians, and those heretics that
were wont to be called Catharises, or Puritanes, dream of purity and
perfection in this life.
albeit by the grace of Regeneration, we desire in all things to live
righteously and well, yet still we labor under the infirmity of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 17.
that we cannot do the things we would. Whereof the Apostle Paul (one, more
then after an ordinary sort regenerate) gives in his own person a noble
example, Romans 7. 15, etc. I approve not that I work: for I do not that I
would, but what I hate, that do I: for I am delighted with the Law of God, as
touching the inner man, but I see another Law in my members, etc. and in the
end concludes, Therefore I my self in the Spirit indeed serve the Law of God,
but in my flesh the Law of sin. Wherefore in this estate it is enough, if
sin Romans 6. 12.
reign not in our mortal bodies: it is not required (which is impossible)
that it should not at all dwell in us.

And where the Scripture in many places does call us perfect, as when it says,
Matthew. 5. 48.
Ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.
1. Cor. 2. 6.
We speak wisdom among those that are perfect. 1. Cor. 14. 20.
In understanding be ye perfect, Ephesians. 4. 13.
till we come to a perfect man. Phil. 3. 12.
As many therefore as be perfect, let us be thus minded. 1. John 2. 5.
Whosoever keeps his Word, of a truth, in him the love of God is perfected.
1. Ioh. 4. 12.
If we love one another, God abides in us, and his love is perfited in us. 1.
Ioh. 4. 18.
Perfect love casts out fear. Iam. 1. 4.
That ye may be perfect and wholly sound, wanting in nothing. By perfect, it
means not the exact performance of legal Righteousness, but the whole and
total change of all the man, which yet in this life is evermore imperfect. And
so does James in that place last before mentioned, expound it. So that there is
a Legal, and an Evangelical perfection, which rather and more properly is
termed integrity. I call it total: first, in respect that the whole man, and
all our parts and powers both of the soul and body are renewed, as the
Apostle to the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
Thessalonians prays, that their Spirit, soul and body may be kept
unblameable in the coming of Jesus Christ.

First, our mind, and even the Spirit of our mind, whereof it is said, Romans 12.
2.
Be transformed in the renewing of your mind. Ephe. 4. 23.
Be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. I Ezech. 36. 26.
will put a new Spirit in the midst of you.

Again, both our Knowledge and Judgment are reformed, that now 1. Cor. 2. 15.
the spiritual man discerns all things. And our Memory and Consciences
purged: for the Memory that serves, where the Apostle does commend the 1 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
Thessalonians, for having a good memory of him always. And to the 1. Cor. 11.
2.
Corinths, That they remembered all his matters, or remembered him in all things.
Of the Conscience it is said, Heb. 9. 4.
That the blood of Christ purges our Consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God. And Heb. 10. 22.
Hebrews the tenth, Having your hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience.

This Renewing reaches to the heart also, that is, to the Soul the seat of
the Desire, Will, Affection, which Ezech. 36. 26
Ezechiel adds to that of the Spirit, I will give you a new heart. And Deuteronomy.
10. 16.
Moses says, Circumcise the foreskin of your heart.

Of the Desire we read, The Gal. 5. 17.
Spirit, or part regenerate, lusts against the flesh.

Of the Will, that Phil. 2. 3.
God works this grace in us, to will according to his own good pleasure.

And of the Affections, They that Gal. 5. 24.
are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts of it.

Lastly, The Body it self, and all the members, are made anew, not in
substance, but in quality, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, as
the Apostle speaks, Col. 2. 11.
Colossians the second. Whereupon he does exhort us, Romans 6. 12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. Col. 3. 5.
Mortify your earthly members, fornication and uncleanness, etc. For as there
is a Romans 7. 25.
law of the members that rebelleth against the Law of the mind: so there are
1. Cor. 12. 27.
members, that are by Regeneration the members of CHRIST, which fight against
that Law of the old man.

Secondly, It is total, in respect that it makes a change, not in our Ier. 7.
3.
ways and actions only, but in our very nature, the perfect and all-sufficient
Sanctification Esaias 1. 16, 17.
of our nature, in the person of Christ himself, freeing us from that natural
corruption, which, as the Law of the members, is inherent in us. This the
Apostle speaks, Romans Romans 8. 2.
the eighth, The Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has
freed me from the Law of sin and of death: that is, from that inherent
corruption, which, as the Law of the members, sticks to our nature, the
perfect Sanctification of his humane nature beginning a Sanctification here in
us, even in our very nature, over and besides the Righteousness of our ways.

Thirdly, It is total, in regard of both the parts of Righteousness which we
are renewed into, Holiness and true Justice: for both these the Scripture
notes, Ephesians. 4. 24. Put on the new man, which according to God is created in
Holiness and true Justice. Mark 6. 20. Herod reverenced JOHN BAPTIST, knowing
he was a just and a holy man. Luke 1. 74. That we being delivered from the
hands of our enemies, may serve him in true Justice and Holiness. Titus 2. 11,
12. The grace of God has appeared, etc. instructing us to live wisely, and
justly, and godly in this present World.

Yet we must observe that there are degrees in the imperfection which we speak
of: for

First, Some are weak ones, and even Babes in Christ, weak in Faith, weak in
Knowledge, weak in all kind of practice of spiritual Graces, whom the Apostle
calls carnal, that is to say, rude. Of the weak in Faith, the Apostle
speaks, Romans 14. 1. And our Savior many times vpbraydeth his Disciples, O
ye of little faith! Of weak in knowledge, and capacity of heavenly things,
it is said, Romans 6. 19. I spoke unto you after the manner of men, that is, by
Similitudes taken from the common course of man's life, For the infirmity of
your flesh. And Heb. 5. 12. For when through the time, ye ought to have been
Teachers, yea have need to be taught anew what are the elements of the
beginning of the words of Christ, and are become those that have need of Milk,
and not of strong meat. So our Savior Christ tells his Disciples, John 16.
12.
I have many things to say unto you, but you are not able to bear them now. Of
weak in practice we read, 1. Cor. 3. 1. I, Brethren, could not speak unto
you as spiritual, but as carnal, as Infants in CHRIST; I gave you Milk to
drink, and not strong meat: for you were not able to bear it.

Secondly, There is a further step, which Christians of the better sort
commonly attain unto, standing in a sufficient furniture of all graces
needful for the performance of every good duty in soul, good manner, and a
blameless and undefiled life, whereof the Scripture gives testimony to many
particular Christians: And the Apostles in their Epistles, partly 1. Cor. 1. 1.
1. These. 5, etc.
witness of diverse Churches, and partly Phil. 2. 15. 2. Pet. 3. 14, etc.
pray for them to be such.

Thirdly, Upon some few, in respect of his ordinary dealing, it pleases GOD
to power a more abundant measure of grace, and higher degree of perfection,
filling and enriching their hearts with an exceeding increase of Faith, of
Knowledge, of Love, of Hope, of Patience, and of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.
These the Apostle calls Heb. 5. 14.
perfect men, who through a habit have their senses exercised to the discerning
of good and evil. Phil. 3. 15. As many of us as are perfect, let us be thus
minded and if ye think any thing otherwise, that also will God reveal. Thus
Romans 4. 20, 21
it is said of Abraham, that he was strong in Faith, and had full assurance of
the promise of God. And of the 1. These. 1. 3.
Thessalonians, that their Faith did increase exceedingly, or above the common
or ordinary measure, and the (...) did abound. In another 1. These. 1. 3.
place he commends not only the virtues themselue^, but the fruit which
they showed of them, Remembering the work of your faith, your laborious love,
and patient hope, etc. And the James 5. 11.
Scripture sets before us the Patience of Job, and the Virtues and
Perfections of other men of God, as mirrours and glasses for us to look into,
for the reforming of our ways, and that we might become like unto them.

Not that such a one has attained to perfection, or may now set down and
rest, as being come to his iournies end, but the more graces he has, the more
fruitfully he ought to labor for an increase of them, and not so much to
think what he has; as what he does yet want, following the example of the
Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15.
Apostle PAVL, Brethren, I count not that I have attained unto the mark, that
is to say, perfection. But one thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and
endeavor my self to that which is before. As many of us therefore as are
perfect, let us be thus minded. Wherein we have the Mat. 25. 29.
promise of our Savior Christ to give us comfort, that to him that has, (that
is, carefully imployeth and uses to Gods Glory, the good things he has
received) more shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Our
Sanctification being so imperfect, as we have said, it is a noble and
necessary piece of service to inform our selves, how we may be able to
discern it. I will point out such notes and marks as I hold to be the
principal. First is, by those common affections noted before, which generally
belong to all holy Duties, and are here certain marks of renewed Holiness:

As first, A love of the Truth, and of the Word John 17. 17. Thy Word is Truth.
for the Truths sake: for to be of the Truth, that is, a lover and imbracer of
the Truth, is all one as to be of God. And so our Savior Christ expounds it,
when saying in John 18. 37.
one place, Every one that is of the Truth, hears my voice, he renders it
in John 8. 47.
another place by this, as all one in weight and substance: He that is of God,
hears the words of God. O how I love thy Law, (says Psalm. 119. 91.
DAVID!) All the day long it is my Meditation.

The contrary whereof, is an evident sign of an evil and wicked heart, and
draws after it many heavy Judgments, forerunners of destruction: for 2.
These. 2. 11, 12.
Because (says the Apostle) they receive not the love of the Truth, that they
might be saved: therefore GOD will send unto them effectual errors to believe
lies, that all may be condemned, that believe not the Truth, but take pleasure
in iniquity.

Secondly, Cheerfulness in well-doing. Whereupon the Children of God are
euery-where called, Psalm. 110. 3. Cant. 6. 9. etc.
A free-hearted people.

Thirdly, A fear of offending in any thing, which Solomon makes the Badge of
Gods Children: Blessed is the man that fears always.

Fourthly, Sincerity and singleness of heart, which one thing, in the midst
of many difficulties, held up the Apostle Paul, insomuch as he professes of
himself, This 2. Cor. 1. 12.
is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in singleness and
sincerity of God, we have been conversant in the World.

Fifthly, Zeal: when not only we love God, and his Truth, but our love is
hot, vehement, fervent, that Cant. 7. 11.
much water cannot quench it, no, nor the floods drown it. And if a man should
give all the substance of his house for this love, it should utterly be
contemned. PHINEAS for this grace obtained a great Mercy, Numb. 25. 12, 13.
Therefore behold, I give unto him my Covenant of Peace: for he and his seed
after him shall have an everlasting Priesthood by covenant, because he was
zealous for his God.

Sixthly, Watchfulness over our ways, which our Savior so often does beat
upon: Mat. 26. 14.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

Seventhly, A constant resolution to cleave unseparably unto Christ. So Acts
11. 23, 24. BA^NABAS exhorted all with purpose of heart, to cleave unto the
Lord: for he was (says the Text) a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and
Faith.

Eighthly, To perform whatsoever we do of conscience to God, Working it from
the heart, as to the Lord, and not to man, Col. 3. 23.

Ninthly, To seek his glory in all things: which general rule the Apostle
sets down, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God.

Tenthly, That the greater and more holy the duties are, and the more they do
excel, the more excellent our Love, Zeal, Cheerfulness and Sincerity be in
the performance of them: This Commandment we have, Matthew 22. 37. Thou shall
love the Lord with all thy heart.

The eleventh and last (which yet is so far from being least, that in a
manner it carries the praise from all the rest) is an entire obedience, when
we labor to keep whatsoever God has commanded, and to please him in all
things, being holy, as he is holy, Ezechiel in his eighteenth Chapter in one
word expresses it, If he keep all mine Ordinances: and then Ezech. 18. 11,
12, etc.
amplifying it by the contrary, beats upon it (as his manner is) with a
heap and multitude of enforcing speeches, If he do to his Brother, other then
any one of those things, and he do not all these things, etc.

For the practice of this Lesson, good Cornelius and the rest with him
assembled, are highly commended, Acts 10. 33. We all are here present before
God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. And of David the Holy
Ghost bears Acts 13. 22.
witness, I have found out DAVID the son of IESSE, according to my heart,
that will (...).
do all my will in all things. Not like to Saul, 1. Sam. 1. 15.
who served GOD but by halues: for the which Mark 6. 20.
Herod is also bra^ded, that he did many things, but not all that he heard of
John Baptist. And James 3. 2.
the more to encourage us to this duty, the Scripture teaches, that though in
many things we fail all, God accepts the desire for the thing it self, that
if our heart and purpose be to forsake every evil path, and to cleave unto
God, without being drawn away, it is in his sight all one, as if we had done
it: so James 2. 22.
James says, that ABRAHAM offered his Son ISACK, where indeed he did but
show himself willing and ready to offer him; and Mat. 5. 6.
Christ promises, that they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, shall
be satisfied.

To come to some other notes of Sanctification, in the second place many parts
of Holiness are undoubted signs of it.

First, our intercourse with God by private and fervent Prayer of Faith, is the
most infallible sign of all the rest. A singular fruit and testimony to a
man's conscience, that he is regenerate: for this is the very mark which the
Holy Ghost sets upon profane men, They Psalm. 53. 5.
call not upon God: and the reason is plain and evident: for either Prayer
will make men to leave sin, or sin will make men to leave to pray.

The wicked, though they seem to pray in secret, do it seldom, or never,
with company to fill up the number, and for their credit sake; or for some
worldly respect, they can be content to make one. But howsoever it be, their
Prayers differ far from the properties of true Prayer, that are only to be
found in Gods Children. Which properties, and wherein the wicked differ from
them, may all be gathered out of that most absolute Prayer both for matter and
form, which our Savior himself has taught us, and are these that follow,

First, The faithful man is furnished with the Zach. 1^. ^
Spirit of Prayer, or Supplication, that is, an excellent Grace, faculty, or
ability wrought in a man by the holy Spirit, whereby he is made able, willing,
and ready to pray unto God for every want, as the present occasion does
require: for as the Romans 8. 26.
Apostle says, Of our selves we know not what to pray. Therefore our Savior
delivers unto us in few words, all the maine Graces we can desire, and maine
wants we any way can stand in need of, to ask at the hands of God, which may
serve for a Storehouse, continually to put words in our mouth. But the carnal
man, though he can speak and tell a perswasiue Tale for worldly things, he is
utterly ignorant how to ask heavenly.

Secondly, That we may pray as we ought, the Romans 8. 26, 27
Spirit helps our infirmity, and teaches us to pray according unto God,
with groans and sighs that cannot be expressed. But this the Worldling is
far from, to whom such sighs and gronings of the Spirit are as strange and
unheard of, as is the John 14. 17.
Spirit it self the Author of it.

Thirdly, Gods Children in all their necessities address themselves to him,
and seek for good things at the hands of their heavenly Father through Christ;
the wicked howsoever with Numb. 23. 14
Balaam they may break forth into wishes and woulds, Let my soul dye the
death of the Righteous, and my latter end be like to him; have neither the face
nor the heart to go to God by humble Prayer, as David in the like case did,
Psalm. 26. 9. Take not away my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men.
This diversity you may find, Psalm. 4. 7. Many say, Who will show us good?
JEHOVAH, lift up upon us the light of thy countenance.

Fourthly, The godly prepare themselves to Prayer, by Eccles. 4. 13.
meditating beforehand of the duty they are to perform, and of the arguments
and reasons that may stir them up unto it. And so our Savior in that Prayer
teaches us to do, by the using of a Preface. The wicked never make conscience
of their Prayers.

Fifthly, True Prayer cannot be without Faith, whereby we apply particularly to
our selves, the love of GOD in Christ, to call him Our Father: for how shall
they call on him, in whom they do not believe? Romans 10. 14. but this the
carnal man has not.

Sixthly, Gods Children come with boldness and confidence unto him, as a Child
unto his Father; whereas the carnal man flies from him, and is afraid of him,
as of a Just and Righteous Judge. This difference in the point of Prayer the
Apostle teaches, Romans 8. 15. We have not received the Spirit of bondage, to
fear any more: but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father.

Seventhly, Reverence is in the true and faithful Caller upon of Gods Name,
Eccles. 5. 1.
knowing that God is in Heaven, and himself upon Earth: the carnal man
rusheth without all reverence into his presence.

Eighthly, Our Savior requires of his, Zeal and earnestness in Prayer, that
all our affections be taken up, and wholly bent upon it, which the shortness
of the Prayer teaches, and the concluding of it with this word, Amen: and the
rather to kindle in us a feruencie in Prayer, he beats upon it with many
words: Mat. 7. ^.
Ask, Seek, Knock, etc. For cold Suitors prove cold Speeders: But such as
even rent the Heavens with their Prayers, and pull, as it were by violence,
Gods Graces from him, are those that he delights in: but this the carnal
man is far from, whose mind is always straggling and thinks upon his
penny, his business and worldly delights.

Ninthly, In Gods Children there is a greater feruencie of Spirit, in praying
for the things that concern Gods glory, then for those that concern our own
good, yea though it be the salvation of our souls; and in those that concern
our own good, greater zeal, and feruencie for heavenly things, then for
earthly, that are sought but as additaments, and appendances to the other; all
which, the very order of petitioning in the Lords Prayer shows. Contrariwise,
of these, worldly things are altogether, or (at the least) most sought after.

Tenthly, The godly pray, to set forth Gods glory, as may be seen there: The
James 4. 3.
wicked ask, to employ it upon their lusts.

Eleuenthly, Gods Children in their prayers remember not themselves only, but
the Church, their brethren and fellow members, in a fellow-feeling and love one
of another: Our Father, Our bread, Our trespasses, Lead us not, Deliver us,
etc. The wicked are every one for himself.

Twelfthly, The Elect pray with assurance of obtaining the things; we pray for
earthly things, with condition, so far as God has appointed them for our
good: All other absolutely without condition: which assurance is noted in the
word Amen, signifying, that not only so we desire it may be, but that so
undoubtedly it is, and shall be: whereunto we are induced both by the
consideration of the love of God, who is our Father, and therefore willing; and
of his power, which is in heaven, and therefore able to do us good. Which two,
(his Goodness, and his Greatness) are the two maine pillars and props of our
Faith. And to this virtue in prayer, our Savior does exhort us, Mark. 11. 24.
All things, whatsoever ye ask when ye pray, believe ye shall receive them,
and they shall be yours. The wicked are as James 1. 6.
waves of the Sea tossed about with every wind, doubting and distrusting of
Gods goodness in the things they pray for.

Thirteenth, Gods Children are constant in their prayers, and continue in them,
Give us this day, etc. every day renewing their supplications. The wicked faint
and quickly give over, or pray but by starts.

These circumstances to be observed out of the manner of the Lords Prayer, lead
me by the hand to some consideration of the matter it self, and parts of that
Prayer; wherein also, unless I deceive may self, we shall nothing digress
from our purpose.

There be two parts of that, as of all other Prayers: for it stands partly in
petition, partly, in thanksgiving: The Petitions are six in number, all in
that course and order, as the Doctrine before was handled, whereof the first
three (comprehended in the first part of Divinity) are of those things that
belong unto Gods glory, without any respect of our own good: as the particle
Thy in every one does show. And this one thing, wh^eein the soundest Divines
agree, being well observed, brings a great light for the distinguishing of
all the six Petitions, according to their proper bounds and limits, in such
sort as hereafter follows:

The first Peticion, Hallowed be thy name: O thou the blessed and great
JEHOVAH, Father, Son, and holy Spirit, three persons, and one only true and
everliving God, whose Esaias 9. 3.
name is wonderful, and who alone art glorious and excellent: thy Mercy great
unto the Heavens, thy Truth unto the Clouds: thy Righteousness as the mighty
Hills; thy Judgments like the bottomless Deep: exalt thy self, O God, above
the heavens, thy Glory over all the earth.

And make it known unto thy creatures, that thou the Creator (blessed for
ever, Amen) art a Nature Spiritual and Divine, of thy self, and in thy self,
and by thy self subsisting, Eternal, Immeasurable, Incomprehensible,
Infinite* in Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Truth, Mercy, Justice, and whatsoever
good is, yea, Goodness and Perfection it self: So that both whatsoever thou
do, is absolutely good and holy, and all good and perfect gifts are thine,
there being no jot of good in any creature, but that only which they have from
thee who art the Father of Lights.

And this respects the first branch of that part of Divinity, concerning the
Nature, Persons, and Properties of the Godhead.

The second Petition, Thy Kingdom come. Advance the Throne and Scepter of thy
Kingdom in the Government of the World, according to all thy counsels and
purposes decreed from Eternity.

Whether of saving the Elect, or destroying of the Reprobate, or of the
businesses and affairs pertaining to this life, and the general Providence
over all things that thy hands have fashioned and made, together with the
means which thou have sanctified thereunto, thy Gospel, with the Ministry
and preaching thereof, the Sacraments, Censures, and Discipline of the Church,
and all other good things thou have ordained, may prove to thy Children a
savor of life unto life, and to none of them a savor of death unto death.

And that thou would so dispose of things by thy hidden and secret
providence, that all persons and creatures (although they, many of them
sinfully and wretchedly moved with other causes and ends, then in obedience
unto thee, yet in regard of thy work most holily and justly) may concur to
do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel has fore-determined to be done.
Neither let any power or policy of Satan or man, or any other creature hinder
the execution of thy most glorious and magnificent, most wise and just Decrees:
But let them all be as the Mountains of Brass that cannot be removed, but
stand fast for ever.

And this respects the second branch, touching the Kingdom of God, and the
dispensation of his Counsels.

The third Petition: Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Have thou
always in the World, even here among men, as thou have among thy holy Angels
and Spirits of the Righteous that are deceased, a Church and chosen Company,
which may Zach. 8. 8.
refresh and delight thy Spirit, by yielding with free and ready hearts, all
cheerful obedience to thy known and revealed will, whilst they be seen to
prefer the love they bear to thee, before the love of themselves, their own
pleasure, profit, or lives, or whatsoever else that is most dear unto them.

And this which is the third branch (the honor due to God) rises by a
necessary consequence from the former two: for he that is in himself and in
his works so glorious, is worthy, and alone worthy to be honored and served
of us.

The three latter Petitions comprehended in the second part of Divinity, are
of those things that concern our own and our Neighbors good, whereof the
first (being the fourth Petition in number) is for the Fountain of all good,
that excellent John 4. 4.
gift of Christ himself, and all the means, and Graces, Faith especially,
whereby he may be ours, and we come to be his.

The fifth and sixth are for the streams of Righteousness that flow from it,
and spring unto everlasting life: So that in these last Petitions the whole
substance of the Gospel is contained: for touching the other Righteousness
which is our own, or by the Law, the same being impossible through our own
corruption to be had, our Savior teaches us not to pray for it. But
contrariwise, in teaching Regeneration and Righteousness through him, he does
utterly exclude all Righteousness from our selves, or by our own Creation.

And in willing us to pray to be delivered from evil, he shows the right
use of the Law, whereby evil is discovered to be the rule of our obedience.

The fourth Petition: Give us this Day that Bread of ours, that (bread) above
substance, or better then all wealth and riches which consume and perish,
whereas this indureth to everlasting Life, being the Bread of God that comes
down from Heaven, and gives life unto the World, even Christ himself the
spiritual Manna, promised in Paradise, figured in the Wilderness, forespoken
by the Prophets, shaddowed in the Law, manifested in the Gospel, thy only
Son, of thine own eternal nature and Essence, conceived and borne of the
Virgin, by the wonderful work of thy holy Spirit, sanctified from the Womb,
to be the mighty and powerful Instrument, in and by whose flesh or humane
nature united to the Godhead, personally he quickens all those that by
Faith are ingraffed in him; replenished with all Righteousness and fullness of
the Spirit above measure: And therefore in himself most blessed and happy,
but for us and for our sakes accursed, in that he bare the whole wrath due to
our sins, and became subject to death, the most ignominious death of the
Cross it self, under which notwithstanding, he did not lie, for that it was
impossible he should be holden of it: but loosing the pangs and sorrows of
death, he arose again and ascended into Heaven, where he sits at the right
hand of thy most excellent Majesty, to make continual Intercession for those
that are his, and has obtained a Name above all names, a Crown of Glory, and
a Kingdom, whereof there shall not be any end; governing all things in Heaven
and upon the Earth, vanquishing and subduing the proud Enemies, and Rebels to
his Kingdom, and leading captivity captive, gathering out of the wicked World
a holy Nation, a peculiar people (even in respect of their outward calling) to
the praise of his glorious Name, opening their eyes to behold the unsearchable
riches of himself, in whom are hidden all the treasures of Wisdom and
Understanding, filling their hearts with manifold Graces and Blessings of his
Spirit, separating and choosing out from among them, Pastors, Teachers, and
other Officers, for the well ordering and guiding of his House, which is the
Church of the living God, and not only reaching forth to many of them from
above, a comfortable taste of the sweetness and excellency that is in him,
but upon such and so many as God the Father (through him) has from everlasting
purposed unto Glory; pouring down that most excellent and precious gift of
Faith proper to the Elect, whereby he gives himself to be theirs, and takes
them to be his, knitteth and unites them as members to that Mystical Body,
whereof himself is the Head, makes them in a spiritual and unspeakable
sort, bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, and one together with him, and so
becomes unto them that heavenly and supernatural Bread, whereby their souls
are fed unto everlasting life.

Good Lord, this Mat. 6. 11.
Day and every Luke 11. 3.
Day, give this our bread unto us, that we may so come unto him, as we may
never hunger, so believe in him, as we may never thirst* so be regenerate, and
borne again, by the incorruptible seed of the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever, that it may never dye within us, but confirmed still in our
most holy Faith, by the preaching of thy Gospel, participation of thy
Sacraments, Prayer, and other holy means, we may grow up thoroughly in him
which is our Head, till we come to the full age of men grown in Christ, by
the joyful and blessed beholding of him in his Glory.

The fifth Petition, And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us, is for Justification through the Righteousness we have
in Christ, forgiveness of sins, which is but one part, being put for the
whole.

Pardon and forgive us all our sins, by the death and sufferings of thy
Son, and so remove both the guilt and punishment away from us; Clothe us
with all his sufficient and most absolute and perfect Holiness and Obedience,
that being made the Righteousness of God in him, we may appear in thy
presence, not only as no sinners, but as perfectly just in thy Son, having
that Righteousness that is able to abide the rigor of thy sentence: so as
thou thy self justifying and absoluing, none may be able to accuse: And
looking upon us no otherwise then thou do upon thine only Son, we may at
the bar of thy Tribunal Seat, and in thy most holy Judgment* be freed
from wrath and condemnation, and declared worthy of everlasting life.

The last Petition has two branches. One, to be delivered from the evil of
sin: the other, from the evil of punishment. In both, the contrary good is
prayed for. The Holiness or Sanctification which we have from Christ in the
one; Blessedness in the other.

The first branch: And lead us not into temptation. Being now ingraffed into
the noble stock of the Body of thy Son, and justified through him,
sanctify us also by his Spirit dwelling in us, mortifying and subduing sin;
that it bear not the sway in our mortal bodies, that neither the Devil, the
World, nor the flesh, or our own corruption prevail against us, to make us to
fulfill the lust thereof, but go forward with the work of our new Birth,
quickening and renewing us in our Memory, Judgments, Will, Affections, and in
all the parts and powers of our Soul and Body from dead works, to serve thee
the true and the living God: that even now in this life, whilst here we
struggle with those spiritual foes of ours, we may attain to that measure of
perfection which may be pleasing and acceptable in thy Son; and that after
this life ended, and all our enemies subdued under us, we may be taken up
without spot or wrinkle, to be presented, as a pure Virgin unto Christ, in the
Day of our spiritual Marriage.

The second branch, But deliver us from evil.

Together with the friut of Righteousness (which is to be sanctified by the
Spirit of thy Son) give us also the free reward which thou have promised to
all that are found in him. Hale and pull us, as a beast that sticks in the
mire, out of the miserable condition whereinto sin has plunged us, the curse
of the Law, Hell, Death, and Condemnation; and from him that has the power of
death, that is to say, the Devil. So make us happy and blessed, through the
communion of the Blessedness which is in thee, that even now in some measure we
may have our part in all, and so much as is able to fall into this life: where
the testimony and assurance of thy love, and the having and inioying (in and
from thy love) of all the good things of this present life, both for necessity
and Christian Delight, Maintenance, Health, Credit, Friends, Comfort of Wife,
Children, Servants, a Blessing upon our Labors, the fruit of Magistracy and
of Government, and good order in the World, together with the sanctifying of
all things, even our very troubles and crosses of this life, unto our good, so
as thou in thy Mercy have appointed for us, Peace of conscience and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, do excel: and by these degrees, as it were by so many steps and
stayres make us to climb up to that perfect and eternal Happiness, which is
reserved for thy Saints in Heaven, when Hell, Satan, sin, weakness, shame
trodden under foot, we shall be all spiritual and glorious, and reign as
Kings with thee for evermore.

Wherefore here is set before us, that in estimable benefit we receive by
Christ, which coming last, crowns the rest, and in the lauding Revel. 5. 8,
9. 10, 11, 12, 13.
and magnifying whereof, all Eternity shall be spent, the full and final
Redemption of our souls and bodies, unto the glorious Inheritance purchased
for the sons of God.

Whereupon, after the Petitions ended, follows Praise and Thanksgiving unto
God, the Fountain of all good, in these words: For thine is the Kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever: that is to say, all absolute and
perfect Blessedness, both for thy might and Sovereignty of commanding all
things, being all thy creatures, and the work of thy hands: and for the power
of effecting whatsoever thou will and do command: and lastly, in regard of
the infinite Graces that shine so gloriously in thy person, and which thou
do so graciously extend to us: being thy self eternal, and therefore
exercising an eternal power and dominion in the World; not only confounding
those whom thou have appointed to destruction to the praise of thy glorious
Justice: but (which is principally here considered) creating anew an eternal
people to thy self, to the praise of thy glorious Grace.

Having thus finished the Lords Prayer, because the sense which I gave of the
fourth Petition may seem new (though it cannot be called new, which a number
of the Fathers do so expound) yet for the better satisfying of the godly
Reader, let me shortly render my reasons for it:

First, I hold this Prayer to be a compendiarie sum of all the holy Doctrine
concerning God and our Salvation in Christ: wherein it cannot be thought, that
he himself and our incorporating into him (the root and bases of all good
things we have from him) should be omitted, being that which he so presses us
to seek, and gives the first place unto in all his Doctrines, John 3. 3. John
4. and John 6. which Chapter may serve for a Commentary upon this place.

Secondly; The method and order of the Petitions were not so natural, to ask
earthly benefits before heavenly Blessings.

Thirdly, the Analogy and correspondence of these latter Petitions with the
former three, for as they beginning with the great and glorious Name of God,
fall afterward to his adioynts of Kingdom, and Honor: so these begin with
Christ and Regeneration through him, the fruits whereof are Justification and
Sanctification, which follow in their place: as the Apostle, agreeably hereunto
reduces the benefits we have by Christ, to these three heads, and that in the
same order: Regeneration, the root and mother of the rest: Justification and
Sanctification, the two twins and noble pair that comes from it, 1. Ioh.
5. 8. There be three that bear record in Earth, to the Soul and Conscience of
every true Believer: The Spirit, or part regenerate: Water, whereby we are
washed and cleansed from our sin: and Blood, purging and abolishing both the
root and fruits of it; which is attributed to the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.
14. 1. John 1. 7, 9 And that is so to be taken in this place, not for
expiatition, I gather, by that the Apostle 1. John 5. 6.
said before, This is he that came by Water and Blood, that is to say, not our
Iustifier only, which all men do willingly embrace: but to sanctify us also,
which men will not so easily be brought unto.

Fourthly, Seeing it is plain, that by obtaining pardon for our sins, and
Righteousness in Christ (which is asked in the fifth Petition) consequently we
have all the Blessedness that belongs to it, one part whereof is this, to
have all outward things, as additaments and appendances cast unto us, so far
as God has appointed them for our good, as our Savior Christ's both speech and
promise is, Mat. 6. 33. and further then that, we have no warrant to desire
them; it seems not so likely, that either our Savior Christ would rent these
things a sunder, and transplant one from another, especially to set the fruit
before the branch that bears it, or in so short a sum admit of repetition,
which must needs follow, if being elsewhere included, we ask them here by
name. And this also may serve to prove, that no defect or maime can justly be
imputed to this absolute form of Prayer, though outward things come not within
compass of the fourth Petition.

Fifthly, The doubling of the Article (...), shows it to be no common Bread,
but a Bread of some rare and singular quality: the very like doubling of the
Article to that purpose, you find in this selfsame argument, John 6. 32.
(...). And most aptly is ( Bread) here taken up, to express our spiritual
conjunction with Christ, being that which to the Worlds end must represent him
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Lastly, the word (...), which makes all the doubt, being never read, but in
this Prayer only, and therefore of an uncertain signification, I derive from
(...), with the best Interpreters, as I make no doubt it must of necessity be:
but not in that sense which I see them to do, who expound it competent or
sufficient for our nature, that is, for our sustenance and nourishment. Of
which signification of the word (...), you shall hardly find any example, as
H. Stephen in his Greek Thesaurus notes: But in that sense which the
Scripture uses it, Luke 14. 12, 13 (and never otherwise) as it signifies,
wealth and substance: from whence I take to be derived two words of near
affinity, (...) here, and (...), Titus 2. 14. one noting that, which as the
remain and overplus of our substance, we lay up in store and keep for a
Jewel; the other, that which excels all wealth and substance, which (among
many other) is one signification of the proposition (...), Romans 9. 5. Ephesians. 4.
6. and so does (...) aptly answer (...) Psalm. 119. 14. I rejoice in the way of
thy Testimonies, as above all substance. And it seems unto me, that our
Savior Christ does herein allude to that saying of SOLOMON, Cant. 8. 11. If a
man would give all the substance of his House, for this Love (of Jesus Christ,
to whom I am even now ascending out of the Wilderness of this World, to join
and unite my self by Faith) he should be utterly despised: yet the other
Interpretation, which the most Learned and best Divines of our time do follow,
carries a sound and a godly sense, against which no exception can be taken:
And therefore in such cases men are not to strive.

To come to the other notes, whereby we may assure our own souls, and give
good testimony unto other, that we are of the number of those which are
sanctified through Christ: Next unto Prayer, is the Luke 21. 9.
patient bearing of afflictions. Our Savior calls it, The Mat. 16. 24.
taking In your patience possess your souls, Col. 1. 11. That ye may be
strengthened unto all patience and long sufferance with joy.
up of our Cross, which being so hard a Lesson to take out, and Heb. 10. 36.
Patience a thing that we have special need of, the Scripture uses many
Arguments to persuade us thereunto: Taken from the causes of affliction, both
principal in GOD; and secondarie in our selves, from the end, from the
effects, and lastly, from the things that do accompany and are adjoined to
it. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow me.


For first, the consideration of this, that God is the Author of all
judgments, has a singular use for the quieting of our minds in the storms
and tempests of afflictions: for whether the same come immediately from God,
without the hand of man, we are to remember him that said, Psalm. 39. 10.
I am dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou have done it. Or if he plague
and scourge by men, we are taught not to be impatient, nor to rage against the
means, but to look up unto God, as the chief working cause. This made the
holy man of God to say, JEHOVAH John 1. 21.
gave and JEHOVAH has taken; blessed be the Name of JEHOVAH. And David, when
railing Shimei threw stones at him, and cursed him to his face, Let 2. Sam. 16.
11
him alone: for JEHOVAH has commanded him to curse DAVID. How could Joseph
have borne with patience the malice of his Brethren, throwing him out of his
fathers house, and selling him into a strange Country; had not this persuasion
prevailed with him, that it was the Lord that did it? It Genesis 45. 8.
is not ye that sold me into Egypt, but God that sent me hither.

Secondly, God has from everlasting purposed and decreed us to this end, to
glorify his Name, by suffering of afflictions: For Romans 8. 29.
whom he has fore-knowne, them he has also predestinate, to be (this way)
conformed to the Image of his Son. And therefore being his will and purpose,
the Lord forbid that any man should be found so hardy, as to oppose against
it: for Gods Counsels are always best. Whereupon the 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3, 4
Apostle says, Let no man be moved with these afflictions: for your selves
know, that hereunto we are appointed.

Thirdly, Not only they come from God, according to his everlasting purpose,
but the same is in his love and favor toward us: For Pro. 3. 12.
whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, even as a father does the son in whom
he takes pleasure: or as the Apostle to the Hebrews has it, rendering the
sense, not incumbring the words, And he Heb. 12. 6.
scourges every son, whom he does embrace.

Fourthly, Affliction, as Job 5. 6.
Eliphaz tells JOB, comes not out of the dust, neither does tribulation
spring from the Earth, but man is borne unto trouble, as the little sparks do
fly upward: that is, it comes not by chance or fortune, neither are we to
lay the fault upon any other, but to impute unto our selves the just desert of
our offenses, that Leu. 26. 23, 24
because we walk rashly with God, therefore he also walks rashly with us;
and therefore to Micah. 7. 9.
bear the indignation of JEHOVAH, because we have sinned against him. As also
the Prophet teaches, Why Lament. 3. 39 40, 41, 42.
should a living person keep a wruling? a man, when he is chastized for the
punishment of his sins? Rather let us sift our ways, and search and return
unto JEHOVAH, lifting up our heart We know, that to them that love God, all
things work together to good.
with both hands to the mighty God of Heaven, saying, We have fallen away and
rebelled: thou pardonest not, etc.

Fifthly, The end of them is, for our Romans 8. 28.
good and profit, Heb. 12. 10.
as the Apostle speaks, that we may partake his Holiness: and that as Deuteronomy. 8.
16.
Moses says, he may do good unto us in the end: for when 1. Cor. 11. 31.
we are judged, we are chastized of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the World.

Sixthly, They work Heb. 12. 11.
at the least the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, to those that are
exercised thereby, Romans 5. 3, 4. Affliction works Patience, and Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed. PAVL by this
Lesson was taught, not to 1. Cor. 1. 9.
trust in himself, but in God that rayseth up the dead. And again, That 2.
Cor. 12. 1.
I might not be lift up by the excellency of Revelation, there was given unto
me a prick in the flesh (some exceeding affliction) the messenger of Satan to
buffet me, that I should not be puffed up. Yea, Christ himself, Heb. 5. 1.
though he were the Son, yet he learned, by the things he suffered,
Obedience, and was perfited thereby. It is Psalm. 119. 7.
good for me, says DAVID, that I was afflicted, that I may learn thy
Statutes. And ESAIAS, Esaias 26. 16.
O JEHOVAH, in affliction they visited thee, they powered out submisse Prayers,
when thy chastizement was upon them. So God, to whom our nature is best known,
tells aforehand, Heb. 5. 5. In their affliction they will seek me early.
An example whereof is to be seen, Psalm. 78. When Psalm. 78. 34.
he slew them, then they sought unto him, and returned, and went early unto
the mighty God. And notable is that of Jeremy, I have Ier. 31. 18, 19
certainly heard EPHRAIM mourning to himself, and saying, Thou have chastized
me, that I might be chastized: for I was an untamed Hayfer* Convert me, that
I may be converted: for when I shall be converted, it shall repent me, and
after I shall be showed my fault, I will clap upon the thigh (in sign of
mourning.) I blush and am ashamed, because I bear the reproach of my youth.

Seventhly, It is the way that leads unto Glory: for if we suffer with him,
we shall also be glorified together with him, Romans 8. 17.

Eighthly, Affliction is a Crown of Glory, an excellent and a noble benefit,
Philip. 1. 29. To you is this grace freely given, not only to believe in
Christ, but also to suffer for him, 2. Cor. 12. 7. he boasts of it, as of a
bountiful gift of God, that I might not be lift up by the excellency of
Revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh.

Ninthly, It is the common lot of all Gods Children: For 2. Tim. 3. 12.
whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And what
Heb. 12. 7, 8.
son is there (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) whom the Father does not
chastize? Therefore if ye be without chastizement, whereof all are made
partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not children. Therefore Ioha Revel. 1. 9.
calls himself, our brother and partner in affliction, and kingdom, and
suffering for Christ Jesus. And the speech of our Savior Christ is general,
If any man will follow me, let him take up his Cross, etc. For this cause is
the Church called his Esaias 21. 10.
threshing, and the Son of his Floor. One whom he beats and thresheth with
afflictions, a^ the Corn in the Barn is threshed with the Flaile; and is
compared to a Exodus 3. 2.
Bush burning in the fire, and to Zach. 1. 8.
Mirrh Trees that grow in a bottom, in a place exposed to wind and weather,
and to all storms. A thing most necessary to be known, and thoroughly disgested,
for preventing of those temptations that have always troubled the Saints of
God, and held them as it were amazed. Insomuch as comparing the happiness of
the wicked, and the drunkenness of their pleasures, with their own bitter
potions, they, through the infirmity of the flesh, call many times in question
the providence of God, to say, How should the mighty God know, or how can
there be any knowledge in the most High? Behold, these are the wicked ones, and
they prosper for ever, and multiply riches, but I am smitt^n all the day long,
and my rebuke is every Morning: whereby they come almost to make a scoff of
the generation of GODS Children, as in the seventy three Psalm the Prophet
David shows in his own person, how these conflicts do assault them; from
which, he professes there, that hardly he could get out, till he went into the
Sanctuary of GOD, to the holy meetings, and assemblies of the Church, where he
learned the the end of those men, how the Lord had set them in slippery places,
etc. The whole Psalm is very notable, and full of many sweet and heavenly
Meditations, which are as the Wine and Apples spoken of in the Cant. 2. 5.
Canticles, to stay and cheer up the hearts of the faithful, that they faint
not under this temptation.

Another, an excellent man of God, and a Prophet sanctified from his Mothers
womb, is bold to dispute this question with God, Why Ier. 12. 1, 2, 3.
the way of the wicked prospers? why transgressors are at rest? why they be
planted, and also rooted, continue and bring forth fruit? In whose mouth God is
nigh, but far from their reins. At length he satisfies his own soul, by
showing first (in himself) the singular good that adversity brings to the
godly: For thou, O JEHOVAH, know me, thou see me; therefore thou tryest my
mind to cleave unto thee. Afterward, the end of the prosperity of the
wicked, who are fed and fatted unto destruction: Thou pullest these away, as
Sheep unto the Butchery, and preparest them unto the day of slaughter. The
Book of Job swarmeth with these complaints: and Solomon the wise thought it
fit to arm men against it; If Eccles. 5. 7, 8.
thou see the oppression of the peer, and the wresting of right, and Justice
in place of Judgment; marvel not at this their will: for the High above, the
High observes, yea, the most High^nes (the eternal Father, Son and Holy
Spirit) above these.

Tenthly, We are hereby made like to Christ, and conformed to his Image, Romans
8. 29. Whom he has foreknowne, them he has predestinate to be conformed to
the Image of his Son. And again, Verse 17. If we suffer together with him.
Now Col. 1. 24.
do I fulfill, says PAVL, in my flesh, the remainders of the sufferings of
Christ, who having before suffered in his own person, as the Head, does now
suffer in the daily infirmities of his members; which is it the Apostle
calls, To 1. Cor. 4. 10.
carry about us always in our body, the dying of the Lord Jesus. And this
Argument Peter 1. Pet. 4. 13.
specially takes up, to persuade us not only to hear, but to rejoice in
afflictions: In as much as ye partake of the afflictions of Christ, rejoice,
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may rejoice and be glad. And the
reason is great and singular: for if, as the Apostle says, Heb. 2. 10. to
bring many children into Glory, it was necessary to consecrate the Prince of
their salvation, through afflictions, whereupon he is not ashamed to call us
Brethren: who is he that would stick to go through fire and water with such a
Brother, especially when it is to obtain so great a Garland?

Eleuenthly, God is able, and will deliver us, and send a gracious issue out of
all, whereof we have a promise, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee: so shall thou glorify me. And 1. Cor. 10.
13. No temptation has laid hold upon you, but that which befalls unto men.
Now God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tried above that you are
able, but together with the temptation will make an issue, that you may be
able for to bear. For the Church of God, howsoever it be in continual floate,
tumbling, and tossed with contrary winds, yet can never be sunk, but is like
to a Exodus 3. 2.
Bush burning in the fire, but not consumed: and to the Zach. 1. 8.
Mirrh Tree, which, though it grow in a bottom, in a place that lies open to
all kind of tempestuous weather, yet is ever green and flourishing, full of
fruit, sweet and edoriferous: God so tempering their afflictions, that even
Esaias 42. 25.
then when he is angry with us for our sins, yet he does but sprinkle upon
us a few drops, and lets out a small quillet of his wrath, that he might
not waste us with the extremity of the heat (as he does his Esaias 66. 15.
foes) but disple us with the shaking of his Rod, to bring us home unto
himself. Whereupon the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4. 8, 9.
In all things we are pressed, but not distressed; doubting, but not
despayring; persecuted, but not forsaken in it; cast down, but perish not.
This is it which makes so large a difference between Gods Children and the
ungodly; that whereas a little trouble amazeth the one, that their heart, with
1. Sam. 25, 37
Nabal, is as heavy as a stone, and ready to dye within them, the other
joyfully undergo whatsoever affliction; because, come life, come death, come
what will else, they know it is from God, who is able, and will set them free.
The Psalmist notes that diversity, when he says, Psalm. 34. 20, 22
Many are the afflictions of the just, but JEHOVAH delivers them out of all;
but one affliction kills the wicked man. Again, Psalm. 32. 7.
Great and many are the sorrows of the wicked man: but he that trusts in
JEHOVAH, kindness shall compass him about. And Solomon in his Proverbs,
Though Pro. 24. 16.
the righteous man fall seven times, yet he rises up again: but the wicked
at one evil fall downright. Esaias 40. 30, 31
Children, says the Prophet ESAIAS, faint and are wearied, and young men fall
down flat: that is, whosoever, either through childishness, as Babes, seek
not unto GOD, or in a iollitie and vain confidence of their own strength, as
lusty Youths, care not for him: but they that wait upon JEHOVAH, renew their
strength, they fly up with the wing as an Eagle, which in swiftness of flying
upwards, passes all other Birds: so they speedily get out and pass over all
affliction, trusting in the love and favor of God: They run, and are not
wearied; they go forward, and do not faint.

Twelfthly, Christ himself is our supporter, and ministers strength unto us,
Philip. 4. 13. I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens
me.

Thirteenth, We have innumerable Angels that attend to help us, Psalm. 34. 7,
8. The Angel of JEHOVAH pitcheth his Tents round about them that fear him. 2.
Kings 6. 16, 17. Fear not, there be more with us then that are with them. Then
praying to JEHOVAH, he opened the eyes of his servant, who looking saw, that
behold, the Mountain was full of Horses and Chariots of fire, that is, of holy
Angels round about ELISHA.

Fourteenth, There is no cause why we should ^aint under this burden, seeing
Prayer ministers abundant comfort to us, which coming from Gods Spirit with
so much the greater vehemency, sighs and groans, as the troubles that lie
upon us are more pressing and weighty, must needs be effectual for the
working of some good blessing. To which purpose, the Apostle inforceth this
Argument, Romans 8. 26, 27.

Fifteenth, Howsoever it be, no affliction can debase us, or make us poor:
for having Christ, who is Heb. 1. 2.
Heir of all things, and Lord of Heaven and Earth, we cannot but be rich in
him. By this Argument the Apostle Romans 8. 31.
there mollifieth the bitterness of afflictions: He that has not spared his
own Son, but for us all has given him up to death, how shall he not
together with him give us all good things?

I have been too long in these: The rest of the marks that follow, to shut
them up shortly, are,

First, Humility, Micah 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and
what does JEHOVAH require of thee, but to do right, and to love kindness, and
to walk humbly with thy God?

Secondly, Love of the Brethren: because they are Brethren and Children of the
same Father, 1. John 3. 14. We know we are passed from death to life because we
love the Brethren. The practice of this one duty to the members of Christ, for
Christ's sake, casts such a shining Light in the eyes of God and Man, that our
Savior, Mat. 25. 35, 36. by it, our Faith, and consequently the righteous
judgment of God in the saving of our Souls, shall be made manifest to all the
World in the latter Day.

Thirdly, To love our Enemies, and to forgive them their offenses, Mat. 5. 44,
45. Love your enemies: bless them that curse you: do good to them that hate
you and pray for them that molest you and persecute you, that you may be the
children of your Father which is in Heaven, etc. Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgive one
another, as God in Christ has forgiven you.

Fourthly, Open profession of Christ and of the Gospel, Romans 10. 10. With the
heart men believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
unto saluatition.

Fifthly, Humble confession of our sins, Proverbs 25. 13. He that confesses
his sin, and forsakes it, shall obtain Mercy.

Sixthly, The using of good means to cleanse us from them, Psalm. 19. 1^. His
ignorance who understands. O cl^nse me from my secret sins.

Seventhly, Holily and religiously to sanctify the Sabbath Day: for this
binding us to the good abearing, from following our own pleasures and profits,
and the things that are so sweet unto the flesh, cannot rightly be performed
but of those that indeed make a conscience of their ways: wherefore the Esaias
58. 13, 14
Prophet sets it as a special mark upon the Child of God, If thou will
keep back thy foot on the Sabbath, from doing thine own pleasure in my holy
Day, and shall call the Sabbath, delight, holy to JEHOVAH, glorious, and shall
honor it, not to do thine own ways, nor to find out thy pleasure, nor to
speak a word; then shall thou delight thy self in JEHOVAH, and I will make
thee to ride upon the high places of the Land, and make thee to eat the
Inheritance of thy Father JACOB. So Ier. 17. 14, etc
Jeremy 17. many sweet and gracious promises are made to those that keep the
Sabbath, and sharp and to the end of the Chapter.
severe Judgments threatened to the contrary. And seeing it pleases God, to
set such a special Memento upon this Commandment above the rest, Remember
thou keep holy the Sabbath Day: it should teach us what a deep Root the same
ought to have in our heart, and how it should affect us. Of this that our
Sanctification is here imperfect, two things do follow; a Christian Warfare,
and Repentance.

Christian Warfare is a War proclaimed of GOD himself, for men to try all
their strength and valor in, when he says, I Genesis 3. 15.
will set enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and
between her seed. Meant principally of Christ the Seed of the Virgin, but
withal comprehending all his members. Therefore here is a Flag of defiance
set up, and a perpetual and endless War denounced, wherein we may take no
truce, nor ever be weary of it. Of this it is written in the Revel. 12. 7.
Revelation, that a great sign was seen in Heaven, MICHAEL and his Angels
(meaning specially the Saints upon Earth) fighting with the Devil and his
angels. And to this spiritual Combat the Scripture euery-where does incite
us, 1. Tim. 1. 18.
Fight that good fight. Let Heb. 12. 1.
us run with patience the strife that is set before us, and such like.
Whereupon, the Church of God in this life is called, The militant Church, and
all Christians 2. Tim. 2. 3.
Soldiers: though principally the same be given to the Ministers, whose part
it is to go before the people in this spiritual Conflict. So PAVL, Phil. 2.
25. makes mention of EPAPHRODITVS his fellow-Souldier. And so does he and
Timothy call Archippus in the Verse 2.
Epistle to Philemon: being a Phrase of speech borrowed from the Law, where the
Ministry of the Priests and Levites is called a Souldiership, or Number. 4. 3.
and 8. 24, 25.
Warfare.

In this spiritual Battle, I consider five things:

First, The Enemies we are to fight with, Satan and all his brood: the name of
Satan comprehending all impure spirits, of whom he is the Head, being not
only, our Mat. 13. 39.
enemy, that hates us, and 1. Pet. 5. 8.
goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: but withal, our
Revel. 12. 10.
accuser that accuses us before our God day and night, and the 1. Pet. 5. 8.
pleader against us. This the Apostle notably describes, Ephesians. 6. Put on the
whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of the
Devil: for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities,
against Powers, and against the worldly Governors, the Princes of the darkness
of this World, against most wicked spirits which are in the high places.

Satan's brood I call the World and the Flesh:

By World, meaning,

First, The malignant Church, the company of the wicked and ungodly, The
sons of that naughty one, as they are termed, Mat. 13. 38. For John 15. 19.
and 17. 14.
because we are not of the World, but GOD has chosen us out of the World,
therefore does the World hate us, which is the perpetual state of Gods Church
from the beginning, and was figured in Ge. 25. 22, 23
Rebecca, a Type of the Church, in whose womb were two Nations divided that
strove and fought together. And our Savior does fore-warne us not to look for
better: In John 16. 33.
the World ye shall have affliction.

Secondly, Whatsoever is unregenerate in the Children of God themselves,
whereby it many times falls out, that none are greater instruments unto us of
offending God then they. By the flesh, I mean, our natural corruption, and
all the lusts and works of it: an enemy which we always carry about us, not
only in our bosom, but in our very bowels: So that here is the battle
between the flesh and the Spirit, whereof the Gal. 5. 17.
Apostle says, that the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh: And these, says he, are opposite one to another. Romans 22.
23. It is elegantly described, I find therefore this Law for me, when I would
do well, that evil lies ready for me to slay and seize on me, as the Lord
speaks of sin, Genes. 4. 6. For I am delighted in the Law of God as
touching the inner man, but I see another Law in my members, warring against
the Law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin, that is in my
members. 1. Pet. ^. 11.
PETER in like sort wills us to abstain from fleshly lusts that war against
the soul. And hereof are the exhortations so common in the Scripture, Gal. 5.
16.
Walk in the Spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh. We Romans 8. 12.
are debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, but to the Spirit, to
be led by it: Take Romans 13. 14.
no care of the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Christ 1. Pet. 4. 1.
therefore having suffered for us in the flesh. Put you on also the same mind,
that he which suffers in the flesh, has ceased from sin.

Secondly, In this conflict are to be considered the two Generals of these
Battles.

The Captain under whom we fight, JESUS, the Heb. 12. 2.
Prince and perfiter of our Faith, in Genesis 3. 15.
Genesis pointed out by the seed of the woman, to note his Manhood: in the
Revel. 12. 7.
Revelation, by Michael, equal with the mighty God, to set forth his
Godhead: you shall find him royally described, Revel. 19. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. The head and general lifted up against him, is the Dragon, the old
Serpent, Satan or the Devil, as we heard before.

Thirdly, The weapons of this Warfare, both those which our Adversaries the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil fight withal, and those whereby we do
resist them.

The weapon of sin, or of the flesh, is Lust, as it is said, Romans 7. 8. Sin
taking occasion by the Law, wrought in me all manner of lust. Gal. 5. 17. The
flesh lusts against the Spirit.

The weapons of the World, are,

First, Outward Afflictions and Persecutions, Reproaches, Slanders, etc. to draw
us from Christ, John 16. 33. In the World ye shall have afflictions.

Secondly, Ease, Credit, Pleasure, Profit, Honor, etc.

Thirdly, Evil Examples.

Satan's weapons are outward or inward: Outward,

First* The World: for wicked men are the Hel-hounds of Satan, the Champions
and Soldiers which he fights withal, whose head and general he is, and
therefore called the John 14. 30. and 16. 11.
prince of this World (which name is given to all Ephesians. 6. 12.
unclean spirits) The 2. Cor. 4. 4.
god of this World. And the afflictions of the World, as they proceed from him,
are called, The 2. Co. 12. 7.
buffetings of Satan.

Secondly, The objects of sin to our eyes, our ears, and other senses, which
Satan sets before us, to draw us to a love, and in love, to a committing of
it, as he did to our first Parents in Paradise, and to our Mat. 4.
Savior Christ in the Wilderness, and as he cease not continually to do
to us.

Inward ones are,

First, His kindling of the fire of our own concupiscence, blowing as it were
the bellows, and gathering together matter for it to work upon.

Secondly, Temptations or Illusions, which he casts into hearts, as Venom or
Poison for to infect us.

Our weapons whereby we do resist them, what they are, the Apostle notably
declares, 2. Cor. 10. 4. not carnal, but mighty and valiant, to the throwing
down of all the strong holds of sin. Where, though he speak specially of
the Ministers, yet the like is to be said (in their degree and place) of all
other Christians. Generally, it is the Word of God, as appears, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
8. Whom God will consume with the breath of his mouth. But more particularly
they may be reduced unto two heads, Faith and the fruits of Sanctification that
come from it: for so 1. Tim. 1. 18.
Paul to Timothy, under these two, comprehends all, willing him to fight that
good Fight, having faith and a good conscience. And 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Put on the
Breast Plate of Faith, and Love, and for a Helmet, the hope of Salvation. And 1.
Cor. 16. 13, 14. Watch, stand in the Faith: Let all your things be done in
love. In the Revel. 12. 11.
Revelation, they are reckoned these three (which come all under the other two)
Faith in the blood of the Lamb, as the Shield, the Sword of the Word of God,
and confession of Christ, unto the death. Of Faith the Apostle speaks, 1. Pe.
5. 9. Whom (that is the Devil) resist steadfast in Faith. And 1. John 5. 4, 5
This is the victory that overcomes the World, even your Faith. And this as
our chief and principal weapon, the Apostle bids us above all, to take
unto us, by it having Christ himself, and his Spirit to be ours. And
therefore being that, Ephesians. 6. 16.
whereby we are able to quench the fiery darts of the Devil.

The fruits of Sanctification, are all the Christian Virtues and Qualities
which the Word of God requires. The Apostle, Ephesians. 6. reckons them up in
this order:

First, Truth, or a sound and sincere heart wrought by the Gospel, which is
the Word of Truth, as a belt to gird us in.

Secondly, Righteousness; both Piety and Justice in a Holiness toward God, and
Innocence toward our Neighbors, for a Breast Plate, the habit and perfection
whereof being Love 1. Tim. 1. 5.
out of Faith unfeigned. The Apostle therefore 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. calls it The
Breast Plate of Faith and Love.

Thirdly, Preparation, or readiness of mind, which is, as it were, the
shooing of our feet, to make them light and nimble; and is another gracious
effect of the Gospel of Peace, which bringing the glad tidings of
Reconciliation unto God, makes our Consciences secure and at Peace in all our
Combats, and so gives us a joyful passage through the midst of the Millions
of enemies which we are to pass.

Fourthly, Faith for our Shield, to hold out the Darts of Satan.

Fifthly, Salvation, or the assured hope of Salvation (as it is said in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.
another place) that is, of safety and deliverance reached out unto us from
Jesus Christ, for a Helmet.

Sixthly, and lastly, The Word of God, or the knowledge of the Scriptures, which
are the Spiritual Sword, to cut asunder all things that oppose themselves unto
us. Thus the Apostle sets forth the complete Harness of a Christian
Soldier, according to such furniture as then they used, unto the which he
elsewhere adds certain other Tackling and Harness, namely, Prayer,
Watchfulness, Perseverance, Patience, and such like, Ephesians. 6. 18. withal
Prayer and Supplication, praying continually in the Spirit, and thereunto
watching with all perseverance and supplication, etc. Heb. 12. 4. With patience
let us run the Race that is set before us. And again, Heb. 10. 3, 6.
For ye have need of patience, that doing the will of God, ye may receive the
promise.

The fourth thing in this Conflict, is the Goal or Masterie we fight for, to
wit, the maintenance and increase of Faith and Sanctification, which we strive
to uphold, Satan with all his forces for to shake, especially, striking at our
Holiness of life, that so he may wound our Faith: Therefore Paul boasts of
his keeping of the Faith, as of his winning of the Goal, for that standing, we
shall never fall: I have 2. Tim. 4. 7.
fought that good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the Faith:
from henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God,
that righteous Judge shall render unto me in that Day. And Christ unto Luke 22.
32.
PETER, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith should not fail. PAVL also
exhorts the Philippians, Phil. 1. 27.
Wrestle for the Faith of* the Gospel, 1. Tim. 6. 12. Fight the good Fight of
Faith, or for the Faith; as Jude Jude verse 3.
exhorts those to whom he writes, to strive for the Faith once (for all,
never to be lost) delivered to the Saints.

He strikes at our Holiness or Sanctification of life, by provoking to us
sin, as occasion is offered, or our own disposition does most incline: in
regard whereof he is called, The Mat. 4. 2.
Tempter.

For the effecting of it, two slights he uses;

First, Lessening of sins which men go about to commit, to make them seem
but light.

Secondly, Bringing men asleep with a presumption of Gods Mercies.

This temptation we are to resist:

First, By a serious meditation of the Law of GOD, condemning all sin, and
teaching us what is his good and acceptable will.

Secondly, By consideration of the Judgments of God, and of the punishment due
to sin.

Thirdly, By calling to mind the love of GOD in Christ, and the end of our
Redemption, which is, that being delivered out of the hand of all our foes, we
might serve him in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our life, Luke
1. 74. 75 Our Faith he does assault, by laboring to bring us unto despair for
our sins committed.

His slights to work it, are likewise two:

First, Aggravating of our offenses, to make them seem unpardonable.

Secondly, Terrifying the offender with Gods Judgments; both which we are to
resist by the Meditation of the sweet promises made, without exception unto all
that repent, and believe the Gospel.

Of these temptations, end there will be none: therefore in them al we must
take heed we never be secure; one temptation is to be looked for after another:
for our enemy never is at rest, 1 Pe. 5. 8. And so we Luke 5. 13.
read of Christ himself, that when the Devil departed from him, (after he
had tempted him all he could) it was but for a while.

The first and last thing is the issue of all this Conflict, that howsoever by
the violent storms and tempests of temptations, our Faith and Holiness may
before battered and shaken, yet never it can be lost; but like the Cammomill,
the more it is trodden down, the more it rises up: and as a mighty fire,
that many pailes of waters are thrown upon, or other engines and devices used
to smother and keep it down, at the last to bursteth out again, and flameth
more then it did before. Wherefore this must make us to fight courageously,
because we are assured of the victory: for we fight not by our own
strength, but in the strength of him who has overcome for us: And therefore in
his last farewell, bids us Be John 16. 33.
of good comfort, or take good heart unto you, I have overcome the World.

We come now unto Repentance, which I make to follow upon the former, because
of the many falls and foiles that we receive at the hands of Satan in this our
spiritual Conflict: out of the which we are to rise by true Repentance:
speaking of Repentance here, as it comes from a man renewed, not of the
first work of our conversion unto God: for Repentance in general
comprehends the whole Mark 1. 4.
work of Sanctification: but there is a special Repentance of our every days
slips and falls, which only has place in a man Regenerate: for to him that is
come so far, there is no further need of that first kind of Repentance,
seeing it is impossible that the Grace of Regeneration once begun, should at
any time be lost altogether. So I understand that which is spoken, Luke 15. 7.
of righteous men that need no Repentance. Yet in truth there is but one
Repentance, as there is but one Faith: But that Repentance begun by Faith, is
continued all our life, practiced and professed day by day more or less,
according to the nature of our several and particular sins.

This Repentance The Papists make three parts of Repentance, Confession,
Contrition, Satisfaction.

Confession (which they will have to be made in the Priests ear, and call
Auricular) is vain, because

First, It is impossible to make recital of all our particular faults, which
are both infinite, and in a great part unknown.

Secondly, For private consolation, as well the Priest is to make Confession to
the people, as the people to him.

Contrition or sorrow, and brokennesse of heart for our former sins, we
hold, as well as they, requisite to true Repentance.

Satisfaction is al^o necessary to be made to such as any way we have
wronged: But to God we are not able to make any, in as much as

First, We can give him nothing: for all we can do, is due unto him.

Secondly, No good work of ours is able to stand before him, ^n ^ to endure
the Touchstone of his Trial: And therefore this kind of satisfaction is
bla^phemous and derogatorie from the death of Christ, who is our only
Sat(...)ction, Ransom, and Redemption.


therefore, or practice of Repentance, I call, A continual sorrow for our
sins, and a purpose to resist against them: for sorrow and a grief for sin
committed, is one special part of Repentance, whereof the whole many times
does take the name, 1. Cor. 10. 7. The sorrow which is according unto God,
works a change of mind unto salvation, never to be repented of: where both
these parts, as you see, are comprehended.

Six things are to be noted in true Repentance.

First, The notes or signs of Repentance: the Apostle, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
reckons these seven.

First, Study, or diligence to rouse our selves out of sleep and security of
sin.

Secondly, A defense, excuse or clearing of our selves, not by standing in it,
as if we had done well, or making less of it, then the quality of the offense
deserves, but asking pardon for our fault, in that we did it not wilfully and
with malice, but of frailty and infirmity, and that so, as none more then we
are offended therewithal. A notable example whereof we have in that
Confession of the Church, Cant. 5. 1. I slept, but my heart waked.

Thirdly, Indignation, or an holy anger against our selves for it.

Fourthly, A fear lest we should fall again into the like.

Fifthly, A longing to be delivered from the body of sin, and to be made
perfect.

Sixthly, Zeal to God and to all goodness.

Seventhly, Revenge, by taming and chastizing the flesh, and taking as it were
our penniworths of it, that we run not into the like hereafter: And therefore
both forbearing lawful things, that we may the better abstain from
unlawful, and flying lesser sins, lest we fall into greater, and all those
things that have been the means to lead us unto sin before.

The second is the fruit of this Repentance: A restoring of us unto the former
good estate, from the which, through frailty we are fallen. So says ELIHV,
Job 33. 25, 26. His flesh is softened more then in his childhood, he returns
to the days of his youth, when he does humbly pray to God, he does accept him
so, as he beholds his face with rejoicing, and he restroreth a man to his
Righteousness. And David, after his great fall, prays, Psalm. 51. 14.
Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation.

Thirdly, What sins true Repentance does free us from. All, without
exception, how great soever, and how many soever the same be, secret, known,
wilful, or whatsoever else, except that one sin against the Holy Ghost,
which none of the faithful can fall into, nor can be repented of: for the
multitude of our sins is not to be compared with the Infiniteness of GODS
Merits, but is infinitely surpassed and overcome of it, Esaias 1. 18. If your
sin were as Scarlet double dyed, they shall be as white as Snow: if they were
as red as Purple, they shall be made like unto the Wool: for my thoughts
(says the Lord) Esaias 55. 8, 9. are not as your thoughts, nor my ways as your
ways (my thoughts and ways of mercy and forgiveness, as your thoughts and
ways of wickedness: they are too base and shallow to be compared to them)
but as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so (and infinitely more) are my
ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. DAVID, Psalm.
103. 10, 11 has the like comparison: He deals not with us according to our
sins, nor requiteth us according to our iniquities: but as high as the
Heavens are above the Earth, does his kindness prevail toward them that
fear him.

Fourthly, That Repentance is not in our own power, when we are once renewed,
but it is the special work and Grace of God, to touch our hearts, being fallen
as it was at the first to quicken our souls. Therefore it is the Prayer of
Ephraim, that is, of the Church of GOD, Ier. 31. 18.
Convert thou me, that I may be converted.

And in the Lam 5. 21.
Lamentations, Turn thou us unto thee, O JEHOVAH, and we shall be turned. So
Cant. 5. 1. it was the voice of Christ that awakened and raised up the Church,
when she slept in her sins.

Fifthly, That God in his time will raise up all that are his, how long soever
they sleep in sin, as he promises in Hoshea 2. 14
Hoshea, and as we see in David, who lay in his sin without Repentance, some
whole year, as it is very like; and that seems to be the force of the
Argument which the Church uses, Ierem. 31. 18. Convert thou me, that I may be
converted: for thou art JEHOVAH my God. As if she should say, For thou only
art able to do it, and wilt do it for thy Covenant sake.

Howbeit this must not make us the less to fear sin, because the Children of
God at one time or other repent them of it: No, not only the ugly face of
sin, contrary to the Image of God, who is Holiness it self, and the
author Satan, from whom it comes, but the fruits and lamentable effects
thereof show, how much it is to be detested.

First, We offend God, and make sad his holy Spirit, Esaias 63. 10. But they
rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit. Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit
of God, by the which you are sealed unto the day of Redemption.

Secondly, We grieve and offend his Children. So the Apostle 2. Cor. 2. 5.
to the Corinths declares himself and all the Church, to have been grieved
with that fact of the incestuous person: If any man have grieved, he has not
grieved me, but in part, that I do not ouer-charge him, you all.

Thirdly, We cause his Gospel to be blasphemed and evil spoken of, Romans 2.
24. The Name of GOD for your sakes is blasphemed amongst the Nations. Hereby is
David's sin made the fouler and more hateful, 2. Sam. 12. 14. Because in so
doing, thou have caused the enemies of JEHOVAH to provoke and contemn him.

Fourthly, We make other to stumble and fall: whereof we know what our Savior
says, Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever offends one of these little ones that believe in
me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
drowned in the bottom of the Sea.

Fifthly, We wound our own souls with the conscience of our sins, and the
terror of Gods Judgments: As David confesses of himself, Psalm. 51. 10.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice.

Sixthly, We bereave our selves of the sweet comforts we have felt, and that are
to be had in him; as it follows in that Psalm, Psalm. 51. 14.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and with thy free Spirit uphold me.

Seventhly, We bring manifold troubles and afflictions upon our persons, upon
our Wives, Children, Families, and those that belong unto us, whereof if there
were no more, that one example of David may be a sufficient witness, and
serve in stead of many: 2. Sam. 12. 10, 11.
The Sword shall never depart from thy house for ever. I will raise up against
thee evil out of thine own house: And I will take thy Wives before thine
eyes, and give them to thy fellow, who shall lie with them before this Sun.

To conclude, it must cost many bitter cries and pitiful lamentations, many a
salt tear, deep sighs, sobs, and groans, great deiection of mind, and
abasing of ones self, long exercise in the School of Affliction, much strife
and struggling, and many a pluck and wrestle (like true Israelites) with God
himself, our own conscience, and the fears and terrors of Hell, before we
can come to obtain a blessing at his hand, to be assured we are reconciled to
him.

And yet for all that, we are not free from falling any more after we be once
risen: for every day we fall, yea, oftentimes a day, and therefore have need of
a continual and every day Repentance.

The greater question is, whether we may fall again into the same sin,
whereof truly we have repented, especially if it be a gross and heinous
sin? I answer, The best man in the World has no privilege this way, but
that as he may lie long in his sin, so he may fall again into it: and as
he may fall once, so may he fall twice, and so may he fall oftener, and how
often the word (for ought I know) sets not any stint; neither are the Mercies
of God, nor Merits of Christ to be restrained to so narrow bounds, but that
where sin abounds, there grace does more abound. Howbeit, he that shall so
do, spoyleth himself of much comfort, and greatly shakes the assurance of
Faith, which every Christian ought to labor for; seeing a continual relapse
into one and the same offense, is a fearful argument of a man forsaken and
given up of God; yet all comfort is not wholly to be denied to such a one: for

First, 2. Cor. 8. 12.
If there be a willing mind, every one is accepted for that grace he has, not
for that which he has not.

Secondly, 2. Cor. 12. 9, 10
The power of GOD is perfected in our weakness.

The sixth and last thing touching Repentance, is the means to spur us
forwards to this duty, which is twofold. One, on the behalf of God; the other,
of our selves. On the behalf of GOD, by the power of his Spirit, by the
Ministry of his Word, by chastizements and afflictions, by blessings and
outward benefits, as he promises in Hosh. 2. 14, 15, 16.
HOSHEA, Therefore, behold, I will persuade her by my Spirit, after I have
brought her into the Wilderness (and tamed her by afflictions) and will speak
unto her heart, there is the word moving: And will give unto her Vineyards,
etc. that she may sing as in the days of her youth, and what time she came
out of the Land of Egypt. And in that Day, says he, thou shall call me, My
good man, etc. that is, then shall thou take me for thy Husband, and serve and
worship me.

On our behalf, for the better quickening of us unto this duty, we are not
only carefully, and with a good conscience, to use all the holy means
ordained of God for the converting of our souls, Prayer, Meditation of the
Word, and other godly and profitable exercises, but especially, sometimes we
are to take up the exercise of a true fast commanded in the Word of God: for
our Mat. 17. 21.
Savior tells us, that there are some kind of Devils, whom Prayer only will
not cast out, unless it have Fasting joined with it.

Fasting is an utter abstinence for a time, not from flesh only, but from all
the delights, and commodities of this life, so far as necessity and
comeliness will permit. Whereupon it is called, A Joel 2. 15. (...)
day of restraint.

That we may know to fast as we ought, it shall be fit to reduce to some
heads, what is necessary to a true fast.

All may be comprehended in these four:

The first head is of the things we are commanded to abstain from:

As first, all kind of Popish Fast, which permits al kind of meat at
Dinner, flesh only excepted; and at Supper to fill ones self with bread and
drink; and both at Dinner and Supper with Wine and all kind of Dainties,
Spicebread, Fruit, Marmal^t, and Sucker, etc.
Meats and Drinks, which the very word of (...). John 3. 8.
fasting does import: And therefore in the Fast of Niniue, they are forbidden
as much as to Jonas 3. 7.
taste any thing.

Secondly, The benefit of ordinary sleep; Joel 1. 13. Go lodge in Sackcloth:
extending this exercise at the least to some part of the night: whereupon Mark
13. 32
watching is also added as a Companion to this exercise.

Thirdly, All bravery and costlinesse of attire, contenting our selves with a
common kind of apparel, or rather under that which is common and ordinary,
Exodus 33. 5. JEHOVAH said unto MOSES, Say unto the Children of Israel, Thou
art a stiff-necked people, etc. Put therefore thine Ornaments and Jewels from
upon thee, that I may know what to do with thee. Thus did the holy Fathers in
times past clothe themselves with Sackcloth and Ashes; which Fashion Kings
themselves in their Fasts scorned not to take up, as we read of the King of
Niniue, Jonas 3. 7. Who rose out of his Throne, put away his Robe from him, and
covered himself with Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes. And the like did wicked
Ahab, 1. Kings 21. 27.

Fourthly, Cheerfulness and outward joy and pleasure. In which respect, the
exercise which the Mar. 2. 20. Luke 5. 35.
other Evangelists ca^l Fasting, Mat. 9. 15.
Matthew calls Mourning, Can the children of the Bride-chamber mourn, as
long as the Bridegroom is with them? And Joel calls it weeping. Let the
Priests weep between the Porch and the Altar.

So it is said, Judges 20. 26. that all the Israelites came to Bethel, and
there wept and fasted. And 1. Sam. 7. 6. in the Fast at Mispa, that they drew
out of the fountain of their heart tears, as it were, buckets of waters,
which they powered forth before JEHOVAH.

Fifthly, All gate and gesture that may carry any show of loftiness with it.
So did AHAB 1. King. 21. 27
clothe himself in Sackcloth, and went softly.

Sixthly, The lawful use of Marriage, 1. Cor. 7. 5. Deprive not one another,
but by consent for a time, that ye may have leisure for Fasting and Prayer:
yea, though it be between the Bridegroom and the Bride, which of all other
are least to be restrained, Joel 2. 16. Let the Bridegroom go out of his
chamber, and the Bride out of her Bedchamber.

The second head, is The Popish Fast, which was judged sufficient, if they
only abstayned from meat, without any regard of inward godliness.
the end and true use of Fasting, whereunto all the former bodily exercises
tend. This is double, according as they are both laid forth, Ezra 8. 21 Then I
proclaimed a Fast at the River of Ahaua, that we might afflict our souls
before our GOD, and seek of him a right way for us, our little ones, and our
substance.

First, Is the humbling and casting of our The Pharisaicall Fast of the
Papists, which is so far from humbling them, that contrariwise it makes them
swell with a proud opinion of meriting thereby.
selves down before the high Majesty of Almighty God, both in sorrow for our
sins, and in a solemn confession of the same, and of the just punishments, and
threatenings of the Law that belong unto us for them. Therefore the Lord
instituting this Fast, tells the people, Leuit. 16. 31. and Leuit. 23. 27,
29, 32. Number. 29. 7.
They shall humble their souls that day.

Secondly, A raising of our selves up by the sweet and gracious promises of the
Gospel, with assurance, that together with the forgiveness of our sins, we
shall obtain the things we sue for, so far as it is for Gods Glory, and
our good: whereupon it is called, A Day of Atonement, and has most excellent
promises made unto it, Joel 2. 13, 14. Rent your hearts, and not your garments,
and return unto JEHOVAH your God. Who knows whether he will return, and
repent him, and leave a blessing behind him? And again, Joel 2. 10, 20.
Now is JEHOVAH already zealous for his Land, and uses clemency toward his
people. And JEHOVAH answered and said to his people, Behold, I will send you
wheat, etc. And this, the sweet experience of all the Fasts of Gods Children
does from time to time confirm: The end of whose Fasting was always Judges
20. 23. Ezra 19. 6. Ester 14. 16. 2. Chr^n. 20. 3. Dan. 9. 20.
Feasting; and of their mourning, exceeding great reioying.

The third head, is the time of Fasting, The Popish Fast, which appoints set
times, Fridayes, and such like, howsoever the time fall out prosperous or
adverse.
which generally is the time of heaviness and affliction, as the Prophet
says, Esaias 22. 12. In that Day, when the enemy besieged thee (being a Day of
wasting, and trampling, and confusion, as he said before, Verse 5.) the Lord
JEHOVAH of Hosts called to weeping, and mourning, and to baldness, and to
girding with Sackcloth. But as it cannot be limited to any certain set days,
so neither can it be circumscribed within any stint of time, being to hold
longer or shorter, as the hand and wrath of God does more or less lie upon us:
the least time that may be, is a whole day. Under the Law, from evening to
evening, as the Commandment is given, Leuit. 23. 32. and the Children of God
have Judges ^0. 26. and elsewhere.
always practiced. With us Christians (whose Sabbaths begin otherwise) from
morning to morning, upon occasion of great calamities either pressing or
approaching. It is sometimes three days together, as in Queen Ester 4. 16.
Hesters time. And that of Acts 9. 9.
Paul, upon his first Conversion. Daniel for his own private humiliation,
stretches it further, Daniel 10. 3, 4. In those days I DANIEL gave my self
to mourning three weeks of days, pleasant bread I did not eat, neither did
flesh or wine come within my mouth, etc.

The last thing is, Popery, that (ordayning many both wicked and unnecessary
holy days) razeth out of their Calendar this one, and beside, the Sabbath, the
only holy Day ordained of the Lord.
That this time (whatsoever) has the nature of a Sabbath, and therefore is
called a Leuit. 16. 31. and Leuit. 23. 32.
Sabbath, and a Day of rest: wherein we are expressly Leuit. 16. 29. and 23.
28, 30, 31
forbidden all kind of work, and are called to the duties of Piety, and of
the Service of God; whence it is called, Joel 2. 12.
The sanctifying of a Fast, Joel 2. 12. having always extraordinary The
Popish Fast, which has no more extraordinary Prayer upon that Day then upon
any other.
exercise of Prayer joined with it, Mat. 17. 21 This kind of Devils goes not
out, but by Prayer and Fasting, 1. Cor. 7. 5. that ye may be at leisure for
Fasting and Prayer. And so you shall see in Judges 20. 26. Ezra 9. 5. Nehem. 1.
4. Dan. 9. 3. 2. Chro. 20. 4, 5, 6
all the Feasts recorded in the Book of God. And if the Fast be public of a
whole Church, City, or Kingdom, then it has also the preaching of the Word,
and all other holy exercises. So the Prophet Joel 2. 15, 16
JOEL wills them to gather the People, and to proclaim an Assembly. And
Leuit. 23. 27. a Law is made, that on the Fast day there should be an holy
Convocation.

To return now from whence we are digressed: A are not only pleasing unto
God, through his forgiveness of the sin:
question of great moment does here offer it self: If sin be mingled with
all our Actions, how can they please God, or how can we look for a reward for
them? which 1. Tim. 4. 8.
Paul assures us of, telling us that Godliness is profitable to all things,
and that it has the promises both of this life, and of the life to come.

The answer is: They are pleasing and acceptable unto God, by his forgiving of
the sin that cleaneth to them, covering and hiding that which is ours, and
looking upon his own work within us. So Revel. 8. 3. 4.
Christ being the Angel that stands before the Altar, having a Golden Censer,
is said to have much Odours given unto him, which he offers, with the Prayers
of all the Saints, upon the Golden Altar which is before the Throne: Insomuch
as the smoke of the Odours, with the Prayers of the Saints, go up before God
out of the Angels hand: that is, by the virtue of his Prayer and Intercession,
all the works and Prayers of Gods Children are made acceptable unto him, and as
a sweet smelling savor before him: So the Mal. 3. 4.
Prophet does foretell, when the Angel of the Covenant shall once come, the
Oblation of Judah and Jerusalem shall be sweet unto JEHOVAH. And Romans 12. 1.
Paul does exhort us to present our bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God: 1. Pet. 2. 5.
PETER in like sort, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto GOD,
through JESUS CHRIST.

Touching the reward, it is true indeed, in many places but have beside, of
Gods free Goodness looking upon them in the perfection of his Son, special
promises of reward made unto them* both in this life and in the life to come.
of the Scripture, large and ample promises are made unto our works, as Mat.
10. 42. Whosoever shall give to one of these little ones a cup of cold water,
only in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward, Ephesians. 6. 8. What
good soever every man does, that he shall receive of the Lord, Heb. 6. 10. God
is not unjust, to forget your works and the labor of love which ye showed
toward his Name, ministering to the Saints, etc. But the reward they have, is
not for themselves, or of their own desert, since there is nothing absolutely
good and worthy of reward, that comes from us, and everlasting life, with all
the parts of it, is the free gift of God in Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 23. but
because they proceed from Faith, that is, by the promise of Grace, not by the
promise of the Law.

Good works therefore The Popish doctrine, that we are justified by the works
which Christ works in us by his Spirit So joining works together with Christ
in the matter of Justification, and their doctrime of Merits: reaching that the
good works of such as are in the state of Grace, do ex condign^, (that is, of
a sufficient worthiness and desert that is in them) merit eternal life.
avail no whit to the purchasing or meriting of our Salvation, neither in the
whole, nor in part.

First, Because the best of all our works in this life is stained with some
pollution, and therefore not able to stand before God, whose exact Justice
cannot abide the least defect.

Secondly, The Apostle says expressly, Romans 3. 20. By the works of the Law
none can be justified. Where, by the works of the Law, he means not works
done by our own strength, without Faith and the Grace of God (as Papists
absurdly teach:) for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. And
therefore a question too unworthy for the Apostle to dispute, whether or no,
works merely sinful, without any manner of Goodness in them, may justify in
the sight of God; neither can the Law be done in any measure at all, by our
own strength; for the wisdom of the flesh, or of the natural and
unregenerate man, destitute of Gods Spirit, is enmity unto God, and neither
is, nor can be subject to the Law of God, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 7. and
thereof sets himself in the former Chapter for an example, that albeit in
his mind, or part regenerate, he served the Law of God, yet in his flesh, or
part not regenerate, he served the law of sin, Romans 7. 22. Wherefore the very
drift of the Apostle appears to be, to exclude all works from justifying,
even those that are done by regenerate men in some measure, according to the
rule and direction of the Law. For which purpose he does in this Argument
apply the doctrine to the best and most righteous Jews, that lived under the
Law, Romans 3. 19. Whatsoever the Law says, it speaks to those that are within
the Law. And Gal. 5. 4. 5. not only to the Galatians that believed, but to
himself as one of that number, who not by the works of the Law, but by Faith
waited for the hope, or hoped-for reward of Righteousness. Which he teaches
clearly, Phil. 3. 9. That I might be found in him, (Christ) that is, not having
mine own Righteousness, that which is by the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God through Faith.

This further appears by Ier. 23. 6.
Jeremy, calling Christ, JEHOVAH our Righteousness. Therefore Salvation
comes not by our own. And when the 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Apostle says, that Christ is made unto us of God, both Righteousness and
Sanctification, if the Popish doctrine of being justified by the works which
Christ works in us by his Spirit, were true: it should follow, that Justice
and Sanctification, which the Apostle distinguishes, should be one. But that
to the Romans 1. 17.
Romans, In the Gospel the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith, as it is written, The righteous by Faith shall live, is notable to this
purpose.

First, In that the Apostle calls it, The Righteousness of God which is by
Faith: for seeing Faith apprehends not the works contained in the Law, but
Christ alone; it must needs follow, that Christ, whom Faith apprehends, is
our Justice, and not the works of the Law wrought by the Spirit of Christ,
which is not the subject of Faith. And thereupon the Apostle teaches, Gal. 3.
12. The Law is not of Faith, but the man that does these things, shall live by
them.

Secondly, When he says, that this Righteousness is revealed from Faith to
Faith, he declares, that we are justified by Faith, not only at the time
when we first believe, but that our whole and continual Justification is by
Faith: otherwise he should not have said, From Faith to Faith, but, From Faith
to Works. And if Christ were not our Righteousness himself, but obtained
only power for us, that we might have Righteousness in our selves, then he
should not be our Savior, but an instrument of our Salvation.

As for that which James says, that Iam. 2. 21, 25
ABRAHAM was justified by works, and so of Rahab: weighing the circumstances
of the Text, I suppose, he understands by Works, a lively and a working
Faith: for James opposes not the Works of the Law to a true Faith, as Paul
does, but Works, that is to say, an effectual lively Faith, that shows his
life and vigor by the fruits, to a dead and fruitless Faith, which is no
Faith, but a shadow and carcass of Faith: So the semblance of difference
between the two Apostles may be conceived to be, not in the word Justifying,
which with them both goes, for that ^^ is, to be made righteous in the sight
and judgment of God: but in the term of Works, Paul taking them literally,
James by a Metonymie, for Faith that brings them forth: ascribing that to the
effect which he intends proper to the cause, from whence of necessity and
unseparably it comes. And this to be his meaning, may be gathered by Verse
17, 20.
many passages, but especially, Verse 23. where that which he had said Verse 11.
immediately before, Was not ABRAHAM justified by works? he explaineth to be
as much as, ABRAHAM believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness.
But albeit good works do not iusti^e, is there therefore no need to do good
Works? O* yes, very great, for many and those most weighty causes.

First, God is hereby glorified, as our Savior teaches us: John 15. ^.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. Mat. 5. 16.
Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, We gather from hence assurance that we are the Children of God,
and they serve as Testimonies and Pledges both to our selves and others, that
we belong to him: for which cause our Savior shows, how in that great Day
of his most glorious Coming, all flesh shall be judged, not by their Faith or
unbelief, but by their Works, as sure Arguments to approve to all the World,
the righteous Sentence of God; especially to our selves, they seal up Gods
Election, and make it sure to us: for whosoever finds not that he has in
some measure the Spirit of Sanctification, the Grace of Addoption and
Justification has not yet laid hold upon him. Hither tend those exhortations,
so common in the Scripture, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Make your Calling and Election firm by your Works, etc. True it is (as 2.
Tim. 2. 19.
the Apostle says) that there is a double Seal; one resting in God himself,
which is firm and sure and never can be shaken, but the other rests in us,
who are by good Works to set that Seal upon our Souls and Consciences, The
foundation of God remains firm, having this Seal; God knows who are his.
And, Let every one that names the Name of CHRIST, depart from iniquity.

Thirdly, Good Works in those that profess Christ, stop the mouth of the
Adversary, who otherwise is ready to slander the Gospel, and to speak evil
of it, as of a doctrine of liberty. So says 1. Pet. 2. 15.
PETER, For so is the will of God, that doing well, you might stop the mouth of
the ignorance of foolishmen, as free, and not having liberty as a cover of
naughtiness.

Fourthly, By this means we give a good Example unto other, and win many to
the profession of the Gospel. Whereupon the same 1. Pet. 3. 12.
Apostle exhorts Wives so to behave themselves, that by the beholding of
their chaste and modest carriage, their Husbands that believe not the Word,
may, without the Word be gained unto Christ.

Fifthly, God is pleased, and has promised, of his free Mercy and Goodness,
to bestow a reward upon them: which ought to quicken us to this duty, 1. Cor.
3. 8. Every one shall receive his own reward, according to his own labor, 2.
John, Verse 8. Take heed to your selves, that we lose not the good things we
have wrought, but that we may receive a full reward.

And thus far touching our Sanctification; in this Hereafter we shall have
an Angellike perfection.
life weak and imperfect, which in Heaven shall be fully and wholly perfected,
and we, when received up unto Christ, shall be made Ephesians. 5. 27.
glorious, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, and Mat. 22. 30.
like to the holy Angels. This absolute perfection and Angellicall purity,
free from the least spot of sin whatsoever, is a thing that must necessarily
be attained unto.

First, Because else we should not have, by the Mercy of God in Christ, as
good and holy an estate, as we had by our first Creation, and lost by our own
sins in Adam.

Secondly, So long as man is imperfectly holy, he can never be perfectly
happy, by inioying the presence of God, before whom no sinful thing can come.

Now this I mean, that in this estate we shall be perfectly righteous, not only
by Christ's obedience imputed unto us, and made ours, but by a righteousness also
inhere^t in our selves: for in the life to come, the Elect shall be restored to
that perfect inherent Holiness wherein Adam was created, but in a more
excellent measure, even in the full height and top of all perfection; and great
reason there is why we shall then so much excel.

First, Because the faculties of our soul and body shall then be made
spiritual, and glorified in an excellent manner, as we showed before, whereby
to be more quick and ready for the performance of every good and holy duty
then Adam was.

Secondly, In respect of the place where we shall be; in Heaven, where 1. Cor.
13. 12.
we shall see God face to face, and have familiar conversation in his presence.

This Celestial Holiness is all one with that which we have in this World,
even as our bodies and souls are the same, but differing in the excellent
measure of it.

That which follows of this Angellicall perfection, is,

First, That there shall be no more strife nor warfare against sin; Satan
himself and all our spiritual foes being trodden under our feet, and the
Goal we now strive for, gotten and won: whereupon the Church of God in
Heaven is called, The Church Triumphant; for Revel. 14. 13.
they cease from their labors.

Secondly, That there is no more Repentance, no more sorrow and grief for
sin, Revel. 21. 4, 5
neither pain, nor crying, nor labor: for all tears shall be wiped from
their eyes.

After the Doctrine of Sanctification, order requires Redemption, whereby
to speak of Redemption. A double Redemption or (to speak more properly)
Redemption in a double sense we find spoken of in the Scripture. One, the
paying of the price, by the sheading of Christ's Blood, to free us from the
servitude of sin and death: which the Apostle touches, Ephesians. 1. 7. and
Coloss. 1. 14. and is the ransom or matter of our Redemption. The other, a
fruit and effect of the former, which, in that place to the Ephesians, Ephesians.
1. 14.
is also mentioned, when by him we are set free indeed. And that is the
Redemption meant, 1. Cor. 1. 30. in the purting away of evil, and the
bestowing of freeing us from the curse (himself be coming a curse for us)
all good. Wherefore two parts here offer themselves. One is, the remoouing of
our cursed estate, setting us free from Death, Hell, and Condemnation, and from
the Curse of the Law, by his Death and Sufferings: for by death he has
abolished him that has the power of death, that is, the Devil, and set them
free, who through fear of death, were all their life long subject unto
bondage, says the Apostle to the Heb. 2. 14.
Hebrews. And Gal. 3. 8. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law
being made a Curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
upon the Tree.

The other is, the making of us blessed by the participation he makes us
blessed, by the participation of his Blessedness.
of his Blessedness. A reward that follows our Justification through Christ.
So we are plainly taught, G^l. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that by Faith
God would justify the Nations, published the glad tidings before unto ABRAHAM,
that in thee (that is, in thy Seed, Christ Jesus) shall all Nations be blessed:
for being approved of God as righteous in Christ, consequently in him we are
to have a reward. Revel. 16. 6. They shall walk with me in Whites: for they
are worthy.

The distinct degrees of Blessedness come now to be Our Blessedness, in the
estate we now are in, stands
considered: for truly may the Children of God be said, even in this life
blessed; meaning it in part, as a step and stayre to climb up unto full and
perfect Happiness. And thereof came those Phrases, John 6. 47.
He that believes in me: (or as it is in another place) John 3. 36.
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, and comes not unto
judgment, but is passed from death to life. 1. John 5. 12.
He that has the Son, has life. 1. John 3. 14.
We know that we are (already) passed from death to life, because we love
the Brethren. That is the reason why the Romans 8. 29.
Apostle speaks in the present, or time past, not in the future, when he
says, Whom he has justified, them he has also glorified.

The particularities of this degree of Happiness, beside our Union with
Christ, and through him, with God, whereof we have spoken already, are these
that follow:

First, The love of God Heb. 12. 6.
anew, that now he vouchsafes First, in the Love of God anew.
to call us friends: As we read of ABRAHAM, that he was called the friend of
God, James 2. 33.

Whereof follow three excellent consequences:

First, His general goodness in the government of the World, does after a
more special and loving manner extend unto the faithful, and that three
manner of ways:

First, In an extraordinary bounty and goodness: In which sense the 1. Tim.
4. 10.
Apostle calls him the Sauer and Preserver of all men, but especially of the
faithful. And Psalm. 68. 20.
David says, The God of our Salvation lodeth us with benefits day by day.

Secondly, In a most fatherly providence over his Church and chosen people, of
whom he lets not so much as Psalm. 34. 20.
one bone to be broken, keeps them in all their ways, that they should not
Psalm. 91. 22.
dash their foot against a stone. Nay, the Luke 12. 7.
very hairs of their head are all numbered. And Zach. 2* 8.
he that but touches them, touches the apple of his eye. Whereupon we are 1.
Pet. 5. 7.
willed to cast our care upon God: for he cares for us. A Doctrine full of
most sweet comfort, the use whereof is large, and reaches very far, all our
life is subject to an infinite heap of evils, whether we look upwards or
down unto our feet. A thousand dangers compass us about, at home and abroad,
rising up and lying down, walking and sitting still. On every side of us, how
many things there be that threaten danger, yea, to the very taking away of
life? In the midst of these, how were it possible for a man to be quiet, if
he did not rest assured, that God had a special care of him? which when once
his heart conceiueth, by and by all fear and perplexity flies from him; and
casting all his care on God, He says boldly, Psalm. 27. 3.
Though an Army pitch against me, my heart shall not be afraid. Though War
rise up against me, in that will I have trust. Psalm. 3. 6, 7.
I will not fear for ten thousand of people that have set their Tents round
about me, but will lie down and sleep, and wake again: for JEHOVAH holds
me up. Psalm. 118. 6, 7 Heb. 13. 6.
JEHOVAH is with me, and my helper: I will not be afraid what man can do
unto me. And therefore also, he takes as made unto himself those golden
promises, mentioned in the Psalm, Psalm. 91. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
He shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, from the plaguie
pestilence: with his feathers shall he cover thee, when thou betakest thy self
under his wing, a shield and buckler his truth shall be. Thou shall not be
afraid of the fear by night, of the Arrow that flies in the day, of the
Pestilence that walks in a mist, of the Murraine that wastes at noone day: a
thousand falling at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, it shall not
come near to thee. In a word, no open, nor secret, outward, nor inward,
bodily, nor spiritual evil, no not at any time, shall be able to prevail
against thee.

Thirdly, In all kindness and mercy comforting them in their distresses, as
he has promised, To Esaias 25. 8.
wipe away all tears from their eyes. And again, Esaias 49. 15.
Though a Mother forget her child, yet will I not forget thee. Sorrow, says
Psalm. 30. 6.
DAVID, may come in the night, but in the morning is singing. And in the
Prophet ESAIAS, Esaias 54. 7, 8.
For a little time I have left thee, but with everlasting Mercies will I gather
thee: with a little wrath did I hide my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee.

The second consequence is, that all things turn unto whereby all things,
our good: We know, says the Romans 8. 28.
Apostle to the Romans, that to them that love God, all things work together
to good. In which respect he says in 1. Cor. 3. 21, 22
another place, All things are yours, whether life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, etc.

To declare this more particularly:

First, The calamities and troubles of this life, are not not the calamities
only and troubles of this life,
now any punishment of sin unto us, which is all borne in Christ; but fatherly
chastizements for our amendment; whereunto that sentence of the Apostle, Romans
8. 28. more specially drives. And this is the Covenant and promise of God,
Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33, 34. If his sons forsake my Law, and walk not in my
Statutes, etc. I will visit their transgressions with the Rod, and their
inquitie with stripes: but my kindness I will not put from him, nor falsific
my faith.

Secondly, Death it self has lost his sting, and the and also death it self,
Grave his victory. Being no more fearful and terrible, but the gate of
hope, and a sweet and pleasant passage unto life and immortality: In so much
as knowing the nature of it to be changed from a punishment of sin, which
properly it is unto a good and happy thing, we come now to desire it, and to
wish for it: Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Wherefore, 1. Cor. 3. 22. death is said to be ours, and to serve for our good.
And to the Heb. 2. 14, 15
Hebrews, that Christ by his death does set us free from all fear of death.
Hence arises the 1. Cor. 15. 55.
Apostles holy triumphing over it, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where
is thy victory?

Thirdly, Our very sins, by the wonderful Goodness but even our very sins
turn unto our good:
of God, and his admirable and unspeakable Wisdom, who brings light out of
darkness, serve for our further strengthening and encouragement unto good.

For, first, they tend to manifest our own weakness and corruption, and to
make us more watchful in time to come, and more to wrestle with our own
souls against the temptations of sin.

Secondly, Hereby we have more plentiful matter and arguments ministered unto
us, to confirm our selves in Gods Mercies, and to reach and instruct others;
which use our Luke 22. 32.
Savior notes in the Apostasy of Peter, Thou, when thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren. And David Psalm. 51. 14.
in the one and fiftieth Psalm professes, that when God shall be merciful
to his sins, and restore unto him the joy of his Salvation, then says he, I
will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee.

The third consequence is, a heap and multitude of and in the assurance whereof
spiritual Graces, wrought in our hearts by the Holy Ghost.

First, Assurance of the love of God in Christ, sealed up in our consciences by
the testimony of the Spirit: for the Rom 8. 16.
Spirit bears record to our spirits, that we are the sons of God. I am Romans
8. 38, 39
persuaded, says the same Apostle, using a word that secretly imports a
persuasion, wrought by the Holy Ghost, through the Ministry of the Word, that
nothing shall separate me from the love of God in Christ.

Secondly, Peace of conscience. we have peace of conscience, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost.


Thirdly, Joy in the Holy Ghost, procceding from the testimony of a good
conscience, as the Apostle teaches 1. Cor. 2. 12. For this is our rejoicing,
the testimony of our conscience.

The same Apostle, Romans 14. 17. coupleth these two together, as special
fruits of the Righteousness we have in Christ: The Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Secondly, in that we are made near unto him,


To come to the second of those general heads, wherein our happiness here
stands, we Ephesians. 2. 13.
which before were far off, are brought near unto God, in Christ; and Ephesians.
2. 19.
therefore are no more Strangers, and Forainers, but Citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of GOD.

From whence another excellent favor comes* that and have continual access
with boldness into his presence.
we have continual access unto the Throne of grace, and entrance with
boldness into his presence, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom
we have boldness and access, with confidence through Faith in him. And
again, Ephesians. 2. 15.
By him we both (Gentiles as well as Jews) have access, through one Spirit,
unto the Father.

For this and the rest that went before, that place is very singular, Romans 5.
1, 2, 5. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: by whom also we have access, through Faith, into this Grace
wherein we stand, and rejoice, under the hope of the Glory of God: for the
love of God is shed in our hearts by the Holy Ghost that is given unto us
(whereas you see) all are comprehended.

The third is our Sovereignty renewed: which you Thirdly, in our former
Sovereignty, and power over the creatures,
may consider in these three steps or degrees:

First, We are restored to that Sovereignty that once we had over all the
Creatures of God, which the Psalm. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Psalmist first, and after him, and out of him, the Heb. 2. 6, 7, 8
Apostle to the Hebrews lays forth at large in the person of Christ, by
whom we have this benefit; What is man, that thou do remember him, or the
son of man, that thou visitest him? for whose sake thou have made him (that
is to say, Christ) a little lower then the Angels: yet having undergone death
for our sakes, thou have raised him up again, and with glory and honor have
thou crowned him, and set him (Christ our Head, and us in him) over the works
of thine hands: All things have thou made subject under his feet, Sheep and
Oxen, all of them, and also the Beasts of the Field, the Fowls of the Air,
and the Fishes of the Sea. All which, in Christ, we see now accomplished in us
his members; it being yet unseen, shall then become manifest, when we with him
shall be made perfect, as the Verse 8, 9.
Apostle there declares.

Whereof follows Christian liberty whereof comes free liberty of using
them all,
The Papists doctrine of Devils, forbidding flesh upon certain days.
in things indifferent.

By Christian liberty, I mean, that we may now lawfully and with a good
conscience use all the Creatures of God, to our comfort, not only for
necessity, but for Christian delight, 1. Corinthians 9. 1. Am I not free?

This has not been always so from the beginning; it pleased God to make some
restraints, till the fullness of time came, that by degrees this liberty might
be made known unto the Church.

First, Before the giving of the Law, in some few things, and peradventure (for
I speak here but of things for common use, not of the Service of God) only
that one of forbidding to eat blood, Genesis 9. 4. whereas otherwise Genesis 9. 3.
all meats were lawful.

Secondly, After that, more plentifully and abundantly in the Jewish
Pedagogie, when many meats and drinks, and other things were barred them.

The liberty then which we have by Christ, take from the Apostles words, I
know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is profane, Romans 14.
14. And again, Every Creature of God is good, and none to be reject, if it be
taken with Thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4. 3.

Not that it is lawful for us to take so great a liberty herein, as though we
needed to respect no other but our selves; we must respect the infirmities of
our weak Brethren, that our liberty be not used as a snare to entrap others,
and so make them to offend: but to edify and build up their conscience,
whereof the Apostle many times takes us out the Lesson, both by his own
practice and commandment, 1. Cor. 9. 19. Being free from all, I made my self
a servant unto all, that I might gain many, etc. 1. Cor. 10. 23, 24. All
things are lawful for me: but all things are not expedient. All things are
lawful for me: but all things do not edify. Let no man seek his own
things, but every one another man's. And again, Verse 32, 33.
Be without offense, to Jews and Gentiles, and to the Church of God. Even as I
in all things please all men, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved, Romans 14 13, etc. Let us not therefore judge one
another; but this rather judge, not to lay a stumbling block before thy
Brother, or an offense. Destroy not him by thy meat, for whom Christ dyed. Let
not therefore your good (so calling that liberty which Christ has purchased
for us) be evil spoken of. Let us therefore follow after the things of peace,
and of edification one toward another. Destroy not for meats sake the work
of God. All things indeed are clean: but it is ill for the man that eats
with offense. It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any
thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak.

To set down therefore the cautions that are to be given herein, and how,
and in what cases we are so to bridle our Christian liberty.

The first caution is, that it be in things which GOD has once restrained:
for no Law of God, nor rule of Charity binds to forbear meats, or drinks,
or other things which never were unlawful by the Commandment of God, but by
the vain superstition of men: that being but to give strength and countenance
to the doctrine of Devils, with which name the Apostle brandeth them, 1. Tim.
4. 1.

Secondly, It must be but to bear with our weak Brethren, and for awhile,
Act. 15, 28, 29
till they may be better informed of the liberty they have in Christ; it must
not be to nourish or strengthen men in evil, nor when it tends not to
edification but destruction: So did Act. 16. 3.
Paul circumcise Timothy, not as the Sacrament that God had once ordained, but
as a bare Ceremony and thing indifferent, which he had free power to use for
the edification of the Church, till the abolishing of* Ceremonies by the
coming of Christ were better known. But Gal. 2. 4, 5.
Titus he would in no sort circumcise, when he saw he could not do it without
betraying the Truth of the Gospel, and giving occasion to the adversaries
against him.

The second step of our Sovereignty renewed, is the and deliverance from the
bondage of Satan.
setting us free from the bondage and slavery of Satan, under whom we were
held before in thraldom, in a continual fear of death, as the Apostle
teaches, Heb. 2. 14. 15. that by death he might abolish him that has the
power of death, that is to say, the Devil, and might set free from his tyranny
and dominion, as many as through fear of death were all their life long
subject unto bondage. This was the first promise made in Paradise: Genesis 3. 15.
The seed of the woman, Christ, and in him, and by his power, all those that
are his, shall bruise the head of the Serpent.

The third and last, is a noble privilege and prerogative This also as a noble
access added thereunto, that the holy Angels themselves are made Ministers for
our good.
to Gods children, over and above all that Ada^ had; that the holy Angels
themselves are made Ministers for our good, whereof there be many most
glorious promises in the Word, Psalm. 91. 11. He will give his Angels charge
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. A favor principally meant to
Christ, the Head of the Church, and after him, to all the faithful. Generally,
the Apostle to the Heb. 1. 14.
Hebrews says, They are ministering Spirits sent forth for their sakes that
are to inherit salvation. And in the Psalm, Psalm. 34. 9.
The Angel of JEHOVAH pitcheth his Tents round about those that fear him.

Hereupon our Savior calls them our Mat. 18. 10. See you despise not one of
these little ones, for I say unto you, that their Angels in Heaven do always
behold the face of my Father, etc.
Angels: for first, thorowout the course of our life they watch over us, to
keep us in all our ways, that no evil should come unto us, as it follows
in that Psalm. 91. 12, 13
Psalm, and as we are taught not only by the Example of Dan. 1. 3.
Daniel, for whose sake God sent his Angel to stop the mouth of the Lions,
that they should not hurt him: And of Shadrach, Dan. 3. 28.
Meshach, and Abednego, delivered by an Angel from the fury of the flame,
which the profane King himself was driven to acknowledge; and of diverse
others whose lives are registered in the Scriptures: but beside, by the manifold
experience that every one of us has in our selves in so many, so wonderful,
and so strange escapes, whereof no reason can be assigned, but the Angels
watchful attendance and garding of us.

Secondly, In the hour of death they are about us, ready at the last gasp to
receive our Soul, and by their Ministry to convey it up to Heaven: for when
Lazarus dyed, Luke 16. 22.
He was carried (says our Savior Christ) of the Angels into ABRAHAM'S bosom.

The right whereby we have this, is, because being servants unto Christ, who
is the Head, consequently they are to serve the faithful, which are his
members.

The excellency of their service the Scripture commends unto us by diverse
arguments.

First, By their nature qualified and made fit for it, in that they are Spirits.

Secondly, By their rule and sovereignty, being themselves called Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, Governments, Chief Princes, etc. And what a thing
is it then, to have so great Princes attending on us?

Thirdly, By their power, able to throw down whatsoever does withstand them.
Whereof, among many other, we have a famous Example of one Angel, that in one
night slew one hundred, fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians Camp, 2.
Kings 19. 25.

Fourthly, By their Glory, to terrify and amaze our Adversaries, as we read
in MATTHEW, The Mat. 28. 3, 4.
Angel of the Lord came down from Heaven, whose countenance was like
lightening, and his garment white as snow: for fear of him the Keepers were
smitten, and became as dead men.

Fifthly, By their Wisdom and Knowledge.

Sixthly, By the place where they dwell, being in Heaven; and therefore have all
advantages to do us good.

Seventhly, By the multitude and number of holy Angels, which makes not a
little for the strengthening of our Faith: for even among men, A Eccles. 4. 12.
threefold cord is not easily broken. When Genesis 32. 1, 2.
Jacob went on his way, to return into his Country, as God had commanded him,
the Angels of God met him; even a whole Army and troop of Angels, in so much
as he called the name of the place, Machanaima, a pair of Armies, his own
and the Angels Army. So in Luke 2. 13.
Luke it is said, that there was with the Shepherds a multitude of an heavenly
Army. In the Psalm. 68. 17.
Psalms, They are named many thousands of Angels. And to the Heb. 12. 22.
Hebrews, Myriades (that is, ten thousands) of Angels. Dan. 7. 10.
DANIEL also reckons a thousand thousand standing before the Ancient of
days. By this Argument 2. Kings 6. 15 16, 17.
Elisha the man of God incourageth his Servant, when seeing the Companies and
troops of men that compassed the City, and Horses and Chariots, he cried
out, Alas, Master, what shall we do? To whom ELISHA said, Fear not: for
there be more with us then are with them. Then praying to Jehovah, the Servants
eyes were opened, and he saw the Mountains were full with Horses, and Chariots
of fire round about ELISHA. And our Savior Christ by the same argument
shows, how able he had been to free himself from the hands of his enemies:
Mat. 26. 53.
Could not I pray unto my Father, and he would give me more then twelve
Legions of Angels?

Eighthly and lastly, by their willingness unto this Service, declared for the
most part by three circumstances.

First, They stand continually in Gods presence, waiting, as it were, for a
Commission from him to do us good, Mat. 18. 10. Their Angels see always the
face of my Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, They are glad and rejoice at the good of his Saints. So Luke 2. 13,
14. they declare themselves not a little affected with the joy of the glad
tidings which they brought unto the Shepherds, They praised God, and said,
Glory unto God on high, in Earth peace, and good will toward men. And our
Savior tells us, There Luke 15. 7, 10
is joy in Heaven with the Angels of God for sinners that repent.

Thirdly, They are pressed and ready at Gods Commandment, with all speed to put
the same in practice. This the Psalm. 103. 20.
Psalmist commends in them, Bless JEHOVAH, ye his Angels, which do his
Word, which harken to his voice. Our Savior likewise teaches us to pray, Thy
will be done in Earth as it in Heaven. The speed and cheerfulness they use in
executing Gods Commissions, was figured under the Law, by the Cherubins in the
Tabernacle, painted with wings: wherefore, Psalm 18. 10. God is said to come
riding upon them as upon Chariots, and flying as it were with wings. In the
Vision of Esaias 6. 2.
Esaia they have each of them six wings, whereof with two they fly: yea, so
swiftly and so earnestly do they fly, that, as it were, they weary
themselves with flying, as of the Angel Dan. 9. 21.
Gabriel it is expressly spoken. These qualities before named are all of them
figured in the Vision of Ezech. 1. 10. and 10. 14.
Ezechiel, where the four living creatures, which are the holy Angels, are
said to have each of them four faces; the face of a man, the face of a Lion,
the face of an Ox, and the face of an Eagle. By the Similitude of a man, their
wisdom and understanding is incled, which among all earthly Creatures is
only to be found in man; in a Lion their strength and power; their labor and
industry in an Ox or Heifar: (without whom the Crib is empty) but much
increase comes by his travel, says the Wiseman in his Proverbs. And lastly,
their swiftness, in an Eagle, which the better to recommend in that Foul,
Revel. 4. 7.
John gives him the Epithete of a flying Eagle. The glory of these Angels he
describes, saying, that Ezech. 1. 4.
out of the midst of that fire, (the visible sign of Gods presence)
sparkled, as it were, a most lively hiew, which he explayneth Verse 13.
afterward to be like unto coals of fire, burning as Lamps, not only
themselves set on fire, but affecting all the creatures with the glittering of
their glory, as the Lamps disperse their flame.

The last of those general heads, wherein we place our Fourthly, in a
spiritual glory and wisdom, and other graces.
happiness in this life, is a spiritual glory and wisdom, and other graces,
whereof the Preacher Eccles. 8. 1.
speaks, The wisdom of a man makes his face to shine. And Paul, 2. Cor. 3.
18.
We all with open face beholding, as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord, are
transformed into the same Image, from glory to glory: that is, by the
participation of his glory, our selves become glorious, as it were by the
reflection of his beams.

Our perfect Blessedness or Redemption (which comes After this life, comes
the fullness of Blessedness,
in the last place to be handled) we consider in four steps or degrees of
glory, which all the members of Christ shall be made partakers of, answerable
to their Head.

To them all two things pertayne in common; the more or less, according to the
diverse measure of our Faith here. To the soul in Heaven, presently after
death, till the latter Day.
place where we shall enjoy it, Heaven: and the differing measure of glory.
But these two will come in better, when the rest are once handled.

Wherefore the first degree is that, which is to the soul only, and that
presently after death, till the latter Day, our bodies resting in the grave,
unto the time of the restoring of all things, as the bodies of the wicked also
do; between whom and us, there is in this respect no difference.

But for our souls, as soon as the period Popish Purgatory, and Limbus Patrum.
of this life is run out, they are forthwith carried into Heaven by the
Ministry of the holy Angels. So the Preacher says, Eccles. 12. 9.
Dust (that is the body of man) returns to the Earth, as it was before, and
the Spirit returns unto God that gave it. And the Apostle PAVL, We 2. Cor.
5. 1.
know, when this our earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building from
God, not made with hands, everlasting in Heaven. And the same dwelling in the
Heavens, he Verse 6, 7, 8.
by and by interprets to be as much, as to go and dwell with the Lord: We
know, that while we dwell in the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we
walk by Faith, and not by sight: Therefore we desire rather to remove out of
the body, and to dwell with the Lord. So to the Phil. 1. 23.
Philippians, I do desire to loose from hence, that is, to have my soul depart
from my body: (A Metaphor taken from Ships that loose, or set from the shore)
and to be with Christ. And this to be his meaning, the next words make it very
plain, but to continue in the flesh, is more necessary for you. This is it
which our Savior Luke 23. 43.
Christ says to the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In the
Revel. 6. 10.
Revelation, the souls of the Martyrs are said to be at rest under the Altar.
And the Apostle to the Heb. 12. 23.
Hebrews reckons the Spirit of the righteous that are perfi^ed. For this
cause, our Savior Luke 23. 46.
Christ upon the Cross commends his Spirit into the hands of his Father,
that it might be an assurance unto us, that our spirits also shall go to him,
when they depart out of this body. And this estate both of the Elect and
Reprobate, our Savior Christ expressly shows in the Parable of the Rich man.
The very scope whereof drives unto this, that although the wicked, in this
life, for the most part, enjoy pleasure, and the Saints of God are pinched with
penury, yet that after death there abides a large recompense for the godly,
when to the wicked shall be anguish and sorrow. Therefore he says, Luke 16.
22, 23
That LAZARUS when he dyed, was carried of Angels into ABRAHAM'S bosom, and the
Rich man buried and cast into Hell. For being in Hell, says our Savior
Christ, in torment, he saw ABRAHAM afar off, and LAZARUS in his bosom.

The second degree is a better and more excellent At what time
condition after that both to soul and body, for the full effecting whereof,
there be two most glorious and renowned works, the wonders of the World,
which Christ our Lord and King shall by the power and force of his Kingdom,
and by virtue of that Office given unto him of his Father, perform in the
latter Day, to the everlasting joy and comfort of his Children: In respect
whereof, that Day is called, The Day of the Lord.

And those are a general Resurrection and the last Judgment.

By the general Resurrection, I mean, that there shall our bodies being
raised up
be a raising up of all the dead bodies which have slept, or shall sleep in
the Dust of the Earth: that so being knit again into one person with their
souls, both bodies and souls may receive according to the things they have
done in this World, whether they be good or evil. So says the Prophet Dan.
12. 2.
DANIEL, At the length many of them that slept in the dustie earth, shall
awake, these to everlasting life, and those to shame and reproach everlasting.

And our Savior Christ, John 5. 28, 29. The hour comes, wherein all that
are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: they which have
done good things, unto the Resurrection of life, and they which have done evil
things, unto the Resurrection of condemnation.

In this Doctrine of the Resurrection, I note,

First, Who shall arise. All the dead without exception, both just and unjust,
as it is said, Acts 24. 15.

Secondly, By what power they shall arise: by the power and voice of Christ,
using the Ministry of an Archangell or a Chief and a Principal Angel, John
5. 28. The hour comes, when all that are in the grave, shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth, etc. 1. These. 4. 16. The Lord himself with a
showting, with the voice of an Archangell, and with the Trumpet of God, shall
come down from Heaven, and the dead in Christ shall arise. 1. Cor. 15. 52 The
Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised up.

Thirdly, In what sort we shall arise. In the selfsame bodies that we now
carry about us, as Job 19. 25, 26, 27.
Job says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that the latter man shall rise
up upon the dust. Therefore after, I shall awake, and the Worms have dug
through this, yet in my flesh shall I see God: even I, the selfsame that I am,
and not a stranger, shall see for my self, and mine own eyes shall behold,
after that my reins, with my bosom* shall be consumed. Else it could be no
Resurrection, unless the very same bodies did arise.

Fourthly, Two things are to be considered proper to the Elect: for

First, They shall rise glorious, like to the glorified body glorious,
of our Savior Christ. In which respect it is said, They shall Mat. 13. 43.
shine as the Sun. And the Apostle says, 1. Co. 15. 42, 43
It is sown a body, subject to corruption, it is raised incorrupt: it sown
dishonorable, it is raised glorious: it is sown weak, it is raised powerful.
And afterward, Verse 47, etc
The first man from the Earth, the second Man, the Lord from Heaven: such as
the earthy one was, such also are the earthly men: and such as the heavenly one
is, such also shall the heavenly ones be. And as we have carried the image of
the earthy one so also shall we carry the Image of the heavenly One. Coloss.
3. 4. When Christ shall be manifested, which is our life, then shall ye also be
manifested with him glorious. Phil. 3. 21. Who will transform this our base
body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, whereby he is able to
subject all things unto himself. So as they shall not any more be quickened by
meat or drink, or the use of outward things, but by the only participation of
the Power of Christ's Spirit: whereupon they are called 1. Cor. 15. 44.
Spiritual bodies, living only by the Power of Christ's Spirit immediately
quickening them for ever: as those we carry now about us, are called natural
bodies, because they live by natural means, and the power of the foul that
quickens them, which is another thing, wherein our state is bettered in
Christ, above that it was in Adam; whose body, though it were comely and
beautiful, yet was not glorious, as ours shall be being glorified through
Christ.

Secondly, This is done by the special Power and Virtue of his Resurrection,
whose members they are, and in Ephesians. 2. 6.
whom, and together with whom, when he arose from the dead, all the Church
did rise. Wherefore the 1. These. 4. 14.
Apostle says, If we believe that Jesus is dead and risen again, so also will
God bring together with him those that slept, through Jesus.

And hereupon, 1. Cor. 15. 20, 21, 22. he calls him, The first fruits of the
dead, who in and by his rising again, has sanctified the Resurrection of all
his: For as by man came death: so also by Man comes the Resurrection from the
dead; for as in ADAM al dyed, so also in Christ shall all be quickened: that
is, all the faithful, of whom he there speaks: for the Reprobate he does not
raise up (as he does the Elect, whose Head he is) by virtue of his own
Resurrection, but only the force of that curse, ( Genesis 2. 17,
What Day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall certainly dye) shall
restore to them their bodies, wherein to suffer everlasting torments. Whence it
is, that this Coming of theirs out of the Grave (being only unto death) is
scarce vouchsafed in the Scripture the name of a Resurrection, whereas to GODS
Children, being one principal part of their redeeming and freeing into
everlasting Glory, it has the name of Regeneration given to it, Mat. 19. 28.
for this cause it is also called, Luke 14. 14.
The Resurrection of the Righteous, and they named Children of the Luke 20. 36.
Resurrection, for that the fruit and comfort of the Resurrection does properly
and only appertain to them. In the last Judgment I note,

First, Who shall be judged. All, both Devils and the whole man shall meet
men, as it is said, Romans 14. 10. and 1. Cor. 5. 10.
All of us must be presented before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

And of the Angels that fell, the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 5. 1.
Know ye not, that we shall judge the Angel^? Jude verse 6.
The angels that kept not their first estate, he has kept in everlasting
chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day.

Secondly, Who shall be the Judge. Even Christ, who Christ
Acts 10. 42.
is appointed of God the Judge of the living and dead. Christ Jesus, I say, God
and Man appearing in his Manhood visible and to be seen in the flesh: Acts
17. 31.
For he has set a Day (says PAVL, wherein he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by the Man whom he has appointed: The Father nor Holy Ghost
shall not appear.

Thirdly, The coming of this Judge. Wherein I observe coming to Judgment,
four circumstances:

First, The place from whence he shall come, as we read, This Acts 1. 11.
JESUS who is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come from Heaven, as ye
have beheld him going into Heaven. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.
When the Lord JESUS CHRIST shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
The Lord himself with a showting shall come down from Heaven.

Secondly, The time of his coming: the Day and hour whereof is uncertain:
Mat. 24. 36.
Of that Day or hour (says he) knows no man, no, not the Angels of Heaven,
but my Father only: and as another Mark 13. 32
Evangelist has it, nor the Son himself: meaning, as he is the Mediator
of his Church, and not as he is God equal with his Father.

Thirdly, As earthly Princes have sundry States to go before them in great
bravery and ostentation, to give warning of their coming, and at length
follows the Prince with all his Nobles: So this King of Kings sends before
him certain glorious signs and foretokens of his Coming, before he himself
do come. These Signs you shall find all recorded, Mat. 24. of which Chapter
(so much thereof as appertains to this purpose) it shall not be amiss,
before we go further, to make some short Analysis or resolution, both for the
excellency of the matter, and to clear some difficulties in the passage: for
I know, it is commonly taken, that some of those tokens are immediately upon
his Coming, and as it were, at his setting forth; whereas the truth is, the
very nearest of them is at the least some Age of years before, as appears,
Verse 33, 34.

To come therefore to the four and twentieth of Matthew, our Savior having
finished the Signs of Ierusalems overthrow, in the first 22. Verses of the
Chapter, begins in the 23. Verse, to enter upon those that were to
fore-runne his Coming unto Judgment, whereof he mentions four of all
other the greatest and most memorable.

The first is the Kingdom of Popery: where, see how he painteth out the
Romish Synagogue even in her colors.

First, It is a Church in show and semblance; else false christ's and false
prophets could not be spoken of: but yet in truth it is no Church at all: For
if any man (says he) shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there,
believe it not.

Secondly, They shall say, Here is Christ, and there is Christ. Notably
verified in the Popish Mass, which (to make it appear to all the World, that
they are of the number of these false prophets) proclaymeth Christ to be really
in the Sacraments.

Thirdly, It is a persecuting Church. So he says, Verse 29. Immediately after
the affliction of those days. Therein comprehending the whole Antichristian
Tyranny.

Fourthly, Of this Church, Antichrist is the head, whose whole succession he
terms False christ's, and false prophets. Not such false christ's as he
speaks of with another manner of style, Verse 5. which should say, I am
Christ, falsely belying his very Person: but that great seducer and false
prophet, who, under the Name of Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor, should
iustle Christ out of his Chair.

Fifthly, The Arms, Legs and Shoulders of it, or the Tail rather, (for the
Sting and Poison of these Scorpions is in their Tail) are a Rabble of false
teachers, False prophets, as he terms them.

Sixthly, By these false teachers, are wrought a multitude of false and feigned
miracles.

Seventhly, The body is their Romish catholic, apostaticall Church, seduced
by such false teachers, and by those lying signs and miracles.

How maruellously do these things iumpe with that which we find recorded in
the Epistle to the Thessalonians, and by John in the Revelation?

They shall, says Christ here, work great Signs and Wonders, insomuch as
they should deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. So says 2 Thessalonians. 2.
9, 10, 11.
PAVL, Whose coming shall be by the effectual working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceitfulness of iniquity
in them that perish, etc. Therefore God shall send them effectual errors, to
believe lies. And in the Revel. 13. 12, 13, 14.
Revelation he makes the Earth and the Inhabitants thereof to worship the
first Beast, and works great signs, insomuch as he makes fire come down
from Heaven unto the Earth before men, and deceives the Inhabitants of the
Earth, by the signs which were given to him to do.

These are the signs and wonders which the Papists so brag of, and make one
special mark of their Church, as Universality, that is, their universal
Apostasy here also mentioned, is another.

These seven are in the 23. and 24. Verses.

Eighthly, The error and superstition of the times, placing all Religion and
Christianity in the Wilderness among the Eremites, or in their Monkish Cells and
Cloisters: Against which he armeth us with a double argument: first, Verse 27.
The Light, says he, of the Gospel (that he means by the Coming of the
Son of Man, as it is taken much in the same sense, 2. These. 2. 8.) is as the
Lightening, which flasheth from the East to the West, and lighteneth all the
World: So does the Gospel not the Deserts and Cloisters only, but, in every
place, He that fears God and works Righteousness, is accepted of him.

Again, as the Verse 28.
Eagles (or with us, Crows and Ravens) flock unto a Carcass wheresoever it may
be found: So do the faithful to Christ, wheresoever he Gal. 2. 2.
by the preaching of the Gospel is crucified before their eyes.

And so, ninthly and lastly, delivering a most certain and infallible note of
the true Church, he gives a Bill of Divorce to the Romish Synagogue, that
holds not Christ the Head, nor Justification by Faith alone in his blood.

Thus have we in the whole a lively description of the Romish Catholic
Church; which for the ROMANISTS better help, may out of this place be defined
thus: The Romish Catholic Church is a cruel persecuting Church, whereof
Christ's Vicar (falsely so named) is the head: multitude of false teachers, and a
whole World of mis-beleeuers, by lying miracles deceiving and deceived, make
the body, which seek Christ upon the Earth in their Sacrament of the Altar,
place Religion in an Eremiticall, or Monkish life; not holding Christ the Head,
nor Justification by Faith alone in his blood: And therefore are not the Church
of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan.

The second sign is, that Verse 29.
The Heaven shall be darkened, The Moon shall not give her Light, the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of Heaven (or powerful and potent
Heavens) shall be shaken. Such Metaphors as these, the Scripture is wont to
use, when it would express a notable change to fall out in the World, the
ruin and overthrow of some great State or Monarchy. Esaias 13. 10.
Esaias in his thirteenth Chapter speaking of the destruction of Babel, The
Stars of the Heaven, and their Planets shall not give their light, and the
Moon shall not shine bright, the Sun shall be darkened at his rising. Joel
4. 7.
JOEL prophesying of the severe Judgment against the enemies of Gods Church,
The Sun and the Moon shall be black, and the Stars shall take in their
Light. And Ezech. 32. 7, 8
Ezechiel to Pharaoh King of Egypt, I will cover (when I put thee out) the
Heavens, and I will make their Stars black. The Sun I will cover in a Cloud,
and the Moon shall not make her Light shine. All the Planets of light in the
Heaven will I make black for thy sake: And I will set darkness in the Land.
So in the Revel. 6. 12, 13, 14.
Revelation, When he opened the sixth Seal, there was a great Earthquake, and
the Sun became black, as hayrie sackcloth, and the Moon became as blood,
and the Stars of Heaven fell to the ground, and Heaven parted asunder as a
Book rolled together, and every Mountain and Island were removed out of their
places. Which things point not to the end of the World, seeing many things were
to fellow under the seventh Seal: but are meant, as it seems, of that great
overthrow which Constantine gave to Dioclesian, and other Tyrants of the
Church, turning the whole Empire of Rome vpside down, from Gentilisme to
Christianity.

This second sign therefore I judge to be the Turks overthrow, which shall
fall out Revel. 16. 19. and 19. 20. and 20. 10.
as soon as the Church is delivered from the Tyranny of Antichrist, that is,
as our Savior speaks here, immediately after the affliction of those days.

The third Sign, is the calling of the Jews, wherein four things may be
observed:

First, The time: And then, says Verse 30.
he, that is, Ezech. 38. and 39. to the end of the Prophecy, Revel. 20 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, etc.
immediately upon the Ruin of the Turkish Empire: for though some Ezech. 37.
and Revel. ^6. 12, 13 14, 15, 16.
beginnings are to be made, before an endeavor to, and preparation to seek
Christ, whereupon Dan. 1. 12, ^.
shall ensue the forest time of affliction to that people that ever was in the
world; yet their full and through Call begins not, till the Turk be done
away.

Secondly, The glory of their Church two ways described; one, by calling it,
The Sign of the Son of man: the other, The Coming of the Son of man in
the Clouds of the Heaven: for so is the latter used, Reave. 1. 7 And before in
this Chapter, Verse 27. and they both import the self same thing which Paul,
2 Thessalonians. 28. calls, The brightness of his Coming: to wit, not a corporal,
but a spiritual Coming, powerfully and royally in the great and glorious
Conversion of this Nation.

Thirdly, The generality of their call, that all the Tribes of Israel, as well
as Judah, shall be saved. Which very word of Tribes, if there were no more,
shows of what people it must be meant.

Fourthly, Their true and unfeigned Repentance: for the mourning here spoken
of, is that bitter mourning for the sin of all sins, the sin of refusing
Christ, whereof you read, Zachary 12. 10, 11, etc. Reu. 1. 7.

The fourth Sign, is the general publishing of the Gospel thorowout the
World: for this sending of his Angels with a Trumpet, and great voice, and
their gathering of the Elect out of the four Winds, from one end of the
Heaven to another, Verse 31. cannot be that voice of an Archangell, and
Trumpet of God, which the Apostle speaks of, 1. These. 4. 16. nor the
gathering mentioned, Mat. 25. 32. for it is expressly said here, Verse 33, 34.
When you see all those things (whereof this which we now speak of, is one)
know he is near at the doors (not yet come, as he must be, when the
Archangels voice does sound.) Verily I say unto you, The same So is (...)
taken, Luke 17. 34.
age (the Age wherein the last of these things shall be fulfilled) shall not
pass away, till all things be done. Therefore it must needs be taken of a
glorious spreading of the Gospel among all Nations, not spoken figuratively,
or by Hyperbole, and excess of speech (as that other, Verse 14.) but in a true
literal and proper sense. And as the former was given to the Apostles for a
Sign, that should go before the Jews desolation, and consequently before
Antichrist should come, who was not to appear till some Ages after they were
destroyed: So this is to come after: After his, after the Turks destruction,
after the Jews repair; for Revel. 21. 24.
then shall the Nations bring their Honor and Glory to the new holy City.
Ezech. 47.
Then shall waters fly out of the Temple into the East, and to all the
quarters round about, by the sweetness whereof shall be engendered a multitude
of fish, exceeding many. Then Dan. 7. 14.
after the small horn taken away (which is the Turk) a Kingdom shall be
given to him, that was like the Son of man, that all People, Nations, and
Tongues shall serve him. Then Zach. 14. 19.
shall JEHOVAH be King over all the Earth. And in that Day there shall be one
JEHOVAH, and his name one.

Having done now with the Signs, the last circumstance is, the manner of his
Coming, which shall be sudden, manifest and notorious unto all, and full of
State and Majesty. For the suddenness of it, it is compared to a 1 Thessalonians. 2.
2. Revel. 16. 5.
Thief in the night: to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
travail that comes on a sudden to a woman with child, and to a Luke 21. 35.
snare, that catches men unawares. Whereupon it is also compared to the days
of Mat. 24. 37, 38, 39.
Noe and of Lot: for as men then were taken, before they were aware, so shall
they be in the Day of Judgment, which serves to stir us up to
watchfulness, as our Savior in Luke 21. 35.
Luke makes that use of it; As a snare it shall come upon all that sit upon
the face of the Earth. Mat. 25. 13.
Watch therefore at all times, praying, etc. And Mat. 24. and 25. he inforceth
the same by two excellent Parables; one, of the Steward put in trust by his
Master: the other of the ten Virgins; concluding with the selfsame
exhortation; Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour the Son of man
shall come. Again, it shall be very evident, visible, and notorious of all
men, especially of the Elect. So the Angel tells the^, Acts 1. 11.
This Jesus which is taken from you into Heaven, shall come after the same
manner, as ye have seen him going into Heaven: that is, visibly and
apparently, as it was said before, Verse 9.
That they seeing and beholding a Cloud took him from their eyes. In regard of
the State and Majesty of his Coming, it Titus 2. 13. and els-where.
is euery-where called, his (...)
glorious and bright appearance: Opposed to his first Coming, which was
without any show, in Meekness and Humility; whereas this shall be in all
Royalty and Magnificence, above the pomp and glittering show of all the Kings
of the World.

For first, it shall be, Mat. 24. 30.
With power and much glory.

Secondly, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
In a flaming fire.

Thirdly, With the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
voice of an Archangell, with a Trumpet of God.

Fourthly, With infinite thousands of holy Angels to attend upon him, Mat. 25.
31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all his holy Angels with
him. 2. These. 1. 7. When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his
mighty Angels. For the blessed souls of the righteous deceased, shall not
attend him when he comes to Judgment, but shall be sent to their bodies in
the Graves, from thence to be taken up and presented before him.

The fourth thing to be observed in the last Judgment, in the Air, and there
is the place where the same shall be: which the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
Apostle teaches, when he says, We which live and remain, shall be caught up
with them also in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: for it seems,
the whole Earth can hardly hold the men that then shall come to Judgment.

Next, are the things, which he shall do when he is come, being of three
sorts:

First, The preparation to the Sentence.

This stands in four things:

First, The erecting of a great and glorious Throne for this Judge to sit upon;
though of what matter the Scripture concealeth, yet (undoubtedly) fit for the
Majesty of the Judge of all the World; whether the same be the glorious Angels
of God, that as a Throne bear up our Savior Christ, or some other thing: but
for certain, a real, and most Royal Place it shall be, where he shall sit
evidently to be seen of all, Mat. 19. 28. When the Son of man shall sit
upon his glorious Throne. Revel. 20. 11. I saw a great white Throne, and one
sitting upon it; great, to show the Majesty; and white, to note the sincerity
and uprightness of his Judgment.

Secondly, His retinue and attendants, which are the troops and thousand
thousands of holy Angels compassing him about.

Thirdly, The gathering together of all both Elect and Reprobate, to come
before him.

Fourthly, The separating of those two sorts one from the other, setting the
Elect at his right hand, and the Reprobate at his left hand. You shall find
them all four, Mat. 25. 31, 32, 33. And when the Son of man comes in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of
his glory: And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate
one from another, as the Shepherd separateth the Sheep from the Goats, and
he shall set the Sheep at his right hand, and the Goats on his left.

The second thing which he shall do, being come, is receive sentence of all
fulness of blessedness for ever:
the sentencing or proceeding unto Judgment.

Wherein I consider,

First, The order of the Sentence, that first it shall be pronounced upon the
Elect, then, against the Reprobate: for so our Savior manifestly shows, Mat.
25. 34. Then (as soon as separation is made) the King shall say to them at his
right hand, And, Verse 41.
Then (afterward) he shall also say to them at his left hand.

This appears further by that honor that the Children of God shall have to
judge the wicked, justifying and approouing, by their voice and suffrage, the
holy Sentence of Christ; which, because it cannot be, until themselves have
received the sentence of glory, it follows, that the same goes in order
before the other.

Secondly, The sentence Mat. 25. 34, 41.
it self; to the Elect, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the World. To the Reprobate, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels.

Thirdly, The Mat. 25. 4, 34, 35, 36, 41, 42 43.
reason of the Sentence, justifying this great Judge before God and the World,
and to the consciences of all men: for in it is opened first the eternal and
most righteous Decree of God, electing one, and reprobating the other. Then the
sequels of this Election and Reprobation: In the Elect, Love to Christ and to
his members; undoubted fruits and testimonies of their Faith: in the Reprobate,
hardness of heart, without compassion or love unto the Saints; a declaration
before men and to their own souls of their righteous and just perdition. John
in the Revel. 20. 21.
Revelation does elegantly describe it by two Books, wherein those reasons are
both written: The first is, The Book of both their consciences, wherein are
written the ones wicked works, to convince their damnation to be most just,
and the others Holiness of conversation. The other Book is, The Book of
Life, which is the eternal Election of the latter; to show that they, being
many times guilty of foul offenses, and the best of all their works weak
and imperfect, and utterly of no desert, their Salvation is altogether free,
and of Gods mere grace and favor, in and through Christ.

The third is, The Execution of this Sentence, wherewith which
our Savior shuts up, Mat. 25. 46. So these shall go away unto everlasting
punishment, but the righteous unto life everlasting.

Wherein we consider the order of it, and the thing it self.

The order, first, upon the Reprobate, then, to the Elect: for albeit the
Sentence of Come, ye blessed, for such causes as we have heard already, be
in order to go before that of, Go ye cursed, etc. yet the Execution
begins here, the holy Mat. 13. 49, 50.
Angels first of all flying at once upon the Reprobate, to throw them into the
place of their deserved torment, that so the joy of the Elect may be the
fuller, when in the view and eyesight of their misery, themselves, together
with Christ their Head, shall triumphantly ascend to Heaven: And this to be no
vain nor idle fantasy, but a doctrine of great fruit, and worthy to be stood
upon, the very order of Christ's own words enforces, so marshalling the
Execution.

The thing it self; that the whole man, soul and body, we shall enjoy, taken
up into Heaven by the virtue of his Ascension.
after this Sentence, is taken up into Heaven, by the virtue of him that has
entered Heaven for us, and shall there enjoy the highest top and fullness of all
perfection for evermore. Wherefore here many things may be observed, common for
the most part to both degrees of glory, but which I said for greater comfort
should specially be reserved hither. I will reduce them all to four heads.
The place where we shall enjoy it: the glory we shall enjoy: the measure of
the glory: and the eternity of it. This happiness is to be had in Heaven,
which adds no small increase to the fullness of joy, which the Elect are then
to have, both in regard of the excellency of the Place, whereof we have
spoken before, being that Blessed and Glorious Seat on high, the Palace of the
great King, of John 14. 2.
large receipt, and goodly dwelling Rooms, and also by reason of those great
and glorious things that are no where to be had but there, to wit, the presence
of Christ, the company and fellowship of the Mat. 8. 11.
Saints and holy Heb. 12. 22.
Angels, and of those great Assemblies whereof the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.
23.

The right we have of coming to this Place, is by the virtue of Christ's
Ascension, as he says, John 14. 23. and John 16. 17.
I go to prepare a place for you. So Luke 23. 43. he makes the virtue and
power of his being in Paradise, to be the cause of the Thieves coming
thither, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise: for this ascending of
CHRIST'S, though it were in the end of the World, was of power sufficient to
open Heaven to all Believers, from the beginning; and upon his ascending, all
the Ephesians. 2. ^
Church in him, as in their Head, ascended with him. Therefore it is, that upon
his Inauguration to his Office, the Heavens opened, which before were shut
against the sons of men. This was figured in the Types of the Law, by the
Heb. 9. 24.
Priests entering into the most Holy Place; to show that Christ should go into
Heaven it self, to appear there in the flesh, that we might come thither
after him.

Whereof I gather a fourth prerogative, which we have through the imputation
of Christ's Righteousness, above that that was in Adam, or that our own
Righteousness in the greatest perfection of it could possibly bring us to: of
earthly Creatures, and dwellers in Houses of Clay, to make us heavenly
Creatures, and Citizens of the new Jerusalem which is above.

To declare this somewhat more largely; It is the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, by which alone we may lay claim to the Kingdom of Heaven:
for man was created an earthly Creature; and though he had all the
Righteousness that his nature might reach unto, yet he could never challenge
Heaven by it, but his Happiness was to be all upon Earth, which was his proper
Element wherein God had set him, and Adams Paradise was a terrestrial
dwelling, where he inioyed as much Happiness, as he might expect or look for;
neither was he to pass the bounds that GOD had set, in coue^ing after the
Kingdom of Heaven, and to be an Associate among the Blessed Angels, but to
content him with his portion here below, being the fullness of all joy that his
nature could receive. So that if our Savior Christ had only dyed for the
Remission of sins, though he had thereby made us as righteous in our selves,
as ever Adam was, yet could we not thereby claim to have any part in Heaven:
But our Savior bestowing withal a Righteousness upon us, far above the
Righteousness of Angels, being the Righteousness of his own person who was
both God and Man; as he himself merited Heaven, and the fullness of all Glory
there: so by that means our right also comes, of being where our Head is.
The like is to be said of our bodies, glorified in a far other sort then
ever Adam was, and of many parts of Happiness more, which in their place shall
come more properly to be spoken of. The Blessedness it self is to be
considered, both in the Root and in the Branches of it. The Root and
Wel-Spring of all our Happiness, is this, that in as much as we shall be
joined in Spiritual Marriage unto Christ, we shall in his humane nature be
espoused and made one person with God, and thereby more nearly joined unto him,
then either Adam was in his Innocence, or the Angels are in Heaven: Even as the
wife is more nearly joined to the Husband, then is Father, or Mother, or other
friend: all whom he must forsake, to clean unto his Wife. Whereupon the
Apostle calls this, A great Mystery, Ephesians. 5. 3, 2. The branches or sweet
streams of Blessedness that flow from hence, (all easy to be gathered by
that that went before) are these four:

First, The perfect fruition of Gods Love.

Secondly, The inioying of his gracious presence, to be ever with him, and to
behold him face to face; Christ visibly, with the eyes of the body, the Father
and the Holy Ghost, with the eyes of the Soul. So it is said, Revel. 22. 4.
that in the new Jerusalem they shall behold his face. Psalm. 17. 15. I in
Righteousness shall see thy face. 1. John 3. 12.
JOHN also says, We shall see him as he is. And 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
Paul to the Thessalonians, We shall be ever with the Lord. Now forasmuch Psalm
16. 11.
as at his right hand be pleasures for evermore, therefore all Esaias 35. 10.
joy and gladness lay hold upon them eternally, all sorrow and grief fly
from them for ever. All these, together with the comfortable fruits that come
of them, John does notably describe, I JOHN R(...) ^. 4.
saw the Holy City, new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven prepared
as a Bride trimmed for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven
saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,
and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their GOD with them:
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for
the first things are passed.

Thirdly, Dominion and a Kingdom, Mat. 25. 34. Come, ye blessed, and inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you. And Revel. 2. 26, 27, 28. He that overcomes,
and keeps my works unto the end, I will give unto him power over the
Nations, and he shall feed them: with a rod of Iron, as Potters Vessels, they
shall be broken, as I also have received of my Father. And I will give unto
you the Morning Star. So it is said, Revel. 5. 10. Thou have made us unto our
God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon the Earth.

From this Power and Rule two things proceed.

First, That together with Christ our Head, we shall judge the World, as well
the Angels that fell, as reprobate and wicked men, 1. Cor. 6. 2. Know ye not
that the Saints shall judge the World? And again, Verse 3. Know ye not that
we shall judge the Angels? That also which Mat. 19. 28.
Christ says to the Apostles, When the Son of Man shall sit upon his
glorious Throne, then shall you also sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel, is (in some measure) common to all the Elect, as
appears, Revel. 20. 4.

Secondly, That we shall be made the heirs of Heaven and Earth, in and
through him, Who as the Heb. 1. 2.
Apostle says, is made heir of all things. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Who has begotten us
anew unto an Heritance, incorruptible and undefiled, which cannot fade away,
reserved in Heaven for us. Revel at. 21. 7. He that overcomes, shall inherit
these things.

Fourthly, The glory and excellency that then shall be in our Knowledge,
Memory and all other parts and faculties, as you have it set forth, 1. Cor.
13, 11, 12. Insomuch as there is no doubt we shall know one another: for
hereby our Savior sets forth the state of the Blessed, Mat. 17. 3, 4.

We come now to the measure or quantity of these good things, albeit not
infinite, yet wonderful, such as no man knows but God, and he Esaias 64. 4.
that does enjoy them, which is the third benefit that we have by Christ, above
that which was in Adam, who lacking that sweet conjunction, which we have with
Christ, from whom, as from our Head, his own very Blessedness is derived
down unto us, could not have the good things that were in him, to be so great
and excellent.

In the measure of our happiness, two things are to be observed: The one,
proper to this estate, that the fullness of it, after the last Judgment,
exceeds that which our souls, separated from our bodies, had before: for
when the Souls of the Martyrs slain for the Word of God, and the testimony
of Jesus, (if at the least you understand that place of the souls deceased)
cry, How long, O Lord, holy and true! Wilt not thou judge and avenge our blood
of the Inhabitants of the Earth? And it was answered them, that they must rest
a while, till the number of their fellow* servants and brethren be filled up,
which should be killed as well as they: it shows, that their full rest is not
yet accomplished. To this purpose it serves, that the general Judgment of
all the dead, is termed, A time of giving a reward to Gods servants the
Prophets, and to the Saints, and to all that fear his Name: As not having yet
the full reward that is promised in that Day; whereunto Gods Children lift up
their head, as to the top and perfection of all their comfort. Hereafter (says
PAVL) is laid up for me a Crown of Glory, which God the righteous Judge will
render in that Day. And the Prophet DAVID, I, when I awake, that is, rise from
the dead in the Resurrection of the righteous, shall be satisfied with thy
likeness. JOHN also refers our full perfection unto that time, When he
(that is, Christ) shall be manifested, we shall be like unto him. And hither
tends the speech of the Apostle, That his Spirit may be saved in the Day of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

The second is, that beside the Happiness common to them all, there are some
which shall have joy above their fellows: Not that this argues any want in
those that have less; for though all receive not alike measure, yet all shall
be full; As a Vessel containing a Gallon, is as full for the bigness, as
that which contains ten.

And this difference grows from the diverse measure of Faith, which God in
this life does indue us with: for Faith, as we heard before, is that which
joins us to Christ: And as our Faith grows, so are we more deeply and
firmly rooted and built in him: The greater therefore that our Faith is, the
nearer and the straighter is our conjunction with Christ; and the nearer we
are knit to him, the greater our glory and excellency must be. And because
our Faith is discerned by the fruits; great faith, many fruits; small faith,
few fruits: thereof it is, that for the most part we see the measure of
Happiness ascribed to the multitude and quality of the fruits. 1. Corinthians. 3.
8. Every one shall receive his own proper reward, according to his own proper
labor, Philip. 4. 17. I desire a fruit that may abound in your account.

To give a taste of some that are noted in the Scripture thus to excel, though
it hold not in every particular person, yet generally these sorts and estates
are observed:

First, Those that instruct others, shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and those that justify many: that is, are the good Instruments of
God to bring men to Christ, shall be as the stars, Dan. 12. 3.

Secondly, The Master Builder that planteth and lays the foundation, shall
have greater glory then he that waters and builds thereupon, 1. Cor. 3. 8,
10.

Thirdly, The Martyr shall be made a Revel. 3. 12.
Pillar in the Temple of God, and preferred before other.

The last thing, is the Chiliastes, which place happiness after the
Resurrection, in the pleasures of the body and upon the Earth, and that to
endure but for a thousand years, abusing the place, Revel. 20. 4. They reigned
with Christ a thousand years, which is not to be understood of the condition
of the Elect after this life, but in this present World, during all that time
that Satan by the Ministry of the Gospel should be bound that he might not
deceive the Nations, which was very near a thousand years after Christ, all
which time some truth remained in the Churches, as concerning the maine points
of Christian Doctrine.
eternity and continuance of our Happiness: As it is said, 1. These. 4. 17.
So shall we be always with the Lord. Revel. 22. 5.
They shall reign for ever and ever. And 1. Pet. 1. 4.
Peter calls it an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and which withers
not: wherein also it is much more excellent then that we lost in Adam, which
was mutable and subject unto change; whereas this, by the special grace and
goodness of God continually supporting us, is immutable, and the same for
ever, 2. Cor. 5. 4.
immortality being sallowed up of life.

That all must dye, and all thus rise again, is the common Certain men upon
our Savior Christ's Resurrection rose again, and are already with him in
Heaven.
condition of all Mankind, some few excepted, and those of three sorts: for

First, Some there were, who being dead, upon our Savior Christ's Resurrection
rose again, and are already with him in glory. Of whom you may read, Mat.
27. 52, 53. that the graves did open themselves, and many bodies of the Saints
which slept, arose, and came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went
into the holy City, and appeared unto many. Which word ( appearing) shows
that they did not rise, to converse among men, or to dye again, as Lazarus and
some other did, but in their own persons to attend upon him in his Ascension
unto Heaven, and by their Resurrection, to seal up the truth of his and of
ours, in and through him; that so not only in Christ our Head, but in our
Brethren and fellow members, full assurance might be made unto us of this
sweet and comfortable Doctrine.

Secondly, Other there were that never dyed, but So are Enoch and Elias both
alive assumed thither.
only changed their miserable condition into Glory and Immortality, and so
were taken up alive into Heaven. And this was the peculiar privilege of Enoch
and Elias: One, before the Law; another under the Law: both in most corrupt and
depraved times, wherein the sincere worship of God was no* where to be found,
the hope of eternal Life, and of the Resurrection to come, utterly lost and
gone. God therefore, to leave a plentiful testimony of a blessed
Resurrection, till the cleerer manifestation of it by the rising of his Son,
and both to give testimony of the Faith and Piety of such men, and to
convince the wicked World of Infidelity, suffered not those two to go the way
of all flesh, but by a special favor did assume them body and soul unto
himself: thereby also to make them types and figures of the Resurrection of
his Son, by whose power they thus escaped death.

Of Enoch, first, it is recorded, Genesis 5. 24. That he walking with God three
thousand years (in which time, as Jude ver. 24.
Jude the Apostle witnesses, he diligently executed the part of a faithful
Teacher in Gods Church, reproouing the corrupt World of sin, and denouncing
Gods severe Judgments against them, even to the extreme curse of Anathema
Maranatha in the end, he was no more seen: for God took him: that is, as the
Heb. 11. 5.
Apostle to the Hebrews does expound it, did translate him that he should not
see death. And of Elias the Story is set forth at large, in the first and
second Book of Kings: How after long conflicts with Achab the King of Israel,
and Iesabel his wife, and with four hundred and fifty prophets, the priests
of Baal at once, being tossed (as we say) from Post to Pillar, and driven to
fly for his life, having restored the true Worship of God, and reedified his
Altars that before were thrown down and destroyed, and being now, as he
thought, left alone and weary of his life, God in the end, after his many
labors, 2. Kings 2. 23
took him up in a whirlewinde into Heaven: Thereby conuincing the Idolatry of
that Age. And when in the Town of Bethel, where the Calves were erected, and
Idolatry and Superstition raged, they made a Scoff of this Ascension, and
taught their children so to do, saying, to Elisha in scoffing sort, Ascend,
Bald-pate, ascend Bald-pate, that is, Go up to Heaven as Elias did: as if they
should have said, A proper and goodly ascension: two Bears coming out of the
Forest, tare in pieces two and forty children of them. And that this was
always the judgment of the Church, concerning Elias, may appear, Luke 9. 8.
where in the diversity of opinions held of our Savior Christ, some said, that
JOHN was raised from the dead; some, that ELIAS had appeared; other, that one
of the old Prophets was risen again. To all the rest attributing Resurrection,
as of bodies dead, only to ELIAS Apparition, in the truth of his humane
nature, as of one that never dyed.

Two things there be that may seem to cross this Doctrine: One, that Christ
is called, The first fruits of them that sleep, 1. Cor. 15. 20. The other,
that in the eleventh to the Heb. 11. 39. the Apostle speaking of the holy men
of God before the Coming of Christ: And of Enoch among the rest, says of them
all, that they received not the promises. But hereunto it may be answered,
that the promise which the Apostle means, is the manifestation of Christ in
the flesh, and the more plentiful measure of grace now, then was before his
Coming, which pertayneth nothing to this question. As for that, 1. Cor. 15.
Christ is called, The first fruits of them that sleep, because by the power of
his Resurrection all shall rise again, and his Resurrection sanctifies ours,
as the first fruits did the whole crop; not that he of necessity must be the
first that rose, no more then he was the first whose soul did enter Heaven:
though all both before and since have entered by his power: Although, if you
should so far press this Phrase, Christ was indeed the first that rose,
seeing to speak properly, Enoch and Elias never dyed, and therefore never
rose. And howsoever it be an extraordinary Example, in one or two special
persons, it serves not to overthrow a general truth: But the first I take to
be the Apostles meaning.

Yet have not these two sorts their full glory already: for* howsoever their
whole nature be made perfect, yet the fullness of their perfection is deferred
till the latter Day, as to the rest of Gods Elect: Even as we see, the whole
spiritual nature of the Angels that fell, is now fully accursed, and yet
reserved for a more full damnation.

The third sort, are those men that the Coming of Those that are living at the
latter Day, shall suddenly be changed, after the dead are once risen.
Christ does find alive, who shall not dye, but shall suddenly be changed, as
Enoch and Elias were; and so be taken up to meet Christ, after that the dead
in him shall be first risen. All of us, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 51, 52.
shall not sleep, but all of us shall be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last Trumpet: for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
rise up without corruption, and we shall be changed. And again, 1* These. 4.
15, 16, 17. This say we to you in the Word of the Lord, that we which live, and
are remaining in the Coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which sleep:
for the Lord himself shall come down from Heaven, and the dead in Christ
shall arise first, afterward, shall we which live and remain, be caught up
also with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air.

By the Analogy of which places we are to gather, that to the Reprobate also
which are then living, there shall be a miserable and wretched change of their
bodies, which shall be in stead of death.

This is further to be added, touching the Resurrection The creatures also for
our sake shall then be renewed into a glorious estate not subject to corruprion.
of the Righteous, that not only they shall so rise to glory, but for their
sakes the very Creatures themselves, and the whole frame of Gods Creation shall
be renewed into a glorious estate not subject to corruption; the power of
Christ's Resurrection renewing all the World: for as the Creature had a part in
the Curse of man, as before we showed: so the Scripture teaches, that they
shall have their part in his Renouation: And when we their Masters shall be
promoted, they that serve us, shall put on new Liueries. Paul both generally
applies it to the (...).
whole Creation, that is, to all the things created, exempting nothing, Heaven
and Earth, Beasts, Plants, Metals, and whatsoever else, and defines the time
when this shall be: for Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22.
the creature waiting, as it were, with the head stretched out, expects the
Revelation of the sons of God, that is, till the glory appointed for Gods
Children be made manifest: for the creature is made subject to vanity, not of
it own accord, but for him that has subjected it thereunto, under hope that
even the creature shall be freed from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God: for we know that the whole Creation
groneth, and trauelleth together unto this present time. By travel, noting not
only their present labor and pain, but the happy issue that shall follow as
deliverance to one with child, which the Apostle 2. Pet. 3. 13.
Peter utters more plainly, when he says, We look for new Heavens and a new
Earth according to his promise, wherein dwells Righteousness. And no marvel
though he says there, According to his promise: for the Prophets herein are
not silent: first, Esaias expressly says of them, Esaias 65. 17.
Behold, I will create new Heavens and a new Earth, and these former shall be
no more remembered nor come to mind. And in Esaias 66. 22.
the next Chapter, to show this promise not to be in vain, he confirms by
the remembrance thereof his promises to the Church: For as those new Heavens,
and that new Earth, which I shall make, shall stand before me, says JEHOVAH:
So shall your seed and your name stand. The Prophet David in his sweet and
heavenly melody triumphantly describes it, Psalm. 96. 10, 11, 12.
The Heavens shall rejoice, and the Earth shall be glad, the Sea shall make a
noise, and whatsoever fills it; the field shall triumph, and whatsoever is
therein; then shall all the Trees of the Forest sing before JEHOVAH, when he
comes: for he comes to judge the Earth, etc. wherein not only the first
coming of Christ into the World, but this time withal is respected, yea, and
this especially, in as much as the full accomplishment of that his Kingdom in
men themselves (how much more in these?) does not yet appear, but is deferred
till the latter Day; for which cause, the same is called (as by a proper name)
Acts 3. 21.
The time of the restoring of all things.

The quality of this estate, whereunto the whole Creation shall be renewed, is
three manner of ways set forth unto us: first, in calling them 2. Pet. 3. 13.
Esaias 65. 17. and 66. 22. Revel. 21. 1.
new Heavens and a new Earth, in quality, not in substance, the exceeding
glory and excellency which shall be engraven in them, being a new Creation,
yea, better and a purer then the first; for that which is said in 2. Pet. 3. 13.
PETER, The Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the Element also with
burning shall be diss^lued, and the Earth and works therein shall be burnt
up. And that of the Romans 8. 21.
Psalm, They (the Earth which thou have founded, and the work of thine hands,
the Heavens) shall perish, and all of them, as a garment, shall wax ^lde, as a
vesture thou shall change them, and they shall be changed: These, I say, and
whatsoever else of like kind, are to be referred not unto their nature and
substance, which shall remain, but to their deformity, which is to be done
away.

Secondly, It is described, in saying, that Righteousness dwells in them: and
lastly, that they shall be freed into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. Whereby is no^ meant that they shall be received into the fellowship of
that glory that abides for Gods Children, but it only signifies the
integrity, and perfection of estate, whatsoever the same be, whereunto they
shall be renewed.

With this little in so general terms delivered, we are to rest content, and
not to feed our selves with vain and curious speculations, which neither it is
profitable to know, nor lawful to enquire. Rather let us look to the
excellent use which the Apostle gathers of this Doctrine; that seeing all
these things are to be renewed and fined, what purity and cleanness, how 2.
Pet. 8. 11. (...).
great a measure of Godliness should there shine in those, for whose cause
they shall be changed? They, the pure and excellent creatures of God, are to
pass the fire, that they may be purged. What then must become of us that are
full of so great uncleanness? And withal let us not forget, if the Romans 8. 33.
dumb and senseless creatures joyfully undergo the miserable condition
whereunto sin has thrown them, for the assured hope they have of a happy
deliverance, into a better estate: if hereby the whole frame of this World, and
every part thereof takes comfort cheerfully to run their course, and
without all wearisomnesse to do the office which the Creatours pleasure
enioyneth them unto: How much more ought we to do the like, that have received
already the first fruits of the Spirit?

FINIS.
Certain faults, which because they would most trouble the Reader, I desire him
to amend with his Pen, before he read. Most of the^ grew not so much from the
Printer, as by the fault of the Copy, mistakings of the Hebrew or Greek
Letters, and of the quotations in the margent (which may easily be discerned)
as also of Secretary in stead of Roman, or contrariwise, and literal faults
I leave to the Judicious Reader.
P, stands for page, l. for the line, r. for read, p. 7. l. 34. r. would
even l. 35 put out men, p. 12. l. vlt. r. or vnworth, p. 19. l. 30. put out
and, p. 20. l. 16. r. is any l. 17. r. in all p. 23. l. 27. r. inhabited world,
p. 24. l. 3. 4. put out (the first and the last) and in stead thereof say (the
beginning and the ending) p. 25. l. 8. r. he had, p. 32. l 30. r. imitation, p.
34. l. 9. r. for theirs, p. 21. r. Mat. p. 35. l. 17. r. first he, p. 39. l 10.
r. am the. p. 45. l. 2. r. truly God. p. 54. l. 26. r. even to, p. 58. l. 25.
r. work of, p. 60. in l. 17. r. exercise toward, p. 76 l. vlt. put out (the
Angels) p. 83. l. 25. r. even in Christ, p. 91. l. 33. in stead of (whereof so
holy and good it was as) read ( whereof it is that though this action was most
holy and good, as) p. 96. l. 32. r. pace, p. 99. l. 6. r. God threatens, l.
20. r. Commandment, l. 23. put out (as) p. 104. l. 24. r. strong in loyne, p.
108. l. 22. r. mere uncertain, p. 116. l. 15. r. or in a. The 8. pages
following alter the number of them. p. 117. l. 1. r. affect, l. 8. r. most
resemble, p. 124. l. 27. r. yield absolute, p. 127. l. 16. r. marking, p. 132.
l. 16. r. are not ware of, p. 133. l. 1. r. Secondly, zeal, p. 134. l. 19. r.
that they make, 136. l. 24. r. it the perpetual, p. 148 l. 30. r. The
affirmative, p. 151. l 3. r. Fourthly, to believe, l. 21. r. Fifthly, to, p.
154. l. 27. r. gave not glory, p. 169. l. 30. r. this insolently, p. 172. l.
30 for (the) r. ( that) p. 190. l. 15. r. first using, p. 191. l. 14. r.
Secondly, giving, l. 18 r. Thirdly, by, p. 194. l. 10. r. and last of their
garment, and threw dust, p. 197 l. 19. r. Secondly, to, p. 198. l. 1^. r
Marriage I call, p. 200. l 22. r. express. p. 214 l. 9. r and judgment, p. 215.
l. 5. r. heed of, Tit. 3. 2. l. 18. r. or relating, p. 226 l. 1. put out
(honor and) p. 228. l. 19. r. are not well divided, l. 20. r. that should
contain, p. 234. l. 17. r. this business, p. 237. l. 19. r. Thus sin, p 242
l. 19. r. law, sin, p. 284. l. 18. r. And if as, p. 286. l. 1. r. wherein
looking, l. penult. r. state as it were and project, p. 293. l. 8. in stead of
(in sin) r. ( in him) p. 300. l. vlt. r. as Mediator, p. 301. l. r. this
elect, p. 308. l. 24. r. firmly fixed, p. 309. put out (Heresies and Errors)
p. 30^. l without an oath (in stead of without another) p. 313. l. 13. after (in
himself) put so he has given the Son to have life in himself, l. 31. r. this
life, p. 327. l. 16. r. kin of Christ, p. 338. l. 11 r. hope of, p. 340. l. 31.
not the, p. 353. l. 8. r. not only a corrupt and unsound church, but no
church, etc. p. 357. l. 13. r. else why, p. 362. r. l. 25. holy use, p. 366 l.
3. put out (Thirdly) p. 373. l. 28. so much greater, p. 375. l. 29. r. the
substance p. 384. l. 12. r. nor Paul will, p. 391. l. 5. r. of the whole, l.
21. r. is the p. 399. l. 33. r. And is the, l. 34. r. is of the outward, p.
410. l. 29. r. assigned, p. 411. l. 7. r. Christ, as may, p. 415. l. 9. r. I
will put, p. 421. in the margent, r. a heavenly World, by the power of his
Resurrection, p. 424. in the margent, l. 10, 11. 12. ( by the power of his
Resurrection) put it all out in this place, p. 426. l. 28. r. and continuing
his, p. 428. l. 28. after man, r. ( nor of the will of the flesh) and put that
out in the next line, p. 439. l. 14. r. bidding of the bands, p. 453. l. 33. r.
But when, 454 in l. 12. left in nature, p. 455. l. 3. r. considering as well, p.
461 l 16. put out (in soul, good manner) p. 470. l. 11. r. That thy, p. 481.
l. 2. r. at the last, 486. l. 28. r. our Savior tells us, p. 487. l. 26. in
stead of (make thee to eat) r. seed thee with, p. 489. l. 29. put out (for me)
l. 30. r. to fly, p. 490 l. 9. r. of the field, p. 497. l. 16. for (Merits) r.
Mercies.


