TWO SERMONS, THE ONE COMMENDING THE MINISTRY IN GENERAL: THE OTHER
DEFENDING THE OFFICE OF BISHOPS in particular:

Both Preached, and since enlarged by GEORGE DOWNHAM Doctor of Divinity.

1. TIM. 3. 1, 2. It is a faithful saying; If any man desire the office of a
Bishop, he coueteth a good work. A Bishop therefore must be unreprovable,
etc. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard by Matthew Lownes. 1608.

REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMINO HONORATISSIMO, DOMINO RICHARDO
PROVIDENTIA DIVINA ARCHIEPISCOPO CANTVARIENSI, TOTIVS ANGLIAE PRIMATI AC
METROPOLITANO, SERENISSIMAE QVE REGIAE MAIESTATI A SANCTIORIBVS CONSILIIS,
DOMINO SVO AC PATRONO COLENDISSIMO:
GEORGIUS DOWNHAM CONCIONEM HANC, QVA TVM MINISTERII DIGNITAS TVM MINISTRORVM
(...) TRACTATVR IN PERPETVVM OBSERVANTIAE SVMMAE TESTIMONIVM L.M.D.D.

A SERMON OF THE DIGNITY AND DVETIE OF THE MINISTRY.
1. TIM. 3. 1. 2. Faithful is this saying: If a man desire the office of a
Bishop, he coueteth a good, or goodly, work. A Bishop therefore must be
blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of decent behavior,
given to hospitality, apt to teach, etc.
THe blessed Apostle S. Paul, having left 1. Tim. 1. 3*
Timothy as his substitute at Ephesus, and invested him with Episcopal
authority, (that is to say, with so much of the Apostolical power as was
necessarily to continue in the Church, which besides the Ministry of the word
and Sacraments, common to all Ministers, consists specially in the power of
Ordination, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction:) he addresseth this and the
other Epistle unto him, thereby informing him, and Chrysostom. hom. 10. in 1.
Tim. Oecumen in 1. Tim. 5. The Epistles to Timothy and Titus, are precedents
for Bishops* and are as Tertullian says, de ecclesiastico statu compositae.
aduers. Marcion. lib. 5. in fine.
in him all Bishops, how to 1. Tim. 3. 15.
behave himself in the house of God, which is his Church. And to this end he
prescribes Ecclesiastical Canons, and Apostolical Constitutions, not only
concerning the exercise of his Episcopal jurisdiction and government of the
Church, but also touching the ordination of Ministers. For as in the fifth
Chapter he charge him 1. Tim. 5. 22.
not to lay his hands rashly upon any: so Chrysostom. hom. 10. in 1. Tim. Non
absque ratione Paulus huiusmodi monitis vtitur, quia Timoth^^ ipsi cura
incumbebal Episcopos ordinandi, sicut and Tito. Confer with this place, Tit.
1. 56
here he directs him, what manner of persons he is to ordain Ministers.
Proving from the weight and excellency of the calling, that not every one that
desires this office, is to be preferred thereunto: but such a one as Elthu
Job. 33. 23.
scarcely acknowledges to be one of a thousand, who^ the Lord has, with the
excellent indowments of learning and piety, adorned and made fit for so great
and worthy a function. For men's calling must not go before, but follow the
calling of God. For their calling is but declaratiue, as the Schoolmen speak,
whereas Gods calling is effectiue. And therefore men ought by their calling to
declare none fit for the Ministry, but such as God by his calling has made
fit. The office of a Bishop, says Paul, is an excellent function, a glorious
calling, a worthy work: therefore he that would be preferred to this office,
must be qualified accordingly: that is, for his life, he must be both in
general (...), without blame, and in particular, chaste, as being the husband
of one wife, vigilant, sober, of decent behavior, harborous, etc. and for his
gifts (...), that is, as the Apostle speaks in another 2. Tim. 2. 2. See also
Tit. 1. 9.
place (...), apt or able to teach.

So that this text is an enthymeme, as we call it, the antecedent whereof
sets forth amplitudinem Ministerij, the dignity of the Ministry, or
worthiness of the calling: the consequent, aptitudinem Ministrorum, the
worthiness of the persons who are to be Ministers, inferred thereupon.

The Antecedent Paul confirms by his own testimony. For that asseueration
(...), it is a faithful saying, has (as oaths also have) the force of a
testimony: and in this place is used (...), that is, by way of prevention. For
as the oaths, which the holy Ghost interposeth any where in the Scriptures, do
argue our infidelity; so these asseuerations do presuppose in us some
contrary and erroneous conceit. As if the Apostle had said: Although carnal
men, whose Romans 8.
wisdom is enmity against God, do basely esteem of Ministers in regard of
their calling: yet it is a most certain truth, which by the spirit of truth
I do testify unto you, that the office of Ministers is an excellent and
worthy calling, and that they are greatly honored of God, whom he calls
thereunto. Indeed it is, and always has been, the lot and condition of Gods
Ministers in this world, to be contemned, scorned and abused. The Prophets, who
were the Ambassadors of the great God, and Angels of the Lord of hosts, were ^
Chron. 36. 16
despised and derided. The Apostles, who were the twelve Patriarchs as it were
of the Israel of God, and Ambassadors sent from Christ's side, to reconcile men
unto God, were notwithstanding esteemed as the 1. Cor. 4. 13.
Skumme of the world and of scouring of all things. But what speak I of
servants? was not Christ himself our royal Priest and Prophet, the Hebr. 3. 1.
Apostle and high Priest of our profession, of his own kindred esteemed as a
Mar. 3. 21.
mad man, of his ill willers slaundered as a Ioh. 8. 48. 52.
Daemoniacke, of Herod and his gallants scorned and even set (...). Luc. 23. 11.
at naught?

Against this carnal conceit of profane men, the holy Ghost opposes his
verdict, when he says, this is a faithful saying. Whereby we are taught,
unless we had rather conform our judgments to the vain opinion of the
wicked world, than to the infallible censure of the holy Ghost, to conceive
honorably of the Ministers of God.

And this was the prosyllogisme or proof of the Antecedent, taken from the
testimony of Gods spirit speaking in the Apostle, and prefixed as a preface,
to win both attention and credit to this text.

Now follows the antecedent it self. If a man desires the office of a
Bishop, he desires a good, or excellent work. In which words, besides the
commendation of the Ministry, which is the maine intendment thereof, two
things are briefly to be discussed. The one, whether it be lawful for a man
to desire the office of a Bishop: the other, what is the office of a Bishop,
which the Apostle here does so highly commend. Of the former the Apostle makes
no question, but takes it for granted, that it is lawful for a man to desire
this function. For what (says Homil. 10. in 1. Tim.
Chrysostom) does the Apostle say? If a man desire the function of a Bishop, I
mislike it not, he desires a goodly work. For first, when men consecrate
themselves, as Numb. 6. Amos 2. 11.
Nazarits, to the study of divinity, they do it in this desire: which, if it
be a desire, as well to do the work of the Ministry, as to obtain the
honor thereto belonging, is without doubt most acceptable unto God. And
afterward, when God has blessed their studies, and fitted them for this
function; this desire and willingness to exercise their gifts, and to employ
their talents, is a part of their calling from God. For God calls men, partly
inwardly by himself, not only furnishing them with those gifts which
appertain to the sufficiency of a Minister, but also giving the^ this Rom 1.
15. 1. Pet. 5. 2.
(...), or willing readiness to employ their gifts: and partly outwardly by his
substitutes, to whom in his Church he has committed the power of calling,
ordaining and admitting Ministers. The Prophet Esaias, Esaias 6. 6. ^.
when his tongue had been touched with a coal from the Altar, and he had
heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, he offers himself
and says, Ecce me, Behold, here am I, send me. A desire therefore to glorify
God in the service of the Church, and a signification of this desire, when a
man is fitted for the calling, is not only lawful, but also commendable. The
greedy and ambitious desire of them, who either are not willing, or not able
to glorify God in the Ministry, is that which is to be condemned.

As touching the second, it will be objected; that the calling of a Bishop,
being a function of great authority and preeminence in the Church of God, is
indeed an excellent and worthy work; but what is this to other Ministers,
who are subject to the Bishops? I answer, by (...), we are in this place to
understand the office, and by (...), the person, not only of such as ever
since the Apostles times have properly been called Bishops, (howsoever this
place is principally to be understood of them, and so is expounded by diverse
Chrysostom. hom. 11. in 1. Tim. Ambr. in. 1. Tim. 3. Hieronvm. Theophyl. etc.
of the Fathers:) but of all Pastors and Ministers of the word and Sacraments
in general. Which interpretation may be confirmed by conference of this
Scripture with Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Tit. 1. where the same Canon being repeated, the Apostle uses sometimes the
word (...), and sometimes (...). From whence we may gather, either that by
Bishop here the Apostle means any presbyter, the names being as yet
confounded, as Jerome and Theodoret suppose: or at the least, that the same
things which here are spoken of the duty and dignity of Bishops, do also
appertain to Presbyters in general: which cause the other Fathers alleag^,
why Presbyters be not expressly mentioned in this place. But howsoever the
Fathers seem to be divided in the interpretation of the word Bishop, some of
them by Bishop understanding every Presbyter; others, those who properly are
called Bishops: yet all agree in this, that both of Presbyters and Bishops,
that is to say, of all Ministers in general, this text is understood. For
Theod^r. in. 1. Tim. 3. Etiamsi presbyteris has leges co^stituis diuinu^
Apostolus, clarum est quod eas op^rtet primos seruare Episcopos, vt qui maiorem
sint dignitat^^ assecuti.
Theodoret, though he say, that by Bishop every Presbyter is here meant; yet
he professes that what is here said of Presbyters, does chiefly appertain to
Bishops. And the other Fathers, though they understand this text as spoken of
them who properly are called Bishops; yet they say, that in the name of
Bishops, Presbyters are also included. Here by the way we are to note, that if
the names of Bishop and Presbyter in the writings of the Apostles be
confounded, as Jerome and Theodoret teach, and many in our times not only
affirm, but also out of Act. 20. 17. 2^ Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Phil. 1. 1. 1. Pet.
5. 1, 2.
Acts 20. Tit. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Pet. 5. confirm, in so much as every Bishop is a
Presbyter, so every Presbyter a Bishop, according to the Apostles phrase: then
it follows necessarily, that in the Apostles writings, there are no Presbyters
mentioned, but such as are Pastors and Ministers of the Word. And agreeable to
the phrase of the Apostles, has the perpetual use of this word been in the
Primitive Church: there being, as I suppose, not any one example to be alleged
out of any Council or Father, where the word Presbyter does signify any other
than a Minister or Priest. And if the like shall be objected against Bishops,
that in the Apostles times there was no difference betwixt Presbyters and them:
I answer, though the names of Bishop and Presbyter were for a short time
confounded; yet the functions were not, as I have In Apoc. 1. 20
elsewhere showed.

But to come to that, which, as I said, is the maine intendment of these words:
the commendation, which the Apostle gives to the office of a Bishop, is, that
it is (...), a worthy work. He calls it a work, that we should not imagine
it to be an idle dignity, which when we have once obtained, we might give
over our selves to ease and security; but a work full of employment and
difficulty, wherein it behooves Ministers (who are the Lords Matthew. 9. 38.
workmen) to labor, and as the Apostle speaks 1. Tim. 5. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12.
(...) that is, to labor unto wearines. But neither is it a servile work, or
a base Ministry; but (...), a goodly and excellent work.

Two things therefore do here offer themselves to our consideration, Onus and
honos Ministerij: The burden and the honor of the Ministry, both
appertaining to the greatness of this calling, and both requiring, (which is
the Apostles scope,) a correspondencie of gifts in the person of the
Ministry. For, in regard of both, we may justly use that exclamation, 2. Cor.
2. 16.
(...), and who is sufficient for these things? that is, who is able to bear
this burden, who is worthy to have this honor? For in that he calls it a
work, that appertains to the burden* in that he terms it excellent, that
belongs to the honor. And these two are inseperable companions. For, honos
and onus: honor and charge go together. Whence it is, that the same Hebrew
(...)
word signifies both honorare and onerare. For whom God aduanceth unto honor,
them he does burden with a charge, and on whom he imposes a burden, to them
he vouchsafes honor. And as they be inseperable, so also proportionable. For
such as is the weight of the burden, such is the height of the honor, and
contrariwise. These things therefore which the holy Ghost has vnseparablie
united, ought not to be separated, neither by the Ministers themselves, nor yet
by the people. Desire thou the honor of the Ministry, vt praesis, that
thou may be preferred above others? thou must also desire the work of the
Ministry, vt prosis, that thou may profit others. For he, that desires the
office of a Bishop, desires an excellent work. Art thou discouraged with the
weight of the burden? so much let the height of the honor which God has in
this life awarded, and in the life to come provided for faithful Ministers,
encourage thee. As for the people: many care not how great a burden they lay
upon the Ministers, and how little honor they afford them: as though their
charge among all callings could be the greatest, and their honor the least. In
a word, let us on all hands so acknowledge the duty and dignity of the
Ministry to be conjoined, that the Ministers be as ready to perform the
duty of the Ministry, as to challenge the honor: And the people as willing
to yield the double honor of reverence and maintenance to their Minister, as
from him to expect the performance of his duty. For what things God has
conjoined, let no man sever.

But how soever in use these things may not be disioyned; yet, that I may
distinctlie and orderly speak of them, I am for a while to sever them in my
speech* And first we are to weigh the burden of the Ministry. For that are we
to undergo, before we can justly claim the honor. 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Double honor indeed belongs to the Ministry: of which, as the people must
count their Ministers worthy, so must we labor to be worthy. For (...)
should go with (...). And who are worthy of the honor of the Ministry?
Surely they, which bear, the burden, or do the work of the Ministry. The
work of a Bishop, whereof the Apostle speaks, is, as may be gathered out of
the words, (...), to be a good Superintendent, whereunto Peter 1. Pet. 5. 2.
exhorts: 1. Epist. 5. Now what that is, the Apostle shows, Act. 20. where
he exhorts the Ministers of Ephesus, Act. 20. 28.
that they would attend unto themselves and to the whole flock, over which the
holy Ghost had made them Superintendents, to feed the Church of God which he
has purchased with his own blood. The same he repeateth, though in other
words, 1. Tim. 5. 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Ministers are to be accounted worthy of double honor. But who? (...), that
are good presidents, especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. For
to feed the flock, is the chief work of the Pastor or Bishop, as appears
in all these three places. Feed the flock, says Peter to the Ministers,
(...), performing the Office of Bishops or Superintendents, not as of
necessity, but as willingly, etc. But to speak more distinctly, the work of
a Bishop or Pastor, which, as I said, is (...), to be good Presidents, or
Superintendents, contains these branches. The first is, that they attend to
themselves* the second, to their flock. To themselves, that they may be
precedents, and as the holy Ghost speaks 1. Pet. 5. 3. Tit. 2. 7.
(...), paternes and samplers of a godly life. For this in the Apostles phrase
is Tit. 3. 8. 14.
(...), to be presidents of good works. But of this more, when I come to the
worthiness of the person: verse. 2. To the flock also they must attend,
feeding and ouerseeing the same both 1. Pet. 5. 2.
willingly and Heb. 13. 17.
carefully, as those who are to give an account. For whom in the new Testament,
the holy Ghost, calls (...), Superintendents, in the old he calls Tsophim.
speculatores, watchmen* whose office is the custody and gardianship, not of
men's bodies, but, that which is Ars est artium, regimen animarum. Gregor.
pastoral. part. 1. c. 1.
more, of their souls; for which they are to watch, as they who are to give an
account. In so much, that if any of their flock shall perish through their
default; they shall perish indeed in their sins, but their blood will the
Lord require at the Ezec. 3. 17. 33. 8.
watchmens hands. And this does the Apostle Paul insinuate in his farwell
Sermon, where in the conscience of his Ministry faithfully performed, he
professes Act. 20. 26.
that he was free from the blood of them all. By which word, says Gregory,
Homil. 11. in Ezech.
we are convicted who are called Priests, who besides those evils which we have
of our own, do ad the deaths of other men. For so many do we kill, as we
do suffer through our negligence and silence to perish. Now we are to attend
the flock, first, by watching over the same as good shepherds, accomodating
our selves to their several estates and necessities. As namely, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Ezech. 34. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
to instruct the ignorant, to reduce the erroneous, to heal the diseased, to
seek the lost, to admonish the disorderly, to comfort the distressed, to
support the weak, to be patient toward all. Secondly, by 1. Pet. 5. 2.
feeding them in the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, and lastly by 1.
Sam. 12. 23
praying for them both publicly and privately.

This burden of the Ministry, was after a sort prefigured by the burden of the
Arc, which was imposed Deuteronomy. 31. 9.
on the Priests. For in the Arc Hebr. 9. 4, 5.
was the golden pot having Manna, and Aarons fruitful rod, and the tables of
the Covenant; and upon it the propitiatory ouershadowed with the glorious
Cherubins. For by the pot of Manna, we may understand the Sacraments; by the
rod, Ecclesiastical discipline; by the budding and fruitfulness Numb. 17. 8.
of it, their fruitful conversation; by the tables, the preaching of the law;
and by bearing the propitiatory (figuring Christ,) the Ministry of
reconciliation committed unto the Ministers of God, both in respect of prayer
and also of preaching.

But the principal burden and chief work of the Ministry, for which double
honor is 1. Tim. 5. 17.
especially due to Ministers, is the preaching, that is, the expounding and
applying of the word, to the diverse uses of 2. Tim. 3. 16.
doctrine, confutation, instruction and reproof. To the 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2.
diligent performance whereof, in the 1. Cor. 2. 4.
demonstration of the spirit, in 2. Cor. 4. 2. and 2. 17.
sincerity as in the sight of God, in Matthew. 24. 45
discretion and 1. Cor. 4. 2.
faithfulness, as it becomes the wise and faithful steward of God, with
Tit. 2. 7.
gravity, Mic. 3. 8.
judgment, Ephesians. 6. 19. 20 Ierem. 1. 8. 17. Ezec. 3. 8, 9.
boldness and power, and finally with zeal of Gods John 7. 18. Mal. 2. 2.
glory and 2. Cor. 11. 2. Gal. 4. 19.
salvation of the hearer: the Minister is bound with a double bond of
necessity, the one, in regard of himself; the other, in respect of the
people. In regard of our selves, every one of us must say with the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 9. 16.
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. For
if they be subject to the curse; who withhold the corn: what is to be
expected of them, who withdraw from the people of God, the divine food of their
souls? Assuredly both are accursed: they, Prou. 11. 26.
of the people: these, of God: Ezech. 34. 2.
woe to those Pastors, qui non pascunt, sed depascunt gregem, who feed not the
flock, but feed upon it. And again, ^ac. 11. 17.
Vae Pastori nihili, VVoe to the idle shepherd that forsakes the flock: the
sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye, (whereby is meant his
power and judgment.) His arm shall be dried up, and his eye shall be utterly
darkened.

In regard of the people, the Ministry of the word is so necessary, that our
Savior says Luke 10. 42.
there is necessity of this one thing. And Solomon, Prou. 29. 18.
that where this is wanting, the people perish. But the necessity of preaching
in respect of the people, appertains to the dignity of the Ministry,
whereof I am now to speak.

And first of the office it self, and then of those titles, wherewith
Ministers are adorned in the word of God. Of the office I am to speak, first,
absolutely; then, by way of comparison. Absolutely it is affirmed in this
place, to be an excellent, or worthy work. And Heb. 5. 4.
Heb. 5. an honor: and elsewhere we are taught, that for this works sake, the
Ministers are 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. (...).
exceedingly to be loved, and reverenced, and for the dignity of their
function to be Phil. 2. 29.
had in honor. Yea that the very Esaias 52. 7. Romans 10. 15.
feet of those which preach the Gospel ought to seem beautiful unto us. And
the same may be confirmed, by consideration of the institution of the
Ministry; the eminency of the persons who have exercised this function; the
excellency of the end for which it was ordained; and lastly, the dignity of
the parts, whereof it does consist.

First, therefore Ministers were ordained to supply the office, and sustain
the person of the Son of God, who is the Word and wisdom of his father. For
from the beginning of the world until the time of Moses, the Lord for the most
part in his own person, performed the office of preaching to his people. In
which respect he is often called in the books of Moses, the Genesis 22. 11. 12
Exodus 3. 2. 4. 6. Genesis 32. 28. 30 and Hos. 12. 3. Exodus 13. 20, 21 and 1 Cor.
10. 9. Malac. 3. 1.
Angel of God, and elsewhere the Angel of the covenant. But when the Lord in
terrible manner had published his law from heaven, and the people, not being
able to endure his voice, had humbly entreated him, that he would be pleased to
speak unto them by a Prophet: upon this occasion, the Lord ordained the
public Ministry, and Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
promised a continual succession of Prophets, (into whose mouth he would put
his words,) which was to continue until Christ, in whom especially that
prophecy was verified. And again, when Christ was to ascend into heaven, he
ordained the Ministers of the Gospel, as the Ambassadors of God, in his
stead: affirming, John 20. 21.
that as his father had sent him, so he did send them. For we (says the
Apostle) 2. Cor. 5. 20.
are the Ambassadors of God in Christ's stead, even as though God did entreat
you by us, we beseech you in Christ's stead, be reconciled unto God. The
Ministers therefore were ordained to supply the room of Christ. Which the
Lord did, not that he would have the Ministry of the word less esteemed,
then if he should speak from heaven himself; but that he might by this
means teach us after a more familiar manner, and might make the better trial
of our obedience. For as John says, 1. John 4. 6.
He that knows God, hears us; and who is not of God, hears us not. Our
duty therefore is, when God does speak unto us by his Ministers, to set our
selves, with Cornelius Act. 10. 33.
and his company, in the presence of God; and to hear 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
(...), The word preached, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the
word of God: and to receive the Ministers of God, as the Galathians Gal. 4. 14.
entertained Paul, as the Ambassadors of Christ, as the Angels of God, yea, as
Christ himself. For so has he said Luke 10. 16.
to his Ministers, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises
you, despises me.

But let us also consider the excellency of those persons, who have in former
times exercised any part of this function. And here I could commend unto you
Noah, the prince of the world, and 2. Pet. 2. 5.
Preacher of righteousness: Melchisedec, who was both Hebr. 7. 1. Genesis 14. 18.
a King and a Priest: Moses the Prophet and Prince of Israel: David a King and
a Prophet: Solomon that glorious King, affecting the name of a Ecclesiast.
Preacher. I might allege that the Kings among the heathen, were also Priests.
For hence it was, that the Athenians and the Romans, after they had expelled
their tyrannizing Kings, did ordain to themselves, Reges sacrificos,
sacrificing Kings, because certain sacrifices among them, might not be offered
but by Kings. But what speak I of mere men? The son of God, before his
incarnation, as you heard before, was the Angel and messenger of God unto his
people: and after he became flesh, he professed, that Luke 4. 18. 43.
he was sent to preach. And who knows not, that he being truly and only
(...), as he is our King, so also our Prophet, and our Priest? And that, which
yet more sets forth the excellency of the Ministry; Christ, who, as he was
God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: yet as he was also man, he
would not take upon him this Heb. 5. 4, 5.
honor to be our Priest, unless he had been called thereto of God, as Aaron
was. Whereas therefore I said, that certain Princes have been Prophets: you
may well think, that this is no greater credit to the Ministry, that Kings
have prophesied; than it was commendation to the Kings themselves, that they
were Prophets. And howsoever sometimes they have been graced with that part of
the Ministry, (for even 1 Samuel 10. 11. 19 24.
Saul sometimes was among the Prophets:) yet might they not intrude upon the
other functions of the Priesthood. And therefore Saul, the King of Israel, for
thrusting himself into the office of the Priest, 1. Sam. 13. 9. 13. 14.
was himself thrust out of his kingdom. Likewise, when Huzziah the King of
Judah, 2. Chron. 26. 16. 19.
presuming (his heart being lift up with pride,) to offer incense upon the
altar, which was a function peculiar to the Priests, the sons of Aaron; the
Lord, not only caused a fearful Amos 1. 1. Zac. 14. 5. Joseph. Antiq. Iud.
lib. 9. c. 11.
earthquake, to testify his displeasure: but also presently smote him with a
Leprosy, and sequestered him from his regal function. For Hebr. 5. 4.
no man, whatsoever he be, may take upon him this honor, but he that is called
thereunto of God, as Aaron was.

I come to the end of the Ministry; which is, to save men's souls. Other
professions respect the good of this life; as the Magistracy, the maintenance
of peace and good order among the subjects; the art of the Physician, the
health of his Patient; the profession of the Lawyer, the wealth of his Client.
But the end of the Ministry alone, is the salvation of Souls. For although
Christ has performed so much as is sufficient, for the salvation of all: yet
none are actually saved, but they only, to whom the benefit of the Messiah is
communicated. Now the merits of Christ are applied ordinarily by the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments: unto which, for that cause, the power of
Salvation is ascribed. They therefore who enjoy the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, let them acknowledge themselves infinitely bound unto the Lord; who
has visited them with the favor of his people, and vouchsafed unto them the
peculiar privilege of his visible Church; in that he has not only sent his
Son to redeem them, but also given them those means, whereby the benefit of
Redemption may be applied unto them.

There remain the parts of the Ministry; which are two: the Leiturgie or
public service of God in the Congregation, and the regiment of the Church. The
Leiturgie has three parts; the Preaching of the Word, public Prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments. In the Preaching of the word, as the duty
of the Ministry, so also the dignity does principally consist: this being
the chief work Ephesians. 4. 12.
of the Ministry, for which 1. Tim. 5. 17.
double honor is especially due unto the Ministers: yea, the 1. Cor. 16. 10.
work of the Lord, in respect where of the Ministers (...), as the Romans 15. 16.
Apostle speaks, that is, performing the sacred function of preaching the
Gospel, are called, 1. Cor. 3. 9.
(...), the co-workers of God. But the worthiness of this work may easily
appear, if we consider the excellency, profit, and necessity thereof. For
what greater honor can be vouchsafed to a mortal and sinful man, then to be
the Job 33. 23.
Angel or 2. Cor. 5. 18. 20
Ambassador of God in stead of Christ; appointed and sent of God, 2. Cor. 5.
18. 20
to reconcile men unto himself, to justify them, and to save them? And hereby
also appears the exceeding profit and necessity of the Ministry of the
word. The profit, in that by the preaching of the word, men are brought to
salvation, and all the degrees thereof. The necessity, in that without it
ordinarily men cannot attain to salvation, no nor yet to any degree of
salvation. For whereas there are three degrees of salvation in this life, our
vocation, our justification, our sanctification: what one of these is not
effected by the Ministry of the word, and what one of them is effected
ordinarily without it? For whom God Romans 8. 30.
has elected, them does he call; neither shall any be saved (I speak of such
as come to years of discretion,) but such as are, or shall be called. Hence it
is, that the Church, which is the company of the elect, is called (...), a
company of men called. Now men are called by the Ministry of the 2 Thessalonians.
2. 14.
Gospel, seconded and made powerful by the Spirit of God. For first, by it,
our minds are enlightened Luke 1. 79. Act. 26. 18.
to see our own misery in our selves, and the infinite mercies of God in the
mystery of salvation by Christ. Secondly, by it, as by the Esaias 53. 1. Act.
26. 18.
arm of God, men are drawn unto him, that they may turn unto God, and
believe in Christ. Neither is there any means in the world, so effectual to
work the conversion of a sinner, or to bring him unto faith in Christ, as the
Ministry of the word: by which if a man will not be persuaded, neither will
he believe, though an Angel should come from heaven, or a Luke 16. 31.
man be raised from the dead. For indeed the Ministry of the Gospel, is the
Romans 1. 16.
power of God to our salvation. And although in the world it be contemned, as a
weak and foolish means: yet it is the good 1. Cor. 1. 21.
pleasure of God, by the foolishnes of preaching, to save those that believe.

Again, Romans 8. 30.
whom God calls, them he justifies, acquitting them from their sins, and
accepting them in Christ, as righteous, and as heirs of eternal life. But men
are justified by faith: and faith Romans 10. 17.
comes by hearing the word of God. For as the Apostle reasons, Romans 10. 14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed; and how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard; and how shall they hear without a
preacher? For this cause, Preachers are said to be 1. Cor. 3. 5.
Ministers, by whom we believe, and being Ministers of faith, whereby men are
justified, they are also said Dan. 12. 3.
to justify men.

Moreover, whom the Lord does justify by faith, them also he does sanctify
by the Spirit of regeneration. For 2. Cor. 5. 17.
whosoever is in Christ, he is a new creature. Neither can any man truly hope
to enter into John 3. 3.
the kingdom of heaven, unless he be borne again. But how should men be
borne again? by 1. Pet. 1. 23.
the immortal seed, says Peter, which is the word of the living God: by
which Preachers do beget men unto God. And in that respect are called
spiritual fathers, fathers in the faith; because, as Paul speaks to the 1.
Cor. 4. 15.
Corinthians, they beget them by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And forasmuch as
we are nourished, as the Philosopher says, by that from which we are
engendered: the word therefore, as it is the seed of our spiritual generation,
so is it the food of our souls, whereby we are to be nourished, and to grow
up in grace: affording, both 1. Pet. 2. 1.
milk for the newborn, and Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.
strong meat for those who are better grown in Christ. And therefore, as the
Ministers be fathers to beget men; so are they also Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors, to feed them. And whereas sanctification consists of two parts, a
dying unto sin, and a living unto righteousness: the Ministry of the word,
is as salt to mortify our corruptions. In which respect the Ministers are
called the Matthew. 5. 13.
salt of the earth. And in respect of righteousness habitual, it is the Romans
10. 8.
word of faith, the 2 Cor. 3. 8.
Ministry of the Spirit, the Act. 20. 32.
word of grace, by John 7. 17.
which we are sanctified. And as for actual righteousness, it is the Coloss.
1. 6.
fruit of the word preached, which being sown in the furrows of good and
honest hearts, Luke 8. 15.
brings forth fruit with patience.

If therefore our vocation, justification and sanctification, which are all the
degrees of salvation going between election and glorification, be all of them
wrought by the Ministry of the word: we must acknowledge it, worthily to be
called the power of God to our salvation, and not without good cause the power
of saving men's souls to be ascribed unto it, and to the preachers of it, as
to the means and instruments under God. Receive with meeknes, says S. James,
Iam. 1. 21.
(...), the word engrafted, (to wit, by the Preachers who are Gods 1. Cor. 3.
6, 7, 8
planters: 1. Cor. 3.) Which (says he) is able to save your souls. Attend to
thy self (says Paul to 1. Tim. 4. 16.
Timothy) and to doctrine, continue therein; for this doing, thou shall save
both thy self, and them that hear thee. But to conclude this point with the
oracle of our Savior Christ, sounding in the ears of S. Paul at his
conversion, from heaven: at which time he appearing unto Paul, to make him as
he there says, Acts 26. 16.
a Minister of the Gospel, sets down the end of the Ministry in these
words, which contain the sum of all that has been said concerning the
preaching of the word. To open (says Act. 26. 18.
he) their eyes, that they may be turned from darkness unto light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, (there is vocation) that by faith in Christ, (for
so I construe the words, there being a comma in the Greek text after (...))
they may receive forgiveness of sins, (that is justification) and inheritance
among them that are sanctified: there is sanctification, and glorification; and
all to be procured by the Ministry of the word.

Here therefore by the way diverse sorts of men are to be admonished. First,
the Ministers: that as they desire the salvation of their people, whom Christ
has redeemed with his most precious blood, they would not only be diligent
in preaching, but also be careful so to preach, as that their conscience may
bear them witness, that in their Ministry they truly seek to glorify
God, in the salvation of the people. Secondly, the people; that as they tender
the eternal salvation of their souls, so they should be affected to the
Ministry of the word. For the Matthew. 13. 44, 45.
kingdom of heaven (so is the preaching of the Gospel called, because it is
the principal means to bring us to Gods Kingdom) is like a treasure, or a
precious pearl, which a man having found, he will sell all that he has to
procure it. Thirdly, they that do hinder the preaching of the word: for seeing
the word preached is of such necessity to salvation, they which are an
hinderance to the preaching of the word, do also hinder the salvation of their
brethren, which every Christian is bound by all good means to advance. Of this
kind are they, who being not of the Ministry do get into their hands the
livings and possessions of the Church. For where is want of living, there will
be want of Preachers: where Preachers or Prophets are wanting, there prophecy,
or preaching fails: and where Prou 29. 18.
prophecy fails, there the people perish. The people indeed shall perish in
their sins: but their blood shall be required at thy hands, who have been the
cause of their spiritual famishment.

Such also are those greedy Patrons, or rather latrons of Church livings, who
with Gehezi, sell such things as none but Simons will buy: who with the thief,
and traitor Judas betray for quid mihi dabitis, the body of Christ, which is
his Church, into the hand of blind and Pharisaicall guides: who with 1. King.
12. 3^. 1. King. 13. 33.
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, prefer to the Ministry, the skirts, or, as the
Prophet calls such, the Esaias 9. 15.
tail of the people. But these men as they imitate the practice of Gehezi,
Judas and Jeroboam: so let them fear their end.

And lastly, such are those Ministers, who having either no will, or no skill
to feed the people of God with the food of life; do notwithstanding for the
milk and fleece of the flock take upon them the charge of souls. But let
these and the former consider, that whereas they ought to be resolved, not to
hazard, or lose their own souls, though they might Mark. 8. 36.
gain the whole world: they to gain, not the whole world, but the tithes of
some one parish (which are as nothing in comparision of the world) do hazard
not their own souls alone, but the souls of the people, whom they deprive of
the principal ordinary means of their salvation.

But to return to my purpose: have you by your own experience found the
Ministers to have been the means under God of your vocation, justification,
sanctification, which are the necessary forerunners of salvation? then, I dare
say, you will confess that to be true, which Paul writing to Philemon,
forbeareth to speak: that you owe even your own Phil. 17.
selves unto them: and that you ought to be affected to them, as the Galathians
were to S. Paul, who gives this testimony of them, that they were ready (if
it had been possible) to Gal. 4. 15.
pull out their own eyes to do him good. But if you be more ready to pull out
their eyes, then to do them any good; it is a manifest argument, that as yet
you are not sanctified, not justified, not called; and therefore not to be
saved, unless these graces shall hereafter be wrought in you by the Ministry
of the word. Which benefits if you do but look for at the Ministers hands,
you cannot but honor and reverence them in the mean time. But if you neither
have these graces, nor hope for any, we must count our selves blessed, when
for our calling and the discharge of our duty, we are of such persons hated
and reviled.

Thus much I thought good to speak of preaching the word. Now are we briefly
to entreat of invocation, and so of the rest. For as in the preaching of the
word, the Minister is the Lords Ambassador to his people: so in public
prayer he is an orator, and as it were an intercessour for the people unto God.
In which respect, Chrysostom De Sacerdot. lib. 6. cap. 4.
says, that the Minister performs an embassage unto God, not only for his
own people, but also for the whole world, as if he were an universal father
having care of all. And Nazianzene Apolog.
acknowledges it to be no small honor, to be preferred before others in
neerenesse unto God, and to receive (...): a presidentship of souls, and a
mediation between God and men: By which they stand, as Moses Psalm. 106. 23.
once did, in the breach: and for which, as the Prophets were wont, so may
godly Ministers now, be worthily called the 2. King. 2. 12. and cap. 13. 14.
horsemen and chariots of Israel.

I come to the Sacraments: whereof the Ministers also are dispensers. For as in
respect of the word, which is as it were Gods treasury, the Ministers are his
treasurers: so in respect of the Sacraments, which are the seals of God, the
Romans 4. 1^.
seals of that righteousness which is by faith, they are the keepers of the
Lords seals, whereby the people of God are assured, not of an earthly
patrimony, but of an eternal kingdom in heaven. If therefore it be a great
honor (as it is indeed) to be the Lord keeper of the Kings seal, which
notwithstanding has use but in temporal affairs: what shall we think of
their function, who are the keepers of the heavenly Kings seals: which also
serve for the confirmation of spiritual blessings in heavenly things?

Having spoken of the leiturgie, we are now to entreat of the regiment of the
Church. For to the Ministers the Church, which is the spouse of Christ, is
committed: that having espoused her against the marriage day, which is the day
of judgment, they may present her 2. Cor. 11. 2.
unto Christ the bridegroom, as a pure virgin and undefiled. In which sense
Apolog.
Nazianzene calls the Minister, (...), and De Sacerdot. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Chrysostom thus describes him, (...), He whose office it is to adorn the
spouse of Christ. And forasmuch as the Church in the Scriptures is also called
the house of God: therefore the Ministers, who are set over the Church, are
called Tit. 1. 7. Luke 12. 42.
(...), that is, stewards of God set over his household. And whereas the
authority of a steward is signified by the Esaias 22. 22.
keys committed unto him: our Savior Christ therefore, to his stewards has
committed keys, Matthew. 16. 19
The keys of the kingdom of heaven, that both by preaching the Gospel, and
by Ecclesiastical discipline, they might open to some the gates of heaven, and
shut them to others: that to them which believe and repent, they might
pronounce the sentence of absolution, and might denounce damnation against the
unfaithful and impenitent: that they might loose the one, and bind the other.
Which their authority he has ratified with most gracious promises, assuring
them on his word, which is infallible, that John 20. 23.
whose sins they remit, they shall be remitted, and whose sins they
retain, they shall be retained. And again, Matthew. 18. 18
What soever they bind on earth, it shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever
they loose on earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. Wherefore, as by the work
of their Ministry, men being thereby converted, the will of God is done, as in
heaven, so also upon earth, according to our daily Matthew. 6. 10.
prayer: so by the authority committed unto them, it is done, as in the earth,
so also in heaven. Then which, what authority is more glorious upon the earth?
the Magistrates indeed, having the keys of an earthly kingdom, have also
power to loose and to bind the bodies of their subjects, and to commit the same
to a Iaylour or executioner. But the Ministers, having the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, have power to bind and loose the souls of men, and to
deliver the obstinate to Satan: and what they do upon earth, is ratified in
heaven. And this is that, which Ad Heliodorum de vit^^ ^remitica.
Jerome says, the Ministers having the keys of the kingdom of heaven, do
judge after a sort before the day of judgment.

Hitherto the dignity of the Ministry has been absolutely declared, and
without comparison. But if into the balance of comparison we shall put the
Ministers and other men, I had almost in some respects added the Angels, we
shall find that to be true, which De dignitate sacerd. cap. 2. Honor and
sublimitas Episcopalis null^s potest comparationibus ad^quari.
Ambrose has auerred: that the dignity of Bishops can scarsely be matched
with any comparisons. We will therefore compare Ministers with other men:
first, as they are men; secondly, as they are Christians: thirdly, as they are
honorable.

Men by nature, are the children Ephesians. 2. 3.
of wrath, and enemies of God; the Ministers are 2. Cor. 5, 18. 20
Ambassadors sent from God to reconcile them unto him. Men naturally sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, knowing no more of God then serves to
leave them without excuse: the Ministers are the Matthew. 5. 14.
light of the world, who are sent of God to Luke 1. 79.
enlighten them, to open Act. 26. 18.
their eyes, to bring them out of darkness into light, and to guide their
feet into the way of peace. Men narurally are such, as Ezech. 16. 14
Ezechiel describes, wallowing in their own pollutions, not washed with
water, nor seasoned with salt: The Ministers are the Matthew. 5. 13.
salt of the earth, ordained of God to season men, and to John* 17. 17.
sanctify them with the word of truth, and to wash them with the lauour of
regeneration. Men naturally are Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead in sin, neither can they live unto God, unless they be borne again:
Ministers are spiritual fathers, who by preaching the Gospel 1. Cor. 4. 15.
beget men unto God. Men naturally are without faith, void of the spirit,
destitute of grace: Preachers are 1. Cor. 3. 5.
Ministers by whom they believe: Ministers of the 2. Cor. 3. 6. 9.
Spirit, Ministers of grace. Men naturalli^ being the bondslaues of sin, and
captives of Satan, are by him as the Luke 8. 33.
Gergesins swine carried headlong into mare mortuum, the dead sea of perdition:
the Ministers are by Obadiah Obad. 21.
called sauiors, and by Christ himself, Luke 5. 10.
the fishers of men, (...), catching with the Matthew. 13. 47
net of the word 2. Tim. 2. 26.
(...), those, who were caught of the devil; bringing them out of the Act. 16.
18.
power of Satan into Gods kingdom; out of the slavery of sin, into the
glorious liberty of Gods children; out of the state of damnation, as it were
the universal deluge, into the state of grace and salvation, as it were into
the Arc of Noah. You see then how the comparison stands between Ministers and
other men.

Let us therefore compare them with others, as they be Christians, and such as
shall be saved by Christ. Other Christians are but the sheep Ioh. 10.
of Christ: Ministers are also Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors or shepherds, to whom Christ the chief Pastor has committed his
sheep to be guided and Ioh. 21. 15. 16 17.
fed. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Act. 20. 28.
Other Christians are but the Cant. 4. 12.
plants in the Lords garden: Ministers are also the Lords gardiners, appointed
of God to 1. Cor. 3. 6. 7 8.
plant, and to water them. Other Christians are but living 1 Pet. 2 5.
stones in the Temple of God, which is his Church: Ministers are also Gods 1.
Cor. 3 9.
builders, ordained of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12.
(...), for the edifying o^ his body, which is his Church. Others finally are
but the family, and as it were the house hold servants of Christ: the
Ministers are the stewards, Titus 1. 7. Matthew. 24. 45. Luke 12. 42.
whom the Lord has set over his family, to give to every one, which be of the
household of faith, their (...), portion of food in due season.

Out of these two comparisons it does evidently appear, that no man,
whatsoever he be, whether a true Christian, or but a natural man, has just
cause to despise the ministers of God. For in that the true Chistian has
attained to grace, he has obtained it by the help of the Ministry, whereby
he was reconciled unto God, enlightened with the truth, begotten unto God, etc.
And the natural man, who wants grace, is also to receive it ordinarily by
the help of the Minister, if ever he have it. And therefore those, who vilify
and contemn the Ministers of God in respect of their calling, do manifestly
bewraie themselves to be vile and contemptible persons, who neither have any
grace, nor yet desire any.

But now let us compare the Ministers with other men, as they are honorable;
and first, with all jointly, and together* For if we will make a comparison of
all honors in general; we must also take a view both of their burden in this
life, and reward in the life to come. For the first, I have showed before, not
only that honos and onus do always go together; but also that according to
the weight of the burden, such is the height of the honor. Now every man is
ready to lay load upon the Ministers, and amongst all callings to attribute
the greatest burden and charge unto them: by which reason, they must be feign
to ascribe unto them the greatest honor. For they are Pastors, not of men's
bodies, as Magistrates are, but of their souls; and they bear all men's
burdens, as Chrysostom says, and they watch for other men's souls; insomuch
that if any perish through their negligence, the blood of those which do
perish, shall be Ezech. 33. 8.
required at their hands. How weighty this burden is, it will easily appear
if we shall consider how heavy every private man's own Gal. 6. 5.
burden will be to bear in the day of the Lord. For the Ministers own burden
may seem to be heavier then others. First, because the Lord requires greater
matters in them, then in others. Secondly, because the same sins, which in
other men are less offenses, in them are esteemed greater faults. Simple
fornication, which in others was after a sort salued by marriage, in the Leuit.
21. ^.
Priests daughter, was punished with death. Thirdly, because the Priest Leuit.
4. 3. 13.
was to offer as great a sacrifice for his own sins, as for the sins of the
whole people. But the Minister must not only bear his own burden, but as
upon Aaron Exodus 28 29.
the names of the twelve Tribes were imposed; so the Ministers are to bear the
charge of their flock; and of that flock, which Christ has redeemed Act. 20.
28.
with his blood, and therefore was more dear and precious to him, then his
own most precious blood. But what use are we to make of this? shall we
therefore depresse the Ministers by contempt, whom we oppress with our
burdens? nay rather as we press them down with our burden, so let us exalt
them with honor. It is the exhortation of the holy Ghost: Heb. 13. Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves unto them,
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they
may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

But as the Ministers charge is greater then others in this life; so having
discharged his duty, he shall have a greater weight of glory in the life to
come. For that wise and faithful steward mentioned, Matthew. 24, Man. 24 45.
shall not only receive blessedness for his reward, or that incorruptible
crown of glory, which the holy Ghost has promised unto them: but also
having saved 1. Tim. 4. 16.
both himself, and those that hear him, of whom he may say in the day of
judgment, Behold, here I am and the children which the Lord has given me (for
whom the Minister begets through his Gospel unto God, they shall be, as 2.
Cor. 1. 14.
Paul says, his rejoicing in the day of the Lord) he shall be preferred above
others in happiness. For good Ministers, as they have been Apocal. 1. 20
stars in the Church militant to enlighten others with the truth: so in the
Church triumphant they shall shine Dan. ^2. 3.
as stars in the firmament for ever and ever. And this is that, which in the
place before cited, the Lord promises to the wise and faithful steward: that
he will make him Mat. 24. 47.
ruler over all his goods. Upon which words, an ancient and learned Author
imperfect. operis apud Chrysostin Matthew. 24.
expositour writes to this effect; The greatest amongst all is the Priestly
dignity, if a man keep it without blemish. For if the Lord above all his
works, esteem the souls of men most precious, (for them he has redeemed
with his own blood) it is not to be meruailed, if he set him over all, who
brings unto him the gain of souls.

Now are we to compare the Ministers with those peculiar sorts of men, to whom
the Lord has vouchsafed honor. And these are either private in the family,
or public out of the family in the Church, and commonwealth. Those that are
to be honored in the family, are our parents: to whom great honor is due by
Gods commandment, but not so great as to the Ministers. For, from thy parents
as the instruments of God, thou have thy generation: from the Ministers, as the
instruments of the holy Ghost, thy regeneration: by thy parents thou art a man,
by the Ministers a Christian thy parents by mortal seed begat thee unto this
world, the Minister, by immortal seed begets thee unto the world to come:
by thy parents is sin and corruption derived to thee from the first Adam; by
the Ministers, justification and freedom from sin is communicated unto thee
from the second Adam. Finally, thy natural parents are fathers in the flesh;
but the Ministers are fathers in the Spirit. Both then, as you see, are
parents: but the spiritual fathers are, as Chrysostom says, De sacerdot.
lib. 3. cap. 5.
(...), more honorable then fathers. And so great is the difference, Cap. 6.
(...).
says he, of them both, as of the life present, and the life to come; for
these beget thee into this life, they into the other. Wherefore, leaving our
natural parents, we will compare them with another sort of spiritual fathers,
which is now ceased: I mean the Leuiticall Priests; and chiefelie, the high
Priest, whose dignity appeared, both in his office, and in his attire. For his
office, he was, as it were, a mediator betwixt God and man; and therein,
because he represented the Messiah, he was superior, not only to other men,
but to the Angels themselves. And his attire, which the Lord Exodus 18. and 39.
appointed unto him, was answerable thereunto, signifying a ^^rson, excelling
the condition of other men. Insomuch that as histories Joseph. Antiquit. Iud.
lib. 11. cap. 8.
do record, Alexander the great, coming with his army against Jerusalem,
when the high Priest did meet him araied with his sacred and magnificent
attire; he dismounted himself, and in the high Priest worshipped God: who, as
he said, had in a dream appeared unto him in that habit. But what is this to
our Ministry? As an argument of comparison from the less to the greater.
For, if the ministry of the law was so excellent: what shall we think of the
Ministry of the Gospel, which, as the Apostle shows, 2. Cor. 3. 7. 8. 9.
2. Cor. 3. is much more excellent and glorious then it? The same does our
Savior seem to testify, when having extolled John Baptist above all the
Priests and Prophets that went before him, as being more then a Prophet, then
whom a greater had not risen amongst the sons of women; notwithstanding he
prefers every faithful Minister Mat. 11. 11.
in the kingdom of God, that is to say, in the Church of Christ, before him.

Now we are to enter into comparison with the civil Magistrate. Wherein the
fathers Ambros. Chrysostom. Nazianz.
indeed have included also the sovereign Magistrate, affirming that the
Ministers excel Princes, as far as gold is better then lead, as heaven
surpasses the earth, as the soul excels the body: and such like speeches
are frequent among them, which the Papists abuse to the maintenance of the
Popes supremacy over Princes: For, whereas the Fathers speak of the dignity
and spiritual excellency of the Ministry above all other callings; the
Papists understand their speeches of power and external authority. And
again, whereas their commendations are given of the calling in general,
either of all Ministers, or at least of all Bishops, whom the Fathers
notwithstanding, acknowledged to be subject to their Princes: the Papists
apply them as peculiar to their Lord God Extra. Joan. 22. tit. 14 De verborum
sig. ^. cum inter. in glossa.
the Pope, whom they style the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. But
howsoever the comparison of Bishops with Princes, used by the fathers, may
seem capable of good construction, in respect of spiritual excellency, and
dignity celestial: yet me thinks it should beseem the modesty of a loyal
subject, in reverence due to that supereminent function, to exempt the royal
Majesty of Sovereign Princes from this comparison, not only in respect of
external power and authority, (in regard whereof, we do freely profess that
Ministers are and ought to be subject to their Sovereign, and that to the King
is committed of God a sovereign or supreme authority in all causes and over
all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil:) but also in respect of
external excellency and glory. For as the whole Church, the spouse of
Christ; so the Ministers, especially, are glorious within: Psalm 45. Psalm.
45. 13
And as Christ his kingdom was not of this world: so is not their excellency
worldly, nor their dignity carnal. For the Ministry, as Chrysostom says,
(...). De. sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Is indeed executed upon the earth, but it is to be numbered in the order of
heavenly things, to other Magistrates, we say with Nazianzene, Orat. ad
Nazianz. ciues (...).
(...), we also are rulers: yea I will add (says he) that we have a greater
and more perfect rule; unless you will say, that the spirit must give place to
the flesh, or heavenly things to earthly. The judgment seat of the Magistrate
is placed on the earth, and he only determines earthly affairs: but the
throne of the Minister, who exercises heavenly judgments, is, as Tom. 1. de
verbis Esaiae. homil. 5.
Chrysostom says, in heaven; and his sentence pronounced on earth, is
executed in heaven. The Magistrate, as Peter 1. Pet. 2. 13.
says, is, (...), an ordinance humane, or appertaining to men: but the
Ministry is (...), an ordinance divine, or apperteining to God. Or as
Iehosaphat 2. Chron. 19. 11.
distinguishes them; the one for the Kings affairs, the other for the business
of the Lord. Both in deed are Gods Ministers, but the Minister, as In Nu^er.
Procopius says, augustius est sortitus Ministerium, has obtained a more
worthy Ministry. For the Magistrate is conversant in external matters, that
concern the world: but the Minister is employed in spiritual things
appertaining to God: the one is the Minister of Gods external judgment: the
other of his word, and judgments spiritual. Both also may be called the
Pastors of the people: but the Magistrates are Pastors of their bodies, the
Ministers of their souls. The one, may say with the Roman Magistrate, Ilictor
liga manus, deliga ad palum, or as ours do use to write, capias corpus, take
his body, or habeas corpus, having authority only to bind the body: the other
may say with Paul, 1. Cor. 5. 5.
Tradatur Satanae, let him be delivered to Satan, or let him be 1. Cor. 16. 22.
Anathema maranatha, that is, accursed until the coming of the Lord, as
having authority to bind the soul: the one procures the temporal good of
the body, the other the eternal salvation of the soul. The armor, warfare
and munitions of the one, are corporal: of the other, 2. Cor. 10. 4.
spiritual, (...).
mighty through God, to the overthrowing of strong holds. The one preserves
us from external foes, who are but flesh and blood: the other warreth not with
flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, delivering men from most
dangerous enemies, both within them, that is, their own sins and
corruptions, and without them, that is, the world, and the Prince of this
world, the devil. And therefore in this respect also, as the Prophets were
wont; so may the Ministers now, be called the horsemen and chariots of Israel.
Wherefore, if heaven and heavenly things surpass the earth, and earthly
affairs; if the soul, and the eternal salvation both of body and soul, are
to be preferred before the body, and temporal good thereof; if the enemies of
the soul be more dangerous, then the foes of the body: then can we not deny,
but that the Ministry in dignity does excel the Magistracy. It is the
conclusion of Chrysostom: The Ministry, De sacerd. lib. 3 cap. 1. (...).
says he, so far surpasses the Magistracy, as the spirit excels the
flesh. And not to stand any longer in particular comparison with the several
sorts of men, this may be avouched in general, that as the Ministry is of
all good things among men the most excellent, as Ad Smyrn. (...).
Ignatius says: so the Minister is vouchsafed the greatest favor among men;
so that he may not unworthily be called by a special prerogative, as Moses in
his speech to God, calls the Priest, Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
^sh chasideca, virum quem benignitate prosequeris, as if the Minister were
among men the chief object of Gods bounty and favor, and as you would say,
the fauorit of God. But I pray you what means that speech of God to Moses,
Exodus 30. 30. 32.
Exodus 30. where having commanded him verse. 30. to anoint the Priests with the
sacred oil: in the two and thirtieth verse, he forbids to anoint man's
flesh with it? How shall we untie this knot, says Procop. in Exodus 30.
Procopius, writing upon that place, Priests must be anointed with the holy
oil, but men may not? Surely, says he, you must remember that the Priesthood
or Ministry surpasses the height of all humane excellency. For Ministers
though they be men: yet are they not as others, men of the world, but, as the
Scripture usually calls them, men of God. To conclude, if the charge of the
Ministry be, as Chrysostom speaks, Onus angeloru^ humeris formidandum, a
burden which the shoulders of Angels may shrincke at; and yet God enableth
those men, whom he calls, to bear this burden, whereunto none in themselves
are able; it cannot be denied, but those whom the Lord calls to the
Ministry, he aduanceth above the condition of other men; calling them, as to a
charge, so also to an honor, which might seem to become Angels, rather then
men.

Wherefore ceasing to compare Ministers with other men: let us consider, whether
they may not be compared with the blessed Angels. For as in some things they
are like unto them; so in other things, they seem to have some preeminence
above them. Like in this, that as the Angels, so also the Ministers, are Hebr.
1. 14.
sent forth into the Ministry for their sake, which shall be heirs of
salvation. In which regard the Ministers are often called in the Scriptures
Angels; and the Angels Apoc. 19. 10. and 22. 9.
(...), the fellow servants of the Ministers. Superior they seem to be in
respect of their Embassage, and of their spiritual authority. The Embassage
of the Ministers is not simply (...) a message; but (...) the Euangell, into
which the Angels themselves do desire, as Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 1. 12. John
20. 5.
(...), that is, stooping down, as it were, to look, and to behold. The law
indeed was published by the Ministry Act. 7. 53. Gala^h 3. 19.
of Angels; but the Gospel, by Christ and his Ministers. Now the Ministry of
the Gospel is far more 2. Cor. 3.
excellent, then that of the law, and the contempt there of more Hebr. 2. 2. 3.
grievous. Neither has the Lord, as appears by the story of Act. 10. 6.
Cornelius, committed the preaching of the Gospel to Angels; but to his
Ministers, whom we are bound to hear and to receive, not only as Gal. 4. 14.
Angels of God, but even as Christ Jesus.

And as touching their authority: to the Ministers, says Chrysostom, De
Sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 5. (...).
being conversant on earth is committed the administration of things in heaven;
and they have received such an authority as God never communicated to the
angels. For to which of the Angels has God said at any time, which he has
said to his Ministers: Mat. 18. 18.
Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, it shall be
bound in heaven: and whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven. And again. John 20. 23.
Whose sins you forgive, they shall be forgiven; and whose sins you
retain, they shall be retained. On which words, Theophylacts annotation is
something hyperbolicall; but in a qualified sense, true: Theoph. in I^an. 20.
(...).
Mark me, says he, the dignity of priests, that it is divine; for it
belongs to God to forgive sins: wherefore you must honor them as God. As
if in plainer terms he had said; the authority of forgiving sins is divine;
which being communicated after a sort to Ministers, in that they pronouncing
the forgiveness of sin according to their commission the sins indeed are
forgiven, their authority also may be said to be divine. Wherefore they
bearing the image of Gods authority before men in forgiving or retaining
sins, you are to honor and obey them as God, whose vicegerents they be. The
like has Ad Trall. (...).
Ignatius; Be subject, says he, unto your Bishop, as unto the Lord. And
again, reverence your Bishop as Christ. Neither is this any more, then is
commended unto us in the example of the Galathians, Gal* 4. 14.
who received the Apostle as an Angel of God, yea as Jesus Christ.

Hitherto I have commended the office of the Ministry, both absolutely, and
by way of comparison. Now am I to propound the honorable titles, which are
given to the Ministers of the word. Whereof great store might be produced out
of the Fathers, but I will content my self with a few. Chrysostom therefore
calls Ministers the In Matthew 7. ^omil. 17. oper. imperfect.
Vicars, or vicegerents of Christ; in which title, though common to all
Ministers in a right sense, the vicar of Rome, (though lifting up himself
above all that is called God) does chiefly glory. Origin calls them the In
Matthew. tract. 5.
eyes of the Church: Ambrose, the captains and governors of Christ's flock:
Augustine, De doctr. Christian. lib. 4. cap 4.
the defenders of the true faith, and subduers of errors: Nazianzene, likewise
I^ Ap^loget.
(...), the presidents of truth, Init. carm. ad epise.
(...), the glorious gardians of men's souls, the foundations of the world, the
light of the life, and pillars of the Christian faith. Bernard and others,
praelatos, as being preferred before other men.

But omitting the writings of the fathers, let us search the Scriptures; and
inquire, what titles, or attributes of honor are by the holy Ghost assigned
to Ministers. And first we will begin with this very title of Gods Ministers,
being a title common to them not only with Romans 13. 4.
Princes, but also with Christ, who is called the Romans 15. 8.
Minister of circumcision, that is, of the Jews.

2 They are called (...), Hebr. 13 17.
rulers.

3 By a special prerogative, they are termed not only in the old Testament,
but also in the new, 1. Tim. 6. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 17.
men of God.

4 (...), 1. Cor. 3. 9.
coworkers of God, who has so honored his Ministers, that he communicates
his own work unto them. Hence it is, that in the Scriptures they are said to
remit sins, to beget men unto God, and to save them, etc.

5 (...), the Titus 1. 7.
stewards of God, to whom are committed the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

6 The Aggei. 1. 13.
Ambassadors of God; and that, in the 2. Cor. 5. 20.
stead of Christ.

7 The Apoc. 1. 2. 3. Judge 2. 1. Malach. 2. 7.
Angels of the Lord, and Angels of the Churches, and therefore as Job 33. 23.
Galath. 4. 14.
Angels to be received.

8 The 2. King 2. 12. etc. 13. v. 14.
chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, that is, the strength and stay of
the Church, which is the Israel of God.

9 Stars, Apocal. 1. 20.
because as in this life they shine before others, with the light of doctrine
and good example; so in the life to come they shall Dan. 12. 3.
shine as the stars in glory.

These are honorable titles, but you shall hear more glorious. For the holy
Ghost not content to have honored the Ministers with these, ascribes also unto
them such titles and effects, as most properly belong unto God. For albeit we
have but Mat. 23. 8 9.
one Father, and one Teacher, who is in the heavens: notwithstanding the
Ministers are called in the Scriptures, not only Doctors, but also Fathers; and
such Fathers, as are (...). De Sacerd. l. 3. cap. 5.
more to be feared then Princes, more to be honored then fathers, as
Chrysostom speaks* For whom they beget, they beget them sons of God, heirs
of heaven, and coheires with Christ. And although this very work of
regenerating or begetting men to God, be the proper work of the holy Ghost:
yet the Ministers also are said by the 1. Cor. 4. 15.
Gospel to beget men unto God, likewise to Malac 4. 5. Luk 1. 16.
convert men unto God, to Act. 26. 18.
open their eyes, to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, to Dan. 12. 3. John 20. 23.
justify men, and to remit their sins, to Matthew 5. 13.
season them as salt, that they do not putrify in their corruptions, are the
proper works of the blessed Trinity: and yet notwithstanding all and every of
them are ascribed to the Ministers of God. Moreover, it is proper unto Christ
to be the 1. Pet. 2. 25.
Pastor of our souls, the John 1. 9.
light of the world, the Matthew. 1. 21.
Savior of his brethren: and yet the Ministers also are called Ephis 4. 11.
Heb. 13. 17.
Pastors, not of men's bodies, but of their souls, the Matthew. 5 14.
light of the world, Obad. 21.
saviors of their brethren, to whom, as the instruments of God, power of 1.
Tim. 4. 16. Romans 11. 14.
saving is ascribed. Wherefore to conclude; if the Ministers were ordained to
supply the room of Christ, and to be the Ambassadors of God in his stead: if
Kings and Princes, yea if the King of Princes have executed this function: if
the proper end of their Ministry be the salvation of souls: if in regard of
preaching, they be the mouth of God to his people, in regard of prayer, the
mouth of the people unto God: in respect of the Sacraments, the keepers of Gods
seals; as touching the government of the Church, the guardians of Christ's
body, to whom are committed the keys of the kingdom of heaven: if compared
to other men, they, be the children of wrath, as all by nature are; these,
reconcilers to God: they, sitting in darkness; these, the light of the world:
they, putrefying in their corruption; these, the salt of the earth: they, dead
in sin; these, begetting them anew, that they may live to God: they
bondslaues of Satan; these, sent to bring the^ out of the power of Satan unto
God: if to other Christians, they, be sheep these, Pastors: they, plants;
these, pla^ters: they stones; these, builders: they, household servants; these,
stewards of Gods house: if to other honorable personages in general, the
Ministers do so much excel others in honor, as their charge is greater in
this life, and their reward more glorious in the world to come; if in special,
the Spiritual fathers be in honor to be preferred before the carnal, as far
as the life to come before this present life; if the Priests of the law, in
whom notwithstanding appeared a mirror of Gods glory, are far surpassed by
the Ministers of the Gospel, who have received a more glorious Ministry: if
the spiritual pastors have a more excellent function, then the civil, by how
much the heaven is more excellent then the earth, (...). De Sacerd. l. 3. cap.
5.
or the souls more precious then the body, as Chrysostom says: if the Lord
having advanced them above the condition of other men, has made them in some
things equal, in some things superior to the glorious Angels of God: and
lastly, if the holy Ghost has assigned unto them titles of honor, not
only common to them with the best of the creatures, but also peculiar to the
Creator, all which has with unanswerable evidence of truth been demonstrated
unto us: then can we not deny, but that the Ministry, is not only a worthy
work, as the Apostle here speaks, but a most excellent and glorious function.

The full demonstration whereof, I thought to be very needful, as well for
their sakes, who be not of the Ministry, as for those that be. For first,
those of the Laity, by this doctrine may be thoroughly persuaded, to esteem
their Ministers worthy of that double honor of reverence and maintenance,
which by the word of God is due unto them: and to free themselves from the two,
no more usual then capital sins of our time, Contempt of the word and
Sacrilege.

For as touching reverence; there is no true Christian, but he will readily
acknowledge, that he ought highly to reverence those, whom God would have in
special manner honored, as the Ambassadors of God in the stead of Christ,
sent to reconcile men unto God, and to save them. Neither will he easily
despise those, whom he acknowledges to be the blessed instruments of God, for
his singular and everlasting 1. Cor. 47. (...).
discerned them: so he seems to know no better good things then worldly
goods, and therefore thinks himself so much better then the Minister, as he
is richer. But those who are religious and wise, are otherwise minded. Obadiah,
though the governor of the Kings house, disdained not to do reverence 1.
King. 18. 7. 9.
to the poor Prophet Eliah. and Ioash the King, when Elisha was sick, was
content to do him this honor, as not only to visit him, but also to weep
upon his face and say: 2. King. 13. 14
My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and horsemen of the same. Yea, the
Emperor Justinian Maxima quidem in omnibus sunt dona Dei a superna collata
clementia, sacerdotium and impcoium: and illud quidem diuinie ministyans, he
autem humanie praesidens, etc. Auth. Collat. 1. Tit. 6. Novel. 6. in praefat.
acknowledging, that the Ministry, and the Magistracy were two principal
gifts of God, gives the precedence to the Ministry. And the like preeminence
do our laws give to those of the spiritualty, before them of the temporaltie.
Howbeit private men stand otherwise affected toward the Ministry: every
mean man almost, not only preferring himself before the Minister, but also
disdaining to bestow, either his son on the Ministry, or his daughter on a
Minister. Yet Esaias the Prophet was a Noble man, and as it is thought of the
blood royal. Neither did the Kings of Judah disdain to join in 2. Chron. 22.
11. 2. King. 23. 31.
affinity with the Priests.

To despise and contemn the Minister in respect of his calling, is to despise
God he that despises you, says Luke 10. 16.
Christ, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.
It is to profess a man's self void of all soundness of religion. For it is
certain that a true estimate may be taken of men's religion and piety toward
God, by their behavior to the Ministers of God. Neither can it be, that they,
who have been brought by the Ministry of the word to the state of grace and
salvation, should contemn the Ministers thereof. Wherefore he that despises
the Ministry, undoubtedly, says Ignatius, Ad Trall. (...).
He is an Atheist, and irreligious man, and a despiser of Christ. It is to
hinder their own salvation, by making the means thereof ineffectual unto
them, which Chrysostom esteems a point of madness. For it is manifest
madness, De Sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 5. (...).
says he, to despise so great authority, without which we can neither attain
to salvation, nor to the promised good things. For he that despises the
Ministers, despises also their Ministry, by which notwithstanding, as by the
ordinary Romans 1. 16.
power of God to our salvation, he is 1. Cor. 1. 21.
pleased to save those that believe. And whosoever despises the Ministry of
the Gospel, it shall be easier for them of Mat. 10. 15.
Sodom and Gomorah in the day of judgment, then for him.

God, it cannot be denied, but that by the injuries and indignities that are
offered to them as Ministers, the Majesty of God is violated. Wherefore he
has said, Psalm. 105. 15.
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Yea, who knows not
that the persons of Ambassadors, are by the Siquis legatum hostium pulsasset,
contraius gentium id commissum esse existimatur: quia sancti habentur legati.
Digest. lib. 5. tit. 50. lege vltima. Cic. in Verr. lib. 1. Nomen legati
eiusmo. di esse debet, quod non modo inter sociorum iura, sed etiam inter
bostium tela in colume versetur. De harusp. respons. sic enim lentio, ius
legatorum cum hominum praesidio munitum sit, tum etiam diuino iure esse
vallatum.
law of nations sacred and inviolable? Because their Ambassadors were
contumeliously used, the ancient Romans Cic. pro lege Manilia.
thought it a sufficient cause to extinguish Corinth, though the eye of Greece.

David likewise revenged the indignity offered to his Ambassadors, with the
overthrow of the Ammonites. 2. Sam. 10. Do earthly Princes, who are but dust
and ashes, revenge the wrongs offered to their Ambassadors; and shall we
think, that the Lord of hosts, the God Psalm. 94. 1.
of vengeance will suffer the indignities offered to his Ambassadors, to go
unpunished? Never any man, says (...). ad Magnes.
Ignatius, offending in this kind escaped punishment. Let the withered hand of
Jeroboam, 1. King. 13. 4.
which he had stretched out against the Prophet: let the two Captains with
their fifties, 2. King. 1. 10. 12.
who were sent to apprehend the Prophet Eltah, destroyed by fire from heaven:
let the leaud children ^. King. 2. 24.
which reviled Elisha, devoured by the bears: let the people of Israel, for 2.
Chron. 36. 16.
contemning and mocking the Prophets, rejected: let Corah, Dathan and Abiram,
who for insurrection made against Aaron, were Numb. 16.
swallowed up of the earth, be witnesses of this truth. Neither has the Lord
taught this by example alone, but also by precept; wherein he has appointed
Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
death to him that rebelleth against the Priest. For though the contempt of the
Ministers now adays seem a very small or none offense: yet Chrysostom Homil.
2. in 2. Timoth.
doubts not to call it the cause of all evil, and the Scripture notes it as
a grievous sin. Wherefore the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 4. 4.
when he would set out in lively colors, the desperate wickedness of the
people in his time, he says, they were like them which contend with the
Priest. For to impugn the Ministers which are sent of God, is not to repugne
men, but giantlike, to Act. 5. 39.
fight with God: For it is not Aaron that you strive against, says Moses,
Numb. 16. 11.
to Corah and his accomplices, but even against God himself.

I come to the honor of maintenance; which, though it be most due to the
Minister by the word of God, is notwithstanding now adays greatly called into
question. Some thinking the Ministry unworthy of allowance, as being in
their conceit an idle and needelesse function; and therefore whatsoever they
can by any fraudulent device either detain or purloine from the Minister,
they think it well gotten. Others thinking, that the maintenance of the
Ministry is a thing arbitrary, which they may either yield or withhold, as
^^ey find themselves able, or as they like their Minister. Others acknowledging
that Ministers ought to be maintained, notwithstanding would have them to
depend either altogether, or for the most part, on the uncertain benevolence
of the people: themselves not caring how little they pay by way of duty, so
they may pay what they list by way of benevolence. The first is a kind of
brutish people, which have no taste of religion; but are either mere
earthwormes, or Epicures, serving no God but Mammon, or their own belly. The
second, a kind of professors forward in show, and but in show; who thinking the
maintenance of Ministers to be as it were a matter of ceremony, make no
conscience of it. The third, a company of glorious professors, who being
indeed unwilling to pay so much as they ought of duty, would notwithstanding
make God as it were beholding, and his Ministers obnoxious unto them for their
gratuities. But I hope it does sufficiently appear by that which has bin said
in commendation of the Ministry, that the Ministers are well worthy of
sufficient maitenance, and that, to be yielded unto them, neither as a thing
arbitrary, nor as a mere gratuitie; but as an honor in equity and justice due
unto them by the word of God. Yea, I will add, so due, as that without
sacrilege it cannot be detained from them.

For the clearing of this point, we are to show two things; first, that a
sufficient maintenance is due to the Minister. Secondly, what this sufficient
maintenance is. As touching the former: the Apostle 1. Cor. 9. 14.
says: 1. Cor. 9. 14. God has ordained that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. The maintenance, therefore of Ministers is not an
humane policy, but the ordinance of God: and we are to acknowledge it to be
due unto them not only by man's law, but also, iure diuino, by the law of God.
Now God has ordained it as a duty both of piety toward him, and also of
justice and equity toward his Ministers. Piety requires that we should Mat.
22. 21.
give unto God that which is Gods. For God having reserved unto himself a
portion in all men's goods, he is to be honored with the same, as Solomon Prou.
3. 9.
says: Prou. 3. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the chief of thy
increase. This portion is the Ministers allowance: in which respect the Lord
Deuteronomy. 18. 2. Ezech. 44. 28.
professes, that he is the portion of his Ministers. And this portion is so
due unto God, and from him to his Ministers, as that to profess religion, and
to deny this allowance, is no better then to Gala. 6. 6. 7.
mock God, and no less then to Matthew. 3. 8.
rob him.

Equity requires, that the Ministers, having not only for the furnishing of
themselves to the service of the Church, spent their time, industry, and
substance; but also when they are furnished, employing their gifts, and
spending their strength in the most profitable and necessary service of the
Church, should be liberally maintained, and as the Apostle speaks, be 1.
Tim. 5. 17.
counted worthy of double honor. And this equity the holy Ghost proves by
diverse reasons: 1. Cor. 9. First, a pari, verse. 7. 1. Cor. 9. 7.
Who goes a warfare at his own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not
of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of
the flock? Therefore by the same reason, Ministers, who are the captains of
the Lords bands, planters of his vineyard, Pastors of his flock, are to have
maintenance from the Church. Secondly, a minori; we are in equity to afford
food, and 1. Cor. 9. 9. 10. 1. Tim. 5. 18.
not to mussle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn: therefore much
more are we to yield maintenance to them, that break unto us the food of life:
verse. 9. 10. Thirdly, a maieri, the Minister communicates spiritual things to
the people, which are incomparably of more value then all temporal
commodities. Is it then a great matter, says the 1. Cor. 9. 11.
Apostle, if we reap your carnal things? verse. 11. Fourthly, a simili, as the
Leuiticall Priests for their service had liberal maintenance; so ought the
Ministers of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9. 13. 14.
Do you not know, says he, verse. 13. 14. that they which minister about the
holy things, eat of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? so also has the Lord ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

Now, what and how great this sufficient maintenance is, which as I said, is
due to the Ministers, we are not to estimate according to the niggardly
conceits of worldly men, but according unto that proportion of allowa^ce,
which God assigned to the Priests of the Law. For it cannot be denied, but that
as we are more bound unto the Lord in all duties of thankfulness, since the
Messiah exhibited, then they to whom he was only promised; and as in the same
respect the Ministry of the Gospel far excels the priesthood of the law:
so the portion which is due unto God, and from him to his Ministers, ought to
be answerable.

Let us then consider, what allowance was due to the clergy by the law.
First, they had Numb. 35. 4. 5. 7. Joshua 21. Philo de Sacerd. honorib.
48. cities, and the suburbane fields round about, for the space of two
thousand cubits every way; which in so small a country was a very great
proportion. Secondly; they had the Numb. 18. 21. Leuit. 27. 30. 32. Matthew. 23.
23.
tithes of the corn, wine, oil, and of all fruits and herbs, the tithes of
the herds and the flocks. Thirdly, the first Exodus 34. 19. 20. Ezech. 44.
30. Nehem. 10. 36. Number. 18. 15. 16.
borne, of all sorts of cattle, as of beeues, sheep; and goats, and the
prises of the rest, according to the Priests estimation. Likewise, the first
borne of men, redeemed at five shekels a man. Fourthlie, the Number. 18. 13. Deuteronomy.
18. 4. Ezech. 44. 30. Nehem. 10. 35. 37.
first fruits, as namely, the first ripe of all that was in the land; the first
fruits of the wine, oil, and wool, the first fruit of their dough. Fiftlie,
all Number. 18. 8. 14. 19. Ezech. 44. 29. 30.
the oblations and vows, and whatsoever was dedicated unto God, and separated
from common use. Sixthly, the Numb. 18. 9. 11. Ezech. 44. 29. Leuit. 24. 9.
Matthew. 12. 5.
meat offerings, the sin offerings, and the trespass offerings, the heave
offerings, and the shake offerings, and the shewbread. Seuenthlie, of Number. 18.
18. Leuit. 7. 31. 32. 34. Deuteronomy. 18. 3. Leuit. 7. 8.
sacrifices eucharisticall, they had the breast and the shoulder; of others, the
shoulder, the two cheeks, and the mawe; of burnt sacrifices, the skin.
Eighthly, all the Exodus 23. 15. cap. 34. 20.
males were to appear thrice a year before the Lord, and none empty handed.
Lastly, all these duties were to be Nehem. 10. 35. 37.
brought to the Priests and Levites; and if any for their own ease desired not
to pay in kind, but to redeem any duty, or consecrated thing; they were to
pay according to the Priests estimation, and to add a fifth part. And if any
Leuit. 5. 15. 16.
detained any thing, either in whole, or in part, which was holy, and by law
due; he was to bring a ram for an offering, he was to make good that which
he withheld, and also to add a fifth part.

The maintenance therefore of the Priests, by the law of God, was in respect of
the quantity, very liberal; and in respect of the manner, very honorable. For
as Philo De honorib. Sacerd.
says, it is a great honor to be partaker of those things which are
consecrated to God; and as he Ibid.
has well observed, lest the people when they brought any of their duties,
should vpbraid the Priest, as if he were beholding unto them; they were
commanded to bring their offerings or gifts into the Temple, that from thence
the Priests might receive them, as from the hands of God. Now, if such
plentiful and honorable maintenance by the law of God, was due to the Priests
and Levites; no man of understanding will deny, but as great a proportion at
the least, does in equity belong to the Ministers of the Gospel.

If it be said, that the Levites were the 13. part of Israel, and therefore a
greater proportion needful for their maintenance: I answer, though they were
the 13. Tribe, yet were they not the thirteenth part. For when the other 12.
Tribes were Numb. 1. 46.
numbered from 20. years and upward, such only as were fit to bear arms,
the number of them was six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty.
Whereunto if you shall add all which were either under twenty years, or
unfit for service, the number would be at the least doubled. But the Levites
being al reckoned from a month old and above, their number was Numb. 3. 39.
but two and twenty thousand: which was not much above the sixtith part; and
not so much by Numb. 3. 33.
two hundred seventy three, as the only first borne of the other tribes. And
therefore when the Lord took the Levites for the first borne of Israel, the
odd two hundred seventy three, were redeemed according to the Number. 18. 16.
law, at five shekels a man; and for them a Numb. 7. 47. 48. 50. 51.
thousand three hundred sixty five shekels given to Aaron and his sons. Now,
if a survey be taken of the Clergy of England and their families; I suppose,
they will not come much short of this proportion. Besides, the means of
maintenance, which the Clergy of Israel had, descended to their posterity;
and therefore a less annuitie might suffice them, because they had a
perpetuity; whereas the maintenance of our Clergy dies with them; and out of
the annual receites, which the parent has for term of life, his posterity
must be provided for; and in that respect an inheritance to be permitted unto
them, which was denied to the Levites. But although our Ministry be more
excellent, and therefore greater honor both of reverence and maintenance due
unto it: though our number and charge being not less, our need of larger
maintenance greater, because it ends with us: though the Church, being not
tied to the succession of the posterity, which often would prove unworthy, but
being (by law) always to be provided of sufficient incumbents, ought in this
regard also to make the better allowance; yet what have we in comparison of
them? yea what are our annuities to their perpetuities? Our Colleges, and
collegiate Churches (blessed be God) have lands, and our benefices glebes,
though much impaired by sacrilege. But what are these to the 48. cities of the
Priests and Levites with their precincts; beside all the land, which at any
time was dedicated unto God, and (being not redeemed) remained for a perpetual
Leuit. 27. 21. 28.
possession to the Priests? Beside the lands (which many want) we have scarce
any thing but tithes; and a great part of them, by popish either
appropriations, wholly alienated, or exemptions defaulked, or by the
sacrilegious practices, both of corrupt Patrons, and also of unconscionable
parishioners, mightily impaired. But the Priests, to whom our Ministers are
answerable, had so many allowances (as you heard) that although they had had no
tithes, the proportion of their maintenance had far exceeded ours.

If it shall be said, that tithes are ceremonial or judicial, and therefore
not to be exacted of us: I answer, first, that many learned men are of
judgment, that they are moral, as being that part of men's goods which is
perpetually due unto the Lord. But I will not enter into that question at this
time, it shall suffice us to acknowledge these two things: first, that if not
the same maintenance which was assigned to the Priests, then questionless a
greater is due unto the Ministers of the Gospel, for the reasons before
delivered: secondly, that although tithes were prescribed by the judicial law;
yet the equity of that law remains, and it is lawful for Christian
Magistrates in imitation thereof, to prescribe the same things. Neither can it
be denied, but that the tithes being by the laws, not only of this land, but
almost of all Christendom, consecrated unto God, for the maintenance of the
Ministers, they cannot without sacrilege be alienated, or detained from them.
It is destruction, says Prou. 20. 25.
Solomon, to devour that which is sanctified, and after the Vows to enquire.
That which is once dedicated unto holy uses, and consecrated to God, may not
return to common uses. If the thing be abused* the use is to be reformed: but
the property is the Lords, and no man can take it from him. See Numb. 16. 38.
Leuit. 27. 21. 28. Sacrilegious therefore was the alienation of Church livings
by appropriations, which are the bane of the people, and blemish of our Church:
neither will the Popes authority, by which they were made, excuse them as
lawful; but prove the original of them, to have been Antichristian.
Sacrilegious has been the practice of courtly Harpies, who have prayed upon
the livings of the Church, which prayed for them. If it were sacrilege in
Nebuchadnezzar (though a conqueror) to take away the golden Dan. 5. 2. 2^.
vessels of the Temple; and in Belshazzer, to abuse them to profane uses: what
shall we say of them, who have taken, not the mooueables, but the very
patrimony of the Church? Sacrilegious is the practice of Patrones, who detain
any part of the glebe or tithes, or with Gehezi make gain of that which ought
freely to be given: as well as it was sacrilege in Ios. 6. 22. and 7. ^1.
Achan, to take part of that which was consecrated unto God. Sacrilegious are
all the practices and devises of unconscionable parishioners, who either by
fraud or pretense of law, as by pretended customs, compositions, or such
like, defraude the Minister of his due. Was it sacrilege in Act. 5.
Ananias and Sapphira, punishable with sudden death, who detained part of that
which themselves had consecrated unto God, and might before the consecration
thereof have kept it to themselves? and is it not much more sacrilegious to
detain that, which we never had right to keep, as being by law consecrated
unto God? Christians should remember that the tithes and revenues of the
Church, are Gods part; and that it is their duty to honor God, not with the
Mal. 1. 8.
refuse, but with the Prou. 3. 9.
chief of their increase: that to detain those things which be consecrated
to God, for the maintenance of his Ministers, is no other then to rob and
spoil God himself. For will a man, says Mala^. 3. 8.
he, spoil his gods? yet have you spoiled me: but you say, wherein have we
spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings. Let them consider on the one side, the
gracious promises of God made to those who honor him by giving the due honor
of maintenance to his Ministers, as Prou. 3. Prou. 3. 9 10.
Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the chief of all thine increase. So
shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall even burst
with new wine. And Malach. 3. Malach. 3. 10
Bring you all the tithes into the store house, that there may be meat in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not
open the windo was of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without
measure. On the other side, the fearful curse, not only denounced, as Malac.
3. Malac. 3. 9.
You are accursed with a curse, for you have spoiled me, says the Lord, viz.
in tithes, and in offerings: but also executed on those who have been guilty
of sacrilege. Let the great and greedy Harpyes set before their eyes, the
Dan. 5. 5.
hand writing, which appeared to Belshazzar when he was quaffing in the cups
of the Temple: and let the rest, I mean sacrilegious proprietaries, corrupt
Patrons, covetous and unconscionable parishioners call to mind what befell to
Ios. 7.
Achan, to 2. King. 5. 27.
Gehezi, to Act. 5.
Ananias and Sapphira: and as they would avoid their punishment, so let them
abhor their sin.

And to conclude this point, let those which be in authority (as it becomes
the nursing fathers of the Church) imitate the zeal of godly Nehemiah, who
could not cndure the alienation of one Nehem. 13. 8.
chamber of the Priests to the private use of Tobiah. And let our Parliaments,
in the name of God, be careful to avoid that imputation which Paul lays
upon the Jews, that howsoever in respect of the particulars before mentioned,
it may be verified of too many among us, yet notwithstanding the whole state
may not be charged with it. Romans 2. 22.
Thou abhorrest idols, says he, and do thou commit sacrilege? And let them
know that not only to the restitution of impropriations (which at the
dissolution of the Abbeys ought to have been made) they still remain deeply
obliged: but also for the not restoring thereof, the whole land stands in an
high degree, obnoxious to the judgments of God. For though the Pope and
Papists had some show of reason to take from the secular Priests, that which
they gave to the regular, who as they imagined, lived in a state of perfection,
whose devotions were in their conceit the treasures of the Church for the
relief of laboring souls, and whose maintenance in their intent, was to
serve for the great relief of the poor and harbourlesse: yet what color, or
show of reason have we, by alienating the Church livings from the Clergy, to
rob God of his portion, the Ministers of their maintenance, the people of
their spiritual, and the poor of their corporal sustenance? And lastly, let
them acknowledge it to be a great shame for our land prosessing the Gospel,
and sincere religion of Christ, that the idolatrous Priests, not only among
the Papists, but also among the Genesis 47. 22.
Heathen, are more regarded, and better rewarded, then the true Ministers of
Christ among us.

And thus much of the use, which the people are to make of this doctrine.

Before I come to the Ministers themselves, some thing is to be added
concerning scholars or students. That none of them presume to refuse the
Ministry, as thinking themselves in respect either of their parentage, or of
their wealth, or of their gifts, too good to be Ministers. For if they will
call to mind what has been said concerning the honor of the Ministry: I
doubt not, but they will say with Paul, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
And who is sufficient for these things? and be more ready to acknowledge
themselves unworthy to be Ministers, then the Ministry to be unworthy of
them. If they refuse it, because it wants either wealth or honor, or because
they call into question the lawfulnes of the chief places in the Ministry
(which respects have diuerted many endued with excellent gifts, to the study
of Physic, or law either civil or common) I would entreat, not only them,
that they would with indifferency read that which In Apoc. 1. 20.
elsewhere I have alleged to justify the honorable calling of Bishops, as
being the ordinance of God, but also those which be in authority, that they
would acknowledge it to be a godly, wise, and necessary policy, that places of
great reward and eminent honor, should be provided for those who deserve best,
in respect either of the study and profession of divinity, or exercise of
their Ministry, For honos alit arts: neither may it be expected that men of
best gifts, and therefore most worthy to be consecrated to the Lord, will
ordinarily undertake this calling, which is exposed to such contempt of the
world, subject to so great a charge as the gardianship of men's souls, and yet
rewarded with small preferment either of maintenance or honor; when other
studies, especially that of the law, does promise unto them, so rich rewards,
so great honor, so high preferment in the world. It is true, there should be
no comparison in the estimation of a Christian, between that profession which
respects only outward wealth (especially if you add the usual and
personal corruption of them who profess it, who undertaking all causes that
come to hand, seem to set not only their tongues, but also their souls to
sale) and that calling, by the study and practice whereof, thou may 1. Tim.
4. 16.
save thine own soul, and those that do hear thee: notwithstanding because
young men, when they are to make choice of their profession, are not (for the
most part) so well settled in Christianity, as simply to prefer things
spiritual, to things temporal; there must be some inducements to the study
of divinity, which may even in outward respects allure them who are of best
gifts, and of greatest hope: for they also are flesh and blood.

Now I come to the Prophets, and sons of the Prophets; that is, to Ministers
and students of Divinity: who from the dignity of the Ministry are to reap
two uses. The one, of comfort and encouragement, the other of instruction. For
although the Ministry above all callings is most subject to the contempt and
disgrace of profane and godless men: yet the Ministers are to be assured, that
their function, is a worthy and excellent work; and that as God himself has
greatly honored the^, so can they not but be honored of all those* who are the
children of God. The contempts and contumelies of the rest, which they offer
unto us for Christ's, or for our callings sake, ought to be so far from
dismaying us, as that we ought in respect thereof to account our selves Matthew.
5. 11. 12.
happy: For being there by made conformable not only to the Prophets and
Apostles of Christ, but also to our Savior himself, we shall also be
conformed unto them in happiness and glory. And howsoever our Ministry be
contemned or oppugned; yet we are to be assured with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2.
15. 16.
that we are a sweet savor unto God in Christ, not only in them that are
saved, but in them also that perish; to the one, a savor of death unto death,
and to the other, a savor of life unto life. And in some measure may every
one of us say with the Prophet (though speaking in the name of Christ) Esa. 49.
4. 5.
howsoever I have labored in vain, and have spent my strength in vain, and
for nothing: yet my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And
though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord,
and my God shall be my strength.

The instruction which is to be learned is this, that seeing the function of
the Ministry is so honorable, as has been said, Ministers first, would
labor to be worthy of that honor, which in respect of their function
appertains to them. And secondly, that students in divinity would not offer
themselves, or Bishops admit them, namely, to be Pastors, until they be in
some competent measure qualified according to that sufficiency or worthiness,
which is required in the Minister of God. For (as they say) Non ex quouis ligno
fit Mercurius. And this (that I may proceed from the worthiness of the
Ministry, to the worthiness of the Minister, described verse. 2.) is the use
which the Apostle himself makes in this place. The office of a Bishop, says
he, is a worthy work: therefore a Bishop ought to be blameless, etc. But
howsoever many things are here required to the worthiness or sufficiency of a
Minister; yet all may be reduced to these two heads. The one, respecting his
life, that he be (...), of blameless conversation: the other, his Ministry,
that he be (...), apt, that is, able and willing to teach: the one, implying,
(...) personae, the gifts of the person, wherewith the Minister is to be
adorned, (...), Gal. 2. 14.
to walk vprightlie; the other, (...) Ministerij, the gifts of the Ministry,
wherewith he is to be furnished, (...), to 2. Tim. 2. 15.
divide the word aright. And these two are usually joined together in the
Scriptures, to wit, Thummim and vrim, integrity of life, and light of
doctrine; precept, and practice. For the Lord would have his Ministers, whom
they teach by precept, to go before them also in example, and contrariwise.
For this cause, as God inserted in the breast plate of the Priest Exodus 28. 30.
vrim and thummim, to be upon his heart: so Moses praying that God would adorn
his Priests with sufficiency, he craves these two Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
; Let thy Thummim and thy vrim be upon the man of they mercy. Likewise, on the
skirts of the Priests robe the Lord appointed Exodus 28. 33. 34.
golden belles and pomgranates to be sowed round about; signifying by the one,
the sweet and heavenly sound of true doctrine; without which sound, says
Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 24. in ea verba Exodus 28. Audiatur sonitus, etc. Sacerdos
ingrediens sanctuarium moritur* si de eo sonitus non audiatur: quia iram contra
se occul^i iudicis exigit, si sine sonitu praedicationis incedat.
Gregory, if a Minister do go into the Sanctuary, he incurreth the anger
of God: by the other, the sweet and wholesome fruit of a godly life. For as the
divine Plato in Lachete.
Philosopher says, He makes the best harmony, whose life agrees with his
doctrine. But whose doctrine is altogether dissonant from his life, he is, as
the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13. 1.
a iarring Cymball. The same has the Prophet Malachie joined together; showing
that these things were, and so ought to be in the Priests of God. Mal. 2. 6. 7.
The law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his
lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity. For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the law at his mouth, for he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. In the
new testament these two often concur. Mat. 5. 13. 14. cum 16.
Matthew. 5. Ministers are said to be the salt of the earth, and the light of
the world; because their office is, by sound doctrine to season, and by good
example to shine before others: Act. 20. 28.
Act. 20. The Ministers of Ephesus are exhorted to attend both to themselves
and to the flock: to themselves, by living well; to the flock, by feeding
them with wholesome doctrine. For we that are Ministers, says Tom. 9. de Pastor.
cap. 1.
Augustine, have two things; the one, that we are Christians; the other, that
we are Ministers. Illud quod Christiani sumus, propter nos est; quod autem
praepositi sumus, propter vos est. In eo quod Christiani sumus, attenditur
vtilitas nostra: in eo quod praepositi, non nisi vestra. We are Christians
for our selves, and Ministers for you. In that we are Christians, our own
profit is attended; but as we are Ministers, your profit it sought. Likewise,
in his epistles, Paul exhorts Ministers 1. Tim. 1. 19.
to retatne faith, that is, sound doctrine, and a good conscience: to 1. Tim.
4. 16.
attend to themselves and to doctrine: as touching their life, to show
themselves Tit. 2. 7. 8.
examples of good works: and as touching their Ministry, Tit. 2. 7. 8.
to teach sound and vncorrupt dostrine. These two, whosoever joins together,
that is, Matthew. 5. 19.
whosoever shall keep the Commandments of God and teach others so to do,
the shall be great in the kingdom of God. Such a Minister was John Baptist, to
whom our Savior gives this testimony, Ioh. 5. 35.
that he was a burning and a shining light: burning, in himself, and shining
unto others. Such were all the men of God, who are commended unto us in the
Scriptures; whose knowledge was inflamed with piety, and their piety
enlightened with knowledge.

These things which the holy Ghost jointly requires in Ministers, by no means
ought to be severed. For what is an honest Minister, if he be unlearned? A
Lamp that burns, but gives no light: a Bell of good metal, but wanting a
Clapper: a kind Nurse, but without milk: an honest Gregor. past. part. 2. c.
4. Praeconis officium suscipist, quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, vt ante
aduentum iudicis qui terribiliter sequitur, ipse scilicet clamando gradiatur.
Sacerdos ergo si praedicationis est nescius, quam clamoris vocem daturus est
praeco mutus?
Crier, but without a voice: a well minded Watchman, but void of sight: a
willing Guide, but ingorant of the way. And therefore they are like to remain
in darkness, who should be enlightened by him: to be hunger-starued, that
should be fed by him: to remain uncalled, who should be called by him: to
be surprised who should have warning from him: to go out of the way, who
should be guided by him. Wherefore it is well said of Jerome, Hieronym* ad
Oceanum. Innocens a^sque sermon conuersatio, quantum exemplo prodest, tantum
silentio nocet.
Innocent conversation without instruction, does as much hurt by silence, as it
helps by example. For the Ministers, they be the light of the world, the salt
of the earth, the eyes in the body of Christ, which is his Church, the guides
of the people: If therefore the light Matthew. 6. 23.
of the people be darkness; alas, how great shall their darkness be? If the
salt whereby the people should be seasoned be vasauourie, how should not the
people putrify in their sins? If the eyes of the congregation (as Number. 10.
31.
guides be in stead of eyes) be blind, how should the people see? If the guides
know not the way, needs must the people wander. If the Matthew. 15. 14.
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

But some idle drone will say: it is enough for me, that I serve God in
holiness and righteousness; though I cannot, or do not preach. To whom I
answer, that a man's religion and justice, if he have any, must appear in the
exercise of his calling. And therefore a Minister can hardly be a good man, as
I suppose, that is not, in some competencie, a good Minister. Now a good
Minister, is not only a sheep in Christ's fold, but also a Pastor of his
flock: not only a living stone in the Temple of God, but also a builder: not
only a plant in Gods garden, but also a planter: not only a child of God, but
a father also in the faith, begetting others unto God: not only (...), a
disciple of Christ, but a teacher, Mat. 28. 19.
(...), instructing others.

On the other side, what is a learned Minister, if he be ungodly? He is
nothing, says Paul, 1. Cor. 13. 2.
for if I had prophecy, says he, and knew all mysteries, and alknowledge, and
had not charity, I were nothing. For an 1. Cor. 8. 4.
Idol is nothing, as he says in the same Epistle. And a Minister, that says,
and does not, little differs from an idol; being not unfitly to be
compared to the Mercuriales statuae, which show the way to passengers, but
themselves stir not. But with Paul (in 1. Cor. 13. 2. 3.
that place) nihil esse, and nihil prodesse, to be nothing, and to profit
nothing, is all one. But Ministers, who with the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.
say and do not, they are like to profit the people but a little; and
themselves nothing at all. This therefore ought to be the first care of every
Divine, Matthew. 6. 33.
First, to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness. That he may be a
sound Christian, before he be a Minister; a Disciple of Christ, before he
take upon him to teach others; a living stone in the Temple of God, before he
presume to be a builder: a sheep of Christ, before he be a Pastor; a plant in
Gods garden, before he be a planter; that himself be called, before he call
others: himself a follower of Christ, before he lead others: himself one of
the household of faith, before he take upon him to be a steward or ruler of the
household.

And surely if all Christians, who tender their own salvation, had need to
labor for holiness, Hebr. 12. 14.
without which no man shall see God: then much more had Ministers need to 1.
Tim. 4. 7.
exercise themselves unto godliness, to whose care and fidelity the salvation
of others is entrusted; that by preaching profitablie, and living vprightlie,
they may 1. Tim. 4. 16.
save, not only themselves, but those also who are committed to their trust.
Otherwise, if we say and do not; yea, if we say one thing, and do the
contrary, we shall neither profit the people, nor yet our selves. Not the
people, whom by our example we do more scandalize, then edify by our doctrine,
pulling down with the left hand, what we set up with the right, misleading by
our life, whom by our doctrine we would seem to lead. Even as the Prophet
says, Esaias 3. 13.
My people, qui ducunt te, seducunt: they which lead thee, mislead thee.
Wherefore, as Isidore says, Qui negligit recta facere desinat and recta docere:
Let him cease to teach well, that cares not to live well. For to what purpose
do thou commend to thy people the strait and afflicted way to heaven; when
thy self take the broad and easy way, which leads unto hell? for will not
the people sooner learn Atheism by thy life, then religion by thy doctrine?
For what says thy silly sheep in such a case? Surely if my Pastor were
indeed persuaded, that there is a God which will judge the world, ren dering to
every man according to his ways; if he thought indeed, that there is a
heaven for the godly, and a hell for the wicked, as he would persuade us; it
could not be, that he would live as he does. But what hear I words, when I
see deeds? If my guide go that way, who am I, that I should not follow him?
This is that, which Gregory says, Pastoral. part. 1. cap. 2.
Cum Pastor per abrupta graditur, ad praecipitium grex sequitur; when the
Pastor goes in steep-downe places, the flock follows headlong unto ruin.
Wherefore, whosoever by an ungodly life overthrows his doctrine, he lays
Leuit. 19. 14.
a stumbling block before the blind, or causes Deuteronomy. 27. 18.
the blind to err out of his way, which whosoever does he is accursed: yea, as
I said, he opens a school to Atheism, whereby it comes to pass, as De
dignit. Sacerd. cap. 6.
Ambrose says Vt non solums ipsi dum male agunt, digne pereant, sed alios
insuper secum indigne perdant: That not only themselves whiles they live
wickedly, do worthily perish, but also unworthily they destroy others. But
neither do they profit themselves, for as Paul says, 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2.
If I speak with the tongue of Angles, and could prophecy, and had all
knowledge, and have not love, it profits me nothing. Such Ministers are like
to cooks, which provide wholesome meat for others, but eat not thereof
themselves. Like to those carpenters that built the Arc for Noah, and
themselves perished in the flood; for whiles they 1. Cor. 9. 27.
preach to others, themselves become reprobates. For if we have nothing to
allege for our selves in the day of judgment, Matthew. 7. 22. 2^.
but, Lord have not we prophesied in thy name? we shall receive this doom, I
know you not, depart from me you workers of iniquity. Yea, he that teaches
others, and teaches not himself; he that condemns other sinners unto hell,
and commits greater crimes himself; he teaches God with what sentence to
condemn himself, for unto him that terrible, but yet just sentence does
belong; Luke 19. 22.
Out of thine own mouth I will condemn thee thou wicked servant. Whereas
contrariwise, if we would 1. Tim. 4. 16.
attend to our selves to live well, and to doctrine to teach well, and would
continue therein, we should save both our selves and those that hear us: if
we would be careful both to Matthew. 5. 19.
keep Gods Commandments, and teach others so to do, we should be great in
the kingdom of God; great (I say) in the kingdom of grace, but incomparably
greater in the kingdom of glory. Unto which he bring us, that has so dearly
bought it for us, even Christ Jesus the righteous: to whom with the Father and
the holy Ghost be all praise and glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Corrections.
Page 11. lin. a fine 6. Minister. page 18. lin. vlt. idol. page 52. lin. 1.
things. To. page 58. marg. lin. a fine 5. (...). lin. vlt. (...). page 59. lin.
penult. of life. page 62. lin. 4. God. Likewise page 88. lin. vlt. Ministry.
For.

A Sermon defending the honorable function of BISHOPS, Preached, April. 17.
Anno. D. 1608. at the Consecration of the right reverend Father in GOD, the L.
Bishop of Bath and Wells:

By George Downame, Doctor of Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Matthew Lownes, and ^^lix Kyngston. Anno. D.
1608.

REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMINO, DOMINO IACOBO MOVNTAGVE, EPISCOPO
BATHONIENSI ET WELLENSI, PRAESVLI CLARISSIMO, DOMINO SVO INPRIMIS OBSERVANDO
Georgius Downame Concionem hanc, qua dignitas Episcopalis asseritur, ad
perpetuam amoris et observantiae memoriam, Dicat Consecratque.

To the Christian Reader.
ALthough I am not ignorant (good Christian Reader) how unpleasing this Sermon
will be to some, who are forestalled with preiudicate opinions, (whom I could
wish, I were as sure to persuade, as I hope by evidence of truth to convince:)
notwithstanding, if I may entreat thee, to read it without prejudice, and to
judge of it without partiality; I doubt not, but thou will acknowledge with
me, that the doctrine therein contained, is not only true, but also a
profitable and necessary truth. And the rather do I conceive this hope,
because the time has been, when mine affection inclined by the reverent
opinion, which I had worthily conceived not only of Master Calvin, the author,
but also of Master Beza, and many other godly and learned men, patrones and
fautors of the pretended discipline, made me suspend my judgment in this
cause; until I had seriously entered into the study thereof. The which for a
long time I did forbear: partly because I did rightly suppose, that my pains
might be more profitably bestowed in other parts of divinity, and I had
heard a zealous preacher reprove young Divines in a Sermon at Cambridge, Master
Greenham.
who, before they had studied the grounds of theology, would ouer-busie
themselves in matters of discipline, and as he said, before they had laid the
foundation of their study, would be setting up as it were the roof: and
partly because in my slender judgment, I could not then see, what good would
come either to my self or to the Church of God, by my pains taken in that
controversy. For I conceived the issue of my study would be, either the
disgrace of my ministry among the forwarder sort* if I resolved, as now I
know I should have done; or the overthrow of my ministry, if I should stand
for that discipline. Thus was I content to remain in suspense, whiles I took
it to be the best course, both for my self and for the Church, to be no
medler on either side. But when of late years the case was so altered with the
time, that a necessity was imposed, not only to resolve, but also to profess
my resolution on the one part; and it was now expected, that I should inform
not only my self, but some others also what way to take: I did then seriously
enter into the study of these things; Perhaps with another mind then some
others have done, and therefore with other success. I considered with my
self, that this Church of England, wherein I was called to be a minister, did
hold and profess all substantial points of divinity, as soundly as any Church
in the world, none excepted neither in this age, nor in the primitive times of
the Church. And secondly, that it has the testimony of all other true
Churches. Thirdly, that in it the means of salvation are ordinarily and
plentifully to be had. And therefore to make separation from it, I took to be
schismatic and damanable presumption. And as touching my self, I considered
that being in the ministry, necessity is laid upon me, and woe be unto
me, if I preach not the Gospel. Wherefore I must confess, I studied the
controversies wherein the policy of our Church is called into question, as one
who meant if he were not convicted with evidence of truth, to be as it were
the respondent, or defendant, resolving not to leave my standing wherein God
had placed me, unless by force of argument, I were removed: Whereas others,
having (as it seems) been out of love with our Church Discipline before, and
in affection wholly alienated from our Church-gouernours, have studied these
things as opponents and plaintiffes. And therefore having sought a knot as it
were in every bulrush, and strained at every gnatte, they have picked so many
quarrels against the Church, and by consequent, against their own ministry,
as that by their oppos^^ion, the Church is deprived of their ministry, and
themselves of the employment of their gifts; They suffering the Land to swarm
(even in their own opinion) with Papists and Atheistes, and their places
either to be destitute, or to be occupied with such as they account
unprofitable ministers, rather the^ they will embrace, nay rather then they will
without prejudice and partiality read, what is truly said for the defense of
our Church. But to return to my self: when with this resolution (which I am
persuaded ought to be in the like case) I had studied some, which are supposed
to be the chief treatises on both sides: I found on the one side, certain
places of Scripture drawn as it were by the neck to that side, a few
straggling sentences quoted out of the Fathers, and as it were with oars
wherried by these men (looking as one would think the other way) against the
full stream of Antiquity; some pretty speeches and witty proofs, which
notwithstanding, were (as before I had observed in the question of usury)
mere colors, rather then sound arguments. On the other side, I found full and
plentiful proofs, as in other writings, so namely in the learned treatise of
the perpetual gouernemant of the Church, from which I received good
satisfaction. Now, the arguments which persuaded me, I have here set down, as
the shortness of a Sermon (though somewhat enlarged) would permit; hoping
(because I know nothing to the contrary, setting not the judgment of men,
otherwise minded, but their prejudice aside) that the same arguments which
have persuaded me, will also prevail with others to embrace this, which at the
first I called a profitable and necessary truth. The which if it shall please
God according to my hearts desire to effect, I would hope through Gods
goodness qu^^kly to see an end of this pernicious division which is among us.
For though some other particulars be co^trouerted; yet this, of the
church-gouernment, is the chief and principal: and so chief, as that sometimes
I have thought the rest to be but controversies in pretense to avoid the envy
of this. Neither do I doubt, but that if men sincerely affected were rightly
persuaded of the government, that either they would not so stand upon matters of
ceremony, and such like of small importance, as that for them they would
maintain this rent in the body of Christ or suffer either themselves to be
deprived of the employments of their talents, or the Church of their
ministry: or if any out of tenderness of conscience should make scruple of
these things, that they would favorably be respected. So that by the
acknowledgment of this one truth our differences would be compounded, our
breaches healed, our divided minds reunited, with one heart and voice to
glorify God in the edification of his Church, propagation of the Gospel
confusion of Popery and Atheism. Whereas now this opposition, whiles it is
continued, greatly dishonors God and his true religion which we profess,
hinders the proceedings of the Gospel, aduantageth Popery and Atheism
scandalizeth the people whom we ought to edify, and not only the backwarder
sort; who hereby take occasion to be of no religion, but also the forwarder
sort, and that many ways, as I will particularly show. For they (I speak not of
all) are hereby occasioned, 1. To despise the solemn worship and service of
God, and whatsoever good thing else is set forth by Authority: and 2 Whereas
they would seem above all things to esteem the ministry of the word, as that
precious treasure for which they would (with him in the Gospel) forgo all
things; they not only vilify and disgrace the ministry, which is to be had
(I mean of those who are conformable, though no way inferior, but in many
graces, by many degrees superior to many of those whom they admire:) but also
encourage by all means their admired ministers to stand out, as though they
had rather want the food of their souls, and that which they acknowledge to
be the power of god to salvation, the^ not to enjoy their fa^cies, for which
they have no ground. 3. To place the height of religion in disconformitie,
turning zeal into faction, godly confere^ces to bitter inuectiues against
Bishops, and odious censures of such as they call formalists; the study of the
scriptures and the substance of divinity, to disputation of discipline and
ceremonies, and being ignorant in the Catechism to profess skill in those
things: Combining themselves in a divided brothe hood, as though none were to
be accounted Christians or brethren in Christ, but such as stand for the
pretended discipline; to whom also they co^fine their charity. 4. To be
da^gerously unthankful unto God for the continuance of the Gospel together
with outward peace and prosperity under the happy government of our gracious
and dread sovereign. For whereas before the end of the blessed reign of
Queen Elizabeth, all good Christians would have acknowledged themselves
infinitely bound to Almighty God in all duties of thankfulness, if they might
have been assured of the continuance of these things after her decease (which
was the time that we feared and our enemies expected:) yet now when the Lord
has granted whatsoever almost we could desire, we take on, as if we had
nothing; and like weyward children when we have what is fit for us, if we
cannot also have what we fancy besides, we are ready to cast away that, which,
through Gods unspeakable goodness, we may to our souls health enjoy. Yea so
strangely do some dote upon their own devises, that they protest to all the
world, Christian and modest offer of disput.
unless their assertions (diverse even the principal whereof were never heard
of in the Church of God within 1600. and some odd years after Christ) be
granted, they see not how our separation from the Church of Rome can be
justified. Nay they protest, that if they be in an error and the Bishops have
the truth, the Pope and Church of Rome have had great wrong and indignity
offered unto them, in that they are rejected: and that all the protestant
Churches are schismatic in forsaking unity and communion with them; And
therefore in their wisdoms make this offer to the Priests and Jesuits, that if
from them they can receive satisfaction concerning their propositions, they
will be reconciled to the Sea of Rome. So that now it must be thought that we
separated from the church of Rome, not for their abominable idolatries and
heathenish superstitions, nor for their capital heresies subuerting the
foundation of religion, nor because the church of Rome is the whore of Babylon,
the Sea of Antichrist, the mother of all fornications and abominations, being
also embrued, and as it were died red with the blood of the Saints, and of the
Martyrs of Jesus; from which we are commanded to separate in these respects: but
because forsooth among them, every particular parish is not held to be an
entire body by it self, furnished with sufficient power and authority, for the
government of it self in all causes ecclesiastical; because every parish
among the^ has not power immediately under Christ, to elect and ordain,
deprive and depose their Ministers, and to execute all other ecclesiast*
censures: because the Pastor of every particular congregation, is not among
the^ the highest ordinary ecclesiastical officer, but above him they have
diocesan and provincial church officers, and such like; for it shall suffice
to have mentioned those, which as they concern the cause in hand, so they are
the principal. In respect whereof, seeing they hold separation is to be made
from the church of Rome, they plainly bewray themselves what manner of persons
they be, who for the same causes may separate not only from our Church, but
those of Scotland, and Geneua, and all others, where these undigested devises
were never heard of. Fifthly, to grow wanton in religion through a kind of
spiritual pride, not caring for the heavenly food of their souls, unless
they may have their own sawee, and preferring the circumstances of religion and
ceremonies, before the substance. We will not hear a sermon forsooth made at a
funeral, be it never so profitable, and by our good will we would hear none
that is conformable, be he never so learned and godly a preacher: of if we
do, (we hearing with preiuiudice, and making the word vneffectual unto us) we
say his gifts be decayed, and his preaching to be without power: we hear and
not hear with admirable acceptance of persons, as if we had never learned to
acknowledge Gods ordinance, or to look higher then to the speaker. Moreover, if
law did not compel us, we had rather be at no public prayers, then at
those which by authority are appointed; or if we be present, we will behave
our selves as absent, not vouchsafing to join with the congregation. We had
rather not have our child baptized (if we might choose) then that the cross in
baptism should be used. We had rather not receive the Communion, then receive
kneeling etc. Which things, when I consider how few among the people (in
comparison) de care for religion, and of those few, how many are (I am sorry to
speak it) schismatically disposed, do make my heart to sorrow, and my bowels
to yearne in commiseration so the^. Neither can I choose, but in an earnest
desire of the peace of our church (whereby these inconveniences might be
remedied) to entreat, and even in the bowls of Christ, to beseech my brethren
of the Ministry, that as they tender the glory of God, in the propagation of
the Gospel, or the salvation of the people which Christ has redeemed with his
precious blood: or if these considerations will not prevail, as they hope to
answer these things at the day of the Lord, they would at length seek the
peace of Sion, and be as desirous to find arguments to revntie themselves unto
us, as they have bin ouer-busie in seeking reasons to disioyne themselves from
us. Or if they will not be at so much pains, yet at the least, that they would
weigh in the balance of an upright and impartial judgment, those proofs
which here are briefly set down. And if they find them to ouer-weigh the
reasons of the contrary part, they would give glory to God, by acknowledging
ingenuously so profitable, and as these times are, so necessary a truth.
Neither shall they need to fear discredit, if upon better information they
shall reform their judgments. Wherein all moderate men will hold them excused:
remembering first, the common condition of humane frailty, which is subject to
over sight; from which the most zealous men are so far from being exempted, as
that many times they are more subject thereunto then others of milder temper;
men of greatest zeal being not always, nor for the most part, of soundest
judgment. Secondly, the reverent opinion which worthily they have conceived of
Calvin and Beza, and other worthy Divines, whom they having found so admirably
sound and orthodoxal in the substantial points of religion; it is no marvel,
though without any great search they relied upon their credit for matters of
less importance. Thirdly, the good effects which (as they have been informed)
the new discipline has brought forth, and the manifold corruptions which they
have taken notice of in the government of our church, being the personal
defaults not so much of the Bb. themselves, as of their officers. And yet what
are these to those horible co^fusions, which if the discipline of the newest
edition should be established, would inevitably follow? Namely, if every parish
Bishop should, as they teach, be the supreme or highest ecclesiastical
officer: that every parish (where plurality of voices must carry all things, and
the greater part ouersway the better) should within it self have authority
immediately derived from Christ, to elect, ordain, depose and deprive their
Minister, and to exercise all other ecclesiastical censures; that every parish
should be an entire body within it self, having neither subordinatio^, nor
(for ought that I see in the new plotforme) consociation with others.

And is it possible, that these things should not only be broached of godly
learned Ministers, but also with such vehemence be urged, that separation is to
be made from all those churches which admit not these new and undigested
fancies? Or shall we not rather think, that Brownists, or some not far from
Brownisme, have abused their names? which if it be so, why do not the rest
disavow these newfound assertions, and protest against such schismatic
novelties? Why are the people suffered to receive the^ as oracles? why is this
advantage given to Papists as though the ministers among us, who would be
thought to seek reformation, did acknowledge no greater cause of separation
from the church of Rome, then these matters of the newfound parish-discipline,
which no reformed Church in the world does observe?

But if in the partial balance of their forestalled judgment these arguments
shall seem light in comparison of their own; my desire is, that their answers
may be distinctly applied to every argument in order, and that their proofs may
be produced: which (they must remember) had need to be very pregnant and
demonstratiue, which are to persuade, both the abolishing of that government
which even from the apostles times has been perpetually observed in the
church, and setting up of another which was never heard of till now of late.
And if for ought that I have here said, or can say, the newest things will
prove the truest, (which yet never happened) I will then acknowledge my error.
Only I desire christian and modest dealing: not as in that which is called the
christian and modest offer, which notwithstanding that title, is full of odious
censures, proud and scornful speeches, unchristian and immodest provocations,
with great bitterness galling those whom they have made their opposites. In
expectation whereof, I commend thee to the Grace of God, unfeignedly protesting,
that what I have here either in this Praeface or in the Sermon delivered, is
that which in my conscience I am verily persuaded to be the truth.

Thine in the Lord, G. D.

Page 97. lin. 13. read, Presbyteries.

A SERMON PREAched at Lambith.
APOCAL. 1. 20. The seven Stars, are the Angels of the seven Churches.
Our Lord and Savior Christ, having appeared to Saint John, in a glorious
form, v. 13. etc.
(before described) in the midst of seven golden Candlesticks, having seven
v. 16.
Stars in his right hand: In this verse, he expounds the mystery both of
the seven Stars, and also of the seven golden Candlesticks; showing, that
as by the golden Candlestickes are meant the seven famous Churches of Asia,
viz. Ephesus, Smyrna, and the rest before specified, verse. 11: so the seven
Stars are (that is, do signify) the Angels of those seven Churches. In
handling of which words, I am to perform two things First, because this
exposition is, as In Apoc. 1.
Albertus notes, allegorical, we are to examine, who, and what manner of of
persons are meant by the Angels of the Churches. For although it be a thing
agreed upon among the Those few which by the Angels understand, either the
Angels of heaven, or the whole churches, are easily confuted: the former,
because the faults reproved, and repentance enjoined in the Epistles, cannot
agree to Angels; the latter, because they confound the seven Stars, which
Christ held in his hand, with the seven golden Candlestickes, in the midst
whereof he walked.
interpreters both new and old, that by the Angels we are to understand the
Pastors or Bishops of the Churches: yet is it become a great controversy in
our time (which I wish were as likely to be determined and ended, as it is
easy by evidence of truth to be decided) what manner of Bishops they were:
whether (for the substance of their calling) such as the reverend Fathers of
our Church are (which, by the grace of GOD, I will plainly prove), or such,
as some of our time have fancied.

Secondly, we are to consider the quality of their function, and out of the
words to show, that the office and function of Bishops here meant by
Angels, is in this text both approved as lawful, and commended as excellent:
they having this relation to the Churches whereof they are Bishops, that
where the Churches are compared to Candlesticks, they are presupposed to be
the lights set there on, to Mat. 5 15. John 5. 35.
give light to all in the house of God: where the Church in this book is
termed heaven (as it is the heaven upon earth) the Pastors and Bishops are
the Stars of heaven: where it is called the kingdom of heaven, as though it
were the heaven of heavens, they are the Angels in this heaven.

For the deciding of the former question, two things are in the words offered
to our consideration. For whereas they are said to be Angels of the Churches,
we are first to consider what manner of Churches they were, whereof they were
Angels; and secondly, what manner of pre-eminence they had in those Churches,
in regard whereof they are termed the Angels of the Churches. As touching the
first: we are to try, whether these Churches whereof they were Angels or
Bishops, were parishes, or dioceses: and consequently, whether they were
parishionall, or diocesa^ Bishops. For some of late have taught, that properly
there is no visible Church, but a parish, nor lawful Bishops but
parishionall; and that for the space of two hundred years after Christ, there
were no other but parish-bishops. And that we should not think, they use the
word parish, in so ample a sense as the ancient Fathers and Councilles were
wont to use the word (...), (as after you shall hear): they define a Parish
to be a particular, ordinary, or set Congregation or Christians assembling in
one place (as it were in one synagogue) to the solemn worship and service of
God; such as be our parishes here in England. To make good this newe-found
opinion (the novelty whereof bewrays the falsitie) they have coined others,
as new, and therefore as false assertions. As first, that every parish Iure
diuino*
by right has sufficient authority within it self immediately derived from
Christ, for the government of it self in all causes ecclesiastical. And
secondly, least they might seem to set up an absolute Popeling in every
parish, who should have not only For they say, that the Pastor of a particular
congregation is the highest ordinary ecclesiastical office in any true
co^stituted visible Church of Christ.
supreme, but also sole authority in causes ecclesiastical: they adioyne
unto him, his consistory of lay or governing Elders. And to this parishionall
presbytery consisting of the parish Bishop (forsooth) and his parish elders,
they do ascribe that sufficient, immediate, and independent authority for
ecclesiastical government of every proper visible Church, otherwise called a
parish. Thirdly, as for diocesan or provincial Bishops, they hold them
unlawful, and Antichristian: neither may they (good men) be acknowledged to
be so much as members of the true visible Church; because forsooth they be
not members of some one only parish; which in these men's conceit must needs
be the kings own case.

Concerning the second; viz. what was the pre-eminence of these Bishops in
the Churches, in respect whereof they are called the Angels of the Churches;
Others more wise and learned then the former, granting they were Bishops of
whole Cities, and the Countries adjoining (that is to say of Dioceses)
notwithstanding the sway of the government they ascribe to the Presbyteries of
those Churches, consisting partly of ministers and partly of annual or
Lay-presbyters; making these Angels or Bishops nothing else but (...), or
presidents of those presbyteries: and such presidents, as were not superior to
the other presbyters in degree, but only in order; having an authority
committed to them by the free consent of the rest, to assemble the Presbyters,
to moderate the action, to propound matters, to ask voices, ever pronouncing
what the greater part decrees, and lastly to execute the presbyterial decrees:
and further, such president, as had not this superiority for term of life,
but for a shor time, as a week or a month, and that by course; this
presidentshippe being, according to their conceit, common to all in their
turns.

Now for the clearing of this matter, which we have in hand: forasmuch as both
sorts obtrude lay elders to extrude Bishops; I will endued with power of
ecclesiastical government, were dioceses properly, and not parishes: and that
the presbyteries which were in those times, were assigned not to parishes, but
to dioceses. And consequently, that the Angels of the Churches and presidents

Against the latter, that the Bishop being advanced

And so in the last place I will come to the other thing, which is to be
observed in this

ANd first, First, no presbyters, but Ministers.
I am to show, that there were no other Presbyters in the primitive Church but
Ministers. A sufficient proof whereof may be this: that, as in the writings
of the Apostles, in the ancient Fathers and councils, the word (...) or
Presbyter (noting an Ecclesiastical person) does evermore signify a Minister
of Priest (which word, though abused by the Papists to signify sacrificing
Priests, is the proper english of Presbyter, and from thence derived:) and
therefore question might as well be made whether there were any annual
ministers or lay-priests, as presbyters, (that being also a name, as themselves
say, confounded in the Scriptures with Episcopus, and noting a person, who must
by the Apostles rule be Able to teach.
(...)): so can there not any one pregnant testimony be alleged out of the
scriptures, Councils or Fathers, mentioning or meaning any lay, annual,
onely-gouerning presbyters: which no doubt will seem strange to those; who
remember with what vehemency this kind of presbyters has been urged and
obtruded upon us. For although many places are usually alleged out of the
Scriptures and Fathers: yet I do unfeignedly profess, that (to my knowledge)
there are only two allegations, which I esteem worth the answering: the one,
out of 1. Tim. 5. 17.
1. Tim. 5. the other, out of Ambrose on the same Chapter. The Presbyters,
says Paul, that rule well, let them be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. From whence they gather a
distinction of Presbyters or elders; that some are governing elders only:
others, also Ministers. Whereunto I answer, that not any of the Fathers, or
any other before our age, did ever understand this text of any other, but of
the ministers of the word, they co^ceiuing of it, as if the Apostle had said:
Let those Ministers or Priests which rule well etc. Neither does the Apostle
indeed note 2 sorts of Elders, as they imagine, but two duties of the
Ministers, in respect whereof double honor is due unto them: the one general,
(...), to be good presidents; the other special, (...), to labor in the word
and doctrine. Putting only this difference, that whereas double honor is due
to all ministers for the performance of their duty in general, (for so Hiero.
nym. in 1. Ti. 5.
Jerome expounds these words, qui been praesunt (i. That is, who fulfill
their office.
qui implent officium suum:) yet especially they are to be honored for their
pains in preaching the word; that being, in Paul's estimation, the chief work
of the Ministry. For (...) is all one with that phrase of going out and in
before others, whereby the conversation of public persons in the scriptures is
signified. And they are said (...), who go out and in before the people of God
as it becomes them. And thus also the ancient Syriack Paraphrase expounds
those words, (...) qui been segerunt, who demean themselves well in their
place. And this is to be understood both of their private conversation (in
which sense the word (...) is used Tit. 3. 8. 14.
Tit. 3. 8. 14. where those which believe, are exhorted (...), to be
presidents of good works) and also of their public administration. Both which
the Apostle expresses in his farewell-sermon to the same Presbyters of
Ephesus, of whom he speaks to Timothe, Act. 20. 28.
Act. 20. 28. which may serve as a co^mentarie to this place. As if the Apostle
had said, those Presbyters or Ministers among you, who fulfill their ministry
according to that direction which at my departure I gave them, viz. that they
should attend to themselves and to the whole flock, over which the holy Ghost
had made them overseers, (that is (...)) and more specially, to feed the
Church of God which he has redeemed with his own blood, (that is, to labor
in the word and doctrine) let them be counted worthy of double honor. It is
plain therefore, that the Apostle in that place speaks only of Ministers.
And that he speaks not there of lay or onely-gouerning elders, it may
further be proved by plain evidence out of the text. For, seeing by honor in
that place the Apostle understands honorable maintenance, which by their
own confession is not due to lay elders; it is therefore certain, that this
place acknowledges none such. Thus therefore I argue;

To all those elders, who are mentioned or meant in this place, the honor of
maintenance is due for their work sake.

To the Lay Elders the honor of maintetenance is not due for their work sake.

Therefore lay elders are not mentioned nor meant in this place.

The proposition the Apostle proves in the next words by 2. 1. Tim. 5. 18
Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
testimonies. For the Scripture says, thou shall not moosell the mouth of the
Ox that treads out the corn. Which testimony he also alleges 1. Cor. 9.
9.
1. Corin. 9, to prove that mainetenance is due to the Ministers of the
Gospel. And again, Luke 10, 7.
The workman is worthy of his stipend.

The Assumption themselves confess, both by their doctrine and their practice.
For, whereas some object, that their lay elders, if they stand in need, are to
be maintained: I answer, that they See the Survey of the pretended
discipline cap. 10.
choose such as have not need; and if they have, that the maintenance which is
allowed, is for their need, and not for their work sake. But the Apostle
says, the Presbyters are worthy of double honor, and the workman is worthy
of his stipend; to signify, that the honor or mayntenaunce, whereof he
speaks, is not a beggarly alms given only in charity for need; but an
honorable stipende, in justice due to the Minister for his work sake.

Seeing therefore this Scripture fails them, we may conclude, that lay elders
have no footing in the Scriptures; and therefore by their own principles ought
not to be obtruded upon the Church of God.

I come to Ambrose, writing on the first verse of the same Chapter Ambrose. in
1. Tim. 5. 1.
Where the Apostle exhorting Timothy, not to rebuke an elder or aged man,
Ambrose gives this reason: For among all nations old age is honorable: and
then adds, vnde and synagoga, and postea ecclesia seniores habuit, quorum
sine consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsole verit
nescio, nisi forte doctorum desidia aut magis superbia, dum soli volunt alquid
videri. Whence it is, that both the Synagogue, and afterward the Church had
Seniors, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church. Which by what
negligence it is grown out of use, I know not, unless perhaps by the
slothfulness of the learned or teachers, or rather pride, whiles they alone
will seem to be some thing. Which words, whosoever understand as giving
testimony to lay elders, they wrong Ambrose, in making him against his meaning
to testify that, which has no warrant either in Scriptures, or in the elder
writings of Antiquity. For, Ambrose himself was a Diocesan Bishop, and one
who labored as much as any, not to justify (for that needs not in those
times) but to magnify the calling of Bishops; and was as far as any, from
subiecting either Bishops or Ministers (as these men do) to the Presbyteries
of lay men.

But let us examine the force of their argument. Ambrose says, there were
elders in the Church as well as in the Synagogue, therefore (say they) there
were lay elders. It follows not. For even the Synagogue had Ierom. 19. 1.
Seniores sacerdotum, Seniors of the Priests, as well as Seniores populi,
Seniors of the people. And, of such, Ambrose speaks, when he says, in the
Church or Church causes nothing was done without their advise. If it be said,
that Ambrose speaks of such Seniors, whose advise was neglected through the
default of the learned or teachers, and therefore of such as were not teachers;
I answer again, neither does this follow: for, doctorum, the learned or
teachers, being a common title both to Bishops and Presbyters, and so to be
understood in this place; we may easily conceive, how the assistance of the
Seniors, through not laymen but Ministers, was grown out of use, through the
default of such as had been teachers in the Church, either as Presbyters, or
as Bishops. For, whereas in the Primitive Church, the Bishop had used the advice of certain grave Ministers, who remained with him, after the greatest
number of Presbyters (being now allotted to their several titles or charges)
were severed from him: (a lively resemblaunce whereof remains in the Deanes
and Chapters of Cathedral Churches) and nothing almost was done in Church
causes without their advise: Ambrose complains, that their counsel in his
time was neglected, and their assistance grown out of use, by what negligence
he could not tell: but as he ghesseth, it was to be attributed either to the
idleness doctorum of the learned or teachers, that is to say, of the
Presbyters, who for their own ease gave over meddling in matters appertaining
to government; or else to the pride doctorum of the learned or teachers, that
is to say, of the Bishops, who took all upon themselves, that they alone
might seem to be somewhat. For if you expound Doctorum, for pastors of
parishes alone, as the Presbyterians do, or for Bishops alone, as others
do: I cannot see, how the excluding of Seniors, and taking the whole burden
and employment upon themselves, could by Ambrose be imputed as a matter of
sloth or idleness, either to the Pastors, excluding the lay Elders; or to the
Bishops, excluding the learned Presbyters. But howsoever Ambrose knew not
what to say of this matter, otherwise then by conjecture; yet I doubt not but
the true causes, wherefore the assistaunce of the Seniors grew out of use,
were these: First, because it being a matter of great trouble, whereby they
had no profitte, they provided for their own ease, giuinge over to intermeddle
in those combersome imploymentes, (which was Ambrose his first reason).
Secondly, because it grew needelesse; for that the frequent Synodes of
Bishops, which in every Province were assembled, not only determined many
causes, which before were wont by Presbyteries to be decided: but also decreed
many canons and constitutions, whereby the Bishop, without his former
assistance, might seem sufficiently directed. I conclude therefore the first
point, viz. that in the Primitive church there were no lay Elders, and
consequently, no parishionall Presbyteries. Whereupon, it will necessarily
follow, either that every parish Bishop (as they call him) must rule as a Pope,
or be subjected to the authority of the diocesan Bishop.

I come to the second; 2. The Churches, dioceses.
which is, to show, that in the Apostles times, and in the age following, the
Churches, whereof the Bishops are called Angels (or, to use their words, the
visible Churches, endued with power of Ecclesiastical government) were dioceses
properly, and not parishes. This is prooved out of this place. For, whereas our
Savior Christ, writing to the Churches of Asia, numbreth but 7. and naming the
principal, and (some of them) mother-cities of Asia, says, the seven
stars, were the Angels of those 7. churches; it cannot be denied, but that
the churches whereof they were Bishops, were great and ample cities: and not
the cities alone, but also the countries adjoining. For, it is evident, that
the Apostles, when they intended to co^vert any Nation, they first preached to
the chief cities thereof. Wherein, when through Gods blessing they had
converted some, their manner was to ordain Presbyters; hoping by their
Ministry, to convert not only the rest of the city, but also in the
countries adjoining, so many as did belong unto GOD; the kingdom of heaven
being like a little Mat. 13. 33
leaven, which being put into any part of the meal, seasoneth all. Neither
were the parishes distinguished in the Apostles times, nor the presbyters
assigned to their several titles or cures; but in common, the presbyters were
to attend the Act. 20. 28
whole flock converted, feeding them with the Word and Sacraments, and to
labor the conversion of the residue, so far as they should be able, both in
the city, and in the countries adjoining. The presbyteries therefore in the
Apostles times, were appointed, not to several parishes, but to whole cities,
and the countries annexed, that is to say, to Dioceses; that both they might
convert them, and attend and feed them being converted.

Against this which has been said, they do object; that in the first 200.
years, all the christians in any one great city, did make but one particular
ordinary congregation assembled in one place; and consequently, that both the
presbytery, and the President thereof, were assigned but to one congregation.

I answer, first, that the presbytery and the President thereof, were
provided, not only for the cities themselves, but also for the countries
adjoining, which were converted, or to be converted, by the Bishop and
presbyters of the city; and being converted, were counted part of that church.
And therefore though the antecedent of this objectio^ were true, yet the
consequence were to be denied. But the antecedent, is not only false, but also
unreasonable, and incredible. For, if you consider the number of the christians
in the greatest cities within the first two hundred years, or the times
wherein they lived, or the places where they used to assemble; you will
acknowledge, that all the Christians in the great Cities, neither did, nor
could ordinarily assemble in the same place, as one set particular ordinary
congregation.

What the number of Christians were before the first 200. years were ended, in
Rome, Ephesus, Alexandria; and such like Cities, we may imagine by that great
multitude of Christians which were at Acts. 4. 4. 5000.
Jerusalem; within a few weeks after the death of Christ: 3000. having been
converted in Acts. 2. 41.
one day. At Rome* about the year 100. the company of Christians being much
increased, (and til then both the Presbyters attending them promiscuoslie, and
the people meeting in diverse places uncertainly) Euaristus the Bishop of Rome,
was feign, for avoiding of confusion, to distinguish the^ into diverse Platina,
ex Dama^o. Onuphr. de episcopat. et titulis. etc.
parishes, or titles, assigning unto them, not presbyteries, but several
Presbyters; the number whereof by Platina, ex Dama^o. Onuphr. de episcopat. et
titulis. etc.
Hyginus was augmented, about the year 138. In the time of Cornelius, Bishops
and Martyr, about the year 250. there were in the Church of Rome (as himself
shows in an Epistle yet extant in Eusebius) one, Eusebius. lib. ^ cap. 43.
and but one Bishop, 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons, and of other Clergymen 101, of
widows and other distressed people, above 1500: all maintained by the
charitable contribution of the Christian people in Rome, which afterward he
calls (...), a very great and innumerable people. And well might he so call
it: for, Tertullian within the first 200. years says no less. See his
Apologet. cap. 37. Add to the multitude of the people, the consideration of
the times, raging for the most part with persecution, and not permitting the
Christians ordinarily to meet in great multitudes; also the consideration of
the places wherein they used to assemble, as it were by stealth (as private
houses, and ^aults called Cryptae, and other private and privy places, not
capable of such multitudes) and you will easily acknowledge, that the Churches
which were in the Cities alone, contained many particular congregations, unto
all which, there was but one presbytery, or College of Presbyters assigned.

NOw, 3, The Angels, not parishionall, but diocesan Bishops?
these Presbyteries in the Apostles times, as the presbyterians confess, had
and by divine ordinance ought to have a President, whom the holy Ghost here
calls an Angel, and the Fathers, a Bishop; which, by that which has been
said, may be proved to have been, not a parishionall, but a diocesan Bishop.
And that is the 3. point, which I was to prove. For, if the churches whereof
they were Bishops, were dioceses, and not parishes; if the parishes were not
yet distinguished, nor Ministers assigned to their peculiar titles, or several
cures; if the presbyteries were allotted to whole dioceses, and not to several
parishes: then the Bishop, who was set over a whole diocese, and not a
particular parish, who was president of the presbytery allotted not to a
several parish, but to a whole diocese, was undoubtedly not a parishionall,
but a diocesan Bishop. And this was the state of the Church in the Apostles
times. Howbeit, in the end of the Apostles time, parishes began to be
distinguished in cities, and afterward in the country. For, about the year
100. and therefore before the death of S. John, Euaristus Bishop of Rome,
distinguished the parishes or titles in Rome, Damasus, etc. vt supra.
and assigned not a presbytery, but several Ministers to every of the^: which
was also practiced in other cities. We may gather out of Eusebius, that before
the time of Iulianus, that is, before the year 180, diverse particular
congregations or churches, were subject to the Bishop of Alexandria. For, in
the first year (says he Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 9.
) of Commodus, the Bishopric (...), of the Churches in or about Alexandria,
was committed to Iulianus, after that Agrippinus had fulfilled his ministry
for the space of twelve years. Neither may we omit that, which Eusebius says
of Titus, and Theodoret both of Titus and also of Timothe, because it also
plainly confuteth their new assertion, who deny, that more particular
congregations then one, were subject to any Bishop, within the first two
hundred years.

Titus (says Eusebius) the Bishop (...) Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.
of the churches in Creet. Theodoret. in 1. Tim. 3.
Theodoret says, Titus was the Bishop Cretensium, of the Cretians, and Timothe
Asianorum, of them in Asia.

Epiphanius says Singuli ecclesia^u^ episcopi habeut beut sub se ecclesias:
Epist. ad Joan. Hiei ^ sol. apud Hieron. tom 2.
all Bishops of the Churches, have Churches under the^. As touching country
Towns, they were indeed converted aftor the Cities: and because they remained
heathenish for a time after the conversion of the City, therefore heathenish
people are still called Pagans: Notwithstanding the Bishop and Presbytery of
the City acknowledging them to belong to their charge, labored their
conversion as soon as they could; and when they were converted, the Bishop
out of his Presbytery assigned not a Presbytery, but a Presbyter or Minister
to every of them; a Presbiter, I say, and not a Bishop: saving that where the
Diocese was large, the Bishop being not able to perform all episcopal duties
in all places (things being as yet not so well settled) was feign to appoint a
Presbyter here and there, to be (...), a country Bishop, who, together with
his charge, remained subject to the Bishop of the City, in whose diocese he
was; neither might he meddle any further in Episcopal affairs, the^ by the
Bishop was permitted unto him. The Council of Sardica determined, that one
Presbyter is sufficient for a village; or a little City or Town, Council.
sard. capit. 6.
and therefore license not to be granted to ordain a Bishop in such places.
Which evidently shows, that Bishops were set over cities and dioceses, and
that every parish and Countrey-towne had not a Bishop, or a presbytery, but
one only Minister, as sufficing for such a charge.

Thus the^ parishes were distinguished, both in the cities and countries, and
several presbyters peculiarly assigned unto them. Upon which division of
parishes, and assignement of presbyters unto them, there happened no alteration
to the state of the Bishop: the difference was in the employment of the
presbyters. For whereas, before, they attended the whole flock in common, by
the direction of the Bishop: now, by his assignement, they were deputed to
their several charges. The Bishops jurisdiction was not altered, he having,
as before, the same episcopal charge of the city and country adjoining. In
respect whereof, a diocese contained (...) and (...), in this division,
signifying, not as the vulgar use of our English word Parish imports a
particular ordinary congregation, answerable to a Jewish Synagogue, but the
whole city and suburbs, though containing as many particular parishes, as In
Jerusalem were 400. Synagogues. Joseph.
Jerusalem did Synagogues; and in that sense (even after the division of
Parishes) is ordinarily used in the best Eusebius. hist. passim. Epiph. Epist. ad
Joan. Hieros. apud Hieronym. tom. 2.
writers. One of the ancient Canon. Apost. 33.
Canons, called the Apostles, appoints every Bishop to deal in those matters
(...), whatsoever appertain to his own See, and the countries subject unto it.
Which Canon the council of Antioch reciting, and calling it the ancient canon
of their fathers, explaneth in these words; Council. Antioch. c. 9.
For every Bishop ought to have authority over his own paroecia, and to have
care (...), of the whole region which is subject to his city, using (...) and
(...) promiscuously.

These three points whereof hitherto I have entreated, are of such evident and
undeniable truth, that Calvin, the first founder of the Presbyterian
discipline, does acknowledge the same. For, speaking of the discipline of the
primitive Church, which Instit. lib. 4. ca. 4.. 1.
he confesses was framed according to the word of God, and scarcely had any
thing differing therfrom; he says: Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4.. 2.
Quibus ergo docendi etc. to whom the office of teaching was enjoined, all the^
they named Presbyters. They, out of their number chose one in every city, to
whom they specially gave the title of Bishop: ne ex aequalitate, vt fieri
solet, dissidia nascerentur; least out of aequality, as usually it happens,
dissensions should arise. And somewhat after, Habebant ergo, etc. Every city
had their College of Presbyters, who were Pastors and Teachers. And again, To
every city there was attributed a certain region or country, which from
thence should receive their Presbyters, and be reckned as part of that church.
And yet again: But if the country which was under his Bishopric, were more
large then that he could sufficiently discharge all the offices of a Bishop in
every place: through the country, in certain places, some Presbyters were
appointed, who in matters of less importance should be the vicegerents of the
Bishop. Such they called Chorepiscopi, because in the province they represented
the Bishop.

Thus far, that worthy servant of Christ, Calvin: who though in these three
things he agrees with us, namely, that the Presbyteries consisted of
Ministers, that the Churches endued with power of Ecclesiastical government,
were dioceses, and that Bishops under their charge, had both their cities and
countries adjoining: yet I confess, in the fourth point he differs from us,
and as I am undoubtedly persuaded, from the truth.

IN the 4. 4. Bishops, superior to other Ministers, in degree.
place therefore, we are to entreat of the superiority of Bishops over other
Ministers. For, although the presbyterians and we agree in this, that by divine
institution, there was in the primitive Church, and still ought to be one, set
over the Presbyters: yet in diverse things they dissent from us, and as I said,
from the truth. First, in that they make the Bishop superior in order only,
and not degree. Secondly, in that they assign a superiority or
presidentshippe unto him for a short time, and that by course. Thirdly, in that
they ascribe unto him a prioritie only of order, and not a majority of rule or
power. And to this pupose, it pleases the^ to distinguish Bishops into 3.
sorts, divine, humane, divelish; acknowledging such only, as they fancy, for
divine. Howbeit, I must needs confess, that reverend Beza, though an earnest
patron of the presbyterian discipline, and one who came far short of Caluins
moderation in this behalf, notwithstanding he speaks far otherwise of our
Bishops, then our men use to do. Beza de ministr. euang. cap. 18. see* also
cap 21. in fine.
Quod si nunc Anglicanae Ecclesiae, says he, etc. But if now the reformed
English Churches do persist being vpheld by the authority of their Bishops
and Archbishops (as this has happened unto them in our memory, that they have
had men of that order not only famous martyrs of God, but ^^o most worthy
Pastors and Doctors:) let England surely enjoy that singular blessing of God,
which I pray God may be perpetual unto it. And that we may all say Amen to
Beza his wish, I will show you first in general, that the Bishops or Angels
of the primitive Church, were superior, as well as ours, in degree to other
Ministers: and then more particularly I will declare, wherein their
superiority did consist.

That Bishops were superior to other Ministers in degree, all antiquity
with one consent (if you except Aerius, who for dissenting in this point was
accounted an heretic by Epiphanius and Augustine) does acknowledge; Council.
fard. c. ^3.
distinguishing three (...) degrees of Ministers, Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons, aunswerable to the high Priest, Priests and Leuits; making the
Bishops to be the first degree, Presbyters the second, Aduers. Parmenian.
libro 1. Quid commemorem Laicos, qui tunc in ecclesia nulla fuerunt dignitate
suffulti? quid ministros plurimos? quid diaconosintertio? quid presbyteros in
secundo sacerdotio co^stitutos? ipsi apices and principes omnium aliqui
episcopi illis temporibus, vt damno aeternae vitae istius incertae lucis mora^
breuissi mas compararent, instrumenta diuinae legis impie tradiderunt.
and Deacons the third. So says Optatus, What should I mention the Deacons
placed in the third, or the Presbyters in the second Priesthood or Ministry?
the very chief, and principes omnium Episcopi etc. and princes of all, the
Bishops etc. Neither is any thing more usual in Councils and Fathers, then
the distinction of ministers in^^ these three degrees.

Ignatius, who lived in the Apostles times, often mentions this distinction:
as, ad smyrn. Ignat. ad smyrnenses.
Let the Lay men be subject to the Deacons, the Deacons to the Presbyters, the
Presbyters to the Bishop, the Bishop to Christ: and ad Tarsens. Ad Tarse^s
Presbyters submit your selves to to the Bishop: Deacons to the Presbyters:
the people to the Presbyters and Deacons. (...), my soul for theirs, who
observe this good order, and the Lord be always with them. And again, Ad
Philadelph.
(...). Let the Presbyters, and the Deacons, and the rest of the Clergy
together with all the people, be obedient to the Bishop, as their ruler; for
so much is implied in the word.

And such was the difference between the degree of a Presbyter and of a
Bishop, that when Eustathius the Bishop of Tyrus sought upon secret
displeasure to disgrade certain Bishops whom Photius had ordained; the
censure of the great Council of Ex actis Council. Chalced. de Photio and
Eustathio.
Chalcedon was this, (...): to reduce a Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter, it
is sacrilege. To omit others, let us hear Ieromes confession, because he
usually is alleged as favoring the heresy of Aerius. Hyero^i^^. ad Euagrium.
At Alexandria (says he) From Mark the Evangelist unto Heraclas and
Dionysius Bishops, evermore the Presbyters having chosen one from among
themselves, and placed him in excelsiori gradu in a higher degree, called him
Bishop, eue^ as an army makes an Emperor; and in the end of the same Epistle,
That we may know, says he, that the apostolical traditions are taken out of
the old testament, look what Aaron and his sons, and the Levites were in the
Temple, the same let the Bishops, Priests and Deacons challenge in the Church.

But let us consider more particularly wherein the superiority of Bishops
did, and does consist. Paul writing Tit. 1. 5.
to Titus, the Bishop of Creet, says, I left thee, that thou should
continue to redress those things that are amiss, and that thou should
ordain Presbyters in every City, as I appointed thee. From whence we may
gather a threefolde superiority of Bishops; the first, Singularity of
preeminence, during life: I left thee, that thou sholdest etc. The second, the
power of ordination; that thou should ordain Presbyters: The third, the
power of jurisdiction; that thou should redress etc. and this twofold power
not confined to a parish, but extended to the whole Island of Creet, and to all
the Cities thereof. From the first of these depends the unity, from the
second the perpetuity, from the third the eutaxy or good order of every
Church.

As touching the first, Bishops, superior to other Ministers in singularity of
preeminence, during life.
whereas there were many Presbyters in one City, (as in the time of Cornelius
Epist. Cornel. apud Eusebius. lib 6. c. 43.
there were 46. in Rome;) yet there neither was nor might be, as he there
says, any more Bishops but one in a whole Diocese, or as the holy Ghost here
teaches us, but one Angel in a Church; one Timothe at Ephesus, one Titus in
Creet, one Epaphroditus in Philippi, one Archippus at Colossa etc. which is a
truth that Councilles and Fathers with one consent do testify. Council. Nicen.
apud Ruffin. eccl. hist. lib. 10. c. 6.
Ruffinus reports this Canon out of the Cou^cil of Nice, which indeed agrees
with the 8. Cano^, Ne in (...) ciuitate duo sint Episcopi, that in one City
there be not two Bishops. Hieronym. Chrysostom. Ambros. Theodoret. Oecumen. In:
Philipp. 1.
Ierom writing on the first to the Philippia^s says, Here, by Bishops we
understand Presbyters, for in one City there could not be more Bishops then
one: the like has Hieronym. Chrysostom. Ambros. Theodoret. Oecumen. In: Philipp.
1.
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Oecumenius, writing on the same place.

This, as it was ordained for the preservation of the Church in unity, and for
the avoiding of schism; so is it for the same cause to be retained. For
whence, says Cyprian Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 9.
have schisms and heresies risen and do rise, but whiles the Bishop, who is
one and governs the Church, by the proud presumption of some is contemned;
and the man, honored by Gods acceptance of him as worthy, is judged of
unworthy men?

The like has Hier. aduers. Luciferian.
Jerome, who says, that unless this singularity of preeminence be yielded
to the bishop, tot in ecclesi^^ efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes, there
will be so many schisms in the Churches as there be Priests. And in the
place before Ad Euag^ium.
cited, he says, that the Presbyters having elected One from among
themselves, and placed him in a higher degree, called him a Bishop. And that
we should not think this to have been peculiar to Alexandria; elsewere, he
says, after that every one sought to draw disciples after him, In Tit. 1:
toto orb decretum est, vt vnus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur
caeteris, ad quem omnis ecclesiae cura pertineret: It was decreede in the whole
world, that one being chosen from among the Presbyters, should be set over
the rest in every Church, unto whom the whole care of that Church, or care of
that whole Church, should appertain.

The Presbyterians also confess, that by Gods ordinance there ought to be one
set over the rest: but that one, they say, was for a short time, as for a week
or a Month, and that by course; this superiority being common to all in their
turns. And to this purpose they allege the courses of the Priests, and the
testimony of In Ephesians.
Ambrose. But, the courses of the Priests make nothing to this purpose. For
though the several orders of Priests served in their course; yet he, who was
chief of his order, kept his preeminence when their course was ended. And to
their testimony I answer: first, that the author of those commentaries is
suspected. Secondly, that his testimony is false: for nothing is more evident,
the^ that bishops were elected to their places. Jerome, in the two last
testimonies which I alleged, witnesses the same. And lastly it is falsified
by them who allege it: for that author speaks not of a running regency to be
changed every week or month; but of the succession of one bishop after the
deceasse of another, according to their senioritie. Neither can any thing be
more evidently proved out of the momuments of Antiquity then this, that
bishops continued their regency for term of life. Was not Eusebius. lib. 3. 13.
and 21. etc.
Anianus bishop of Alexandria 22. years, and Abilius after him 13. years, even
in the Apostles times? Likewise James at Jerusalem 30. years, and after him
Simeon the son of Cleophas 3^? Euodius at Antioch above 20. years, and
Ignatius 40? Linus at Rome 12. years after the death of Peter and Paul, 22. in
all? Anacletus 10. and odd months: Clemens, 9. Euaristus 8? and so
throughout the succession of Bishops from the Apostles to the Council of
Nice, and so downward? Notwithstanding if you will believe them, such Bishops
as were for a week by course (for they suppose it was Hebdoma^ica (...)) must
be esteemed divine; though there cannot be alleged out of all antiquity,
either in the Apostles times or since, any one example of such. As for those
who be for term of life, they (forsooth) are but humane, though superior
only in priority of order: but if superior also in power or maioritie of
rule; then are they, in their judgment, worse then humane.

Let us therefore see, B B. Superior in power or maioritie of rule.
if Bishops were not also superior in power. Hearken to Ierom. Aduers.
Luciferia^os.
The safety of the Church (says he) depends on the dignity of the chief
Priest or Bishop: to whom if there be not given exors and ab omnibus ^minens
potestas, a peerless power, and eminent above all, there will be so many
schisms in the Churches, as there be Priests.

This power is twofold: the power of ordination, and of jurisdiction. As
touching the former: it has been the received opinion in in the Church of God,
even from the Apostles time until our age, that the right of ordination of
Presbyters, is such a peculiar prerogative of Bishops, as that ordinarily, and
regularly, there could be no lawful ordination, but by a Bishop.

At Ephesus, there were diverse Presbyters, Acts 20. and so no doubt in Creet*
yet the Apostle for this cause substituteth Timothe at Ephesus, and Titus in
Creet, that they might ordain Elders by imposition of hands. Which authority,
as it was not in the Presbyters before their coming, but in the Apostles; so
was it not at their deceasse derived to the^, but to such as were successors of
Timothe at Ephesus, and of Titus in Creet.

They object, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, with imposition of hands of the Presbytery. Upon
which place especially, they build the authority of their presbyteries. But
without cause; this place admitting two expositions, neither whereof does
favor their presbytery. For first, Presbyterium here may signify, not the
fenate, or company of Presbyters, but the office of a Presbyter or priesthood;
in which sense the word is often used.

And so, not only diverse in former times, as Jerome, Brimasius, Anselmus,
Haymo, Lyra, but Culvin also expound it. Paul, says Calvin Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 3. in fine.
in another place, says, that he, and not any more, imposed hands on Timothe.
2. Tim. 1. 6. I admonish thee that thou stir up the grace which is in thee by
imposition of my hands. For that, which in the other Epistle is said
concerning the imposition of hands of the Presbytery; I do not so
understand, as if Paul did speak of the College of Seniors: but under this
name I understand the ordination it self; as if he should say, endevoure that
the grace which by imposition of hands thou did receive when I made thee
Presbyter, be not in vain.

Again, though it should signify a company of Seniors; notwithstanding, this
place is so far from prooving either parishionall Presbyteries (which never
were, or if they had been, should not have had authority to ordain him, who
was not to serve a parish) or lay presbyteries whatsoever, (which Calv. lib. 4.
c. 3. 16. hoc postrem^ habendu^ est, solos pastores manus imposuisse ministris.
And Beza speaking of the word (...) in his annot. quo nemine coetus omnis ille
significaatur qui in verbo laborabant.
Calvin and Beza acknowledge to have no right to impose hands) as that those
Chrysostom. Theodor. Theophy. Oecumen. in. 1. Tim. 4.
Fathers, who expound this place of a company of Elders, understand, here, the
ordination of Timothe to be a bishop by the imposition of their hands, who
were either bishops, or more then bishops; the word being here, and
elsewhere, generally taken; as Beza also confesses. Insomuch, that as the
Apostles sometimes 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. John. 1. and 3. Epist. 1.
are called Presbyteri, so Presbyterium here may signify a company of
Apostles or apostolic men; in which number 2. Tim. 1. 6
Paul was one. For Presbyters, as these Fathers say, might not ordain a
bishop.

Neque enim sas erat, says Ambr. in 1. Tim. 3.
Ambrose, neque decebat, for neither was it lawful, nor dece^t, that the
inferior should ordain the superior: For no man gives what he has not
received. And without all co^tradiction, says the Heb. 7. 7.
Apostle, the greater blesses the less, and not contrariwise, namely, ex aut
horitate.

Yea, but the Cou^c. of Carth. say they, commits authority of imposing
hands to Presbyters.

The words of the Canon are these: Council. Carth. 4. c. 3.
When a Presbyter or Priest is ordained, the Bishop blessing him, or holding
his hand upon his head, let all the Presbyters also which be present, hold
their hands upon his head, by the Bishops hand. Where, we plainly see the power
of ordination to be ascribed to the Bishop, and the Presbyters hands to be
adjoined (as with us) not for necessity, but for the greater solemnity of the
action, and the better encouragment of the party ordained, having the consent
and approbation of more then one. Otherwise, the perpetual consent of the
church of God, appropriateth the ordinary right of ordination to the Bishop
alone; the Councils and Fathers speaking of the Ordainer, as of one: As,
Council. Antioch. c. 9.
Every Bishop, within his own diocese, may ordain Presbyters and Deacons.
Canon Apost. 2.
(...), let a Presbyter be ordained of one Bishop. Council. Carth. 3. c. 45. et
Africa^. c. 22
By one Bishop, many Presbyters may be ordained. Council. Hispal. 2. c 6.
A Bishop alone may give to Priests and Deacons their honor: but he alone
cannot take it from them.

As for Presbyters, they are by Councils forbidden to ordain: and if at any
time they presumed so to do, (there being the^ no want of orthodoxall Bishops)
their ordination was repealed and judged of none effect. Because Colluthus
Athanasi. apol. 2. contra Arian. in epist. presbyt. et diac. Mareotic. ad
Curios. et Philagr. prefect. Agypti.
was not a true, but an imaginary Bishop, not only himself was commanded in a
general cou^cil to carry himself as a Presbyter: but Ischyras also and others,
who by him had been ordained Presbyters, were returned to their former order.
Likewise the cou^cil of Council. Co^stan. 1. c. 6.
Constantinople, judging Maximus to have bin no lawful Bishop, judged also the
ministers by him ordained, unlawful. Yea the Chorepiscopi themselves,
sometimes were Council. Antioch c. 10.
restrained, and sometimes forbidden Council. Ancyr. c. 12. Damas. epist. 4. Leo,
epist. 88.
altogether, to ordain Presbyters or Deacons. Nay further we read, that when a
certain Bishop in the ordination of a Presbyter and two Deacons imposed his
hands on them, and used the help of a Presbyter, only to read the words of
consecration and to bless them, himself oculorum dolor derentus, being not
able to read for the pain of his eyes: the council of Council Hispal. 2. ca.
5.
Hispalis reversed the ordination as unlawful.

And this is one principal reason whereby Epiph. haeres. 75.
Epiphanius proves against Aerius the heretic, that the office of a Bishop
is a higher degree then that of Presbyters, (...), for the function of Bishops,
is an order generatiue of fathers; for it begets fathers to the church: vvheras
the order of presbyters, being not able to beget fathers; by the laver of
regeneration, begets children to the church, not fathers, or teachers. And
this is so clear a case, that bishops only, in the judgment of the fathers,
have right of ordaining Ministers regularly; as that Jerome himself, even
where and when he seeks to advance the presbyters as high as he can above
the deacons, does confess ordination to be peculiar to bishops. Ad Evagr.
Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod presbyter no^ faciat? what does
a bishop excepting ordinatio^, which a presbyter may not do? Where, you are not
to understand him, or other or the Fathers, speaking sometime to the like
Chrysostom. hom. 11. in 1. Tim. episcopi sola ordinatione superiores sunt, atque
hoc tantu^ plusquam presbyteri ^abere videntur.
purpose, as though the bishop were not superior in any thing else: but that
potestate ordinis, as touching power of order, he is superior only in
ordination. For, that he is superior potestate jurisdictionis, in power of
jurisdiction, they every where acknowledge.

Thus have I reported the judgment of the ancient church, ascribing the
ordinary right of ordination to bishops: But yet, not so appropriating it unto
them, as that extraordinarily, and in case of necessity, it might not be lawful
for presbyters to ordain; and much less teaching (as the Papists imagine)
absolutely a nullity in the ordination which is not performed by a bishop. For
suppose a church The state of some reformed churches.
either altogether destitute of a bishop, or pestered with such as the popish
prelates are, heretical and idolatrous, by who^ no orthodoxall Ministers might
hope to be ordained; we need not doubt, but that the ancient Fathers would,
in such a case of necessity, have allowed ordination without a bishop, though
not as regular, according to the rules of ordinary church government; yet, as
effectual, and as justifiable, in the want of a bishop. For, seeing the Cou^c.
of Conc. Antioch. c. 10.
Antioch, permitted the lice^sed Chorepiscopi, who were but presbyters, to
ordain presbyters and deacons in the country, in the local absence of the
bishop, to whom with a little more pains they might have repaired: how much
more would they have allowed the same to a company of grave and learned
Ministers in the total want of a bishop? Yea, does not the church of Rome,
in her practice allow Chorepiscopos or Suffragans to ordain? and have not some
learned See D. Field. de ecclesia. lib. 3. ca. 39.
men among them (in their judgment) approved the ordination, not of priests
alone, but of Bishops performed by Presbyters, where no Bishops are to be had?
Yea, suppose that the right of ordinatio^ does belong to the power of the
episcopal order: yet I am sure the begetting of fathers to the church by
ordination, does no more belong to the power of order in Bishops, then the
begetting of children to the church by Baptism, to the power of order in all
Ministers. Yet, in the case of supposed necessity, in the absence of their
priests, not only other men, but women also, among them are permitted to
baptize. The truth is, where Ministers may be had, none but Ministers ought to
baptize: and where bishops may be had, none but bishops ought to ordain. But
though neither ought to be done; yet being done, the former, by other
christians in the want of a Minister, the latter, by other Ministers, in the
defect of a bishop, as the one in the judgment of the fathers is of force,
the church receiving the party baptized into the communion of the faithful;
so also the other, the church admitting the party ordained as a lawful
Minister. Thus much by the way, to prevent popish cavills.

Now am I to show, that the Bishop is superior also in the power of
jurisdiction. The Presbyters indeed do govern, but the people only of their
particular flock; and that not ^ot in an outward court, but in the Court of
the conscience.
in foro externo, but in foro conscientiae, ^eeding and guiding them by the
ministry of the word and sacraments, and by watching over them. And that
pastoral authority which they have, is delegated and committed unto them by
the Bishop; unto whom the care of the whole Church, as In Tit. 1.
Jerome says, does belong. But the Bishop does govern also in foro externo,
not one particular flock, but the whole diocese; and not the people only, but
the Presbyters also, having authority both to direct, and also to correct
them. And that authority is derived unto them from the Apostles, as to their
successors in the government of the Church. For which cause, as we shall
hear anon, Bishops at the first were called Apostles. For, as Jerome Hieronym
ad Marcella (...). aduers. Montan.
says, Apud nos, that is, in the true Church, Bishops do hold the place of
the Apostles. And Irenaeus Irenaeus. lib. 3. c. 3.
testifies that the Apostles left the Bishops their successors, delivering
unto the^ their own place of government.

I shall not need to prove their authority over the people of their diocese,
if I demonstrate their rule over the presbyters thereof.

Consider therefore the Presbyters, either as they were parts of the
Presbytery assisting the Bishop; or as Pastors, severed from the Bishop, and
allotted to their several charges. As touching the former; it is evident, that
the Bishops had not only a prioritie of order, over the several Presbyters;
but a majoritie of rule, over them all. For Aduers. Luciferianos.
Jerome (as you heard) yields to the Bishop a peerless power and eminent over
all, or as the word exors may signify, admitting no partener. Likewise
Ignatius that holy martyr, who for many years was Bishop of Antioch in Saint
John's time, (...) says he, Ignat. ad Trallian.
(...); What is a Bishop else, but such an one as holds or menageth the
whole power and authority above all? And writing, a little before his
Martyrdom, to the Presbyters of Antioch, where himself was Bishop, (...)
says he, Idem ad Antioch.
(...). You Presbyters feed the flock which is among you, until God shall
declare who shall be your governor; for I am even now to be sacrificed, that
I may gain Christ. And in diverse of his Ad Smyrnens. ad Tarsens. ad
Philadelph.
Epistles (as you heard before) he exhorts the Presbyters to be subject and
obedient to their Bishop.

Now, the Presbyters were subject to their Bishop, both as to their Ruler, to
be guided and directed by him; and also as their judge, to be censured and
corrected of him. For by ancient Canons, and Councils, the presbyters might
not do any thing of importance, without the direction of their Bishop. Let
Presbyters and Deacons do nothing says the ancient Canon, Canon apost. 40.
(...) without the sentence or appointment of the Bishop. The first Council
Council. Arelatens. 1. c. 19.
of Ar^es likewise decreede, vt presbyteri sine conscientia episcoporum nihil
faciant: and to the like purpose the Council of Council. Ancyr. c. 12.
Ancyra. As touching Baptism, Tertull. de Baptismo.
Tertullian says, The chief Priest, which is the Bishop, has the right of
giving baptism: then, the Presbyters and the Deacons, but yet not without the
authority of the bishop for the honor of the church; which being safe, peace is
safe: and for the communion; Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 14.
Cyprya^ finds fault with the Presbyters of Carthage, where he was Bishop,
that they not regarding propositum sibi episcopum, the Bishop set over them,
had received some to the communion who had fallen in time of persecution,
without warrant from him, though absent. In a word, Let no man, says Ignatius
Ignat. ad smyrn.
do any thing appertaining to the Church, without the Bishop: and more
particularly he says, Ibid.
that the administration of the Eucharist is then to be esteemed firm and
good, when it is done either by the Bishop, or by him whom the Bishop has
authorized.

But as the Bishops had authority to guide and direct, so also to censure
and correct the Presbyters. For proof whereof, what should I tell you of Cypr.
lib 3. Epist. 9.
Cyprian, partly assuring Rogatianus a Bishop (who in modesty, having been
reproched of his Deacon, complained to his fellow Bishops) that pro
episcopatus vigore and cathedrae authoritate, for the vigor of his
Bishopric, and authority of his chair, he had power to revenge his own
cause: and partly aduising him, if the Deacon did persist, he should either
depose or suspend him? Of Aduers. Vigilantium ad Riparium.
Jerome, maruelling that the Bishop of the Church, where Vigilantius was
Presbyter, did not virga apostolica, with the Apostolic, and with an iron
rod, break that unprofitable vessel, and deliver him unto the destruction
of his flesh, that his spirit might be safe? Does not the scripture testify
the same, when the Angel of the Church of Apoc. 2. 2.
Ephesus is commended for examining and not suffering those which said they
were Apostles and were not? and contrariwise the Angel of Ap. 2. 20.
Thyatira reproved for suffering the teachers of the Nicolaitan heresy, who
are compared sometimes to Balaam, and sometimes to Iezabell, because they
persuaded to fornication and Idolatry? But most plainly does Paul attribute to
Timothe and Titus (who, as afterward we shall prove, were Bishops) this
episcopal power, whereof we speak: to them alone and their successors, does
he direct his injunctions for the execution of that power; and on the^ he lays
the whole charge. For this cause I left thee in Creet, Tit. 1. 5.
says he to Titus, that thou should (...) reform and correct what is
defective or amiss, and should ordain Presbyters in every City, as I
appointed thee. And to Timothe, I requested thee 1. Tim. 1. 3.
says he, to abide still in Ephesus, that thou may commau^d some that they
do not (...) teach strange doctrine: 1. Tim. 5. 22.
lay not thou hands hastily on no man, neither be thou partaker of other men's
sins, keep thy self pure. 1. Tim. 5. 19. 20.
Against a Presbyter receive not thou an accusation, but under two or three
witnesses; them that sin rebuke openly, etc. On which words, Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius infers against Aerius, therefore Presbyters are subject to the
Bishop, as to their judge; and therefore as to their superior. Now follows
the charge: 1. Tim. 5. 21. etc. 6. 14.
I charge thee before God, and the lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
that thou observe these things without prejudice, and without partiality.

But consider also the Presbyters, as severed in place from the Bishop, and
affixed to their several cures: First, in the City, and then in the Country.
For as in the City, the Bishop, to whom, as In Tit. 1
Jerome says, the whole care of the Church did appertain, distinguished the
parishes, and assigned a Presbyter to every of them: so in the Country, when
the towns and villages were converted (which was effected by the Bishop of the
City and his presbytery.) they had their presbyters Here note by the way* that
presbyters first were ordained (as divines be in our universities) to the
national or diocesan Church (where they lived) in common, before they were
assigned to their peculiar titles or cures.
by the Bishop appointed unto them: and when any place was void, the Bishop out
of his presbytery, or if he could not, the Metropolitan supplied it. These
presbyters, as I said before, might do nothing but by authority from the
bishop, or as the ancient council of Council. Ancyr. c. 12.
Ancyra speaks, sine authoritate literaru^ eius, without the authority of
his Letters. Nay, they might not so much as travel from place to place, and
much less remove from one cure to another, without the Bishopslicence. To his
jurisdiction and censures they were subject: for to him they were accused;
being accused, by him they were conuented, and examined; being faulty, by him
they were Council. Nicen. c. 5. Carthag. 2. c. 8. and alijs.
censured, according to the quality of their offense; by reproof, putting to
silence, suspension, deprivation, excommunication.

To conclude, the pastors of several parishes either had assistants to
restrain them, or they were subject to the bishop, or they ruled alone without
co^trolement, neither subject to Bishop, nor restrained by assistants. But this
last is absurd: for that had been to set up a Pope in every parish, and to
make as many schisms as there were parishes. Associates of lay Presbyters in
every parish they never had, nor yet have in those Countries where Presbyters
be erected. For there is but one Presbytery in the Church of Geneua, for all
the parishes in the City, and territory thereto belonging: and in all
Scotland, where be some thousands of parishes, there be scarce half a hundred
presbyteries. To have a Presbytery of ministers to assist the pastor in every
parish, it neither was, nor is possible. It remains therefore, that the
Ministers of several parishes ever were, and still ought to be, subject to the
bishop; whose pastoral care extended it self to all even the remotest
parishes in his Diocese, to see them furnished with sufficient Ministers, to
provide that they were soundly taught, and discreetly guided, to reform abuses
notified unto him, to suppress schisms, to decide controversies, to exercise
Church Censures against offenders, etc.

Thus then you have heard, that the Angels or Bishops of the Primitive Church
were, for the substance of their calling, such as our bishops are; that is to
say, Diocesan and provincial bishops, being superior in degree to other
Ministers, and having a singularity of preeminence for term of life, and a
peerless power both of ordination and jurisdiction. For, as for titles of
honor, which in our church are given to bishops; sure it is, they are
inferior to those which the holy Ghost assigns unto the^ in this place.
Neither should we think much, that they, in respect of their honorable
calling, are termed Lords (a title in Scriptures given not only Genesis 31. 35
Let not my Lord be angry, says Rabel to her father.
to natural, but also, and that more woorthily, to spiritual 1. King. 18. 7.
13. Art not thou my Lord Eliah? and, was it not told my Lord, says religious
Obadiah.
fathers) when the holy Ghost terms them Angels of the churches. Not that
Bishops may behave themselves as 1. Pet. 5.
LL. of the churches; but that they being angels, and spiritual fathers, to
who^, a paternal and pastoral authority is committed over the churches, may
worthily be honored with the title of Lords. Neither is there such great
difference between Master and Lord, that inferior Ministers, which assume to
themselves the title of Master, should deny the title of Lord to Bishops.
Neither does it follow, that Bishops are Lords of the churches, or they masters
of the churches, because the titles of Lords are attributed to Bishops, and
Masters to them.

IT remains, 5. The quality of the episcopal function.
that I should demonstrate not only the lawfulnes of the Bishops calling, but
also the excellency, and dignity thereof, in that they are here called
stars and angels. But to entreat of the excellency, it shall not be
needful, if we be persuaded of the lawfulnes. For if the function of all
Ministers in general, be (as I have elsewhere In 1. Tim. 3. 1.
manifestly proved) honorable, and they, in regard of their calling, are to
be 1. Tim. 5. 17.
esteemed worthy of double honor; then much more the office of Bishops, who
are the chief and principal Ministers, is a worthy or excellent work. If
every Minister in a diocese is to be honored in regard of his calling; much
more that one, who in a place of singular preeminence is set over the rest. And
if a worthy minister be among men as one of a thousand, as Elih^ Job. 33. 23.
speaks; undoubtedly a worthy bishop is as one of a million. If it be an
honor to beget children to the church, as all ministers do, by the ministry of
the Gospel, and by the laver of regeneration; much more to beget fathers to
the church, as bishops do, by ordination. If it be a great honor to be set
over the people of one particular flock; what is it to be set over not only
the people, but the Pastors also of many flocks, as a chief steward over Gods
family, as a principal spiritual Governor of his body, which is his church,
as a singular successor (as touching ordination and jurisdiction) in every
church, of the glorious Apostles of Christ.

All the question now adays is of the lawfulnes. For those, who understanding
the words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. 1. (that the office of a bishop is (...))
of the ministry in general, acknowledge it to be both good and excellent; they
are so far from granting (...), the office of a bishop, properly understood of
those, whom the church of God, ever since the Apostles times, has peculiarly
termed Bishops, to be excellent, that they do not acknowledge it to be good.
Yea, they are so far from acknowledging it to be good, that they think it
neither lawful, nor indifferent, nor tolerable.

I will therefore show that the function of Bishops is lawful and good, in that
they have divine both institution, being Angels (and therefore sent of God) and
approbation, being stars, which Christ holds in his right hand. And this I
will prove, first, by consequence; and then directly. The function episcopal,
an apostolical and divine ordinance.
For, what function or government is of apostolical institution, that is to
be acknowledged a divine ordinance, in respect of the first institution; as
having GOD the author thereof: the episcopal function, or government by
bishops, is of apostolical institution: therefore the episcopal function is a
divine ordinance.

The proposition is of undoubted truth, and is so acknowledged by Beza. Surely,
says he, De grad. Ministr. c. 23.
if it proceeded from the Apostles, I would be bold to ascribe it wholly, as al
other apostolical ordinances, to the institution of God.

The assumption I will prove by three arguments: in which I will proceed as it
were by degrees. 1. That government which was generally and perpetually used in
all Christian churches in the first three hundred years after Christ, and his
Apostles, and not ordained by general councils, was undoubtedly of
apostolical institution. This proposition, besides that it is Augustines rule,
is also of manifest truth. That which the whole church observes, says De
baptis. contra Donatist. l. 4. c. 24. quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec
co^cilijs institutu^, sed semper retentu^ est, non nisi authoritate apostolica
traditu^ rectissime creditur.
Augustine, and was not instituted by Councills, but always retained, it is
very rightly believed to have been ordained no otherwise but by the authority
of the Apostles. And again, to dispute whether Aug. ep. 118
that which the whole primitive church throughout the world observes, is to be
done or not, insolentissimae insan^ae est, it is most insolent madness. For,
can it enter into the heart of a modest and charitable Christian, to imagine,
that all the godly learned Fathers, whereof many had lived and conversed with
the Apostles, all the famous Confessors, and glorious Martyrs of the primitive
Church, all those pure and orthodoxall churches, planted by the Apostles, did
all with one consent, immediately after the deceasse of the Apostles, conspire
to abolish that form of government, which the Apostles had established, and
(as these men use to aggravate the matter) to turn Christ out of his kingdom?
Or if we could find in our hearts to think they were so ungodly (which be it
far from us once to imagine:) yet how is it possible, that al christians, in
all places, so far distant one from another, should suddenly, and at once,
jumpe, not only in abolishing the Apostolical government, but also in setting
up in all places throughout the Christian world, one uniform government, which
they had not received from the Apostles? Therefore this proposition also, is of
infallible truth.

I will therefore add the assumption. But the government of the churches, by
such Bishops as I have spoken of, was generally and perpetually used in all
Christian churches, in the first three hundred years after Christ and his
Apostles, and not ordained by any general Council.

That it was so used, appears first by that which has been said: when I
showed that the Angels or Bb. in the primitive Church, were diocesan Bb.
superior in degree to other Ministers, having singularity of preeminence during
life, and majority of power, in respect both of ordination, and also
jurisdiction.

Secondly, by the confession of Jerome, who says Hier. in Tit. 1.
when factions began in the church, toto orb decretum, it was decreed in the
whole world, that one elected from the rest of the Presbyters, should be set
over the rest, viz. in every church, unto whom the whole care of that church
should appertain, and that the seeds of schisms might be taken away. And in
another place, he says In Psalm. 44.
that the church when the apostles deceassed, in stead of them who had bin
fathers, had her children, that is, bishops, who should become Princes or
Governors in all Lands. In omnibus finibus mundi (says he) principes
ecclesiae. i. episcopi constituti sunt: In all the ends of the world, the
princes of the church, that is, Bishops, were ordained or established.

Thirdly, by the testimonies of Councils, histories, and Fathers, who with one
consent give testimony to this government. Neither can any one pregnant
testimony of any sound writer, or example of any one orthodoxal or apostolical
church, be produced to the contrary. Fourthly, the successions of Bb. in all
the most famous churches, deduced from the Apostles times to the council of
Nice, do yet remain upon record in the Eus^. passim Epiph. haer. 66. Iraeneus
and Tertullian do prove the deriuation of the orthodoxall doctrine from the
Apostles, by a continual succession of Bishops in the churches, teaching the
same truth. Irae. lib. ^. c. 3. Tertul. de praescrip.
histories and other momuments of best credit. Neither is any thing objected
against this succession, which I hold worth the mentioning. Verily, to a
moderate christian, this might seem a sufficient commendation of the episcopal
function, though no more could be said to justify it; that in the best times of
the primitive church, it was borne of so many thousand godly and learned Bb.
received in all true churches, approved of all the orthodoxall and learned
Fathers, allowed and commended of all the famous councils. Allowed I say, and
commended, but not first ordained by Councils. For, the most ancient
provincial Councils, consisted chiefly of such Bishops, assembled and guided
by the Metropolitanes. And the council of Nice, which was the first general
council (for until the time of Constantine, there was no means for
assembling a Council general) is so far from first ordayning Bishops, as
not only that Council consisted of such bishops, but also it speaks of
Metropolitanes, as being long before in use; yea, and ratifieth the ancient
custom (for so it says Council. Nic. ca. 6.
(...)) of subjecting diverse provinces to the Patriarchs or Archbishops of
Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, and confirms Cap. 7.
the next place of honor (according to the ancient custom) to the bishop of
Jerusalem.

Therefore the government of the Churches by such Bishops, as I have spoken of,
was undoubtedly of apostolical institution.

Again, that government which no where was in use in the first three hundred
years, is not of Apostolical institution:

The government of the Churches, by a paritie of Ministers, and assistance of
Lay Elders in every parish, was no where in use in the first three hundred
years. Therefore it is not Apostolical institution.

Now I proceed to the second degree, ascending to the Apostles times, from
whence in the second place I argue thus:

That government which even in the Apostles This I take for granted.

The government by Bishops was used even in the Apostles times, and not
contradicted by them. This I prove, both by Scripture, and by other evidence.
The seven Angels were the Bishops of the seven Churches as all confess,
and for the substance of their calling like to ours, as I have proved.
Besides, it is well known, that the Angel of the church of Smyrna, to whom the
second Epistle is directed, was Polycarpus Bulling. in Apoc. conc. 9. notes
that Polycarpe was made Bishop of Smyrna, 13. years before the revelation was
given, and so he continued for many years after.
that renowned Martyr, of whom the Church of Smyrna that then was, writes
Eusebius. lib. 4 c. 15.
thus in an Epistle yet extant in Eusebius: Of which elect (say they) this
Polycarpe was one in our times, an Apostolical and prophetical Doctor (...)
having been the Bishop of the Catholic Church in Smyrna. And it may well
be supposed, that the Angel of the Church at Ephesus, to whom the first
Epistle is directed, was Onesimus. For when Ignatius wrote his Epistles, he
testifies, Ignat. ad Ephesians. and ad Antioch.
that at that time, Onesimus was Bishop of Ephesus. Now he wrote, while
Clemens was Bishop of Rome; as appears by his first Ignat. ad Mariam Cassob.
Epistle: That is to say; between the 90. year of our Lord and 99. in the
midst of which time the Revelation was given. And that we should not think
that Testimony counterfeit and falsely fathered on Ignatius, who was Bishop
of Antioch at the same time: Eusebius also alleges it out of the same
Epistle. Ignatius, says he, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 35.
being at Smyrna where Polycarpus was, he writes one Epistle to the Church of
Ephesus, mentioning their pastor Onesimus.

Moreover it is evident, that from these seven Angels, a succession of
Bishops was continued in all those seven Churches, until the Council of
Nice, and long after: for both to that council, and to diverse others
following, the Bishops of those seven Churches Vide subscriptiones Council.
Niceni; Ephesini interact. Chalced; Chalcedonensis, and Constantinop. 6.
subscribed their names: As, to to the Council of Nice, Menophantes bishop of
Ephesus, Artemidorus of Sardis, Eutychius of Smyrna, etc. to the council of
Chalcedon, Stephanus B. of Ephesus, Florentius of Sardis etc. Again, it is with
great consent testified by Irenaeus. Eusebius. Epiphanius. Augustine, etc.
Authors of best credit in the Church of God, that in the Apostles time
(reckoning until the death of S. John: that is to the year of our Lord, 101,
or 102), there were not only Bishops, but also a succession of Bishops in
diverse Churches. As, at Rome these were bishops successively in the Apostles
time; Irenaeus. lib. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 2. and 4. and capp. 13. 14. 34.
Linus, Anacletus, Clemens, and about the year 99. Euaristus.

At Jerusalem Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 23. and l. 3. c. 11.
James the just, and Simeon the son of Cleophas.

At Antioch, Ignat. ad Antioch. Eusebius. 3. 22.
Euodius and Ignatius.

At Alexandria, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24 and l. 3. c. 13.
Saint Mark, Anianus, Ab^^ius, Cerdo.

Neither were they contradicted by the Apostles, but approved by them: As,
these Angels of the seven Churches, in respect of their function approved
by Saint John, or rather by our Savior Christ. Epaphroditus, the Apostle or
Bishop of the Philippians, (who therefore is not mentioned in the
inscription, because that Epistle was sent by him) commended by Paul as his
Phil. 2. 25.
(...) copartner both in his function and in affliction, and the Philippians
Phil. 2. 29. (...).
commanded to have in honor such. James the just, Bishop of Jerusalem,
generally approved, Act. 15. See the Geneua note on Act 21. 18.
Act. 15. and 21. Gal. 1. 19. Archippus the Bishop of Colossa, in respect of
his function, Colos. 4. 17
approved of Paul Coloss. 4. 17. Antipas, Apoc. 2. 13.
who had been Bishop of Pergamus (as Arethas reports) highly commended by
the holy Ghost. Apoc. 2. 13.

Hereunto add the confession of Jerome, In Tit. 1.
that when factions began to arise in the Church, some saying I am of Paul, I
am of Apollos, I am of 1. Cor. 1.
Cephas, (which was in the Apostles times, 1. Cor. 1.) it was decreed in the
whole world (and therefore by the Apostles; for Jerome himself calls the
episcopal function, Ad Euagr.
a tradition Apostolical) that one being chosen from among the Presbyters,
should be set over the rest, etc. He also confesses, Catalog. script.
that James the just, shortly after the passion of Christ, was made Bishop of
Jerusalem. And that at Alexandria, even from Ad Euagr.
Saint Mark (who died five or six years before Peter and Paul, and after whom
there was a succession of three more in the Bishopric, during the Apostles
time) there had been Bishops chosen successively. And least we should think,
as some do, that the words, A Marco, are understood exclusiuely, as though
Mark himself had not been Bishippe of Alexandria; Jerome tells us
elsewhere, Prooem. in Matthew. Marcus interpres Apos. Petri, and Alexandrinae
Ecclesiae primus Episcopus.
that Mark was the first Bishop of the Church at Alexandria.

Seeing therefore godly and worthy Bishops were ordained in the Apostolical
Churches in the Apostles times, and they not oppugned, but approved of the
Apostles; it follows therefore, that the government of the churches by
Bishops, is of Apostolical institution.

But yet I proceed to a further degree. Which

As concerning the time, there is some difference between the Church of
Jerusalem, and the rest. For there, because shortly after Christ's passion, a
great number were converted to the faith (for we Acts. 2. 41. and 4. 4.
read of 3000. converted in one day:) and because that was the mother Church,
unto which Christians from all parts were afterward to have recourse; the
Apostles before their dispersion, Statim post passionem domini, straightwayes
after the passion of our Lord, ordained James the just, Bishop of Jerusalem,
as lerome Catelog. scriptorum.
testifies. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23. (...).
Eusebius reports out of Hegesippus, who was near the Apostles times (as
Jerome says) that to James our Lords brother, the throne of the Bishopric at
Jerusalem was committed by the Apostles. Likewise Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 1.
out of Clemens Alexandrinus, hypotopos. 6. that Peter, James and John, after
the ascension of our Savior, did choose James the just, Bishop of Jerusalem.
The same is testified by Epiphanius Epiphan. haeres. 66.
haeres. 66. where also he sets down the succession of the Bishops of
Jerusalem from James, to his time. By homil. 3. and 33. in initio.
Chrysostom on the Acts. By Ambros. in Galat. 1. 19.
Ambrose on the Epistle to the Galathians, Paul saw James at Jerusalem,
because there he had been ordained Bishop by the Apostles. By Eusebius
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 5. and Chronic. Anno 33.
himself, by Doroth. in synops.
Dorotheus, by Aug. contra ^resconium. l. 2. c. 37. in order, not in degree.
Augustine, etc.

If any object (as some de gradib. ministr. c. 23.
have done) that James was ordine, but not gradu, superior to the Presbyters
of the Church at Jerusalem, or that he was (according to their conceit)
president of the presbytery for a short time, and that only in his course:
they must remember, that he was an Apostle, and his honor and degree by his
Bishopric not impaired. Yea, Eusebius reports out of Clemens Alexandr. Euse.
l. 2. c. 1 (...).
that Peter, James and John after the ascension of Christ our Savior, though
the Lord had vouchsafed them some prerogative of honor, yet they would not
arrogate to themselves that glory, but chose James the just to be Bishop of
Jerusalem. And good Authors Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 11. and 4. c. 22. ex Hegesippo.
testify, that both he, and his successor Simon, the son of Cleophas, were
by the Apostles preferred to that place, because they were our Savior Christ's
kinsmen according to the flesh.

What then? was he superior to the rest of the Apostles? In degree he was not;
but in order he was, when and whilst they were at Jerusalem, after his
election, as appears Act. 15. howbeit their purpose in making him Bishop, was
not to set him over themselves, but over the presbyters and people of
Jerusalem. For indeed the Apostles first jointly ruled the Church at Jerusalem;
but being to go into all the world, and no longer to be accounted members of
that particular church, ordained James to be bishop: and that charge which
before they had in common, they now committed to him in particular. And this is
that which Jerome cites out of Hegesippus. Hegesippus (says he) Catalog.
scriptor. in Jacob.
who was near the Apostles times, in the fifth book of his commentaries
speaking of James, says, Suscepit Ecclesia^ Hiero solymae post apostolos
frater Domini Iacobus, cognomento Iustus. James the brother of our Lord,
surnamed Iustus, received or undertook the Church of Jerusalem after the
Apostles.

For the other point: (to omit his continuance at Jerusalem, as the
superinte^dent of that Church testified by the Act. 15. Act. 21. Gal. 1.
scriptures) the same authors which say he was Bishop, do also testify
that he continued so until his death. Catalog. script. in Jacob.
Thirty years, says Jerome, rexit he ruled the Church at Jerusalem, that is
to say, even unto the seventh year of Nero; and in like manner his
successor, 38. years.

As touching other churches; we are to observe, that the Apostles did not, at
the very first planting of them, appoint bishops unto them; because as yet,
there was neither that choice, nor yet that use of the^, among a people, which
was to be converted, before it needed to be governed: but first they ordained
Act. 14. 23. 19. 6. et 20. 17. 28.
Presbyters, to labor the conversion of the people, and to seed them which
were converted by the Word and Sacraments, and attending them in common, to
govern them after a private manner, and as it were, in foro conscientiae. But
the Episcopal power, which consists specially in the right of ordination,
and in the sway of ecclesiastical jurisdiction committed to one, the Apostles
each of them retained in their own hands, as it is manifest 2. These. 3. 14. 1.
Corin. 5.
whiles either they continued near them, or meant not to be long from them.
All which while, bishops were not so needful; the Apostles providing for the
necessity of those churches, either by their presence, or by their Letters or
Messengers. And this is the cause, why in the writings of the apostles, bishops
are so seldom (though not so seldom as some imagine) mentioned, and the name
with Presbyter confounded. But when as they were to leave the churches
altogether, either by departure, or by death, (that the churches should not be
left fatherless, they fulfilled that in Psalm. 45. according to Augustine and
Ieromes exposition, In stead of fathers, that is, the apostles, there shall be
children borne unto thee, whom thou shall make Princes over all the earth;
Hieronym. et Augustine. in Psalm. 44.
that is, bishops succeeding the apostles in the regiment of the church:) at
their departure they left substitutes, and at their death appointed successors,
to whom they committed the government of the churches; furnishing them by a
singularity of preeminence, both with the right of ordination, and with the
power of jurisdiction, as well over the Presbyters, as the people of each
City, with the country adjoining. And these, at the first were called,
sometimes Angels of the churches, as Apoc. 1. 2. 3. sometimes (...),
praepositi, Rulers. Hebr. 13. 17. (which text in the Canon. 44.
canons of the apostles, and in the second Epistle of Ignatius ad Trallian.
Ignatius, as also the name praepositi, in Latin Fathers, from thence is
appropriated to Bishops.) sometimes, the apostles Philip. 2. 25
of the churches, as succeeding the apostles in the government of the
particular churches: as, Philip. 2. 25. Epaphroditus, who was the Bishop or
Pastor of Philippi, is therefore called their Apostle; as not only Ambrose.
Hieronym. Theodoret. Calvin. Tho. Aqui. etc. in Philip. 2.
Ambrose; Jerome, Theodoret, but also Calvin teaches upon that place, and
observes the mutual affection, both of Epaphroditus as their Pastor, and of
the Philippians, as his stock. For, whiles the episcopal power was for the
most part in the apostles and apostolic men, those, who also had that power,
were called apostles: and therefore Ambr. Ambr. in Ephe. 4. et in 1. Cor. 12. 28.
vndersta^ds by apostles, in some places of the scripture, bishops, as Ephesians. 4,
11. and 1. Cor. 12. 28. Apostoli, episcopi sunt. And to the like purpose,
Cyprian, Cypri. lib. 3 epist. 9.
Apostolos. i. episcopos et praepositos dominus elegit. For, as Theodoret
Theodoret in 1. Tim. 3.
has well observed, on 1. Tim. 3. Intimes past, says he, they called the same
men Presbyters and Bb. and those who now are called Bishops, they named
Apostles. But in process of time, they left the name of Apostle, to those who
are properly called Apostles, and the name of Bishop they imposed on them who
had been called Apostles. Thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians,
Titus of the Cretians, and Timothe of the Asians. Neither was it long, that the
name Episcopus was confounded with Presbyter. For, Ignatius, who was a bishop
above 30. For S. John died anno. 101 and 5. of Trajane. And Ignatius, after he
had been 40. years Bishop, died in the year 107. and 11. of Trajane.
years in the apostles times, appropriateth the name (...), to a Bishop, and
distinguishes the three degrees of the Clergy (as the church, ever since the
time of the apostles, has distinguished the^) by these three names, Bishop,
Presbyter, Deacon. So do the Can. 2. 6. 7. etc.
canons which are called the Apostles, and some other monuments of Antiquity,
which were written near the Apostles times; of which sort are diverse
testimonies in Eusebius, cited out of the most ancient writers of the church.

But, we are also to show the places where, and the persons whom, the apostles
ordained Bishops: and first out of the Scriptures. For, by the Epistles of
Saint Paul to Timothe and Titus, it is apparent, that he had ordained Timothe
Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet; The Epistles themselves, being the
very patterns and precedents of the episcopal function. For, as the Apostle
had committed (unto them episcopal authority, both in respect of ordination
and jurisdiction, which in the epistles is presupposed: so does he by those
Epistles 1. Tim. 3. 15. Ambros. praefat. in 1. Tim. Timotheu^ iam creatum
episcopum instruit per epistolam, quomodo deberet ecclesiam ordinate.
inform them, and in them all Bishops, how to exercise their function; First,
in respect of ordination (as Tit. 1. 5, I left thee in Creet, that thou
should ordain presbyters in every city, as I appointed thee. 1. Tim. 5. 22,
Impose hands hastily on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins: And
to this purpose describes how Presbyters and Deacons, who^ they were to
ordain, should be qualified. 1. Tim. 3. 2. and 8. Tit. 1. 6. 7. 8. 9.)
Secondly, in regard of jurisdiction Tit. 1. 5.
not only over the people, but also over the presbyters; appointing them to be
both guides and censurers of their doctrine, (as 1. Tim. 1, 3,) I required thee
to continue in Ephesus, that thou should command some that they teach no
strange doctrine* neither that they attend (...), etc. ^. Tim. 2, 10, stay
prophane^ and vain bablings. T^^. 1, 10, 11, There are many deceivers, (...),
whose mouths thou must stop, which subvert whole houses, reaching things
which they ought not for filty by lucres sake: wherefore rebuke theme sharply*
that they may be sound in the faith. Tit, 3, 9, Stay foolish questions and
genealogies, etc.) and also judges of their persons and conversation: as, 1.
Tim, 5, 19, 20, 21, Against a Presbyter receive not an accusation, but under
two or three witnesses. The^ that sin rebuke openly, that the rest also may
fear. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
angels, that thou observe these things without prejudice, and without
partiality. Tit. 3, 10, Reicet him that is an heretic, after once or twice
admonition.

And that we should not think (as some do) that these things were spoken to
them, as to extraordinary persons (whose authority should did with them) but
to them and their successors to the end of the world: he straightly charge
Timothe, that the commandments and directions which he gave him, should be
kept inviolable 1. Tim. 6. 13. 14.
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore by such as should
have the like authority unto the end. Ambrose, writing on those words, faith,
Ambrose in 1. Tim. 6.
Paul is so circumspect, not because he is fearful of Timothe his care; but
for his successors, that they, after the example of Timothe, might conti^inue
the will ordering of the church. For the authority which was committed to them
is perpetually necessary: without which, the church neither can be governed
(as without jurisdiction) neither yet continued, as without ordination; and
therefore not peculiar to extraordinary persons, but by an ordinary deriuation
to be continued in those, who are the successors of Timothe and Titus. Now I
appeal to al, who have any judgment, whether their supposed Presbyteries
(which consist of Laymen for the greatest part) or the Bb. which succeeded them
in the government of the church, were to be accounted their successors. Why
but, did bishops indeed succeed Timothe in the government of Ephesus? yes,
without question* For (to omit not only this angel of Ephesus, Apoc. 2. which
was one of the next successors unto Tim. whether it were Onesimus or any other,
but also Polycrates the Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.
B. of Ephesus in the time of Victor, who professes that he was the 8. bishop
of his kindred) in the council of Chalcedon, Co^c. Chalc. Act. 11.
Leontius the B. of Magnesia says, that from S. Timothe to that time, there had
bine 7. Bb. of Ephesus al ordained there.

Against this, two things are objected; first; that Timothe and Titus may seem
not to have been appointed Bishops of Ephesus and Creet, because they did not
continue there, but were removed to other places. Whereunto I answer, that
although upon special and extraordinary occasions, they were by the apostles
called to other places, as his, or the churches necessity required; yet these
were the places of their ordinary resiance, where they both lived and died.
Paul wills Timothe 1. Tim. 1. 3.
(...), permanere, (the word is See the use of the word, Math. 15. 32. Acts.
11. 23. and 18. 18. 1. Tim. 5. 5.
significant) to abide still, or continue at Ephesus: and he left Titus not to
redress things in Creet for a brunt, and so to come away; but that he should
Tit. 1. 5.
(...), continue in redressing what should be amiss, and still keep that
church, as it were, in reparation, For whereas some De Ministr. grad. c. 22. et
in 1. Tim. 1. 3.
think that Timothe was commanded Acts, 20, to stay at Ephesus for a short
time, only to confirm the church there, being troubled with the sedition
raised by Demetrius; they are utterly deceived. For, Paul appointed, Timothe to
continue in Ephesus, 1. Tim. 1. 3.
(...), when himself was going into Macedony. But this cannot be understood
of either of those voyages into Macedonia, which are mentioned Acts, 20: the
first, from Ephesus* after the tumult was appeased, Acts, 20, 1. at which time
he could not leave Timothe at Ephesus to settle the christians after the
vp-rore raised by Demetrius; for immediately before the history of that tumult,
it is said, that he had sent Act. 19. 22.
Timothe before into Macedonia, and himself followed Act. 20. 1. and when he
had gone through those parts, (namely of Macedonia) he came into Greece,
purposing from thence to go toward Jerusalem. But understanding that the
Jews laid wait for him Act 20. 3.
he resolved (that he might avoid their ambushments) to return into
Macedonie, and from thence to ^ayl toward Jerusalem, traveling along by the
coasts of Asia: in which journey it is expressly said, Act. 20. 4. 5. 14.
that Timothe Their conceit therefore is strange who say that the first
Epistle was write to Timothe out of Macedonie.
accompanied him, and from Philippi with others went before him to Troas, and
to Assos, from whence he accompanied him to Miletum; Act. 20* 17.
whether the Apostle sent for the Presbyters of Ephesus. Seeing therefore Paul
appointed Timothe to stay at Ephesus, when himself was going into Macedonia;
and in all those iourneyes into Macedonia mentioned in the Acts, viz. cap. 16.
19. 20, Timothe was with him in Macedonia; and forasmuch as he went no more
thither until he had been at Rome: it is apparent therefore that this journey
happened in Paul's peregrinations, after his departure from Rome; when he
having staid there above two years, was at length dismissed and set at liberty
by Nero, in the 4. of his reign, which was the 57. year of grace. From which
time until the 13. of Nero, he renewed his former pains in traveling from
place to place. Now, the history of the Acts of the Apostles ending with
Paul's first being at Act. 28. 30.
Rome, the rest of his acts in the 9. years following, cannot otherwise be
known but by those his Epistles which were written in that time, and other
monuments of Antiquity, which testify that Paul ordained Timothe Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of Creet. Whereunto we may add the credible testimony of
Hieronym. sieve Sophronius in Catalog. in Tito. Dorotheus in synopsi. Isidorus
de vita and morte sanct orum. 87. and 88. Vincentius lib. 38. c. 10. and
Antonius ex Polycrate, part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 28.. 6. Niceph. lib. 10. c. 11.
diverse authors, who report, that Timothe and Titus, as they lived, so also
died, the one at Ephesus, the other in Creete.

The other thing which they object, is, that they were Evangelists. But that
does not hinder, but that when they were assigned to certain Churches and
furnished with episcopal power, they became Bishops. For as Zuinglius In
Ecclesiaste.
has well observed, Philippe the Evangelist, who had been one of the Deacons,
was afterward Bishop of Caesarea. James the Apostle was Bishop of
Jerusalem, and diverse of the Apostles (which also may be verefied of the So
was Mark of Alexandria.
Evangelists) when they ceased from their peregrination, became Bishops of
certain Churches, as by the ancient histories is manifest. Hereof we may
conclude thus: The supposed Euangelisticall function of Timothe and Titus, was
to end with their persons, and admitted no succession, being (as themselves
^each) both extrordinarie and temporary. but the function and Authority which
they had, as being assigned to certain Churches, viz. of Ephesus and Creete,
(consisting specially in the power of ordination and jurisdiction) was not to
end with their persons, but to be continued in their successors; as being
ordinary, and perpetually necessary, not only for the well being, but also
for the very being of the visible Churches: (For, if whiles the Apostles
themselves lived, it was necessary, that they should substitute in the
Churches already planted, such as Timothe, and Titus, furnished with
episcopal power: then much more, after their decease, have the Churches need
of such governors.) Therefore the function and authority, which Timothe and
Titus had, as being assigned to Ephesus and Creet, was not extraordinary and
Euangelisticall; but, as I will further prove, Episcopal. For, that Timothe
was Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet, it appears not only by the
subscriptions, annexed to the end of the Epistle to Titus, and second to
Timothe: but also by the general consent of the ancient fathers, and
histories of the Church. Eusebius reports out of the ecclesiastical
histories which were before his time, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. ^.
that Timothe first had the Bishopric of the Church at Ephesus, and Titus of
the Churches in Creet. The Author of the book, which goes under the name of
Dionysius Areopagita, dedicating his treati^e de diuinis nominib. to Timothe
the Bishop of Ephesus, does at the least signify, that in his time it was a
thing confessed, that Timothe was Bishop of Ephesus. The Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical writers, which is in Jerome, reports, that Timothe was
ordained of blessed Paul Bishop of the Ephesians, and that Titus was Bishop
of Creete. The same is testified by Ambrose, praefat. in. 1. Tim. and praefat.
in Tit. by Dorotheus in Synopsi. by Theodoret in 1. Tim. 3. by Chrysostom in
argum. 1. Tim. and in Epist. ad Philipp. homil. 1. by Epiphanius, haeres. 75.
by Gregory the great, Pastoral. part. 2. cap. 11. by Polycrates apud Antoninum
part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 28.. 6. by Oecumenius in Ephesians. 4. and in 1. Tim. 1. and
^. and in Titum. 1. by Primasius praefat. in 1. Tim. and in 2. Tim. 1. by
Nicephorus, lib. 2. c. 34. by Isidorus, de vita and morte sanctorum 87. 88.

To these two mentioned in the Scriptures, we may add others out of other the
most ancient records of the Church, whereof some were made by Peter and Paul,
some by John the Evangelist, some by diverse of the Apostles.

Anticch, (where the professors of the Christian faith were first called
Christians) had the first Bishop, after Jerusalem, ordained by the Apostles,
Peter and Paul, about the year of our Lord 45. (as Chronie. Eusebius. anno 45.
Eusebius says) viz. Euodius, whom Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22.
Ignatius succeeded. He, in his Epistle to them of Antioch, has these words;
Ignat, ad Antioch.
You were the disciples of Paul and Peter, lose not that which was committed to
your trust. (...). Remember Euodius your most blessed pastor, to whom the
government of you was first committed by the Apostles.

As touching the first Bishop of Rome, though I find great variety of
opinions, yet this I take to be the truth; that Peter and Paul being both
Peter came to Rome to op pugne Simon Magus in the second of Nero. Paul shortly
after, upon the occasion of his appeal; from whence, after two years they
departed; Paul being dismissed and set at liberty, Peter driven thence by
Nero. Prudent. peristeph. passio. Petti and Pauli. viuis vtrunque dies, ple^o
tamen innou^tus anno vid^e superba morte laureatum. Peter crucified Iun. 29.
anno Neronis. 12. Paul beheaded sun. 29. anno Neronis. 13. not. 14. for Nero
himself died on the 10. of June in the 14. year of his Empire.
at Rome (where they staid either of them somewhat above two years, but
neither of them professing themselves Bishop of Rome) about the year of our
Lord 56, ordained Linus the bishop of Rome; who continued Bishop there ten
years before the death of Paul, and twelve years after. And this is that which
Irenaeus one of the most ancient writers does testify: namely, that the
Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3.
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, the founders and instructors of the Church of
Rome, Lino episcopatum administrandae ecclesiae tradiderunt, committed the
Bishopric and administration of that Church to Linus: after whom followed,
successively, Anacletus, and then Clemens; as not only Iren. 3. 3.
Irenaeus, and Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22.
Eusebius (who says, that he was the third after Paul and Peter: for Linus,
says he, was the first, and after him (...).
Anacletus) but Ignat. ep. ad Martam Cassobolit.
Ignatius also (who lived at the same time) do witness.

I come to Alexandria, where Mark the Evangelist was the first bishop, by
the appointment of Peter. For although this be not certainly known, whither
Peter leaving Rome, did take Mark with him into Egypt, and ordained him there,
(as Niceph. lib. 14. c. 39.
Nicephorus writes, and as we may well think, if by Babylon where Mark was
with him, 1. Pet. 5. 13. we understand Babylon in Egypt,) or whether he did
send him thither from other parts, as Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 37.
others testify; yet this is confessed, that he was by Peter appointed bishop
there. And surely if he were bishop there, we need not doubt, but it was by
Peter's assigneme^t. For being his disciple, and perpetual follower, it may not
be thought, that he separated himself from Peter, and bestowed himself, whiles
Peter lived, without his direction. But that he was bishop there, whiles
Peter lived, we have certain evidence. In the eight year of Nero his reign,
says Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24.
Eusebius (that is 4. or 5. years before Pet. death) Anianus succeeded Mark
the Evangelist in the Church of Alexandria, being a religious man and every way
admirable. Hierome says, Prooem. in Matthew.
that the second Evangelist is Mark, interpres Apostoli Petri, and Alexandrinae
Ecclesiae primus episcopus, the interpreter of Peter the Apostle, and the first
Bishop of the Church at Alexandria. And again, In Catalog. script.
that Mark having established the Church at Alexandria, died in the eight
year of Nero, and was buried at Alexandria, Anianus succeeding him: and in
another place, that Ad Euagr.
at Alexandria, even from Mark the Evangelist, there had always Bishops been
elected etc. Dorotheus also says, that Mark Doroth. synops.
was the first Bishop of Alexandria, and that he was martyred and buried
there.

From Alexandria I return again to Jerusalem for after James the just was put
to death, the Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 11.
apostles and disciples, and kinsmen of our Savior Christ, which yet were
remaining, assembled themselves from al parts, and having consulted among
themselves, whom they should think worthy to succeed James; with one consent
made choice of Symeon the son of Cleophas, of whom there is mention in the
Gospel, because he also was our Saviors cousin: For Cleophas, as Hegesippus
reports, was Joseph's brother.

Thus have you heard, that the Bishops of the four principal churches, Rome,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, were all ordained of the apostles. To these
I will add Smyrna, because thereof there is most evident proof: namely, that
S. John the apostle, ordained Polycarpe the bishop of that church. That he was
bishop there, the church of Smyrna, as you heard before, which lived under him,
did by their Letters profess: and Ignatius, who was well acquainted with him,
does Igna. epi. 7 ad Smyrn. et 8. ad Poly^. episc. S^yrnens.
witness. That he was made bishop by the Apostles, Irenaeus, who was his
scholar, does plainly testify. Polycarpus, says he, Ire. l. 3. c. 3.
was not only taught of the Apostles, and had conversed with many of them, who
had seen our Lord; but also he was, by the Apostles, ordained Bishop in Asia,
in that church which is at Smyrna. The like has Eusebius, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap.
35.
(...). And more particularly, that he was ordained by Saint John, not only
Tertullian De praescr^p.
does acknowledge: (for, having said that the churches were able to show, that
their first bishop was ordained by some of the Apostles; he adds, Sicut
Smyrnaeorum ecclesia Polycarpum ab Ioanne conlocatum refert, as the church of
Smyrna recounteth Polycarpe placed by John:) But Jerome also does confess.
Polycarpus Ioannis Apostoli discipulus, et ab eo Smyrnae episcopus ordinatus:
Catalog. scriptor.
Polycarpe, John the apostles scholar, and by him ordained Bishop of Smyrna.

And not to mention any more particulars, the most ancient Writers, who lived
next the Apostles times, do witness, that John, after his return from exile,
ordained Bishops in diverse places, according to the direction of the holy
Ghost. So says Eusebius. ex Clem. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Clemens. Irenaeus says, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 63.
the apostles committed the church, which is in every place to bishops; And
Lib. 3. c. 3.
that the apostles left them their successors, sunm ipsoru^ locum magisterij
tradentes. And again, Ibid.
habemus annumerare, etc. We are able to recke^ those who were by the apostles
ordained Bb. and their successors unto our time. Likewise Tertullia^ Tertul. de
praescrip. advers, haeretic.
professes, that the apostolic churches could show the order of their
bishops, so running along by successions from the beginning, that their first
Bishop had for their founder and ancecessor, one of the Apostles, or
apostolic men, who had continued with the Apostles.

Against all this, which has been said to prove that the episcopal function
is of apostolical institution, the authority of Jerome is objected. First,
where he says, In Tit. 1.
until factions did arise in the church, some saying, I am of Paul, I am of
Apollo, etc. the churches were governed by the common counsel of the
Presbyters: But when they began to draw disciples after them, namely, such as
themselves had baptized, it was agreed in the whole world, etc.

I answer, first, that this speech of Jerome, in respect of the church at
Ierus. is untrue: which was first governed by the apostles in common, and
after, committed to James in particular, before we read of any presbyters there
ordained. Catalog.
Jerome himself has told us, that James straight-waies after the passion of
our Lord, was by the Apostles ordained Bishop of Jerusalem. Secondly, in
respect of other churches; that which he says, neither proves that the office
of Bb. and presbyters were co^fou^ded (which notwithstanding seems to have
bin his scope by that which follows in the same place) neither does it
hinder, but that the distinct office of Bb. is of apostolical institution.

It is true, that for a time the Presbyters by common counsel governed the
churches, but as under the Apostles, who kept in their own hands the
Episcopal authority; they, I mean the Presbyters, having neither the right
of ordination, nor the power of outward jurisdiction. This therefore does not
prove, that the offices of Bishops and Presbyters were confounded. The name of
Bishop was confounded with Presbyter: but the office and authority of the
Bishop, was as yet in the Apostles; The Presbyters being such then under the
Apostles, as they were afterward, under the Bishop.

But when the apostles were to discontinue from those churches, which they had
planted, then were Bishops substituted: wher-vnto the factious behavior of the
Presbyters (whereof Jerome speaks) might be some inducement. For, parity
indeed breeds faction and confusion. For the avoiding whereof in the absence
of the Apostles, Bishops were instituted; but when, and where, and by whom, and
to what end, let Jerome himself testify. When? when factions began to spring
in the church, says In Tit. 1.
Jerome, some saying I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, which was
in the Apostles time, 1. Corin. 1. and it were fond to imagine, that factions
did not begin till after their time.

Where? in toto orb, says Jerome, it was decreed in the whole world. Which
could not be in the Apostles times, without their consent; nor near the
Apostles times, without a general Council, which was not.

By whom? Jerome Vide. supra.
has told us, when, and by whom, James was made bishop of Jerusalem, Mark of
Alexandria, Timothe of Ephesus, Polycarpe of Smyrna, etc. To what end? to
avoyde schism, says Jerome: And therefore, Aduers. Luciferian.
for the same end to be retained, as he does also acknowledge. For, the safety
of the church, depends on the dignity of the Bishop; to who^ if a peerless
power and eminent above all be not given, there will be as many schisms in the
churches as there be Priests.

Secondly, they urge Ieromes inference in that place: Presbyters, at the first,
ruled the church by common counsel; therefore the bishops, and they, ought to
rule the church in common still. I answer, it follows not in respect of the
Presbyters themselves. Before titles were distinguished, and presbyters
assigned to their several cures, they attended the whole flock in common;
which after the parishes were distinguished, and they severed to their several
cures, they did not: Only the Bishop, and the presbyters which remained still
about him, had the like care, which the apostles and presbyters had, at the
first; The Bishop using the advice of the Presbyters (though not to be
overruled by them) until their advise and assistance, to themselves seeming
troublesome, and to the Bishop (by reason of the frequent Synodes, and synodall
constitutions) needless, grew out of use.

Thirdly, they allege out of Jerome, Epist. ad Oceanu^, item ad Evagrium. in
Tit. 1.
that Bishop and Presbyter is all one: and therefore Bb. are to know, that they
be greater the^ Presbyters, rather by the custom of the church, the^ by the
truth of divine disposition. I answer: where Jerome says Episcopus and
Presbyter is all one, he is to be understood in respect of the names, which he
proves, by Phil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 17. 28. Tit. 1. 5. 7. 1. Pet. 5.
many testimonies, to be confounded in the writings of the apostles. And in
this sense it is true, that whereas now Episcopus is more then Presbyter, it is
to be ascribed to the custom of the Church; as before I have noted out of
Theod. And in the same sense, Augustine Epist. 19. ad Hieronym.
is to be understood, when he says, according to the names of honor, in which
the use of the church has prevailed, Episcopatus est mayor Presbyterio; that
is, Episcopatus, Bishop-ship, is a name of greater honor then Presbyterium,
Priesthood. But if you think that Jerome, in affection toward his own degree,
(which he sought to set as high above the deacons as he could, who Ad Evagr.
at that time began to compare with the Presbyters) did mean, that the
functions, as well as the names, were confounded, or that it is not an
Apostolical ordinance, that Bishops should be set over the Presbyters: you
shall make him, not only to strive against the stream of all Antiquity, but
also to be contrary to himself: as appears by all those allegations, which I
have already cited out of his writings.

If his meaning should be, that the superiority of Bishops over Presbyters,
though it be an apostolical tradition (as Ad Evagr.
himself calls it) yet notwithstanding, is not directly of divine
institution; although there be small Though in respect of the first institution,
there is small difference between an apostolical and divine ordinance, because
what was ordained by the Apostles, proceeded from God, (in which sense and no
other, I do hold the episcopal function to be a divine ordinance:) yet in
respect of perpetuity, difference by some is made betwixt those things which be
divini, and those which be apostolici iuris: the former in their understanding
being generally, perpetually, and immutably necessary; the latter, not so.
difference between these two (as I understand divine institution) because what
the apostles did in the execution of their apostolical function, they did by
direction of the holy Ghost, so that they might truly say, both of their
ordinances, Act. 15.
it seemed good to the holy Ghost and us; and of the parties by them ordained,
Act. 20. 28
attend the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you bishops:
notwithstanding, for more evidence, I will in the last place directly, yet
briefly prove, that the episcopal function, is of divine institution, or, that
bishops were ordained of God. For, by who^ was Timothe ordained Bishop? By
Paul, I confess, as the instrument; but yet by the holy Ghost, as the author
and director of his ordinatio^. For he was made bishop by prophecy, 1. Tim. 4.
14.
1. Tim. 4. How is that? (...), thou wast made bishop says Chrisost. homil. 5.
in 1. Tim.
Chrysostom, not by humane suffrage, but by prophecy, that is, by divine
revelation, says Theodoret. Theophylact. Oecumen. In 1. Tim. 4. See Calvin
also in 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Theodoret. That is, spiritu sancto iubente, by the commandment of the holy
Ghost, says Theophyl. (...), says Oecumenius, (...), for by the appointment
of the holy Ghost, Bb. were made, and not at ra^don. By whom was Archippus made
Bishop of Colossa? Col. 4. 17.
see Col. 4. 17. Where Paul using the same exhortation to him, which he gave
to Timothe the Bishop of Ephesus 2. Tim 4. 5.
2. Tim. 4. namely that he should fulfill his ministry, he adds, which
thou have received in the Lord; and therefore by Gods ordinance, and as it were
at the Lords hands. And to conclude, the same may evidently be proved out of
this text, which I have in hand. First, in that the Bishops of the seven
Churches are called Angels: which not only shows the excellency of their
calling, but also proves, that they were authorized and sent of God. Secondly,
that they are commended under the name of Stars; to signify both the
preeminence of dignity which they have in this life (for the Stars are the
Apoc. 12. 1
crown of the Church, Apoc. 12.) and also the prerogative of glory which they
shall have in the world to come, when they having faithfully performed their
duty shall shine as Dan. 12. 3
Stars in the Firmament for ever. Daniell, 12.

Thirdly, that these be the seven Stars which our Savior Christ did Apoc. 1.
16. ^ 20.
hold in his right hand. Which plainly argues, his, both approbation of their
function, and gracious protection of their persons.

Thus having proved this doctrine arising out of the text, that the episcopal
function is of apostolical and divine institution: it remains, that we
should from thence gather some uses to our selves, both for the informing of our
judgments and reforming of our lives. For the rectifying of our judgments, the
same doctrine which by way of explication of my text I proved; I do now by way
of application commend unto you: that as the episcopal function has been
manifestly proved to be lawful and good, as being the ordinance of God; so
you would be persuaded to acknowledge it. But you will say; Some further
matter, by your doctrine, may seem to be intended. For whereas it has bin
proved, that the government of the Churches by Bishops, is an apostolical
and divine ordinance: may not we also infer, that all Churches are so
necessarily and perpetually tied unto it, as that no other form of
government is warrantable in the Church of GOD? and that not only this
government is lawful, but that it only is lawful? This inference I refer
to their consideration who having fancied that the Presbyteriall plot-forme is
commended unto us in the scriptures; do therefore urge the same upon us, as
perpetually and vnchaungeably necessary in all Churches. As for others, who
being of better temper, do so commend their form of discipline, as that they
do not condemn all others, neither seek to force other Churches to their
imitation; they are to expect the like moderation from us. For although we be
well assured that the form of government by Bishops, is the best, as having
not only the warrant of Scripture for the first institution, but also the
perpetual practice of the Church from the Apostles time to our age, for the
continuance of it: notwithstanding, we doubt not, but where this may not be
had, others may be admitted; neither do we deny, but that silver is good,
though gould be better.

But some will say, the protestants, which were the blessed instruments of GOD
for the reformation of religion in this last age, are thought to have preferred
the other discipline by presbyteries, before this by Bishops: and therefore in
thus magnifying the Bishops, you seem to join with the Papists against
them. Whereunto I answer, that those godly and learned men See the Survey of
the pretended discipline. cap. 8. page 110. 111. etc.
allowed the episcopal function, and simply desired the continuance thereof.
Notwithstanding, when together with it they could not enjoy the profession of
the Gospel, (such was the obstinacy and tyranny of the Popish Prelates:) they
were forced with the loss of the episcopal government, to redeem the most
precious jewel of the Gospel; which is to be Mat. 13. 45. 46.
redeemed (if need be) with the loss of all outward things. Which loss,
notwithstanding, they endeavored to repair in some places, by renewing the
function of Bishops and Arch-bishoppes, under the names of superintendents,
and general superintendents, as in Germany. In others, where that could not
be done, either because the Popish Bishops were still countenanced by the
civil magistrate, as in France; or because the form of civil government being
after the expulsion of the B. changed into a popular state, could no more
endure the government of a Bishop, then Rome after the expulsion of Tarquinius
the regiment of a King, as at Geneua: they were forced to bring in that form
of government, which is next the best, and by a Senate or Aristocratie of grave
men, to supply the absence of a Bishop. But, as in those places, where
orthodoxall Bishops could not be had, presbyters were wisely brought in,
(for any government whatsoever, is better then none at all:) so are they very
inconsideratly obtruded on those Churches, where Bishops, most soundly
professing the Gospel of Christ, are established; especially, considering that
the government by Bishops, is not only simply good and lawful; but also in
comparison, to be preferred before theirs, as having better warrant.

Now let us consider, what practical uses this doctrine does afforde: first,
to the^, whom God has subjected to the authority of Bishops. For if their
authority be the ordinance of God, and they in respect of their function are
termed Angels, as sent from God; and Stars, which Christ holds in his hand,
as approving their office, and protecting their persons; then are we bound in
conscience, first, to reverence their persons, and as the Apostle exhorts the
Phil. 2. 29.
Philippians, to have them in honor, as spiritual fathers; and as they are
here called, so to receive them, as the Angels of God.

Secondly, to obey their authority, as being the holy ordinance of God: It is
the exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 17.
Heb. 13. 17. as the Canons Canon. 40. Ignat. ad Trall.
of the Apostles, and Ignatius do expound and apply it. And the rather we
should make conscience of these three uses already mentioned, because the
schism, which is in our Church, and all the euilles which arise from thence,
(which are worthy to be lamented with abundance of tears,) are to be
ascribed to the neglect thereof; that is, to the not acknowledging of their
lawful function, the contemning of their persons, and oppugning their
authority.

As for the reverend Bishops themselves, they may reap comfort and
encourageme^t from this text. For, seeing they be Stars in Christ's right
hand, they may be assured whiles they receiving their light from him, who is
the Sun of righteousness, do shine unto his people in the light of doctrine,
and of a godly life, they shall be protected from evil (for who shall be able
to pluck John. 10. 28
them out of his right hand?) and also be preserved, both from falling with the
falling Apo. 12. 4.
stars, and from erring with the Iud. ver. 13.
wandering stars. And seeing they be the Angels and Ambassadors of God; whiles
they perform their office and embassage faithfully, they may expect, that he
will bless, defend, revenge, and reward them.

And lastly, from these words they are to be put in mind of their duty, that
as they be here honored with the titles of Angels and stars; so they would
endeavor to be answerable to their names; that they would fulfill Colo. 4. 17
2. Tim. 4. 5.
their ministry, that they would keep their 1. Tim. 6. 20.
depositum, or that which is committed to their trust; that, as stars, they
would shine before others in the light of pure doctrine, 1. Tim. 3. 2.
and of a godly conversation; that they acknowledging themselves as Angels,
entrusted with the Psalm. 91.
custody and gardianship of Gods people, may faithfully, cheerfully,
uprightly, discharge the trust reposed in them; and as Angels sent from God for
the Heb. 1. 14.
good of those who shall inherit salvation, they may faithfully and zealously
seek the glory of God, from whom they are sent, in the salvation of his
chosen, for whom they are sent: that so having shined as stars upon the
earth, and demeaned themselves as Angels in the church militant; they may also
shine as the stars in heaven, as Daniell Dan. 12. 3.
has promised, and be like the elect Math. 22.
angels in the Church triumphant. Which the Lord grant for his Christ's sake; to
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, one eternal, all-sufficient,
infinite, most gracious, and most glorious GOD, be all glory, honor and
praise, both now and euer-more. Amen.

Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace.
Corrections, and additions.
Page 4. in marg. lin. a fin. 5. officer. p. 14. l. 6. 7. needed. in marg.
Iere^. p. 31. in marg. ad 4. lin. add et editionis graecae. ca. 29. p. 34. l.
10. elsewhere he. p. 40. ad lin. 9. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. ^. 3.. 16, Incertu^
est an plures imposuerint manus, necne. p. 48. l. 2. praepositum. p. 65. l. a
fine 4. apostolical. p. 73. l. 15. ad 8.


