A TREATISE OF THE TRVE NATVRE AND DEFINITION of justifying faith; TOGETHER
WITH A DEFENSE of the same, against the Answer of N. Baxter.

By JOHN DOWN B. in Divinity, and sometime Fellow of EMANVEL C. in Cambridge.

AUGUST. DESPIR. ET LIT. CAP. 30. Lex dicit, non concupisces; Fides dicit, Sana
animam meam, quoniam peccavi tibi; Gratia dicit, Ecce sanus factus es, jam noli
peccare, ne quid tibi deterius contingat; Sanitas dicit, Domine Deus meus,
clamavi ad te and sanasti me; Liberum arbitrium dicit, voluntary sacrificabo
tibi; Dilectio justitiae dicit, narraverunt mihi iniusti delectationes, sed non
sicut Lex tua Domine.

The Law says, thou shall not covet; Faith says, heal my soul, for I have
sinned against thee; Grace faith, lo thou art made whole, sin no more least a
worse thing befall thee: Health says, O Lord my God, I have cried unto thee
and thou have healed me; Free Will says, I will freely sacrifice unto thee;
Love of justice says, the wicked have showed me delights, but not according
to thy law O Lord.

OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD for Edward Forest. 1635.

TO THE READER.
IT is now somewhat upward of two years, This must be referred to the time
when the Author writ it.
since passing through the City of Bristol toward the University of Cambridge,
I was by the importunity of sundry Citizens, my very good friends, arrested
there certain days. For no sooner was I there arrived, but presently they
repaired unto me, and like so many Jacobs began to wrestle with me, Gen
32.24.26. Romans 1.11. Mat. 11.12.
protesting they would not let me go unless I first promised to bless them,
and to bestow some spiritual gift among them. It was no small Joy unto me to
see the Kingdom of Heaven suffer such violence, and the people of God (like so
many thirsty Hearts, Psalm. 42.1.
braying for the rivers of waters,) and pa^ting after the living God. Wherefore
I could not but with Jacobs Angel give them leave to prevail, Genesis 32.28. Mat.
5.41.
and yield so far unto their earnest request, that being angariated to go
but one mile, I was notwithstanding content to go with them more then twain,
preaching (before my departure thence) diverse sermons unto them.

One time among the rest I chose for my Theme that of St Paul to the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 6. 16.
Above all take the shield of Faith whereby ye may quench all the fiery darts
of that wicked One. Wherein because Justifying Faith seemed to be commended as
the principallest piece of the Christians Panoplie, and of surest proof
against all the assaults and temptations of Satan, I held it necessary with all
diligence to enquire what might be the true nature and definition thereof, and
at length I resolved that the Act thereof was not Assurance but Affiance, the
Subject not the understanding, but the will; and the Object not present grace
and future glory, but the person of the Mediator. So that I defined it, not as
vulgarly it is conceived, An assurance that we are already justified and shall
be saved; but thus, An affiance upon Christ the Mediator for justification and
consequently Salvation. The occasion moving me to entreat of this argument was
this; A certain grave and godly Matrone of that City having been a long time
sore afflicted with sickness both in mind and body, I went upon entreaty with
other friends to visit her; and after mutual salutation, Sister quoth I unto
her, were I Physician for the body, I would advise you the best I could for the
health thereof: but it is not my element, and therefore I may not without great
rashness put my self into it: nevertheless if you shall please to discover
unto me the wound of your spirit, happily I may apply such a salve thereunto,
as by the blessing of God may close it up, or at least give some refocilation
and ease unto the anguish thereof. My wound then, quoth she, in a word is this:
I want faith; And what may be the ground, quoth I, of this persuasion? Because,
quoth she, I am not assured that I am justified and shall be saved: A weak
ground, quoth I, seeing a man may have Faith that wants such Assurance; how
may that be, quoth she? for as hitherto I have been taught, Faith is no other
then Assurance: then have you been taught amiss, quoth I: and if this be all
the scruple that troubles you, I hope ere we part to finish the cure.
Thereupon I began freely to declare what I conceived of the true nature of
justifying Faith, and proved unto her by sundry remonstrances that it was not
Assurance but Affiance, and with so good success, that both she and all that
were present rested therewith much comforted and contented. Only they prayed me
both for their own confirmation, and the farther information of others, that I
would be pleased to speak of it again in a more public audience: whereunto
(seeing no reason to dissuade me) I readily condescended, and on the text
aforesaid handled the matter somewhat largely.

This Sermon at least so far as concerns the Definition of Faith was by one
Mr Baxter then preacher of that City greatly distasted and disliked: in so much
as by message he threatened me with open confutation thereof in the Pulpit,
unless I gave him the speedier and better satisfaction; which threatening
though I little feared, knowing I had built nor hay nor stubble upon the
foundation, 1 Cor. 3.12.13.
but such doctrines as were well able to endure the trial of the fire: yet
because the Apostle charge to be ready always to give answer to every man
that asks a reason of the Hope that is in us, 1 Pet. 3.15.
I was eftsoons willing the best I could to satisfy him. Being therefore by
the mediation of some friends brought to a parlie with him, I prayed him to
remember that whatsoever I said in that Sermon was not barely affirmed but
soundly proved, and therefore he might not in reason demand satisfaction of me
until himself had satisfied my reasons: which if he should substantially do,
I would ease him of his Pulpit-confutation, and the same tongue that broched
the error, should in the same place again revoke it. Then began I to press
him with this argument, If faith be Assurance, then God commanding a Reprobate
to believe, commands him also to be assured, which is absurd: whereunto all his
answer was, who art thou that disputest with God? I replied, Romans 9.20.
that I neither disputed with God nor controled his actions: but only denied
that God commands a Reprobate to be assured, for so he should command that to
be believed for true, which nor is nor ever shall be true. Again I argued
thus, If Faith be Assurance, then whosoever wants Assurance wants Faith,
which to a distressed soul is most uncomfortable. To this he answered that
desire of Assurance is in the acceptance of God as Assurance it self. I
replied, that Mr Perkins being urged with the same Objection answered in the
same manner, but insufficiently: for if actual Faith be necessary to
justification, then is actual Assurance also necessary if Faith be assurance:
Here Mr Baxter would needs take occasion to expostulate, why I should presume
to define otherwise then Mr. Perkins, and so many worthy Divines had done
before me. Whereunto I answered roundly and plainly, Socrates is dear,
Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 5.
and Plato is dear, but truth is far dearer: and therefore prayed him that
leaving to oppose authority unto reason, and sounding names unto sound proofs,
he would return again within the lists, and either satisfy what I had said,
or give me leave to proceed to the rest of my arguments; But for this he
craved, as then, to be excused, pretending urgent and instant business, yet
offering to have our conference adiourned unto some other day: I told him that
the time of absence (limited me from the College, whereof I was then Fellow)
was almost at an end; so that unless I would hazard my place I might make no
longer stay there: nevertheless if he pleased I would before my departure give
him my mind in writing, and attend his answer also in writing at his better
leisure: To this he presently condescended, holding it the fittest course, and
promising (if I held my word with him) within one Month to return me his full
answer. I assured him that for my part I would not fail him: and thereupon
embracing one the other, and giving hand that we would proceed as we had
begun with all peace and love, we brake off talk at that time and departed.
The second day after, according to promise, I sent him the Treatise following,
Of the true nature and definition of justifying Faith, comprizing therein with
some addition whatsoever touching the matter in question I had more briefly
delivered in the Pulpit: and the next morning taking leave of my friends, and
commending them to the grace of God in Christ I set forward for Cambridge.

The month being expired I looked out for my answer: for I could not think
he would prove a bad play master, and break day with me: But a month and a
month and many other months followed after their predecessor, and all the
while not a word from my Antagonist: which though in some Creditors it would
have bred suspicion, yet was I content to lay hold on the better handle, and to
set the best construction I could upon his ouerlong silence, Epist. Fam. l. 9.
ep. 8.
interpreting it as Cicero did his friend Varros forbearance, rather Diligence
then Slacknes. For as Zeuxis was the longer in drawing his Pictures, because as
he said unto Agatharchus, he painted unto Eternity: so Mr Baxter perhaps might
the more slowely come off with his answer, that in the mean season he might
make it the more exact and accurate, it being seldom seen that the same thing
is both hastily and exquisitely done. But while I was thus ingenuously
censuring his silence, and resolving yet further to forbear him, remembering
that of Cato, Soon enough if well enough: I received certain advertisement
that he had erewhile broken silence, and dispersed among his friends a most
bitter and contumelious Invectiue against me, contrary both to his promise that
he would proceed with all peace and charity, and the reputation of learning he
so much affects, not daring to send me a Copy thereof. Loath I was seeing I have
not the rule of other men's pens, that others should have the command of my
affections: yet being so vrgently and vnschollerly dealt withal, the next time
I passed through the City I could not but with some indignation challenge him
for it to his face: At which time how he faltered and staggered in his tale,
now confidently affirming he had by a friend conveyed his answer unto me, and
by and by being contested by the party, shamefully retracting it. Pretending
for excuse the loss of my paper, I appeal to them who then both saw and heard
it. But this I say, that as his inconstancy and distraction bewrayed little
friendship betwixt his heart and tongue, and argued a selfe-guiltines of a
poor and sorry Reply: so the prete^ced loss of my paper was but a silly shift
to delay me for the present, and as the event shows a miserable
tergiuersation. For having a fresh offered within one month to send me an
answer, and thereupon engaged both his credit and schollership if he were
supplied with another copy: although the next day I left one for him under my
hand, and now not one only but twelve months are since fully finished and
expired, yet has he hitherto been to me ward as silent as midnight: to me
ward I say, for otherwise the libell still passed under hand, and at every
meeting made his disciples good glee. Whereby it plainly appears, his meaning
never was by an honest and christian intercourse of writing to sift out the
truth: but only by secret pamphletting to disparage me among his followers,
that so himself might rise the higher, in the balance of their estimation.
For had he sincerely and unfeignedly purposed the maintenance of Gods truth, and
the reformation of my erroneous judgment, would he thus uncharitably have
played his prizes in the dark, and to michingly have gone about to steal an
opinion of victory? or would he not rather as became a right Champion of truth
boldly have confronted his adversary in the field, yea though he had been
armed with no better weapon then a fillie sling, as long as he came (for so he
pretends) in the name of the Lord of Hosts? But the truth is perceiving
himself so far advanced into the battle that now without shame and
confusion he might not retreat, he held it the safest course by writing
something to make the world believe he had duly performed with me, and yet by
limiting it unto the hands of a few of his trustiest friends to deprive me of
all possibility of answering for my self, resting assured that my silence
would be taken to proceed rather of weakness and insufficiency in me, then any
necessity by his cunning enforced upon me. A new kind of policy, or of
malice rather as Hierome says unto Ruffin, Contra Ruffin. ad Pamm. and
Marcell. l. 1. c. 1.
to accuse of what you fear to discover, and to write what you would have
concealed. And so wary and heedfull has he been herein, that with all the
diligence and endeavor I could use, I could not for the space of full two
twelve months be seized of his Answer.

But at length the night-raven fell into the snare, and by the watchfulness of
my good friends in Bristow I obtained such a Copy thereof as with all his
shifts and excuses he cannot possibly disclaim, being indeed subscribed with
his own hand. Perhaps you may think it found me when I first received it,
strongly forestalled and possessed with prejudice: and indeed his base and
unworthy dealing deserved no other. For how could I entertain any indifferent
conceit of that whereof the authors self seemed to be ashamed? Nevertheless
before I began to pervse it, so far prevailed I over my affections, that I
thoroughly cleared them of all partiality and presumption, yea and grew so
rigorous and unequal against my self, that I was content to suppose I might
be in error, and he happily the Physician to cure the disease of my judgment,
resolving if I might plainly be convinced to take unto me Christian severity
and recant the same. For if I may not hope in this life to aspire to the
highest degree of wisdom, yet would I willingly rise to some degree of
modesty: that if I may not in all things say that which is not to be repented
of, yet I may at least repent me of what I have said amiss.

In this temper and disposition I took the book, and casting mine eye upon
the front thereof, there I found it thus inscribed. The answer of Nath. Baxter
Bachelor in Divinity and Warden of new College in Yoghul to the arguments of
Mr Io. Down Bachelor in Divinity in a controversy of justifying Faith,
preached by the said Mr Down in Bristoll. Then underneath, the Question thus
stated M. Down; Justifying Faith is not assurance, persuasion, or firm
knowledge of a man's salvation in Christ Jesus. M. Baxter; Justifying Faith is
an assurance and knowledge of our salvation in Christ Jesus. And lastly under
that again this passage of Calvin vouched, In ad Coloss. c. 1. to. 6.
The Faith of the Gospel is properly called a knowledge of the grace of God:
because no man ever tasted of the Gospel but he which knew himself reconciled
unto God, and apprehended his salvation offered to him in Christ. In the
inscription, though it please him in such sort to style himself, I think to
make the reader believe that I had met with my peer at least; Horat. lib. 1.
Sat. 7.
and if I were a Bithus, he were no less then a Bacchius: yet could he not
without great arrogance challenge those titles to himself, having never taken
such degree in either of the Universities, and being no more Warden of Yoghul
then was Captain Stukelie Marquis of Ireland, Gentil. exam. Conc. Trid. Sess.
1.
or Robert Venantius in the Council of Trent Archibishop of Armach. As touching
the Question that also is very defectiuely and imperfectly propounded: for
neither do J maintain negatiuely alone that Faith is not Assurance, but
affirmatively also that it is Affiance. neither does he only affirm
contradictorily unto me that it is Assurance, but further grants in his
Answer that it includes also my Affiance. And as for the passage of Calvin, to
what end it is here prefixed unless it be to preiudicate me with the
greatness of his authority, I know not. But as he would hold it
unreasonable if another should urge him therewith in the question of
Ecclesiastical Policy and conformity, because himself is of another mind:
so neither has he any reason to press the same upon me in this controversy
wherein I profess my self (but with all modesty) to differ from him. These
flashings, as it were, and inflammations thus appearing in the very face of his
book, made me I confess, somewhat stagger in my former resolution, and to
doubt lest they might be symptoms of an unsound and distempered body.
Nevertheless I was not so driven from my station but that I easily recovered
the same again. For fearing lest as the Physiognomer was foully deceived,
judging of Socrates only by his outward Physnomie and countenance; so I also
might be as much mistaken if by the front alone I should make an estimate of
the whole Answer: I was soon persuaded, yet further to suspend my verdict
until I had taken a full and through survay thereof: Which when I had once
done, then indeed began I to be greatly abashed, and utterly to condemn my
self of foolish lightness and credulity, Mat. 7.16.
that could hope so suddenly to gather Grapes of Thorns; or reap other then
tares in the field of the envious man. For whereas touching the manner I looked
he should have followed the Apostles counsel, who advises to instruct with
meekness those that are contrary minded, if God at any time will give them
repentance to acknowledge the truth: 2 Timothy 2.25.
he as if he had to deal, not with a brother erring of infirmity, but some
obstinate Heretic condemned of his own conscience, Tit. 3.11.
inflames his affections against me in as high a degree as was Nabucodonosors
furnace, seven times hotter then Christian charity could have made them: And
whereas touching the matter I expected that he who stood so much upon terms
of schollership, should use nothing else but Syllogismes and necessary
Demonstrations, that by pure virtue and fine force he might captive my reason
unto the obedience of Faith: he rather like an idle declaimer, trusting more to
the noise and multitude of his words then the strength and pregnancy of his
reasons, traverseth a loofe in unnecessary and impertinent discourses, and
puffs up his empty Answer with the breath of many frivolous and vainly
affected phrases, gaining perhaps thereby applause of the vulgar and simple,
but from the grave and learned no better entertainment then the Shepherds
whistle. In a word, Cic. l. 1. ep. 13. ad Attic. Hist. not. lib. 12. c. 19.
as the Troglodytes (of whom Pliny reports) venture upon the maine Ocean,
without either rudder or oar or sail, having in their boats nothing but man
and boldness: even so my adversary hazardeth himself upon this deep
question, and takes upon him the Confutation of my Treatise, using therein nor
natural reason, nor humanity, nor divinity, but only impudent facing, and
desperate asseveration.

The consideration of all which half persuaded me at the first not to
vouchsafe it any Replication at all, but without farther ceremony to commit it
to the mercy of the Moth or the Grocer. For how could I reply unto it, but
either I must grace it by making it seem worthy to be confuted, or disgrace my
self by co^futing so unworthy a joy? And what should I reioine unto it? That
which is serious and of importance* I could not, because he gives me no
occasion: Reproach for reproach, and slander for slander? I might not, because it
is unchristian: and to answer a fool according to his folly were to prove like
unto him, as Solomon says. Prou. 26.4.
Howbeit upon riper advise and deliberation I held it for sundry causes if not
necessary yet very expedient and fitting to shape him an answer. And first in
respect of him, if it may be to express his audaciousnes, and to let him see
that they oftentimes leap too short, who think to make another impeachement
arise for their own reputation. For if a fool be not answered according to
his folly, Prou. 26.5.
he will says Solomon, wax wise in his own conceit. Then secondly in regard
of my own self, and the credit of my Ministry, to wipe away the slanderous
aspersions and imputations of I know not what strange opinions and dangerous
intentions wrongfullie if not maliciously charged upon me: lest if I dissemble
them I be thought to confess them, or to approve them if I refell them not.
Thirdly and lastly in regard of others, and among the rest those my good
friends especially who occasioned the preaching of this doctrine, partly to
preserve from recidiuation such as by the comfortablenesse thereof were
recovered out of great distress, and partly to prevent others from falling
into the like perplexity. Although therefore I deny not but that good hours
bestowed upon so bad a subject might have been more profitably employed,
especially considering that by the violent struggling thereof against the rooke
of truth, it has wholly turned it self into froth, and has not so much as a
drop of clear reason in it: yet notwithstanding for the reasons aforesaid, and
that it may perfectly appear how steadfast and unmoved the rock stands, and
how little the storms and tempests raised against it have prevailed upon it, I
have thought good to skim away the foam of Sophistry wrought about it, and to
discover the very ground whereon it is settled. Which when I shall have done, I
doubt not, howsoever my adversary with his tong-valiantnes and swelling words
may have made unexperienced folk believe that with the breath of his mouth he
is able to drive whole armies of arguments before him: yet I shall approve even
to the judgment of prejudice it self that whatsoever in this windy and
wordie Pamphlet he has vented against me is vainer then vanity it self.

And thus, Christian Reader, have I at length fully acquainted thee with the
whole story both of the original and progress of this controversy. Now it
remains ere thou pass thy censure and sentence thereupon, that thou be
pleased to bestow a little pains in perusing our adversary writings; and what
thou find in them (said or gainsaid) diligently to examine, not by the
deceitful balance of private opinion, but by the public beam of the
Sanctuary even the Scriptures of God. For man's silver is mingled with dross,
Esa. 1.22.
and his wine is tempered with water, neither has he received such a measure
of the Spirit as to know all things, or to be exempted from possibility of
erring: but God is light and in him is no darkness, 1 Ioh. 1.5.
and truth is unto him so necessary and essential as it is impossible he
should either deceive or be deceived, it implying contradiction with his
nature. And therefore the privilege of infallibility belonging unto him alone,
to him alone belongs also the prerogative of supreme judicature: so that
whatsoever he says, is simply and absolutely to be believed, whereas the
sayings of men are by his word to be tried and determined. This I say not to
impeach the credit or estimation of any, only I would reserve unto God the
Sovereign authority due unto him: Which if any presume to arrogate or claim
unto himself (as indeed the Bishop of Rome does unto his chair, as if it were
made of Irish timber, and might not endure a spider to hang his web thereon)
he is undoubtedly possessed with the Spirit of Antichristian pride, and like
another Lucifer usurps upon the throne of God. But they that are led by the
Spirit of Christ, and have been reputed the worthiest instruments and
ornaments in the Church, acknowledging holy Writ to be the Standard of truth,
and the only unmoved Principle into which all Questions of Faith are finally to
be resolved, boldly exact the writings of other men thereunto, and meekely
submit their own to be censured thereby. Let one S. Augustine speak for all,
The disputations of men, says he, Epist. 111. ad Fortunatian.
how Catholic or laudable soever, we ought not to esteem as Canonical
Scripture, as if it were not lawful (saving the honor due unto them) to
disallow or reject any thing in their writings, if happily we find ought in
them swaruing from truth. Such am I in the writings of other men, and so would
I have others to understand in me. Now therefore, to draw to a conclusion,
seeing to thy upright censure and arbitrament I refer my self, and the rule
by which thou art to proceed if thou will pronounce righteously, is as we have
showed, not the opinion of man, but the oracle of God; I must entreat thee
that laying aside all respect of persons thou suffer not thy self to be
swayed either with the multitude or greatness of those that are contrary minded,
but conferring cause with cause, and counterpoising reason against reason, thou
give thy judgment of them as the weight of Divine evidence shall incline thee.
For otherwise, if like a partial Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure,
Act. 25.9.
thou demand of me, Whither I will go up to Jerusalem and there be judged of
these things before thee: I must roundly and peremptorily answer thee with S.
Paul, V. 10.11.
I stand at Caesar's bar where I ought to be judged, to the Jews I have done
no wrong, neither may any man deliver me unto them, I appeal unto Caesar: But
if with the same Festus better advised by his Counsel, V. 12.
thou say unto me as he did unto Paul, Have thou appealed unto Caesar? Unto
Caesar shall thou go: then look what definitive sentence soever thou shall
give according to Caesar's law, I mean the sacred Scriptures, I shall as
becomes a subject of the Kingdom humbly submit my self unto it, and without
further provocation or appeal quietly and peaceably rest in it. In the mean
season I conclude with that holy and devout prayer of Fulgentius, beseeching
the God of all truth, De Praedest. to Mon. l. 1.
that by his preventing and pursuing mercy whatsoever truths we know which
sauingly are to be known he would teach us, in those which already we know to
be true he would keep us, wherein as men we fail and are deceived he would
correct us, in what truths we doubt of he would confirm us, and from false
and pernicious errors he would deliver us: Ephesians. 4.13.
that so at length we may all meet, as the Apostle speaks, in the unity of
Faith and knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, even to the measure
of the age of the fullness of Christ. Amen.

A TREATISE OF THE TRVE NATVRE AND DEFINITION of justifying faith;
IF it be true which Tertullian says, that even in the very smallest matters
regard is to be had of Truth: surely in those weighty and profound mysteries
of Religion wherein error does so much hazard soul and salvation, nothing
ought more carefully to be respected then the search and finding out of Truth.
For as the same Father says, Apol. aduer. Genesis c. 46.
Although Philosophers Player-like affect the truth as being ambitious of
glory, yet Christians studiously follow it, as being careful of their
Salvation. Now among the many excellent and heavenly graces, wherewith the
spirit of God beautifieth and enricheth the hearts of his Elect, there is no
one of more either necessity unto salvation, or importance for comfort and
consolation, then that of Justifying Faith. For as by the first Act of this
faith, our Justification before God, our peace with God, our incorporation into
the mystical body of Christ Jesus, our conversion unto God are first wrought
and effected: so by the consequent continued Acts of the same Faith, are we
(being fallen) daily renewed, and from both total and final falling away
safely preserved and maintained. This (considered me-thinkes) no time can be
better employed, nor no pains more profitably taken, then in the quest and
enquiry of the true nature and definition of Justifying Faith. And although, I
cannot deny but he may have faith who cannot like a Logician define it, and
may have the benefit of Justification, by it, who cannot distinguinsh the
nature of it: yet this withal I boldly auerre, that the ignorance hereof, or a
confused and indistinct apprehension of it, disableth us both from giving and
taking direct and evident comfort from it, whereas a clear and distinct
knowledge thereof is able to satisfy and replenish with comfort any distressed
or afflicted conscience. For this cause have I undertaken (so briefly and
perspicuously as I can) to set down my opinion of the definition of Faith,
persuading my self I do not, endeavoring at leastwise not to swerve from the
wholesome doctrine of Christ and Gods word. From the writings and doctrine of
most learned and worthy Divines peradventure it does, and indeed it does vary:
to whom although as far far inferior I owe all respect and reverence, yet
being Gods freeman I cannot endure to be man's bondman and swear to all they
say. One Paphnutius sometime in the matter of Priests marriage prevailed
against a whole Counsel of most learned and godly Bishops: Socrat. l. 1. c. 8.
and young Elihu may speak more oportunely and pertinently then they that are
much his Ancients. Therefore as Nisus says in Virgill, Neque hac nostris
spectentur ab annis, Aeneid. l. 9.
look not how green or how gray his head be that speaks, but let the touch
of truth try all, and what by it shall appear to be base and counterfeit,
refuse and reject; that which shall be found true and sound, approve and
embrace. And that prejudice too strongly possess thee not, take my
protestation; that I never have entertained this opinion rashly and
inconsiderately, but upon mature advise and deliberation: nor broach it upon a
preposterous humor of nouelty or ambition, to build up mine own credit and
existimation by the ruin and disparagement of so great Divines (for this were
Subula leonem excipere, to encounter a Lion with a bodkin, as it is in the
Proverb) but upon a sincere affection and desire, to minister solid and found
consolation to despayring and perplexed minds, which (as after shall appear)
upon this foundation may most firmly be raised. And now trusting what I say
shall be weighed in the balance not of prejudice but upright judgment, I
leave to preface any farther and come directly to the purprose.

Because I purpose not to raise my building very high I mean not to lay my
foundation very deep: and therefore neither will I play the Phylologer in
showing the diverse uses and acceptations of the word (...) or Fides, id est
Faith, or quote Ciceros Fiat quod dictum est, or St. Augustines Fac quod dicis,
Offic. l. 1.
to do as a man says, for the notation of Faith: neither will I play the
Philosopher in discoursing of Physical or Moral or Civil Faith, wherein it
were easy to wast much oil and paper: nor lastly will I speak of that
Theological Faith called Miraculous either in Agent or Patient, which I take
to be none other then a divine instinct for the working of a Miracle. For
albeit they who at the last day shall say Lord in thy name have we not cast out
Devils may seem to have trusted in Miraculous Faith for Justification, Mat.
7.22.23.
and acknowledgement of Christ: yet notwithstanding never any controversy
about it has exercised the Church of God. To defer your expectations
therefore no farther, three Faiths there seem to be, which lay claim and
title to the privilege of justification: give me leave to distinguish and
denominate them according to their Objects, neither be offended if I handle
(...), and give new terms to old matters.

The first is Fides Historiae, Historical Faith, which is an Assent of the
mind unto the truth of Gods word, and specially the Gospel. And this Faith
whether it be according to the distinction of the Scoolemen, Acquisite, gotten
by much hearing and experience without illumination, or infused and revealed by
the spirit of illumination, it has no interest in the matter of Justification.
For besides that it is absurd that so general a Knowledge should justify.
Acquisit Faith the Devils have; according to that of St James, Iam. 2. 19.
The Devils believe and tremble: Infused faith the Reprobates may have, as
Balaam, Judas, Magus. Now the Scripture is plain that justifying faith is
propper and peculiar unto the Elect, and therefore Historical faith cannot
justify.

The second is Fides Promissionum, Faith of promises, which is a Persuasion or
Assurance that the promises of God made in Christ, to wit Justification,
Remission of sins, Adoption, Regeneration, and finally Election it self, and
eternal Salvation do particularly pertain to me, and are mine. Now this
although I deny not but in Scripture it is called faith, and that every Saint
of God both may and ought to have this particular persuasion and Assurance, yet
this I confidently deny that this persuasion is that which justifies a man
before God; and my reasons are these.

1. If this were justifying Faith, then whosoever lives and dies without this
particular Assurance, he cannot be saved, Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. But a man may be saved without
it; I instance in those our Brethren of Germany, who hold that faith may
finally and totally fall away, and consequently that there can be no certainty
of Salvation, whom yet the Church of God calls and counts brethren, and it
were uncharitable to censure of them otherwise. Therefore, or at leastwise
probably Faith is not an Assurance.

2. That which is in time after Justifying Faith cannot be that faith. This is
undeniable. But this particular knowledge is in time after faith. This I prove
out of 1. Ioh. 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe in the
name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. Behold
Believing goes before, and Knowledge comes after: as for that which follows
in the same verse, and that ye may believe, I interpret it of Perseverance and
growth in Faith. Howsoever, believing and Knowing are distinguished, and
therefore are not one.

3. That which in nature comes after Justification cannot be Justifying faith.
This appears because Faith is the Efficient isntrumental cause of
Justification, and every Efficient by the rule of Logic is in nature before
the Effect. But this knowledge or Assurance is in nature after justification.
This I prove thus, the truth of a proposition is always in nature before the
knowledge of the truth: for Propositions are not therefore true because known
so, but they are first true and then known so. Therefore this Proposition, I
know I am justified spoken by on that is justified, must needs presuppose the
party before to be justified. Therefore this knowledge of Justification in
nature following Justification it cannot be Justifying faith.

4. In conditional promises there can be no Assurance of the thing promised
before the performance of the condition. V. G. This is a conditional promise
in the covenant of works, do this and thou shall live, life is promised, but
on condition of doing: and therefore until we have performed the condition, we
cannot, nor may not look that God should be reciprocal and give us life: So
in the covenant of grace, justification is promised, but upon condition of
faith: so says the Scripture, believe, and thy sins shall be forgiven thee.
And therefore the condition of believing must first be performed before we can
assure our selves our sins are forgiven. If so, then faith going before and
Assurance following after, Assurance cannot be justifying faith.

5 That from whence follows a blasphemous absurdity cannot be a truth: for
from truth naught but truth can be concluded. But from this that faith is an
Assurance such an absurdity does follow. What is that? That God commands a man
to know an untruth, and to assure himself of that which never shall be. For
God being truth cannot command falsehood to be taken for truth. Nether tell me
here, for who art thou that disputest with God? for this is a ruled case in
divinity, God cannot do things which imply contradiction, and therefore not
make untruth to be truth, or knowledge error. Now that this absurdity follows
from hence thus I demonstrate it. God commands the Reprobate to believe: For,
Ioh. 18.8.9.
for unbelief the world shall be condemned: but no condemnation but for
breach of a commandment: 1 Ioh.3.4.
for (...) Sin is the transgression of the law, and therefore they are
commanded to believe. I ask you then what it is to believe? you will say, to
know, to assure. Therefore God commands the Reprobates to know and be assured.
But this is a blasphemous absurdity: therefore is your opinion absurd which
infers it.

6. That which the wicked may have cannot be justifying faith: for it is Fides
Electorum, the faith of the Elect. But the wicked may have this persuasion, yea
and many have been most confidently persuaded that they are in the favor of
God. You will say it is no true persuasion: but I say if form make truth they
are as formally and therefore as truly persuaded of it as the godly. And
therefore if the godly are therefore and for this cause justified because cause
they are strongly persuaded that they are justified: then why should not the
wicked likewise be justified by his strong persuasion? But in truth these kind
of speeches are unreasonable and senseless, and so the opinion cannot be
reasonable.

These six reasons shall suffice for the present, although many more might be
added: only from hence I gather this Corollary, that if justifying Faith be not
a Knowledge or Assurance, much less is it a full knowledge or full Assurance.
Nay though we should grant it to be a knowledge, yet is it against Logic to
define it by the perfection of knowledge. For as there is a strong tree so there
is a bruised reed: as there is a burning lamp, so there is smoking flax: as
there is (...) a Faith come to full age and maturity, so there is (...) a
Faith, in the nonage and minority. So therefore to define it were to exclude
the weak Faith, and to make the Definition narrower and of less latitude then
the definite. Besides it is a most discomfortable doctrine unto a troubled
mind, and leads the directest way to desperation: for so the palsy hand of
Faith should not receive Christ. And were not this to quench fire with oil,
and to add Aloes to wormwood? and might not he that thus comfort, be
counted one of Jobs miserable comforters?

Ob. The godly are said to know and to be persuaded yea the Prophet says, Io.
3.14. Ioh. 17.3. Esa. 53.11. Heb. 11.1.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and Faith is (...)
and (...), a Subsistence and Evidence.

Ans. First, I grant the godly may and ought to know: but the question is not
of their duty, but what it is which iustifies them.

2 Secondly, to know, and so likewise the Verbs of Sense in the Hebrew tongue
usually signifies not only an act of the Mind or outward Sense, but of the
Will and affection also. So in the Psalm (...). Psalm. 1.6. Mat. 7.13.
The Lord knows the way of the Righteous, and in the Gospel Depart I know
you not, and elsewhere, I will not hear, see, etc. that is, God will not so
know, hear, see, etc. as in favor to love or approve. And so do I interpret
that of the Prophet, Christ being so known as to be embraced and rested upon
by the Will shall justify many.

3 Thirdly, that Definition in the eleventh to the Hebrews I deny with Peter
Martyr and the rest of our Divines, to be perfect, but rather by the Effects
to describe it. And as for that word (...) Subsistence whereon you seem to
stand, take this, first that the writers of the new Testament use words in the
same sense that the Seventy Translators do. Secondly, that that which in
Hebrew is (...) Expectation, that the Septuagint turn (...), as in Ruth (...):
Ruth. 1.12.
so that (...) in the Hebrews shall not be Subsistence but expectation or
desire of things that are hoped for. But of this umpliandum censeo, I pronounce
nothing; only I conclude his second Faith not to be Justifying Faith. And
because you shall not count me singular or alone in this point, read M. Fox in
his book de Christo gratis iustificante, and you shall find him earnest
against this opinion.

The third faith is Fides Person or Personalis meriti, Faith of Person or of
Personal merit, and of this I make the Object to be Christ the Mediator
meriting; the Act of it Fiducia a Rest or Deuolution, the Subject of it the
faculty of the Will and not the Understanding, the next End of it
Justification, the remote End, eternal Salvation. And thus I define it, a Rest
of the Will upon Christ and his merits for Justification and consequently
Salvation. In which Definition:

1 That the Object of it, is the Person or Personal merit of Christ, the whole
tenor of Scripture proves which runs thus, He that believes in me shall not
perish, Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 14.1. Ioh. 1.12.
and, Ye believe also in me, and, As many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the Sons of God, that is, to them that believed in his Name, and
in six hundred places besides. But if thou will be further informed, see M.
Fox in the book before quoted.

2 That the Act of it is Fiducia, Affiance, I report me to all the words used
in the original of the old Testament, as (...) to retire unto, (...) to
deuolue or Roll upon, (...) to trust or put confidence in, and all the rest:
and to the form of words used in the new, as Credere in, Sperare in; to
believe and hope in or upon.

3 That it is Subiectiuely in the Will, appears by the Act; for Fiducia,
Affiance, without controversy is in the Will: as also by the Object Christ
which implies not a Knowledge but Fiducia or Rest.

Ob. Fiducia, Affiance is Spes roborata, a confirmed Hope; therefore if you
make Faith to be Fiducia, Affiance, you make it likewise to be hope, and
unskillfully confound two distinct virtues.

Ans. I deny Fiducia, Affiance to be Hope, although the Prince of Schoolmen,
Thomas of Watering and his followers have heretofore taught it. For,

1 Hope looks to the End which is Salvation; Affiance, to the means, which is
Christ's personal merit.

2 The Act of Hope is expectare, to look out for: the Act of Affiance is
tuniti, to lean on, or rest upon.

3 Hope is of things that are future; but Affiance of that which is present. So
yet Faith is Fiducia, Affiance: which I further confirm by S. Augustins
authority, Credere est amare, In Ioh. 7. tract. 29.
and amando in Deum tendere, To believe is to love, and by loving to move unto
God, expounding Amare by Confidere, Love by Affiance according to that Fathers
usual phrase in his Tractates upon John.

Ob. Faith may be both Notitia and Fiducia, Knowledge and Affiance, and so both
in the Will and in the Understanding.

Ans. It cannot be, because it is impossible for one and the same Habit to be
Subiectiuely in two several Faculties of so different natures: Indeed
Bonauenture says, Hope is in both being Certi expectatio, In 3. Scut. citante
Kemnit. loco de iustif.
a certain expectation; Expectation being in the will, certitude in the
Understanding. But I answer, that Certainty is the ground of divine Hope, but
no part of the nature thereof, as knowledge of a thing to be loue-worthy is the
ground of love, for Ignoti nulla cupido, no desire of that which is unknown,
but not of the nature of it, and therefore as you cannot place Love both in the
Mind and Will, no more may you Hope or Faith.

Ob. If Faith be Fiducia, Affiance, then the wicked may have it: for Balaam
desired the death of the righteous, Number. 23.10. Mat. 13.20.21.
and some receive the Word with joy believing but for a time.

Ans. There is a double Affiance, the one is slight and superficial, and
grounded on no other foundation then a general apprehension that it is good to
be saved by Christ, but leave not their former course and embrace a new: the
other is settled and grounded having these precedents.

1 A particular knowledge of our sinful estate, examined by the rule of Gods
Word.

2 An apprehension of Gods wrath and eternal death deserved by sin.

3 Unfeigned sorrow for sin with resolution of new life.

4 A knowledge of Christ, and here; 1 Of his sufficiency. 2 His loving
inuitation of all to rest on him for Justification and Salvation.


These four things going before, if by the operation of Gods spirit shall
afterward follow a rest upon Jesus Christ for Justification and Salvation, I
pronounce this Rest to be that Act which does justify before God. So that
these three Faiths shall be as the three Propositions of a Categoricke
Syllogism, Faith of Story being the Mayor, Faith of Person or Personal merit
being the Assumption, and Faith of Promises being the Conclusion, on this wise.

De- Whosoever shall (as formerly is declared) rest upon the merits of Christ
for his Justification and Salvation, he shall be justified and saved: This the
Scripture affirms, and to acknowledge the truth thereof is Historical Faith:

ri. But I do so rest upon Christ; This the Conscience privy to the sincerity
of the heart assumeth, which act of Resting I term Justifying Faith:

j. Therefore I am justified and shall be saved. And this is the Faith of
Promise concluded of the former premises, and is the Assurance before
mentioned.

To draw to a Conclusion, concerning these three Faiths I add farther, that to
the Faith of Story many do not aspire, namely such Paynims and Gentiles to
whom God has not vouchsafed the Ministry of the Word and means of knowledge:
yet many Reprobates do, living within the compass and territory of the
Church, and remain for all that unjustified. Unto the Faith of Person, and
that Affiance which I call slight and superficial, many likewise of the
vessels of wrath do attain, but cannot go one step farther, whereas all and
every of the Elect rest on Christ in the second manner, and upon the precedents
before specified, and are thereby justified. Unto the Faith of promise though
the children of God may come, and most do come, yet some doubtless partly
through the strength of flesh, and mixture of infidelity with their Faith,
partly through the force and violence of temptation, do not nor dare not
infer the Conclusion, and yet may be justified.

Lastly and finally, whereas Faith is distinguished into (...) and (...), full
Faith and little Faith, I take it that (...) is not to be restrained to Faith
of Promise only, but that both are common to all three: so that a weak assent
unto the story is (...), a strong assent is (...), a strong Affiance is (...),
a weak Affiance is (...), a bold and confident inference of the Conclusion is
(...), a fearful and timorous inference is (...). But yet neither of them in
the first does justify, although one of them of necessity must go before
Justification, nor yet in the third, although (...) may and ought to follow:
but in the second the least dram of Affiance though it be but as a grain of
mustard seed does justify as perfectly as the greatest quantity, because it
receives all Christ, who is not capable of magis and minus, more and less: as
a palsy hand may receive as much though shakingly, as does the hand of a
strong man steadfastly.

And thus with as much breuity as I could with avoiding of obscurity, I have
delivered my mind concerning the true nature and definition of justifying
Faith: which whether we have or no, how easy it is to find out, how full of
sweet use and comfort it is in comparison of the common received opinion not
Eagles only but Moles may see. If any notwithstanding the evidence of my
reasons shall persist in his former judgment, suo fruatur per me iudicio, Let
him abound in his own sense: but for my self my word shall always be (...),
the right is on my side. Nevertheless if any by sound and substantial
arguments shall convince me, I will not prove refractary or opinionate, Ep. 9.
ad Hier. In Retract.
but according to S. Augustins counsel unto Hierome, and his own heroical
practice, I will (...), and retract all I have said or written. For I count it
a plain token of a perverse and illiberall mind, for a man seeing his error
whereby he was misled, rather to bend his wit for to find reason that he was
not in error, and so to be mad with reason; then to frame his wit and will to
assent and yield to truth being demonstrated unto him. Hor. l. 1. ep. 6. ad
Numie.
But until that be, give me leave to conclude with the Poet:

-- Si quid nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his vtere mecum.
If ought you know righter then here you see,
Impart it friendly, else this use with me.
I. D.

A DEFENSE OF THE FORMER TREATISE OF IVSTIFYING FAITH, Against the answer of N.
B.
N. B. IT had been good, M. Down, you had been advised and warned by Diphilus
in Athenaeus who said, Lib. 15. in fabula cui titulus (...).
(...), accepta candela candelabrum quaerebamus, we took the candle before we
had the candlestick; meaning that it sauoureth not of providence to light the
one before we be sure of the other. Without doubt you would not then have
builded your doctrine here in this City, till you had laid a good foundation
for the same, even Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Apoc. 1.
who stands in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, and is the sole
foundation of the eternal verity. But such was the judgment of God cast upon
us for our sins, Mat. 18.
that refusing the wholesome doctrine of his Word, and following fantasies and
novelties of our own inventions, we should now give heed to lying spirits, and
be led away with the spirit of error. But we be to them by whom offenses come:
you cannot escape the hand of God except you speedily repent, and make
satisfaction to this offended flock.


I. D. Indeed, M. Baxter, if I have presumed to determine a question merely
Theological by such principles as are heterogeneall and Improper unto the
science of Divinity: I must needs confess I have foully faulted, and justly
deserved the blame of Improuidence you lay upon me. Poster. l. 1. c. 7.. 1. and
4.
For it is impossible to demonstrate, says the Philosopher, passing from one
kind to another: as for Arithmetike to demonstrate a problem or conclusion in
Geometry. Eccles. 2.14.
But had your eyes been where Solomon says a wise man's eyes should be when you
read my writing, you could not but perceive that I had builded my doctrine upon
that very same good foundation you speak of, even Jesus Christ and his blessed
word. For whatsoever I have affirmed throughout that whole discourse I have
sufficiently warranted either by express testimony of Scripture, or (which is
equivalent) by necessary collection from it. Unto your advice therefore out of
Diphilus in Athenaus I answer with the like but more sanctified words of
Athanasius, Orat. contra Arrian.
Lo we speak boldly out of the sacred Scriptures of holy and religious Faith,
and setting the candle as it were upon the candlestick do we thus pronounce
of the nature and definition of Justifying Faith.

But put case M. Baxter I had been mistaken either in the truth of the
conclusion, or in the proofs thereof, yet considering at least wise the
probability of the one and the comfortablenes of the other, Charity I am sure
would have judged the publishing thereof to have proceeded (to use the words of
Augustine) rather from the error of love, then the love of error. The more
uncharitable are you that being not able to convince me of the least untruth,
rank me notwithstanding in the number of lying spirits, and so peremptorily
denounce woe and judgment against me. 1 King. 19.12.
Wherein as you bewray how little you favor of his mild spirit who chose
rather to come in a still and soft voice, then in a tempest and whirlewind: so
greatly are you deceived if you think such causes and idle means either
affright or affect me. No no I am not so simple to believe that the earthquakes
when moles begin to heave, or that thunderbolts presently fly abroad the
world when every hot brain threatens fire from heaven. Prou. 26.2.
For as the bird by wandering and the swallow by flying escapes, so the
undeserved curse shall not come, says Solomon. Act. 4.36.
And therefore unless you can prove me in delivering this doctrine to have
been an unadvised Barnabas, I have no cause to fear when you prove yourselfe
but a rash and hasty Boanerges. Mar. 3.17.



N. B. Your Sermon made here in Bristol Nouemb. 5. 1601. stuffed with quirks,
full of elenchs, and subtle distinctions, wholly bent it self against the
truth of God, and has shaken the well affected minds of many, who by your
Sophismes seduced scarce know by what means they shall be saved. Demosth. in
Philip.
You gave us Mandragor as to drink, and under a sugared potion of your own
sole contriuing cast upon us the spirit of slumber. Aristoph. in Pluto.
Was it not a bold part thus in peace to play the Lion, and rent in sunder
(under pretense of truth) the blessed union of holy piety? to deliver such new
coined, strange, uncouth, and singular definitions, divisions or distinctions
of Justifying Faith (being indeed Callida mendacia crafty untruths) Plaut.
Mostel. Athen. Dipnos. li. 3. Cic. pro Cluent.
as Apollo himself could by no means understand (to use the phrase of
Antiphanes) and then to boast that scarce Archimedes could better and more
lively have depainted his Theoremes then you justifying Faith: Theocrit. hodaep.
then you forsooth had then against all writers old and new in one sole and
silly Sermon walking without fire in the dark delineated yea demonstrated as
you say true Justifying Faith the comfort of a Christian man.


I. D. Three heinous faults you charge my Sermon withal, Untruth in the
Matter, Sophistry in the Manner, and Breach of peace in the issue and event:
all which, if one dead fly be sufficient to corrupt a whole Alabaster of
sweet ointme^t, Eccles. 10.1.
as the wiseman says, must needs be more then enough to discredit one poor
and simple Sermon.

As touching the Matter, you know that so much thereof as concerns the point
in question is every way parallel and agreeing unto the writing I sent you:
and therefore if as you say it have bent it self against the truth of God, lo
here is Rhodes, according to the Proverb, Aesop.
let us see your leap, show it in this and it shall be granted you in that
also. Otherwise being so foullie ouerseene in charging a written tract whereof
you have taken so long aduisement and deliberation, you will hardly be
believed in accusing a transient speech which might happily be past your ears
before your understanding had leisure to apprehend it.

As for the Manner, it cannot lightly be more absurd then is your manner of
quarrelling at it. For if it be so stuffed with quirks, elenchs, sophismes, and
subtleties, how is it that by and by you call in contempt a silly Sermon? And
if it contain such new coined, strange, uncouth, and singular definitions,
divisions, or distinctions as Apollo himself could by no means understand,
how come you to know that they are Callida mendacia, crafty untruths,
understanding so readily what Apollo himself by no means could? Surely M.
Baxter it was somewhat unseasonable while you were chalenging me for I know not
what Sophismes and Subtleties, thus to entangle your self in these labyrinths
and mazes of contradiction. But in truth you play right Senecas Harpaste with
me, and as she being blind herself, Sen. ep. 50.
ever complained of the darkness of the house: so you wanting either wit or
will to understand tell me that I walk without fire in the dark, and impute
Obscurity unto my preaching. A vice from which I have ever been abhorring as
they know well who are mine ordinary Auditors, or have had experience of my
courses. For as in judgment I have always esteemed Perspicuity a principal
virtue in Oratory, utterly disliking the vanity and affectation of those men
who with Antony desire rather to be admired then understood: Sueton. Aug. c.
86.
so have I continually endeavored to frame my practice unto this judgment,
thinking that then I have used best eloquence when I have spoken with the
greatest evidence. If therefore, as Austin says, I point you out with my
finger the old or new moon, or some star not so clear which you would
gladly see, De doct. Christ. Prolog.
and your sight be so weak that it cannot reach so far as my finger, you have
no reason to be offended with me. You should rather pray God to vouchsafe unto
you the eye salve of his spirit that you may see: I can but lend you my finger,
Reu. 3.18.
sight I cannot give you.

Now for the issue and event, you say that like a potion of Mandrake it has
cast upon you the spirit of slumber, and like a Lion has rent in sunder the
blessed union of holy Piety, that is in other terms has bred in you at once
both a Lethargy and frenzy, which is very near akin unto that witty speech
of the Apothecaries wife, that Pepper is hot in working and cold in operation.
But tell me M. Baxter in plain sadness, has that Sermon indeed so shaken the
well affected minds of many that now they scarce know by what means they shall
be saved? For it seems strange to me that one sole and fillie Sermon should
shake the minds of so many, and those so well affected too, and that in so
important a case as the means of salvation: If your meaning be, as I guess it
is, that opposing the vulgar definition of Faith, and defining otherwise then
formerly they conceived of it, doubts and disputes have grown thereupon, and
consequently the interruption of your peace, and the union of Piety: I answer,
first, that necessary doctrines must not be suppressed, nor studious minds
deprived of wholesome instructions because of some inconveniences which may
happen to follow. For as Augustine says, if upon the publishing of truth
offense be taken, De lib. ar^.
it is better to give way to such offense then that truth be abandoned.
Secondly, all the doubt and dispute that can grow upon that Sermon is no other
then this, of two definitions whether is the better, which I suppose is not to
call in question the means of salvation. And surely if every difference in the
Logical handling of a point in Divinity were the renting in sunder of the
union of piety, there is no Divine but plays the Lion, and deserves the same
aspersion you cast upon me. Lastly, better is doubting of truth, then
resolution in error: for doubting stirs up seeking, and seeking has the
promise of finding, Mat. 7.7.
and diverse I know unto whom this promise even in this particular has
graciously been performed to the full satisfaction of their minds, and the
unspeakable comfort of their conscience, which comfort of conscience if you
understand by the spirit of slumber you do no less then blaspheme: unless
you can show that it is grounded upon error which I know you can never do.


N. B. Well since so it pleased you to try your wit and follow your will that
upon a sole confident opinion of your sound arguments, you have bidden battle
to all the learned men of Christendom, bitten famous Melancthon, honorable P.
Martyr, blessed Calvin, renouned Beza, thrice honorable Grynaeus and Polanus,
snapt and snarled at glorious Whitaker; and excellent Perkins (whom as you say
you drove so hard to the wall with your sudden arguments that he knew not what
to answer) yea all Fathers and writers both old and new for these. Theocr.
(...).
1600. years: Since I say you would needs come barefoot to these mountains,
give leave I pray you to me one of the least but the most offended in the
absence of the rest, for the glory of God and the satisfying of our people, to
sift your arguments as you have laid them down in writing, and shape you an
answer for the desence of Justifying Faith, till you grasple with other most
learned men's writings which shortly you shall receive. Wherein if your errors
be spied, it was your fault so confidently to deliver in writing under your
hand such absurdities: praying you to remember (...), Dinoloch. apud Hesych.
who spits in an Ants nest shall have sore lips.


I. D. De Anim. l. 3. cap. 3.
It is not in our power, says the Philosopher, to entertain what opinion we
please, neither does the mind choose whether it will assent unto the truth of a
conclusion yea or no: but simply and of the necessity of its nature yields to
that part of the contradiction whereunto by force of syllogism it is
determined. If therefore the arguments which I have used in this question be
indeed as they seem unto me sound and necessary: you may as well chide the Sun
for moving toward the west, or the earth for resting steadfastly on her center,
as me for being swayed and persuaded by them. And yet by your leave I was not
so transported with Confidence, but that I still kept my self within the
bounds of Modesty. For although it pelase you in the former section to charge
me with ^oasting that scarce Archimedes could better and more lively have
painted his Theoremes then I justifying Faith: yet was I in truth as far from
it, as you are from truth in affirming of it, submitting my self in all
humility unto the censure of Gods Church, and promising upon conviction of my
error to reuerse what ever I had said.

Yea but very insolently I have bidden battle to all the learned men of
Christendom, bitten, snapt, and snarled at Melancthon, Martyr etc. yea all
Fathers and Writers both old and new for these 1600. years. 1 Samuel 17.26.
Intolerable arrogance I confess if your accusation be just: for who but a
presumptuous and proud Goliath would in such opprobrious manner defy and revile
the host of the living God? But tell me I beseech you what are those
despitefull and contumelious terms wherewith I have so reproched those famous
and excellent men? Nay did I in my Sermon so much as name either Melancthon, or
Martyr, or Calvin, or Beza, or Grynaus, or Pelanus, or Whitaker, or Perkins,
whom yet you say I snapt and snarled at? For that you add particularly of M.
Perkins, as if I had boasted by my sudden arguments to have driven him so hard
to the wall as he knew not what to answer, is but a black drop of your
slanderous pen. The truth is this, that in a private conference I told you,
that he being demanded, if Faith be an assurance of our present state in grace
and future salvation, what comfort remained for him who not feeling this
assurance thinks himself to be without Faith and consequently in the state of
damnation: his answer was (which also in his books he has published) that
desire of assurance is in the acceptance of God as assurance indeed: to the
which I said I could no way yield, seeing by the covenant of Grace, actual
Faith it self is absolutely required unto Justification, and therefore actual
assurance, if Faith be assurance. Besides this private speech all I have
publicly said or written is no more but this in general, that though my
opinion differ from the writings and doctrine of most learned and worthy
Divines, to whom as far inferior I owe all respect and reverence; yet being
Gods freeman I cannot endure to be man's Bondsman and swear to all they say.
And is not this the same in effect which all our Divines answer when they are
charged by the adversary to dissent from the Fathers? Let one Whitaker speak
for them all; We are, says he, not the servants but the Sons of the Fathers:
Contra Duraeum.
if out of the law and from divine authority they prescribe any thing unto us
we obey them as Parents: if they command ought against the voice of the
heavenly doctrine, we say we must harken not unto them but God. You Jesuits
like bondmen and base slaves admit without judgment and reason all the sayings
of the Fathers, fearing I think the gibbet or whip if ye refuse any. Now M.
Baxter, say if you dare, that glorious Whitaker with the rest of our Divines
bite, and snap, and snarle at the Fathers as well as I: if you dare not, and
yet I use no other language then they do, then are biting, and snapping, and
snarling, but your own doggish terms, arguing rather notorious Sycophancie
in you then such barbarous inciuility in me.

Well yet since you will needs, say you, come barefoot to these mountains give
me lea^e to sift your arguments and to shape you an answer for the defense of
Justifying Faith. Exodus 3.5.
Sir it was reason I should pull off my shoes and come barefoot to these
mountains, because the ground on which I was to stand is holy. Nevertheless
in this encounter with you I trust you shall find my feet so well sh^^ with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
that I need not care what briers or thorns soever you plant in my way. And
therefore good leave have you, sift my arguments in Gods name at your pleasure,
for to that very end sent I them you in writing. But I am afraid least instead
of sifting, I find from you nothing else but mere shifting, as indeed I do
not. For to some of my arguments you shape no answer at all, some you unshape
and turn clean out of the form I set upon them, to not one of them do you
shape so much as probable or tolerable answer. So that although you seem very
ambitious and greedy of the title, yet if you have no better skill in sifting
arguments, and shaping answers, you will hardly obtain so high an honor as to
be styled Defender of the Faith.

Further you tell me that shortly I shall receive the writings of other most
learned men, and grasple with them. They shall be welcome M. Baxter whenever
they come: for the more you are that impugn the truth, the more honorable will
the victory be. But I beseech you, Sir, when will that shortly you speak of be
expired? for it is now more then two years since you first threatened me with
them, as by the date of your writing appears: and yet hitherto could I never
hear either from them or of them whether they be white or black. Only it
seems they are very angry Pismires, that a man cannot spit among them without
sore lips. But when I shall speak with these enemies in the gate, as the
Psalmist says, I hope they shall find my lips so seasoned with the salt of
grace, and so well provided of an answer; Psalm. 127.5. Col. 4.6.
that I need not fear if they prove a nest, I say not of Ants only, but even
of Waspes and Hornets also. In the mean season if they be so deeply learned
as you pretend, how is it that you so hastily prevent them, and have not the
manners to stay till your betters have spoken? It is not, you say; upon
presumption of your greater learning, being one of the least but out of a
greater measure of zeal, as being the most offended. But, M. Baxter, they that
do the works of Zimri, have not lightly in them the affection of Phinees. And
seeing you will needs be the most offended, shall I say being the most
offending? Certainly having no just cause of offense given you, it is not so
much either the glory of God, or the satisfaction of your people, as your own
factiousnesse and vaineglory that sets you so forward in this business, and
makes you so impatient to think of the second place. Of a colder temper it
seems are those learned Rabbis you scarre me withal, who while you hazard
your self in the forlorn hope, wisely provide for their own security in the
reerward. And as the Turk uses to marshall the basest of his nations in the
front of the battle, that the enemies arms being wearied, and swords blunted
upon them, his ^a^j^ars may find the less danger and ^esistance: so these I
think are not unwilling that you with your wrangling a while comber and annoy
me, that having spent my strength upon you, I should not be able to endure the
force of their second charge. But unto (...) ^^ish policy I oppose the old
Roman wisdom, Veget. l. 1. c. ^1.
and as th^^ exercising their young soldiers to skirmish and (...) Martial
actiuities against a post ^repared (...) ^hereby with more readiness and skill
to encounter a true enemy: so will I by trying and experiencing my self upon
you) fit and provide my self to the better entertainment unto those learned
adversaries whenever they shall please to assail me.


N. B. Your writings are well polished, and show whence you came, and where you
were bred: Plutarch. (...).
but as smooth as they be they cannot help you nor save you from blemish,
except you speedily (which I wish) snetch the new hatched Mansters. For the
fair shoe helps no man of the Gowt.


I. D. Here, M. Baxter, you bestow upon me once for all a few drops of your
holy water sprinkle, telling me that my writings are smooth and well polished,
sauouring something of the place whence I came and where I was bred: but
withal remembering me (I think lest I should grow too proud of your praises)
that though the shoe be fair, the foot is gowtie, that is, though the style
and manner of handling be Schollerly, yet the argument and matter is erroneous
if not heretical. And so, as Hierome spea^ (...) you cast upon me an honorable
kind of contumely, Ep. 6 ad Pam. and Ocean.
comm^^^ing me a little for some good parts, but utterly bereauing one of the
truth of Faith. Which commendation also here vousafed me in gross, anon you
rob me of again by retaile, allowing me nothing but ridiculous, unlearned,
and inkehorne speeches, and scarce affording me skill enough to compose a
Syllogism. But the best is your judgment is not the truest touch to try
desert by* and therefore whether you praise or dispraise it no way moves me, the
one cannot better me, the other cannot disparage me. Nevertheless if you can
plainly and directly show that like another Ixion embracing a cloud instead of
Juno, I mean my own fancy instead of Gods truth, I have begotten thereupon
these monsters (as you term them) of opinions: I will as you wish me
speedily snetch them, Psalm. 137.9.
and dash their heads against the stones that they grow not up to the strength
and stature of Giants, to the further danger and disturbance of the Church. But
till then pardon me, if I neither snetch them, 1 Pet. 2.2.
nor fear blemish by them: nay if as the blessed offspring of celestial verity
I still feed and cherish them with the sincere milk of the word that they may
grow thereby to the further comforting of distressed souls, Jude 20.
and building up of the Saints in their most holy Faith.

And thus much in brief for answer to your Prologue: now take we a view also
of the Disputation it self. Wherein if you observe due proportion and Decorum,
as that is no other then a head without wit or brain, so this can be no
better then a body without heart and spirit.


N. B. But that I may orderly proceed, I will briefly (...) the state of the
Question betwixt us, and next showing how it is holden by you and denied by
me. The Quest.
The Question is whether iustify^^g Faith by the Church for 1600. years be
rightly d^fined: you deny it, I affirm it.


I. D. In word you promise orderly proceeding, but indeed you lay the
foundation of Babel, and by perverting the state of the Question disorder and
confound the whole Disputation. For whereas I inquire What is the true Nature
and definition of justifying Faith, and determine that that act whereby a man
stands justified before God, is not Assurance in the Mind but Affiance in the
Will: you to forestall the reader on your side, and to work all the prejudice
you can against me, substitute instead thereof this envious demand, Whether
justifying Faith by the Church for 1600. years be rightly defined, and boldly
auerre that I maintain it negatiuely and you affirmatively. How you can quit
your self of manifest preuarication herein I see not, unless perhaps you say
that albeit directly and in precise terms I affirm not so much: yet defining
otherwise then the Church hitherto has done, indirectly and by consequence I
avouch no less; But this figleafe is not broad enough to cover your
nakedness. For suppose it were so, yet was it your duty to have retained the
Question in that very form of words I propounded it unto you, and not in lieu
of my Conclusion to place a Consectary of your own collection. If whereas you
hold that Faith is Assurance, I should state the Question thus, Whether God
command a lie to be believed as true, and then peremptorily pronounce that
you affirm it and I deny it, would you not think your self much wronged and
abused? And yet this absurdity necessarily following upon that opinion, as in
my fifth Argument is firmly proved: I should so doing but serve you with your
own sauce and repay you in your own coin. How forcible therefore soever your
Consequence may be, in this place it is very unseasonable, and with more credit
should you have performed your promise of orderly proceeding, if you had
reserved it thither where you mean to argue against me. But Camels, says
Pliny, love not to drink till they have troubled the water, Hist. Not. l. 8.
ca. 18.
nor Sophisters to dispute till they have clouded the Question.

Nevertheless because you vaunt so much and so often of all the learned men of
Christendom, all the Church, all the world, all Fathers, all Writers, old and
new, Greek and Latin for these 1600. years: give me leave in this place once
for all to apply mine answer thereunto. I say therefore that it is but a vain
and idle brag full of Arrogance, Temerity, and Untruth; Arrogance in that you
would seem to have read all Authors that have wrtten these 1600. years: which
if you were such a glutton of books, and withal had the strength of an oak
and the time of Mathuselah; yet could you not by any means perform: Temerity
in that you think with the countenance of one inartificiall argument, to
outbraue so many sound Demonstrations grounded on Gods Word and according with
right reason: Untruth, in that you bear the world in hand as if all Writers
both old and new were clearly against me, not so much as one giving his
suffrage and voice with me, whereas in my Treatise I have expressly showed the
contrary.

For first touching the Negative, that Faith is not Assurance, I vouched
therein the authority of that reverend and worthy man of God M. Fox, whose
words anon you shall hear at large: In the mean season it behooves you, if
you will be believed in this point, to produce the cloud of witnesses you so
much boast of, that we may hear whether they will depose the contradictory
hereunto, namely that Faith is Assurance. For howsoever, you say you have no
fewer then All, yet it may be when all comes to all you will prove as ill
stored of testimonies as the wise man of Athens was of shipping, who being not
worth the poorest shallop in the harbor, bare himself notwithstanding for
owner of all the galleys that arrived therein. And surely having thoroughly
searched your Answer to this purpose, I find the number (by you cited) so
small, that I need not much skill in Arithmetike to sum them up: for, the
total amounts to no more then an Unity, and all your Authors are but one
Calvin, once alleged in the front thereof. Unto whom I deny not but you might
have joined some other of the later Writers: but what are they to all both old
and new for 1600. years? For as for the ancient Fathers, not one of them (so
far as I can learn) affirms the justifying act of Faith to be Assurance:
and among the Modern it is more then manifest that a good part of them flatly
denies it. So that being backed of so few, and yet craking so loudly of All,
Ter. Eunuch. act. 4. Scen. 7.
you play right the glorious Soldier in the Comedy, who having but four men
in all the world, bestirred himself so busily with three of them as if he had
been mustering a whole Legion, and at length missing the fourth, gallantly
demanded where all the rest were.

Again touching the Affirmative, that Faith is Affiance, I quoted that passage
of S. Augustine, To believe is to love, ad by loving to move unto God. In my
Treatise De morib. Eccl. ca. 15.
Now Love (by which that Father usually defines Virtue) properly is not an act
of Faith, because of Charity; Charity and Faith being two different and
distinct Habits. 1 Cor. 13.13.
And therefore by Love you are to understand generally an act of the will, it
being an affection of that Faculty: as if in plainer terms he should have
said, To believe is that act of the Will whereby we move unto God: Which
elsewhere he expresses more clearly, saying, He that comes unwillingly
believes not, In Ioh. 6. tract. 26.
and he that believes not comes not: for we run not unto Christ by walking
but believing; neither come we by the motion of the body, but by the will of the
heart. So that Faith being in S. Augustins judgment an act or motion of the
Will, what other can it be then Affiance? 12. q. 40. a. 2. ad 2.
For, as Thomas says, that motion in the appetite which immediately follows
Desire to obtain that good which we esteem possible to be obtained, is
Affiance: Add unto him Theophylact; He that with great affection believes,
In Marc. 11.
stretches out his heart toward God. And what does it? It is united unto him;
and the heart enflamed gathers great certainty that it shall obtain his
desires. Where by the way observe that certainty is concluded out of Faith, and
therefore can no more be Faith then the Conclusion can be one of the
Premises. Sermon. de Sancto Andr.
So Barnard, To believe in God is to set all our hope in him. And our Divines
in the Conference of Altemburg define it by Affiance in the Heart and Will. In
a word all those who seat it only or principally in the will, Colloq. Altemb.
accord with me. For although defining it popularly they put usually into
their Descriptions, Assent unto supernatural verities which is an act of the
mind: yet making not that, but Affiance only the proper act that iustifies,
they do in effect fully accord and agree with me. So that you see I am not
driven to so near an exigent, but unto your one I can oppose more then you are
aware of. And yet had I far more, I would not upon presumption, either of
their number or authority, say unto you, Ep. 11. inter. ep. Aug.
as Hierome sometime wrote unto Augustine, Suffer me I pray thee to err with
such men: and since you see I have so many companions in error with me, you
ought to bring forth one at least that ioynes with you. For who is he that
would willingly err with whomsoever or how many soever? 2 Pet. 1.19.
But having as S. Peter speaks a more sure word of the Prophets for my
warrant, I rather conclude with that free and ingenuous answer of Augustine to
Hierom, More testimonies I think might I easily have found if I had read much:
Epist. 19.
but the Apostle Paul shall be unto me instead of them all, yea, above them
all.


N. B. Let us therefore see what you affirm and we agree to be our justifying
Faith, and how you impugn it. Fides iustificans in adultis quae sit.
Justifying Faith agreed upon us both as holden by the Church.
We agree both in this that justifying Faith (as we hold it and you deny it) is
A certain knowledge infused into the hearts of the elect by the Holy Ghost by
which they constantly agree to all things revealed in the Word of God, and also
a firm Assurance whereby every one of the Elect relieth upon the Promises of
Christ, fully resolving that Christ with all his merits are given to him for
justification and eternal life. Now as you deny this to be justifying Faith,
so again let us see what you count justifying Faith to be. M. Downs
justifying Faith.
Justifying Faith is a rest of man's will upon Christ and his merits of
Justification and Salvation. The validity of your definition we will view anon
by Gods help: in the mean season let us see with what engines of rare wit and
solid Syllogismes you endeavor to overthrow the former definition of ours,
consisting upon the general Word, the causes, the effects, the proper Subject
and Adjuncts or essential Properties.


I. D. Your second cogitations I see are wiser then the first, and now you
shoot with far better aim then erewhile, missing not much of the right state
of the Question. For the Definition here attributed unto me is I confess that
which I defend, and the other assumed unto your self is that also which I
impugn; I mean so far forth as it makes Knowledge the General Word, and
Particular Assurance the Act, or as you term it the adiunct or essential
Property. For otherwise that causally it is from the Holy Ghost, subiectiuely
in the elect, and effectual unto Justification is not questioned by me, but
equally acknowledged of us both.

Now the validity of my definition you say you will view anon, and anon by Gods
help will I farther maintain it against you. In the mean season let us see
how skilfully you can use your buckler hand, and ward of those arguments I
object against you. And that the reader may more easily concern the course of
our disputation, and how pertinently things are applied: as hitherto before my
Reply I have set down the words of your Answer, so henceforward before your
Answer will I set down the words also of the Treatise I sent you:


Treatise. I will not play the Philologer in showing the diverse use and
acceptance of the word (...) or Fides, or quote Ciceros Fiat quod dictum est,
or Augustins Fac quod dicis for the Notation of it: nor play the Philosopher in
discoursing of Physical or Moral or Civil Faith, nor lastly will I speak of
Theological Miraculous Faith.


N. B. No doubt but then we are like to hear good stuff seeing at the first
entrance into the lists you refuse to be tried by those that best knew the
meaning of the things which they would express, Nomen quod rem notat quasi
notame nec aliter enunciari res possit nisi aliquo nomine. Aug. de Genesis ad lit.
c. 7. lib. imperfecto. Apoc. adu. Gent. c. 46. Ib. ca. 3.
and therefore found out names fit to note their natures. But Tertullian could
have told you (whose words you cite in your preface though falsely) Sinominis,
inquit, odium est, quis nominum reatus, quae nominum accusatio? Nisi si aut
barbarum sonat vox aliqua nominis, aut infaustum, aut maledicum, aut impudicum.
If you find fault with the Word wherein does the Word offend, what can you say
against it? except the Word be barbarous, or ominous, or slanderous, or
unchaste.


I. D. Stumbling at the threshold they say bodes no good, and little hope do
you give of honest and plain dealing in the sequel, that make your beginning
with so fond and shameless a cavil. For neither do I refuse to be tried by
those who found out the names of things, neither do my words import any
disliking of the word (...) or Fides: only I omit to discourse of such things
as are vulgarly known and not greatly material to my purpose. Apolog. c. 2.
and 3.
Tertullian indeed tells me that the Gentiles sometimes hated the very name of
Christian, persecuting it with as much rigor in them that bare it as they did
notorious wickedness in others, albeit the Name neither were barbarous, nor
ominous, nor slanderous, nor unchaste. But what is this to the purpose? unless
you say I am grown into as deep a detestation of the word Faith, as Pagans
were of the name of Christian: which none but an infidel can do, and no other
then a Satanicall and devilish spirit would object unto me. For as the thing
signified by the Word is that most noble grace of the Spirit of God which
gives the form and being to a Christian man: so the Word also I confess has
from the beginning both been sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and religiously
retained in the Church to signify the same; neither can it now without
sacrilege and impiety either be violated or disused. It is not I therefore
that find fault or am offended with the Word: it is you rather that offer open
violence unto the plainest sentence, giving withal strong suspicion, that
having once passed the bounds of modesty, wilfully perverting the state of the
question, you will hereafter steel your forehead and wax rechlesse of saying
any thing.

But I have cited, you say, the words of Tertullian falsely. Not so falsely as
you have cited him idly. For whereas that Father says, Apol. c. 46.
Philosophers player-like affect truth, and affecting corrupt it as being
ambitious of glory: but Christians necessarily desire it, and entirely practice
it as being careful of their salvation: I report it somewhat more breefly
thus, Although Philosophers player-like affect the truth as being ambitious of
glory: yet Christians studiously follow it as being careful of their
Salvation. So that omission of a word or twain without any alteration of the
sense, in a matter neither hindering nor furthering the cause in hand, or some
such toy, as Hierome speaks, Epist. 101. ad Pammach.
is the crime you charge me withal. For the true meaning of the sentence I am
sure I have kept: as for the words, because I endited out of my memory being
then in Bristol, and use not to carry my Library about with me when I travel
abroad, it was easy to mistake or forget some part of them.


N. B. But you knowing the very meaning of the Greek word (...) coming (...)
persuasus sum vel fui, I have been or am persuaded.
whereof comes (...) persuadere, to persuade, would have stayed you from
condemning us that say Faith is a full persuasion: Besides the Hebrew word
(...) coming of that which a man simply is persuaded of, Truth.
and the Greek coming of the Passive (...) to be persuaded, if you would
might have stayed you from incurring this infamy, and me from this labor. It
had therefore as I think been much better for you to have been Philologos
then Antipistos. But let us see how you proceed.


I. D. Kemnitius a grave and learned Divine says that so great a matter as is
the Definition of justifying Faith is not to be committed only unto
Grammatical disputations: Loco de Iustif.
and yet so great store do you make of one poor and naked Etymology, as if
there need no more but the knowledge thereof to decide the controversy. For
this, you say, if I would might have stayed me from condemning you, and eased
you from this labor. Let us therefore (seeing you are so confident upon it)
try the strength of this Achilles.

Faith, you say, in the Greek and Hebrew comes from a word signifying to be
persuaded, Ergo Faith is a Persuasion. Sir I deny your Consequence. For first,
every word bears not always the signification of the primitive from which it
is derived, Arist. (...) ca. 1.
partly because the number of words being certain and definite, but infinite
of things, one word of necessity must have more then one meaning: partly by use
(which is the rule and warrant of speech) they oftentimes degenerate from their
native and first signification into a strange and far different meaning. So
that if your kind of reasoning may pass for current, great danger and error
must needs ensue upon it. For example, Hypostasis if we regard the first
original thereof signifies Substance, and so says Hierome, all schools of
humane learning understand it: Epist. 57. ad Damas.
yet were it horrible blasphemy thereupon to conclude, Ergo in the matter of
the Trinity it must signify so too; for what mouth, says the same Father, is
so sacrilegious as to say there are three Substances in the Trinity? It is not
therefore so much to be marked whence a word is derived, as what it is used to
signify; and if it signify many things (as Faith does) then must we inquire
in what sense it is to be taken in the present question, that so we may build
our doctrines not in the aerie sound of words, but in the virtue of the things
signified, as Basil speaks. Contra Eunom. lib. 2.


Again, words (as Logicians teach us) have their originations sundry ways,
and among the rest from the Effects. Not to seek far for an instance; The
third argument in a Syllogism whereby the Conclusion is proved, is by the
Grecians called (...), that is Faith, a word as you say derived from a verb
signifying to be persuaded: and yet I think your self will acknowledge that
here it has the name from the Effect, not because it is Persuasion, but for
that it does beget Persuasion. Whereupon it follows likewise that Faith in
our Question flowing from the same fountain is not necessarily to signify
Assurance, but may well be called so because by it every true believer may
gather and conclude unto himself Assurance.

Lastly, although the Greek and Hebrew words whence Faith comes signify to
be persuaded, yet they do not only signify so. For (...) as Rabbi Kimhi
says implies Affiance, and (...) in the middle voice imports as much, whence
comes (...) Confidence: and (...) (a word growing upon the same root that
(...) does) construed with the Preposition (...) signifies to trust, rest,
rely on. Wherefore the original words in either language being indifferently
affected unto both, what reason can be rendered why faith in those languages
should not as well bear the signification of Affiance as Assurance?

These reasons considered, you see at length the weakness of your Achillean
argument, and how insufficient it is to persuade that Faith is a Persuasion.
Withal you may perceive that if I would I might have been Philologos without
any hazard unto the definition of Faith which I maintain: and that there is no
cause why either you should vpbraid me with the odious name of Antipistos, or
I fear incurring infamy for any thing hitherto I have said or written.
Howsoever, sure I am my Theology agrees better with true Philologie, then
these virulent speeches with the rule of Charity, or (to show by the way what a
skillful Pedant you are) your preposterous deduction of (...) from (...), the
Primitive from the Deriuatiue, with the precepts of Grammar.


Treatise. Be not offended if I handle (...), and give new terms to old
matters.


N. B. Aristoph. in Ran. and Lucian. in Pseudosophista.
You are no Constable, neither have you put on the Lions skin to subdue us to
your command. I tell you Master Down we are offended that you give new
terms to old Positions, and handle them not only (...) (which in this point
you cannot be permitted to do) but also (...) which is utterly intolerable. I
will therefore say unto you. With S. Hierom, Ep. ad Pammach. and Ocean.
Cur post quadringintos annos docere nos niteris quod ante nesciuimus? How
comes it to pass that thou after 400. years space go about to teach us
that before we knew not? And so to you how dare you deal after a new manner in
so weighty a thing as is Faith, opposing your judgment to the judgment of
all the Church for these 1600. years? In Praescript.
Alas says Tertullian, qui estis vos, vnde, quando? who are you, whence are
you, and of what continuance? In Genesis hom. 3. lib. 3. ad Licent.
But suo ipsius iudicio perijt sorex, By showing your self you perish, as
says Origin and Augustine of others. Now perceive we that the judgment of the
whole Church cannot content you, but still you must have one inkhorne term or
other of your own to show your itching ears. Would not or could not all the
learned men of the world define justifying Faith, and contenting themselves
with the Genus and Difference satisfy you, but that you would not only
dispute pro forma against them (which might be in a Scholar for trial of wit
tolerable) but also publicly preach against their judgments, and proclaim
them erroneous, only allowing your own for true.


I. D. Indeed, M. Baxter, it is true, I am no Constable: if I were I think I
should find it a very troublesome office to have such a turbulent spirit
within my jurisdiction as you are. And as for the Lions skin, as you say I have
not put it on: it is you that have ietted up and down along time in it, to the
great scarring and affrighting of simple people. Aesop.
But because your untimely braying and the unlucky appearance of your ears now
bewray that it grows not to your back, you must be content to be stripped of
it, and to walk hereafter as you are in your own hide.

You are offended, you say, that I give new terms to old positions, and
handle them (...) after a new manner. An offense not given, but taken, and
therefore little to be regarded. For the Philosopher, Categ. c. 7.. 16.
though he would have the common use of speech to be retained in familiar
conversation: yet Artists, says he, have liberty to invent new terms, so as
they be proper, determined, and adequated to the thing signified. Simplic.
super Praedicam. qual. Academ. Quaest. lib. 1.
In regard whereof himself doubted not first to use (...) for that which
formerly in the Concrete was called (...): neither was Cicero afraid with out
former example to call that Qualitas which the Grecians termed (...). In a
word, how many terms are there now frequently used in schools, which unto
the ancients were uncouth and never heard of? It cannot therefore be a
sufficient exception to say the term is new, unless with all you show it is
not proper enough to express the thing signified, which here you cannot do,
as by and by will appear.

This I think you saw, and thereupon very restrictiuely you say that in this
point I cannot be permitted so to do. And why I pray you not in this point as
well as in others? For it has always been the custom of the Church of God
even in the highest points of Religion, partly for the clearing of those parts
that are obscure and dark in them, partly for the preservation of them against
the innouations of heretics, to devise new terms, and as Athanasius speaks,
In disp. cum Ario coram Probo Gentili iudice.
things unchangeably remaining to change the names of things. Hence the ancient
Fathers invented the word Trinity to signify the plurality of persons in one
substance, Homousios to express the consubstantiality of the Son with the
Father, Theotokos to maintain the personal union of both natures in Christ,
and six hundred such like words utterly unknown unto former ages: Ibid.
old matters, as the same Athanasius says, Cap. 18.
receiving new names and those new names couching under them no new meaning.
According whereunto Vincentius Lirinensis, though he would not have his
Timothy to broach new things, yet gives him leave to teach the same things he
has learned after a new manner. Being therefore warra^ted both by the precept
and practice of the Primitive Church I see no cause but that even in this point
also I may be permitted to use new terms.

Perhaps you will say that not only the term wherewith it is invested, but
the matter hereof is also new: for so much your questions out of Hierome and
Tertullian, and the flood of words following with not a drop of reason in them
seem to import. Whereunto though I have already sufficiently answered, yet now
I add by way of surplus, that many Truths lie a long time hidden in their
principles, and vnheeded of the wisest, which being at length disclosed and
brought to light, are not therefore new in themselves, but only unto us,
coming newly unto our knowledge: even as the country of America is called the
new world, not because it is of a latter creation then Europe, Asia, or Africa,
but only because it is of a later discovery. These Conclusions until their
dependency and coherence with the principles do manifestly appear unto us, it
suffices to believe them implicitly and in the preparation of the Mind: but
when they shall be unfolded out of their principles, and clearly demonstrated
unto us by necessary deduction from them, we are bound to yield distinct and
express assent unto them. And then, as it would have been great folly in the
Spaniard to have refused the gold and treasures of the new world, because it
was found out not by the old Argonauts, but by Christopher Columbus a late
sailer: so would it be great sin in us to disclaim and renounce the benefit
of a truth, because it is made known unto us, not by an ancient Father, but by
a man of yesterday or to day. Iam. 2.1.
For this were to have the faith of God in respect of persons, as S. James
says, and to restrain the gift of the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation unto
the times of our predecessors, as if they only had eyes given them to spy out
truths, and it were impossible for us to see what they saw, not, although we
carried the Sun in our hands, as Lactantius speaks. Now then (to apply this
unto the matter in hand) if the point you quarrel at be not only new unto the
present custom; De Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 7.
as S. Augustine speaks, but also contrary unto reason and the grounds of
Faith, I confess it is erroneous; and justly may you come upon me with your
demands out of Hierome and Tertullian, Ep. 23. ad Paulin. De veland. virg.
cap. 1.
who are you, whence, when, that after 400. years you should go about to
teach us what we knew not before? But if it be new only unto us, and not in
it self: then do I answer your Hierome with Hierome, Weigh not truth by time,
and Tertullian with Tertullian, Nor space of times, nor patronage of persons,
nor privilege of places may prescribe against truth. For that which is no
otherwise new is true, and as the truth of God is with all reverence and
submission to be embraced. Howbeit this I say not as if I would be thought to
be the first discouerer hereof, or that it had lain hid as it were in the pit
of Democritus until this time. For that there is a Faith (whose object is the
Person of the Mediator) was never yet unknown in the Church, but has ever
been manifest even from the beginning. Search the Scriptures and you shall
find therein nothing more clear then this. For (as in the treatise sent you I
have showed) the whole tenor of them runs thus, He that believes in me shall
not perish, Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 14.1. Ioh. 1.12.
ye believe in God believe also in me: As many as received him to them he
gave power to be the Sons of God, that is to them that believe in him etc.
Romans 3.22.26. Gal. 2.16.3.22. Phil. 3.9. Iam. 2.1. Reu. 2.13.14.12.
Whereunto I add that in sundry places it is expressly called the Faith of
Jesus Christ, not because it inhereth in Christ as in a Subject, but for that
it has relation and respect unto Christ as unto the right Object.

And that at length it appears, both that the matter is every way old though
the term be new, and that new terms may be given to old matters even of
this kind, so as they be proper determined and adequated thereunto. It
remains only to show that such is the term which here I use. For proof
whereof I say no more but this, that if our best Divines have conveniently
distinguished other Faiths according to their objects, calling one Faith of
story because Scripture story, another Faith of Promise because the
Evangelical promise, a third Faith of Miracles because miracles are the proper
object of them: I see no reason why I may not as freely and as fitly call that
Faith of Person which has for its Object the Person of Jesus Christ. Neither
can I conceive if this be an inkhorne term as it pleases your elegancy to
term it, why Faith of Story, Faith of Promise, Faith of Miracles should not
be inkhorne-tearmes also. But you are a very nice and dainty man, you can taste
no wine how old or generous soever, unless the cup out of which you drink it
be graven by Myron or Polycletus.


N. B. But this has been the course of all fanaticall spirits in all ages,
moved with (...), Phil: 1.14.
self-love, contention, hypocrisy, and covetousness, De Haeresibus ad
Quodvult Deum.
to condemn all others to set up and stablish their own fantasies. Read
Augustine, yea see the Ecclesiastical histories, Eusebius, Sozomen, Euagrius,
Dorotheus, Vincentius etc. there shall you see whereupon these Schisms in the
Church began. Let me therefore entreat you if you will needs deal in these
grave causes (...), yet that you will deal also (...), well, as becomes a
wise man. For otherwise you shall bewray your mind desirous of novelties,
hazard your credit, offend the Church, yea as he says take upon you to glue
an egg, Diogenianus.
loosing your labor, and making your self ridiculous to the best.


I. D. What has been the course of fanaticall spirits in all ages, and
whereupon they have been moved to begin their Schisms in the Church; I am
not now to learn of you: neither needed you in this point so to flourish with
your Greek, or to make such a rumble with the names of Eusebius, Sozomen,
Euagrius, Dorotheus, Vincentius and the rest. But what my inward motives have
been, and with what affection I have proceeded in this business, God and my
own conscience are a sufficient theater: for your tongue is not the fan of
this floor. And seeing my earnest protestation in my preface cannot persuade
your uncharitable heart to entertain a better opinion of my sincere and
upright meaning in this cause, but that you will notwithstanding reckon me in
the number of fanaticall spirits, possessed with self-love, contention,
hypocrisy, and covetousness, condemning all other to set up and stablish
their own fantasies; I appeal unto him who alone knows the heart and tries
the raines, Ep. 69. ad Florent. Pupian.
and say unto you in the words of S. Cyprian, These things have I written out
of a pure mind and conscience, and with steadfast trust upon my Lord and God.
You have my letters, I have yours; in the day of judgment both shall be
rehearsed before the tribunal of Christ.

Whereas you entreat me to deal in this grave cause well, and as becomes a
wise man, surely hitherto I have endeavored so to do: how well I have
performed it I leave unto the censure of the Church, and specially of those
unto whom the Spirits of the Prophets are subject. In the mean season pardon
me if I fear none of those dangers you threaten unto me. How your self will
avoid them I cannot tell, for never was there man wrote with less reason and
more folly.


Treatise. Three Faiths there seem to be which lay claim and title to the
privilege of justification; Faith of History, Faith of promise, and Faith of
Person. The first is an assent of the mind unto the truth of Gods Word, and
specially the Gospel. And this whether it be Acquisite or Infused has no
interest in the matter of justification. For besides that is absurd general
knowledge should justify --


N. B. That you dare be so bold to make such a distribution of Faith I impute
it to your desire of novelties, Ephesians. 4.
as you say in the words last between us debated. I tell you there is but one
Faith, and that a true and lively working Faith, Knowledge the beginning,
Application or Apprehension the Progress, Rest the end of Faith.
and this only is justifying Faith, and comprehends your three nice
distinctions, and is compounded of them all conjoined together, the first the
beginning, the second the progress, the third being the end.


I. D. It is not desire of novelty in me, but love of confusion in you, that
dare not have those things distinguished which in their natures are divided.
For distinction of that which is ambiguous, Top. 1. c. vlt.
says Aristotle, is the prime and most necessary principle both of defining
and disputing well: the neglect whereof instead of profitable reasoning about
matters of substance, induces fruitless contention and iangling about words.
Now that Faith is equivocal and needs distinction appears first by reason,
for that it comprehends under it sometime more and sometime fewer things, is
both affirmed and denied of the same persons, is a word of accident attributed
to diverse Subjects not contained under one next Genus, as to the Elect, to
Reprobates, to Devils. Secondly by authority, Ser. de temp. 181.
It is one thing to believe a God, another to yield belief unto God, another
to believe on God, says Augustine. There is a kind of gift equiuocally called
Faith, says Oecumenius. In 1. Cor. 13. In 1. Cor. 12.
Not Faith of doctrines, but Faith of miracles, says Theophilact. There is one
Faith of Precepts, another of Signs, another of Promises, says Bernard. The
same among the latter writers confesses Melancthon, Martyr, Kemnitius,
Hiperius, Calvin, Vrsin, Fox, Perkins, and who not? Nay behold Saul himself
also among the Prophets: for besides that anon you acknowledge Faith sometime
to be spoken abusiuely and by an equivocation, you do expressly both in your
margent and text affirm that there are three kinds of Faith, and approve the
same distribution which here you condemn in me.

For all this I tell you, say you, there is but one Faith, and that is
justifying Faith. Shall I now say unto you as elsewhere you do unto me, that
you speak pure Bellarmine? De Iustif. l. 2. cap. 4.
For indeed you use the very language of that Jesuit. Sectaries (says he,
understanding Protestants) are wont to distinguish three faiths, of history, of
miracles, of promises: but Catholics teach that they are one and the same
Faith, and that justifying Faith. But does not the Apostle (in the place here
quoted by you) avouch that there is but one Faith? yes verily: but thereby in
the judgment of the best Divines he means, not that Faith whereby we do
believe, but that which we do believe: that is not the Habit but the Object of
Faith, as if he should more plainly say, there is but one Christian Religion.
And although in regard of the variety and multitude of material objects, there
may seem to be not one but many Faiths: yet because the formal reason
wherefore we do believe them is but one, namely divine testimony, and they are
in such sort linked and woouen together that one Article cannot be denied
without the dissolution of the whole Creed, all being according to the old rule
one copulative, it is therefore rightly and justly called one Faith.

Finally where you say Faith comprehends my three nice distinctions, and is
compounded of them all, I answer that such composition is altogether
impossible: for Faith of Story, and Faith of Promise are in the Understanding,
but Faith of Person is in the Will, and it cannot be that one and the same
Habit should be subiectiuely in two several faculties of so different
natures. For the Habit that is for example in Peter is one in number and that
which is one in number is indivisible, and that which is indivisible cannot be
at once in two Subjects, because as Philosophy teaches Numeration is from the
plurality of Subjects. This M. Perkins saw, On the Creed.
and therefore says, Some do place Faith partly in the Mind, partly in the
Will, because it has two parts, Knowledge and Affiance: but it seems not
greatly to stand with reason that one particular and single Grace should be
seated in diverse parts or Faculties of the Soul. And this also you cannot be
ignorant was answered in my treatise unto the same objection: which objection I
marvel how you can with modesty and credit mention, unless withal you were
provided to satisfy my answer. But seeing (as Cicero says of Hortensius) when
you have ought to say you have not the power to hold your peace, Verrin. 3.
it is an evident and strong presumption now that you say nothing, that you
have nothing to say.


N. B. Bleare not the eyes of Gods Saints with your niceties and falsities any
longer, for thus you reason. No historical Faith has any interest in the
matter of Justification: But firmly to believe the truth of Gods Word, and
specially the Gospel is historical Faith, Therefore firmly to believe the
truth of Gods Word and specially the Gospel has no interest in the matter of
Justification. Good Sir I deny your Mayor, which you thus endeavor to prove ab
absurdo and enumeratione partium, No general knowledge shall have any stroke
in the matter of Justification, All historical Faith is a general knowledge,
Therefore no historical Faith has any interest in the matter of
justification. Prove your Minor, which I deny, telling you moreover that
firmly to consent to the truth of Gods Word in genere, and the Gospel in
Specie is not a General knowledge, but a Special knowledge, and therefore I
argue. Such a special knowledge of the Gospel is the beginning of Faith
Justifying. Mat. 13.11. Ioh. 17.3. Mat. 16.17.
But firmly to consent to the truth of Gods Word and the Gospel is such a
special knowledge: ex confesso. Therefore firmly to consent to the truth of
Gods Word and especially the Gospel is the beginning of Justifying Faith.


I. D. If you were as far from hood-winking your own eyes, as I am from
blearing the eyes of others, you might easily perceive that now I deal against
our common adversaries the Papists, and overthrow the justification of their
Historical Faith, by the chiefest arguments which Protestants use. But you
after the manner of those Gladiators called Andabatae, nor see nor care whom or
what you strike: and so mildly affected are you toward me that so you may
make some probable show of endammaging or disaduantaging me, you reck not
though through my sides you reach and wound the best Divines of our Church, yea
and the common truth which we all maintain.

Neither do I use such circumguagues, nor wiredraw my arguments into such a
length as you bear us in hand: but having nakedly and plainly defined what
Historical Faith is, I prove by two reasons that Faith so defined does not
justify, the first whereof is this, because it is absurd that so general a
Knowledge should justify. So that your Ferio Syllogism deserves a Ferula, and
utterly to be cashed, as being no creature of mine, but an idle figment of
your own: and the next in Celarent (for so you form it, although indeed it
be also in Ferio, the Minor proposition and Conclusion notwithstanding your
general notes being but particular enuntiations) is the only Syllogism
intended by me, and including my first argument. The Mayor whereof it seems
you grant saying nothing unto it: and the Minor only you deny, which I cannot
but wonder at, seeing both the Minor and Conclusion are universally vouched by
all the Divines of our side. The Conclusion is that Historical Faith iustifies
not: So says Hyperius, De fide Hom. iustificandi.
There is a certain Historical Faith whereby those things which are
propounded in holy writ are simply believed: but yet is not applied unto Christ
and the matter of our Salvation. Loco de Fide.
The Minor is that Historical Faith is a general Knowledge: So says
Kemnitius, There is a certain general Faith which usually is termed
Historical: and again, Historical Faith is a general assent holding in
general that the promise of the Gospel is true. And M. Perkins, Ser. cause. c.
36.
A general Faith whereby they give assent unto the Gospel. Neither do I know
any one of our Divines that either in the Conclusion or the Minor does gainsay
them. So that by the judgment of these men, both consenting to Gods Word in
general, and to the Gospel in special, is not a Special but General
Knowledge: and if the Speciality of the Gospel being but a part of the whole
Scripture did specify Faith, it would follow thereupon that there are as many
Special Faiths as there are several Articles of the Creed, which were
unreasonable to imagine. For that Faith which assenteth unto the Gospel is no
other then that which assenteth unto the rest of holy Scripture: and although
it may principally respect that part of divine truth, yet does it not only
respect it, nor is limited thereunto as unto the proper adequate object
thereof, but universally extends it self unto all supernatural revealed
verities whatsoever. As for that Faith which our Divines call Special, is to
be understood of Faith of Promises whereby the Saints apply and appropriate them
unto themselves, particularly and indiuidually assuring themselves of their
present justification and future salvation. And the ignorance hereof as I ween
is the cause why you turn general into special and write of this matter so
wildly and confusedly.

This notwithstanding very peremptorily you pronounce that Historiall Faith is
a special Knowledge, and thereupon Syllogistically infer that it is the
Beginning of Justifying Faith: to what end I wot not well, unless it be to
prove that it does justify because as you conclude it is the beginning of that
Faith. But whatsoever your intent be, your argument I answer by distinguishing
of the word Beginning. For if you understand thereby a Pre-requisite or
Preparatiue unto justifying Faith, you do but fight with a shadow, for in that
sense I grant the Conclusion, neither does such a beginning of Justifying Faith
justify. If you mean thereby that it is Justifying Faith inchoat and in a
remisser degree, then I deny your Mayor, and say that such a knowledge (call it
as you please general or special) is not the beginning of justifying Faith;
If it were, then Devils and Reprobates having it should have justifying Faith
which Gods Word attributes unto the Elect only. Tit. 1.1.
And if it be true that Faith of person is the consummation of Justifying
Faith as in the former section you say, it cannot be that such a knowledge
should be the Beginning thereof: unless you will say that Accidents may pass
from one Subject to another, which is against all Philosophy. For Historical
Faith is in the Understanding, and Faith of Person is in the Will: and
therefore Faith of Story beginning in the Mind can have no subsistence
elsewhere, and justifying Faith being perfected in the Will cannot be begun
in any other Subject. The passages quoted in the margent though you should rack
them till they rent asunder, yet will they not confess what you allege them
for. For how I pray you hang these things together? To you it is given to know
the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven; This is life everlasting to know thee;
Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee but my Father, Ergo Such a
knowledge is justifying Faith begun. This is too violent astraining of
Scripture, and as Volusian speaks, is not a sucking of milk, but drawing of
blood from the dugs of the Church. Ep. 1. ad Nic. 1.
As for the Minor I have already sufficiently demonstrated the falsehood
thereof: only it seems strange why you should take it as confessed. For sure
I am in express terms I have affirmed the contrary: neither can I guess of
what words you gather it, unless perhaps of that I say and specially the
Gospel, which were too ridiculous. For that indeed confesses the Gospel to
be a special part of Gods truth, but (not determining Faith only thereunto)
it does in no sort specify it, as is above fully proved.


N. B. Historical Faith not divided from the other two kinds, but joined with
the^, is cause of Justification.
Again I would pray you to speak more learnedly, and argue soundly: For if
you had said formerly, No Historical Faith only justifies etc. We had been
agreed. For Historica Fides est causa iustificationis non solitaria sed socia;
non diuisa sed coniuncta. But speaking thus absolutely you speak unlearnedly.
Well, thus you proceed leaving your Minor naked and exposed to the mercy of
the World.


I. D Agreed, quoth you? Nay he can hardly agree with me that is at war
with himself: and had I spoken never so learnedly, and argued never so
soundly, yet I verily believe you would have quarrelled at it, because I see
you make contradiction of me the only rule of your speeches. That there is
but one Faith you say it is nouelty not to grant, and that, Faith only
iustifies I think you dare not deny: how is it then that in the margent
forgetting your self you talk of three kinds of Faith, which except my
Arithmetike fail me are more then one? and join fellows with that in
justification in the body of your text, which yet you confess does only
justify? But what is it that comes not within the sphere of your omnipotent
Philosophy? The power of your Logic has already contracted Universal into
Special: and why then may not the subtlety of your Metaphysicke find a
plurality also in an Unity?

But to be plain with you, I say that Historical Faith is so far from being a
joint cause that at all properly understood of Justification, but only as I
have said a Pre-requisite or Preparatiue thereunto. True it is that Faith of
Person is never Solitary, but is ever conjoined with sundry other graces, and
among the rest with Historical Faith: yet are not their operations to be
confounded, because in the same person they are conjoined. Many seeds lie in my
hand together, yet every one has his several and distinct virtue: Faith of
Person is never without Faith of Story, yet it is Faith of Person which only
iustifies. And as in the generation of man, the Sensitive soul goes before,
and prepares a fit organ for the infusion of the Reasonable, and yet not the
Sensitive but the Reasonable only does inform: so in the reparation of man,
Faith of Story proceeds, and makes way for the inducement of Faith of Person,
and yet not Faith of Story but Faith of Person only does justify.

Now whether in speaking thus absolutely I have spoken unlearnedly as you say
or no, it skilleth not much, seeing I am sure I have spoken truly. 1 Cor. 15.9.
What ever I am, by the grace of God I am, and desire so to be unto his glory.
My want and inability I thank God I know: yet know I no cause why in this
mediocrity of knowledge and speech I should in comparison with you any whit
disable my self. But since as the Apostle says, knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor.
8.1.
God grant us both the spirit of humility, that denying our selves and all our
learning, we may be content to be wholly captiuated unto the obedience of the
Faith of Christ.

The Minor which you say I left naked and exposed to the mercy of the world was
this, that Historical Faith is a general knowledge, which indeed in my
Treatise I did forbear to confirm, not for want of sufficient proofs, but
presuming that so evident a truth would never have been denied. But now I hope
it appears by what I have above said to be so well guarded with strength of
reason and approbation of the learned, that henceforward it need not fear the
rigor of your opposition.


Treatise. Acquisite Faith the Devils have according to that of Saint James,
The Devils believe and tremble: Infused Faith the Reprobates may have, as
Balaam, Judas, Magus. Now justifying Faith is proper to the Elect, and
therefore historical Faith cannot justify.


N. B. O ye noble Scholars mark this Syllogism: I have made your arguments
hitherto for you Master Down, and in this creeping and incroching argument
tell you that you beg the matter in question. For I deny that your definition
of Historical Faith is a general knowledge, but special and peculiar unto
the Elect in the beginning of their justifying Faith, conjoined with the
Application, and Resting upon Christ and his merits. And to be plain with you
I tell you it is ridiculous yea blasphemous to say that Devils have Faith, or
that ever Balaam, Judas, or Magus had Faith. And so tells you M. Calvin, In
Iac. 2.19.
Ridiculum erit si quis Diabolos habere fidem dicat, it is ridiculous for any
man to say that Devils have Faith: For there is but one Faith, Ephesians. 4. and the
other is spoken (...), abusiuely and by an equivocation, and is but a vulgar
knowledge, or rather peculiar show by miracles etc. as the same M. Calvin
shows right learnedly, 1 Cor. 13.2. Calu. ibid.
and also tells you, Abunde constat totam hanc disputationem de fide non
haberi, it is plain that this whole disputation Iam. 2. is not about Faith.
Let this therefore serve for an answer I pray you to your first distinction of
Historical Faith, which you confound with a vulgar knowledge as appears
before: knowing this, No man that finally contemns this Special knowledge of
Gods Word and specially the Gospel can be saved. For he can never have the
other two kinds of Faith spoken of before, except he begin with this kind of
Faith.


I. D. Surely I am very deeply beholding unto your Mastership, having so small
skill in Logic, that you will be pleased to form my arguments, and to shape
them in so excellent fashion for me. But I beseech you spare your pains where
you are like to reap little thanks for your labor. Such officiousness in an
adversary is not without suspicion: and if you may have the hammering of my
arguments, your weakest answers I doubt not will be proof enough against them.
Leave me therefore I pray you to the meaning of my own weapons, and look you
well unto your own defense; for I fear me you will hardly be able to avoid
the danger of them. For thus I reason, That Faith which Devils and Reprobates
have, iustifies not: Historical Faith Devils and Reprobates have, Ergo
Historical Faith iustifies not. Here you see nor creeping, nor incroching, but
fair and plain dealing and such as I am well content all noble Scholars
mark it. But let us see what you reioyne hereunto.

First, you say I beg the matter in Question. What matter? that Historical
Faith is a general knowledge; but neither is that the matter now in Question,
neither do I any way beg it. For in this Syllogism the Question is, whether
Historical Faith do justify, of your Question there appears nor palm nor
footstep: which yet in the former section against your negative I have proved
to be most true. That which you add if it be not senseless is contrary both
to your self and unto reason. For saying that Historical Faith is proper and
special unto the Elect in the beginning of their justifying Faith, you
plainly distinguish it from justifying Faith, which is contrary to what you
have elsewhere said. If you still confound them and make Historical Faith the
beginning of Justifying Faith, it is as if you should say the beginning of
justifying Faith, is special and peculiar unto the Elect in the beginning of
their justifying Faith, which is altogether witless and senseless. Lastly, to
say that Historical Faith which before was General and common as soon as it
is conjoined with application and Resting on Christ becomes special and
peculiar, is utterly void of reason. For as Grace superadded unto Nature in the
Elect makes not Nature special and peculiar unto them, but that still it
remains common unto all men: so also Historical Faith by accession of
Justifying Faith or Affiance changes not its nature and becomes Special, but
as it was evermore continues General. General I say, both Obiectiuely as
stretching it self unto all supernatural revealed verities: and Subiectiuely
not being appropriated unto the Elect only, but commonly incident unto others
also.

Secondly you deny the Minor, telling me plainly that it is ridiculous yea
blasphemous to say that Devils have Faith, or that ever Balaam, Judas, or Magus
had Faith. If I should now temper my ink with some sharper ingredient, and in
the zeal of my affection say unto you as the Angel sometime said unto Satan,
Jude 9.
The Lord rebuke thee, it were no more then here you justly deserve. For it is
not holy and learned men alone (which yet were too impudent) but even the
spirit of Wisdom and truth himself whom (I tremble to speak it) you charge
with ridiculousnes and blasphemy. For does not the Holy Ghost by Saint James
in express terms say, The Devils believe and tremble? and by Saint Luke,
Then Simon himself also believed? Iam. 2.19. Act. 8.13.
and did not Balaam prophesying of Christ, and Judas preaching Christ assent
unto those truths wherewith they were illuminated? And what Orthodoxe Divine is
there ancient or modern who falling upon this question does not acknowledge
that Devils and Reprobates do Historically believe? De vnico Bapt. cont.
Petil. c. 10.
Saint Augustine is bold and compares the Faith of Devils confessing Christ,
We know thee who thou art, even the Son of God, with that memorable
confession of Peter, Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God. This
confession, says he, was fruitful unto Peter, but pernicious unto the
Devils, yet in both not false but true, not to be denied but acknowledged, not
to be detested but approved. And a little after having vouched that of Saint
James, the Devils believe and tremble, and compared therewith the Faith of
those who believe the truth of God but live wickedly, Behold, says he, We
have found out of the Church not only certain men, but Devils also confessing
the same Faith of one God, yet both confirmed by the Apostles rather then
denied. Of the same judgment are our latter writers, That Faith is attributed
to Simon Magus, Inst. lib. 3. ca. 2.. 10.
says Calvin, We understand not with some that he fained in words a Faith
which was not in his heart, but think rather that being overcome by the
Majesty of the Gospel, he did in a sort believe and acknowledge Christ to be
the Author of Life and Salvation. Simon, says Beza, In Act. 8.13. On the
Creed. Ans. to Rhem. T. in Iam. 2.6.
believed with Historical Faith. Historical Faith, says Perkins, is in the
Devil and his Angels. Such a Faith, says Fulke, as is in Devils, namely an
acknowledging that there is one God, and so likewise of all the rest of the
Articles of Faith to be true, without trust or confidence in God. Finally, the
whole Church of Auspurg, Whereas Saint James says, Harm. Confess.
the Devils believe and tremble, he speaks of an Historical Faith: Now this
Faith does not justify; for the Devils and the wicked are cunning in the
History. Which last words I would wish you to note and observe. For if
Historical Faith be no other then an assent of the Mind unto the truth of
Gods Word, then Devils and Reprobates so assenting, yea being cunning in the
Story, must needs have Historical Faith. Add hereunto, that if they do not
so much as Historically believe, then the sins which they commit against the
Gospel are only sins of ignorance and not against knowledge, neither can
they offend of malice, or fall into that unpardonable sin which is against
the Holy Ghost. Mat. 12.32.
Neither lastly can any be said to have made shipwreck of Faith, which yet
the Scripture says some have done, 1 Timothy 1.19.
unless perhaps you will say a man may make shipwreck of that which he never
had. So that now if I have spoken ridiculously and blasphemously as you say,
you see what Schoolemasters have deceived me, and upon what reasons I have been
drawn into this folly and impiety: or rather the world sees what folly it is
in you thus against all reason to impute blasphemy and ridiculousnesse unto the
truth of God, and the most glorious preachers and defenders thereof.

Yet Calvin, you say, tells me it is ridiculous to say that Devils have
Faith, and, it is plain that this whole disputation Iam. 2. is not about
Faith. But is it possible that Calvin should strive against the torrent of so
maine authority? or like the Philosopher of whom Aristotle speaks forget, his
own voice, and unsay that which he had formerly said? Certainly if you will
give him leave to be the interpreter of his own meaning you shall find he
does not. For when he denies that Devils have Faith, and that Saint James
there disputes of Faith, he understands not Faith indefinitely, but
particularly justifying Faith. This is evident by his annotation on the
twentieth verse, In Iam. 2.20.
Here, says he, is no disputation of the cause of Justification, whereby what
other can he mean then Justifying Faith: And when he says the dispute is
not about Faith, he adds forthwith, but of a vulgar knowledge which
conioyneth a man to God no more then the sight of the Sun lifts him to
Heaven. Now what is that Faith which unites us unto God, but only Justifying
Faith? and what is this vulgar knowledge other then Historical Faith, by which
the eye of the mind sees divine truth as that of the body sees the Sun? Of
that therefore by Caluins judgment Saint James speaks not, Beza in eundem
locum.
of this he does. And Beza who upon this place treads in Caluins steps and
well knew his meaning affirms that Saint James understands not the same
Faith whereby Saint Paul says we are justified, but only that whereby we
do believe there is a God, and that Christ is the Son of God, and that all
things prescribed in both the testaments are true, which is in effect the very
definition of Historical Faith. But for all your praising of Calvin, you
cannot be contented with his exposition, but you must needs have a trick
beyond him. For whereas he by Saint James his Faith understand a vulgar
knowledge, you will rather have it to be a peculiar show by miracles, which is
the most senseless device that ever was imagined. For who ever dreamed that
the Question which there the Apostle disputes should be this, Whether a
peculiar show by miracles without works do justify? And when he says Thou
beleeuest there is one God, thou do well; the Devils believe also and
tremble, what brute of Cuma or Arcadia would expound it thus, Thou have a
peculiar show by miracle, it is well, the Devils have a peculiar show by
miracles also and tremble? Learn therefore and know that the Faith which
Devils have, cannot be Faith of miracles: for miracles the Devils can work
none, being limited within the compass of their nature which cannot produce
supernatural effects, and never being ordained to be the confirmers of Faith,
to which end miracles were appointed. Now then to end this point, whereas you
pray this may serve for an answer unto my first distinction of Historical
Faith, I must tell you plainly that what you cannot win by force, you are not
like to get by begging; neither can I at any hand be entreated to accept of
frivolous and desperate speeches, for sound and substantial answers. Whereas
again you make the ground of my error as you pretend to be confounding of
Historical Faith with a vulgar knowledge, You shall by your patience give me
leave still to err that error, until by some newfound nicetie you can
distinguish them, whereof I pray you let us hear by the next. Lastly, where
you wish me to know that whosoever finally contemns Historical Faith cannot
have the other two kinds of Faith, nor be saved, I do you to weet that I know
it right well, but what you intend or would infer thereon nor I nor I think
your self know. Some thing was to be said to make a show and to fill up paper:
but what and how pertinent it is, Hippoclides cares not.


Treatise. The second is Faith of Promise and is a Persuasion or Assurance that
the Promises of God made in Christ, to wit justification, remission of sins,
adoption, regeneration, finally Election it self and eternal salvation do
particularly pertain unto me and are mine; Yet this iustifies not.


N. B. And I confidently hold that a firm and final persuasion, application
and assurance that the promises of God made in Christ to wit Justification,
Remission of Sins, Adoption, Regeneration, and Election it self, and
eternal Salvation do particularly belong unto me and are mine, is that which
iustifies a man before God. You deny it, and thus you oppose.


I. D. Unto my assertion you oppose only your simple contradiction, preparing
your self immediately to answer my arguments. But because in my Treatise
certain words are promised before my reasons, whereat you cavil after your
confused manner in a very importune and unfit place: I will by your leave
rectify what you have disturbed, and maintain them there where my own method
first ordered them.


Treatise. This Faith of Promise although I deny not but in Scripture it is
called Faith, and that every Saint of God both may and ought to have particular
persuasion and Assurance: Yet I confidently deny that this Persuasion and
Assurance is that which iustifies a Man before God.


N. B. A man may be saved by this Faith, yet this Faith is not a justifying
Faith, therefore a man may be saved without a justifying Faith. Whosoever may
be saved by this Faith, and by your third kind of Faith may be saved by two
kind of Faiths, the one justifying, the other not justifying, which is absurd.
Yet by your confession M. Down, a Christian ought to have this Faith as of
necessity. Then if he ought to have it he cannot be without it, and yet may
ordinarily be saved without it as you say, and so saved without that which he
ought of necessity to have to salvation: and also ought to have that to
salvation which will do him no good to salvation because he may be saved
without it. What absurdities and contrarieties be these?


I. D. Now alas were I as cunning as Theseus himself, how could I wind my
self out of these perplexities and labyrinths wherein you have entangled me?
or were I as strong as Samson how could I break in sunder these cords of
absurdities and contrarieties wherewith you have so fast bound me? And yet
when I look more nearly unto the matter, me thinks the knots are not so
intricate that there needs some God from the engine, (as it is in the Proverb),
to untie them. For as Augustine says, Do but restore my words, and your
calumniation will presently vanish. All I say is no more but this that every
Saint of God both may and ought to have particular assurance and persuasion:
you report me to say: A man may be saved by this assurance, and that he ought
to have it as of necessity to salvation. Betwixt which sayings there are as the
Poet speaks many high hills and deep seas: and therefore what iars or discords
soever you have here found, is in the song of your own setting and not of my
devising. For what mad Syllogismes are these if instead of your imaginary
proposition you restore my true assertion, and then add unto it your
Assumption and Conclusions, thus; A man may and ought to be assured, But
Assurance is not justifying Faith, Ergo, a man may be saved without a
Justifying Faith, Ergo, a man may be saved by two kinds of Faith, Ergo, he
may be saved, without that which he ought of necessity to have to salvation,
Ergo, he ought to have that to salvation which will do him no good to
salvation: Do you not see that against the canons of Logic, first, you have
one term in the conclusion, namely may be saved, which is not found in
either of the premises? Again, that neither term of the Conclusion is in
the Mayor proposition? And lastly, that the Conclusion is affirmative
notwithstanding that the Assumption is negative? Fie, fie that a Logicke-wright
should so much ouershoot himself, and so shamefully transgress his own
precepts. This infamy (to retort upon you your own words) had you not
incurred, if you could have abstained from perverting my speeches, and adding
unto them such impudent glossems of your own.

But yet when I say a man ought to have Assurance, do I not therein confess
it to be so necessary unto Salvation that a man cannot be saved without it?
Nothing less, and God forbid that every ignorance or doubting of what we
ought to know, should presently exclude and bar us from Salvation; for then
no flesh possibly could be saved. Although therefore when I say a man may be
assured I confess a possibility, and when I say he ought to be assured I
acknowledge a duty: yet does it not follow thereupon that such assurance is of
absolute necessity. Necessary it may be unto the well-being of the Son of
God, but not unto his Being, as if he could not be a new creature without it:
necessary to cheer and solace him in the way to the end, but not unto the end
it self, as if without it he could not aspire unto salvation. Such absolute
necessity of assurance upon pain of damnation I know none, save only of those
truths which we call fundamental, among which I suppose your and my
justification and salvation are not to be reckoned. And yet had I said (which
I deny) that Assurance is necessary unto Salvation, what inconvenience is it to
say that nevertheless it is not necessary unto justification? For Salvation is
the End, Justification a mean or way unto the End, and more things are
subordinate unto the end, then unto the way: as unto Salvation both Faith and
works are necessary, but unto Justification Faith alone is required. And
therefore also it is no absurdity to say that two Faiths are requisite unto
Salvation, as indeed Faith of Story and Faith of Person are, although but one
Faith justify which is Faith of Person. And thus much for your plaine-song: now
let us hear your descant and division upon it.


N. B. Martial. Emerepes apud. Apophth. Chrysippus.
Dij mentem tibi dent tuam Philaeni, God send you your right wits to see these
errors and to amend them. (...), Ne vities Musicam said one, Corrupt not
music, speak not contraries nor novelties. You cannot always sail in the
night but at last will be taken, if you were as crafty as a Cuckoo, Athanas.
in Symb.
as spoke Pliny and Aristotle. We hold in Divinity but one Faith and not
diverse in specie, and that every Christian man is bound to have it having
means given him from God upon pain of damnation, and that no man can
ordinarily be saved without it. And therefore do cast out your cobwebs, as
following his counsel that said Vasis eijcias quas nectit aranea telas,
knowing that your speeches endeavor to mingle water and fire together, which
is impossible to do. Neither are your forces any thing able to deceive Gods
Elect, so long time trained up in his blessed school. Well may you consume
your self as one said Comedo meipsum more Polypi, Alcaeus apud Athen. l. 7.
Catull. Mat. 11. 1 Timothy 3.15. Act. 9.
I eat up my self like Polypus, but the Church can you not deceive, for your
sack is full of Spiders as Catullus tells one, Nam tui Catulli Plenus
sacculus est aranearum. The Church is no reed but the pillar of truth, and
therefore it is hard for you to spurn against it.


I. D. Unto this Rapsodie of sentences and proverbs drawn in like Hercules
oxen, and tied together like Samsons foxes so preposterously by the tails,
were I a Grammar-schoole-boy again, I would quickly patch you up an answer in
the same kind. But now I affect not an opinion of learning that way, desiring
as becomes a Divine rather to be real then verbal. If children either in age
or understanding be pleased with such Pedanterie, and delight to see so many
babies in your writing, I envy it not, so long as the grauer and learneder
sort rest contented and satisfied with the substance of my reasons. Only unto
that charitable prayer which you make for me out of that devout Poet Martial,
that God would send me my wits again, Lib. 2. Sat. 3.
I know not what kinder wish to oppose then that of Horace the deuouter Poet of
the two, that you which are frantic and bedlem-mad would something bear with
those who are but a little discrazed and distempered. For indeed you are right
twin unto the Lunaticke gentleman in Horace, and as he every day visited the
theater and there ^ate clapping his hands and keeping a stirreas if he saw some
notable Tragedieacted before him, whereas the stage all the while was empty: so
you here make much ado, and tell me of I know not what absurdities,
contrarieties, and novelties, and yet the ground you lay for them is in my
words no where to be found. Wherefore as Soph^cles being accused of dotage
read before the judges his Ordipus Coloneus which he had very lately composed,
Cic. de Senect.
and then demanded of them whether it seemed the poem of a dotard or no: so
because you charge me as ber^^ of my right wits and fraught with nothing else
but errors and contradictions, I appeal unto the Christian reader, praying him
to peruse and ponder my treatise, and if he please this Disputation also, and
then to judge indifferently betwixt us whether I be as this Festus accuses me
mad and beside my self, or else with Saint Paul, Act. 26.24.25.
have spoken the words of truth and sobernes.


Treatise. 1. Arg. If this were justifying Faith, then whosoever lives and dies
without this particular Assurance cannot be saved: sine Fide etc. without
Faith it is impossible to please God. But a man may be saved without it. Ergo.


N. E. I hope you mean de adultis, of men that have means given them from God
to get this Assurance: for otherwise I easily agree that God may
extraordinarily save whom it pleases him. But doubting not of your meaning,
and denying your Minor, you take upon you to prove it, first by an instance,
and next by six reasons: All which let us see.


I. D. Epist. 57.
Taking me to mean de adultis, you do no whit mistake me: for as Augustine
says, that Infants know the things of God who know not so much as the things
of men; if we should go about by words to demonstrate, I fear me we should
be injurious even to our very senses, endeavoring to persuade that by speech,
the evidence of whose truth surpasses all faculty and office of speech.
Nevertheless because it is written without Faith no man can please God, and,
the just shall live by his own faith, many learned men have hereupon conclude
that Infants have a Faith even of their own: Adacta Colloq. Mompelg. Resp. de
Bapt.
in so much that Beza though of a different judgment confesses this to be a
very solid and firm foundation, and soon after adds, that of this matter
very learned Divines, yea and the ancient Fathers also differ in opinion; for
this Question, says he, is among the number of those wherein because we all
know many things but in part we may vary in judgment, and yet the foundation
of orthodoxall Faith stand safe. But you take it I mean de adultis, and as I
have said you do not mistake me, and therefore you deny my Minor: which when
you say I prove by an instance and six reasons, it seems you passed over my
reasons perfunctorily and without attention, or cared not to let drop of your
pen at adventure whatsoever came next to head. For I prove the Minor by one
instance only, and the arguments following are no more but five, and conclude
not the Minor but the maine Question, to wit, that Assurance does not justify:
The instance is this.


Treatise. I instance in those our Brethren of Germany who hold that Faith may
totally and finally fall away, and consequently that there can be no certainty
of Salvation, whom yet the Church of God calls and counts Brethren, and it
were uncharitable to censure of them otherwise. Therefore (or at leastwise
probable) Faith is not an Assurance.


N. B. Whatsoever our Brethren of Germany hold is true, but they hold that a
man may be saved without this Faith, Therefore this position is true. O hominis
acumen and argumentum lepidum! What mood and figure I pray you was this
Syllogism borne in? But prove your Mayor; for we have learned Christ otherwise
then to tie our Faith unto the opinions of any one particular Church. Yea this
argument sauoureth mightily of Popery, which I thought you had been as far
from as I know you are in this point from Christ's verity and Christian unity.
For why I pray you might I reason thus as you do to prove that works do
justify a man before God, and merit eternal life. The Church of Rome holds
so, Ergo, the Position is true? Ob. But you will say they are no Brethren: A. I
answer they be the Church of God if we believe M. Calvin and M. Bunny citing
this place Antichrist sits in the temple of God: Ep. Tract. of Pacif.
But he sits at Rome, Therefore Rome is the temple of God. But I pray you
let us not be bound to defend the errors of our Brethren, neither too hasty to
discover them. And that this opinion is an error let the whole course of the
Scripture declare. Darij Darij
Whosoever lives byaboue4 Faithaboue5 liuethaboue3 foraboue1 eueraboue2, But
the Saints of God live for ever, Therefore they live by Faith for ever. All the
gifts of God be without repentance, Faith is the gift of God, Therefore without
repentance. That which continues unto the end and is made perfect cannot
finally fall always, Perficiet vsque ad finem bonum Phil. 2. Fides est opus Dei.
Ioh. 6. Ambr. 2. Cor. 6. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 106. col. 513.
But Faith continues unto the end and is made perfect, Therefore it cannot
finally fall away. See what the Fathers say, Neque fides vera est si non sit
perpetua, sed possit deficere, Neither is Faith true Faith except it be
perpetual and cannot fall away. Credere vere est credere inconcusse, firm,
stabiliter, and fortiter: To believe truly is to believe without wavering,
firmly, steadfastly, and strongly.


I. D. There is a little triobolar pamphlet commonly called Baxters Logic,
the Author whereof I think you esteem as skillful in that Art as ever was
Zeno or Aristotle himself. Though I could never find in my heart to loose an
hour or twain in perusing it, yet I persuade my self no man can better
resolve you in what mood and figure this Syllogism was borne. But if not
satisfied herewith you will needs know my opinion also, thus I think without
all figure it was borne in a peevish mood. For it is far from my thought and
purpose to maintain that Whatsoever our Brethren of Germany hold is true, or
that Faith once infused can either finally or totally fall away: and if you
were not either desperately impudent, or brutishly ignorant, you would not so
have forced my words, and obtruded such unreasonable reasons upon me. For thus
I argue, Our Brethren of Germany may be saved, yet they have not this
Assurance, Ergo, some that have not this Assurance may be saved. The Mayor is
grounded upon the judgment of Charity, and the censure of Gods Church calling
and counting them Brethren. Such is the judgment of Beza, Sadeel, Jewel,
Epist. 2. ad Dudith. Posnan. Assert. conf. in nota vnitatis. In Apol. and
Defense of Apol. De Eccles. q. 5. c. 8. In thesi 5. On the Creed.
Whitaker, Reinolds, Perkins, and whosoever is borne within the temperate zone
of Christian love, and not under the burning region of intemperate zeal, or
frozen climate of uncharitableness. The Minor is thus proved, because they
hold that Faith may finally and totally fall away. For whether this Position
be true or false is not material in this place: only if they hold so, as
questionless they do, then can they not be assured, which is my Assumption.
For to be certain of Salvation, and in possibility of damnation are
incompatible and cannot stand together.

These things being so, to what end take you so much pains to show that it is
not always true which some one Church holds, troubling the Reader with your
needless Obs and Sols? and why do you allege so many Scriptures to prove
that Faith cannot fail, a truth I never doubted of? For herein you do but
plow the Seashore, and let fly at Sempronius when it was Titius that struck
you. Neither is it a matter of any hardness or difficulty to refell the most
of your arguments if I would spend time and oil about it: for like a bungling
workman you have marred a good cause with ill handling. For example (to give
you a little taste of your weakness this way) that we are not to tie our Faith
unto the opinions of any particular Church you prove, because the contrary
sauoureth mightily of Popery. And yet Popery teaches not that a particular
Church cannot err, nay does not define that the particular Church of Rome
cannot err, but only allows that privilege unto the Catholic or
Universal Church. Again, to prove that Faith cannot finally or totally fall
away thus you reason, Whosoever lives for ever lives by Faith, But the Saints
of God live for ever, Therefore they live by Faith for ever. May I not now in
requital of your scoffing exclamation cry out O hominem obtusum and
argumentum stupidum? For first you conclude that the Saints live by Faith,
which is not the point in question. Secondly you have one term in the
Conclusion not found in the premises, namely live by Faith for ever, and so
your Syllogism is a mere Paralogisme. Lastly, if to perfect up the Syllogism
you understand the Mayor Proposition thus, Whosoever lives for ever lives by
Faith for ever, then do I flatly deny it: for they that live for ever live
only in this life by Faith, in the life to come Faith cease, and then they
live by vision, not by Faith. But I forbear farther to examine either these or
the rest of your arguments, partly because we agree both in the general
Conclusions, Demonax apud Plut. Apop^h.
and partly lest I prove as wise as he, who while his fellow was milking a
ram-goat, held a sieve under to receive the milk.


N. B. But you say the German Church holds it: I deny it, neither can you be
able to show it, and therefore it is a great sin thus to traduce the fame of
so honorable Personages. Three and those no small lights in the Church of God I
will show which hold the contrary, and so leave you to the Spirit of God who
work in you conversion. In Postill. mayor in Sex-ages. in Euang. Luc. 8. de
Semine.
Luther in the place before, says, Very auditores sunt qui Verbum Dei perpetuo
retinent and fructum adferunt: They be true belieuers which hold fast always
the Word of God (which none can do without Faith) and bring forth fruit.
Brentius speaking of time-seruers says that they did never truly believe, In
idem. Euang. In ad Ephesians. c. 1.
Bucer calls that Faith which may be lost imaginem fidei and simulatam
credulitotem, an image of faith and counterfeit credulity. Now you have heard
these great Fathers of Germany against you, with what face can you accuse so
indefinitely the Brethren of Germany of so notable an error? But I will stay
your leisure to produce those German-Brethren.


I. D. My leisure shall you not long stay for. That many do not persevere but
fall from grace, both Scripture and experience teaches, says Kemnitius. Exam.
part 1. de Iustil
They that are most elected may become Reprobates and therefore utterly fall
away, says D. Andreas. Colloq. Mompelg. quaest. de Bapt. De gratia universally
p. 26. Ib. p. 30.
David was elected, faith Heming^^s, yet indeed lost the spirit, and was made
guilty of eternal wrath until he again repented. And again, As often as a
sinner, says he, although never so enormious repents, of a vessel of
dishonor and wrath, he is made a vessel of honor and mercy: as on the
contrary side whosoever is a vessel of honor and mercy, when willingly and
wittingly he falls into sin, he wastes his conscience, and loosing Faith
becomes a vessel of wrath and dishonor. The Century-writers, Cent. 1. l. 2.
ca. 4. p. 275. and l. 1. c. 4. p. 120.
That Faith once conceived may be lost and shaken out, it is plain by sundry
examples and by the sayings of Christ: and, that Faith may be lost the
Apostles both by their sayings, and examples do demonstrate. Finally, the
whole Church of Saxony, Harm. conf. incon. Sax. art. 10.
It is manifest that some that are regenerate do grieve and shake off the Holy
Ghost, and are again rejected of God, and made subject to the wrath of God,
and eternal punishment. Read Zanchie in his Miscellanies, and there shall you
find how much trouble that that worthy man sustained in Germany among other
things for gainsaying this point. For indeed this is one special Article
wherein we and the Lutherans (for them I understand by Brethren of Germany)
do disagree, and the ignorance thereof argues that you are little or nothing
at all acquainted with the controversies that are betwixt us and them.

But you have great Fathers of Germany against me, and can show three no small
lights in Gods Church which hold the contrary, even Luther, Brentius, and
Bucer. First Luther was no Lutheran, and not holding all those errors which
those who are called of his name defend, is not to be reckoned among them: yet
thus says he, In artic. small. called.
It is necessary to teach and know that when the Saints fall into manifest
sins, as David did, then Faith and the Holy Ghost are lost. Brentius indeed
was a rigid Lutheran, and therefore it is likly he held as the rest of his
fellows do, for certainty I have none having not his writings by me. Neither
does the passage you allege out of him euince the contrary; for as
Excutifidians (give me leave so to call them) distinguish, they that have true
Faith in the trunesse of essence or existence, may yet as they say want true
Faith in the trunesse of permanence or perseverance. As for Bucer he falls not
within the compass of those whom I mean by the Brethren of Germany, for he
was none of those whom they call Lutherans. In Miscell.
And yet as he is alleged by Zanchie and others for the Perpetuity of Faith,
so is he vouched also by the contrary side for falling away from grace, as
where he says: They who sin against conscience by no means have a true and
lively Faith. In Colloq. Ratisb. page 247.
But suppose these three were such Brethren as we speak of, yet what are they
to Kemnitius, D. Andreas, Hemingius, Illyricus, Wigandus, Mathaeus Iudex,
Basilius Faber, the whole Church of Saxony, and generally all Lutherans, who
all hold as I have affirmed? And therefore I do not as you say traduce their
fame, nor accuse them wrongfully of error: they themselves have diuulged and
published it to the whole world in their books. And so my Assumption, that they
have not Assurance remains hitherto in his full strength and virtue.


N. B. You conclude upon the premises thus, Therefore or at leastwise probably
this is not justifying Faith. Dispute you positiuely, and conclude probably?
Alas Master Down, do you preach after this manner at Cambridge to deliver
definitions by Sophistry, when you should speak vere truly? It seems when
you said so you were not persuaded that your doctrine was true, but determined
contingently and probably with fine words to ensnare poor silly hearers. For
when you say, Therefore or at leastwise probably, you doubted of the Truth
thereof. Surely this is not to go recto pectore with an upright conscience in
Gods cause. Ammian. Marc. l. 17. Plutar. in collect.
But I hope we shall take heed of you when you preach next, seeing you mean
to tell us the truth but only a probable tale. (...), A wise man will eschew
your snares. Ep. ad Bosphor.
Bis enim ad eundem lapidem impingere stulto conuenit, says Gregorius
Theologus, It is the property of fools to stumble twice at one stone.


I. D. Why Sir is it unlawful to conclude otherwise then Apodictically? or is
it Sophistry to use Dialecticall Syllogismes in matters of Divinity? Certainly
then much to blame are all those Logicians who handle Topicall Syllogismes
whose matter is contingent other where then among the Elenchs: and foully
ouerseene are all writers both sacred and profane, ancient and modern, who
oftentimes dispute probably, knowing that although Demonstration only do force
and constrain, yet Probability does very much bend and incline the mind.
Saint Augustine did not so lightly esteem of Probable reasons: for Other
writers, says he, I so read, that how much soever they excel in holiness
and learning, Ep. 19. ad Hieron.
I do not therefore think any thing to be true because they judge so, but
because they persuade me either by those Canonical Authors, or by probable
reason not abhorring from truth. Bellarmine vpbraiding Illyricus for his
Conjectures is thus answered by learned Iunius, Contra Bell. de transl. impl.
1. c. 11.
Be not so hot I pray you against humane conjectures: In a word whether we
would modestly show our own opinion, or refell another, we deal humanely
saying it is a conjecture, but to vpbraid humane conjectures is mere
inhumanity. Dan. Cham. de oecum. Pont.
Nay Daniel Chamier a very learned late writer in his book de oecumenico
Pontifice does professedly distinguish his arguments into Scripture,
Conjecture, and Testimony: and will you therefore say of him as you do unto
me, that he doubted of the truth of his cause, determined to ensnare poor
silly Readers, and walked not recto pectore with an upright conscience?
Reioinder to Brist. reply.
But so it is (I use the very words of D. Fulk being almost in the same terms
cauilled withal by blundering Bristow) When you can say nothing against my
assertion your self, you would make me uncertain of it, and say that it is
but a light suspicion of mine, because in one place before I come to the sound
proof of it I say it is a probable conjecture. And does it follow therefore
that I doubt of it because I offer a probable conjecture unto other men's
understanding before by order of discourse I am brought to the manifest
probation of it?

Well yet if Probable like you not, those that follow are Necessary, and I
fear me you will be able to say little to them that leave this without
answer, and the weaker the argument the more disgrace to be graueld by it. But
my purpose in using both, was for the more strength and persuasion: for as
Pindar says, It is the surest and safest way in a tempestuous night to cast
out of the ship two ankers. Olymp. (...). 6.



Treatise. 2. Arg. That which is in time after justifying Faith cannot be that
Faith; This is undeniable. But this Particular knowledge is in time after that
Faith. This I prove out of 1 Ioh. 5.13. These things have I written unto you
that believe in the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
Eternal life. Behold Believing goes before and Knowledge comes after. As for
that which follows in the same verse, and that ye may believe, I interpret
it of Perseverance and growth in Faith. Howsoever Believing and Knowing are
here distinguished, and therefore are not all one.


N. B. I deny your Minor: neither does that place of S. John help you ought as
we shall see anon. I tell you that justifying Faith is a Particular Knowledge,
though in other terms by us used, and by the Scripture set down. So that
where you say, a man first belieueth and then knows, we say he believes,
that is, he particularly knows, apprehends, and applies Christ to
himself perpetually and lively to his salvation. So that Believing and
particular knowing himself to be elected are one: and that it is this
knowledge thus I argue.


I. D. Before you come to bestow a word or two upon the Minor which you deny,
you think it good like a cunning and subtle disputer flatly to deny the
Conclusion, and peremptorily to avouch the Contradictory unto it, and then very
prodigally to wast a multitude of words in the proof thereof. A marvelous
policy I promise you utterly disabling me from farther replying: for as much as
Logic it self gives no precept how a man may reply upon him who denies the
Conclusion, and taking the Contradictory thereof as granted goes about thereby
to disprove the Premises. For so do you when you say Faith is a knowledge, and
therefore goes not before knowledge: my reason being contrarily framed thus,
Faith goes before knowledge, therefore is not knowledge. Doubtless had you not
had the heart of Zenodotus, Martial.
and the liver of Crates, as the Poet says, you could never have stumbled upon
so politic a devise. But let us hear your reasons.


N. B. What soever justifies a man is Faith: Darij Esa. 53.11.
But particular knowledge justifies a man, Therefore particular knowledge is
Faith. I prove the Minor out of the Scripture, By the knowledge of himself,
says the Lord, shall my righteous servant justify many. Lo M. Down here the
knowledge of Christ justifies a man, and is the same in effect and working
that Faith is, and therefore are they both one, which you make to be twain by
distinction and original. Your speech helps Bellarmine that says Faith may
be rather in ignorantia implicita in an ignorance couched, then in explicita
cognitione a discovered knowledge. Tom. 3. de iustif. l. 5. c. 7.



I. D. Iud. 14.18.
Seeing here you plow with my heifer (as Samson sometime said unto the
Philistines) how is it that you read not my riddle also? I mean having
borrowed this Objection from my Treatise, why take you not from thence the
answer also? Surely that you urge the one so eagerly, and so diligently
suppress the other, I know no cause but this you knew not how to reply unto
it: and therefore I will by your favor repeat the same again, until you find
out some forcible reason to drive me from it. The verbs of under standing and
sense in the Hebrew tongue signify not only the acts of them, but of the will
and affections also. So Psalm. 1.6. the Lord knows the way of the righteous:
And, Depart, I know you not: And I will not hear, see, etc. that is, God will
not so know, hear, see, as to love, and approve. And so may I interpret that
of the Prophet, Christ being so known as to be embraced and rested on by the
will shall justify many. Add now, that it is neither necessary nor likely
your Particular knowledge should be here meant: for the Object of the Prophets
knowledge is no other then Christ, but the Object of your knowledge is your
own self, or, your present state in grace and future Salvation. And what a
senseless speech do you put into the mouth of the Prophet? for by your gloss
it is as if he should say My righteous servant by making many to know that
they are already justified shall bring many unto that which already they have
namely justification. But Esaias had in him both the Spirit of Wisdom and the
Tongue of Eloquence, and therefore pardon me if I cannot think he used to
speak nonsense like you.

Where you say my speech helps Bellarmine who says Faith may be rather in
ignorantia implicita, in an ignorance couched, then in explicita cognitione, a
discovered knowledge; First, Bellarmine has no such words, neither I think
did he ever dream of an implicit or couched ignorance. Of an implicit Faith
we have often heard, and of a rude and confused apprehension the Jesuit in the
place by you quoted speaks: but an implicit ignorance was never yet heard of,
and what meaning it may have for my part I cannot see. De iustif. lib. 1. ca. 7.
Bellarmines right words are these, Faith is better defined by ignorance then
knowledge: which saying of his how my speech helps I would you had taken a
little more pains to make it manifest. For, whence and how you should collect
it I cannot tell, except perhaps it be thus, I say that Faith is not a
knowledge; Ergo, I say also it is an ignorance. I answer therefore secondly,
that Bellarmine and I, speak not of the same Faith, for he speaks of Faith
of Story, and I of Faith of Person: so that when I say Faith of Person is not a
knowledge I cannot help him who says Faith of Story is not a knowledge. For,
as for Faith of Story you cannot be ignorant that contrary unto Bellarmine in
my Treatise, I have called it a General knowledge, so far am I from defining
it by ignorance with him. And yet I would have you to know also, that when I
say Faith of Story is a knowledge, I mean not thereby Science of Conclusions
acquired and gotten by demonstratiue proof out of such principles as are of
themselves known and evident. For how can a man by the light of natural
reason aspire to the knowledge of that which is supernatural and above reason?
But I understand an explicit and distinct apprehension of the necessary
Articles of Faith, opposite unto that brutish ignorance which Papists call
implicit Faith and Blind obedience: which distinct apprehension Bellarmine in
the place before alleged denies necessarily to be required unto Faith.
Farthermore I would feign know how this follows, Faith is not knowledge, Ergo,
it is Ignorance: for by the same reason you may conclude, Faith is not Hope,
Ergo, it is Despair; or thus, Earth is not fire, Ergo, it is water, and so by
your creation all things in the world shall be one of two, fire or water.
Metaph. 12.
But you should remember that simple negation is positive of nothing, and that
Priuations are reduced unto that subject whereunto their Habits do belong:
whence it follows that denying Faith to be in the Understanding and so to be
knowledge, I deny it also to be Ignorance.


N. B. Again, whatsoever brings life eternal brings justification and is
Faith: But true knowledge of Jesus Christ brings life eternal, Therefore
true knowledge of Jesus Christ brings justification and is Faith. The Minor I
prove out of the Words of Christ in S. John, Ioh. 17.3. Mel. and Pez. Arg.
Theol. p. 3. notitia Es. 53. significat. non solum agnitionem personae and
beneficiorum Christised etiam fiduciam quiescentem in Christo sicuti and Ioh.
17.
This is life eternal to know thee to be the only true Lord, and him to be
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent into the world. The Mayor is plain,
whatsoever apprehends that last which is life Eternal, apprehends the
former, as election and justification etc. But the knowledge of Christ
apprehends eternal life, Therefore it apprehends justification. But hence
it follows, whatsoever apprehends justification is Faith, True knowledge of
Jesus Christ apprehends justification, Therefore true knowledge of Christ is
Faith, and so consequently and conuersiuely Faith is knowledge, and this
knowledge is Faith. Ioh. 19.25. Ephesians. 3.14.15.16.17.18. 1 Cor. 13.
And by this means Particular knowledge comes not in time after faith, but
is Faith, and is knowledge in the beginning, and in proceeding is knowledge,
and in the end is knowledge.


I. D. The Mayor of your first Syllogism that whatsoever brings life
eternal brings justification I deny. You say it is plain because whatsoever
apprehends the last such as is eternal life, apprehends the former also
which is justification. But first, what rule of Logic allows you thus to
shift terms, and to turn bringing of life and justification into
apprehending life and justification? For, howsoever you seem to use them
indifferently, yet are they words of different significations: and therefore
confounding them thus you make not so much the truth of the Mayor plain, as
obscure the meaning thereof. Again, choose whether of these terms you please,
yet is it palpably false that Whatsoever brings or apprehends the last,
brings and apprehends also the former. Rhetoric brings a man to speak
eloquently which is the latter: yet it is Grammar not Rhetoric that brings a
man to speak congrue which is the former. Physic brings a man to the faculty
of curing diseases which is the latter: yet brings not to the knowledge of the
nature of things; for that belongs unto the natural Philosopher, and according
to the old saying, where the Physiologer ends, there the Physician begins. So
also in divine matters, Hope apprehends eternal life which is the latter, for
it is the proper object about which it is occupied: it apprehends not
justification which is the former, for then by your rule it should be Faith it
self, that being faith as you say which apprehends justification. As therefore
when diverse needles are by the Loadstone trained one after another, the virtue
of the stone moves the first, the first the second, and so of the rest, but
the third or second is no way the cause of the dependency of the first: so in
the concatenation of the causes of our salvation reckoned up by the Apostle, to
wit Election, Romans 8.30.
Vocation, Justification, Glorification, the former are mouers as it were unto
the latter, but not the latter unto the former. The reason of all in a word is
this, because as I have already showed, more is required unto the maine end,
then unto the subordinate means: and therefore seeing salvation is the end,
Justification the means, not whatsoever is requisite unto that is presently
necessary unto this.

The Minor that true knowledge of Jesus Christ brings eternal life, I also
deny. For Particular assurance (which is the knowledge you must here
understand, or else you conclude not to the purpose) brings not eternal
life, in as much as a man may be saved without it, as we have already
sufficiently proved. Neither do the words of Christ in S. John verify your
Minor: Ioh. 17.3.
for by knowledge there he means not your particular assurance and persuasion
by which a man knows he is justified and shall be saved: but such a knowledge
of Christ and his Gospel as is mingled with faith, and works our wills to
accept of Jesus Christ for our only mediator. And this knowledge is said to
be eternal life, not because every one that barely and nakedly knows lives
eternally (for as we have showed Reprobates and Devils have Historical Faith)
but partly, because no man can live without it, partly because by it the Spirit
of God works in the Elect that Faith by which they are justified and so come
to eternal life.

But what say I unto the Minor delivered in other terms, thus, Knowledge of
Christ apprehends eternal life? I say first, it is not the same Proposition,
because the terms are changed, neither are they equipollent. Secondly, I
grant it to be true, whether you mean by knowledge Dogmaticall Faith or
Particular assurance: for by the one do we apprehend that there is an eternal
life, by the other that we have special interest in it. Well then, if it
apprehends eternal life does it not follow that therefore also it
apprehends justification? No, by no means: for as we have above
demonstrated, it is not necessary that that which apprehends the latter
should apprehend the former also. And yet though I disallow the consequence,
the consequent I readily yield you, that Particular knowledge apprehends
justification: for so have we defined Faith of promise to be a persuasion or
assurance that the promise of God made in Christ, to wit justification,
remission of sins, adoption, regeneration, finally, election it self and
eternal salvation do particularly pertain unto me and are mine. What gather
you now of this? Ergo, say you, it is justifying Faith. How so? Because
whatsoever apprehends justification is justifying Faith. Nay contrarily
whatsoever apprehends justification it not justifying Faith: for apprehension
follows justification, no man apprehending himself to be justified until
he be justified, but Justifying Faith is in nature before justification, that
being the cause and this the effect. And therefore unless you will say that
that which follows is that which goes before, you cannot say that that which
apprehends justification is that which justifies.

To conclude therefore neither is Faith knowledge nor knowledge Faith, but
particular knowledge for ought you have yet said or can say comes in time
after Faith. But whereas finally you infer that Faith is knowledge in the
beginning, knowledge in proceeding, knowledge in the end, besides that the
foundation upon which it is grounded is untrue it is clean contrary also to
that which erewhile you affirmed, that Faith is but one, compounded of my three
nice distinctions, the first being the beginning, the second the progress, the
third the end. For the third is Faith of Person, and in the Will, and is by
your confession there the end of Faith, yet here you say faith is knowledge in
the end: which things how they can stand together I see not, unless you will
say that knowledge is in the Will and so confound the faculties and operations
of the soul.


N. B. In Ioh. 1. Ep. c. 5. to. 13.
The place of Saint John by you cited to prove your Minor in your argument
makes nothing for you: because the Apostle speaks of their increase of
knowledge, and not of the original begetting of knowledge, and so says M.
Calvin.


I. D. The text in the clearest terms that may be distinguishes between
Believing and knowing, and unto that gives the priority before this: but your
gloss confounds their natures, and says that the Apostle here speaks
only of increase of knowledge. Woe to the gloss that corrupts the text: for
if this be S. John's meaning, it is as if he should say, I write unto you that
know that ye are justified and have eternal life, that ye may increase in
knowing that ye have eternal life, and that ye may know ye are justified
and have eternal life, which how unworthy it is the pen of an Apostle every
one easily sees. But Calvin you say interprets the place as you do. Be it
so: yet is it not the name of Calvin how venerable soever that may sway this
matter. For seeing I profess to differ from him in the definition of
Justifying Faith, he defining it by knowledge, I by Affiance: you may not
think it unreasonable, if in this point, and the explication of such
scriptures as may seem to concern it, I desire rather to be pressed with his
reasons, then borne down with his authority. But what says Calvin? Because
there ought to be daily proceedings in Faith, therefore he writes to them that
believe already, that they may more firmly, and certainly believe. Whereunto I
willingly assent, if you apply it as Beza in his annotations does unto the last
clause of the verse, and that ye may believe: for then the meaning without
forcing or constraining the words will be as if he should say, I write unto
you that believe that believing ye may know ye have eternal life, and
knowing the same may constantly persevere and proceed on in Believing. For as
the clouds pour down rain to moisten the earth, and the earth moistened
sends up vapors again to make clouds: so likewise Faith begets Assurance,
and Assurance being gotten does again confirm and strengthen faith. And thus
do the Century-writers expound this place, Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p. 276.
gathering from it that Cetainty of Salvation is an Effect of Faith and so
evidently distinguishing knowledge from Faith.


Treatise. 3. Arg. That which in nature comes after justification cannot be
justifying Faith. This appears because Faith is the Efficient Isntrumental
cause of Justification: and every Efficient by the rule of Logic is in nature
before the Effect. But this knowledge or assurance is in nature after
Justification, Ergo, it is not Faith.


N. B. Your Minor is very false, and so proved by my former arguments. For
particular knowledge and assurance of our salvation is not in nature after
Faith, but is Faith and wholly infused by the Spirit of God, and begotten by
hearing of the Word preached, and comes to act by degrees according to the
measure of grace given of God. For it is in Habitu sometime and not in actu,
Faith habitual in power, actual in the deed of believing.
as when one sleeps his belief is not in actu, and yet he lives unto God
by his faith which lives powerfully in him though not actually.


I. D. The Mayor of my Syllogism is undeniable, because as I have said Faith
is the cause of justification. For as D. Fulke says unto Bristow excluding it
from Efficient causes, Reioinder to Bristow. p. 172.
Seeing Scripture often affirms that God works in us by Faith, faith must
needs be an isntrumental efficient when you have said all that you can, except
you will teach us new Grammar and Logic. The Minor therefore you say is very
false, and so proved by your former arguments. But those arguments are already
answered, and thus I prove the Minor. For as for the rest of your idle and
wild talk touching the infusion, begetting, degrees, habit, act of Faith, I
willingly pass over, lest pursuing you in this course I seem to run riot and
play the wanton with you.


Treatise. The truth of a Proposition is always in nature before the knowledge
of the truth: for Propositions are not therefore true, because they are known
so, but they are first true and known so. Therefore this Proposition, I know I
am justified, spoken by one that is justified, must needs presuppose the party
before to be justified.


N. B. O. O. O. O. O.


I. D. What mum Master Baxtar? Has Sigalion now instantly sealed up your lips
that you cannot, or are you suddenly become a professed Pythagorean that you
may not speak? For me thinks you that have been so vocal and wastfull of
your breath in so many impertinent and frivolous excursions, should not now be
so sparing and niggardly of a word or twain upon so necessary a point. But the
truth is the argument is unanswerable and invincible, and therefore you held it
better to say nothing, and slily to pass it over, then to mar all by saying
nothing to the purpose. Which course if you had also used in the rest of this
disputation, you should have saved this scribbling labor, and I had received
virgin paper from you. And so, as Galba in the judgment of all might have
been thought worthy of the empire if he had not been Emperor: Tacit. 1. Hist.
you also in the opinion of some might have been counted able to write if you
had not written. But now that after so much loudness and clamourousnesse you
are become so dumb and silent, it argues that though ability fail, yet will
should not have been wanting, unless the evidence of truth had perforce made
up your mouth. And so construeing your silence to be in this point no less
then plain yielding, I pass on to the next argument.


Treatise. 4. Arg. In conditional Promises there can be no Assurance of the
thing promised before the performance of the condition. v. g. This is a
conditional Promise in the covenant of works, Do this and thou shall live,
Life is promised but on condition of Doing: and therefore until we have
performed the condition, we may not look that God should be reciprocal and
give us Life. Now in the Covenant of Grace, Justification is promised, but upon
condition of Faith: so says the Scripture, Believe and thy sins shall be
forgiven thee. Therefore the condition of Believing must first be performed
before we can assure our selves our sins are forgiven. If so, then Faith going
before, and Assurance following after, Assurance connot be Justifying Faith.


N. B. I deny your Minor and say, there may be an Assurance of Salvation in
some measure, before there can be the performance of Faith actual in the
highest measure: Therefore your Minor is utterly false. For Faith in his true
defined state is a firm Assurance and Persuasion, and a firm Assurance and
Persuasion is, Faith, and both the Greek and Hebrew words signifies Faith
(before cited) do declare. Yea this Assurance is given unto us together with
the hearing of the Word of God Habitualiter, and will show it self Actualiter
in due time, and therefore sometime is (...), and sometime is (...), the first
in the beginning, the next in the Lords due time, and this can never be (...),
but secundum magis or minus shall externas vel internas exerere vires, show
forth his forces either within man or without.


I. D. To make all plain, my argument reduced into the right form stands
thus, That which goes before justification is not that which follows after
justification: But Faith goes before justification and Assurance follows
after, Ergo, Faith is not Assurance. The Minor of this Syllogism is that which
you deny affirming it to be utterly false, and you confirm it to be so by
this reason, There may be Assurance of Salvation in some measure before there
can be Performance of Faith Actual in the highest measure, Ergo, Faith goes
not before Assurance, nor does Assurance follow after Faith. The Antecedent of
which Enthymeme I grant, for as much as there may be Assurance in this life,
but not the performance of Faith actual in the highest measure, we here
Believing only in part, as the Apostle says. But if hereupon it follow,
Therefore Faith goes not before Assurance, it will also follow, Faith goes
not before Charity or good works, because Charity and good works may be in some
measure, before Faith actual be in the highest measure: or thus, The elder
Son is not borne before the younger, because the younger may wax as tall as a
Pygmee before the elder be grown to the stature of a Giant. Which
Consequences if they be absurd and ridiculous, as absurd and ridiculous is it
to infer that Faith cannot be before Assurance, because Assurance may be in
some measure before Faith be in the highest measure. Nay far better does it
follow from hence against your self that Faith is not Assurance, nor Assurance
Faith. For if as you expressly say Assurance may be in a lower measure when
Faith is in a higher, how can they possibly differing so in degrees but be
differing things? For although it be true that more and less do not diuersify
the kind, yet is it as true that the same individual quality cannot at the
same time be both intended and remitted, no more then the same string in a
Lute can at once be strained up, and let down, and yield at the same time
both a base and treble sound.

In the residue of this Section, you show your self to be one of those idle
Orators of whom Quintilian speaks, Inst. Orat. l. 11.
who never regard where the point or issue of the Question lies, so they may
besides the cause, either from the persons or out of some common place find
occasion of declaiming. Lib. 6. Epig. 19.
Such as was Postumus the Advocate in Martial, who being entertained to plead
the cause of one who had three Goats stolen from him by his neighbor left the
proof of this, and fell a discoursing of the battle of Cannae, of the
Mithridatike and Carthaginian wars, and other such impertinent matters. But
never was there any offended more notoriously in this kind then you, all those
speeches are nothing else but extrauagances and by-matters. For I pray you, how
does it concern my argument to talk of the origination of Faith in Greek and
Hebrew, how Assurance is given, how it shows it self, of Oligopistie,
Plerophorie, and Apostasy, of the intention and remission of it, and finally
of the inward and outward forces thereof? Surely, De art Poet.
as much as a Cypres-tree concerns a table of shipwreck as Horace speaks.
And therefore give me leave to pluck you by the ear, and to say unto you as
did the poor Client unto his Lawyer above named, Now I pray thee, Postume, say
some thing at length touching my three Goats.


N. B. Where it pleases you to make remission of sins a Promise upon a
Condition, I tell you with all the Church of God in all ages it is rather an
encouragement to believe assuredly in Christ, as if he should say, Thy sins
be forgiven thee, therefore be of good comfort, that both the former and
latter, to wit forgiveness of sins and Belief might be ascribed to the
mercy of God.


I. D. The Minor which in the former section you denied, namely that Faith goes
before justification and Assurance follows after, in my Treatise I thus
proved, because Justification is promised upon condition of Believing: and
seeing in Conditional promises there can be no Assurance of the thing
promised before the performance of the Condition, therefore in this promise we
must Believe before we can be justified, and be justified before we can be
assured we are justified. Now to this you say it is rather an encouragement,
then a Promise upon condition: as if it were impossible that Promise upon
condition might be an encouragement. Whereas me thinks a General does
greatly encourage his Soldiers when he promises unto them preferment and
reward upon condition of some piece of service well performed. 1 Cron. 11.6.
And Ioab peradventure would not have been so forward and venturous in the
battle unless David had promised the office of chief Captain upon condition
of smiting the Iebusites.

But you have reasons for your saying more then a good many: for here like
another Tertullian every word almost you speak is a Demonstration. First all
the Church of God in all ages affirms with you: and yet as shall plentifully
appear in the next Section, the Church of God never understood but that
Remission of sins was promised upon condition of Faith. But as Anaxagoras
when he was driven to his shifts and could not find out the reason of some
things, was wont to say it was the doing of Nous: even so when you have boldly
affirmed that which you can by no means prove, it is your manner desperately
to avouch that it is the saying of the Church. Secondly, you say this speech,
Believe and thy sins shall be forgiven thee is all one with this, Thy sins
be forgiven thee, therefore be of good comfort. Which happily we may think
not to be altogether so witless, if also you can persuade us that a Physician
saying unto his Patient, Use carefully the course of Physic I shall prescribe
unto you, and you shall surely recover of your sickness, means thereby no
other then as if he should say, Be of good cheer, for thou art already
recovered of thy sickness. Lastly, by this means, you say both the former and
the latter, to wit Forgiveness of sins and Belief may be ascribed to the
mercy of God. As if Promise of Remission of sins upon condition of Faith were
any way derogatory unto the Mercy of God, but that both the one and the other
may this notwithstanding be ascribed thereunto. For if when God out of his
sovereign authority commands to Believe, it be nevertheless of his grace
that we can and do Believe, according to that of S. Augustine, Give what thou
command, and command what thou will: why when out of his mercy he promises
Forgiveness if we do Believe, should it not be ascribed unto the same his
mercy that we do perform the condition and Believe? But who knows the salt
that is in you? Eupolis.
You are the only Pericles of this age, Suada sits upon your lips, and you
alone leave a sting behind you. For had it not been for this threefold cord of
yours, I could never so easily have been drawn from this truth.


N. B. Farthermore where you bring for the confirmation of your Minor (to prove
Justification to be conditional with the Papists) this place of Math. cap. 9.
v. 2. M. Downs falsehood, in citing, construing and adding, to the Scripture.
(...) (...), Confide fili, remissa sunt tibi peccata tua, Be of good comfort
Son thy sins be forgiven thee: you wrest it first to tell us that Christ
said to him, Thy sins be forgiven thee if thou will be of good comfort,
which is false, and no part of Christ's meaning, but rather the contrary,
bidding the man sick of the Palsy be of good comfort, because his sins
(being the cause of his disease) were forgiven him. Tom. 9. in Mat. In Mat. c.
9.
This could Saint Hierome have told you, yea Chrysostom and Master Calvin,
Erasmus, and the Greek Scholiast. But what may we expect will be the sequel
of this, if you be not hindered in your course? Well you have a mind to do
mischief, but you want power as spoke Plutarch to one, Harm. in Mat. 9.
Archidamus Zeuxidis filius in Plut. M. Down falsely translating the Greek text.
and so I Hope shall. The second point which I challenge you in is false
translating of the Greek text, contrary to the words themselves, and all the
world for 1600. years. You translate Mat. 9. v. 2. Creed fili and remittentur
tibi peccata tua, Son believe, and then thy sins shall be forgiven thee,
when you should have said with Saint Hierome, Ambrose, Beda, Calvin, Beza,
Erasm. and the Church of England, Son be of good comfort, thy sins be
already forgiven thee. The Greek word can by no means signify to Believe,
but rather to be confident or Bold, to trust to, and not to Believe in, as
Opibus confidere, Cicero, to trust to his riches, not to believe in his riches,
to assure my self that they shall benefit me, not to believe in them as my
God to save me. Beside the Greek word to Believe, is far off another name
and nature. Again by what authority do you translate, Thy sins shall be
forgiven thee, when you should say, thy sins are forgiven thee? Have you any
commission in contemptum omnium Grammaticorum, to change tenses also, as you
take upon you under pretense of (...) to coin Distinctions? But I may easily
spy your drift: you would needs parget your rotten cause and miserable Minor
with this untempered mortar. Well, all the Scholars in our country will
think the worse of (...) as long as they live for this trick. M. Down adds
to the Scripture.
But what intolerable impudency is this and beyond all the rest to add the
word or conjunction (...), and, and, to the Scripture, saying (by your
commission (...)) Believe Son and then thy sins shall be forgiven thee.
Quite contrary is this to your knowledge, and conscience. Apoc. 22.
Bethink you therefore what a fearful judgment you incur, and crave mercy
at the hand of God while you have time, confess your error and cancel your
commission, so shall you have the Church your Mother, and her Children your
Brethren and friends.


I. D. That which in the former section you spoke but lispingly, here you
deliver more plainly and articularly: for there you say it is rather an
encouragement, but now you affirm peremptorily they are none but Papists that
hold Justification to be conditional, to such extremities and straits am I
driven that I am feign to borrow aid and assistance of the common adversary.
But if I be mistaken herein I hope I shall the more easily find pardon,
because they of whom I learned it seemed unto me to be no Papists, and were
commonly taken for very good Protestants. Christ, says Beza, Conf. c. 4. 9. 4.
is offered unto us to be possessed of us with this condition if we do believe
in him. On that condition, says Vrsinus, In Catechismoq de Euang.
is Christ's righteousness made ours, if we receive it: Now that receiving is
the work and act of Faith alone. The condition of Faith, says Hemingius,
Syntag. de Euang. Art. 30. Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 4. p. 93.
is required that the benefit may be applied, that is remission of sins. The
law, say the Century-writers, has the Promise with condition of Doing and
fulfilling it: the Gospel has the free Promise with condition of Believing
and receiving it by Faith. That says Master Fox, De Christo gratis iustif. p.
237. 244.
which properly we inquire is for what cause or reason Salvation and Pardon of
sins is promised, whether upon some condition or none at all: And that the
Promise is made upon no condition no man I think will say, wherefore it
remains of necessity we acknowledge some condition, and that is Faith. In
Camp. 8. Rat.
In the Law, says Whitaker, the condition was hard which no man could satisfy,
but Christ propounds unto us a more easy condition, Believe and thou shall be
saved. Against Sanders cauils on the Lords supper. p. 424. De iustif. l. 1. c.
12. Ter. Eun. Act. 2. Sc. 11.
Gods promises, says Fulke, require the condition of Faith in them that shall
obtain them. Finally Cardinal Bellarmine who hitherto has ever been esteemed
no mean Papist reports this to be the confession of all his adversaries, and
that they cannot deny it, That remission of sins is promised upon condition
of Faith. But Lord what ods and difference there is between simple folk and
intelligent persons! For unless you had told it me I had never known that
Bellarmins adversaries were Papists, nor that these men whom I have named had
been wolves in sheepskins. Neither did I until now understand what you meant
when you charged me with Popery, and speaking pure Papist: your meaning I see
was, that I spoke right as Beza, Vrsinus, Hemingius, the Century-Writers, Fox,
Whitaker, Fulke, and all the rest of that rank use to do.

For confirmation of my Minor, and to prove Justification to be conditional,
I bring, as you say, that place of Math. Be of good comfort Son thy sins
be forgiven thee. In handling whereof you tell me farther, first that I wrest
the text and falsify the meaning thereof, then that I translate the Greek
falsely and contrary to the words themselves and all the world for 1600 years,
lastly that most impudently and quite contrary to knowledge and conscience, I
add unto the Scripture. Telling me moreover that I have a mind to do
mischief, but want power, that I contemn all Grammar, and parget a rotten
cause with untempered mortar, and therefore must needs incur fearful
judgment, if in time I crave not mercy at the hand of God. Thus, Master
Baxter, like Saint George a horse back you fight with a painted dragon, and
faining monsters to your self set upon them with such Herculean impetuousnesse
and fury, as if you would amaze simple people with your great puissance and
powers: and then as if you had flaild to powder your true adversary as well as
your imaginary and strawen enemy, you give forth most terrible menaces and
threats, that folk henceforward may not dare to meddle with your mothers son
more. For where I pray you do you find this passage of S. Matthew quoted by
me? and unless you had resolved by falsehood and forgerie to maintain this
quarrel against me, with what face could you father the allegation of it upon
me? No Sir, I did not so much as dream of that place: only I say in general
that the Scriptures make this to be the tenor of the Evangelical promise
Believe and thy sins shall be forgiven thee, Ioh. 3.10.
little thinking that you who would be counted a Master in Israel had been
ignorant of a doctrine so evident and fundamental. For that so it is let these
few texts be carefully considered, Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall
be saved and thine household; Act. 16.31. Act. 10.23.
That through his Name all that believe in him shall receive remission of
sins: That whosoever belieueth in him should not perish but have eternal
life: Ioh. 3.15.16. Romans 10.9. Gal. 3.22.
If thou believe thou shall be saved: That the promise of Jesus Christ should
be given to them that believe. To these few I might easily add six hundred
mo, all which although not in precise form of words, yet in virtue and meaning
are all one with this Believe and thy sins shall be forgiven thee: and from
them do all Divines gather that the Promise of the Gospel is not absolute but
conditional, if we Believe as is above plentifully declared. Which being so,
you show your self in this Thrasonicall and swaggering section to be tootoo
base and recreant, utterly void both of forhead and conscience: otherwise you
would not first so palpably and desperately have belied me, and then so
impudently and uncivilly revel upon me. Though you deserve it, yet will I not
cast back the dirt you here throw at me again into your own face, I shall
but defile my hands in so doing: rather will I as Saint Bernard counsels;
Break the arrows of contumely upon the sheeld of Patience, Ser. 40. de modo
been viuendi.
and hold forth the buckler of a good conscience against the sword of your
malicious tongue.

But albeit I intended not, nor aimed at this place of Matthew, as being every
way insufficient to prove that justification is promised upon condition of
Faith: yet is it not so abhorring from my purpose, but that it may affoard at
least a probable proof for my maine conclusion. For. Beza in his annotations
on Mark. 2.5. does us to wit that the word (...) may be translated
imperatiuely, thus, Be thy sins pardoned; as if it were in the third person
plural of the Coniunctiue mood (which Diomedes called the Mandatiue mood) for
(...), as (...), says Eustathius, and (...) is used by Homer for (...), and
(...). The reason why it may thus be turned is, because the Scribes understood
Christ, as if he himself had actually forgiven the Palsie-man his sins, as
appears in the sixth and seventh verses, which they could not so have
conceived if he had only told him that his sins were forgiven him. Now if
this be the right translation, what say you to this argument. The Palsie-man
first believed (for so it is said) When Jesus saw their Faith, meaning as well
the Faith of the sick man as of them that brought him) and then after Christ
forgave his sins, Ergo, Faith goes before Remission: But Assurance, as we have
showed, follows after Remission, Ergo, it is not Faith. But you will follow
the ordinary translation. I give you good leave, for I take it to be the
truest: yet from thence also thus I argue, The Palsy man believed, yet was not
assured his sins were forgiven him till Christ told him so much, for
otherwise what needed Christ to tell him what he knew already, Ergo, Assurance
is not Faith.


Treatise. That from whence follows a blasphemous absurdity cannot be a
truth, for from truth naught but truth can be concluded: But from this, that
Faith is Assurance such an absurdity does follow. What is that? That God
commands to Believe an untruth, and to be assured of that which never shall
be. For God being truth cannot command falsehood to be taken for truth.
Neither tell me here of who art thou that disputest with God? For this is a
ruled case in Divinity, God cannot do things which imply contradiction, and
therefore not make untruth to be truth, or knowledge error. Now that this
absurdity follows from thence thus I demonstrate. God commands the Reprobate
to believe: for, for unbelief the world shall be condemned. But no
condemnation but for breach of a commandment, for (...), and therefore they
are commanded to Believe. I ask you then what it is to believe? You will say,
to know to be assured. Therefore God commands the Reprobates to know and to
be assured. But this is a blasphemous absurdity, therefore is your opinion
absurd which infers it.


N. B. Two things in this argument are between us to be discussed: First,
whether it be a blasphemous absurdity, to hold that God commands a
reprobate, to believe that he shall be saved. You affirm it, I deny it.
Secondly, whether in this point God commands a Reprobate to believe an
untruth, when he commands a reprobate to believe and he shall be saved. You
affirm it, I deny it.


I. D. That it is a blasphemous absurdity to say that God commands Reprobates
to know and to be assured, that they are already justified and shall be
saved, I have indeed affirmed, and I think have also sufficiently confirmed.
But that God should command a Reprobate to believe an untruth if he command
him to believe and he shall be saved, I never yet affirmed. What then? This
that, He should command him to believe an untruth, if he command him, to
believe that he is justified and shall be saved. A small difference will you
say between And, and That. So was there betwixt Shibboleth and Sibboleth,
Jude. 12.6.
yet enough to discern an enemy from a friend. For this proposition, Believe
and thou shall be saved is Hypotheticall and Conditional, as if it were said
in other terms, If thou believe thou shall be saved: But this, Believe and
assure thy self that thou shall be saved is Categoricall and Absolute
excluding all Condition. Now that God, commands all both Elect and Reprobate to
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and promises unto them Justification and Salvation
conditionally if they Believe, I grant: but that he commands the Reprobate
absolutely to know and assure himself, that he is already justified, and
shall hereafter be saved and glorified, I constantly deny. Which yet your
opinion that Faith is an Assurance necessarily infers, and therefore cannot be
true. This matter being thus cleared, let us now bring your answers to the
balance and weigh them.


N. B. First, therefore I answer, Mat. 16.15.16.
God cammandeth all men to Believe the Gospel to be saved, and therefore the
Reprobates. If you demand why he commands them to believe that which never
shall be, I answer, So it pleased him: So answers Jesus Christ the Son of
God, Math. 11. v. 26. Now go, Master Down and dispute with Jesus Christ, and
tell him, that his Father delivers a blsphemous absurdity. Search not too
far into the counsels of God, lest you be overwhelmed of his Majesty:
reverence his doctrine, if you cannot understand it, for who is able to search
out the reason of his ways and counsels, Romans 11. seeing they be like a great
deep?


I. D. No, Master Baxter, it is not for dust and ashes to contend with the
Creator of all things: nor for base clay to enter disputation with so glorious
a Majesty. Whatsoever that eternal truth speaks, I reverence and adore, and
dare not presume to search a higher reason of his actions then his will,
knowing full well that his will is the prime rule and cause of Justice, and
therefore that it is both folly to seek a former then the first, and impiety
to subject Gods will unto some extrinsecall director. But yet with you who (as
I take it) are made of no better moulds then my self, and are not exempted
from those humane infirmities, whereunto the rest of your brethren are subject,
I hope I may be bold to enter argument and to hold disputation, as in other
matters, so touching this present question also. To you therefore this I say
that, God does indeed command the reprobate to believe unto salvation, and yet
never shall he believe nor be saved. The cause hereof I know to be Gods will,
and am content with all lowliness and humility to say with Christ, Mat. 11.26.
Even so O Father because thy good pleasure was such. But what is this to our
purpose? For it is one thing to command a Reprobate to believe the Gospel,
another thing to command him to know and assure himself that he is already
justified and shall be saved: for to Believe the Gospel is to assent unto an
infallible truth, but to be persuaded of the other is to yield to that which
neither is nor ever shall be true. You should therefore evidently demonstrate
out of the Scriptures that God commands a Reprobate so to be assured and
persuaded: and then if I rested not satisfied with Gods revealed will, you
might justly bid me go and dispute with Christ, and forbid to search into the
counsels of God lest I be overwhelmed with his Majesty. But if in Gods book
you cannot show it, I hold it a humane fancy rather then a divine truth: and
therefore though I may not curiously pry into the secrets of God, yet may I
freely try and examine the ground of men's opinions.


N. B. Again it is an untruth that God commands, when he bids a Reprobate
to believe and he shall be saved. For, if he could believe, he should then
be saved without doubt, Ioh. 11. That he cannot believe, the reason is, Christ
has not washed him Io. 13.8. neither has opened his heart to believe. So that
if he could have believed, he should have this doctrine effectual unto him
to salvation. That he therefore could not believe is not to be imputed to the
falsity of the doctrine, but to the hardness of his own heart.


I. D. The commandment of God is absolute, Believe: the promise of Salvation
is conditional, if we Believe, That the Promise is conditional you denied in
your answer to the former argument: now also you deny that Believing is
commanded. Whereby you bewray, how inexpert you are in the Word of
righteousness, as the Apostle speaks: and that whereas by office you are,
Heb. 5.12 13.
and concerning the time ought to be a teacher, yet have you need your self to
be taught the very elements of the Christian Religion. That therefore the
Promise is conditional I have in the due place demonstrated: now that
Believing is commanded remains to be poued, or rather it is already proved,
thus, No condemnation but for breach of a Commandment, Condemnation for
unbelief: for, for unbelief the world shall be condemned, Ergo, Belief
commanded. But this reason according to your wont you cunningly suppress, and
having found out a new Art of disputation, think it enough to scorn the
premises, and with a bold face to deny the Conclusion. Yet for your further
confusion unto necessary consequence, I add the express words of Scripture,
This, says John, is his commandment that we believe in the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ. 1 Ioh. 3.23.
And unto divine authority I add the humble consent of holy men of God. Beza
expounds that place of Saint John's Gospel, Ioh. 6.29.
This is the work of God that ye believe in me, De gra. vniuer. De Praedest.
and gratia.
on this wise, This is that which God requires of you that ye believe in me.
The Lord commands, says Hemingius, that we believe. Together with the
Promise, says Master Perkins, is conioined the Exhortation or Commandment to
Believe, which is more general then the Promise, because the promise belongs
only to Belieuers, but the Commandment both to Belieuers and unbelievers.
Harm. Conf. Sax. of remission of sins and iustif.
Finally, the whole Church of Saxony thus confesses, It is the eternal and
immutable commandment of God, that we should believe in the Son of God,
according to this saying (which is my very ground) the Spirit shall convince
the world of sin, because they Believe not in me. Nay, see the luck of it,
that which here you affirm to be an untruth, not many lines before you have
auowed to be a truth saying, God commands all to Believe, and therefore the
Reprobates. Yea do you not in this place unsay that which you say, saying, it
is untrue that God commands when he bids a Reprobate to Believe? For he
that Bids in my understanding commands: unless you that complain of nice
and subtle Distinctions in others, have learned of late by some newfound
nicetie to distinguish there where the letters and syllables only differing,
there is otherwise an identie of nature and definition. A man would wonder how
you could so soon forget your self, but that it is commonly seen a liar has
seldom or never a good memory.

But to prove that God commands not a Reprobate to believe you come upon me
with a most mighty and insoluble Enthymem. What is that I beseech you? Marie
this. A Reprobate if he could believe, he should then without doubt be saved:
Ergo, God does not command him to Believe. A desperate Demonstration I promise
you: for by the same reason you may conclude, that God commands him not to obey
the Precepts of the Moral law neither, Because if he could keep them he
should be saved. What you conceive may be the knot and sowlder as it were of
this Consequence I cannot well imagine, unless it be one of two, either this,
God promises the Reprobate he shall be saved if he Believe, Ergo, he
commands him not to Believe: or this, The Reprobate cannot believe, Ergo, God
commands him not to Believe, for your words seem to be indifferent either
way. If you intend the former, first, you contradict your own self, for in
your answer to the former argument you deny Justification and Salvation to be
promised upon condition of Faith. Secondly, every Catechumenus and Nouice in
Divinity knows that God unto Commandment usually annexeth Promise to draw on
Obedience: as in the Covenant of works, first he Commands, Do this and then
Promises, if thou do it thou shall live; and in the Covenant of Grace also,
first he Commands, Believe, and then adds the Promise, if thou believe
thou shall be saved. So that Promise and Commandment exclude not one the
other, neither does it follow, Faith is the condition of a Promise, Ergo, it is
not commanded. If you understand the latter, then know that as Augustine, and
Barnard, and all Divines not infected with Pelagianisme say, God commands
some things which man cannot do, to the end that knowing his own
insufficiency, he may crave of him the help of grace that he may do them.
And if God do command any supernatural action unto the Reprobate as without
doubt he does, then does he also command some thing above his power: for
being merely natural he cannot produce any supernatural operation. Whereupon
it follows evidently that although a Reprobate cannot believe, yet
nevertheless he may be commanded to Believe.

Well, yet you will prove that a Reprobate cannot Believe. To what end? for it
is not denied, and you should rather strengthen your Consequence, and prove
that therefore Faith is not commanded. Notwithstanding let us hear your
reason, for it seems to be very remarkable. That he cannot Believe, say
you, the reason is, Christ has not washed him. If you had said as follows,
Christ has not opened his heart to Believe, or, it is to be imputed to the
hardness of his own heart, and had stopped there, I should easily have yielded
unto you: but now that you say the reason is because Christ has not washed
him, I must needs tell you it is unreasonable reason, for it implies that we
are first washed and then Believe, whereas both Scripture and the analogy of
Faith teach us that we first believe and then afterward are washed. Search the
book of God, Romans 3.28. Act. 15.9. Romans 3.25.
and there shall you read, that we are justified by Faith, that the heart is
purified by Faith, that God has set forth Jesus Christ to be a reconciliation
through Faith in his Blood. Which Blood although it have in it sufficient
virtue and force to cleanse us from the leprosy of all our sins, yet does it
not actually wash or purge any unless it be particularly applied and accepted
by Faith. Otherwise, as Ambrose excellently speaks, if thou believe not,
Christ descended not for thee, Christ suffered not for thee. De fide ad Gratian.
Whereby it manifestly appears that Remission of sins is an effect or
consequence of Faith, and that therefore the reason of the Reprobates
unbelief, is not because Christ has not washed him, but rather the reason why
Christ has not washed him is, because he does not believe, nor has by Faith
applied the blood of Christ to himself for the remission of his sins. Where
you add negatiuely, that the Reprobates unbelief, is not to be imputed to
the falsity of the Doctrine, whether you mean thereby either this Doctrine
that God commands him to believe, or this that it is absurd he should command
him to be assured, I confess indeed, that neither is the cause why the
Reprobate cannot believe: but that either of them is false, you shall never be
able to show, and I have sufficiently proved the contrary.


N. B. Ex. 14.4. Romans 9.
If you ask, who has hardened him? I answer, God; who has power over the
vessels of his own making, to show his Justice or mercy upon them as pleases
his divine Majesty. If you will demand the cause, why God would not give him a
fleshly heart to believe? Ioh. 12.39.40.
I answer I know not: Est enim aliqua docta ignorantia, there is a certain
learned ignorance, as well teaches Master Calvin; neither can our shallow wits
search out the cause of his doings. But this I know that it is so, and the
cause thereof principally to be his good pleasure. To conclude therefore this
point, this Doctrine brings no blasphemous absurdity, as you impurely and
impiously affirm, neither is the Doctrine false or implies contradictories,
though our blind natures cannot understand the things that be of God. Of this
matter and argument, let these places be well weighed, and by you either
answered or reverenced. Romans 11.23. Gal. 3.22. Act. 13.48. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Mat.
13.11. Prou. 16.4. Romans 9.1^, 19, 20. and from henceforth leave off to grieve
the Spirit of God, wherewith the elect are sealed unto the day of Redemption.


I. D. This is right that Sophysticall place which Aristotle in his Topics
calls Apagogen, Lib. 2. c. 5. See Muret. var. lect, l. 7. c. 10.
that is Abduction. For whereas I go about to prove, that God commands not a
Reprobate to be assured, because so doing he should command him to believe a
manifest falsehood, which implies contradiction, and affirms error to be
truth: you not knowing what answer to make unto the argument, derive the
attention of the Reader another way, and run out into the common place of
Gods secret counsels, and the cause of Induration, and the Reprobates inability
to believe, discoursing too and fro of these things at pleasure, having no
other reason for so doing but only, because in my argument you read the word
Reprobate, and that I told you, in this point you had no just cause to say unto
me (as in our private conference you did) who art thou that disputes with
God? And yet as if all the while you had been in the very bowels of the cause,
and had not wandered so much as a hairs breadth from it, you conclude very
soberly and sadly, Therefore this Doctrine brings no absurdity, neither is
false, nor implies contradiction. But feign would I know what the Premises
are whereupon you infer this Therefore: or whether by the rules of your
Logic you may conclude without them: Unless this be the sequel I know not
what to make of it, Our shallow wits cannot search out the cause of Gods works,
Ergo, we may not think it absurd that God should command a Reprobate to
believe and assure himself of that which neither is nor never shall be true.
Vain man, prove once that God commands so, and I will presently grant, it is
not absurd to think so. Why dispute you so earnestly of the (...) why it is,
when I flatly deny the (...) that it is? And why do you thus always grate
upon the Conclusions, and make so little reckoning to answer the proofs I
bring for it?

Well, not to wrestle with words any longer, nor so fruitlesly to beat the
air, because you think like the Cuttle-Fish to escape the net, by casting
about you a filthy ink of foul speeches, telling me I speak impurely and
impiously, and charging me with Presumption and Curiosity, for inquiring into
the Counsels of God: give me leave by distinguishing matters to clear the
water which you wittingly and purposely have pudled, and withal to let the
Reader see how basely and cowardly you seek out starting holes to shift your
self aside from my arguments, rather then Schollerly to answer them by some
convenient solutions. Consider therefore I pray you these few Positions.

1. The secret Counsels of God are those matters which he has treasured up in
the closet of his own knowledge, and does not disclose unto mankind: but what
truth soever it has pleased him in wisdom to reveal unto us, and has
registered in his Word, is not to be esteemed nor taken for a secret.

2. As to search into the hidden and secret Counsels of God is damnable
Presumption, so not to search and inquire into his revealed will is damnable
Negligence. For as Moses says, The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things revealed unto us and our children for ever. De vocat. Gent. l.
1. c. 7.
Whereupon Prosper, The things which God would have hidden must not be
searched, and the things which he has made manifest must not be neglected,
lest in them we be found unlawfully curious, and in these damnably ungrateful.

3. They therefore that painfully and diligently travel to find out such
truths as are either expressed or infolded in the written word, are not to be
termed Curious but Studious. So distinguishes Saint Augustine, Although both,
De v^il. credendi ca. 9.
says he, be carried with a great desire of knowing, yet the curious man
inquireth those things which nothing concern him, and the Studious man
contrarily inquireth those things which do pertain unto him.

4. This is a revealed truth that, There is no contradiction in God, and that
He cannot do those things which imply contradiction, 2 Cor. 1.17.18.19.20.
Heb. 6.18.
or are repugnant unto the nature and definition of a thing. For in God, as
says S. Paul, there is not yea and nay, but yea and Amen; neither is it
possible that he should lie, or deny himself, and it is rather impotency then
Power so to be able to do, whereas contrarily, De Trin. l. 15. c. 14.
as elegantly Saint Augustine says Powerfully has he not power to do this,
neither is it infirmity but firmity, because that truth cannot be false.

5. These two Propositions are contradictory, The Reprobate is justified, The
Reprobate is not justified: and, The Reprobate shall be saved, The Reprobate
shall not be saved. God therefore cannot make that they should be true at
once. For as Saint Augustine says, Contra Faustum Man. l. 26. c. 5.
Whosoever says, if God be omnipotent, let him make that those things which
have been have not been, sees not that he faith, if God be omnipotent, let him
make that those things which are true in that they are true be false.

6. One part of the Contradiction is necessarily false namely this, The
Reprobate is justified, Romans 8.30.
The Reprobate shall be saved: for they only who are Predestined unto life,
are as Saint Paul says, effectually called, and they only who are effectually
called are justified and shall be glorified. And if it were possible that they
should be saved, then were there change in the unchangeable decree of God
which has finally rejected them, which is impossible.

7. He that commands a Reprobate that is not justified and shall never be
saved, to believe that he is justified and shall be saved, implies a
Contradiction therein, and makes Falsehood to be Truth, and Faith error. For
according to that infallible maxim, Falsehood is not under Faith: and therefore
if the Object be Falsehood it is not Faith which apprehends it for true, if
it be Faith Falsehood is not the Object thereof. So that he which commands
that false Proposition to be believed, makes that to be Faith which cannot
bear the definition of Faith, and that to be the Object which is not the
Object thereof, that is as I said makes Faith to be error, and Falsehood Truth,
which are contradictories.

8. God therefore neither does nor can so command: neither is it impure or
impious to affirm so much, being in the Word of God so manifestly revealed.
Impious rather and blasphemous is it to say the contrary: for it imputes
impotency and weakness unto God, making him to say, Yea and Nay, and to avouch
that for truth which is evidently false.

9. But this opinion, that Faith is an Assurance, infers this blasphemous
absurdity. For as I have showed, God commands all men, even Reprobates to
believe now to believe as you say is to be assured of justification and
Salvation, Ergo, God commands the Reprobate to be assured of his Justification
and Salvation, which is absurd.

10. Absurd therefore is that opinion that Faith is Assurance which infers it.
For from truth no absurdity or blasphemy but only truth can follow. These few
Positions I pray thee, Gentle Reader, consider diligently, and compare Master
Baxters reply with them, and then be judge whether he paint not gourds as it
is in the Proverb, and talk clean beside the purpose.

Those places of Scripture which you desire may be well waighed, and then by
me either answered or reverenced, I have according to your desire duly
examined, and do from my heart adore them as being the words of the Eternal
Verity: and this answer do I give unto them, that not one of them touches the
question in debate betwixt us. Romans 11.23
The first tells us that the Jews if they persist not in infidelity, shall
again by the power of God be ingrafted; Gal. 3.22.
the second that the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise
by the Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that Believe; both which
argue against your self that Faith is the condition of the Promise; the third
says that as many as were ordained unto eternal life believed; Act. 13.48. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Mat. 13.11.
the fourth that every man has not Faith; the fifth that to know the mysteries
of the kingdom of Heaven is given to some and denied to other some, by which
three it is clear, that Reprobates do not believe, Prou. 16.4 Romans 9.18.19.20.
but the Elect only: the sixth affirms that God made the wicked for the evil
day; the last that God shows mercy upon whom he will, and hardneth also
whom he will, and that in this point there is no disputing with God,
intimating therein that there is both an Election and Reprobation, and that
both depend upon the good pleasure of God. But not one of them proves that God
commands a Reprobate to assure himself of his present justification and
future Salvation which is the matter in question: and therefore I hope I may
notwithstanding them all freely conclude that as God cannot command to do that
which is unjust, because he is justice it self, so he cannot command to
believe that which is untrue because he is truth it self. Neither do I (I
trust) so concluding, grieve the Spirit of God, although perhaps therein I
grieve your stubborn spirit, which has (I fear me) throughout this reply too
much rebelled against the light: and therefore take heed lest you your self
grieve the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30.
wherewith the elect are sealed unto the day of Redemption.


Treatise. Arg. 6. That which the wicked may have, cannot be justifying Faith,
for it is The Faith of the Elect: But the wicked may have this Persuasion, yea
and many have been most confidently persuaded that they are in the favor of
God. You will say it is true Persuasion: But I say if form make truth, they
are as formally, and therefore as truly persuaded of it as the godly. If the
Godly then are therefore and for this cause justified, because they are
strongly persuaded they are Justified, then why should not the wicked likewise
be justified by his strong Persuasion. But in truth these kind of speeches are
unreasonable, and senseless, and so that opinion cannot be reasonable.


N. B. Many die and are saved that have not a full Persuasion and assurance of
their Salvation, yet are saved by Faith. I will answer you when you show me
the man that so did die and was saved, and How you know that he had at his
death no full Assurance of his Salvation in Christ Jesus, and yet had Faith, and
when you prove that there is at the hour of death (when the elect are made
without spot or wrinkle) in the Saints of God a doubtful Faith.


I. D. That many Reprobates and wicked men are strongly persuaded they are in
the grace and favor of God, nothing is more clear and manifest. Prou. 30.12.
There is a generation, says Solomon, that are clean in their own eyes, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness. Reu. 3.17.
And the Angel of the Church of Laodicea says of himself that he is rich,
and grown to great wealth, and had need of nothing: Verse. 14. Verse. 17.
and yet in the judgment of him that is Amen, the faithful and true witness,
was wretched, and miserable, Inst. l. 3. c. 2.. 11.
and poor, and blind, and naked. Yea, Experience it self, says Calvin,
shows, that Reprobates sometime are affected with the like feeling almost
that the elect are, that in their own judgment they differ nothing at all
from the Elect. Such is the deceitfulness of man's heart, and the blindness of
his self-love, that it makes him easily ouerweene himself, and to promise
peace unto his soul when he is in the ready way unto destruction. You will
say that the Persuasion of the Reprobate and wicked, is built upon a false and
erroneous ground, and therefore is Presumption rather then true Assurance. For
answer hereunto consider, that the Elect of God before his Justification is but
a wicked man, whence Divines use to call it, The Justification of the wicked,
warranted therein by that of Saint Paul, Romans 4.5.
To him that works not, but belieueth in him that justifies the wicked, his
faith is imputed unto righteousness. Romans 3.28.
Consider moreover that Faith as a cause goes before Justification, for we
are justified by Faith: and therefore if the Elect be wicked before his
justification, he must needs much more be wicked before the first act of his
Believing. In regard whereof Saint Augustine says, Enar. in Ps. 311
Know thou that Faith when it was given thee found thee a sinner. These things
being so, as without controversy they are, I then demand of you, if Faith be
Assurance, what ground has the Elect for his Assurance in the first Act of his
Faith, more then the Reprobates and wicked have? Certainly unless you will
fly with the Anabaptists unto I know not what Enthusiasms and sudden
revelations, grounded upon no arguments, formerly by the Holy Ghost imprinted
in the soul, you cannot possibly show any: seeing before Faith they lie
together in the same mass of corruption, and are alike liable unto eternal
damnation. Now unto this argument thus enlarged and explaned, let us see what
answer you return.

When I can show the man that died without Assurance and was saved, and how I
know at his death he had no full Persuasion, and can prove that there is at
the hour of death in the Saints a Doubtful Faith, then (you say) you will
answer me. What M. Baxter, and not till then? Suppose I cannot satisfy your
demands (as indeed who knows what is in the heart of man at the hour of his
death?) shall my argument therefore for ever stand unanswered? Declar. of Spir.
Desert.
And yet M. Perkins tells you that, When a Professor of the Gospel shall
despair at his end, men are to leave secret judgments unto God, and
charitably judge the best of him* and he instanceth in one M. Chambers, who in
his sickness grievously despaired, and cried out that he was damned, yet,
says he, it is not for any to note him with the black mark of a Reprobate.
The like censure elsewhere gives he of Francis Spiera: Yea further, says he,
When a Professor of the Gospel shall make away himself, though it be a
fearful case, yet still the same opinion must be carried. So that it seems
by this learned man's judgment (who for ought I know is not singular herein but
follows the common opinion of other Divines) that it is possible for a man to
die in Faith and so to be saved, and yet to die in Despair and so without
Assurance: whence it follows necessarily that Faith is not Assurance.

But this answer of yours, Antholog. l. 2, (...).
brings me in mind of a pretty Epigram of Nicarchus, which you may read in
the Greek anthologie. A deaf man commences suit against another deaf man,
before a deaf judge: the plaintiff pleads, that the defendant owes him five
months rent for his house, the defendant answers for himself that he had been
grinding at mill all night, the Judge looking upon them, why contend ye thus
good fellows, quoth he? is she not mother to you both? then keep her both
hardly. Semblable hereunto is your answer, for as if you were as blind as they
were deaf, and had not eyes in your head to read my writing, when I speak of
onions, as it is in the Proverb, you answer of garlic, and roue the whole
heaven wide from the mark you should shoot at. I say that the wicked may be
strongly persuaded, and therefore Faith is not a Persuasion, you like the deaf
defendant reply that you have been grinding at mill all night, telling me I
shall then receive answer when I show the man that died without Persuasion and
yet was saved by Faith, and other such stuff of the same stamp. Verily, I am
persuaded if old Sibyl or Oedipus or any other that has anciently been
esteemed for reading riddles should revive again, yet would they not be able
with all their cunning, to devise how to accommodate and fit this answer to any
part of my argument. For mine own part I can make of it, nor fish, nor flesh
nor good red herring, and therefore not troubling my self with your follies
here I leave it as I found it, vnkith vnkist as they say.


N. B. And in the mean time I will hasten to your Definition of Faith, which
you call the third kind of Faith and only Justifying Faith.


I. D. Soft and fair, no have but good: you post away so fast unto the
Definition, that you leave something behind you unanswered which desires and
deserves your further consideration. For first I prove unto you that Faith
cannot be a full Persuasion and certain Assurance, partly because it is not so
much as Assurance, partly because such Fulness agrees not to little Faith, and
so makes the definition narrower and of less latitude then the definite, and
partly because it is a most discomfortable doctrine to weak Christians, who
finding this strength of Assurance wanting in themselves, may doubt whether
they have any Faith at all, if Faith be no other then a full Assurance and
firm resolution. Again, I answer certain objections the chiefest you can
have against me, and that with such general solutions as will cut off almost
any reason you can oppose unto me. These things being of such importance and
consequence should not thus have been balked and hushed up in silence: for
while they stand unstirred and untouched you cannot reasonably be thought
either fully to have satisfied my arguments, or sufficiently to have maintained
your own cause. Out of doubt therefore it would have been much better for your
credit to have made less have, and more good speed: for tripping away so fast,
and leaving matters of such weight utterly unanswered, all the Scholars in our
Country (to blow back your own scoff into your own face) will think the
worse of your haste so long as they live for this trick.

To conclude this point, whereas there are two many faults as Simplicius says,
too usually committed in the disputation and determination of Questions* it
appears by what I have now said that you have hitherto grossly faulted in
the former. For you do but reject and deny my Conclusions, without refuting
the confirmations I bring for them: and so if not altogether alienate from you,
yet leave in suspense and doubt the mind even of those who otherwise might be
of the same opinion with you. Now if you offend likewise in the second, and do
not in the remainder of your Reply, utterly raze and overthrow the foundations
of my Doctrine, but suffer them to stand unshaken and unmoved: you shall both
leave the thirst of your readers expectation unquenched and unsatisfied, and
prove your self but a bragging and boasting Pyrgopolinices, threatening much
and performing nothing. Let us therefore take a view hereof, and see what you
have to say against the definition which I give to Justifying Faith.


Treatise. The third Faith is Faith of Person or Personal Merit; and of this
Faith, I make the Object to be Christ the Mediator meriting, the Fiducia a
Rest or Deuolution, the Subject of it, the faculty of the Will not the
Understanding, the next end of it Justification, the remore end eternal
salvation, and I thus define it, A rest of the will upon Christ and his merits
for justification and consequently salvation.


I. D. Because you complain anon that the word Rest which I have made to be
the justifying act of Faith is ambiguous, and thereupon it pleases you in your
Answers following to take advantage and make you merry with the Equivocation
thereof: you shall give me leave before I step a foot further in a few words,
and a little more plainly to open my meaning touching that Act. And to this
end, seeing to prove that Faith is an Affiance or Rest, I reported me* in my
Treatise unto the words used in the original of the old Testament, as (...),
and the form of words used in the new, as to believe in, to hope in, or as in
some translations it is read to believe on, to hope on: I will first show that
these terms applied unto Christ the right Object of Faith, import that very
Act whereby we stand justified before God, and secondly I will diligently
inquire and search out what may be the true, proper, and natural meaning of
these terms, both which being clearly demonstrated, it will manifestly
appear both what that Rest is which I make to be the justifying Act of Faith,
and how fondly and vainly you cavil and dally with the ambiguity thereof.

That Believing in or upon imports that Act is in it self so apparent, that
I think no sober man will deny it: but because to you a man must prove that
the Sun shines thus I demonstrate it. That which is imputed for
righteousness, and by which we are justified, is the true Act of Justifying
Faith. This you cannot deny, unless you will turn Papist: for our Religion
will not permit you to join any other companion with Faith in the matter of
Justification. But such believing is imputed for righteousness, and is that by
which we are justified: so says the Apostle, Romans 4.5.
To him that belieueth in him that justifies the wicked his Faith is counted
for righteousness, and again, We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the Faith of Christ. Add hereunto that whereas the same
Apostle says With the heart man belieueth unto righteousness, Romans 10.10.
forthwith in the next verse he interprets that Believing by Believing in,
For, says he, the Scripture says, V. 11.
whosoever belieueth in him shall not be ashamed. Wherefore I conclude that so
to Believe is the Justifying Act of Faith. So also is Hoping in or upon, being
in effect the same with Believing in. For although Hope and Faith be in nature
two distinct Gra^es, and so reckoned by Saint Paul: yet seeing by reason of the
near affinity between them, Hope is sometime put for Faith, it may not seem
strange that to hope in, is also used for to believe in. Now that Hope is
sometime put for Faith appears by that of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of
the Hope that is in you; where Hope, as Calvin says, In eum. loc.
is by a Synechdoche taken for Faith. And as manifest is it by Saint Paul that
to Hope in, is no other then to Believe in: for having said, That we should
be unto the praise of his glory who first hoped in Christ, Ephesians. 1.12.13.
In whom also ye hoped having heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your
Salvation, by and by he ads by way of interpretation, In whom also Believing
yeee were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise. In a word, the Act of Hope
properly taken is expectation or looking out for the performance or coming of
a thing: but Hoping in imports Affiance or trusting on something for the
performance thereof. As touching the words of the old Testament (...), first I
find (...) confounded with (...) as words of the same signification, they being
after the manner of Scripture joined together in the same verse as equipollent
the one to explane and expound the other: for example, Psalm. 118.8. Psalm. 37.5.
It is better, says David, (...) to trust in the Lord (...) then to put
confidence in man, and (...) Roll thy way upon the Lord, (...) and trust upon
him. But (...) it self is in the same manner confounded with (...) which
construed with the Proposition (...) signifies to Believe in, and is by your
own confession the very Act of justifying Faith: for example, (...) they
believed not in God, Psalm. 78.22. Mic. 7.5.
(...) and trusted not in his salvation, and (...) Believe not in a friend,
(...) trust not in a Prince. Again that which in the old Testament is uttered
by one of these words, the same in the new is expressed by Believing in: for
example, (...) We trust in the Name of his Holiness says the old Testament,
Psalm. 33.21. Ioh. 1.12. 1 Ioh. 3.23.5.13. Prou. 3.5. Act. 8.37. Psalm. 25.2.
Psalm. 31.1. Romans 10.11.
He that belieueth in his Name says the new; (...) trust in the Lord with thy
whole heart says the old, If thou Believe with thy whole heart says the new:
finally, In thee O Lord (...) have I trusted let me not be confounded says
the old, He that Belieueth in him shall not be ashamed says the new. If you
except against this last parallel, that the Apostle has reference unto that
of Esaias (...). He that Belieueth makes not haste, rather unto those passages
of the Psalms above quoted: I answer with Beza that it is not likely, In ad
To. 10.11.
partly because the universal particle, and the word in him is not to be
found in the Prophet, partly because the Apostle says not as the Phophet Esaias
does, makes not haste, but precisely accords with the words of the Prophet
David, saying, shall not be confounded nor ashamed. Howsoever, seeing in all
these places the same thing is intended and meant, it is clear that (...), and
Believing in, are Synonyma, differing in name, but not in definition: and so I
conclude what above I undertook to demonstrate, that all these terms
properly import the Justifying act of Faith.

In the next place are we to inquire the right acception and signification of
these words, that we may more perfectly conceive, what that Fiducia or Rest
is, which we have made to be that Act. And first (...) as R. Kimchi
observes, properly and primitiuely signifies to retire into some safe place
for shelter or harbor: Judge. 9.15.
so is it used in sundry places, (...) Come, says the bramble in the book of
Judges, shelter or cover you under my shadow; and the Prophet David in the
Psalms (...) I will retire me under the shadow of thy wings. And hence is it,
that (...) a Noune, Psalm. 57.1.
derived from this root, signifies a place of refuge or protection, as where
David says (...) the rocks are refuge for the conies, and Esaias, Psalm. 104.18.
Thou have been a fortress to the poor, a fortress to the needy in his
trouble, (...) a refuge from the storm or inundation. Esa. 4.6.
So that this word referred unto Christ betokens that Act whereby we betake
our selves unto him as unto the only Sanctuary, where we may be preserved
safe from the tempest of Gods displeasure, which cannot be but by justification
from our sins, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.12.
If his wrath burn yea but a little, (...) blessed are all they that retire
themselves to him. Upon which place learned Iunius notes, that that retiring
unto God (which is there affirmed to be the cause of our blessedness) is no
other then sincere Faith. The next word is (...) which signifies to Roll:
whence comes (...) a Circle or Ring, and (...) a Sphere or Wheel; because
as the cube easily setleth and stays upon one side, so the Sphericall and
round figure is ever subject to rolling and turning. Being joined with the
Preposition, (...) it signifies to Deuolue or Roll upon a thing, either to
oppress i^ and bear it down, as where Joseph's brethren say, We are brought
hither (...) to roll and cast himself upon us, Genesis 43.18. Job. 30.14.
and Job (...) they roll themselves upon me: or to be supported and borne up
by it, as in the place of Psalms above cited, Prou. 16.3.
and that of the Proverbs, (...) Roll thy works upon the Lord and thy thoughts
shall be established. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Psalmist though using
another word (...) Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall sustain thee,
Psalm. 55.23.
he will not suffer the righteous to be moved for ever. This then applied
unto Christ intimates unto us our fleeting and unsettled estate, and the
restlesnesse of our souls until we come unto him, according to that of Saint
Augustine, Thou have made us for thy self, and our hearts are unquiet till they
rest in thee: and so imports that Act whereby being heavy laden with our
sins, and seeking to be eased of them, at length we discharge our lode and
rest our selves upon him. The third word is (...), which signifies to put
confidence, trust, Affiance in or upon a thing, and as Mercer says firmiter
inniti, In the sa^o Pagn.
firmly to lean or rest upon a thing. Hereupon you shall oftentimes find it
joined with (...) properly signifying to lean on, whence also comes (...) a
staff because men use to lean on it and to support themselves by it: as for
example, (...) ye trust in fraud and stubbornness, says Esaias, (...) and lean
upon it, and again, Esa. 30.12. Esa. 50.10.
(...), Let him trust on the Name of the Lord, and lean upon his God. And to
this word had I special regard, when I defined Faith by Fiducia or Rest, as
appears by that in my Treatise I make the Act of Fiducia, to be Inniti, to
lean upon, which yet I therefore rendered rest, because in our English
translations it is usually so turned; as for example, that of the Prophet
Hanani unto King Asa, (...), 2 Chronicles. 16.7. Verse. 8.
is thus englished, Because thou have rested upon the King of Aram, and not
rested in the Lord thy God, and again in the next verse (...), Because thou
did rest upon the Lord. So then this word in the matter of Justification
designeth that Act whereby finding that we are weak and feeble, unable to
support our selves, we make Jesus Christ our staff, staying and resting our
selves upon him, Psalm. 18.19.
according to that of David (...) the Lord was as a staff unto me. The last
word is (...) to Believe in, or upon: for as for that other of Hoping in,
because it may seem to be rather the Act of Hope then of Faith, or but
Catachrestically used when it is put for Believing in, I utterly omit it. What
is it then to believe in, or on? Let the Holy Ghost (whose phrase it is)
declare his own meaning. Behold, says the Apostle Peter out of the Prophet
Esaias, I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2.6. Esa. 28.16.
chosen, and precious; and he that belieueth thereon, shall not be ashamed. To
Believe on a stone seems an insolent and unusual speech: but it is no other
then (as the Apostle expresses himself) to come as living stones unto the
cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2.4.5.
and to lay and build our selves upon it, that we may be made a spiritual
house, which in effect is the same with that Retiring and Resting we have
above spoken of; as will yet farther appear if we compare this place with the
like of the Prophet David; for whereas here it is said, He that belieueth
thereon shall not be ashamed, there the Psalmist delivers it thus, Psalm.
33.5.
They that look unto him, and run unto him their faces shall not be ashamed.
But if you would yet more fully and plainly understand what it is to Believe
in, or upon a thing, then read and consider that most sweet and comfortable
speech of Saint John in his Gospel; As many, says he, as received him, to
them he gave power to be the Sons of God, Ioh. 1.12.
that is to them that Believe in his Name. Lo, to Believe in Christ, says the
holy Apostle, is to receive Christ: and therefore if we may know what it is to
receive Christ, we shall also know what it is to believe in him. Receiving is
a word of Relation and answers unto Offering: for what is not offered is
rather taken then received. To offer Christ unto any is the Act of God only:
to receive Christ, is the Act only of the Elect of God. God offers Christ
unto us, when either outwardly by the public preaching of the Word, or
inwardly by the secret knocking of his spirit, he counsels and advises us
to acknowledge that Jesus is the Mediator, and to admit of him for our
Mediator. And we again receive Christ so offered unto us when as being
convinced and persuaded by the Word and Spirit, we acknowledge him in general
to be the Mediator, and admit him in particular to be our Mediator: So that
there is a double Receiving of Christ, the one is by the Understanding, the
other is by the Will: Christ is received by the Understanding when we Believe
historically, yielding and assenting unto the truth of the Gospel, the sum
whereof is that Jesus is the Christ; For when the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a true saying and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, what can he mean by receiving
other then assenting that it is true? and when our Savior says unto the
Apostle, Act. 22.18.
They will not receive thy witness concerning me, what else can he understand
then this, that they would not give credit unto his testimony, concerning
Redemption and Salvation by Christ? This Receiving though it be of such
absolute necessity unto life, that no man can possibly be saved without it: yet
is it not of such power and efficacy, that whosoever so receives shall
infallibly be saved. For as we have showed, The Devils so believe and tremble:
and many who are enlightened, Iam. 2.19. Heb. 6.4. and 10.26.
and have received the knowledge of the truth, perish, notwithstanding
eternally in their sins. Besides therefore this Receiving of Christ by the
Understanding, there is a Receiving of him also by the Will, which is done by
particular application, when in the sincerity of our hearts we accept and make
choice of him alone to be our Mediator, that is to say, to be unto us a
Prophet, a Priest, and a King. We accept him to be our Prophet, when we
admit him to be our teacher, and absolutely submit our selves unto his
teaching. We accept him to be our Priest, when we rest and repose our selves
upon his Sacrifice and intercession for the washing away of our sins.
Finally, we accept him to be our King, when we put our selves wholly and
only under his government, and subject our wills unto his will, desiring that
in all things it alone may be done by us. And this accepting of Christ by the
Will, is that very Receiving of him which Saint John here means. Ioh. 1.12.
For first, whosoever thus accepts of him has without question withal
bestowed on him the same power and prerogative, which he affirms to be
given to as many as receive him, namely to be made the Sons of God. Again,
that Receiving is understood which is opposed unto the Jews nor Receiving:
Ioh. 1.11.
for having said, He came unto his own, that is unto the Jews, and his own
received him not, immediately it is added, But as many as received him, etc. How
then did the Jews not receive him? only in not assenting unto this that he
was the Messiah? Indeed this was the ground why sundry of them received him
not: but their not-receiuing of him was no other then that Act of their Will,
whereby they refused to submit themselves unto him as unto the Messiah. This
does our Savior intimate, Ioh. 5.43.
when he says unto them, I am come in my Fathers Name and you receive me
not: if another come in his own Name, him Will you receive, that is, him will
you admit and accept for your Messiah. But plainly does he express it when in
the Parable he brings them in, resolutely and directly saying, We will not
have this man reign over us: as also when he says unto them, Luc. 19.14.
Mat. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered thy children together as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Besides, diverse there were of
them, even of the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Priests who knew right well, that
he was the Christ; Mat. 21.38. Mat. 22.30.31.
for so much do the Husbandmen themselves confess in the Parable, when they
say, This is the Heir: and how could our Savior justly charge them with that
irremissible sin against the Holy Ghost, unless they had known him to be
so? These then knowing him to be the Messiah, and yet not receiving him, what
can this not-receiuing be other then their will full rejecting and refusing of
him against their knowledge and against their conscience. Upon all which it
follows that this being not-receiuing, receiving opposed thereunto must needs
be that Act of the Will whereby we accept of Christ to be our Mediator, that
is to say, our Prophet to instruct us, our Priest to make atonement for us, our
King to rule and govern us. And because Believing and Receiving are (as we
have showed) all one, it follows also necessarily that to Believe in Christ
is nothing else then so to accept him.

To grow therefore at length unto an issue, you see that according to promise I
have demonstrated unto you, first, that those terms both of the old and new
Testament mentioned in my Treatise import that Act of Faith whereby we stand
justified before God: secondly, what is the true, proper, and natural meaning
and signification of these terms: and that therefore thirdly by the word
Rest, in my Definition I understand no other thing then that which these words
import and signify. Wherefore I must entreat you in the residue of your Reply
to speak unto this meaning: otherwise you shall but spend your breath in
vain, and wrestle not with me, but with your own shadow. Nevertheless if
any shall think it fitter instead of the word Rest, to substitute any other of
these terms, I forbid him not: for so doing he shall differ from me in word
only, and not in sense. And to speak ingenuously and freely, seeing to
express the Act of Faith special choice is made in the New Testament of
Believing in, or upon, and this again is expounded by such Receiujng as is
before described: happily it were not amiss above all the rest to prefer
this, and to define Faith by that Act of the Will whereby we accept Christ to
be our Mediator for justification and consequently Salvation. The rather
because it seems more fully and plainly to set forth the nature of that Act
by which we are justified, and more apt and fit to resolve many doubts which
may be moved touching justification. For as Vrsinus, a right worthy Divine,
observes, Admonit. de lib. Concord.
Faith justifies no otherwise then as it is an acceptance and application of
the merit of Christ, which is the proper Act of Faith alone, and so very Faith
itself. These things thus premised: let us now in the Name of God proceed to
the examination of what you have replied and opposed against my definition.


N. B. I answer, a man may rest his will upon Christ and his merits, and yet
be damned for want of Sanctification, and so consequently may be damned
having Justifying Faith, which is absurd, therefore is your Definition absurd.


I. D. Here, Master Baxter, and in the rest of your answers ensuing, you wave
and flote up and down like a boat in a storm without a Pilote, answering
tumultuarily what ever comes next to head, and scorning like another Cassius
Seuerus to keep either in method your matter, Tacit. vel potius Quintil. de
causs. corrupt. eloq.
or modesty in your words. But as you lead the dance, so must I needs follow.
Thus therefore you argue. No man can be damned having justifying Faith, A man
may be damned resting his will upon Christ and his merits, Ergo, Resting of the
will upon Christ and his merits is not justifying Faith: The Mayor I grant, the
Minor thus you confirm, He that wants sanctification may be damned, A man
resting his will upon Christ and his merits may want sanctification, Ergo, a
man resting his will upon Christ and his merits may be damned. The Mayor again
I grant, if you understand it either thus, He that finally wants
sanctification shall be damned, or thus, He that wants present
sanctification is for the present in the state of damnation: for otherwise the
Elect until their effectual vocation want sanctification, and yet shall never
actually be damned. The Minor you barely affirm but confirm not: thinking it
as it seems proof enough if you say it and subscribe thereunto Witness our
self: unto this argument therefore I answer two things.

First, that you are a very unkind and ungrateful man that having now the
third or fourth time borrowed arguments of me to serve your need, have not the
good manners to say me God a mercy for it, or to acknowledge to whom you have
been beholding. For in my Treatise thus I objected against my self, If Faith
be Affiance then the wicked may have it: for Balaam desired to die the death of
the Righteous, and some receive the Word with joy believing for a time. And
unto this objection in the same Treatise I gave a sufficient and full solution,
distinguishing between that Affiance which is slight and superficial, and
that which is settled and grounded, as there you may read more at large, for
thither I refer you. But because, Hecub. act. 2.
as Euripides says, the same speech spoken by diverse persons is not alike
entertained: peradventure this answer would be better accepted if you might
have it from the mouth of greater authority. Read then M. Perkins exposition of
the Creed, whereupon the first word I Believe he entreats of the nature of
Faith, and you shall find in effect the same objection in like manner answered,
and distinction made between the fleeting motions and desires of them who live
still in their sins and after the course of the world and the Desire of
reconciliation that comes from a bruzed heart, and brings with it always
reformation and amendment of life. This solution howsoever now you have
cunningly dissembled, yet I must pray you the next time not to ouerslip it: for
otherwise you shall be counted but a miching disputer, and no whit at all
disadvantage your adversary, fighting against him with no better weapon then a
rusty sword both edge and point rebated.

Secondly, I answer unto your Minor negatiuely, denying that such Resting of
the will upon Christ and his merits, as we have described, and in the
definition understand, can at any time be separated from Sanctification. For
besides that it is contrary unto your own Positions, as anon in the due place
shall be observed: it is also flatly repugnant unto the rules of holy
Scripture. For does not the Scripture pronounce them all, Blessed, that retire
themselves unto the Lord? Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 25.2. Psalm. 125.1.
that they shall not be ashamed that put their trust in him? that they shall
be like unto mount Sion which can never be removed, but stands fast for
evermore? 2 Chronicles. 16* 8.9.
that to rest upon the Lord is to be of a perfect heart? Finally, does it not
affirm that whosoever receives Christ and belieueth in him, Ioh. 1.12. Romans
4.5. Ioh. 3.36. 1 Ioh. 5.1. Romans 8.1.14.
is the Son of God, is justified before God, has everlasting life, is borne of
God, is led by the Spirit of God, and walks not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit? unless therefore utterly stripping your self of all modesty you
will put on the forehead of an harlot, and say that all these things may be
affirmed of the Unsanctified man: how can you possibly avouch that a man
resting his will upon Christ, retiring unto him, trusting on him, believing in
him, and accepting of him to be his Mediator, can be without sanctification,
and for want thereof be damned eternally? Nay, whosoever accepts Jesus
Christ for his Mediator, submits himself as we have showed not only unto
his Prophecy and Priesthood, but also unto his Kingdom: and if he submit
himself unto his Kingdom, that is unto his rule and government, how can he
be Unsanctified? for the Unsanctified man subiecteth himself unto the Flesh,
and not unto the Spirit of Christ: Act. 15.9.
where by the way you may observe, defining Faith in this sort, how and after
what manner it purifieth the heart, and begets in us sanctity and newness
of life: whereas defining it by Assurance as you do, it does not readily
appear how such Assurance can be the principle and reason of our
Sanctification. True it is that Assurance may be unto us a strong motive to
proceed on in Sanctification and holiness of life: but it is so far from
causing it, that it is rather caused by it. For by our holy life and
conversation as by the fruits, do we necessarily gather that Faith which is
the cause thereof is in us, and so grow to an Assurance of our Justification
and present state in grace. In regard whereof Saint Peter, as it is in the
vulgar translation and some Greek copies, commands by good works to make our
calling and election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10.
And although in sundry copies and translations By good works is omitted: yet
the addition thereof misliketh not Beza, In loc. praed. Ibid.
and Fulke confesses that the circumstance of the place does of necessity
require, that good works be understood though they be not expressed in the
text. On the other side if you define Faith with me to be that Act whereby
we accept and make choice of Christ to be our Mediator, that is to say, our
Prophet, Priest, and King: who sees not that this Faith working in us a free
and voluntary subjection unto the Kingdom of Christ, is the very purifier of
our hearts, and the cause of all our holy studies and endeavors? whence also it
appears what the reason is why our Savior unto believing in the Son
opposes Disobedience unto him when he says, Ioh. 3.36.
He that belieueth in the Son has everlasting life: and he that obeys
not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him: namely
because as Acceptance of him to be our King is the root of all Obedience, so
the reiection and refusal of him to be our King is the very source of all
Rebellion and Disobedience.


N. B. Your Genus is, that Faith justifying is a Rest, which is false; when you
speak more learnedly I will deigne you farther answer.


I. D. That Rest is not the Genus of Justifying Faith I easily grant you: for
as appears manifestly in my Treatise, I make Affiance, or which is all one
Rest, to be the Act or Form of Faith, and not the Genus thereof. If I had
thought it fitting to have troubled the Definition therewith, I was not so
ignorant but I could have called it either an infused grace, or a gracious
habit, or a Theological virtue: but because the Philosopher taught me that
Habits are sufficiently defined by their Acts in reference unto their proper
Objects, I held it needless to express it.

But suppose I had made it to be the right Genus, how do you disprove it?
Forsooth it is sufficient for such a Pythagoras as you are to say it is false:
and an inexpiable wrong would it be to demand a reason of your sayings. Only
you add, Plut. in vita Alex.
that when I shall speak more learnedly you will deigne me farther answer.
Bravely again spoken, and Alexander-like: for neither would he being a King
contend with any but Kings, neither may you being so transcendent for your
learning, and surmounting the most of men as far as the Sun does the lesser
lights, without impeachment of honor vouchsafe disputation with any but your
Peers, much less with such a one as is scarce to be found in any Predicament.
Yet seeing the Sun so surpassing in glory is no way envious of his light, but
imparteth bountifully of his beams to the enlightening of the rest of the
stars: it may please you also (with whom wisdom must live and dye) Ioh. 12.2.
out of your benignity to send forth some influence of your learning upon me,
that I may more clearly discern at least in this question between truth and
that which is only seeming so.


N. B. Show me for your warrant one place of Scripture that so terms it,
any one Father of the Church, old or new, for these 1600. years, Greeks or
Latins, that will avouch it, and I will yield to your Genus. The Hebrew word
for Faith, and the Greek word (whereof you have heard before) do utterly
condemn you, they both signifying a persuasion and an Assurance, and never a
Rest. I marvel you will teach the Holy Ghost to speak, and the Church now to
understand what Faith is, and that by such a wooden Definition which may
rather move to choler then consent.


I. D. If by denying unto me the warrant of Scriptures, of Fathers old and
new, Greek and Latin, for 1600. years and of the Greek and Hebrew words for
Faith, you intend to prove that Affiance or Rest is not the Genus of Faith, it
shall without more a-doo be yielded unto you: for as appears in the former
section I make it to be not the Genus but the Act or Form thereof. But if you
would thereby persuade that Rest or Affiance is not the Act of Faith, I must
tell you that these reasons are clean out of date, and that you do too much
abuse your Readers patience setting again before him these Coleworts now more
then twice sodden. For both in the beginning of this disputation, and in the
last section save two before this I have thoroughly scanned and cleared this
business; showing that I am so far from teaching the Holy Ghost to speak,
and the Church to understand what Faith is, as you unchristianly lay unto my
charge, that I use no other term, but that which the Spirit of God has in
Scripture sanctified to this purpose, and the Holy Church has ever spoken and
used. But because I am loath to pester my paper with so many Tautologies and
needles repetitions as you use to do, thither must I entreat the courteous
Reader to repair for satisfaction.

In the mean season, seeing both by express testimony of Scripture, and
clear evidence of reason I have warranted every part of my definition, and yet
you without disprouing the weakest of my proofs tauntingly call it a wooden
Definition: you must pardon me if I tell you plainly that this wood-kinde of
answering deserves to be reformed with a little wooden correction. But where
you say my Definition may rather move to choler then consent, a man would
think reading this your answer, that either your principles were so incurably
hurt, or your brain damned and ram'd up with such a deal of dull and tough
phlegm, that it were as easy almost to remove a mountain as to move you either
to the one or the other. And yet indeed I find you of a cleene contrary
complexion, even the most pettish and waspish gentleman that ever I met
withal, every small and petty occasion stirs your choler, and works you
presently out of temper. But because I see it is your impotency and disease I
bear with you the more, praying you notwithstanding to have as much patience
as you may, if at times for the purging of this humor I play the Physician and
minister some small quantity of rheubarb unto you.


N. B. For alas, Master Down, what Rest can a man have upon Christ without
Assurance to be saved by his death and Passion and knowledge of his Lord and
Savior. A full assurance therefore as a cause, works Rest upon Christ as an
effect, and is therefore the General word in the Definition of Justifying
Faith.


I. D. Your argument if I mistake not stands thus, That which is an Effect of
Assurance cannot be the Act of Faith, But Resting upon Christ is an Effect of
Assurance, Ergo, it cannot be the Act of Faith. I distinguish of Assurance,
for it is either of the general proposition, or of the Special and
individual; of the General when we are assured that, Whosoever Belieueth on
Christ shall be justified and saved, of the Special when we are certainly
persuaded that We are justified and shall be saved. If you mean the former,
then I deny the Mayor: for such Historical Assurance is a necessary
pre-requisite unto Justifying Faith, and is the cause without which we cannot
believe on Christ, and therefore that which is such an effect of Assurance may
be the Act of Faith. If you understand the latter, then do I grant the Mayor:
for if such Assurance be (as I have demonstratiuely proved) it self the Effect
of Faith, it is more then manifest that, That which is an effect of such
Assurance cannot be the Act of Faith. But then I deny the Minor, that Resting
upon Christ, is an effect of such assurance: affirming that contrarily Resting
upon Christ is the cause of such Assurance, and Assurance is the Effect of that
Resting.

But, what rest, say you, can a man have upon Christ, without Assurance to be
saved by his Death and Passion? Surely unless we know his Death and Passion
to be the only means of salvation, we cannot rest upon him for it: but to
say, that a man cannot rest upon him for salvation, unless he know that he
is already translated from death to life, is a most unreasonable and senseless
speech, as if a man might not trust unto his friend to do something for him,
until he were sure, it is already done. If you be so sandblind in this present
case that you cannot see how Rest may go before Assurance, yet I hope your
sight is not so much decayed but you may perceive it through a pair of
spectacles. Put case then that a skillful and welknowne Physician should offer
freely to cure the diseases of such as are sick upon condition they receive
Physic of no other, but put themselves wholly and absolutely into his hands:
do you think it absurd to become his patient, or that you cannot repose your
self upon his skill to be cured by him, unless you be first assured that the
cure is already done? Nay rather if you know well, that your health is
perfectly recovered, you cannot rely upon him, for that whereof you are fully
possessed. Jesus Christ the Arch-physician of our souls, as he is known to
be all-sufficient, and every way able to heal our maladies, so does he
lovingly inuit all those that are heavy laden to come unto him, promising to
refresh them all upon condition, that renouncing themselves and all others they
set their whole Affiance on him for the remission of their sins. And dare you
now make question how a man may betake himself into the hands of Christ,
until he know that his sins be already pardoned? Nay rather when we know
the debt is paid, and that according to the old rule sins once remitted never
return again, we remain thankful for that which is past, and continue our
Affiance on him for discharge of that which is to come. For (to observe this by
the way) we may not think that in the first act of our conversion and
justification we receive actual pardon of all our sins past, present, and to
come, as some, and those of no mean mark have rashly and unadvisedly taught:
for sins past only are then actually forgiven, and sins to come only in
the destination and purpose of God. But neither does God actually pardon the
justified man, nor the justified man actually receive pardon for his sins,
until he have actually committed them, and renewed his Faith and Repentance
for them. Neither let any man think that I speak this out of mine own head,
and without ground: for I am strongly backed herein by the warrant of
Scripture, the evidence of reason, and the testimony of worthy men. By the
warrant of Scripture: for that teaches only remission of sins past; so
says Saint Paul in express terms, Romans 3.25.
God has set forth Jesus Christ to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of the sins that are
passed: By the evidence of reason, for if future sins as well as sins past
be actually remitted in our conversion and first acceptance into grace, what
need of Repentance, what need of Prayer that God would forgive us our
trespasses? To repent and crave p^^^on of that whereof we are not guilty, and
which we never committed, is palpable folly: and as great folly is it by
Repentance and prayer to demand that of God which we say we are sure he has
long ago bestowed upon us: Finally, by the testimony of worthy men; for
Pardon, says Origin, is of sins past not future: Repentance, In ad Romans 3.
De acerbe Iudicantib. Miscell. lib. 3. pa. 97.
says Gregory Nyssen, is the dissolution and destruction of sins past. It is
confessed by all truly godly and learned, says Hierome, Zanchie, that the
Saints to obtain new remission for a new sin have need of a new act of Faith
and Repentance, according to that saying so rise in Scripture, that by Faith
men are justified and have their sins remitted: which when it is spoken of
them that are come to years of discretion, is always to be understood of
Actual Faith, that is of the Act of Faith. De praedest. and great.
Lastly Master Perkins, when a Faithful man grievously sins, the sin is
indeed remitted in the destination of God: yet no remission is actually either
given by God, or received by man until he repent. Nay if he should never
repent (which yet is impossible) he should (as guilty of eternal death even
for this one sin) be damned: for there is no new remission of any new sin
without a new act of Faith and Repentance. But enough of this point in this
place though it be of great importance, because it is but by the way: only
hence I gather that seeing Faith goes before and Assurance necessarily comes
after remission, that Faith is not Assurance.


N. B. I had rather say Faith were a labor then a Rest: for it seeks
continually by sanctification and holy love to bring both body and soul unto
eternal rest, and then Faith cease when eternal pacification and rest is
wrought in man.


I. D. Thus you reason, Faith is a labor, Rest is not a labor, Ergo, Faith is
not a Rest. The Mayor you prove thus, That which works rest is a labor, But
Faith works rest and cease when rest is wrought, Ergo, Faith is a labor.
The Minor you leave naked and without proof, supposing I think that no man
unless bereft of his five wits would deny it, and hold that Rest is a labor.
Let us therefore briefly examine them both. The Mayor of your second Syllogism
precisely and literally understood is not true: for that which works is the
Agent or Labourer, and the Labourer cannot be the Action or Labor. Whereupon
it follows, If that which works be not a labor, And Faith as you assume
work, that therefore Faith is not a labor which is contradictory unto the
Mayor of your first Syllogysme. And yet as I grant not unto you that Faith is a
labor, so neither dare I peremptorily deny it: only I blame you for speaking
so confusedly where it was necessary to use distinction. Know therefore that
Faith as all other qualities whether acquired or infused may be considered two
ways, either in the first act, (as Schools use to speak) or in the second.
The first act is the very habit of Faith inhering and sticking in the soul:
the second is the immediate and proper operation and action thereof. If then
you understand Faith in the first Act, and as it is an Habit, it is not a
labor, but is imprinted in us by the Holy Ghost, to the end that when
opportunity is offered, and duty requires, we may by virtue thereof more
sweetly, readily, and easily work, and labor. And so far is it from being a
labor it self, that oftentimes it lies as it were idle and asleep doing
nothing at all until it please the Spirit of God to stir up our wills, and to
quicken the spark he has put in us, inabling us thereby to cooperate with
him. But if you understand Faith in the second Act, and as it is in operation
and action, then may you justly call it a labor: for as our Savior says,
Ioh. 6.29.
to believe in him whom the Father has sent is a Work which God requires us
to do, in regard whereof the Apostle Paul calls it the Work of Faith. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
And because Faith justifies, not as it is in the first, but in the second
act, that is not as it is an Habit, but as it is in action, accepting and
applying unto us Christ and his merits, hence is it, says Bucer, that
Protestants usually define it by a motion. De iustific.
Let the Mayor therefore in this sense be granted unto you.

The Minor which you think to be so cocksure I flatly deny, confidently
affirming that Rest is a labor: provided, you understand no other Rest then
that which in my Treatise I have expressed and declared. For if by Rest you
mean Quiet, such Rest without all question is not Labor: for it is the end of
labor, and a cessation from it, and therefore well did you say that, when
eternal rest is wrought, then the labor of Faith cease. But you cannot be
ignorant, that by Rest I understand not Quiet, but Affiance, in as much as I
render the Latin word Fiducia by it, and make the Act thereof to be Inniti,
which (as I have showed in some of our English translations) is oftentimes
turned by Resting and Staying upon. And this Rest, that is, this Relying, this
Reposing, this Trusting or Believing on Christ, is not a Quiet, but a motion or
operation, and therefore a labor. True it is that whosoever comes unto
Christ, and sets his whole Affiance upon him, shall thereby find
refreshment and Quiet unto his soul: yet nevertheless it is apparent that
Affiance it self, is an act or motion of the Will, and not a Quiet, even as
the inclination of a man's self upon his staff, or the laying of him down
upon his bed is an action of the body. In a word remember what a little before
I have delivered to clear this term from all ambiguity, and take it in the
same sense which there I give unto it, and unless you will say* that light is
darkness you cannot but confess that such rest is a labor, and so that
notwithstanding this argument, Faith may be a Rest.

But now give me leave to take up the weapon which you are forced to lay
down, and to try whether a blow therewith from my arm will pearce any
deeper: for thus I retort your own reason against you. Faith is rather a
labor then a rest, Assurance is not so, but rather a rest then a labor, Ergo,
Faith is not Assurance. The Mayor is your own, and you may not deny it. The
Minor I prove thus, Intellection or knowledge, says Aristotle, is more like
unto rest and quiet then unto motion: for although the mind while it is
inquiring and seeking for knowledge is ever in motion and so labors, yet
when the Habit of knowledge is once acquired and gotten, then is there no
farther motion of the understanding thereunto, but a sweet rest and Quiet
therein. Whereupon says the same Philosopher, By the quieting and settling of
the soul, does a man become intelligent and wise, meaning by Quiet, as Julius
Scaliger expounds him, Exerc. in Card. 307. 13.
nothing else but the assent of the mind. I assume, But Assurance is such
intellection or knowledge, for it is an habitual assent unto this truth, that
we are in the present state of grace and shall infallibly be saved. Wherefore
I conclude that Assurance is rather a rest or quiet then a labor: whence also
it farther follows that Faith, being as you confess rather a labor, then a
rest, cannot be Assurance.

Again, Faith, you say, cease when eternal pacification and rest is
wrought. I grant: for the Object of Faith, as the Apostle says, are things
which are not seen, whereupon Saint Augustine elegantly, Heb. 11.1.
Si vides non est Fides, Beholding is not Believing. As therefore while we live
here in these earthly tabernacles, and are absent from the Lord, we walk not
by Sight, but by Faith: so when we shall be clothed upon, 2. Cor. 5.4.7. Verse.
4.
and mortality shall be swallowed up of life, then shall we walk not by
Faith, but by Sight. Neither is the ceasing of Faith any loss or disadvantage,
but an exchange for the better, namely vision: for Seeing unto Believing is, as
the full brightness of the Sun is to the glimmering light of a candle. I
assume then, But Assurance cease not when eternal pacification and rest is
wrought: for then the certainty of our Election, of our adoption, of our
acceptance into grace, and finally of our Salvation is so far from ceasing,
that it is by so much the more confirmed unto us, as intuitiue apprehension and
the sight of the eye is more infallible then hearsay or seeing by reflection.
I conclude therefore out of your own principles, that Faith ceasing, and
Assurance not ceasing, Faith is not Assurance. But as touching Affiance or
Resting upon the mediation of Christ for justification and Salvation, it is
evident that that cease when we shall have obtained eternal rest and
pacification. For being perfectly quitted of our sins, and in full possession
of Salvation, how can we farther set out Affiance upon him for it? Especially
seeing he shall then cease to be unto us a Mediator of Redemption and
Reconciliation, in regard whereof only he is the Object of Affiance or
Justifying Faith, and shall be unto us no otherwise then he is unto the Elect
Angels, a Mediator of Conservation to confirm and preserve us eternally in
the most blessed state of glory. For neither shall he Prophecy any more unto
us by the ministry of the Gospel, nor propitiate for us by the sacrifice of
his death and Passion, nor govern us by the scepter of his word as here he
does: 1 Cor. 15.24.
but in this respect shall he deliver up the Kingdom unto his Father, and the
Godhead in the holy Trinity shall without all means be immediately unto us
all in all.


N. B. Rest therefore in Christ is the Effect of Faith, and Faith is the cause
of Rest: and so consequently Faith is not Rest, nor Rest is not Faith.


I. D. If, say you, Faith be the cause of Rest, and Rest be the Effect of
Faith, then is not Faith Rest nor Rest Faith. This I yield you. But Faith is
the cause of Rest and Rest is the effect of Faith. How prove you this? It
seems by the illatiue particle: Therefore that you refer us for this unto
some former premises. What then have you formerly said? That a full assurance
as a cause works rest upon Christ as an effect. But neither is Assurance
Faith, and I have sufficiently proved that Assurance is not the cause of Rest,
nor Rest an effect of Assurance. Again, you say that Faith works eternal
rest and peace. But how does this follow, Faith is the cause of eternal quiet
and resting from our labors in the Kingdom of Heaven, Ergo, it is the cause
of Affiance and Resting upon Christ here in this life? for it is not necessary
that that which causes the one, should also cause the other. But if in your
Conclusion when you say Faith is not a Rest, you mean it is not that eternal
rest, what is that to me who define not Faith by such a Rest? So then your
therefore either concluding beside the Question, or being inferred upon no
Premises, deserves of me no answer at all. Yet to take away all scruple, let
us see what may be said for it.

Bellarmine to prove that Affiance is an Effect of Faith, De iustif. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
and consequently not Faith, alleges and urges three passages of Scripture:
but withal I must tell you, that if he dispute to the purpose, he must mean
by Affiance, no other then confident Persuasion or Assurance. For his
adversaries, as himself there says, defining Faith by Affiance, understand
thereby that Special Faith, whereby every one applying to himself the divine
Promise, belieueth or rather confidently trusts that all his sins are
forgiven him by Christ. So that if (as he ought) he argue unto the meaning of
his adversaries, he concludes not against my Affiance, but only against your
Persuasion or Assurance. Nevertheless let us examine those places severally
and particularly. The first is that of the Apostle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.12.
In whom we have boldness and entrance with confidence by the Faith of him:
whence it follows, says he, if confidence or Affiance be by Faith, that
Faith is not Affiance but the cause thereof: for otherwise the sense would be,
we have entrance with confidence by confidence, which is absurd. To this I
answer, first that (...) or Confidence oftentimes signifies Persuasion or
Assurance, being derived of a verb that signifies firmly to be Persuaded, as
where the Apostle says, Romans 2.19.
(...), thou strongly perswadest thy self that thou art a guide of the blind;
Phil. 1.25.
and again, (...), this am I well assured of: and therefore it is not
necessary here to understand it of my Affiance. Secondly, grant that by (...)
this Affiance is meant, yet does it not follow that it is an effect of
Justifying Faith, seeing by faith not Justifying but Historical Faith may be
understood, which is the means by which we grow unto Affiance. Lastly, let it
be farther yielded, that both, by (...) Affiance, and by (...) justifying Faith
are meant; yet may Affiance this notwithstanding be that Faith, neither will
any such absurdity ensue thereon. For as when you say, we are assured by Faith
you would think your self wronged if I should infer thereupon that Faith is
not Assurance but the cause thereof, or that otherwise the sense would be we
are assured by assurance: so when the Apostle says in Affiance by Faith, why
should he not also count himself as much abused if you gather from hence that
Faith is not Affiance but the cause thereof, or that else the speech would be
absurd, as if he should say in Affiance by Affiance. The reason of all in a
word is, because this form of words may import that Affiance is the next and
immediate Act of Justifying Faith. The second place is that saying of our
Savior unto the woman diseased with an issue of blood, Mat. 9.22.
Be confident daughter, thy Faith has saved thee: where says he, Faith is
again in like sort distinguished from Affiance; for the woman is moved to
conceive and entertain Affiance who was already healed by Faith. To this I
answer, that the word which our Savior uses to the woman is (...) which
signifies to be bold or courageous, whence comes (...) Boldness, courage,
Exerc. 317.4.
which as Julius Scaliger says, is the motion of Fortitude unto some work,
and is opposed unto Timerousnesse or Fearfulness. Neither was it without
special reason that our Savior chose that word rather then any other: for
finding that virtue proceeded from him, and demanding who had touched him, Luc.
8.47.
the woman seeing that she could conceal it came unto him trembling, and fell
at his feet, and declared what she had done, whereupon he said unto her,
(...) Tremble not Daughter, nor be dismayed, but cheer up and be of good
courage, for I assure thee thy Faith has saved thee, go thy way in Peace. Now
this Boldness or courage I confess is an effect of Faith, nay oftentimes an
effect of the effect of Faith, namely Hope: for as Despair of victory causes
Fearfulness and deiection of Spirit, so contrariwise Hope of victory makes a
man to be bold and confident. But unless you can prove that this Boldness is
the same with my Affiance (which with all your skill you can never do, they
being of so different natures) you can never conclude from hence that Affiance
is an effect of Faith. The third and last place is that of the same Apostle
unto Timothy, They which minister well shall get unto themselves a good degree
and much affiance in the Faith which is in Christ: where, says he, 1 Timothy
3.13.
Affiance is said to be acquired and gotten by Faith, because Faith may be
without such Affiance. Whereunto I answer that the word used in the original
is (...), which no way signifies Affiance, but liberty and freedom of
speech, whether we utter our mind unto God by prayer, as where the Apostle
says, Heb. 4.16.
Let us come (...) with boldness and freedom of Speech unto the Throne of
grace, or make profession of our Faith before men, as where the same Apostle
says, Cast not away (...) your free profession, Heb. 10.35.
as Beza translateth it: And because this liberty and freedom proceeds from
the testimony of a good conscience, and assurance of the love and favor of
God: Heb. 3.6.
therefore is it sometimes used for Assurance, as where the Apostle says,
Whose house we are if we hold fast (...) that confidence and rejoicing of
Hope unto the end, meaning by Confidence says Beza that most worthy effect of
Faith whereby we cry Abba Father: Prou. 28.1.
and sometimes for that Lion-like boldness which Solomon says, always
attends a good conscience, and so does the same Beza in this present place of
Timothy understand it. Heb. 3.6. vide annot. Tremel. ad Heb. 4.16.
And hence it is that the Syriacke oftentimes renders this word by Retection
or Revelation of the face, because a good conscience lifts up the head, and
boldly shows the face: whereas a guilty mind hangs down the head, and
(as one confounded and ashamed) dares not look either God or man in the face.
So then seeing this is the right sense and meaning of this word in this place,
and it is in no place found to signify my Affiance you cannot with any
probability hence conclude that such Affiance is the Effect of Faith, and not
Faith. Unto these three passages thus vouched by Bellarmine, Heb. 11.1. Col.
2.2. and To. 4.21. Romans 5.1. To. 14.17.5.2.
you may if you please add sundry others of the like nature, as namely those
which attribute unto Faith, Subsistence of things hoped for, evidence of things
not seen, Plerophorie or fullness of Assurance, Peace with God, Joy in the
Holy Ghost, Spiritual glorying and boasting, obsignation by the Spirit, Ephesians.
1.13. Mat. 11.29.
and finally, Tranquillity and quietness of the soul: all which I cannot but
acknowledge to be the fruits and effects of ^ustifying Faith. But yet I deny
that either they all, or any of them have the same definition with that
Affiance which I have made to be the proper Act of that Faith. And therefore
to end this discourse, whereunto not the force of your Conclusion (which being
barely affirmed might as easily have been rejected) but only the sincere
desire I have to leave nothing unsatisfied, drew me: I still pronounce that for
any thing hitherto has been said, Justifying Faith is an Affiance.

Yet before I proceed any farther, I must be so bold as to pluck you by the
ear, and to call to your remembrance what erewhile you said, namely that a man
may rest his will upon Christ and his merits and yet be damned. Which how it
may agree with that which here you say that Rest on Christ is an effect of
justifying Faith, I cannot (such is my blindness) see. For it seems that
where the effects of Justifying Faith are, there justifying Faith also is:
whereupon it follows that either this Resting on Christ cannot be in those
that are to be damned, because they want Justifying Faith to work this effect
in them, or that a man may be damned having Justifying Faith together with the
effects thereof in him which by your own confession is absurd, or lastly that
this Resting upon Christ is not a fruit or effect of Justifying Faith which is
diametrally opposite unto your Conclusion. I beseech you Sir, let us at your
leisure hear from you how either these strange Paradoxes may be verified, or
these seeming contradictions reconciled.


N. B. Besides this word Rest is ambiguous, and may be taken in ill part, and
may be in many negligent and careless Christians which every day and for
every sin bring Christ to the Cross, and say we will rest upon Christ, and
in the mean time work nothing worthy of the Name of a Christian, but rather
wallow in all kind of filthiness. And in this sense only do I say a man may
be damned with such a Rest upon Christ. I speak this to prevent your captious
cauils. It is fit for you therefore that take upon you to see more then ever
any learned man saw before your time to beware of all equivocations and words
doubtful.


I. D. That the word Rest is ambiguous I saw well enough, and therefore in my
Treatise carefully distinguished the equivocation thereof, where if you marked
it not, you must blame your own oversight and not my Unwariness. For two
kinds of Resting upon Christ, I said there were, the one Slight and
Superficial, the other Settled and well grounded, and this Settled and grounded
Affiance I made to be the Act of Justifying Faith, as there you may read more
at large. Now you, to prevent captious cauils, tell me, that when you say, a
man may be damned notwithstanding his Resting upon Christ, you understand it
of that which may be in many negligent and careless Christians, that is to
say of Slight and superficial Affiance only. Wherein you show your self too
too both ridiculous and idle: ridiculous in saying, you speak this to prevent
my captious cauils, whereas indeed this very captious cavil of yours was in my
Treatise as appears so manifestly prevented by me: Idle, in arguing from
slight and superficial Affiance unto that which is Settled and Grounded on
this manner (for so in effect you confess,) Slight Affiance may be in the
Damned, Ergo, settled Affiance is not Justifying Faith, as if you should say, An
ass may have a shadow, Ergo, the Body of a man is not a solid substance. And
thus, to requite you with your own Proverb, you perish like the rat by
bewraying your self: for having urged this argument now twice against me and
that with such confidence as if it alone were sufficient to batter down the
bulwark of my Definition, at length you tell is very gravely and sadly that it
is but paper shot which hitherto you have discharged, and that all the breaches
you have made may easily be repaired by distinguishing an equivocation.

Where you say I take upon me to see more then ever any learned man saw before
my time, it has been already sufficiently answered both in my Treatise and in
this Defense thereof. Nevertheless because you harp so often upon this
string, this I add, that (unless you can demonstrate that it is impossible
for a man of mean parts, and gifts to see and observe that which men of
greater learning and deeper understanding have not observed) I know no reason
why a man may not without taxation of modesty take upon him in some things to
see that which others have not seen before him. It is true that a Giant by
reason of his tallnesse must needs see farther then a dwarf or one that is but
of a mean stature: yet if you place a dwarf aloft upon the shoulders of a
giant, he shall then be able to see farther then the Giant himself can. I am
I confess, not unto your seeming only, but in very deed a dwarf as it were
in Divinity, even the least and meanest often thousand; and those our
Predecessors having been so eminently and incomparably qualified with all kind
of graces and endowments, are as it were Giants in comparison of us. And
therefore it would be intolerable both pride to think and impudence to say
that of my self I could see as far into the mysteries of Religion as they
could. But now being advanced as it were upon their shoulders, and having the
benefit of all those volumes which they wrote, and in them of all whatsoever
they knew: why should it seem strange that something comes within the compass
of my ken which they though eagle-sighted perceived not? And yet by your
favor, Sir, I take no such matter upon me, or if I seem to do so, I hope I
do it with all modesty, and it can be no more then this that out of such
Premises as they have taught me, I gather a Conclusion which they attended not.


N. B. For I tell you this, if Master Perkins whom you say you blanked with
your rare cunning dispute were desirous to sift this Genus or word Rest, you
shall hardly persuade me that he will take it for any other then the effect
of true Justifying Faith.


I. D. Neither is it your vain surmising what Master Perkins would say;
Neither his express and direct saying, that may be the decider of this
controversy. How well that worthy man deserved of the Church of God, wherein
he was like another Baptist both a shining and a burning torch, Ioh. 5.35.
I cannot be ignorant who knew him so well: and very ungrateful were I if I
should not acknowledge to have received a good part of that little skill I have
in my profession from his mouth having been for sundry years his ordinary
auditor. Yet because he was not a Peter, or a Paul, nor so preserved from
error by the Spirit of truth, that he could mistake in nothing: I hope I may,
without arrogance, and with reservation of due reverence and honor unto his
worth in some points dissent from him. And if you may seat Faith both in the
understanding and the will, notwithstanding that M. Perkins place it only in
the understanding, On the Creed.
affirming that it scarce stands with reason that one single grace should
inhere in two distinct faculties: why may not I take the same liberty unto my
self, and define Justifying Faith by Affiance, although M. Perkins would take
it for no other then the Effect of Justifying Faith? for so indeed he does,
and I deny not, but freely confess, that upon the reasons above rendered, I do
in this point altogether differ from him. Neither yet did I say, that I blanked
him with my rare and cunning disputes, for this is but the renewing of your old
slander, the vanity of which I have already detected. Only it seems that your
best wine is wel-nie spent, seeing now you serve your guests with these dregs:
and that you are driven to a very narrow strait, when you are feign to arm
against me such base calumniations and fictions of your own brain.


N. B. When you send me to Master Fox in his Book de Christo gratis
justificante, without citing the place where, or the words what, of me your
speech deserves none answer: but this I dare undertake, you abuse the writings
of so reverend a man.


I. D. The authority of Master Fox was not vouched by me, to justify my
Definition, that Faith is Affiance, but to overthrow yours, who affirm that
Faith is Assurance: and therefore was placed as was fitting, after those
arguments which I urged against you. Nevertheless here it pleases you after
your desultory and disorderly manner of disputing in a very undue place to give
answer unto it. And the reason why with such violence you hale it hither as I
guess, is this, that not appearing where it should it may seem to give no
evidence at all against your Assurance, and being ordered where it should not
it may seem to be but idly alleged as being of no force to maintain my
Affiance. But yet let us see what exceptions you take to eleuate this authority.

Because I cite not the place where, nor the words what, my speech, you say,
deserves no answer. I wisse, M. Baxter, that book is not of such bulk but
that perusing the titles of each Chapter you might soon have found out the
places by me intended: and you know that the schedule I sent you, being endited
at Bristoll, where I was far from my books, I could not possibly refer you
unto the very page and line, as otherwise I would have done. But now because I
have the book at hand, I will set you down his direct words, and quote you
the page where you may read them, and then leave you to be judge your self,
whether as you charge me I abuse the writings of that reverend man, or he
agree with me in this, that Faith is not Assurance. Fox.
Master Fox therefore in his book de Christo gratis iustificante, page
246.says thus, My judgment and opinion is that this confidence of mercy, and
certainty of Salvation promised is a thing which ought to be very nearly
conioined with Faith, and which every one ought necessarily to apply unto
himself: yet being most applied is not that which only by it self properly
and absolutely discharges us of our sins, and iustifies before God, but that
there is some other thing propounded in the Gospel, which in nature goes
before this certainty, and justifies before God. For Faith upon the Person of
the Son of God, whereby we are first reconciled unto God necessarily goes
before. Again page 253. Although, says he, certainty and assurance of divine
grace (which it self is sometime commended under the name of Faith) be very
nearly joined with Faith, yet this assurance does not properly import the
cause of justifying, but receives it being brought, neither works
justification, but is rather wrought by it, and makes them certain, who by
the Faith of Christ are justified, but it self justifies not. And yet again
page 255. If the question be of the cause which properly justifies from
sin, I answer it is that Faith not whereby we believe, that we are
justified, but whereby we believe in Christ the Son of God. Thus M. Fox,
and thus by M. Fox, it appears as I affirmed, that in this point I am not
singular and alone.

Yet to prevent captious cauils, you may be pleased to understand that the
Latin word used by Master Fox, to wit Fiducia, I have in my translation
englished Confidence and Assurance; not that I was afraid lest rendering it
Affiance, he might seem to exclude my affiance also from the Definition of
Faith, for had he done so, it were nothing to me, having showed that he
denies Faith to be Assurance, which was all I there affirmed of him: but
because, if you mark his words attentively, you shall find that by Fiducia,
he understands not Affiance, but confident Persuasion or Assurance, for he
does ever confound it with Certainty, and expressly defines it to be that
whereby we are assured of our justification by Christ. So does Melancthon
also, and Kemnitius, and many others, understanding by Fiducia, a firm
Persuasion that our sins are certainly remitted by the propitiation of
Christ, and all the benefits of the promise of grace given, communicated, and
applied unto us. So that unless I would have depraved my authors meaning, I
could not translate otherwise then I have done.


N. B. Now think not that I hold, that a man ordinarily saved may be saved
without relying upon Christ Jesus: for I hold the clean contrary, viz. that
true Justifying Faith assuring a man in spiritual knowledge of his own
salvation in Jesus Christ, works and causes a sweet rest and reposing of the
whole soul upon Christ and his Merits. But I deny that this Rest is Faith, or
this Faith Rest, no more then the tree can be the fruit, or the fruit the
tree.


I. D. That no man can ordinarily be saved without Relying upon Christ I
grant, for according to my definition, this Relying upon Christ, is Justifying
Faith: but that this Resting upon Christ, is unto Faith, as the fruit is to
the tree, prove it sufficiently, and in Gods Name take the victory. But you
must not think, that affirming is proving, or facing arguing: and very meanly
do you conceive of your Readers judgment, if you think, that your weak
asseuerations can more prevail with them then the strength of my reasons. For
if by Rest you understand, as you should, not Quiet and peace of Conscience
which I confess is not complete without Assurance, but that Affiance by which
we stay our selves upon Christ, accepting him to be our Mediator in such sort
as is above described: I have both plainly and soundly demonstrated, that
Faith is such a Rest, and such a Rest Faith, and not the fruit of Faith.


N. B. And to be plain with you, when you say Justifying Faith is not a
Knowledge or an Assurance, Tom. 3. de Iustif. ca. 7.
you speak pure Bellarmine, as appears in his Book de iustificatione. I
pray you therefore though you mislike M. Perkins, turn not pure Papist.


I. D. And to be plain with you also, if your kind of reasoning may pass for
current, when you say, Justifying Faith is not a Rest or Affiance, you speak
pure Bellarmine: Cap. 5.6.9.
for in the same Book by you quoted, as he denies Faith to be Assurance, so
he denies it also to be Affiance. I pray you therefore though you mislike my
Definition yet turn not pure Papist. But, Master Baxter, you mistake the
matter very much if you think all is Popish or erroneous whatsoever either a
member of the Church of Rome, or the whole Church of Rome holds: for by this
rule we should with the Arrians of Poleland, renounce the very Faith of the
Trinity as a branch of Antichrists Religion, of whom it is reported, that
therefore and for this reason, specially they hold the Pope to be the
mystical beast spoken of in the Revelation, and his triple Crown a visible
mark thereof, because he maintains the doctrine of the Trinity. As
therefore erewhile you said unto me, Let us not be bound to defend the errors
of our Brethren, so say I now unto you, Let us not be bound to reject the
truths of our adversaries. For truth is Gods wheresoever it be found, though
it were in the mouth of him who is the father of lies: and if Ticonius the
Donatist speak with better reason then Cyprian an orthodox father, Retract.
lib. 2. ca. 18.
S. Augustine will not stick therein, to prefer the Heretic before him that
is Catholic. But notwithstanding all this, I would have you to know, that all
the agreement between me and Bellarmine is only in this what Faith is not:
for in question what it is we differ the whole heaven one from another, he
defining it by Assent unto divine truths, I by Affiance on the person of Christ.


N. B. Now, Master Down, to make an end, and return to my other affairs from
whence you have unkindly drawn me, I pray you read a few Positions to the
which oppose what you can.


I. D. What your affairs are I am not well acquainted withal: but what they
should be I wot full well. Among the rest maintenance of Gods truth, and
conuincing of contrary errors are both by the rule of Christianity in general,
and the office of the Ministry which you have taken upon you in particular
required of you. Wherein if you be sure, that all this while you have been
employed, you discredit your action exceedingly when you say you are unkindly
drawn from your other affairs unto it. Plut. Apophth.
Remember you not what the woman replied unto Philip of Macedon denying to
hear her suit, because he was not at leisure? Have thou not, quoth she,
leisure to be a King? So say I unto you, either do the work if you will be
a Minister of Christ's Gospel, or else be no Minister if you be unwilling to
do the work.

To what end you should offer unto me these Positions following, requiring me
to oppose what I can against them, I cannot well conjecture: for what stuff
have you here brought us besides that which either is already sufficiently
answered, or whereof there is no question at all betwixt us? And therefore I
see no cause why I should vouchsafe to bestow any time or labor about them.
Nevertheless to satisfy your request a word or two touching them.


N. B. True Justifying Faith defined.
1. Justifying Faith, is an assured knowledge, or knowing assurance, by the
which every one of the elected relieth upon the Promises of the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, firmly holding that Christ and eternal life together with all
the merits of Christ, are given to him to righteousness and eternal salvation.

Fides vnica and indiuidua specie. Haec Fides differt numero and gradu.
2. There is but one only special justifying Faith.

3. This Faith differs in number and degree.

4. It is manifest there be so many several Faiths in number, as there be
several persons elected.

5. One man is not saved by another man's Faith.

Mat. 26.74.75. and 17.17. Mat. 9.24.
6. This Faith differs in degrees, small in one man, and mighty in another,
Mat. 13.23. and 14.31. Act. 2.8. ca. 4. Mat. 15.28.

Fides imperfecta; Ad resistendum tamen diabolo sufficiens and quare.
7. The greatest Faith in this life is imperfect. 1 Cor. 13.9. and 12.

8. Though it be small and infirm, yet it is sufficient to resist the Devil,
by reason of the prayers and promises of Christ.

2 Cor. 5.1. Esa. 53.11. Causa efficiens material.
9. This Knowledge or Faith (for they be conuertible Ioh. 17.3.) passes all
understanding Ephesians. 3.14. etc.

10. The Efficient cause of this Faith, is the Spirit of God.

11. The isntrumental ordinary cause, is the preaching sincerely of the Word
of God.

12. God may work extraordinarily Faith in the Elect without preaching by his
Spirit. Obiectum Fidei in genere and specie.


13. The object of Faith in generality is the whole Word of God, in speciality
the promises of God in Christ and his Merits.

14. The formal cause is a confident relation to all the Word of God, and
certainty of salvation. Formalis.


15. The final cause subordinate, Finis subordinatus, summus.
is the salvation of the Elect, the chiefest end is the celebration of the
mercy and justice of God.

16. The effects are concerning God, our selves, Effecta.
our neighbor: God, in truly serving him; our selves, in wholly resting upon
him; our neighbor, in truly loving him.

17. The subject where Faith rests is the heart, Subiectum in quo residet
Fides. Adiuncta duo.
the understanding, and the will of man.

18. The properties are two, first, that Faith be alive and not dead;
secondly, that it be perpetual.


I. D. The first, the thirteenth, and the foureteenth, I wholly and absolutely
deny, having fully proved, against the first, that Faith is not a Knowledge or
Assurance; against the thirteenth, that the only proper Object of Faith is the
Person of the Mediator, and against the foureteenth, that the Form thereof is
Affiance and not any such Relation or Certainty. The ninth, sixteenth, and
seventeenth in part I deny: the ninth, where you make Faith and Knowledge to
be conuertible which I have proved to have different natures and Definitions;
the sixteenth where you affirm Resting upon Christ to be an effect of Faith,
which I have demonstrated to be the Form and proper Act of Faith; the
seventeenth, where you say that the subject of Faith is both the Understanding
and the Will, against which I have showed, that it is impossible for one and
the same Habit to be subiectiuely in two several faculties of the Soul. The
rest of your Positions (saving the inconvenience of some terms, and setting a
favorable construction upon them) I acknowledge to be true; and because, as
the Apostle speaks, I can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth,
therefore I oppose them not, but readily and willingly yield and subscribe unto
them.

But, Master Baxter, in all this long discourse of Faith, having spoken so
carefully of the Definition of Faith, of the unity of it in kind, and
difference of it in number and degree, of the imperfection, sufficiency,
efficient, principal and isntrumental, of the object both in general and
special, of the form, and end both Subordinate and Highest, finally of the
Effects, Subjects, and adjuncts thereof: in all this long discourse, I say, how
is it that we hear not so much as a word of Justification, which
notwithstanding is the immediate and proper Effect of Faith? Immediate, because
it is the first fruit and benefit that springs of it, and comes before
Adoption and Sanctification: proper, because it is the Act of Faith only, and
not of any other Grace which iustifies a man before God. Whether it were of
negligence, or of policy, that you have omitted so material and necessary a
point, I cannot say. If of negligence, it deserves a severe chastisement: if of
policy, it was I think you foresaw what a dangerous consequence would follow
thereupon. For if you had placed Justification (as needs you must have done if
you had mentioned it) among the Effects of Faith, the Reader possibly might
have reasoned thus, If justification be an Effect of Faith and so follow after
Faith, then cannot Assurance of Justification be Faith, because it is an
effect of Justification and follows after: for it is necessary that a man be
justified, before he can be assured that he is justified. And thus you had
cast away your whole pot of broth, 2 King. 4.39.
if you had not warily kept this Coloquintida out of it. But upon what ground
soever you have forborne to speak of this point, I will by your leave supply
this defect, and in a word or two show you in what sense I affirm that
Affiance iustifies, and deny it of Assurance: for in some sort Assurance also
may be said to justify.

Justification is a law-tearme, and is opposed unto Condemnation. As therefore
Condemnation is the sentence of a judge pronouncing a man to be guilty, and
delivering him over to be punished: so is Justification also the sentence of a
judge, but absoluing and acquitting a man both from crime and punishment. Now
there are three bars at which all men are arraigned, and three Judges, who at
their several bars either justify us, or condemn us, that is to say, the
bar of God, the bar of Conscience, and the bar of Men. If we be
condemned at all these bars, and by all these Judges, we are of all
creatures the most miserable: if we be absolved at them all, and by them all,
of all men we be the most blessed. Again, if Men acquit us, what booteth it,
if our own Conscience condemn us? and if our Conscience acquit us, what
avails it, if God condemn us? for who can deliver the prey out of the paws
of that Lion? On the contrary side, if men condemn us, it mattereth not, so as
our Conscience do absolve us: and if our Conscience also do condemn us, yet
happy are we, if God absolve us, for God is greater then our Conscience. What
that is, 1 Ioh. 3.20.
for which sentence of Condemnation passes upon us at any of these bars there
is no question, for it is well known to be sin: sin I say which is so
indeed, or at least is so in appearance. For although nothing appear unto God
otherwise then it is, so that there can be no error in his judgment: yet our
own consciences and other men may easily be deceived and mistaken, and so
without cause oftentimes pronounce sentence of Condemnation. What then is that
by which we are justified and absolved from our sins, and the punishment of
death due unto them? Surely, that which is contrary unto sin, even
Righteousness. What Righteousness? Phil. 3.9.
for, as the Apostle distinguishes, there is a Righteousness which is of the
law, and there is a righteousness which is of Faith: by the former, shall no
flesh living be justified, by the latter every one that Belieueth is
justified. God justifies us at his bar when he sees our Faith, that by
firm Affiance we rest and rely our selves upon Christ to be our Mediator,
accepting him to be our Prophet, Priest, and King: for then according unto
promise does he accept the Passive obedience of Christ to satisfy for our
sins past, and imputes unto us his Active obedience to supply the want of
that perfect legal righteousness which should be in us. Our Conscience
iustifies us at his bar, when it is persuaded that God has already justified
us: for as long as it is persuaded that God condemns, it cannot acquit us. If
the persuasion of the Conscience be built upon a sandy and deceitful
foundation, it is rather vain presumption then true assurance, and the
judgment that it gives is erroneous: but if it be grounded upon infallible
evidence, even the testimony of the Spirit of God, Romans 8.16.
witnessing with our spirits that we are the sons of God, then is the
Assurance sound and certain, and the sentence pronounced thereupon just and
rightful, Phil. 4.7.
whence presently arises in our souls such inconceivable peace as passes all
understanding, and such durable joy as nothing can take from us. Finally, Men
justify us at their bar also, Ioh. 16.22. Mat. 5.16.
when our light so shines before them, that they see our good works, which are
the fruits of Faith and a good Conscience, and thereby are moved to glorify our
Heavenly Father: as being persuaded in the judgment of Charity that they are
indeed as they seem to be, even justified before God, and borne again of
water and the Holy Ghost. This judgment because it is built upon probability
only, and not upon certainty (for who knows whether the outward appearance
come from the inward holiness or hollownesse of the heart, but only the heart
it self, and God which made it?) May therefore be erroneous, and though
proceeding from Charity, yet in the mean season swaruing from verity. If then
when Men justify us, our own Consciences tell us, that they pronounce a wrong
sentence, and absolve the guilty: the comfort that grows unto us thereby is no
better then a cup of cold water is unto a man sick of a burning fever, or then
the Sardonian laughter which makes the face seem to grin, while the deadly
poison is searching through every vein, and seazing upon the very heart. But
if we be well assured that the sentence is just and true, and that they are
not deceived therein, although it be not the end we aimed at, nor the Crown
we looked for, yet is it a sweet and amiable companion of holy life,
publickely testifying unto our great comfort that God has been glorified by
us, our profession honored, and others invited if not gained unto Christ. And
thus much have I thought good in regard of your silence to speak I hope not
impertinently, at least wise not unprofitably of Justification: the sum
whereof is that Affiance iustifies before God, Assurance before Consience,
works before Men. So that I do not simply deny either that Assurance is Faith
(for in my Treatise I acknowledge that the Scripture sometime calls it Faith)
or that it justifies (for I confess it justifies at the bar of Conscience)
only I deny it to be that Faith which iustifies before God, affirming that
Faith to be no other then Affiance.


N. B. Thus, Master Down, you have, what you have so much, so earnestly, so
bitterly, and contumeliously wrested from me in writing, since that you have
refused to defend your Doctrine preached here by Disputation.


I. D. Indeed, Master Baxter, when I understood by the aduertisements of sundry
my good friends in Bristoll, that you had not only drawn up an Answer against
me full of reproachful and disgraceful speeches, but had also dispersed it
abroad into the hands of diverse Burgesses of that City, thereby to discredit
both me, and the Doctrine which I preached among them, without vouchsafing
after a whole twelve months space to send me a copy thereof according unto
promise: true it is that as soon as the next opportunity was affoarded me, I
could not forbear to challenge you for this unchristian and vnschollerly
dealing, and to let you know the just indignation and disdain I conceived
thereat. Besides that once, did I never either by word or writing solicit you
in this matter: and then earnest perhaps and vehement I might be in
expostulating with you, but Bitter and Contumelious I am sure I was not, and
for proof thereof I refer me unto the testimony of those who were then
present with us. But whether earnest and vehement, or Bitter and Contumelious,
Answer from you by no means could I wrest any. And that now I have obtained a
Copy thereof, thanks unto those my good friends who never left following upon
the sent of the Fox until they surprised him for me, and not unto you who
desired and labored nothing more then to keep it from me. Of all men you
liked not it should light into my hands, and yet of all men me it most
concerned, and unto me was only promised. And so after the Parthian manner
you fight flying, and as Caesar said of the Scythians make it more difficult to
find you then to foil you.

Well yet I refused, you say, to defend the Doctrine I preached by disputation.
First, the course which formerly we had agreed and resolved upon was Writing:
and therefore I saw no reason why I should yield to have the cause removed from
a higher unto an inferior Court, from Writing unto Disputation. For as a late
learned writer says, Writings are more solid, peaceable, Dan. Chamier Ep. ad
Egnat. Armand.
and certain, then is present speech: for more solid must those things needs
be which are meditated then which are suddenly; spoken, more peaceable then
those things which are done in the tumult, and while the minds of the
Disputants are with present vehemence inflamed; more certain, for writings
remain, and words are winged and fly away, and writings easily convince the
impudence of them that would corrupt them, which speaking cannot so well do.
And although in quick writing there be without question more aduisednesse
then in present speaking, yet does Saint Hierome excuse his hasty commentary
upon Saint Mathews Gospel, Proaem. comment. in Math.
promising a more absolute work, that you may know, says he, What ods there
is between the boldness of sudden enditing, and the diligence of well-studied
writing. Secondly, as the Apostle Saint Paul answered the Serieants that were
sent unto him from the governors of Philippi, Act. 16.37.
After that they have beaten us openly uncondemned which are Romans, they have
cast us into Prison, and now would they put us out privily? Nay verily, but let
them come and bring us out: so say I unto you, after you have in a more
public manner traduced and wronged me, scattering through the whole City a
most slanderous inuectiue and libell against me, do you think now by a
private and chamber-disputation to content me? Nay verily, this plaster is
too narrow for the wound, and open wrong requires open satisfaction. Lastly,
howsoever you pretend that you set not pen to paper until I had refused your
challenge of disputation, the Reader may be pleased to understand that it is
clean contrary. And therefore as I cannot but impute your denial to impart
unto me what in writing you had opposed against me, to the distrust you had
either in your cause, or in your own sufficiency: so now, having scribled away
so much precious time, and sacrificed so much paper to Cloacina, that suddenly
you apprehend a disputation, I assure my self it was but a slight devised
upon the present to shift me off, and to rid your self from me, whose
residence you knew to be elsewhere, and who at that time was to take up a
nights lodging with you. Or if you meant sincerely and unfeignedly, doublesse it
was confidence you had either in the boldness of your forehead incapable of
the purple tincture of modesty, or in the unskillfulness of those who were like
to be our Auditors and Moderators, who as I take it have more skill in
Merchandise and trafficking, then in Demonstration or Dialecticall Syllogismes.
For otherwise we had been upon equal ground in either of the Universities, I
suppose you would have been better advised ere you had made that challenge
unto me.


N. B. I pray God it may work in you a willing mind to embrace Peace and
Brotherly love, without the which we can never see God. Bristol. July 27. 1602.


I. D. It is impossible that unto a man of understanding any benefit or profit
should accrue by reprehension, unless it may appear unto him by some evident
remonstrance that that which is reproved in him be faulty and erroneous, and
that also he be guilty thereof. For they that think themselves to be in
health, will hardly be drawn to take Physic: In Pastore.
and then shall we better correct them that are wayward, says Gregory, when
those things which they believe to be well done, we demonstrate to be evil.
Whereas therefore it pleases you here in the conclusion and closing up of your
Answer, to charge me with a most Unpeaceable and Uncharitable disposition,
praying God it may work in me a willing mind to embrace peace and brotherly
love: you may not think that this can any way affect or move me, unless
first you show that I am guilty of this crime, and bear a mind so auerse and
abhorring from Peace and Charity, as you pretend, which I am sure hitherto you
neither have done nor can do. For though you have carefully searched every
corner of my Treatise, and ransackt every letter and syllable thereof with as
much greediness as ever Laban did Jacobs stuff to find his Idols therein;
Genesis 31.33.
yet have you not found any thing sauouring other then of Peace and Love, or if
you have, why do you not, as Jacob said unto his Uncle, put it here before
your brethren and my brethren, Verse. 37.
that they may judge between us both? You will say perhaps that in broaching
this erroneous doctrine touching the Definition of Faith, I plainly bewrayed a
seditious spirit, and that I intended the interruption of Peace and dissolution
of love. But neither is it necessary that whosoever delivers an error should
presently have such a seditious intention, for then what writer almost either
ancient or late but is guilty of that impiety? Neither is the doctrine
errronious, but sound and good, and now plentifully proved so to be by this
Defense thereof against your Answer. So that this accusation of yours, is
altogether unjust, and grounded upon no truth at all. Suppose nevertheless it
were just, and that you had found your Idols, I mean both Falsehood and Faction
in my writing: is it possible think you that such an Answer as this is, either
of it self, or sanctified by your Prayer, may be effectual to reclaim me
from mine error, or to work me unto a more peaceable mind? Certainly it is
impossible. For what is it of it self other then a fardle of vanities? And
what promise have you in Gods word that upon your prayer you shall be able to
open the eyes of the blind by dawbing them over with clay, or to still the
raging of the sea by sending forth more storms and tempests upon it? And that
such is your Answer, and such the course you have taken therein, although this
Defense have already made it as clear as the noonday: yet must I entreat
your patience before I dismiss you in a word or two, to trauerse it over
again, and in a brief Synopsis as it were to set before you the very spirit
and quintessence thereof, that if it be possible you may see your nakedness,
Genesis 3.10.
and be ashamed.

First, it is your manner like the Scholars of Theodorus to receive with the
left hand that which I offer with the right, that is to wrest and pervert my
plainest words, Plutarch. (...).
and to make them speak not that which I intend, but what you conceive is
fittest for you to descant upon. For example where I say, I will not speak of
the notation, or diverse acceptions of the word Faith: you turn it another way
saying I refuse, and accuse, and find fault with them. Again where I argue
thus, It is very probable, that many are saved without Assurance, because our
brethren of Germany hold a man cannot be assured of Salvation: you make me
reason thus, Whatsoever our brethren of Germany hold is true. And again where
I affirm that the Saint of God both may be assured and ought to be assured:
you report me to say that he ought to have it as of necessity to salvation.
And yet again where I say God should command a reprobate to believe an untruth
if he command him to believe that he shall be saved: you relate it as if I
had said, God should command a reprobate to believe an untruth if he command
him to believe, and he shall be saved. These and sundry other sentences in
like sort do you misconster and wilfully deprave: unless perhaps your
ignorance be so gross and palpable that you could not pick the right sense
out of the plainest terms that possibly could be used. But nothing is well
spoken, Terent. Pigh. Hierar. lib. 3. cap. 3.
says the Poet, which by ill relating a Sycophant may not pervert: and if some
be grown to that height of impiety as to make holy writ it self a nose of
wax, and to vary the sense thereof, according to the alteration and change of
time, I may not think it much, if the speeches of so mean a one as I am be as
hardly used, and feel the rack of sinister interpretation also. Only as
Diogenes being informed that some derided him, Plutarch. (...).
they deride not me, quoth he: so say I, while you oppose your self; not
unto the meaning naturally bred in my words, but unto a foreign sense by you
brought unto them, you strike not me but your own fancies, and like a
distracted Ajax fall a murdering of poor cattle instead of Ulysses and his
companions.

Secondly, it is your guise upon every small occasion, and sometime none at all
to shake hands and bid farewell unto the matter in question, and to run out
into many idle and impertinent discourses before you return to it again. In
art Poet.
Not much unlike the foolish Poet in Horace, who professing to sing the fortune
of Priamus and the famous war of Troy, by and by spends all his art and skill
in describing the grove and altar of Diana, or of some Crystal river hastening
about the pleasant and delightful meadows. Of this sort is that purple patch
in answer to my first argument, where you spend a whole side of paper to prove
that which I never denied, That Faith can neither finally nor totally fall
away: and tedious collation you make upon that of Matthew, Son be of good
comfort thy sins be forgiven thee, a place which I never alleged so much as
in my dream: and finally, that unnecessary excursion into the common place of
Election, and Reprobation, and Gods absolute will, which makes no more to the
answering of my fifth argument, then an axe to the opening of a lock, or a key
to the cleaving of wood, as it is in the Proverb. These extrauagances and
outtopes seem to me very strong presumptions that though you could say but
little to the purpose, Epist.
yet your itching tongue had rather talk idly then say nothing. But a wise
man, as Hierome says, before he speaks considers many things, not only
what but also when, and where, and will be sure that it be both true in
regard of substance, and pertinent in regard of circumstance. For as a word
oportunely spoken is, Prou. 25.11.
as Solomon says, Like an aple of gold with pictures of silver; so a word
uttered unseasonably and out of due place are like Jewels and goldrings
sticking in the noses and lips of the barbarous Indians, and rather deforming
then becoming them.

Thirdly, it is another trick of yours, in matters unnecessary and of no
moment to be as loud as Stentor, but in things that very much press you and
call for satisfaction, to be as mute as one possessed with a dumb spirit. For
example, in answer to my threefold distinction of Faith, I tell you, say you,
justifying Faith comprehends your three nice distinctions: but whereas I prove
the contrary, because it is impossible for one and the same habit to be
subiectiuely in several faculties, to this you say not so much as gry. Again,
whereas in my third argument I assume, that assurance in nature comes after
justification, you deny it: but the proof I bring for it, because the truth of
a Proposition is in nature before the knowledge of it, and that therefore
Justification goes before assurance, you pass over very slily, and say not one
word unto it. Furthermore, whereas I frame this objection against my self, By
the knowledge of himself shall my righteous servant justify many, Ergo, Faith
is a knowledge, and this Affiance may be in the wicked, Ergo, Faith is not
Affiance: you can be well content to borrow them from me, and to dart back
as it were my own arguments against me, but close up your eyes not daring to
behold the answers wherewith I assoiled them, Genesis 29.17.
as if you had been a tender-eyed Leah, and had met with an Object ouer-bright
for you. It may be you learned this policy of Antony, Cicl. l. 2. de orat.
who held it the safest and surest course for an Orator, when he meets with
a knotty piece and is unprovided of a fit wedge for it, to pass it over with
silence, and say nothing. But if, as Cato defines, and Quintilian largely
maintains, an Orator be a good man skillful to speak in causes: Instit.
Orator. l. 12. c. 1.
I assure you he will much disdain such base and dishonest shifting, as no
way fitting with his own goodness, or becoming the defense of a good cause.
And howsoever in a continued Oration, because the mind can hardly so divide it
self, as at once to reflect upon what is already spoken, and to attend what is
presently said, and be imminent and instant upon what follows to be said,
many things may soon be forgotten and escape unobserved by the Anditors: yet
may not the like be hoped for in a written tract, specially when it shall fall
into the hand of an adversary, for having leisure and time enough to peruse it
over again and again, he will be sure to sift and examine every sentence
and syllable with such curiosity, that such palpable omissions as these cannot
possibly pass vnheeded by him. But your trust was that this writing of yours,
being entrusted unto a few of your friends only, should never come to be so
severely scanned by me. Otherwise had you had but the least dram of wit or
shame, either you would never have set pen to paper, knowing how unable you
were to answer, or you would not thus have played the Abce-boy, and when you met
with a hard word which you could not read, think it enough to skip it over.

Fourthly, as if the old Comedy, or Cartrailing were again revived and
allowed, you lode me every foot with most bitter reproaches and contumelious
terms. Xenoph. Sympos.
And as cunning Cockmasters (distrusting the weakness of their Cocks) feed
them with garlic that yet they may annoy their adversaries with the
rancknesse of their breath: so you seeing by pure strength of reason you were
very unlikely to prevail against me, you thought yet with the stinking
breath of slanderous and opprobrious speeches to molest and trouble me. For I
pray you, are not these the principal flowers of your Rhetoric? Quirks,
Elenchs, Sophismes, Crafty lies, silly Sermon, Monsters, Antipistos, you are no
Constable, Incke-horne-tearmes, Itching-eares, Fanaticall spirits, Self-love,
Contention, Hypocrisy, Desire of novelties, Niceties, Falsities, Unlearned,
Ridiculous, Blasphemous, Hominis acumen, your arguments savor mightily of
Popery, your sack is full of spiders, you have a mind to do mischief,
Intolerable impudence, you incur fearful judgment, you grieve Gods Spirit,
captious cauils, Pure Bellarmine, Pure Papist, and six hundred other like
phrases wherewith every page yea line almost is farced and stuffed, so that a
man may sooner rid Augias stable then your Answer of them. Certainly, the
fountain cannot be sweet whose streams are so unsavory, and the stomach
must needs be full of many rotten and corrupt humors that sends forth such
a pestilent and noisome breath. But it seems by the date of your writing it
was toward dog-dayes when you endited it, and you hoped to prevent a burning
fever or some such dangerous sickness by discharging your stomach of so much
filthy choler. It had been no hard matter to have come even with you in the
same kind, and to vex you with requiting like for like: save only that I
considered, not so much what you deserve, as what best becomes him who pleads
the cause of truth. For truth should be maintained with the spirit of truth
and soberness. Herodot. Polyhimn.
It is the nature indeed of reproachful speeches, as Syagrius the Spartan said,
to stir, provoke a man unto wrath: yet ought it not so to prevail upon a
wise man as to move him inordinately or indecently to reply. Envy may have
taught you to speak evil, and a good conscience has taught me to contemn
evil speeches: you will needs be lord of your tongue, and I will be as much
lord of my ears. And yet if sometimes I sprinckle a little salt upon you, or
to fret away some of your rank flesh apply smarting corrosiues unto you, Publ.
Mim.
you must remember, it is the intemperance of the Patient that makes the
Physician cruel, and according to the old saying, they that rashly speak what
they should not, must sometime for punishment hear what they would not.

Fifthly and lastly, it is your fashion not so much to care what you say, as how
loudly you cry: hoping I think that as C. Marius sometime said, Valor. Max. l.
5. c. 2.
that Laws could not be heard in time of war because of the clattering of
armor, so neither should the voice of truth be heard in this dispute by
reason of your vociferation and clamorousnesse. For thus you come upon me, How
dare you deal thus, That you dare be so bold, with what face can you accuse,
I tell you there is but one faith, I tell you it is ridiculous and blasphemous,
I tell you Faith is a knowledge, I tell you the promise is not conditional, O
hominis acumen and argumentum lepidum, O ye noble Scholars, Woe unto you, You
cannot escape Gods hand, Quite contrary is this to your knowledge and
conscience, Go dispute with Jesus Christ and tell him his Father delivers a
blasphemous absurdity, All Fathers, all Writers, old and new, Greek and Latin
for 1600. years, besides many other such peremptory and confident speeches.
Instit. Orator. l 6. c. 5.
Quintilian thought it scarce worthy to be remembered in his Institutions, that
his Orator be not turbulent and tumultuous as are they who are unlettered and
therefore I marvel how you who would be counted as wise as Thales, could
forget your self so much as to imitate base barristers and pettifoggers. Save
only, Declam. 18.
as the same Quintilian says, it was necessary to avouch with as much
contention of voice as might be, that which otherwise you could not prove:
that what affirmation it could not have from truth, it might receive from your
manner of speaking. But Vanity, says Saint Augustine, De ciuit. Dei l. 5. c. 27.
is wonderful talkatiue, yet is not therefore so powerful as verity, for if
she list she can also be louder then verity. For the shallower the brook
the more the murmr, and the emptier the caske the greater the sound. And
therefore I would wish the Reader not to be terrified with Torrents, Enar. in
Ps. 57.
as Saint Augustine speaks, whose waters make a noise for a time, but
presently will cease and cannot long continue. For doubtless if they of the
hot and dry countries of Tema and Sabaea repair hither in hope to satisfy and
quench their thirst, Job. 6.19.20.
they shall, as Job says, return confounded and ashamed, because their
brother has deceived them as a brook, and as the rising of rivers which
suddenly are dried up and fail out of their places.

Judge. 16.17.
These, Master Baxter, are the Topicall places whence all your arguments are
deduced, and if I may so say, the five locks wherein your chiefest strength
lies. What impressions they may have made in the minds of simple people I
cannot tell. Plaut. Paen. and Hor. l. 1. Ep. 7.
Perhaps they that cannot discern between Conicall and true gold, will be
content to receive Lupins instead of current money, and sounding words for
sound proofs. And indeed it is the manner of the unskillful vulgar, though
rejected and refused as most incompetent, yet to bear themselves as judges in
every cause how weighty soever, and without taking any knowledge at all of the
right issue, to pronounce him overcome that holds his peace, and him to have
answered that has not held his peace, the controversy to be doubtful or
undecidable if both parties have said alike much; whither side speaks with
more reason neither do they attend, and if they do yet can they not
understand. And because Vanity, De ciuit. Dei l. 5. c. 27.
as we have observed out of Saint Augustine, is evermore talkatiue then verity,
and he seems unto them to have spoken best who has said most; therefore do
they for the most part give sentence against the truth for vain talking. But
howsoever simple and ignorant people may judge, sure I am they that are wise
and learned, will esteem the course you have taken rather prejudicial then
any way available unto your cause. For should a man, as Job says, Job. 13.7.
talk deceitfully for Gods cause? or is the strength of truth so empaired that
she can no longer stand but by such wrie and sinister means? Nay verily but
she is still of so noble and hautie a nature that she scorneth to have her
conquests empeached by so base and dishonorable succors. Deprauing of the
adversaries words and meaning, impertinent digressions, dissembling of his
reasons, and answers, unchristian reuelling and reproaching, and tumultuous
hoobubs and outcries, are the usual weapons of those who resolve to fight in
unrighteous quarrels. But truth being pure and simple will not, and standing
firm upon her own base needs not, and because falsehood has no subsistence
but only by her, cannot be assisted and supported by such unjust and
fraudulent policies. Although therefore as I have said these means may be
forcible enough to seduce and beguile simple people, yet they that are wise and
judicious know that naked truth never comes disguised, either in a Wolves or
Foxes case: but prudently discerning and separating betwixt passionate speeches
and found reasons, Rhetorical flourishes and Logical demonstrations,
unnecessary circumstances and substantial matter, judge always of
controversies not by what is confidently said and affirmed, but by what is
reasonable alleged and proved. And whosoever thou be Christian Reader, that
art in this sort affected and qualified, Deuteronomy. 33.8. Exodus 28.30. Mal. 2.7.
especially if thou be the man of Gods mercies, upon whose heart the Lords
Vrim and Thummim are set, whose lips preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth the
Law is to be sought, because thou art the Angel of the Lord of Hosts: to
thee, and to thy upright and impartial censure do I most humbly submit my
self, and my whole proceedings in this cause. If thou approve, Ps. 141.5.
it shall the more confirm and settle me in the truth: if thou reprove, it
shall not break my head, but be unto me a most sovereign and precious
ointment. Judge therefore between us both indifferently and freely, and the
Lord give thee a right judgment in all things.

2 Timothy 2.7.
And thus, Master Baxter, have you at length my whole and entire Apology, not
importunately and violently wrested from me, as you say your Answer was from
you, but voluntarily of mine own accord endited for the information and
satisfaction of those who earnestly expect the issue of this combat. Whereby
the prudent and discreet Reader, and I hope your self also may perceive how
small cause you had so unseasonably to sing your Paean in your Prologue, and to
trumpet out victory before you were entered in the lists. If for all this as yet
you rest unsatisfied, the fault is your own and not mine: Eurip.
for I cannot, as Euripides says, fill him that is not staunch, pouring wise
sayings into a man that is not wise. And yet it may be your Conscience and
inward man are fully satisfied although ambition and vain glory cause you to
dissemble it. If without all paraphrase and circumlocution I call a spade a
spade, and give the right name unto every thing, I beseech you, bear a little
with the ingenuity of my nature, Plut. Apophth.
we Macedonians are somewhat rude. And yet I would have you know that it is
not so much your ignorance as your insolency which I inueigh against. For, Yuo
Viliomar. in Rob. Tit.
as a late learned Humanist writes, There is no mortal man but is in some
degree, tainted with ignorance, and this contagion have we drawn from
mortality it self: for man when he erreth, erreth because he is a man, and
to vpbraid error in man is to reproach even mortality in self. Which if you had
seriously and duly considered, either you would not with such petulancy have
been carried against the errors you imagine to be in me, or at least you would
have remembered your self also to be a man. But seeing you count your self the
only wiseman, and others, as the Poet speaks, Homer.
to fly about like shadows: you may not think it hard, if being both ignorant
and insolent, you be admonished of the one, and chastised for the other.


OF THE FAITH OF INFANTS, AND HOW THEY ARE Justified and Saved.

By the late Reverend and Learned Divine Master John Down, Bachelour of
Divinity, and sometimes Fellow of Emanuell College in Cambridge.

OXFORD, Prinred by JOHN LICHFIELD, for EDWARD FOREST, Anno Domini M.DC.XXXV.

OF THE FAITH OF INFANTS, AND HOW THEY ARE Justified and Saved.
THat Christian Infants have a particular Faith of their own, is generally
affirmed both by Papists and Lutherans: yet with some difference, De Bapt. l.
1. c. 10.
as Bellarmine writes. For Papists hold that they have only Habitual Faith,
and that it (together with Hope and Charity) is infused into them in the
Sacrament of Baptism: but the Lutherans, says he, attribute unto them Actual
Faith, or something like thereunto. Wherein it may be the Cardinal does them
some wrong. Field Append. part. 2.. 1.
For it is observed by some Divines, that they constantly deny Children to have
any actual apprehension of Gods mercies, or that they feel in themselves any
such motions of Faith. Whereupon it must needs follow; that their meaning is
not to attribute unto them Actual Faith, but a kind of Habitual Faith only,
or that seed, root and Habit, whence Actual motions in due time do flow. But
be their opinion herein whatsoever it will be, sure I am that both Lutheran
and Papist agree in this, that Infants have a particular Faith of their own.

The principal reasons that they allege for proof hereof are these. Heb.
11.6.
Infants please God: but without Faith, it is impossible to please him. Mat.
19.14.
The Kingdom of God belongs unto them: Which yet the Scriptures say cannot be
attained without Faith. The Word of God every where makes particular Faith a
necessary means unto Justification and Salvation, as where the Prophet says,
The just man shall live by his Faith: Hab. 2.4.
but Infants are justified before God, and being justified cannot but be
saved. Matt 18.6. Mar. 9.36. Luc. 1.41.
Nay Christ himself expressly says that they do believe. And John the Baptist
in the very womb of his Mother was filled with the Holy Ghost, and sprang at
the salutation of the Blessed Virgin. Other arguments they use, but they are
all of the like nature, and notwithstanding them all, I cannot be persuaded
that Infants while they are such, have any Faith of their own either Actual
or Habitual. And these among sundry others are my chiefest reasons.

Deuteronomy. 1.39.
First, the Scripture in plain terms affirms, that they have no knowledge
at all, either of good or evil: and that they cannot so much as discern
between the right and the left hand. If so, Ion. 4.11.
how can they who conceive not of things natural, understand those things that
are heavenly and above the pitch of nature? To this effect Saint Augustine,
Epist. 57.
Scire diuina paruulos qui nec humana adhuc norint, si verbis velimus
ostendere, vereorne ipsis sensibus nostris facere videamur iniuriam, quando
i^^loquendo fuadere studemus, vbi omnes vires officiumque sermonis superet
euidentia veritatis: that is, If we should go about to demonstrate with words
that Children know the things of God, who as yet know not the things of men, I
fear we should offer wrong even to our very senses endeavoring to persuade by
speech that, the evidence of the truth whereof far exceeds all power and office
of speech.

Secondly, when Infants are presented at the holy Font, and either sprinkled
with the water of Baptism, or dipped therein: how chances it that they so
much dislike thereof, testifying their dislike by their crying and other motion
of the body? Certainly, had they actual Faith, they would endure all with much
patience and cheerfulness, and never bewray so much aduersenesse and
discontent. But if in doing so they go against their knowledge, the Sacrament
must needs be so f^rre from auailing them to the washing away of Original
guilt, that by their reluctation they rather contract a further guilt of
Actual sin, which I suppose none except he be too too uncharitable will
imagine of them.

Thirdly, if they have Faith, why are they not after their initiation by
Baptism, forthwith admitted unto holy Communion? In the time of Saint
Augustine, and Innocent the first, it was the practice of the Church so to do:
and it continued, as some write, for the space of six hundred years, down
unto the times of Ludouicus Pius, and Lotharius. But why is that custom now
grown out of use, and why are Children barred from the Eucharist, if they
believe as well as elder people? Nay why are they not rather admitted then
those of riper years? For Infants have not so much as evil thoughts in them:
but these by reason of their longer life have made themselves guilty of many
evil deeds besides.

Fourthly, Faith, as Saint Paul witnesses, comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God preached. But Infants hear not, neither by the ear, nor by
any other way proportionable thereunto: or if they do, yet they understand not
what they hear. For did they understand, I presume they would harken more
attentively unto what is said, then we see they do. Wherefore not hearing,
neither do they believe. If you say, they believe by an inward Hearing: then
is that Faith wrought either by Ordinary or Extraordinary means. Not by
Extraordinary means, for it is done every day and hour. By Ordinary
therefore. If so, then have we a double manner of working Faith, and both of
them Ordinary: the one by Inward Hearing in Infants only, the other by Inward
and Outward also in those that are Adulti, which is a mere nouelty in the
Church of God.

Fifthly, how comes it to pass, if Children have Faith, that among so many
millions of them as have been in the world, not so much as one of them when
they come to riper years, gives any testimony of his Faith until he be
farther taught and informed? If a child borne of Christian parents, and entered
into the visible Church by Baptism, shall afterward while he is yet in his
tender years fall into the hands of Infidels or Turks, (as the more the pity
many thousands of them have done, and the whole band of Ianizars), they say,
consists of no other: does he not readily receive that religion, which is
first instilled into him, without once dreaming of the Christian Faith? Which
yet how it should be, having from his first infancy been seasoned and
sanctified with the Christian Faith, cannot easily be conceived or imagined.

Sixthly, tell me, do all that have received Faith in their infancy loose it
again when they come to be of more years? It seems so, if then they
received it: for otherwise, why are they put to their Catechism, and taught
the elements of Faith again? But this were a very strange course: For how
should they loose it? unless perhaps God secretly steal that from them which
erst he gave them: which to say, is very derogatory to the bounty of God, who
never withdraws grace once given, until man by abusing it have deserved to
loose it. Not loosing it therefore, and yet learning it when they come to
years of capacity, It is a plain argument they never received it in their
Infancy.

Seventhly and lastly, there is not the least Habit, either acquired by
custom, or infused from above but makes a man more apt and prone unto their
proper actions. For example, whosoever is possessed of the virtues of Justice,
Temperance, Liberality, Fortitude, will readily do justly, temperatly,
liberally, valiantly: it being the nature of Habits to facilitate Actions. Tell
me then, are the Children of Christians when they come first to be instructed
more capable of Christian Religion, or more inclinable to holy actions, then
the Children of Infidels? Experience tells us they are not, but are as wax
indifferently flexible any way. It is absurd therefore and void of reason to
place in Infants the Habit of Faith, which yet inclines them no more to the
Acts of Faith, then those that are without it.

Now having thus briefly demonstrated that Infants have neither Actual nor
Habitual Faith: it follows in the next place to answer the contrary
arguments above set down. And first where it is said, that Faith is a
necessary means unto Justification and Salvation, in as much as none can
please God or live without it: I answer in a word, it is to be understood not
of Infants; But de Adultis of those that are of riper years, unto whom alone
Faith is necessary. These cannot please God, nor live, nor be justified and
saved without a particular Faith of their own: but Infants by reason of their
incapacity through the indulgence of God may. Add hereunto, that according to
the Tenent of our Divines, it is not the Habit but the Act of Faith that does
justify: in regard whereof they define it by a Motion of the Will grounded upon
an assent of the Mind unto the truth of the Gospel. Unless therefore, you
grant unto Infants such a motion both of the Mind and Will, which Papists
expressly deny, and Lutherans seem to stagger at, neither can they be
justified by Actual Faith, having none. And seeing without it the Habit
auailes nothing at all, as being an idle Faith: I see not to what end the Habit
should be infused. And if it be to no end, neither is it infused. For if
Nature do not, much less does God any thing in vain.

To that of our Savior where he seems expressly to affirm that Little-ones
believe: I answer first, that those Little-ones are not Infants properly, but
such men as resemble little Children in holy Innocence and Simplicity: in
regard whereof they are elsewhere called by Christ (...), that is Infants.
Secondly, Mat. 11.25.
grant it that Children be also meant, yet not such Children as are infants,
but grown to some stature and capacity. For although the Child whom Christ
took in his arms, be called (...), a little Child: yet was he both a
follower and hearer of Christ, and such a one as in some measure could
understand, such as were those (...) little Children to whom Saint John thought
it not unfit to write. 1 Ioh. 2.14.
For as the text says, he was one that came of himself being called: and
farther, he was capable of scandal and offense which questionless is not
incident unto Infants.

Lastly, to the example of John the Baptist, Ep. 57.
I answer with Saint Augustine, Nec quod factum est in Iohanne contemno, nec
inde regulam quid sentiendun sit de paruulis figo: immo id in illo mirabiliter
praedico, quia in alijs non inuenio: Neither do I contemn, says he, that
which was done in John, neither do I from thence frame a rule what we are to
think of little-ones: yea I acknowledge it to be marvelous in him, because I
find it not in others. Moreover, it is not said of him Credidit in vtero, he
believed in the womb, but only exultauit, he sprang in the womb: and this
exultation or Springing, diuinitus facta est in Infant, non humanitus ab
Infant, was done by the power of God in the Infant, and not by any humane
power of the Infant Or if use of reason and will, were so hastened unto him as
he did believe, in miraculis habendum est diuinae potentiae, non ad humanae
trahendum est exemplar naturae: it is to be reckoned among the miracles of
Gods power, and not to be drawn into an example of human nature. And thus much
of reasons both for and against the Faith of Infants.

Now I know it will here farther be demanded, if Infants have neither Actual
nor Habitual Faith of their own, how then and by what means are they
Justified and Saved? For it is merciless, and against all Divinity to exclude
them from either. Whereunto I answer in the words of Bernard, Epist. 77.
Saluantur and ipsi per fidem, non tamen suam, sed alienam: they are also saved
by Faith, yet not their own Faith but another. Another? Will you say: this
seems very strange. Hear then what the same Bernard yet further adds,
Dignum est and ad Dei spectat dignitatem, vt quibus fidem aetas denegat
propriam, gratia concedat prodesse alienam: It is fit and belongs unto the
dignity of God, that to whom age denies a proper Faith of their own, grace
should yield them the benefit of another Faith. And again, Nec enim
omnipotent is iustitia propriam ab his putat exigendam fidem, quos nouit
propriam nullam habere culpam: for neither does the justice of God Almighty
think that a proper Faith is to be required of those, whom he knows to have
no proper fault of their own. In which words of Bernard, two excellent reasons
are rendered, why the Faith of another through the grace and indulgence of God
should be auailable unto them: the first because their Jnfancy denies unto
them a proper Faith of their own, the second because besides that Original
Corruption traduced into them from their parents without their knowledge or
consent, they have no other sin of their own. Can they not then by reason of
their tender years have a Faith of their own? It befits the goodness of God
that they be helped by the Faith of another. Have they no proper and
particular sin of their own* Neither does God think it agreeable with his
justice to exact of them a proper and particular Faith of their own.

Infants then are helped by another Faith. Whose Faith will you say? The Faith
of the Parents, as also of the Church, who is the common mother of us all, and
in whose womb as it were they are conceived and borne. This of old was Saint
Augustins sentence, and this all sound Divines have agreeably with the
Scripture ever held. Only it may be demanded how and in what sort the Parents
Faith avails them. Whereunto I answer, not by particular applying of Christ's
merits and obedience unto them (for this is done only by a man's own Faith
unto himself) but by bringing them within the compass of the Covenant of
Grace. Thus; The Covenant was made not with Abraham only, Genesis 17.19. Act.
2.39.
but with his seed also: and the Promise, says Saint Peter, was given both to
the Parents and to the Children. The Parents therefore by Faith apprehending
this Promise and Covenant, by their Faith interest their Children also
thereunto. For as it is in civil negotiations, the bargain that the Father
makes for himself and his Children is firm and good, although the Children
be not present at the bargaine-making, nor understand what is done: even so in
this spiritual Covenant and contract with God, the Parents Act is sufficient
force to confederate their Children also, and to give them a right unto all the
benefits of the Covenant. And as I conceive, this is imputed unto them in lieu
of all those Acts and Habits which otherwise are required in those that are
Adulti. How farther the Holy Ghost works in them is a deep and inscrutable
secret, Et de occultis non iudicat Ecclesia, the Church is no judge of things
that are hidden. Only I affirm that by the Faith of the Parents the Children
are made a holy seed, and members of Christ's body.

But what if one of the Parents be an Infidel? What if either of them, or
both be notorious hypocrites or openly sinful, having not in them true
Justifying Faith? are the Children therefore, without the compass of the
Covenant, and unjustified before God? I answer, No: For first, if but one of
the Parents believe, yet are the Children holy. 1. Cor. 7.14.
So says Saint Paul, The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your
Children unclean, but now are they holy. Again, though neither of the Parents
believe with justifying Faith, yet being in the Church by the profession of
Christian Religion, their Children are within the Covenant. For first, the
Soul that sins it shall die: Ezech. 18.20.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father
bear the iniquity of the Son. So that the impiety of the Parents preiudiceth
not the Child that is borne in the Church. Secondly, by Parents are to be
understood not those alone of whom Children are immediately begotten and borne:
but their Progenitors and Ancestors also who feared God and lived in the
Church, though many generations before. For God made not his Covenant with
Abraham and his immediate seed only, but with all his seed after them in their
generations: Genesis 17.7. Ex. 20.
and promises to show mercy to the thousandth generation of them that love him
and keep his Commandments. Whence it follows, that these are as it were a
root unto all their posterity borne in the Church: and therefore, Romans 11.16.
if the root be holy, so are the branches also, says Saint Paul. Lastly, be
the next Parents whatsoever they will be, yet their Children being borne in
the Church, the Church is their Mother, and the Faith and piety of the Church
interesteth all such as are borne in her unto the Covenant. And thus you see
how Children are justified and Saved by another Faith.

If Children, may not those that are Adulti so be justified and saved also? No
verily. For as the Prophet says, The just man shall live sua fide, not by
another, Hab. 2.4.
but by his own Faith. And hence is it, that in the Lords prayer we are taught
to say Our Father, but in the Creed, I believe: because Prayer is an Act of
Charity extending it self unto the good of others also, but Believing is an
Act of Faith, only benefiting a man's self. Can the cloths that another
wears, warm me? or the meat another eats, nourish me? or the potion
another receives, cure me? or the soul that is in another man quicken me?
Nor more can the Faith of another man justify or save me. As one man shall not
bear another fault, sed anima quae peccat ipsa morietur, the soul that
sins it shall die: so shall not one man be acquitted for another Faith,
sed anima quae credit ipsa saluabitur, the soul that belieueth it shall be
saved. Salvation every where in Scripture is promised to him who himself
belieueth; and damnation is every where threatened to him that belieueth not so.
And he belieueth not so, who has not a Faith of his own.

Yea but if Adams sin be imputed unto us for Condemnation, and the Obedience
of Christ for Justification: why may not another Faith also be imputed for
Salvation? The case is not alike, for they were public persons and stood in
our steed: but so do not others. In the Covenant of works Adam was our Head:
and therefore his sin is counted the common act of all those that were in his
loins. In the Covenant of Grace, Christ is our Head: and therefore his
Obedience is esteemed the common Obedience of all those who are united unto him
by Faith. Others are not our Heads, nor represent our persons: in regard
whereof neither can their Act be accounted ours. It will further be objected
that Christ forgave the palsie-sicke man his sins for the Faith of them that
brought him: Luc. 5.20.
and so, as Thomas says both Ambrose and one John a Bishop understand it.
Caten. in cum loc.
But Saint Chrysostom otherwise, and that more rightly, understanding it both
of the sick man's Faith and theirs who brought him. For our Savior intending
to bestow a double benefit upon him namely the cure both of body and soul:
this could not be effected but by the interuention of his own Faith, but the
other might by the Faith of those that presented him. So we read that the
Centurions servant, Mat. 8.13. and 15.28.
and the woman of Canaans daughter were healed, the one for his Masters, the
other for her Mothers Faith. And who knows not that unbelievers oftentimes
temporally fare the better for the sake of the Faithful. Saint Ambrose
therefore imputing the remission of sins unto the Faith of others, must be
understood with a grain of Salt, as they say, that one man's Faith may obtain
Faith unto another, and so consequently by the interuention thereof
Justification also: as did the Faith of S. Steven (as some suppose) unto S.
Paul, and the tears of Monica unto her Son Augustine. Thus those that are
Adulti must have a Faith of their own.

And why I pray you more then Infants? The reason is evident. For first those
that are Adulti are capable of Faith, so are not Infants: and therefore reason
would that they should have a Faith of their own, though these be helped by
the Faith of another. Again, they that are grown to riper years have in them
more deadly diseases then Infants: and so need more remedies then these.
Infants indeed are borne in Original corruption propagated unto them from
Adam: but of Actual sins they are not guilty, neither are they defiled with
the fruits of that bitter root. And therefore unto them suffices through the
gracious Covenant of God the Parents Faith. But to those that are Adulti, who
are stained not only with Original s^^ne, but also with many Actual
transgressions by themselves committed in thought, word and deed, it is
requisite that by a particular Faith of their own they apprehend the merits
and obedience of Christ for their Justification and Salvation. In a word,
another Faith, as is above said, may by divine dispensation and indulgence
suffice to him who has only sinned in another: but to him who himself has
sinned, not another but his own particular Faith is necessary.

Now, to conclude all with a little application, seeing all these things are
so, first, we have here the great privilege and prerogative of Christian
Children above others. For by virtue of the Covenant they are a holy seed, have
right to the promises, and the Kingdom of Heaven belongs unto them. Hence is
it that anciently under the law they were Circumcized, and now under the
Gospel are admitted unto Baptism, the seal of the Covenant of grace. In so
much, that whosoever of them depart this life in their infancy and tender
years, undoubtedly they are all and every one of them saved. What should let?
Can they that are holy perish? Will God fail of his Word to those that have
right to the promises? Shall they to whom the Kingdom of Heaven belongs be
excluded from it? Original sin is pardoned them in the Covenant, and washed
away in the lauer of regeneration; other sin they have none to hinder them,
and therefore without doubt so soon as they die their innocent souls are by
the holy Angels of God transported into Abraham's bosom. Neither let any man
think that herein I stand single, and by my self, for thus a reverend Bishop
also of this Church; I pray what did antiquity teach? that young Children
Baptized are delivered from Original sin? Carleton. ag. Montag.
We teach the same, and doubt not but if they die before they come to the
practice of actual sin, they shall be saved. And our Divines in the
Council of Dort, Synod. Dord.
Infantes ante vsum rationis morientes electi: Infants dying before the use of
reason are elected. Tom. 1. Hom. 2. p. 1.
And the book of Homilies, Infants being baptized and dying in their infancy,
are by this Sacrifice washed from sin, brought into Gods favor, made his
children and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. More I could name, but these
may suffice to let you know how unlikely it is that should be Arminianisme
(for so has this opinion rashly been censured of some) which the Church of
England, and the professed enemies of Arminians hold.

But what? are none saved but only the Children of Christians? Or do you
condemn all the rest universally unto the pit of Hell? Iun. de not. and great.
28.
I will tell you what as grave and learned a Divine as any this age has
yielded holds. He doubts not but that many of the Children of Infidels are
saved, partly by virtue of the Covenant, and partly by Gods election. By virtue
of the Covenant, in as much as they are descended of such Ancestors as have
apprehended the Covenant, although their succession have afterward suffered
some interruption. By Election, because God has not barred himself from power
and right to communicate grace even to those whose Ancestors pertained not to
the Covenant. For if he call those Adulti into the Covenant who before were
not of it: why may he not in like manner if he please choose Infants also?
Finally, as he belieueth all that are in the Covenant, and that are elected,
to be saved: so in Charity he presumes all that dye in their Infancy rather
to be saved then shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. For my part, I will
answer no otherwise then in the words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 5.12.13.
What have I to do to judge them that are without? Do ye not judge them that
are within? But God judges them that are without. And so to his righteous
judgment I leave them.

Again, here have we double comfort for all Christian Parents. And first, in
the birth of their Children: seeing they are holy and belong unto the Covenant
of Grace. True it is the Scripture says, Psalm. 51.7. Ephesians. 2.3.
they are conceived and borne in sin, and so the Children of Wrath: but you
are to know that they represent a double person, one of a Son of Adam, the
other of one ingrafted into Christ. As they are the Sons of Adam they are
bone sinful; as ingrafted into Christ, freed from sin. Secondly, in their
death: for they may be assured by Faith that they are translated into those
joys, which eye has not seen, nor ear ever heard, nor has ever entered into
the heart of man. Of elder people they can but hope it in Charity: of these
they have infallible certainty. If they live unto more years, who knows but
wickedness may alter their understanding, Sap. 4.11.
or deceit beguile their mind, as the wise man says? But now being prevented
by death, they are quickly passed this vale of misery, and have soon ended
their painful pilgrimage, and are possessed of the place of eternal rest and
happiness. If any thing will dry up the tears, or stint the sighs and cries
and lamentations of Parents for the loss of their tender Infants, this is it:
especially if they consider withal, that themselves under God have been the
means of bringing them within the Covenant, and procuring unto them their
everlasting Salvation.

Thirdly, Parents may hence learn that a necessity is laid upon them to
present their Children unto the holy Font, so soon as conveniently they may.
For seeing by their birth they are interested unto the Covenant, the seal of
the Covenant must not in any case be slighted or neglected. What though
Baptism be not absolutely necessary unto them? yet is it necessary for Parents
to give it them conditionally, if it may be had. If it cannot be had, the Vow
and Desire of the Parents is sufficient: neither does the bare want of Baptism
without any of his or their default, exclude the Child from Salvation. For if a
just and honest man would, much more will God perform his Word and Covenant,
although the seal be not set thereunto. But if it may be had, there is
Necessitas praecepti, a necessity laid by Gods commandment upon all those that
are Filij praecepti the Sons of the commandment. Those Sons all men are
when they are grown to be Adulti; and therefore if then they neglect to be
baptized, they deserve for their contempt to be cut off and to be eternally
condemned. But Infants while such are none of these Sons, as being both
incapable of the precept, and unable to offer themselves unto the Sacrament:
whence follows that the commandment takes hold only of the Parents, and
those that have the care of them. So that although the Child dying unbaptized
may be free from danger: yet those that neglect to present him unto Baptism
shall be damned for breach of Gods commandment. Le^ Parents therefore by all
means be careful to perform this duty: and if by reason of weakness or
some other impediment it cannot be done publickely, rather then left undone,
let it be done privately. Wise men, and amongst the rest M. Calvin would have
it so: yea the Church of England requires it, prescribing a form of Private
Baptism, in case of necessity, and commanding that what is privately done be by
the Minister publickely made known in the Congregation. An order heretofore
too much neglected, God grant henceforward it may be better observed.

Finally and lastly, seeing every one that is Adultus must of necessity have a
Faith of his own, first it is the duty of Parents by all means to work Faith
in their Children when they are capable thereof: that as they have been
instruments to traduce Original sin unto them to their perdition, so they
may again repair in them the image of God to their eternal salvation.
Secondly, let every one look to himself, and see that he have Faith, for it
is in vain to trust to the Faith of another. The righteousness of Christ
indeed is a cloak large enough to cover the sins of all men: but the Faith of
another man is little enough for himself, I cannot cover my nakedness with
it. They were but foolish virgins that said, Give us of your oil, for our
lamps are out: and fitly were they answered by the wise virgins, We fear
there will not be enough for us and you, but go ye rather to them that sell
and buy for your selves. Let Papists blaspheme and say, they can supererogate
and more then satisfy for their sins, and that one man may for a price buy
out of the Popes treasury the Surplus of another man's merits: yet am I sure the
oil of another man's lamp will not serve my turn, nor procure me favor to
enter with the bridegroom. God grant me therefore wisdom even while it is
called to day, to get me oil in my own lamp.

NOT CONSENT OF FATHERS BUT SCRIPTVRE THE GROUND OF FAITH.

Written by the occasion of a conference had with Mr. Bailey, by the late
Reverend and Learned Divine, Master John Down, Bachelour of Divinity, and
sometimes Fellow of Emanuell College in Cambridge.

OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, for EDWARD FOREST, Anno Domini M.DC.XXXV.

NOT CONSENT OF FATHERS BUT SCRIPTVRE THE GROUND OF FAITH.
LOVING and Reverend M. Bailey, I acknowledge my self much endebted unto you,
both for my kind entertainment, and the peaceable Conference I had with you.
Would you but vouchsafe to visit my poor Cottage, I should readily endeavor
to satisfy some part of the debt, if not with like entertainment, yet with
equal welcome. The residue I know not how better to discharge, then by
pursuing my first intention; that is, by laboring to reduce you back into the
bosom of that Church, out of which with such danger to your soul, scandal to
the brethren, and unkindness to her you have withdrawn your self. And to
this end might I have obtained from you in writing, as at our parting I
entreated, what those special Motives were which had wrought in you this
sudden change: I would have strained my self by writing also to have given
them the best satisfaction. But seeing for reasons best known to your self,
and into which I list not further to inquire, you held it not fit as then to
yield so far unto me: I have thought good for the present to reflect upon
some passages of our Conference, specially that ground whereon you then stood
so much, and upon which you plainly professed that you would adventure your
Faith.

It may please you therefore to remember that being demanded a reason of your
departure, you pretended that in reading the ancient Fathers you had met with
sundry Bugbeares, which so scared and affrighted you, that unless you would
resist the light of Conscience, and hazard your eternal salvation, you could
not choose but be swayed by them. Whereunto it being replied, that happily
those Bugbeares were but Scarcrowes, and that you should have taken a safer and
surer course, if you had resolved your Faith into Scriptures, nothing being
sufficient to bear up so weighty a piece but only divine testimony: your
answer was that upon Scripture you relied, howbeit, because it is obscure and
subject to manifold constructions, upon Scripture understood according to the
interpretation and doctrine of the Fathers, nothing doubting but that as long
as you held the Faith of them whom we verily believe to be saved, your self
could never perish through misbeliefe. In which answer, howsoever in word you
seem to attribute some force and virtue to the Scriptures, yet in truth you
do but cancel them and make them of none effect. For if the Scriptures lie
rather in the Sense then in the Letter, and the Sense by reason of the
darkness and ambiguity of them, be not to be found in themselves, but
elsewhere out of them, in the writings of the Fathers: it follows clearly
that in your account Paul and Peter and James and John and the other Penmen of
holy writ are no better then Ciphers, unless Cyrill and Ambrose and Hierome
and Augustine and the rest of that rank as digit numbers vouchsafe to add some
value and signification unto them. So that now by your favor this must be my
task briefly and plainly to demonstrate, that having removed your Faith from
the authority of Scripture upon the exposition of the Fathers, you have built
quite beside the rock, and laid your foundation upon the sand.

But take this protestation first, that we neither disesteeme nor despise the
Fathers, as by Priests and Jesuits we are ordinarily slandered: but
contrariwise, with all duty we rise up to their gray hairs, and reverence
their venerable antiquity. Withal we acknowledge that they were in their
times excellent ornaments and lights of the Church, endued not only with
singular knowledge in the mystery of Faith, but also with admirable sanctity
and uprightness of life. Whereby, in all their combats and bickerins with
Heretics, they maintained the truth of God so wisely and courageously, that
they ever remained more then conquerors. And now as they have left behind them
a precious name among the Saints so we doubt not but their souls are bound up
in the bundle of life, and enjoy the blessed: making vision of God for
evermore. Such books of theirs as are come to our hands we esteem as rich
treasures, and value them above gold. Them do we search and peruse with all
diligence: be it spoken without offense, no Papists more. Yet can we not
throughout them meet with those terrible Bugbears you so much complain of:
rather we wonder how you could miss all those good Angels so frequently
appearing in them to comfirme and settle you in your first Faith. For I will be
bold to say, notwithstanding all the brags and crakes of that side, that the
Fathers are ours not yours: or if they be yours in any thing, it is in the
pettiest and smallest matters, for in the maine and great questions
controuerted between us, they are expressly for us and against you, as hereafter
God willing shall in part appear. Upon confidence whereof, whenever we were
summond and called unto the Fathers by you, we never refused their trial, but
ever have been ready to adventure all upon their verdict. The challenge of that
famous Prelate, Ser. at Paul's Cross.
Doctor Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, is yet fresh in memory, that if any learned
man of our adversaries, or if all the learned men that be alive, be able to
bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor or Father,
or out of any old general Council, or out of the holy Scriptures of God, or
any one example of the Primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be
proved, that there was any private Mass in the whole world at that time for
the space of six hundred years after Christ, and so forth in seven and
twenty several articles, he would be content to yield and to subscribe.
Reply to Hardings Ans.
This challenge as that renowned Bishop in his lifetime made good himself
against his adversary Master Harding: so was it never yet retracted by any of
us, but has stoutly been maintained by sundry succeeding champions. Hear one
for all. That, says worthy Whitaker, Con. Camp. tat. 5.
which Jewel most truly and constantly uttered that day when he appealed to
the antiquity of six hundred years, and offered unto you that if you could
bring forth but one sentence clear and evident, out of any Father or
Council, he would not refuse to yield the victory unto you: the same do we
all profess, we all promise the same, we will not shrink from our word. Thus
you see how we reject not the Fathers, as you would bear the world in hand,
but triumph rather in the testimony they give us, and in our Apologies and
Defenses allege them plentifully against you.

Howbeit neither do we nor dare we make Gods of them, or equal them with
the holy Apostles, as if they were infallible and could not err. Cloven
tongues never sat upon them, as they did upon these: neither did the Spirit of
God so guide and direct their pens, but that sometimes they might fail, and
write amiss. Had they had infallibility of judgment, safely might we build
our Faith upon them: but this they utterly disclaim, acknowledging it to be
the peculiar privilege of the Apostles. And so far are they from making
themselves Masters of our Faith, that they require us to judge and censure of
their writings by the Scripture which is the rule of Faith. Neither would they
have us to tie our selves unto their authority more then they tied themselves
unto the authority of others but freely to accept or refuse as we see just
cause. Hom. 13. in 2. Cor.
I pray and beseech you all, says Chrysostom, that leaving this and that man's
opinion, you will search all these things out of the Scripture. In Eusebius. hist.
l. 7. c. 24.
Let it be commended, says Dionysius of Alexandria, and without envy assented
unto which is rightly spoken: but if any thing be unsoundly written, let that
be looked into and corrected. Epist. 62.
I know I my self, says Hierome, esteem of the Apostles in one sort, and of
other Writers in another: that the first always speak truth, and the latter
as men do in some things err. De Trinit. l. 3. c. 1.
In all my writings, says Saint Augustine, I desire not only a godly Reader,
but also a free corrector: yet as I would have the Reader addicted unto me, so
neither would I have a corrector addicted to himself. De lib. arb. l. 2. c. 32.
And again, I am not bound to the authority of this man, meaning Cyprian, but
I examine his saying by the authority of Scripture, and what agrees therewith
I receive with his commendation: what agrees not, by his leave I refuse. And
yet again, Epist. 111. ad Fortunat.
Neither are we to esteem the disputations of any men although Catholic and
praise worthy as the Canonical Scriptures, that we may not saving the honor
which is due to those men dislike and reject something in their writings, if
happily we find them to have thought otherwise then the truth either by others
or our selves through Gods help understood. Such am I in the writings of
others, and such would I have the understanders of mine to be. Epist. 19. ad
Hieron.
Finally, I, says the same Saint Augustine, confess unto your charity, that I
have learned to yield unto those books of Scripture alone, which now are called
Canonical, this reverence and honor, that I most firmly believe no Author of
them to have erred any thing in writing: And if I find any thing in their
writings which seems contrary to truth, I will not stick to say, that
either, the copy is faulty, or the translator apprehended not what is spoken,
or I understand it not. But others I so read, that how much soever they excel
in holiness and learning, I think it not therefore true because they thought
so, but because either by those Canonical Authors, or by probable reason not
abhorring from truth they were able to persuade me. Thus the Fathers: whose
steps if we tread in, and whose counsel if we follow, and not taking up
every thing upon trust, but examining them by the touchstone of truth, I hope
we are rather to be commended then blamed.

And reason: for neither were the Fathers more then men, neither are we of
this age less then men. And I wonder, why we may not judge of the sayings of
those, who are but men as well as our selves. What? have we not reasonable
souls as well as they? are we not endued with the same faculty of
understanding and discoursing? have we not still the same helps both of nature
and art which they had? Or when they died, did the Holy Ghost also give up the
ghost with them? or does he deny to assist these latter times with his
enlightening grace as he did the former? Ioh. 16.13.
Certainly the Spirit that leads into all truth is yet, and ever shall be
amongst us unto the end of the world. And as before the writings of the Fathers
were, he directed his Church unto the true sense of Scripture: so now I doubt
not but if all whatsoever they have written were utterly lost, he would still
guide us therein as he did them. And verily unless we will be too
unthankful we cannot but confess, that as age through Gods bounty has had
more means then those heretofore: so through his blessing it has made further
proceedings also in the knowledge of Scripture. For besides that we have
whatsoever helps they had, we have over and above the benefit of all their
works, together with much skilfulnes in the Original of the old Testament,
which most of them wanted, and of the new also, wherewith some were but little
acquainted. In regard whereof whosoever shall duly compare the ancient
Commentaries with those of latter times, must needs be either weak in
judgment, or obstinate in prejudice if he prefer not these. Your own men
ingenuously acknowledge so much. Art. 18. cont. Luther.
It cannot be unknown to any, says Fisher B. of Rochester, that there are
many things as well in other Scriptures as the Gospels now more clearly
discussed and thoroughly understood then in ancient times: namely because the
Ancients had not the ice broken unto them, or because their age sufficed not
exactly to sound the whole sea of Scripture. In Romans 5. disp. 51.
And Salmeron, God has not given to all men all, that every age might enjoy
some truths which the former knew not. Every age has ever ascribed much to
antiquity: yet this we avouch, the younger the Doctors the cleerer sighted. And
Dominicus Bannes, It is not necessary that the more remote the Church is from
the Apostles times, the less perfect knowledge of the mystery of Faith should
be therein: because after the Apostles time there were not the most learned in
the Church which had dexterity in understanding the matters of Faith. We are
not therefore enwrapped in the more darkness, for that in respect of time we
are more distant from Christ: but rather the Doctors of these latter times
being godly, and treading in the steps of the ancient Fathers have attained
more express understanding in some things then they had. For they are like
children standing on the shoulders of Giants, who being lifted by the tallness
of Giants, no marvel if they see further then they themselves. In Luc. 10.
This similitude Stella also uses to the same purpose, God forbid, says he
that I should condemn what such and so many wise men have with one accord
affirmed yet we know well that Pigmies set on the shoulders of Giants, see
further then the Giants themselves do. Thus they. Whereby you see the Fathers
have no prerogative above us, because they were before us: but we rather have
the advantage because we come after them. In a word, be they whatsoever you
will, their servants we are not, but their fellow servants: sent from God with
the same commission, to the same end, and with the same promises that they
were. Neither does their authority more bind us in that they are our
predecessors, then our authority shall bind them who many ages hereafter may be
our successors. But draw we a little closer.

The ancient Fathers say you, are the ground of your Faith. What? severally and
single by themselves? (...) 12.
I suppose no: for there is not one of them, as your own side confesses, but
has his error, and I presume you would be loath to follow them therein. The
Fathers therefore, either all jointly, or the more part of them agreeing in
one. So Canus, Loc. lib. 7. c. 3.
What the greater part of the Fathers judges, that we profess to be of the
Catholic Faith. So Salmeron also, In 1. Ioh. 3. disp. 25.
When all or almost all Fathers agree in one, it is an inevitable argument. And
Gregory of Valentia, It is infallibly true which they deliver with one consent,
Anal. l. 8. c. 8.
^ea an infallible rule judging. And Onuphrius, Prim. Pap. p. 1. c. 6.
It is rash and foolish and terrible rashness to go against a sense given by
the Fathers for the understanding of the Scriptures. And finally the Council
of Trent, which peremptorily charge, that no man dare to interpret the
Scriptures against the unanimous consent of the Fathers. This then undoubtedly
being your assertion, as every way according with the Tenet of the Church of
Rome, let us in Gods name try the strength thereof, and see with what security
and safety a man may adventure his Faith, and consequently his eternal
salvation upon this ground.

And first, whosoever will steadfastly repose his Faith upon consent of Fathers,
had need be right well assured which are the authentical writings of the
Fathers. For if these be doubtful and uncertain, the whole frame raised upon
them must of necessity shake and totter. Now, that there are books more then a
good many which in their forefronts are inscribed and entitled unto the
Fathers, yet in truth are merely suppositious and apocryphal, I know you
cannot be ignorant. Nor Origin, nor Athanasius, nor Basil, nor Chrysostom,
nor Cyril, nor Tertullian, nor Cyprian, nor Ambrose, nor Hier^me, nor Augustine,
nor any one almost of all the Fathers, but has suffered notorious wrong in
this kind, having base brats and misbegotten bastards fathered upon him. Which
also is so clear and manifest, that Posseuin, and Salmeron, and Maldonat, and
Baronius, and Bellarmine, and all the rest of that side, though too frequently
they make use of such refuse stuff, yet every where in their writings are
constrained to acknowledge so much. Biblioth. l. 4.
But amongst the rest Sixtus Senensis especially, who purposely recording the
works of all the Fathers, takes upon him to demonstrate as much in every one
of them, as in his Catalogue he passes from one Father to another. So that
indeed it would be but an idle wasting both of oil and time if I should spend
many words in proof of that which is denied of none: and therefore I forbear
further to trouble you with particularity. Only, because in our Conference you
so confidently affirmed that Dionysius the Areopagite, even he who was Saint
Paul's convert and Scholar, was the right Author of all those books that are
now extant under his name: I must entreat you to have a little patience, while
I maintain against you the negative which I then held, and for which I stand
still engaged unto you.

That this Denise is but a counterfeit, but Divines prove by sundry
unanswerable arguments: I will not urge them all, but cull out the choicest.
Omitting therefore the Style sauouring more of three hundred years after, then
those Apostolical times, and his curious speculations in the secrets of
heaven, as if he had been surueyer thereof, or had taken a muster of all the
heavenly host of the blessed. Spirits therein, whereas Saint Paul himself
though he had been ravished up into the third heaven, even into the Paradise
of God, 2 Cor. 12.3.4.
yet returning back neither durst nor did utter any such thing, and lastly
that he talken so familiarly of Churches and Chancels and Monks and diverse
other orders and ceremonies which are well known to be of a much latter date:
omitting I say these and the like objections, although perhaps not so easy to
be answered, consider with me I beseech you these few reasons following.
First, if these were the books of that Den^ which was Saint Paul's Scholar; how
comes it to pass that neither Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history, nor
Jerome, nor Gennad^ui purposely writing Catalogues of all the famous Writers
before them, nor Origin, nor Chrysostom nor any ancient Father, so far as I
can learn, makes any mention of them, until Gregory the Great, who lived
about 600. Hom. 34. de 10. dragm.
years after Christ, and speaks very doubtfully of them too? For as for
Athanasius whom you affirmed to quote him, I suppose you meant him in his
Questions out of the old and new Testament, wherein he cites his Mystica
Theologia. But neither was this book of Denis known in the time of
Athanasius, nor did Athanasius himself write that, Biblioth. l. 4.
as your Sixtus Senensis thinks. For had he written it, would he, think
you, have vouched his own authority, and that with such arrogance under the
name of Great Athanasius? or could he have mentioned Gregory Nazianzen, who
flourished so long after his decease? I trow no: yet he does both. Quest. 23.
117. 129. Act. 17. 34. Ib. 16.3. etc.
Secondly, it is well known that S. Paul was the man that converted Denis, and
that before his coming to Athens, Timothy had been entertained by him, and in
his company had traveled over many countries, and grew so intimate and dear
unto him that he both counted and called him his Son. 1 Timothy 1.2. and 2. c. 1.2.
Which being so, it cannot reasonably be imagined that the true Denis would
prove either so ungrateful or so presumptuous as this counterfeit shows
himself to be ungrateful, in that forgetting Saint Paul, he ever speaks of
one Hierotheus, in obscure man in comparison as of his Master: presumptuous,
for that as if he were a Father to Timothy as well as Saint Paul he calls
him his Son, notwithstanding he were far more fit to be his disciple.
Thirdly, Divine. nom. c. 5. Strom. l. 8.
this Denis cites Clemens the Philosopher, not Clemens of Rome as some would
have it, but of Alexandria: for in him the very passage quoted by Denis is to
be found. Deuin. nom. c. 4.
And yet this Clemens lived two hundred years after Christ. He cites also
these words out of Ignatius, My love is crucified, as if he had been present
at his Martyrdom: Memod.
and yet the true Dionysius suffered under Domitian, whereas Ignatius both
wrote his Epistle, and was martyred some good while after him under Trajan. He
further cites the Gospel and Revelation of Saint John, as if they had a long
time been parcels of holy Scripture: howbeit if we may believe history, both
those books were written but a little before Saint John's death, and fourteen
years after the death of Dionysius. And yet again, in an Epistle to
Polycarpus he speaks unto him as unto a reverend Bishop and Doctor.
Nevertheless Dionysius himself suffered in France in the year of our Lord
ninety six, as Writers testify, but Polycarpus in the year one hundred sixty
six, and of his age eighty six so that at the death of Dionysius, Polycarpus
could be but a stripling, and about sixteen years old. Fourthly, according to
the Proverb, the Rat perishes by bewraying himself: for speaking of Infants,
and why they are baptized, thus he says, Hier. Eccl. c. 7.
Hereof we say those things which our divine Masters being instructed by the
old tradition have brought unto us. In which words ere he was aware he has
discovered that nor Paul nor any other of the Apostles could be his Masters:
for it is both untrue and absurd to say, that the holy Apostles were instructed
in the point of Christian Baptism by the old tradition. Lastly, this Denis
writes that himself together with Timothy and Hierotheus were present at the
departure and funeral of the Blessed Virgin Mother. Ep. ad Tim.
Now story says that she lived threescore and three years, being fifteen
years of age when she bare Christ; whereunto if ye add thirty three years
of Christ's life, and fifteen more to make up her full age, it will appear that
she dyed eight and forty years after her Sons birth, and fifteen after his
Ascension. But on the other side it plainly appears, that Denis Arcopagite
was not converted unto the Christian Faith till the eighteenth year after the
ascension, one and fifty years after Christ's birth. Our Divines gather it
thus. The Scripture witnesses that Saint Paul was not called till Christ was
ascended. Reinold in Conc. 8. d. 2. Act. 9.5. Gal. 1.18. Act. 9.26. Gal. 1.21.
Act. 13.4. Gal. 2.1. Act. 15.4. Act. 16.1.
Being called, he stayed three years in Damascus and Arabia before he came
to Jerusalem. Thence he went into the coasts of Syria and Cilicia and the
Countries thereabout. And fourteen years after he came to Jerusalem again
with Barnabas to the Council. From the Council he went to Derbe and Lystra,
Where he received Timothy. And having traveled through Phrygia, Galatia,
Mysia, Macedonia, he came at last to Athens, Act. 17.34.
where he converted Denis. So that it must needs be about eighteen, or at the
least seuenteen years after Christ's Ascension before Saint Denis know Christ.
All which duly considered, it is evident that the Blessed Virgin dyed if not
three full years, yet more then two before the conversion of Denis: and
consequently that he could not be one of those Brethren who were present at her
death and funeral. Whence also it follows ineuitably, that the Author of
that book cannot possibly be this Denis. This argument being pressed by that
renowned Reinolds upon John Heart, Confer. c. 8. d. 2.
he confessed ingenuously that he knew not how to accord it. And these or the
like reasons have so prevailed with sundry of your own side, that they have
been forced some to doubt of him, others utterly to disclaim him from being
the true Denis. Praef. in Probl. Alex. Aphrod.
Theodorus Caza affirms those books of the Hierarchy to be none of Denis the
Athenians. In Act. 17. Ibid.
Erasmus also professes himself to be of the same mind. And Laurentius Valla
says, that the learnedest men of his time entitled one Apollinarius unto them.
Cardinal Cajetan not only says it, In Act. 17.
but also shows how unlikely it is that he who wrote of the Names of God,
and of the Heavenly and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy should be this Denis. In
Act. 17.
Erasmus further reports that one William Gro^in, an incomparable man both in
Divinity, and all other humane learning beginning his Lectures in Paul's Church
in London, upon the books of the Heavenly Hierarchy, maintained with great
vehemence that it was the work of Denis the Ar^opagite, wondering at the
impudence of them that denied it. But before he had past half way into the
work, he grew to be of another opinion, and freely confessed that it seemed to
be none of this Denysses. Finally, Biblioth. l. 2. L. 6. a. 22.9.
Sixtus Senensis, although he profess himself to think otherwise, yet he
acknowledges that not only Cajetan, but diverse others also doubt much whether
those books be his whose name they bear. And thus have I at length fully
disengaged my self as touching this Dionysius, having with many unanswerable
arguments maintained the Negative I undertook against you: which if reason may
prevail with you, are I am sure sufficient to convince you; if not, yet
sufficient to make you stagger. But let us return into the lists again, and
resume the argument which we began to urge.

Many Counterfaits there are passing up and down, and masking themselves under
the names of ancient Fathers. This is confessed of all hands. I demand then,
what infallible rule you have whereby to discern, and that without mistaking,
which of them are spurious, and which legitimate. Neither blame me for
demanding so much, seeing your selves are not afraid to ask us, how we
discern the Gospel of S. Matthew to be Canonical rather then that of
Nicodemus. Whereunto if I should answer with you, that the Church has resolved
upon the Canon of Scripture: can you return the like answer unto my demand
that the Church has agreed upon a Canon for the Fathers also? If you cannot,
as I know you neither can nor will, what further security I pray have you? Is
it your own judgment? But I have already showed you, both in Dionysius
Areopagita, and Athanasius, how much that has deceived you. And not to flatter
you, I suppose you have not so thoroughly attended and studied this point, but
that many other of these Counterfaits by bearing the name of the Fathers, may
be entertained by you as the very Fathers themselves. Is it then the judgment
of other learned men? Alas they are distracted among themselves, and one
admits him whom another rejects. For example, the Constitutions of
Clemens, De author. Le. l. 2. c. 11. Hist. tom. 2. p. 15. Enchir. tract. de
Euch. De Euchar. l. 2. c. 9. In 1. Tim. 3. De Euchar. l. 2. c. 14. Of Purg. l.
9. L. 4. in. Hier.
says Stapleton, is a book full of of Apostolical spirit: yet says
Baronius, it is reckoned among these that are Apocryphal. Again, Echius
voucheth Cypri^^ide Caena Dom^ni for Transubstantia^^on: but Bellarmine denies
that book to be Cyprians. The Jesuits of Rhenes also cite the Commentaries
of Ambrose upon the Epistles for the Popes supremacy: yet Bellarmine holds
it was neither written by Ambrose, nor any Catholic Cardinal Allen alleges
Hierome on the Proverbs for Purgatory: but Sixtus Senensis denies those
Commentaries to be Hieromes. Tom. 4. d. 45. S. 1. n. 30.
Finally, for I will only give you a taste, Snares quoteth Augustine ad fratres
in erome for Suffrages: but the Censors of Louan tell him plainly that it is a
counterfeit book. Besides this, if you will needs trust the judgment of
others herein, perhaps when you think you hear a Father speak you may be
pitifully deceived. For whether it be out of ignorance, or retchlesnesse, or
set purpose to beguile, I cannot tell: but sure I am it is most usual and
ordinary in all Popish writers to quote for Fathers those that are not Fathers
and of ancient credit, but I know not what Foundlings and Changelings borne in
Fairie land, and yesterday or three days ago brought amongst us. What adooe
keeps Master Harding with his Amphilochius, Abdias, Leontius, Martialis,
Hippolytus, Simeon Metaphrastes, and other such knights of the post? What a
rumble do others make with the Epistles of Clemens, Euaristus, Telesphorus,
Hyginus, Anicetus, Soter, Calixtus, Vrbanus, Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus and
the like, the barbarousnesse of whose style bewrayes, that they were written
rather by some illeterate clerk then learned Bishop. But above all I cannot
sufficiently wonder at Doctor Bristow, and the whole College of Rhemes, Def.
of Allen. Purg. In Pref. and in Ioh. 10.29. and Heb. 10.26.
who knowing that of the twelve books which Cyril of Alexandria wrote upon
John, four are perished, namely the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eigth, and that
one Iodocus Clichtoueus a mushrom of yesternight supplied them out of his own
brain: yet cite these books of Clichtoueus again and again, and that under
the name of Saint Cyril himself. And this you may please to be advertised of
by way of Caveat also, because, as it seemed in our Conference, you often read
Saint Cyril and peruse him. To urge this point no further I conclude, seeing
you are not any way infallibly certain which are the writings of the Fathers,
which not, and the ground of Faith must be that which is infallibly certain,
you cannot safely build upon consent of Fathers, unless you will build upon
uncertainty.

But suppose there were no doubt at all of their writings, which they be: yet
you cannot with any security rest upon them, unless you are in like manner
certain, that after so many ages they still retain their native purity, and
are come to your hands without any corruption. But such certainty you can have
none: for all the world knows how shamefully the Fathers have been abused,
and how intolerably corrupted, and that both of old and of late also. Cap. 23.
De Christo l. 1. c. 10. L. 4. tit. Orig.
Vincentius Lirinensis says, that diverse of the ancients thought, the works of
Origin had been miserably depraved, Bellarmine says, it is very credible many
blasphemies were inserted into them by Heretics. And Sixtus Senensis, that
they had defiled all his works with innumerable Heresies. Id. ib. tit. Leo.
Pope Leo much grieved that his Epistles had been polluted with the unwashed
hands of Heretics. And the Recognitions of Clemens were by them also
corrupted, Id. tit. Clem. Id. ibid. l. 2.
says Ruffin. It is manifest also, says Sixtus Senensis, that the Canons of
the Apostles were contaminated by the Nicolaitans. Tit. Johan. Chrysostom.
And, the imperfect work of Chrysostom upon Matthew, abounds with sundry
strange monsters of Heretics. The same Sixtus further says, Praefat. in l. 5.
that Pamphilus Martyr, Eusebius Caesariens, Didymus, and Ruffinus much
complained, that very many writings not only of Clemens, Dionysius, Origin, and
Athanasius, but of other noble Doctors also were pitifully handled by Heretics.
Pref in Basil. de Sp. S.
Erasmus not only complains that many things were foysted in by others into
the middle of treatises, as namely of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Hierome, Basil,
others: but expressly affirms that the Friars are they who have corrupted the
Fathers. Not so expressly Ludouicus vines, In Ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
yet covertly he insinuates as much, In this chapter of Augustine, says he,
many things are added by those who with their polluted hands have defiled the
writings of great Authors. Even of late Pamelius, although eight other written
copies failed him, yet bashed not upon the sole authority of one blind Cambron
copy, to insert into Cyprian, de vnitate Ecclesiae, these words, He that
forsakes the chair of Peter on which the Church is founded, does he hope
himself to be in the Church? Which glosseme notwithstanding it be not to be
found nor in Alopecius his print, nor in that of Heruagius, or Langlier, or
Crinitus, or Gryphius, or Manutius, or any other, Part. 1. p. 89.
no not in any other written copy, as our learned Bilson shows: yet because
it seems to make much for the authority of the Sea of Rome, it must of
necessity be clapped into the text. Whereas contrarily, if all the Copies of the
Imperfect work upon Matthew have in them these words, In which not the true
Body of Christ, but the Sacrament of his Body is contained; because it makes
strongly against Transubstantiation, it must needs be enforced (for so it
pleases. Bellarmins grace) by some Scholar of Berengarius. De Euchar. l. 2.
c. 22.
And as the Fathers have been not a little wronged by way of addition, so I
fear me they have received much injury also by way of Subtraction. Ep. dedic.
Ye have taken order, says Sixtus Senensis unto Pope Pius the fifth, that all
the works of Catholic writers, and specially the ancient Fathers should be
purged and corrected. In Cyprians works printed at Rome by Manutius, the letter
of Firmilianus B. of Caesaria is left out. Why? but because he is in somewhat
quick against Steven B. of Rome. In regard whereof says Pamelius, it had
been more wisdom if it never had been set out. The works of Ambrose also set
forth by Frelonius at Lions were before the printing of them razed by two
Friars. This Fr. Iunius saw with his eyes, and the Corrector of the press
complained of it, professing he would buy any other print rather then that.
You must needs be very deaf, for all the world rings of it, if you have not
heard of the late order taken amongst you for the purging of books at the next
reprinting of them: namely that whatsoever is to be found whether in the
Epistle Dedicatory, or Preface, or Margent, or Tables, or Annotations, or in
the Text of the work it self, any way seeming to make either against them, or
for us, be wholly cut off, and left our in the next edition. Then which I think
there was never a more base and beggarly shift used. Neither does it argue
other then the badnesse of your cause, and the distrust you have of it: for
truth and a good cause would much disdain to be supported by so unjust, and
dishonest means. Yet is this policy now a principal pillar of your Religion,
and has of late years been carefully executed. Witness those, Expurgatorie
Indices which give direction to the Overseers of this business, what is to be
altered, which to be added, and what to be defalked and spunged out: of which
five are published to the world, one printed in Flanders, a second in Spain, a
third in Portugal, a fourth in Naples, a fifth in Rome. What others there be
lurking in secret and not yet come to light I know not. Witness also the
writings of Cardinal Cajetan, Polydor Virgil, Andreas Masius, Feras, Ludouicus
Vines, Erasmus, Beatus Rhenanus, and innumerable others which have already
passed this Purgatory, and are not set forth pitifully mangled and dismembered.
But to leave this, suppose the Fathers have not been so shamefully entreated,
as I have showed: yet would I pray you to answer me these two questions, the
first, whether you be assured of this consent by your own reading, or else
believe it upon the report of others: the second, if you have read them all
your own self, whether you have read them in a translation, or in their own
original language. To the first of these two questions, I presume you neither
can nor will answer that you have read them all your self: for I know you
neither have them all, nor have you had sufficient either time or strength to
peruse them all, unless happily your body be made of iron, and you have
reached unto the years of Methuselah. What then? will you trust the
allegations of other men? Take heed what you do, for so you may soon be
deceived. For example, Doct. Princ. l. 6. c. 14.
Stapleton to prove that Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, but Peter both
of Jews and Gentiles, In Gal.
alleges these words of Ambrose, He names Peter alone and compares him to
himself, because he had received the Primacy to build the Church, that
himself likewise is chosen to have the Primacy of building the Churches of the
Gentiles: yet so that Peter preached unto the Gentiles also. Here your Doctor
stops, and John Heart taking it up upon trust, urges it against Reynolds as a
strong testimony: whereas Ambrose, if ye curtall not his words, says clean
otherwise, thus, yet so that Peter also preached to the Gentiles if it were
needful, and Paul to the Jews. Many mo such falsifications might I easily
produce out of your writers: but let us rather hear how themselves censure one
another. Antony Augustine Archbishop of Tarracon desiring in a book written to
that purpose that Gratian might be purged, De emend. Great. l. 1. dial. 1.
says, His faults are so many that they cannot be reckoned in one day. For
he alleges false Authors ascribing words to Gregory, Ambrose, Augustine no
where to be found in them: and produces true Authors, but so as often times he
brings in contrary sentences. Cumel says that the testimony of Hierome is by
Molina, Disp. Var. to. 3. p. 126. Page 124.
Suares, and others fraudulently cited: and that Suares alleging Chrysostom,
cuts off that which immediately goes before and follows after, Defens. p. 324.
because he saw Chrysostom favored not his opinion at all. It is no rare
thing, says Johannes Marsilius, for his illustrious Lordship, meaning
Bellarmine, to cite Authors for an opinion, whereas they affirm the plain
contrary. Page 289.
And again, It grieueth me to see things imputed unto holy Fathers, the
contrary whereof they affirm. Ib. p. 357.
Finally says the foresaid Marsilius touching Cardinal Baronius, I have heard
that as he has taken a liberty to mend the Fathers, Canons, and Historians,
so he will correct the Councels after his manner, and for (...) ^^ne purpose,
and to assume unto himself a license (...), which God forbid. And thus you see
even by your own men how dangerous it is to trust them in their allegations.
As for (...) second question, I think you will confess (pardon ^ee if I
think amiss) that you have not skill enough with understanding to read the
Greek Fathers in their Original, but are feign to trust unto Translations. But
I beseech you do not Translators many times what through ignorance, or
neglicence, or wilfulness mistake and pervert the meaning of their Author? L.
2. c. 1.
Ruffinus translated the Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius, and in it this
passage of Clemens, that Peter, James, and John, although Christ preferred them
almost before all, yet they took not the honor of Primacy to themselves, but
ordained James who was surnamed Just Bishop of the Apostles. A shrewd testimony
for the Primacy of James against that of Peter: but the error is in the
translation, the Greek Eusebius having not Bishop of the Apostles, but Bishop
of Jerusalem. Yet Marianus Scotus cites the same out of Methodius just
according to Ruffins translation, from whence perhaps it was taken. Hist. l. 2.
c. 23.
Eusebius himself in express terms affirms the Epistle of S. James to be
Spurious: but your Chrystopherson renders it so as if he had meant that not
himself but some others in the Church had so esteemed it in former times. And
lastly, not to stand longer upon this point, that very translation of Cyrillus
Alexandrinus which you have, made by Trapezuntius, you have little reason much
to trust unto. For as Bonauentura Vulcanius shows, Praef. and Ann.
it is a very disorderly one, wherein many things are omitted, much is added of
his own, and much peruersly translated. To conclude therefore, seeing the
writings of the Fathers have so many ways and so notoriously been abused, by
addition, by subtraction, by alteration, by misquotation, by mistranslation: it
follows that infallible certainty from them you can have none, and so
consequently that you cannot safely build your Faith upon them.

To proceed, the Scriptures you say are obscure and ambiguous, and therefore
you may not rest upon them save only as they are expounded of the Fathers. If
so, then if the Fathers also be obscure and ambiguous, neither may you rest
your Faith upon them. Now certainly the Fathers are as dark and doubtful as
the Scripture. If you think otherwise, do but read the works of Tertullian
and Arnobius, and let me afterward know your mind. For my part I see no reason
why the Scripture should be more subject to diversity of interpretations
according to the difference of times, as Cardinal Cusan impiously affirms,
Ep. 2. and 7. Cont. Whit. l. 2. p. 45.
and Duraeus the Jesuit impudently defends; then the writings of the Fathers.
What? do we not vouch the Fathers on both sides? are we not as confident upon
them as you? whence comes this, I beseech you, if they be so clear that no
doubt can be made of them? And why do you profess in your Flemish
Expurgatorie Index, that in ancient Catholic Writers, ye tolerate many
errors, ye extenuate and excuse them, and often deny them by devising some
shift, and faining a sense unto them when they are opposed against you? What
need I say, all these tricks and fetches if there be no obscurity in them? If
literal and Grammatical construction may carry it, the Fathers are directly
ours: and we suppose they meant as they wrote, neither can you make any show of
answer, unless you fall to expound the meaning of them. And so as you remove
your Faith from the letter of the Scripture unto the exposition of the Fathers:
so must you of force remove the same again from the letter of the Fathers unto
some other tribunal to determine the sense and meaning thereof. Give me leave
to declare this by some few examples. That Faith only iustifies, Origin,
Cyprian, Eusebius Caesariensis, Hilary, Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine,
Cyril, Primasius, Hesychius, Gennadius, Oecumenius, in express terms
affirm, agreeing therein with us: whose words I will not fail to produce
whenever you shall require. Against having of Images in Churches, and the
Adoration of them, we have the precise words not only of Lactantius and
Epiphanius and other Fathers severally, Epist. ad Ioh. Hicrosol.
but nineteen Bishops together in the Council of Eliberis, and of the whole
Council of Frankford under Charles the Great. Against the Bishop of Romes
supremacy we have the plain resolution of Pope Gregory, Lib. 6. ep. 30.
that he is the forerunner of Antichrist whosoever desires to be called
Universal Bishop. And of the General Council of Chalcedon, Act. 16.
giving to the Bishop of Constantinople equal privileges with the Bishop of
Rome. And of two hundred and seventeen Bishops in the sixth Council of
Carthage, among whom were Saint Augustine, Prosper, Gresians, and many other
worthy Fathers, all decreeing that the Pope of Rome thenceforward should have
no authority over the African Churches. Finally, against Transubstantiation
thus writes Gelasius, himself a Bishop of Rome, De d^ab. not. con. Eu^ych.
The Sacraments of the Body and Blood of CHRIST which we receive is a divine
thing, wherefore by them we are made partakers of the divine nature, and yet
the substance of bread and wine cease not to be. Thus also Theodoret, Dial.
1.
He who has called meat and drink that which naturally is his body, and
after calls himself a Vine, he himself has honored the visible signs with
the name of his Body and Blood, having not changed their nature, but having
added grace unto nature. And again, Dial. 10.
The signs mystical change not their nature after consecration, for they
remain in their first substance, figure and form. Hom. 11.
Chysostom likewise, if he be the Author of the imperfect work on Math. In
the sacred vessels there is not the true Body of CHRIST, but the mystery of his
Body. And Saint Augustine, The Lord doubted not to say; This is my Body, Con.
Adimant. c. 12.
when he gave the sign of his Body. Thus the Fathers in these few points
neither is it hard to show the like consent in the rest. What? Will you now
subscribe unto their words? yea being taken in the right sense. But who shall
judge of the (...) on understand them one way, we another. Shall (...) learned
Rabbis of your side? Fic, that were too partial: and they so enterfere in
their answers that they cut and hew one the other miserably. Reverend Bishop
Morton has demonstrated this at large. Preamble^ng. Mitigator.
Take one of his examples. The Council of B^^beris forbids the having of
Images in Churches, Do Imagine. l. 2. c. 9.
and Adoration of them. Of Images representing Gods nature, faith Andrad^^s.
No, says Bellarmine, for such were not then in use. For fear test Gentiles
should think Christians warshipped them idolatrously, says Sanders. But the
reason of the Canon agrees not much with this exposition, says Bellarmine.
Because Christians seemed to worship those Images as Gods, Ibid.
says Alen Cope. But this exposition is not agreeable to the Canon, says
B^ll^rmine. Lest in time of persecution they should be made a scorn and
contempt unto infidels, says Sanders, Allen, Turrian, De adorat. l. 2. d. 5.
c. 2. n. 131.
and Bellarmine. But this exposition agrees not with the intention of the
Canon, says Vasques. Lest by the decay of the walls they might loose their
luster, says the same Vasques. Ib. n. 132.
The Council was but provincial, and never confirmed by the Pope, Ib. n. 121.
Bell. Imag. l. 2. c. 36. Bin. de Conc. in hunc Can. Biblioth. l. 5. ann. 247.
say diverse of late, being oppressed with the objection. But Baronius and
Binius affirm that it was a lawful Council and free from error. And
whatsoever the occasion of the prohibition was, this is sure, The Council of
Eliberis did absolutely forbid the worship of images, says Sixtus Senensis.
What say you now to this language of Babel? Can you gather any certainty for
your Faith out of such confusion? Certainly you cannot. And if many Fathers
laying their heads together in a general Council, may even in then decrees of
Faith use inconvenient speech either by superfluity of te^^mes, or disorderly
placing them, and the like; so that no^^^ much the words, as the s^^^e is to
be regarded; De Council. l. 2. c. 12.
as your Bellarmine affirms (...) you re^de^ any reason why some few of them
writing funderly, one from another, may not also fail in their terms, and
thereby leave the Readers mind in suspense and douth what their true meaning
should be? The very Sy^^^ of Trent has not spoken so plainly, but that it
has left scruples in the mind of some. And yet, Good God, faith Campian, what
variety of Nations, Rat. 4.
what choice of Bishops out of the whole world, what Majesty of King and
States, what marow of Divines, what holiness, what tears, what fasting, what
flowers of Universities, what tongues, what subtilty, what industry, what
infinite reading, what richesse of virtues and studies replenished that more
then humane Sanctuary. All which notwithstanding Bellarmine and Sixtus Senensis
accord not in the meaning of the third Session touching the number of the
Canonical books. De verb. Dei l. 1. c. 7.
For Bellarmine thinks that the seven last chapters of Hester following after
the tenth are by the Council admitted into the Canon, Biblioth. l. 1. and 8.
but Sixtus thinks no. Neither yet are Bellarmine and Ambrose Catharin agreed
about the eleventh Canon of the seventh Session concerning the necessity of the
Priests intention to make a Sacrament, the one affirming it; De Sacram. in genesis
l. 1. c. 27. Opusc. de intent. minist. Ib. de laps. and pecc. or. c. 6.
the other denying it. Nor lastly, are they resolved of the Councels mind
touching Original sin, Catharin, who had been in the Council a great
stickler, Bell. de amiss. great. l. 5. c. 1^*
defining it only by the Imputation of Adams sin, others affirming it to be
more then so, and that upon the words of the Council too. I could easily
instance in sundry other points: but these are enough to let you see, that the
Oracles of Loxia^ went (...) more perplexe, then the Decrees of this Trident^^
conuenticle. Whether they were framed so of purpose, or no, I cannot tell; many
shrewdly suspect it. Sure I am, it has been so far from stinting of
quarrels, that in many things it has been and still is the matter and fuel
of contention. Howsoever, seeing the Fathers oftentimes write so darkly and
ambiguously, that there is great doubt made not only between you and us, but
amongst your chiefest Doctors also, what their right meaning should be: I
conclude, and that according to your own rule, that Consent of Fathers cannot
be a sufficient ground to build upon.

But what if the more part of Fathers consent in error, even in those points
which the Church of Rome herself condemns? Will you not then freely confess
that such Consent is not so firm and sure a ground as you took it to be?
Doubtless you will, unless you be too too wilful and obstinate in your
opinion. Let us therefore a little examine this point. That Christ after the
first Resurrection shall live with his elect hereupon earth for a thousand
years in all peace and happiness until the second Resurrection, is the error
of the Millenaries, and justly condemned by the Church of Rome. Yet Papias
Saint John the Apostles auditor, Sixth. Senens. l. 5. ann. 233. and 6. ann. 347.
Apollinarius, Irenaus, Tertullianus, Victorinus Pitabionensis, Lactantius,
Seuerus Sulpitius, Justin Martyr, and a great multitude of other Catholic men
were of the ^^me opinion, all being deceived by misunderstanding that in the
Revelation, And they shall reign with him a thousand years. S. Augustine
speaks very tenderly of it, De ciuit. Dei l. 20. c. 7. In Ier. l. 4.
calling it neither error not heresy, himself having sometimes held it. And
Hierome durst not condemn it, because so many Churchmen and Martyrs had said
it. That the souls of just men after their dissolution see not the face of God
until the day of judgment, is an error and condemned by the Church of Rome.
Yet the Liturgy fathered upon Saint James, Irenaeus, Justin, Tertullian,
Clemens Romanus, Origin, Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, Prudentius, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, the Author of the Imperfect work on Matthew, Augustine, Theodoret,
Arethas, Oecumenius, Theophylact, E^thymius, Pope John the two and twentieth,
and Bernard, held the same, whose particular words Sixtus Senensis records in
his Library. Lib. 6. annot. 345. Stapl. de auth. Sc. l. 1. c. ^.
I am not ignorant how Sixtus there labors to excuse them but others of his
pewfellowes find their words so pregnant that they can by no means salve them.
That the thrice blessed Virgin Mary was conceived in Original Sin, the
Church of Rome holds to be an error: 3. d. 117. n. 148.
for not only the unskillful vulgar, but the Doctors and Divines, and all
Catholics with one consent fight for the Immaculate Conception, says Vasques.
And why has your Church by her authority commanded the feast of ^^r Conception
to be celebrated, unless she were conceived without sin? De consecr. d. 4.
Firmissime n. 11.
Yet Cardinal Turr^cremata affirms, that all the Doctors in a manner
maintain the contrary, and that he had gathered together the testimonies of
three hundred to that effect, noting the very places and words wherein they
affirm it, Part. 1. q. 1. d. 5.
And Dominicus Bannes says, that it is the general consent of the holy
Doctors, that she was conceived in sin: and yet the contrary is held in the
Church, to be not only probable, but very godly. That Angels and the Souls
of men are bodily, Action. 5.
visible, and circumscriptible, is an error, and condemned by the Church of
Rome. Yet three hundred Fathers, such as they were, and fifty upon the head of
them, in the second Council of Nice, avouch it, and allege the authority of
Basil surnamed the Great, Blessed Athanasius, Methodius, and their followers
for it. If any shall say, it was the opinion only of John B. of Thessalonica,
and not of the whole Council: I answer, that what John said, Tharasius
Patriarch of Constantinople, forthwith confirmed, and the whole Synod
immediately answered, So it is my Lord. And this is so clear, that Bartholmew
Carranza notes it as an error in them, Epit. Conc. ad cum loc. Ep. 215. De
Eccl. dog. c. 11. and 12.
and contrary unto the Lateran Council: yet adds withal that Saint Augustine
was of the same mind. But leaving other their errors, I come without further
delay to discharge that obligation, wherein I stand bound to prove, that the
Fathers for a time generally held it necessary for all, even young Infants, to
be partakers of the Eucharist, Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. can. 4.
or they could not be saved: which you know the Church of Rome allows not,
but condemns as an error.

Eccl. hier. c. 2. p. 3.
First your Denis, he that goes under the name of Areopagita, after he has
recited other ceremonies in the administration of Baptism, at length, says
he, the Priest calls the party Baptized to the most holy Eucharist, and gives
the Communion unto him. And lest you should understand this of them that are
baptized being Adulti, Id. 7. c. 3.
elsewhere he speaks more plainly thus, That children who cannot yet
understand divine things should be made partakers of holy Baptism, and of the
mystical signs of the most holy Communion, may perhaps seem ridiculous to
profane men, De lapsis.
if the Auditors when Bishops teach such Heavenly things be not fit. Saint
Cyprian reports a story of a certain Infant maid, who had not yet age enough
to tell what wrong another had done her, how when the Deacon had offered the
holy chalice unto her, and she refused, he powered it into her mouth. Ibid.
And a little after, Will not those Infants, says he, when the day of
judgment shall come, say, we have done nothing, neither forsaking the meat
and cup of the Lord have we of our own accord hastened to these profane
contagions: the perfidiousnesse of others has overthrown us, our Parents are
our murderers. Innocent the first B. of Rome, Ep. ad Patr. conc. Milou.
That which your Brotherhood, says he, affirms them to preach, namely that
little ones may obtain the reward of eternal life without the grace of
Baptism is very foolish: for unless they eat the flesh of the Son of man
and drink his blood, they cannot have life in them. Con. Iul. Pel. l. 1. c. 2.
Of this Innocentius S. Augustine says, how he defined, that little ones
unless they did eat the flesh of the Son of man, they could by no means
have life in them. Now I beseech you durst any man at that time hold otherwise
then the head of the Church (for so you count the Pope to be) had defined? But
let us hear Saint Augustine himself. Verily, Con. duas Ep. Pel. l. 1. c. 22.
says he, Christ is the Savior of little ones also, and unless they be
redeemed by him, they must perish: because without his flesh and blood they
cannot have life. And again, Wherefore they also, as I have said, Ad vital.
Ep. 107.
if they die in that tender age, shall certainly be judged, according to the
things they have done by the Body, namely during that time while they lived in
the body, when by the heart and mouth of them that bare them they believed or
not believed, when they were baptized or not baptized, when they ate the flesh
of Christ, or not ate it, when also they drank his blood or not drank it
according to these things I say which they have done by the body, not those
which they would have done had they lived longer here shall they be judged.
And yet again, De pec. mer. and remiss. l. 1. c. 20.
Away therefore now with doubting, Let us hear the Lord and not the suspicions
and conjectures of men, let us I say hear the Lord speaking this not of the
Sacrament of Baptism, but of the Sacrament of his holy Table, to which none
lawfully approaches but he that is Baptized, Unless you eat my Flesh and
drink my Blood you shall have no life in you. What seek we further? What
will they be able to answer hereunto, unless obstinacy do stretch their
striving sinews against the constancy of evident truth? Will any dare to say
this also, that this saying belongs not unto little ones, or that they may have
life in them without the participation of this Body and Blood, because he
says not, he that eats not, as of Baptism, he that is not borne again,
but thus, If ye eat not, as speaking to them who were able to hear and
understand which certainly little ones cannot? But he that says so, marketh
not that unless this saying hold all, that they cannot have life without the
Body and Blood of the Son of Man, even the elder age also will make little
reckoning of it. And yet once more again, Ib. c. 24.
The Carthaginian Christians excellently call Baptism no other then Salvation,
and the Sacrament of the Body of Christ no other then Life. Whence but from an
ancient and as J think Apostolical tradition, by which the Churches of Christ
hold as ingrafied into them that without Baptism and the participation of the
Lords Table no man can come not only to the Kingdom of God, but neither to
salvation nor life eternal. And this being thus proved, by and by he
concludes, If therefore as so many and so pregnant divine testimonies witness
with joint consent, no man may hope either for salvation or eternal life
without Baptism and the Body and Blood of the Lord, in vain do they promise
it to little ones without them. Thus Augustine: where by the way observe how he
affirms this his opinion to be the Tenet of all the Churches of Christ. To
whom I add lastly the eleventh Council of Toledo, Can. 11.
If any faithful man being constrained by any inevitable infirmity shall cast
up the Eucharist which he has received, let him in no case be subject to
Ecclesiastical condemnation. Likewise let not the censure of any condemn
them, who either in the time of their infancy shall do the same, or in the
alienation of their mind, seeming to be ignorant of what they do. In Ioh.
6.53. In Tertull. de cor. mill.
This error touching the necessity of the Eucharist to Infants continued in the
Church a long time, even about six hundred years, as your Maldonat says. And
Beatus Rhenanus observes out of the Rituall books called Agendae, that the
custom of ministering the Communion to Infants was still in use unto the times
of Ludouicus Pius and Lotharius, that is, toward nine hundred years after
Christ. Against all this I know not what can be said, unless perhaps, that it
might be a general custom, but not a general opinion. and so indeed some of
your men turn it off, and the Council of Trent says, that as those holy
Fathers had probable cause of their doing according to the reason of the time,
so without controversy must we believe that they did it not upon necessity of
salvation. But first, this is a question not of Faith but of Fact, namely what
those Fathers did believe in this point: and in a matter of Fact your selves
confess a Council may be deceived. Secondly, the sayings above related are
so plain and express as none can be more: so that it must needs be extreme
madness to yield unto this consequent, the Council of Trent, that is, a few
men of yesterday say so, and therefore though Pope Innocent, and Augustine, and
other of the ancient Fathers say the contrary of themselves, yet must we not
believe them. Thirdly, the very Text of Scripture which they alleged to prove,
their opinion, understanding it of the Eucharist as they did, manifestly argues
they held a necessity of it to Infants, Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of
Man and drink his blood ye shall not have life in you. Lastly, you are to
know that the Fathers brought in this of the Eucharist against the Pelagians to
prove the necessity of Baptism, thus, None can be saved without partaking of
the holy Communion: None may partake of the holy Commumunion except he be
Baptized, Ergo, none can be saved except he be Baptized. The Assumption they
took for granted: the Mayor they warranted by the aforesaid text. So that the
Conclusion must of necessity fall to the ground, and Baptism cannot be
necessary unless the Eucharist also be necessary. And thus have I discharged
this obligation also, and have made good my promise unto you as touching this
point. From which together with the other particulars above mentioned, I
conclude, that the Fathers have generally erred, and consequently that Consent
of Fathers cannot be a ground of Faith, unless you will consent with them in
error.

Which will yet further appear, if you will please to take notice that your
own men orderly reject them notwithstanding their Consent. For why should they
do thus after so many vaunts and brags, if they thought the more part of them
could not err? Yet that so they do, Loc. l. 7. c. 1. n. 1. Romans 5.
learn by these few examples. Canus says that from that place of the Apostle,
In whom have all sinned, all the holy Fathers with one mouth affirm the
Blessed Virgin to have been conceived in Original sin, as namely
Chrysostom, Eusebius, Remigius, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard, Bid, Anselme,
Erardus Martyr, S. Antony, Bonauenture, Aquinas, Vincentius, Damascenus, Hugo
de sancto Victore. Yet, says he, though there were no Author to stand against
them the argument drawn from consent of all the Fathers is but weak, and the
contrary opinion is more probably and piously defended. Salmeron also being
hardly beset with the same army of Fathers in the same point, quits himself
like a man thus, In Romans 5. d. 51.
To this multitude of Doctors we oppose another multitude, to drive out one
nail with another: his meaning is, the learned men of these latter times
against the Ancient Fathers. Michael Medina confesses that Hierome, Ambrose,
De Sacr. hom. orig. l. 1. c. 5.
Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Occumenius, and
Theophylact, to whom he might have added diverse others, that I say they held
there was no difference between a Presbyter and a Bishop: yet he rejects it
as the opinion of the Heretic Aerius. That Christ is the true Shepherd
mentioned in the tenth of John, Augustine, Chrysostom, Hierome, Caesarius,
Cyril, Theodoret, Aponius, Gregorius Romans Anastasius Sinaita, Prosper,
Theophylact, Euthymius, Rupertus, Cyprian, Leontius, Eucherius Lugd. Bid,
Bernard, Anselme Cantear. Liranus, and many others affirm: yet, Antid. Huang.
in Ioh. 10.
says Stapleton, the Pope is understood thereby. All the Ancient Fathers in a
manner, as Gregory Nazianzen, Origin, Athanasius, the Author of the imperfect
work on Matthew, Saint Ambrose, Antiq. Iud. l. 3. c. 4. De Decal. and de leg.
spec.
Saint Hierome, and generally all the ancient Hebrews, as both Josephus and
Philo testify, divided the Decalogue as we do, making the first table to
consist of four Commandments concerning Gods worship, and that against Images
to be the second: your Church notwithstanding to cover her spiritual
fornications, and the sacrilegious razing of that Commandment out of your
Prayer-books and Catechismes, goes against all antiquity, dividing the first
table only into three Commandments, Quaest. 71. in Exodus
and cutting the tenth into two, having no other color for it but only one
Augustins single authority. To be brief, In the exposition of this verse, In
Psalm. 31.
says Tolet, nor the Greeks, nor the Latins, nor they who follow the Hebrews,
seem to me to speak perfectly. So almost all expound, In Mat. 19.11. In Mat.
16.18.
says Maldonat, with whom I cannot agree. And again, The meaning of these
words of Christ seems not to be that which all bring, whom I remember to have
read, except Hilary. And yet again, The opinions of the Fathers touching this
sentence are diverse, but to speak freely I rest in none of them. In Mat.
11.11. and 13. In Ioh. 6.62.
And, All the Fathers almost so expound, but their interpretation seems not
to me fit enough. And lastly, Thus I expound it, and although I have no Author
for this exposition, yet I approve it rather then that of Augustine and the
rest, albeit most probable because if more crosses the meaning of the
Caluinists. Which last clause I would pray you well to consider: for by it, not
Consent of Fathers, but crossing of Caluinists is the rule of truth. O
impudence! O perfidiousnesse! to boast and brag so much of Fathers, and yet
in truth to make so little reckoning of them. But to let you see how the world
is cheated by these Impostors, hear a little further.

If at any time, says Cardinal Cajetan, Proaem. in lib. Moysis.
ye meet with a sense agreeing with the text, although swarning from the
stream of the Doctors, let the Reader show himself an indifferent Censor,
neither let any detest it for this cause, because it disagreeth from the
ancient Doctors. For God has not tied the exposition of the Scripture unto the
senses of the ancient Doctors: otherwise all hope would be taken from us of
expounding the Scripture. This saying of Cajetan is I confess reproved by some
of your men: yet is he defended by Andradius, who also says, Defens. fid.
Trid. l. ^.
We may forsake all the senses of the Fathers, and bring a new unlike unto
theirs, and, the Fathers spoke not oracles when they expounded the Scripture.
Maldonat is very peremptory, Whatsoever many ancient Fathers have thought, Sum.
q. 12. 2. 4.
whether it be true Matrimony after a vow, the contrary is now true. And
Duraeus, Con. Whitel^. p. 140.
The Fathers are not counted Fathers when they either write or teach of their
own, and what they have not received from the Church. p. 1. pa. 75.
And Dominicus Bannes, The more part of Doctors if some few be against them
make no infallible argument in matters of Faith. De iurisd. p. 4.
Dr Marta also, The common opinion of Doctors is not to be regarded, when
another contrary opinion favors the power of the keys and the jurisdiction
of the Church. De vorb. Dei l. 3. c. 10.
Likewise Bellarmine, The Fathers expound the Scriptures not as Judges but as
Doctors: now not to this but that authority is required. And, De conc.
In expounding the Scripture the Catholic Church does not always and in all
things follow the Fathers. The writings of the Fathers are no rules and have no
authority to bind us. In Romans 14.
Finally Tom teltroth Cornelius Mus, To speak freely I would yield more
credence to one chief Bishop in those things which concern the mysteries of
Faith, then a thousand Augustins, Hieromes, or Gregory's. And thus as a right
learned writer says, Reinol. Conf. c. 2. d. 2.
you use the Fathers as Merchants are wont to use their counters. Sometime they
stand with you for pence, sometime for pounds, as they be next and readiest at
hand to make up your accounts. So that I cannot but marvel, how you dare to
make that the ground of your Faith, which the learned of your side so
ordinarily reject as an unsure foundation to build upon.

Shall I tell you, M. Bailey? you have been foully gulled and beguiled by your
new Masters. For notwithstanding all this fair pretense of Fathers: yet in the
end, not Consent of Fathers, but the authority of the present Church must be
your surest anchorhold. So says Gregory de Valentia, a man well seen in the
Romish mysteries, Tom. in Thom. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 3. De Sacram. l. 2. c. 25.
Neither the holy Scripture, nor yet tradition alone, if ye separate from it
the present authority in the Church, is that infallible authority, and
mistress of Faith. So Bellarmine also, The firmity of all ancient Councels and
Doctrines depends upon the authority of the present Church. And this reason
they render, because without the authority of the present Church ye can never
have infallible certainty, either of Scripture, or Councels, or Traditions,
which they be, or what is the true meaning of them. So that now you must of
force remove your Faith from the ancient Fathers, and rest it upon the present
Church. But what? are you now more safe then you were before? Never a whit,
unless you may further be resolved, what is the present Church. For it is
taken three several ways by you: and is either the Church essential
consisting of all Catholics whatsoever, Prier. in Luth. tom. 1. fund. ^.
or Representative of Bishops in a Counsel, or Virtuall the Pope who is head
of the Church. Now which of these three must you pitch upon? The first. So say
some. But the most part of this Church is the Vulgar who are not comprehensiue
of those matters which are controuerted: neither is it possible for you to
gather the voices of such a divided and dispersed body. Others therefore direct
you to the second: But what? to a Council with the Pope or without the Pope?
For here is such confusion of tongues, and part taking of each side, that I
fear you will hardly find any rest for the sole of your foot this way.
Howbeit, if the most voices of the new cut now adays may sway it, not a
Council without the Pope, but the Pope, whether with a Council or without it,
it mattereth not much, Tom. 3. p. 24.
must be the judge and ground of Faith. In this question, says Gregory de
Valentia, by the Church we meant the Roman Bishops: in whom resides the full
authority of the Church when he pleases to determine matters of Faith, whether
he do it with a Council or without. And Greiser, Def. Bellarm. 10. 1. p.
1450. b.
when we affirm the Church to be judge of all controversies of Faith, by the
Church we understand the B. of Rome, who for the time being gouernes the ship
of the militant Church. And Albertin, I say that besides the first verity,
there is an infallible rule, living and endued with reason, such as is the
Church: and this rule living and endued with reason is the chief B. of Rome.
So that, Tom. 1. dis. 44. Sect. 1.
the Popes determination is the truth, says Suares, and were it contrary to
the sayings of all the Saints, yet were it to be preferred before them: nay if
an Angel from Heaven were opposed against him, the Popes determination were to
be preferred. By all which you see, that as you have once already removed your
Faith from the ancient Fathers to your Mother the present Church: so must you
be feign now again to remove it from your mother the present Church, unto
your holy Father the present Pope. But besides that it is altogether improbable
that the Spirit of Truth should be chained unto the chair of those men, who
many of them have been monsters rather then men, and not only Heretics, but
very Atheists and Infidels: I would willingly learn why the Pope is so seldom
in the humor to decide controversies. Why have we not from him an exact
Commentary on the Bible that we need no longer stand in doubt of the meaning
thereof? And why does he not stint the deadly fo-hood that now is on foot
between the Jesuits and Dominicans? But suppose he be both able and ready
to resolve: what? must I travel from England so far as Rome for resolution?
and when I am arrived before him, has he cloven tongues sitting upon him to
speak unto me in the language I understand? Or if I understand him, how am I
assured that speaking to me he intends to teach the whole Church? for
otherwise he may err, as Bellarmine shows Innocent the eighth did, De Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 14.
permitting the Norwegians to celebrate the sacrifice of the Mass without
wine. Shall I tell you a mystery? Whatsoever your Priests and Jesuits prate
either of Fathers, or Church, or Pope, yet to an ordinary man who cannot of
himself be resolved by them, the authority of his Diocesan is sufficient, yea
and he merits by believing it although what he teach be false. This perhaps
may seem strange to you, L. 3. d. 25. q. v. art. 1.
yet thus says Gabriel Biel, If a simple and unlearned man hear his Prelate
preach any thing contrary to the Faith, thinking that what his Prelate has so
preached is believed by the Church, Instr. Sacer. l. 4. c. 3.
such a one not only not sins, but by believing that which is false
meriteth. And Tolet, Again if a Countryman believe his Bishop propounding
some heretical Doctrine about the Articles, he meriteth by believing although
it be an error: because he is bound to believe until it manifestly appear
that it is against the Church. O immortal God, if this be true, how easy a
thing is it for a Papist to be saved? Only believe what your Prelate or
Curate tells you, and you shall not need to trouble your self further: for
whether it be true or false, sound doctrine or heresy, you are out of danger,
nay it is meritorious to believe it. Alas, alas that poor simple people should
be so miserably cheated and seduced. God I hope will ere long open their eyes
to see these impostures, and by the light of his word guide their feet in a
surer way. In the mean season give me leave to sum up all what I have
hitherto said, and thereupon to infer the Conclusion first intended. Seeing
therefore, as we have now fully demonstrated, the Fathers were but men as we
are, neither having the Promise, nor assuming unto themselves the Privilege of
Infallibility above us: seeing secondly, many Counterfaits are set forth under
the names of the Fathers, which the best of your side cannot so readily
discern, and which they ordinarily allege in every controversy betwixt us
for authentical Fathers: seeing thirdly, the writings of the Fathers are
pitifully corrupted and adulterated by Heretics and others, and that sundry
ways, by Addition, Substraction, Alteration, Misquotation, and False
translation: seeing fourthly, the sayings of the Fathers are so ambiguous and
obscure, that not only we and you one against another, but your own side also
among themselves are distracted and divided touching the sense and meaning of
them: seeing fifthly, the more part of the Fathers sometime consent in error,
yea and such errors as the present Church of Rome condemns with Anathema:
seeing sixthly, the most learned of your side make no scruple to reject the
Fathers whenever they consent against them, and warrant their so doing with
diverse reasons: seeing lastly, they make not Consent of Fathers, but the
authority of the present Church, that is to say, the Pope for the time being,
to be the only Infallible judge of Controversies: seeing I say all these
things are undoubtedly so, I will not be afraid to conclude, that the
pretended Consent of Fathers is too weak and deceitful a ground for a man
with security to build his Faith upon.

For whereas you say that believing as the Fathers did, if they be saved (as
doubtless they are) you cannot miscary: take heed lest this prove but a broken
reed, and deceive you in the end. For first, if for the reasons above set down,
you cannot be infallibly certain which are the true Fathers, and what is their
right meaning: how can you be infallibly certain that you believe as they
did? Again, do you think it safe to hold all their errors also? and because
they are not condemned for them, that you shall escape condemnation in like
manner believing them? Cont. Haer. c. 10.
Hear then what Vincentius Lirinensis says, O wonderful change of things,
says he! the Authors of the same opinion are judged Catholics, and the
followers Heretics: the Masters are absolved, and the Scholars condemned: the
Writers of the books shall be the Sons of the Kingdom, and Hell shall keep
those that maintain them. For who doubts but blessed Cyprian the light of
Bishops and holy Martyrs, together with the rest of his Colleagues shall reign
for ever with Christ? Contrarily who is so impious as to deny, that the
Donatists and the rest of that pestilent crew, who under the authority of that
Council presume to rebaptize, shall burn for evermore with the Devil? Thus
he: whereby you see how dangerous it is to believe even as the best have done
before us, unless we have better warrant then so for our doing. Lastly,
suppose the Fathers consenting erred not, yet are you never the safer. For the
strength of Faith exceeds not the strength of the testimony, nor the strength
of the testimony the Veracity of the Witness. Now the Veracity of the Fathers
is but the Veracity of men, and the Veracity of men is imperfect and
inconstant, ever leaving room for that word of truth All men are liars. Whence
it follows that your Faith being grounded only on the Veracity of men, is no
better then an Acquisite and Humane Faith. Whereby though you believe all that
the Fathers did, yet not believing as they did, they may be saved and you
perish. For they building upon divine testimony believed with a Divine Faith,
and therefore, Saving: but you relying on humane authority believe only with
an Acquisite and Humane Faith which saves not, no not although the things you
believe thereby are true. For an Acquisite Faith the devils themselves may have
and yet are damned.

Wherefore it being as you see so dangerous and unsafe to trust in man, and as
the Prophet speaks, to make flesh your arm: let me entreat you even in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, to take unto you Christian severity, and with all speed
to return your Faith back again upon the rock, from which so rashly and
unadvisedly you removed it. Remember I beseech you how S. Augustine, in a
controversy betwixt him and Hierome touching S. Peter's dissimulation, having
elevated the authority of four of those seven Fathers which were urged against
him, and not being able to oppose three to the other three remaining, Epist. 19.
quitteth himself thus, When says he, I seek a third, that I also may oppose
three to three, verily I suppose I might easily find him, if I had read much:
howbeit to me the Apostle Paul shall be instead of all, yea and above them
all. To him I fly, to him I appeal, of him I ask and demand, etc. In like
manner do you also, and in Gods name let your final appeal be made unto the
holy Scriptures, as unto the supreme judge in all questions of Faith. Catech.
4. Theod. l. 1. c. 7.
For as Cyril B. of Jerusalem, says, The security of our Faith arises from
the demonstration of the holy Scripture: and, the resolution of those things we
seek for, must be taken out of the divine inspired Scripture, says
Constantin in his oration to the Bishops of the Nicen Council. Con. Herm. De
bon. vid. c. 1. Orat. de ijs q. adeunt. Hierosol. Hom. 13. in 2. Cor. Epist.
112. ad Paulin.
And reason; for the Scriptures are the rule of Faith, as Tertullian and
Augustine say. A straight and inflexible rule, as Gregory Nyssen says. A most
exquisite rule and exact square and balance to try all things by, says
Chrysostom. In regard whereof says Saint Augustine, If a matter be grounded
on the evident authority of holy Scripture, such I say as the Church calls
Canonical, it is without all doubt to be believed: but as touching other
witnesses and testimonies, upon whose credit a thing is urged upon us to be
believed, thou majest lawfully either credit or not credit them, as thou
perceiuest them to deserve or not to deserve credit. Con. Parmen. l. 5.
And Optatus B. of Milenis, you affirm, we deny: between your yea and our
nay, the souls of the people waver and stagger. Let no man believe either you
or us: We are all contentious men. We must seek out judges. If Christians,
both sides cannot yield them, and part taking would hinder truth. We must
seek for a judge without. If a Pagan, he knows not the mysteries of
Christianity: if a Jew, he is an enemy to Christian Baptism. Therefore upon
earth no judgment touching this matter can be found. We must seek a judge
from heaven. But why knock we at heaven seeing herein the Gospel we have
his will and testament. With these Fathers your own men accord. The holy
doctrine, says Thomas of Aquin, Sum. p. 1. q. 1. a. 8. ad. 2.
uses such authorities (of profane writers) as foreign and probable
arguments: but the authorities of Canonical Scripture it uses arguing
properly and necessarily, and the authorities of the Doctors of the Church, as
disputing indeed properly, yet only probably. For our Faith relyeth on that
revelation which was made to the Apostles and Prophets who wrote the Canonical
books: De verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 2.
but not on revelation made to other Doctors, if any such have been. And
Bellarmin, The sacred Scripture is the rule of Faith most safe and certain:
and God has taught us by corporal letters which we may see and read what he
would have us believe concerning him. And Stapleton, Del. con. Whit. l. 2. De
rat. Con. l. 2. c. 19.
The divine Scriptures alone yield infallible testimony and such as is merely
divine. And Persius also, The authority of no Saint is of infallible truth: for
S. Augustine gives that honor only to the sacred Scripture. But why vouch I
human authority having divine? God himself by the Prophet summons us unto the
law and to the testimony, Esa. 8.20.
affirming that if any speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them. Ioh. 5.39.
Our Savior Christ commands to search the Scriptures as which testify of
him, and wherein eternal life is to be had. Luc. 16.3^
Abraham referred the rich gluttons brethren to Moses and the Prophets assuring
himself that if they refused to hear them, neither would they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. The holy Apostle Paul charge us not to presume
above that which is written: 1. Cor. 4.6.
in as much as the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation through
the Faith that is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
and are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, Luc. 1.3.4.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. To what end did Saint Luke write his
Gospel? was it not that we might know the certainty of those things wherein
we are instructed. Phil. 3.1.
This says Saint Paul, is a very safe course. And hence was it that the
Bereans searched the Scripture so carefully, Act. 17.11.
that they might be fully assured of those things which were taught the^. We
have a more sure word of Prophecy, 2. Pet. 1.19.
says Saint Peter, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise
in your hearts. But S. Paul is yet more peremptory, Though we, says he, Gal.
1.8.
or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Contra Haer. c. 12.
What is it, says Vincentius Lirinensis, that he says, though we? Why not
rather, though I? His meaning is, though Peter, though Andrew, though John, yea
though the whole College of Apostles preach unto you otherwise then we have
preached, let him be anathema. A fearful strain, for the maintenance of the
first Faith neither to spare himself, nor his fellow Apostles. It is but a
little. Although, says he, an Angel from heaven preach otherwise then we
have preached unto you, let him be Anathema. It sufficed not for the
preservation of the Faith once delivered to mention the nature of humane
condition, unless he comprehended Angelical excellency also. Though, says
he we or an Angel from heaven. Thus you see that the Faith which was first
delivered, and is now contained in the Scripture, is the sovereign rule and
judge of all the doctrines both of men and Angels. For whatsoever the Apostles
preached, the same is written, as Irenaeus testifies. Lib. 3. c. 2.
Whereupon Saint Augustine, As touching Christ, or his Church, Cont. Petil. l.
3. c. 6.
or any other thing pertaining to our Faith or life, I will not say, if we,
who are no way to be compared with him that said, Though we, but as it is
added, if an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherWise then what ye have
received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed.

Happily you will say, the Scripture is indeed the rule of Faith, and the law
of the Church, but not the Judge; or if Judge, yet but a mute and dumb Judge:
and if there be not some external, visible, audible, infallible, unerring
Judge to interpret Scriptures, and to stint all controversies, there will never
be an end of quarrels, neither will there ever be peace and unity in the
Church. Indeed, the name of unity and peace is a goodly thing, and a final end
of all controversies, might it be had, were much to be wished for. But I
fear the Church will not be so happy, so long as it dwells in tabernacles,
and is militant here on earth. 2. Cor. 11.18.19.
Otherwise the holy Apostle would never have written thus to the Corinthians, I
hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it: For there
must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest among you. And the general experience of former ages confirms the
same, wherein God continually has exercized his Church, either with the fire
of persecutions, that it might appear who they are that love him more then the
present world: or with the tempests of contrary doctrines, that it might be
known who are chafe, and who wheat, who sound in the Faith, and who not.
Besides this, me thinks the facilnesse and easiness of the way which your new
Masters prescribe unto you, should make you much to suspect the goodness of
it. For whereas it is the good pleasure of God that all men should carefully
and diligently study the holy Scriptures, Psalm. 1.2. and 119.
reading them, and meditating in them night and day, to the end they may grow
rich in all knowledge and understanding: you by your rule may spare all this
pains, and though you sit still, take your ease, and fold your hands, yet if
you believe whatsoever your external human judge shall dictate unto you, you
are safe and cannot miscarry. Now among simple and unlettered Papists who is
this Judge, but some Priest or Jesuit? for other Judge I am sure they meet
with none. A plausible course I confess to many, specially those that are idle
and loath to take pains, or weak and dare not trust their own judgment, or
superstitious and think they merit much by their blind obedience unto their
teachers. But how plausible soever it may seem to flesh and blood, sure I am
it is too broad to be the narrow way that leads unto life: and the Kingdom
of Heaven will never be attained, unless it suffer more violence then so. I
add further, it is too presumptuous to tie Divine Providence unto humane
policy, and for man first to devise what in his wisdom seems fittest, and
then to resolve that therefore God has ordered it so. Yet this is the course
your side ordinarily holds: you love rather to give laws unto God, then to
take laws from him, and in this particular, to prescribe what means God
should appoint to settle us in the knowledge of his truth, rather then to use
the means which he himself has to that end appointed. If you think this
too hard a censure, be it known unto you that Bellarmine the Prince of Jesuits
reasons so. God, says he, De verb. Dei. l. 3. c. 9.
was not ignorant that many difficulties concerning the Faith would rise up in
the Church: he ought therefore to provide some Judge for the Church. What
Judge? Such a one doubtless as by his sole authority and sentence must be
able to resolve all difficulties. Which for as much as neither Scripture, no^
any secular Prince can do: therefore it must needs be the Prince of
Ecclesiastical, that is, the Pope. See I beseech you how peruersly and
preposterously they deal with you: first they take upon them to direct God
wh^^ what he should do, or else forsooth he shall not be provident and
discreet enough, and then thrust their own fancy upon you as a point of Faith,
that God has done it.

But to answer this yet a little more fully, I affirm three things. First,
that holy Scripture knows not, secondly, that the ancient Fathers acknowledge
not, thirdly, that as long as we have the Scripture there needs not any such
standing humane Judge in the Church, as you dream of. As touching the first,
if you know any passage of Scripture wherein God has authorized such a Judge
as you dream of, I require you to show it, for my part I know none. Express
Scripture I am sure you cannot show: deductions and consequences by your own
rule I have no reason to admit. For example, if for proof hereof you urge that
of our Savior to S. Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not:
Luc. 22.32.
I would demand who shall be judge of the meaning of these words? for I hear
that Christ has prayed for Saint Peter, but I hear not that he has prayed
for the Pope, that his Faith fail not: and I know Saint Peter was firm and
constant in the faith unto his lives end, but it seems by Ecclesiastical
Hystory that sundry Popes have made shipwreck of the Faith, and become
Heretics. If there be no Judge to determine this doubt, why do you thrust
such a Judge upon us? If there be, who is he? you will say, the Pope. Then
thus you reason, Christ prayed for S. Peter that his Faith might not fail, by
S. Peter the Pope also is understood, and this appears because the Pope says
so: therefore neither can the Popes Faith fail and consequently he is the
ordinary infallible Judge of the Church More briefly thus, the Pope is that
Judge, because the Pope will have it so. Nominate what other Judge soever you
list, and what other Text besides you please, and the argument is still the
same, too weak to persuade what you intend, unless by some new privilege out
of any premises you may conclude what you will. In a word, search the
Scriptures throughout, and you shall find the Ministry and service of men
established to bring us to the Faith: but an infallible humane magistery and
Lordship to command Faith, it knows none. That prerogative Royal it reserues
only unto Christ himself.

Neither do the ancient Fathers acknowledge any such Judge, which is the
second point. If they do, point I pray to the place, for hitherto it has
been unknown. Many and sharp bickerings had those ancients with diverse and
sundry Heretics, as Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches, Nestorius, and the like: yet
never did they either object unto them that they wanted an infallible Judge, as
you do unto us, or convent them before the tribunal of such a Judge, which
doubtless had been a readier way then disputation to stop their mouths, had
there been such a sovereign Officer in the Church. Sundry and manifold are the
writings of the ancient Fathers touching the Christian Faith, of which some
also were purposely written to instruct us in all the doctrines of our
religion: and is it not strange that such men, in such books, remembering
carefully all other points, should forget so maine and principal a point as
this is? Nay more then this, Tertullian long ago wrote a book of
Prescriptions or Fore-pleadings against Heretics: Saint Augustine also wrote
four books of Christian Doctrine, wherein his direct intent is to prescribe
rules how to understand and interpret Scripture: And Vincentius Litinensis also
has written a short Commonitory for the Antiquity and Verity of the Catholic
Faith against the profane novelties of all Heresies. If these Fathers had
acknowledged this your imaginary Judge, how comes it to pass that they no
where mention him in these books? For certainly here was the proper place, and
they could not without extreme supinity and negligence omit him, had they
known such a one: such a one I say, as upon whom the security of Faith, and
unity of the Church depends. But this deep silence of theirs, and that in so
due a place, and of matter so important, evidently argues that they never were
acquainted therewith, and that it is but an Idol of these latter times.

Now if neither Scripture nor Fathers know such a Judge, I hope I may be bold
to infer that the Church needs him not, which is the third point. For I trow
this is both a safer and sounder kind of reasoning then that of yours, Such a
Judge we conceive to be necessary, Therefore such a one has God ordained.
But to clear this point also, I affirm that the Scriptures by themselves,
through Gods blessing upon our endeavor, is a sufficient outward means to
bring us to salvation: and therefore there is no necessity of your external
Judge. The Consequence is plain and evident: the Antecedent thus I prove,
because all whatsoever is necessary to salvation is so clearly and manifestly
delivered in them, even to the capacity of vulgar and ordinary men, that if
they will either read or hear it read unto them, they cannot but know and
understand it. This I could easily show in every particular and fundamental
point, but that I should hold you too long. Ps. 19.8.9. Ps. 119.105.130.
Only if it be not so, tell me, why does the Holy Ghost say, that they give
wisdom to the simple, and light to the eyes? that they are a lantern to our
feet and a light unto our paths? that the entrance into them shows light,
and gives understanding to the simple? 2. Pet. 1.19.
And why does the holy Apostle S. Peter term them a light shining in a dark
place? Neither is it to be neglected, that all this is meant of the Scripturs
of the old Testament: Ioh. 20.31.
which if they be so lightsome, how bright and clear are they of the new?
These things are written, says Saint John, to the end ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, Romans 15.4.
and that believing ye might have life through his Name. And Saint Paul, The
things that are written, are written for our instruction. Now if the Scriptures
in things necessary be so obscure and hard to understand, either it is because
the Holy Ghost could not write more plainly, or because he would not. That he
could not, no man will say: that he would not, crosses the end of his
writing, which was, as is above said, to instruct in the Faith, and to bring us
unto life. But that God by writing obscurely, and yet commanding us to search,
should either intend to mock us, or fail of his own end, cannot be imagined
without notable impiety. Hear what the Fathers say. Dial. cum. Tryph.
Justin Martyr, Harken to the things which I shall report from the holy
Scriptures, which Scriptures need not to be expounded, but only heard.
Clemens of Alexandria, Exhort. ad. Ethnic.
Hear ye that are far off, hear ye that are nigh: the Word is hidden from
none, it is a common light, it shines unto all men, there is no Cimmerian
darkness in it, let us hasten to salvation, to regeneration. Chrysostom, In.
2 Thessalonians. hom. 3.
All things necessary are clear and plain in the Scriptures, so that were it
not through our own negligence we should not need Homilies and Sermons.
Augustine, Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
In those things which are plainly set down in the Scripture, are found all
those things which contain Faith and Manners of life, to wit, Hope and
Charity. And Bernard, Ser. in illud. Sap. Iustum deduxit.
The ways of the Lord are straight, fair, full, and plain ways. Straight
without error, because they lead unto life: fair without filth because they
teach cleanness: full for multitude, because all the world is within Christ's
net: plain without difficulty, because they yield sweetness. Biblioth. l. 6.
ann. 152.
Hereunto your own men agree. Sixtus Senensis divides the Scripture into two
parts, granting that the one is clear and evident, containing the first and
highest principles of things that are to be believed, and the chief precepts
of good life, and examples easy to be known, such as are some moral
sentences, and certain holy Histories, Anal. ^i^. p. 100.
profitable for the ordering of manners. And Gregory of Valentia, Such verities
concerning our Faith as are absolutely and necessarily to be known and
believed of all men, are in a manner plainly taught in the Scriptures
themselves. Thus all things necessary to salvation are so plainly set down in
Scripture, that at least wise for the determination of them your external
Humane Judge needs not.

Yea but neither are all satisfied with these plain places, neither are all
places of Scripture plain. True. Yet have you no reason to doubt of that which
is plain, because some through frowardness will not understand: no more then
you have of the snow whether it be white, because Anaxagoras thought that it
was black. If nothing can be certain but that which is unquestioned, we must
all turn Scepticks, and never believe any thing. For as in Philosophy, so in
Divinity, there is nothing almost so absurd, but one or other has held: and
what dispute there is even about this Judge of yours, and the last resolution
of Faith, you cannot be ignorant. As for those darker places, if you
understand them not, yet assenting unto the plainer you are without danger,
seeing in those plainer, as we have showed, all things necessary are
comprehended. Neither is their darkness so great, but that without your
torch-bearer they may be enlightened. In Esa. 19.
For as Hierome says, It is the order of the Scripture after hard things to
set down things that are plain, and what is first spoken in Parables,
afterward to deliver in clear terms. Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 6.
And Augustine, There is nothing almost among those obscurities, but in other
places one may find it most plainly delivered. In. 2. Cor. hom. 9.
And Chrysostom, The Scripture every where when it speaks any thing
obscurely, interprets it self again in another place. So the rest. And
hence they gather, that Scripture is to be interpreted by Scripture, and the
doubtful places by those that are more certain, as appears in their
writings: but specially by Saint Augustine in his books of Christian Doctrine,
purposely by him written to demonstrate as much. According to this precept was
their continual practice, and what interpretation they found agreeing with
plain Scripture and the particular circumstances of the text, that they
admitted as true: but what they judged to swerve from it, that they rejected as
contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and the Principles of our Religion. Which
course if we also take (and this course we ought to take, unless we think
that God is not the best interpreter of his own words) we cannot, at leastwise
dangerously err in our interpretations: and we may boldly refuse those as
false which we find contrary unto this Analogy of Faith. For example, These
words of Christ, This is my Body, we understand thus, This Bread is
Sacramentally my Body: you thus, This Bread is turned or transubstantiated into
my Body. The question now is, whether is the truer interpretation yours or
ours. Let us try it by this rule. Your own Scotus and Cameracensis think
that opinion which holds the substance of bread and wine to remain, 4 d. l.
11. q. 3. lit. F. Quaest. in. 4. q. 6. a. 2. Lit. ^
to be the more probable and reasonable opinion, yea and in all appearance
more agreeable with the words of institution. De Euchar. l. 3. c. 23.
In regard whereof says Bellarmine, It may justly be doubted whether the text
be clear enough to enforce it (transubstantiation) seeing most learned and
witty men, such as Scotus was, have thought the contrary. So that in these men's
judgment the likelihood is on our side, and you have great reason to doubt of
your exposition. Besides this, the Analogy of Faith teaches us, that Christ's
Body is a true Body like unto ours: but that Body which you fancy to be in the
Eucharist is not like unto our bodies. For in this Body there is no distance of
one part from another, as of eye from eye, and head from feet, neither has it
any dimensiue quantity, and is all both in Heaven and here on earth in the
Sacrament at once, yet not in the middle region between, nor separated from
himself: but nothing of this can be affirmed of our bodies, or of any other
organicall body. And if you say that you conceive of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament as of a glorified Body, the plain Scripture is against you, that
when Christ spoke these words, This is my Body, his Body was yet vncrucified
and unglorified. Your exposition therefore crossing the Analogy cannot possibly
be good. As for ours thus we show it. The text plainly says, that our
blessed Savior in his last supper took Bread, blessed it, brake it, and gave
it unto his disciples saying, This is my Body. What? This bread. But this
Proposition, This Bread is my Body, literally and properly is not true:
therefore is it figuratively to be understood. How so? Thus. I look into
plain Scripture, and there I find that as the Evangelists call it Bread before
Consecration, so Saint Paul calls it Bread after Consecration. 1. Cor. 11.26.
Ib. v. 27. Ib. v. 28.
As often, says he, as ye shall eat this Bread, and, Whosoever shall eat this
Bread unworthily, and, Let a man examine himself, and so eat of this Bread.
Whence I conclude that the Bread is not changed, but remains still Bread.
Then I consider further that our Savior now institutes a Sacrament, and that
in Sacramental actions Sacramental phrases are usual, and the outward sign
is called by the name of the thing signified: as in the old Testament, Genesis
7.10.
Circumcision is called the Covenant, and the Lamb the Passover, and in the
new, Ex. 12.11.
the Cup is called the new Testament or covenant. Whereupon I infer, there
being no reason to the contrary, Luc. 22.20.
that these words in like manner are to be interpreted, This is my Body, that
is, This Bread is Sacramentally my Body, or the Sacramental sign of my Body.
And thus you see by clearing this one passage, how other darker places also may
receive light from those that are plainer. You will say, this is to build upon
Consequences, wherein it is possible to be deceived. Whereunto I answer three
things, first, that whatsoever may be deduced out of the Word of God by
evident Consequence is certain, even by the certainty of Faith; Bell. de Just.
l. 3. c. 8.
and this your own greatest clarks do grant. Secondly, to banish Consequences
from Divinity, is to banish the use of right reason and discourse also: and
that religion must needs be driven to narrow shifts, which cannot subsist
unless men turn fools or beasts. Thirdly, the necessity of a Consequence
does not any way depend upon the person of him that infers it, but only
upon the mutual relation and strait conjunction between the premises and it:
so that by him who desires to be satisfied in the truth, not the person of him
that deduceth it, but the Consequence it self is to be looked too, whether it
be rightly deduced or no. But who shall judge that will you say? Indeed if you
stand resolved utterly to renounce all the helps and directions both of reason
and art, nor will yield to any Consequence of Scripture how clear and evident
soever, but will only rely on the mouth and sentence of your humane external
Judge: I confess I am at Dulkarnon, to use Chaucers phrase, and you are past
my skill infallibly to persuade you. But if, as we have showed, nor Scripture
nor Fathers acknowledge such a Judge, if all whatsoever is necessary to
salvation be so plainly laid down in Scripture as a man of mean capacity
may understand it, if what is more obscurely delivered in one place is more
plainly expressed in another, if God have appointed that out of the plainer
places we should with study and industry pick the meaning of those that are
harder, if he have promised that those that ask shall have, those that seek
shall find, and to those that knock it shall be opened, if finally though we
miss the true meaning of those harder places, yet firmly adhering unto the
plainer, we are safe and out of danger: then certainly the readiest and
surest way to to interpret Scripture is by Scripture, and there is no other way
to determine controversies and to satisfy the conscience but only this. If any
notwithstanding this list still to be contentious, 1. Cor. 11.
We, says S. Paul have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. The rule it
self is infallible and all-sufficient: if we either through ignorance cannot,
or through negligence do not use it as we ought, the fault is not in God, but
in our selves, neither does he fail in his providence, but we in our duty.
Perform we our duty obediently, and he will perform his promise faithfully.
In necessaries he will never fail: if in other things all be not of one mind,
yet let us still proceed by the same rule, and instruct one another in the
spirit of meekness, and God will reveal that also in due time.

And now, M. Bailey, you have what I intended for the present: it remains that
you peruse it attentively. The sum is. The Fathers may be Ministers by whom
you believe, but their Consent is no ground of Faith. Your external humane
Judge is but a Chimera of man's brain, and not an Officer of Gods making. The
only all-sufficient infallible outward rule of Faith is Scripture in the
plainer places, which places also must interpret the difficulter. Besides this
albeit there may be a jurisdiction in the Church to order and control the
outer man yet to satisfy the Conscience and inner man there is no authority but
this. Which things being so, let me entreat you, and that in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, to remember from whence you are fallen and to cast about yet
again, and by this rule to examine your new Faith. It is not necessary for a
man to be an Euclid or some cunning Mathematician to try by a straight rule
whether a line be straight or no. But you are a Scholar and a Minister, and
should be able skilfully to apply the rule your self. To trust another
application of it for you, and that in the point of salvation, is not Christian
modesty, but mere childishness, and foolish credulity. Remember what
Lactantius says, It behooves a man, Div. Instit. l. 2. c. 8.
specially in that thing wherein the state of our life consists, to trust
himself, and to rely upon his own judgment and understanding for finding out
and examining the truth, rather then believing another errors to be deceived,
as if himself were void of reason. God has given to all men some portion of
wisdom, whereby they may both find out what they have not heard, and examine
what they have heard. This gift of God, this Wisdom I mean, and illumination
of Gods Spirit, use I beseech you to the glory of the donour, and the building
of your self up in your most holy Faith. This you shall do, if shaking off
this blind belief of the dictates and decrees of men, you simply and
absolutely yield all credence to God alone and his word, and to men no
otherwise then under God, and for God. For as the same Lactantius says, with
whose words I conclude, Wisdom and Religion are so nearly joined together,
Ib. l. 4. c. 4. and 1. c. 1.
that they may not be severed one from the other: in so much as neither any
religion is to be embraced without wisdom, nor any wisdom to be approved
without religion. The Lord give you a clean heart, and renew within you a
right Spirit: so prays for you from the bottom of his heart,

Your unfeigned friend and loving brother JOHN DOWN.

OF SITTING AND KNEELING AT THE COMMUNION.
UNTO the schedule you sent me, containing your best reasons for Sitting
against Kneeling, I here return you this short answer. Your end doubtless was
by strength of argument to withdraw me from conformity in Kneeling: my intent
is, by discovering the weakness of your arguments, to work you from
singularity in Sitting. The issue I leave unto God: yet I trust that as my
persuasion and example this last Easter, as you know, reduced diverse, so my
Reply through the blessing of God may also reclaim you. God grant that being
brethren, and children of one common mother: we may with one accord observe
her orders, and honor her authority.

Your writing first maintains sitting, then opposes kneeling. Of sitting you
affirm thus, We ought to sit at the receiving of the Elements of the Lords
Supper. In which Proposition I doubt of one term, and suspect another. The
term I doubt of is this, We ought to sit, namely what you mean thereby. For
if either the nature of the Phrase, or the Conclusion of your third Syllogism
may determine it, then is it equivalent unto this, We must sit, and imports a
necessity of sitting, or that sitting is the only lawful I gesture. But if we
judge thereof by the probable intention of the two first Syllogismes, then the
meaning thereof seems to be no more then this, We may sit, or sitting is a
lawful gesture. In which sense now understand you this Proposition? In the
first? Then I deny it, and say Sitting is not the only lawful gesture. In the
second? Then I answer two things. First you have ill expressed your self, using
words that bear not your meaning: for We ought, imports a necessary duty, and
We may, free choice and liberty. Secondly I distinguish. For if you understand
it Absolutely and Simply in it self, then I grant We may sit, for sitting is
indifferent and so there shall be no controversy betwixt us. But if you
understand it respectively and with regard unto the Canons and constitutions of
the Church, then I say we may not sit: for the Church, unto whom we owe
obedience, has ordained otherwise.

Again, I suspect those words, at the receiving of the Elements of the Lords
Supper: for why do you not say rather, at the receiving of the Body and Blood
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? especially seeing this is the nobler part
of the Sacrament, and the Elements are but shadows of this substance. Was it,
lest sitting might seem too perfunctory, and kneeling never a whit too
reverent for so sacred an action? If so, then are you guilty of no small fault,
thus to slight the holy Sacrament for so poor an advantage. But perhaps it
was done out of simplicity, rather then cunning. Howbeit taking upon you to
play the Logician and to dispute Syllogistically, you ought to have been more
wary of your terms. And so I pass unto your arguments, the first whereof is
thus framed.

1 A comely gesture ought to be used. 1 Cor. 14.40.

Sitting is a comely gesture; (for the affection of joy must then be stirred
up, with which it agrees. Mar. 14.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Ergo, sitting ought to
be used.

This is rather a Paralogisme then Syllogism: for the Propositions are
indefinite, and of no quantity, and out of such Propositions nothing can
Logically be concluded. But I will help to rectify your Syllogism, if first I
may know what you would conclude. The Conclusion must needs be one of two,
either this, We may sit, or this, We must sit. Would you conclude, We may
sit, in the sense above denied? (for so you ought), Then must it thus be
formed, Any comely gesture may be used notwithstanding the Churches ordinance:
sitting is a comely gesture: Ergo, sitting may be used notwithstanding the
Churches ordinance. But so the Mayor is untrue. For Magistrates have authority
to order things indifferent, as they find it expedient, to avoid confusion, and
to settle an uniformity: and we are bound not only for fear, but also for
Conscience to obey. Romans 13.5.
Neither does the passage you quote for proof of your Mayor, euince the
contrary. For Saint Paul commanding that all things be done decently,
permits not every one to use his liberty as he lists, In. 1. Cor. 14.40.
but sets bounds unto us rather, as Calvin says and establishes the
lawful orders of the Church: seeing it cannot be decent to affront authority,
and do as we please.

But it may be you would conclude that we must sit, or that sitting is the
only lawful gesture. Then must your argument be thus framed, A comely
gesture only is to be used: sitting only is comely: Ergo, sitting only is
to be used. The Mayor whereof I grant, and acknowledge to be sufficiently
proved; but I deny the Minor. For if sitting be the only comely gesture,
then is not only the Church of England to be condemned for kneeling, but
sundry other reformed Churches also for standing, yea our Savior himself with
all his Apostles, who (as in due place shall be demonstrated) sat not: to say
nothing, that it is your singular opinion, and that the man cannot be named
who held the same before you, or holds it besides you.

For as for your reason, that sitting agrees with the affection of joy, which
then must be stirred up, it is a very strange and unreasonable one. For first,
be it that joy must then be stirred up: so must humility, reverence,
thankfulness also. And therefore if sitting beecomely because it agrees with
the one: Kneeling also is comely, because it agrees with the other. Again,
suppose that sitting agree with Joy: so does leaping, dancing, exultation also.
Why then if Sitting by virtue of this agreement be comely, are not the rest in
like manner comely? Lastly, that Sitting is the emblem of Rest and that such
posture of the body is fit for study, counsel, meditation, I have often heard:
and so much is meant by those old sayings, The Romans conquer by sitting, and
By sitting men become wise. But how it agrees with the affection of joy,
neither do you show it, neither can you: and therefore I leave it as a fancy,
vnkith vnkist, as they say, and pass to your second argument, which you
conceive in this form.

2 Gesture according to order must be used. 1 Cor. 14.40. Sitting is an orderly
gesture: for Christ and his Apostles sat, so did the Jews also eating the
Passover.

Ergo Sitting must be used.

This argument is every way twin unto the former, and in a manner needs no
other answer then is already given. Nevertheless, for fuller satisfaction let
us examine both the Propositions. The Mayor being rightly understood I grant:
for no gesture may be used but that which is orderly, it being the Apostles
express commandment in the place by you alleged, that all things be done
decently and according unto order. I say, being rightly understood: for there
is a double Order, the one Intrinsecall and in the things themselves, the other
External and unto us. The former is that habitude, disposition, or
correspo^dence which one thing naturally has unto another: in regard whereof
it may also be called a Physical order or an order of Nature. The latter is
that which is made so unto us, being prescribed by lawful authority: in
respect whereof it may further be termed, a moral order, or an order of
Prudence. Now if you understand your Mayor thus, No gesture must be used but
that which is at least one of these two ways orderly, you understand it
aright: for so is S. Paul's meaning, and in that sense it is granted unto you.
But if you understand it thus, that any gesture which is in it self orderly
may indifferently be used by any, albeit the Church have for orders sake among
many such chosen out, and authorized one only: then do you misunderstand it,
and it is denied you: for S. Paul both here and elsewhere plainly declares
himself to be a great enemy unto all such Anarchicall disorder and confusion.

Your Minor is, that Sitting is an orderly gesture. Whereunto I answer, that
it is so indeed in it self, there being a natural aptnes and fitnes in it to
be used at the receiving of the Sacrament yet is it not in this sense the only
orderly gesture: for Standing and Kneeling are so also, and may put in for a
place as well as Sitting. Neither is it unto us orderly, because public
authority has commanded Kneeling only, which to disobey, is, as S. Paul
says, to resist the ordinance of God. Nor does the example and practice of
Christ and his Apostles, and the Jews prove the contrary. For the gesture they
used, as it was orderly in it self, so was it generally received and approved
by the Church at that time: but among us not Sitting but Kneeling is the
gesture that is allowed and enjoined.

But if, this notwithstanding, you will needs have that gesture orderly unto us
now which Christ and his Apostles, used, because it was at that time orderly,
unto them: then know their gesture was not Sitting, and you bewray your self
to be but a bad Antiquary in affirming it. For as all story testifies, it was
the manner of those times and long before, at meals to lie on their beds,
leaning on their elbowes, and supporting themselves with pillowes. And hereunto
agree the words which the Evangelists use to express their gesture: for (...)
in Matthew and Mark, and (...) in Luke and John, import no other then lying at
the table. Neither can you otherwise understand that which is said of him whom
Christ loved, that at supper he lay or leaned on Jesus breast, unless it be by
this gesture. Wherefore you must of force either quit^ Sitting, and urge upon us
a necessity of lying: or acknowledge that Sitting may not be orderly unto us,
though anciently unto Christ and his Apostles it were so. Your third and last
argument is.

3. If sitting be the only warranted gesture by Gods word, then it ought only
to be used.

But it is the only warranted gesture: for it only was used by the Jews at the
Passover, and by Christ and his Apostles at his Supper.

Ergo sitting only is to be used.

That the word written (for so you mean) is the only warrant of all actions,
is more then you will ever be able to prove. For the law of nature written in
the heart, and the light of reason are sufficient warrants for many things.
Otherwise, how could the Gentiles which had not the law written, be as S. Paul
says a law unto themselves? and how could their consciences either accuse them
for breaking the law, or excuse them for doing thereafter? Neither do I herein
derogate ought from Scripture: only I yield unto Reason that which is her due.
They are both from God, and both are to be our directors: the one in those
things that fall within the compass of nature, the other in those things that
are above nature. In things supernatural Scripture is the only warrant, Reason
being therein starkblind: In things Moral it is the safest warrant, Reason
therein being but dimsighted. But to make Scripture the only warrant in all
things without exception, is to put out the sight of Reason, and to make it
stark blind in every thing. Scripture I confess is perfect, but as a creature
perfect in its kind. Whatsoever is necessary unto that end whereto it was
ordained, 2. Tim. 3.15.
namely to make the man of God wise unto Salvation, it contains abundantly,
and with Tertullian, Contra. Hermog. c. 22.
I adore the fulness thereof. Other things if it warrant not, it no way
impeacheth the perfection thereof, because they are impertinent and make not
unto the end thereof. The sequel therefore of your Mayor is not good, and it
is absurd and idle, in things not necessary to salvation to argue, from
authority of Scripture negatiuely, it says not so Ergo it is not so.

But supposing the Consequence of your Mayor to be good, how prove you the
Minor, that Sitting is only warranted by Gods word? Forsooth, because it only
was used by the Jews at the Passover, and by Christ and his Apostles at his
Supper. First I have sufficiently demonstrated above, that they sat not: and
therefore Sitting is so far from being only warranted, that by your rule it
is not warranted at all. Secondly, grant they sat, yet it follows not
thereupon that Sitting only is warranted. For as for the Jews, Ex. 124 11.
neither do their Ceremonies concern us, and at the first it seems they
stood. For they were commanded to eat the Passover, with their loins girt,
their shoos on their feet, and their staves in their hands, v. 25.
and in have: and, as they were commanded, so they did. As touching Christ and
his Apostles, (Supposing they sat.)
their act indeed sufficiently proves that Sitting is in it self, and was unto
them lawful, seeing the wisdom of Christ otherwise, would not have used it:
but that it is the only lawful gesture it cannot possibly prove. If it
could, by the same reason it would follow that the Eucharist is only to be
administered at evening and after supper, because Christ then administered it.
For they are both circumstances, and not essential: and idem jus Titio quod
Sejo, there is the same reason of both.

You will yet happily demand, why we make not Christ's gesture a precedent for
ours? are we wiser then Christ? And I again demand of you, why you lie not on
your beds as Christ did: know you what is convenient better then he? your
answer I suppose will be, that Christ's gesture, was that which ordinarily they
then used at meals: and Sitting is that which ordinarily they now use. And I
answer, because we receive not the Sacrament with our meals, as Christ and
his Apostles first did, therefore do we not use the gesture of meals. The
cause of the gesture being taken away, the gesture it self may be changed
also. The Jews at the first are the Passover standing, as we have showed, to
signify their hasty departure out of Egypt: but being now safely escaped
thence, they alter that gesture, Cap. ^8. Cap. 74.
and our Savior by his practice approues their so doing. The Councels of
Laodicea, and of Trullo forbidding Agapas, that is, the love feasts, with which
they were wont to receive the Communion, forbad also accubitus sternere to lie
any more in the Churches upon their beds. So that in the wisdom of the
Churches of both Testaments, such circumstances may justly be varied as the
causes or reasons of them do vary.

And thus of your arguments for sitting: now let us take a view also of your
reasons against Kneeling. They are in number four, all as you think
demonstratiue, and out of necessary premises concluding, that we may at no
hand Kneel. The first is this: 1 If Kneeling ought to be used, then it is
convenient. But it is not convenient. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Dan. 6.11. Ergo, it is not
to be used.

The Mayor of this Syllogism is Hypotheticall or Conditional, the Consequence
whereof is grounded upon this Categoricall, or simple Proposition, Nothing
ought to be used but that which is convenient. Romans 3.8.
Whereunto I answer, first, as we may not do evil that good may come of it:
so neither may we forbear that good which is commanded us for any evil or
inconvenience that may follow thereof. Secondly, in things indifferent which
are neither good nor evil, if they be not ordered by authority, but are still
arbitrary and left unto our choice, then as we may use them because they are
lawful, so may we not use them when they prove inexpedient. The rule of
charity must ouerrule us in this case. But if once they be ordered by public
authority, then necessity is laid upon us, and we must conform our selves
unto order notwithstanding any pretended inconvenience. The rule of loyalty
must sway with us in this case. Be it then that Kneeling is inconvenient; it
was the fault of our superiors to command i^. Now it is commanded, and it is
our duty to obey them. If it be inconvenient to Kneel: it is more
inconvenient to disobey, and for not Kneeling to be barred from the Sacrament.
The sequel therefore of your Mayor is not good, and I require you to prove it.

The Assumption is, Kneeling is not convenient. I deny it. You prove it by two
places of Scripture, which testify that Solomon and Daniel kneeled when they
prayed. The weakness of which proof that you may the more readily perceive, I
reduce it into form, thus. That gesture which is used in prayer, is not
convenient at the Sacrament. But Kneeling is a gesture used in Prayer. Ergo, it
is inconvenient at the Sacrament. The Minor whereof I grant: but I deny the
Mayor as being too palpably absurd. For first, never man yet dreamed that
Kneeling is proper quarto modo unto it, and may not be used in any other
action. Secondly, then may we neither sit nor stand at the Sacrament, 1 King.
19.4.
because Elias prayed sitting and the Publican standing: Luc. 18.13.
yea happily no gesture is left for the Sacrament, seeing Prayer has ingrost
them all before hand. Lastly, for as much as at the time of receiving our
affections are to be advanced and lifted up unto God in prayer and
thanksgiving: it must needs be by your own rule, that Kneeling is a gesture
every way convenient for it. Your second argument is, 2 No will worship may be
used. Mat. 15.9. Kneeling is will worship: for Pope Honorius first devised it.
Acts and Mon. page 1390.

Ergo, Kneeling may not be used.



To yield unto God that Worship which he himself has revealed and prescribed,
is an Act of true Religion: but to obtrude and thrust upon him a Worship forged
and devised of our selves, is mere superstition. The one he rigourously
exacteth of us, the other he expressly forbids. Ex. 15.38.39.
In the law, God commands the Jews to make them fringes in the borders of
their garments, and to put a blew ribband upon it throughout their generations,
that ye may look upon it, says he, and remember all the Commandments of the
Lord to do them: and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own
eyes after which ye use to go a whoaring. In the Prophets, he oftentimes
vpbraideth them with their own inventions, and disdainfully says unto them,
Who has required these things at your hands? And in the new Testament, our
Savior in the place by you quoted, Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.23.
severely taxes the Pharisees, for teaching their own fantasies, and placing
the worship of God in the observation of men's precepts: and Saint Paul to the
Colossians in plain terms condemns (...), Will Worship, notwithstanding
whatsoever show of Wisdom or humility it carry with it. All which considered,
I yield you your Mayor as true, No Will Worship may be used.

Your Assumption that Kneeling is Will Worship I deny: telling you further that
you do intolerable wrong unto the Church of England, charging her with so
gross a Superstition. For the world knows, and you must needs be a great
stranger in Israel if you be ignorant, that the Governors of our Church press
not their ceremonies upon the consciences of men, as if they were in themselves
necessary and not indifferent: neither place any part of Religion or divine
worship in them. This they leave unto that Man of sin, who challenges power
unto himself, as to create new articles of faith, so to prescribe new forms
of Worship also. That their intent is not Will Worship, but order and
uniformity, they have oftentimes published, if I may so say, with sound of
trumpet: which if you have not heard, it is extreme deafenes: if you have
heard, and yet will not be satisfied, to say no more, it proceeds of mere
wilfulnes and frowardness.

Howbeit to prove your Minor you affirm that Pope Honorius first devised it.
Cap. Sanc, de celeb^^ Miss.
It is true indeed that Honorius the third decreed, that Priests should often
teach their people, reverently to bow themselves at the Elevation of the Host
when Mass is said, and when the Priest carries it to one that is sick, and I
deny not but thereby he intended the Adoration of the Host. But you should
know that it is one thing to receive the Communion Kneeling, another thing to
Kneel at the Elevation when there is no Receiving. This Honorius decreed, not
that, for ought I can learn. Nay further, what that gesture was which
succeeded accubitus, lying on beds, whether it were kneeling, or standing, or
sitting, I suppose he who is well acquainted with Ecclesiastical Story can
hardly determine, much less you whose reading therein passes not beyond the
book of Martyrs. Let every one herein abound in his own sense: I for my part
think it was Kneeling rather then any other, because it is a gesture of most
reverence. Lib. 4. c. 8.
Hospinian a learned man who wrote the story of this Sacrament, has these
words, This Sacrament ought to be handled with great Religion and reverence,
according to the custom of every Church, with decent apparel, temperate
behavior, soberly, religiously, the head bare, the knees bent, and other such
like free ceremonies. And this reverence or honor I doubt not but some of the
Fathers above cited understood by the word Adoration. For to Adore sometime
signifies, as all know, external reverence and veneration exhibited by bodily
gestures and speech unto a thing, as when the knees are bent, the body is
bowed, the head uncovered, the hands lifted up, etc. Thus far Hospinian, by
whose judgment Kneeling in all likelihood was used long before Honorius
lived, or the Real Presence was dreamed of. Howsoever, it is mere foppery to
imagine that a thing in it self lawful once abused to a bad end, can never
recover its right again and be lawfully used: and then taking this for
granted, to prejudice our reverent receiving by Romish practice and
superstition. I conclude therefore this point with that excellent saying of
Origin, Hom. 5. in Euang.
when thou receiuest that holy meat and incorruptible banquet, when thou
enioyest that Bread and Cup of life, and eatest and drinkest the Body and Blood
of the Lord, then the Lord enters under thy roof. Thou therefore humbling thy
self, imitate the Centurion and say, Lord I am not worthy that thou should
come under my roof. The third argument.

3 All show of evil must be eschewed. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Kneeling is a show of
evil, as of Bread worship. Ergo, Kneeling must be eschewed. First I
interpret the Mayor. Saint Paul's words in the place by you quoted are these,
(...): which may be rendered thus, Abstain from all kind of evil. For the
word (...) signifies kind: and in this sense the Syriacke translation
understands it. And interpreting it thus, the Mayor is universally and
without exception true: for no evil whatsoever, being intrinsecally and
formally so, may in any case be done. Besides this exposition there is another
more generally approved, Abstain from all show of evil or evil show. For as
evil it self must be refrained that God be not offended nor our Consciences
disquieted: so must show of evil also be avoided, that we scandal not our
brother, nor discredit our profession. But in this sense the Mayor is not
universally and without exception true. For first, it holds not in necessary
duties commanded by God, nor in things indifferent ordered by man. For the
substance must not be neglected because of a shadow: nor we fall into the
real evils of Disobedience and Disloyalty, to avoid the show of evil. Again
it holds not in Imaginary shows, such as are without ground fancied in the
sick brains of humorous and malecontented people: but such only as indeed
carry with them a shrewd presumption of that evil whereof it is a show. And
thus the Mayor is granted unto you, in the former sense absolutely and simply,
in the latter respectively with these restrictions and limitations.

Now to the Minor I answer, first Kneeling is not formally evil, but of an
indifferent and middle nature, neither good nor evil: and therefore is not
forbidden by the former interpretation, Abstain from all kind of evil.
Secondly, I deny it to be a show of evil. For whereof? Of Bread worship you
say. How so, seeing we are neither Transubstantiators nor Consubstantiators, and
have long since openly before all men disclaimed both Elevation and Ad^^^tion?
And to whom? To Papist or Protestant? Certainly neither: for the one condemns
us for not adoring, and the other suspects us not for adoring. So that the Show
of Breadworship lies not in our Kneeling, but in your Imagination. Which if it
be a sufficient reason to bar us from Kneeling, I must entreat you for the
same reason to abstain from Sitting: See Tertull. de orat. c. 12.
for I can easily imagine in it a show of evil, namely of Sleighting and
Contemning the Sacrament. Nay I must pray you to sit still and do nothing: for
what is it wherein a man may not fancy some evil show or other? Lastly,
suppose Kneeling have the show you speak of, yet is it not to be forborne,
because it is in the number of those things that are excepted from the general
rule. For it is commanded by authority, and to receive the Communion is a
necessary duty which among us without Kneeling cannot be done. Now as I have
said, to avoid seeming evil we may not be evil, and for fear of a shadow
loose the substance, I mean the benefit and comfort of the Sacrament. And thus
your argument drawn from the show of evil proves as you see but the show of
an argument. I come to the last reason.

4 If we may kneel to Bread and wine, much more may We kneel to Angels.

But we may not kneel to Angels. Rev. 19.10.

Ergo we may not kneel to bread and wine.

This is that Fallacy which Logicians call Ignorance of the Elench, when that
is concluded which is not in question. For our Question is, Whether we may
kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament: but your Conclusion is we may not
kneel to Bread and Wine. Neither shall there be any quarrel between us about
this point: for we readily grant it you, acknowledging further that your
argument from the greater to the less sufficiently euinceth it. For if we may
not fall down to adore an Angel, much less may we do so to bread and wine.
And as we may not, so we do not. Our Kneeling is not intended unto bread and
wine, but unto God who in the Sacrament offers unto us the blessed body and
blood of his son, who is God also, and to be worshipped of us for evermore.
You might therefore well have forborne this argument which neither preiudiceth
us, nor aduantageth your self any whit at all: or if you have any other
meaning, you should have better expressed it. For my part I cannot guess what it
should be, nor will I trouble my brain in seeking it. Happily your self know
not what you would.

And thus have I though breefly, yet fully answered all your reasons. It now
remains, that either you produce sounder arguments then yet you have given
us, or add more vigor and strength unto these: or (because I fear you can do
neither) that considering the weakness of those reeds whereon you have hitherto
leaned, hence forward you trust them no more. It can be no disgrace unto you
to be overcome of Truth: neither is it leuity or inconstancy upon sight of
your error to change both your opinion and practice. Take therefore unto you
Christian severity, and ingenuously revoke what you have held or done amiss:
so shall you give glory unto God, and God shall honor you in the sight of all
his Saints. But if, notwithstanding all that has been said, you mean still
to persist in your error, and will not be persuaded although you be persuaded:
I fear lest after straining at these gnats, you fall to swallowing down of
Camels, and proceed from dislike of a few indifferent ceremonies, unto flat
schism and separation. which God forbid for his mercies sake. Amen.

See T de ora
HOW S. PAVL AND S. JAMES ARE TO BE reconciled in the matter of JUSTIFICATION.
YOU demand how Saint Paul teaching Justification by Faith only without the
Works of the Law, To. 5.20.28. Gal. 2.16. Iam. 2.24.
and Saint James affirming that of Works a man is justified and not of Faith
only, may be reconciled. I will endeavor to give you the best satisfaction I
can in a few Propositions.

1 Scripture being the Word of God who is truth and whose promises are not yea
and nay, 2. Cor. 1.17.18.19.20.
but yea and Amen, although sometime there may seem contrariety in it, yet
real difference and repugnancy there can be none, truth ever agreeing and
never contradicting it self.

2 Paul therefore and James being inspired by the same spirit must needs
conspire in the same truth: although the one exclude Works from Faith in the
matter of Justification, the other include Works together with Faith.

3 The readiest way to reconcile this seeming contradiction is to observe
carefully the Occasions whereupon they were moved to deliver these doctrines,
and to distinguish the Equivocation and diverse use of these two words
Justification and Faith. For if there be the same meaning in both, and no
ambiguity in either of these terms, it cannot be avoided but they must of
necessity cross one the other.

4 Saint Paul's occasion was this. He saw with what eagerness and contention
certain Jews maintained, Act. 15.1.
that unless the law of Moses were kept and observed together with the
Gospel, there could be no Justification: and that thereby man's Works were
either substituted in the room of, or yoked together with Faith, to the great
prejudice of Gods free Grace. To. 2.24.
And therefore against these he proves by the testimony of the Law and the
Prophets, that we are Justified by Faith in Christ freely without the works of
the Law.

5 Hereupon some there were, who like spiders sucking venom out of the
wholsomest flowers, so interpreted this comfortable doctrine, as if it skilled
not whether they practiced good works, and led a godly and virtuous life, so as
they did believe. And against this sort of men the Apostle Saint James thought
it necessary to oppose himself.

6 So that Saint James does not dispute against Saint Paul, but for the right
meaning of S. Paul against those that depraved and wrested his doctrine to a
wrong sense. Paul so defending Justification by Faith without Works, as he
denies not the necessary practice of them, but only denies the power of
Justification unto them: James so establishing good Works, not as giving them
force to make a man acceptable and just in the sight of Gods justice, but only
disabling that Faith from having any power to Justify us, which is not
accompanied with them.

7 And thus Saint Augustine understands it. When, De fide and oper. l. 1. c.
14.
says he, the Apostle says, that a man is justified by Faith without the
Works of the Law, he means not that Faith being received and professed; the
works of Justice should be contemned: but that every one should know that he
may be justified by Faith, although the works of the law go not before. For
they follow him that is justified, but go not before him that is to be
justified. And again, 83. quaest. q. 16.
When as Paul speaks of the good works of Abraham which accompanied his Faith,
it is manifest that by the example of Abraham he does not so teach that a man
is justified by Faith without works, that if he do believe it concerns him
not to work well: but to to this end rather, that no man should think that by
the merit of his former good Works he has attained the gift of justification
which is by Faith.

8 As the consideration of the different occasions which moved these two
Apostles to speak so differently does in part clear this question: so will it
yet be more evident if we know the several acceptions and uses of these
words Justification and Faith, and in what sense either Apostle understands
them.

9 Justification usually in the Scripture phrase signifies, not to make just
by infusing the quality of Justice into the soul, 2. King. 15.4. Deuteronomy. 25.1.
Psalm. 81.3. Prove. 17.15. Mat. 12.37. To. 8.33.34.
but to pronounce and declare to be just: being indeed a Law-terme, and drawn
from civil Courts of judicature, and is opposed to Condemnation. And this is
so clear, that Tolet a Jesuit confesses it most frequently so to signify in
Scripture: Pineda, Vega, and Salmeron three great Papists acknowledge it in
this sense to be used by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, where he
disputes purposely of Justification.

10 Now there is a double tribunal where we are to be judged, one is Gods,
the other Man's: and therefore God is said to Justify, and Man also. God when he
acquits a sinner from his sins for the merit of his Son Christ: Man when
seeing our good works (which are the fruits and testimonies of our grace with
God) out of the judgment of Charity he accounts us the Sons of God. Of the
former Saint Paul speaks, of the latter S. James. S. Paul enquireth how we
are made lust before God, namely by Faith: S. James how it may appear unto men
that we are Just, namely by Works. Faith is the principle of Existence by
which we are Just: Works of Knowledge by which we are known to be Just.

Iac. 2.10. In id cap.
11 That Saint James understands such a Declaratiue Justification is plain by
that he says. Show me thy Faith by thy Works? And Thomas of Aquin affirms,
that Works following Faith are not said to Justify, as Justification is an
infusion of justice but as it is an exercise or declaration or perfection of
Faith.

12 Concerning the word Faith, sometimes it signifies that sanctifying grace
of Gods spirit whereby we believe in or on God, that is, put all our affiance
upon God in Christ for Justification and Salvation: sometimes a naked assent or
agreeing to all the truths contained in the Scripture, specially such as are
Evangelical. That is only of the Elect: this the Devils have. That either has
works following it, as in Abraham: or is great in child of works, ready to
travel and bring forth if God give time, as in the thief on the cross. This
many times is without works, and therefore dead and spiritles. Of that S. Paul
speaks: of this S. James. That sole but not solitary iustifies: this being
solitary iustifies not.

13 In a word, S. Paul speaks of the cause of Justification: S. James of the
Effect. S. Paul descends from the Cause to the Effect: S. James ascends from
the Effects to the Cause. S. Paul resolves how we may be justified: S. James
how we may be known to be justified. S. Paul excludes works as being no
Cause of Justification: S. James requires works as fruits of Justification. S.
Paul denies works to go before them that are to be justified: S. James
affirms that they follow him that is justified.

14 Others distinguish, and reconcile them thus. Justification is sometime
understood without implying Sanctification, sometime as it implies also
Sanctification with it. In the former sense S. Paul takes it, when he proves
that a man is justified by Faith without works: S. James in the latter, when he
concludes that a man is justified by works and not by Faith only. And this I
suppose to be a very sound interpretation.

15 Howsoever, that Faith alone without the works of the Law in the sense above
delivered does justify, these ancient Fathers avouch together with us, Origin,
Cyprian, Eusebius Caesariensis, Hilarie, Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine,
Cyril, Primasius, Hesychius, Gennadius, Oecumenius, whose direct and express
words I can at any time produce. Nay these late Papists also (least it should
be thought that none but Protestants hold it) the Canons of Collein, the
authors of the book offered by Caesar unto the Protestant Collocutors in the
assembly of Ratisbon, Pighius, Cassander, Stapulensis, Peraldus, Ferus, and
others who count themselves as good Catholics as they that hold otherwise.

16 And this only Faith is so sure an anchor of our souls, and such^ fountain
of true comfort both, in life and death, that Charles the fifth, Steven
Gardener, Sir Christopher Blunt, and sundry others durst not at their death
trust unto their works, but unto Faith in Christ only. And Cardinal Bellarmin
after a long disputation touching the merit of works is feign to conclude, that
because of the uncertainty of our own justice, and the danger of vaineglory,
the Safest course is to repose all our affiance in the only mercy and goodness
of God. So that in his judgment we Protestants have chosen the Safest course:
and I for my part will never trust my soul unto them who leaving so safe a
course, mean to hazard it through a more dangerous way.

OF THE AVTHORS AND AVTHORITY OF THE CREED, AND WHY IT IS CALLED a Symbol.
THE inscription of the Creed seems to father it on the holy Apostles, calling
it the Symbol of the Apostles. So do almost all the Fathers of the fourth age
after Christ and downward, affirming that the Apostles having received the
Holy Ghost at Jerusalem, and being now ready to disperse themselves into all
parts of the world to preach the Gospel, thought it good before their parting
to compile this Symbol, that it might serve as a pledge of their unity in the
Faith, and a canon for their doctrine and teaching. Yea some of them proceed so
far as particularly to set down what article was made by what Apostle:
whereof see Augustine in his hundred and fifteenth Sermon de tempore. Now
although it be very hard for me to sway against the stream of so maine
authority: yet can I not but doubt thereof, Paraphr. in Mat. Praef.
and confess with Erasmus I know not who made the Creed, especially having so
great probabilities (for demonstrations I dare not call them) that it should
not be done by the twelve Apostles.

For first, were it compiled by them, is it likely that Saint Luke writing the
history of their Acts, would have omitted so principal a matter? Sundry other
things of far less consequence he has carefully recorded: but of this so
important and weighty a business he makes not so much as one word mention,
which certainly he would never have failed to do, had they done so. Add
hereunto that not one of the ancient Fathers who lived within the three first
Centuries of Christ speak of any such thing in any of their writings: and yet
they should best know it whose times were nearest unto the Apostles. This deep
silence both of Saint Luke and all those ancient Doctors, make it unto me more
then probable that the Apostles never composed it.

Secondly, as the silence of these worthies, so the very language of the Creed
conuinceth it to be younger then the Apostles. For the word Catholic used in
the Creed was not known in their time. Can any man think that the Church
should then be called Catholic when it was not Catholic? For when they say
this Creed was compiled, the Church was scarce begun among the Jews, and the
Apostles had no where as yet preached the Gospel among the Gentiles. But hear
the express words of Pacianus Bishop of Barcilona, Sed sub Apostolis, Ad
Sympronian Epist. 1.
inquies, nemo Catholicus vocabatur. Esto, sic fuerit. Vel illud indulge, cum
post Apostolos haereses extitissent, diuersisque nominibus columbam Dei atque
Reginam lacerare per parts and scindere niterentur: nonne cognomen suum plebs
Apostolica postulabat, quo incorrupti populi distingueret vnitatem,
neintemeratam Dei virginem error aliquorum per membra laceraret? In the
Apostles times, you will say, no man was called Catholic. Be it so. Yet by
your leave when after the Apostles heresies were risen up, and by diversity of
names they labored to rent and tear in pieces the done and queen of God: was
it not requisite that those which were Apostolic should have a surname of
their own, whereby the unity of those that are vncorrupt might be
distinguished, and the error of none might rent in pieces the immaculate virgin
of God? Thus he. Against which if it be objected, that the Epistles of James,
Peter, John, and Jude are called Catholic: I answer, the Inscriptions and
Subscriptions of the Epistles are not Apostolical, but added to them by some
other, and sometime untruly. Neither is there any reason they should be so
styled above the rest. For neither is the doctrine contained in them more
Catholic then of all the other Epistles, neither were they written to all the
Jews, more then the Epistle to the Hebrews, neither were they all written to
all Catholics, for the second and third of John were sent unto private persons
only, and all the rest as universally concern all Catholics as these few
termed Catholic do. I conclude therefore, the word Catholic being latter
then the Apostles, so must the Creed be also which uses it.

Thirdly, the different relation of the story bewrayes the uncertainty of it:
for they give not all the same article unto the same Apostle. Some marshall
them just as S. Luke does in the first of the Acts: others thus, Peter, Andrew,
John, James the elder, Thomas, James the younger, Bartlemew, Matthew, Simon,
Jude, Mathias. Again, some of them attribute unto Peter part only of the
first article, I believe in God the Father almighty, and unto John the other
part Maker of Heaven and Earth. But others attribute the whole article unto
Peter, and give another unto John. The like may be observed in other articles.
If then they be certain of the tradition, why do they differ thus in their
reports? If they differ thus one from another, who can be certain of the
tradition.

Fourthly, if the Creed both for matter and form were from the Apostles, and
they delivered it precisely in those words in which we now have it, why is it
not placed in the Canon of Scripture? Certainly in the Church although it ever
have been much esteemed, yet was it never counted Canonical. Neither has it
been preserved so safe from addition, detraction, mutation, as the rest of the
Scriptures always have been. For even in the ancientest times we find great
variety in it. Ruffin writing a just comment on it, omits that clause Maker of
Heaven and Earth. And who knows not how many there are who relating this Creed
leave out the article of Christ descending into hell? De Christi anima. c. 6
Even Bellarmin himself, confesses that it was not found anciently in all
Creeds: and he voucheth for it Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, and Augustine
though five times he expound it, and finally the Creed of the Roman Church also
as Ruffin witnesses unto whom if he had been so pleased, he might have added
a whole army of others, whom for breuities sake I omit. Finally the ancient
Doctors were so far from equalling it with Scripture, that they appealed from
it thereunto as to an higher authority. Catech. 4.
Cyril plainly affirms that we may not believe the Creed without Scripture.
Biblioth. sanc. Patr. tom. 9.
And Paschasius against Macedonius shrowding himself under some words of the
Creed, appealeth unto the Canonical Scripture, for that of it, says he, the
text of the Creed depends. Which had they thought it had been from the
Apostles in such form and as now we have it, without question they never would
have done.

Fifthly, the reason which they assign why they composed this Creed, discouers
the vanity thereof. What was that? That it might be forsooth unto the Apostles
a canon and rule, according to which they should square and conform their
preaching. What unto the Apostles to whom Christ promised his blessed Spirit
that should lead them into all truth? And that himself would put into their
mouths a ready answer upon all occasions, so that they should not need to
bethink themselves what to say? Could they possibly doubt lest any difference
or discord should grow among them in matter of Faith, who were so guided by the
Spirit of truth and unity that they could not in any point either err
themselves, or lead any other into error? Surely, so to think, derogateth much
from the truth of Christ, and imputes much weakness unto the Spirit of God,
and detracteth from the certainty of our Faith which depends on their
preaching. So that for this cause it is unlikely they made this Creed, at
leastwise to this end.

De Symb. ad Cat. l. 1. c. 1.
Lastly, Saint Augustine says thus (not that false Augustine upon whom those
Sermons de tempore are fathered, and whose authority is usually alleged to
warrant this legend, but the true S. Augustine says) Illa verba (Symboli) qua
audiuistis per Scripturas sparsa sunt, and inde collecta, and ad vnum redacta:
those words of the Creed which you have heard, are dispersed through the
Scriptures, and being gathered from thence, are reduced into one. With him
agrees Paschasius, De Spirit. Sanct. c. 1.
De sacris omnino voluminibus quae sunt credenda sumamus, de quorum font
symboli ipsius series deriuata consistit: Let us take out of the sacred volumes
what things we are to believe, out of which fountain the order of the Creed
is derived. Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 4.
And Marcellus a Bishop in a letter to Julius Bishop of Rome professes having
rehearsed the words of the Creed, Se hanc fidem ex Scripturis accepisse, and a
maioribus secundum Deum accepisse, and candem in Ecclesia Dei praedicare: that
he received this Faith out of the Scriptures, and next after God from his
ancestors, and that he preached it in the Church of God. If then, as these
Fathers affirm, the Creed be gathered out of the Scriptures, how can the
Apostles be authors thereof? For out of the old Testament they could not
gather that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, or that he suffered under
Pontius Pilate. And as for the new, many of the Apostles were dead before all
was written, and James before any was written: besides that no part of it was
written when the Creed was compiled, if it be true which the legend says. And
these are the reasons for which it seems unto me more then probable that the
Apostles were never Authors of this Creed.

If it be so will some say, why does it then bear the Apostles name? I
answer, because, as out of S. Augustine and others we have showed, the matter
therein contained is perfectly agreeable with the Apostles writings and was
collected out of them. Moreover, Apostolical is a term extended by writers
unto the first three hundred years after Christ. Haet sola fides, says
Damasus, Ep. 5.
quae Nicaeae Apostolorum authoritate fundata est, perpetua est firmitate
seruanda: this only Faith which was established at Nice by the authority of the
Apostles, is firmly and perpetually to be held. So Scythianus and Terebinthus
are said to have lived temporibus Apostolorum in the time of the Apostles,
Epiph. Haer. 66.
who yet lived in Aurelians time, toward three hundred years after Christ. And
Isidor distinguishing between Apostles and the First Apostles, says that
Apostles continued down until Pope Syluester, and that the times before the
great Council of Nice were Apostolical. Although therefore the first Apostles
were not the founders of this Creed: yet those succeeding Apostles were, of
whom it may be called the Apostles Creed.

These things being so, let it be observed thereupon, first how friuolously
Papists cavil and quarrel with us, affirming that we hold not the Faith of
the Creed because we question it whether the Apostles were authors of it or no.
As if to doubt of the author were to doubt of the truth of the matter: or as if
all those Ancients rejected the epistle to the Hebrews for Apocryphal, which
were not resolved who wrote it, whether Paul, or Barnabas, or Luke, or Clemens.
Secondly, how weaklie Popish traditions are supported by the tradition of this
Creed. For not being the Apostles, how can it be a tradition of the Apostles?
or if it be a tradition of theirs, yet is it such a tradition as is written and
contained in Scripture: and such we willingly receive. Let them prove the rest
of their pretended traditions to be such, and we will readily embrace them
also. But return we to our purpose.

This Creed by whomsoever it was made is entitled (...) a Symbol: the reason
whereof we are now to inquire. To let pass those barbarous and iocular
notations which ignorant Monks have given of it, lest relating them I should
both spend time, and defile my paper: some derive it from (...) signifying as
they say a shote or reckoning, Ruff. Symb. Aug. ser. de tem. 115.
for that the Apostles meeting together to compile it, did each confer his
article as it were his symbol for defraying of this heavenly banquet. But first
the Apostles, as we have declared, never compiled this Creed. Secondly, if they
compiled it, yet, as Antonius Nebrisensis says, Quinquag. c. 40.
it is neither credible nor likely that each of them conferred his particle:
seeing in those things that are constituted and decreed by many, it is not the
manner for every one severally to put his word or saying into it, but for all
jointly to agree upon the whole. Add hereunto, that if it were so, men would
never have divided the Creed as they have done, some into seven articles,
because of the seven gifts of the holy ghost, very many others into fourteen:
but only into twelve, according to the number of the Apostles, who dictated
each of them his article. Lastly, not (...) but (...) signifies a shote, as
the learned know, neither can it be showed to be otherwise in any Greek
writer. Indeed in Latin writers ye shall sometimes find Symbolum so used: yet
that it is found so in any skillful Critics impute it to the ignorance of
Notaries, and by the warrant of the best Manuscripts restore the Feminine
Symbola into the room thereof.

Others fetch it from Symbolum signifying a Pledge or token and first such a
pledge whereby persons espoused bind themselves to be faithful and true one
unto another: because likewise in our spiritual espousals with Christ, as he
gives unto us his blessed spirit as an earnest of his constant love to us, so
we return back again the profession of our faith as a firm pledge of our
loyalty and subjection to him. This reason caries good likelihood and
proportion with it. So does also the next, when it signifies tesseram
hospitalem, such a token as Cities were wont to give unto their friends, that
showing it they might find friendly entertainment in confederate towns: or
such as one friend was wont to give unto an other to the like end. Which how it
fits the amity and frienship between Christ and us, who sees not?

Nevertheless I rather think it is so called from (...) as it signifies a
watchword. For the Primitive Church seems much to have been delighted with
militare terms: I suppose because in Scripture Christians are so often compared
unto soldiers. And hence it is that the Church is distinguished into Militant
and Triumphant, that Heathen are called Pagans in opposition unto soldiers,
that the two mysteries of the Church are termed Sacraments, a word importing
that oath of obedience which soldiers take unto their Generals. In like manner
may the Creed be called a Symbol, because it is as a watchword by which true
Orthodoxe Christians many discern one from the other. Painims, Jews, Turks,
and Heretics. Heerwith agrees Maximus Taurinensis, Symbolum tessera est and
signaculum quo inter fideles perfidosque secernitur: Hom. de trad. Symb.
the Symbol is a watchword or mark by which Faithful and Faithles men are
discerned. And Ambrose, De voland. Virg. l. 3.
Symbolum cordis signaculum est, and nostrae militiae sacramentum: the Symbol
is the seal of the heart, and the sacrament of our warfare. In Symb.
And Ruffin, Nequa doli surreptio fiat, symbola discreta unusquisque dux suis
militibus tradit, quae Latin vel signa vel indicia nominantur, ut si forte
occurrerit quis de quo dubitetur, interrogatus symbolum prodat si sit hostis an
socius: lest there should be any surreption or deceit, every captain
delivers unto his Soldiers a distinct watchword, that if they meet with any
of whom they doubt, by demanding the watchward they may discover whether he
be a friend or an enemy. And this he accommodateth unto the present purpose.
Now seeing the Gentiles were wont to give for their watchword the names of some
of their Gods, Xenoph paed. l. 3. and 7. Pausan. l. 10. Suet. Calig. c. 18.
as (...), Minerua, Jupiter, and the like: what fitter Symbol could Christians
have, then their Faith in the holy and individual Trinity? And thus much of
the title of the Creed: proceed we yet further.

Besides this Creed there are diverse others very ancient, both General of the
whole Church, such as are those four famous ones of Nice, of Ephesus, of
Constantinople, of Chalcedon: and Particular, either of several Churches, or
of private men, among which that of Athanasius is most renowned. All which
though in form of words they vary, yet for substance are all one, there being,
Ephesians. 4.5.
as S. Paul says, but vna fides, one faith. Neither yet was this number of
Creeds needles or endless. For when heresies began to increase and prevail, the
Church thought it necessary to set forth some short Confessions, by which the
people as by a touchstone might discern the gold of Orthodoxe truth from the
copper of errors and heresies. Says S. Hilarie, Nihil mirum videri debet,
fratres charissimi, quod tam frequenter exponi fides caeptae sint: necessitatem
hanc furor haereticus imponit: you ought not to marvel much, beloved brethren,
that nowadayes Creeds are so frequently set forth: the fury of heretics has
laid this necessity upon us. Thus against Arius denying the divinity of Christ
was the Nicene Creed framed: against Macedonius and Eudoxius denying the Deity
of the holy Ghost, and his proceeding from the Father and the Son; the
Constantinopolitane: against Nestorius denying the union of both natures of
Christ in one person, the Ephesine: against Eutyches confounding both natures,
and swallowing up the humane, in the divine, that of Chalcedon. Thus of late
the reformed Churches to quit themselves of the unjust imputations of heresy
and apostasy wherewith they were charged, have been forced sundry times to
set forth several Confessions of their Faith, all which, or most of which are
recorded in the harmony of Confessions. Scurrilous therefore is that taunt of
Papists, who for this cause term us Confessionists. For what have we done
herein, whereunto their slanderous criminations have not compelled us? what,
whereof we have, not example from the Primiue Church? Nay, what whereof we have
not Gods express commandment, 1 Pet. 3.16.
charging us to be ready on every occasion to render an account of the Hope
that is in us?

But yet among all the ancient Creeds, this of the Apostles, has ever been
counted of greatest authority, and ought still so to be counted. Among the
ancient Creeds I say: for the Scripture is peerles, and equal authority with
it neither may it challenge unto it self, neither did any of the ancient
Fathers give it, as above we have touched. For although the substance and
matter of the Creed be divine and perfectly according with the Scripture, yet
for form and order of words it is humane: whereas the Scripture both for
substance and circumstance, matter and form and all is no way humane, but
wholly and entirely divine. The greater the blasphemy of Rhemish Jesuits
auouching this Creed to be the Rule whereby all the writings of the new
Testament are to be tried, In To. 12.6.
and approved: whereas contrarily the Scripture out of which the Creed is
collected, is the only Rule by which both it and all other Creeds are to be
examined. Howbeit the second place, as it is its due, so we willingly yield
unto it. First in regard of the antiquity thereof, because of all other it is
the eldest. Secondly, for the perfection and fulness thereof, there being no one
article of absolute necessity unto Salvation, which is not either in express
terms or impliedly and in its principles contained therein. Thirdly and
lastly, because it has had the universal approbation of all Churches, in all
times, both ancient and modern. The ancient Fathers give unto it most
honorable and magnificent titles. They call it, the key of Faith, the rule of
Faith, the foundation of Faith, the sum of Faith, the form of Faith, the
body of Faith, the rule of truth, the sacrament of humane salvation, the
mystery of religion, the character of the Church, and the like. On it they
commented rather then on any other Creed: unto it all others were conformed, so
as they seem to be but expositions of it. Finally, it was their manner never
to admit any that was adultus either to the Sacrament of Baptism, or to the
holy Eucharist without making confession of his Faith by rehearsing this Creed.
In like manner, all the reformed Churches with all reverence and duty receive
it: they use it in their public Liturgies, and expound it in their
Catechismes. The more malicious is the slander of Gregory Martin and others,
Disc. of Eng. trans. c. 12.
who shame not to say that we hold not the Christian Faith of the articles of
the Creed. Yea, says another of us, they have no faith nor religion, Tho.
Wright. At.
they are infidels, they believe not the holy Catholic Church, the communion
of Saints, the remission of sins, that Christ is the son of God, or that he
descended into Hell. And as if these had not yet said enough, Credo Caluiniscq.
another opening his mouth as wide as Hell affirms our Creed to be this, I
believe in the Devil the tormentor helmighty corrupter of heaven and earth.
And in not-Iesus-not-Christ the only stepsonne degenerate, who was spoiled of
his glory by the holy Ghost, and borne of Mary no Virgin etc. To all which I
answer Increpet te Dominus, the Lord rebuke thee Satan. If they have called our
master Beelzebub, it can be no disgrace to us to suffer the same reproach. The
more incredible things they charge us withal, the less are themselves
believed, and the more credit do we gain unto our profession. All what is
contained in holy writ, in this Creed of the Apostles, in that of Nice and
Athanasius we firmly and entirely believe. Let Hell and Antichrist and all
the brood of Papists burst with malice and envy: yet this and no other Faith do
we hold and teach.

A SHORT CATECHISM.
QVaest. Who placed you here in this World?

Ans. God the maker and Governor of all things.

Q. Wherefore did he place you here?

A. To serve and glorify him.

Q. How will he be served?

A. By doing his holy Will and Commandments.

Q. What Commandments has he given you?

A. The ten Commandments of the Moral law.

Q. Repeat them unto me.

A. Hear Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which etc.

Q. What duties does God require of you in this law?

A. Two: to love God above all, and my neighbor as my self.

Q. Have you done this perfectly?

A. No, neither yet can I, nor any man else.

Q. Why can you not?

A. Because all are conceived and borne in sin.

Q. How comes that to pass?

A. By the fall of our first parents.

Q. Had you obeyed the law what had been the reward?

A. Life everlasting.

Q. What is the punishment of Disobedience?

A. Everlasting death.

Q. Your case then it seems is very miserable.

A. Very miserable unless God be merciful in Jesus Christ.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. The Eternal Son of GOD made Man.

Q. Wherefore was he made Man?

A. To die for man's sin and to reconcile him unto GOD.

Q. Are all men reconciled by him?

A. No, but true belieuers only.

Q. Who are true Belieuers?

A. They who by faith accept him for their only Mediator and Savior.

Q. How is this Faith wrought?

A. By the preaching of the Gospel.

Q. What is the sum of the Gospel?

A. It is contained in the Apostles Creed.

Q. Repeat the same unto me.

A. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker etc.

Q. How may we know that we have true Faith?

A. By the fruits thereof.

Q. What are the fruits of Faith?

A. New Obedience and Repentance.

Q. What is new Obedience?

A. A sincere practice of holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

Q. Can you do this perfectly?

A. No: but if I strive unto perfection God in grace accepts it.

Q. But what if you fall into sin again?

A. I am to rise again by speedy repentance:

Q. What call you repentance?

A. A hearty sorrow for sin with the amendment thereof.

Q. You say it must be speedy: tell me wherefore?

A. Because if I be prevented by death I perish eternally.

Q. What is the benefit of Repentance?

A. Forgiveness of sins, with recovery of Gods favor.

Q. You have told me how Faith is wrought, and how it may be discerned: tell
me now how it must be nourished and preserved.

A. By the use of the Sacraments and Prayer.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A seal of the Covenant of grace.

Q. What things are required in a Sacrament?

A. Two things, a sign and a thing signified.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. The Sacrament whereby we are admitted into the Church of Christ.

Q. What is the outward Sign of Baptism?

A. The sprinkling of Water upon the Body.

Q. What is the thing signified?

A. The washing away of sin by the Blood of Christ.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A The Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment and preservation unto eternal
life.

Q. What is the outward sign in the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine.

Q. What is the thing signified?

A. The Body of Christ broken, and his Blood shed for our Redemption.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. An humble entreating of God for all the good things we stand in need of.

Q. After what manner must we pray?

A. As we are taught in the Lords prayer.

Q. Repeat the same unto me?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed etc.

Q. What is the effect of Prayer?

A. The obtaining of our requests.

Q. Does every one obtain that prays?

A. No, but he only that asks in faith, and in the Name of Christ.

Q. What remains to be done when we have obtained our suites?

A. We are to return unto God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

Instructions for preparation unto the holy COMMUNION.
Q. I see you are desirous with the rest of Gods people to be admitted to the
holy Communion: tell me for what cause are you so desirous thereof?

A. I am desirous thereof for two causes. First, that I may discharge my duty
to God, who commands me to receive so often as conveniently I may: secondly
that I may reap the benefit and comfort which God has promised unto me
thereby.

Q. What benefit or comfort has God promised unto you thereby?

A. That as by Baptism my first incorporation into the mystical Body of
Christ is already sealed up unto me: so by this holy Sacrament my continual
nourishment and preservation in the same Body shall likewise be sealed up unto
me.

Q. But do all reap this benefit that receive this Sacrament?

A. No, but the worthy receiver only: for they that receive unworthily, eat and
drink to themselves their own damnation.

Q. What things are necessarily required unto worthy Receiving?

A. Two things: sufficient knowledge in the understanding, and sanctifying
grace in the heart.

Q. What knowledge count you sufficient?

A. A knowledge of the law sentencing unto death for sin: secondly, a
knowledge of the Gospel promising everlasting life upon condition of Faith and
true repentance: thirdly a knowledge of the Sacraments, and principally of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Q. What knowledge is required touching the Lords Supper?

A. That the sensible signs used therein have spiritual significations: and
therefore as the Minister having blessed the bread and wine, breaks the one
and pours out the other, and I receiving them into my hands convey them into
my Body for the nourishment thereof: so God the Father having predestined his
Son to be our Mediator and Redeemer has given his Body to be broken and his
Blood to be shed for us, that we receiving the same by Faith may thereby be
nourished both bodies and souls unto everlasting life.

Q. But what sanctifying graces are required in the heart?

A. First true and unfeigned repentance for sin: secondly a lively Faith upon
the merits of Christ for remission of sin: thirdly sincere love and charity
with our brethren: fourthly, renewed Faith and repentance for our new sins, and
renewed love in regard of our new breaches with our brethren.

Q. Well then I see you know with what knowledge and grace you ought to be
furnished before you can worthily receive: tell me now how must you behave your
self during the time of administering this Sacrament?

A. With fear and reverence as in the presence of God who sees the very
secret of my heart: and therefore banishing out of my mind all earthly and
impertinent thoughts, I am only and wholly to attend this heavenly action.

Q. And when you have received, what duty remains to be performed?

A. First, I am humbly to thank Almighty God who has vouchsafed to receive
me as a guest at his holy Table: secondly, I am to pray unto God that
pardoning my want of due preparation and all other my infirmities he would
bless this holy Sacrament to the nourishment of my soul: thirdly, I am
carefully to use all other means ordained by God whereby I may still grow
forward in grace till I come to be a perfect man in Christ.

If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.

FINIS.
Peccatum formaliter and proprie non esse infinitum, exercitatio aduersus N.
Probatur.
1 FInitae Essentiae finita est Potentia: finitae Potentiae finita est
Operatio. At Peccatum Operatio est finitae Essentiae, Creatura nimirum
rationalis, Ergo, and finitae Potentiae. Quare and ipsum finitum est.

2. Gratia Dei non est potentior Infinito: Infinito enim nihil infinitius. Sed
potentior est Peccato: tollit enim ipsum and abolet. Ergo Peccatum non est
infinitum.

3. Vnum infinitum non est alio mains: quod enim minus est ideo quia minus est
non est Infinitum. At Peccatum vnum alio maius est and grauius: Imparitatem
enim Peccatorum negare Stoicismus est. Ergo omne Peccatum non est Infinitum.

4. Omnes ad vnum Orthodoxi Theologi tenent, Nullum esse Summum malum:
Sequeretur enim alioqui duo esse prima rerum Principia, Bonum and Malum, quae
Manichaeorum haeresis est. Ergo omne Peccatum non est Infinitum.

5. Peccatum consideratur aut ut. obliquitas, aut cum Action. At neutro modo
Infinitum est. Non ut Actio: prosecta namque a finito ut dictum est, finita sit
necesse est. Non vt Obliquitas, sic enim nihil est: Non Entis autem non est
accidens, nec igitur accidit ei esse Infinito. Add quod non omnia aeque, sed
unum alio a Scopo propius aberret: quare nec omnia infinito interuallo.

Obiicitur.
1. Theologos omnes asserere Peccatum esse Infinitum: vtrumque enim and
Legislatorem Deum and Legem Dei, quae utraque Infinita sunt, Peccato violari.
Respondeo.

1. Eos qui sic loquuntur affirmare, Peccatum Obiectiue, id est Materialiter
infinitum esse, non formaliter.

2. Quamuis peccatum infinitam laedat Maiestatem, non tamen infinito modo:
alioqui quouis peccato Deus aeque offenderetur, quod absurdum est.

3. Non vt Deus sic lex Dei infinita: Si esset, utique and Deus esset, qui
solus est infinitus. Filius quidem Dei verbum increatum est: at Lex creatum:
non ergo vt illud infinitum. Replicatur. Lex infinita est,

1. Quia a Deo infinito condita est.

2. Quia perfecta est. Psalm. 19. Respondeo.

1. Primum illud non sequi: Non enim quod ab Infinito est, id continuo est
Infinitum. A finito nil nisi finitum procedit: ab infinito vtrumque and finitum
and infinitum. Alioqui mundus hic, immo puluisculus quilibet aut atomus, cum a
Deo sit, infinitus esset.

2. Neque Secundum si vox illa Persecta vniuoce intelligatur. Distinguo ergo,
Perfectum vel absolute dici, vel in suo genere. Absolute, cui nihil deest quod
in aliquo genere perfectum est: and sic solus Deus Perfectus est, in quo vno
omnes omnium perfectiones eminentissimo modo aggregantor, proptereaque etiam
solus simpliciter and proprie Infinitus est. In suo genere, cui nihil deest
quod ad suum genus pertinet: and sic quidem Lex Perfecta est, nec quicquam in
ea desideratur quod ad Legis naturam and ingenium spectat. At interim quod sic
Perfectum est non simpliciter and proprie infinitum est.

2. Poena Peccati est Infinita: Ergo and Peccatum ipsum. Nisi enim Poena
Peccato analoga sit, Deus iniustus est, quod horrendum dictu. Respondeo.

1. Si Poena Peccati sit infinita, perperam docent Theologi Deum, vt vltra
Condignum remuneratur, ita punire citra condignum.

2. Paena non est infinita, tum quia Creatura, diuinaeque irae extrinsecum
effectum: tum quia non omnes pares, ideoque nec omnes infinitae. Replicatur.
Aeterna est, Ergo and Infinitae. Respondeo.

1. Non disputari de infinitate Durationis sed grauitatis: quare nihil hoc ad
Andromacham.

2. Nego proprie aeternam esse, sed aeuiternam: incepisse enim quamuis desitura
non sit, ideoque nec proprie infinitam.

3. Peccatum in Electis ne paenas quidem aeuiternas lucre: quare saltem in
illis peccata non esse infinita. In reprobis iustum est ut nunquam careant
supplicio, quia nunquam voluerunt carere peccato.

3 Passio Christi vtroque modo infinita est and mole and duratione: Ergo and
peccatum cuius paenas Christus pro nobis luit. Respondeo.

1. Non sequi: maioris enim illa meriti propter dignitatem personae, quam mill
peccatorum myriades demeriti.

2. Passio Christi mole finita fuit: creatura enim, creatura etiam natura qua
patiebatur.

3. Nego duratione aeuiternam, nedum aeternam fuisse. Qui pote? Nisi forte
triginta quatuor plas minus anni, in quibus solis (...) fuit, pro tota
aeternitate censeri possint. Replicatur. At propter dignitatem Personae
aeternae, Paena fuit etiam aeterna. Respondetur.

1. Verba perplexa, and nequid grauius dicam (...) quorum si haec men's and
sententia sit, Passionem Christi temporalem propter dignitatem personae
aeternae, passioni nostrae aeternae etiam ad assem aquiualere, tria dico.

1. Aliter dictum oportuisse: nec enim hunc sensum verba praese far.

2. Hinc sequi Paenant Christi temporalem duntaxat, non aeternam fuisse.

3. Ideo Christum paenas aeternas non passum, quia peccata Electorum pro quibus
passus est non futura erant aeterna: quippe, per gratiam diuinam interpellanda
and interrumpenda.

2. Siquid aliud haec verba sibi volunt, quaeratur Sibyllae aut somniorum
coniector aliquis: Mihi diuinari nec libet nec vacat.

4. At quid frequentius in sacris concionibus scriptisque Theologicis, quam
Peccatum infinitum, Panam infinitam etc. Respondeo.

1. Non omnia ab omnibus proprie dici, praesertim in demegorijs and homilijs ad
populum: sed pleraque tropice and (...), adrei magnitudinem indicandam.

2. Intelligendi sunt de Peccato non formaliter, sed materialiter and obiectiue
loqui, vt supra dictum est: quia Peccato Maiestas infinita violatur.

3. Distinguo, Rem omnem considerari vel vt quiddam Ens, vel secundum propriam
suam rationem. Vt Ens, finita est res omnis creata. Secundum rationem suam
propriam infinita dici potest, si quicquid ad se pertinere ullo modo potest non
limitata, nec secundum mensuram habeat. Sic lucem Solis infinitam dicimus, non
quidem secundum suum Esse, sed secundum rationem lucis: quia habet quicquid ad
communem rationem lucis pertinere potest. Pari ratione, Peccatum, Poena,
Passio, priori modo proculdubio finita sunt: infinita secundo, si vllo modo
infinita sunt, hoc est, secundum quid, non proprie and simpliciter, quod in
thesi affirmatur. Quod etiam non de omni Peccato aut Paena intelligendum est,
sed fortasse de Peccato in Spiritum Sanctum, aut saltem illo Diaboli: deque
paena Gehennae intensissima.

OF CHOICE OF MEATS AND ABSTINENCE.
I Will endeavor to satisfy your demand the best I can, and to resolve you in
the question of choice of Meats and Abstinence: but briefly and in few words.
It may please you therefore to remember.

1. That all Meats in regard of their nature and creation are good. For of
every thing that was created God himself singularly and severally avouches
that it was good, Genesis 1.4.10.12.18.21.25.31. 2. Tim. 4.3.4.
and of all jointly and collectiuely that they were exceeding good. In
particular of Meats, S. Paul affirms that they are good, and created to be
received with thanksgiving.

2. 2. Tim. 4.1.
They that say the contrary are charged by Saint Paul to hold a doctrine of
Devils. And justly were the Manichaeans, Tatiani and Encratitae, for
maintaining that some Meats are of a polluted and unclean nature, ever
accounted and condemned as Heretics in the Church of God.

3. God who is the Creator of Meats, and sovereign Lord of all things, has
full and absolute power over the Meats, and may restrain the use of any kind
of them at his pleasure. Which when it appears he has done, the Conscience
is ^ou^ (...) ^^^ute obedience and abstinence from meats so (...)

Leuit. 11.
4 While therefore the C^^^^niall part of the law remained in force, wherein
(...) ^^nds of Meats were interdicted unto the Jews, partly to distinguish
them thereby from other nations, partly to figure out the Churches election and
separation from the rest of the world: it had been a breach of Religion and a
great sin to put no difference between meat and meat, but to have used them all
indifferently.

5 By the coming of Christ the shadows of the law are vanished, and the
distinction of meats is utterly abolished and taken away: as appears by the
vision of the Sheet showed unto Peter, and the voice that said unto him. Act.
10.11.15.
The things that God has purified pollute thou not. And the free use or
non-vse of them is a part of that Christian liberty which Christ by his blood
has purchased unto us, Romans 14.14.20. Tit. 1.15. Gal. 5.1.
who unto the clean, as the Apostle says,) has made all things clean.

6 In this Liberty so dearly bought we are commanded to stand fast, and not to
suffer our selves again to be entangled with the yoke of bondage. We entangle
our selves if now we place any holiness or religion in abstinence from some kind
of meats, or if we abstain to the end we may satisfy for our sins, or thereby
merit unto our selves everlasting life. 1. Cor. 8.8.
For Meat, as S. Paul says, makes us not acceptable unto God: and again, The
Kingdom of God is not meat or drink but righteousness and peace and joy in
the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.
Heb. 13.9.
And yet again, It is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace and
not with meats which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.

7. The Church of Rome therefore commanding abstinence from some kinds of meats
to the same ends, and as a part of divine worship, is guilty of horrible
sacrilege and cruel tyranny. For she robs the Church of her Liberty: and
imposes upon her that heavy yoke, which Christ himself had taken off her
neck. To what end has Christ freed our consciences, if Rome may again
enthrall them? and how easy a matter is it to avoid punishment and to win
heaven if abstinence from flesh and eggs will work it?

8. As we must stand fast in this liberty, so must we take heed that we abuse
not our Liberty, making it, as S. Peter speaks a cloak for our naughtines,
or, 2. Pet. 2.16. Gal. 5.13. 1. Cor. 10.23.
as S. Paul says, using it as an occasion to the flesh. For though all things,
that is, all indifferent things, be lawful, yet are they not always
expedient: and therefore are not always indifferently to be used or not used,
but as they are convenient, and we find them tend either to edification or
destruction.

9. They are convenient and destroy not when they are regulated and guided by
Charity, Temperance, Piety, and Loyalty. First by Charity. 1. Cor. 8.9. Romans
14.15. V. 20.21.
For we may not by eating give occasion of falling to them that are weak. So
doing, we should not walk charitably, but destroy with our meats him for whom
Christ died. Though all things be pure, yet is it evil to eat with offense.
When we so sin against the Brethren and wound their weak conscience, we sin
against Christ. 1. Cor. 8.13.14.
Wherefore S. Paul resolved rather then by eating he would offend his brother
he would not eat flesh while the world stands.

10. Secondly, by Temperance and Sobriety. For repletion and fullness nourish
in us our inordinate lusts, and make us like pampered horses grow headstrong
and unruly. Romans 13.13.
We may not therefore abuse our liberty unto surfeiting and drunkenness: yea
if we find that some meats or drinks, though not excessiuely taken, do
inflame our lusts, we must abstain. And this was the cause, 2. Cor. 6.6.
as I suppose, why the Apostle Saint Paul knits these two together, in Fasting,
in Chastity. For according to the old saying, Sine Cerere and Baccho friget
Venus, without bread and wine venery and lust waxes cold.

11. And here I cannot but wonder at the vanity and perverseness of Romanists,
who for the subduing and taming of the flesh, at times forbid the eating of
flesh, but in the mean season give leave to feed on all sorts of fishes,
marmelades, and conserues, and to drink the strongest and choicest wines,
which without question provoke and stir up lust as well as flesh. As if to
eat a bit of course flesh upon a prohibited day were gluttony: but to cram our
selves with all other delicates were abstinence and fasting. O blindness! O
stupidity!

12 Thirdly by Piety and Religion. For although Abstinence as Hierome says,
be not in it self a virtue, nor any part of Divine worship, yet is it an
instrument, help, and furtherance thereunto. And therefore if we would humble
ourselves by repentance, or pray unto God with feruency for the auerting of
dangers imminent, or calamities incumbent upon us: we are then by fasting to
testify our humiliation, and to quicken our devotion, as we read the faithful
both under the Law and Gospel were ever wont to do.

13. Lastly by Loialtie and Dutiful subjection. For if the Magistrate, either
for a public civil good shall at times forbid the use of some meats, as of
flesh on fridayes, saturdayes, emberweeks, lent, and the like, or for the
pacifying of Gods wrath in the common calamity of the state, shall command a
general Fast: we are accordingly to abstain, Romans 13.6.
and to yield obedience unto the Magistrate, not only for fear, but also for
Conscience sake.

14. Thus then first you have Liberty by Christ to eat of all kind of meats:
secondly, you are bound to stand fast in your Liberty and not to put your self
under bondage again: thirdly, you may not wantonlie abuse you liberty by doing
such things as are inconvenient, and hurt rather then edify: lastly, our use
thereof must be moderated and directed by Charity, Temperance, Piety and
Loyalty. This if you know, and thus if you do, you cannot err nor do amiss.

15. Which that you may both know and do you are to pray him that is the donor
and giver of all good things, to make you both wise and prudent. Wise in the
knowledge and practice of whatsoever is of absolute nenessity unto salvation:
prudent in the discretion and right use of things indifferent. This God grant
you for his Christ's sake. Amen.

AN ANSWER UNTO CERTAIN REASONS FOR SEPARATION.
I Could have wished withal my heart that in this particular I might have
proved a false prophet: and that my fears concerning you, though they were not
without cause, yet might have been without effect. But now I plainly perceive
that my words were no less then oracle, and what I feared is accordingly come
to pass. For, as I foretold you, from strayning at gnats, you are fallen to
swallowing of Camels: that is, from scrupulousnes and nicenes in Kneeling at
the Communion, and other such like indifferent ceremonies, you have head-longly
cast your self into the gulf of Schism and Separation. In regard whereof,
having heretofore in the matter of Kneeling bestowed my labor in vain upon
you, I fear, now that you are thus far proceeded, and settled as it were on
your lees, I shall much less prevail with you. Nevertheless, because it
pleased you to send me in writing the reasons of your Separation, promising to
return with all speed if they were sufficiently answered: I may not, unless I
will betray the truth, and fail in the duties of Charity, refuse to take a
little further pains with you. Here therefore I send you this short, and, as I
conceive, full answer: the perusal whereof I leave unto you, the censure unto
Gods Church, and the issue unto God himself. Whom I humbly beseech of his
goodness eftsoons to reduce you.

Two grounds you say there are whereon you have built your Separation: the
first whereof you lay down in these terms, That the Hierarchy and Ministry
of Archbishops, Lord Bishops, etc. and Priests may not be set over the Church
of Christ, nor retained therein. From whence, as I understand it, you would
argue and conclude thus.

Where are such Church Officers as may not be set over nor retained in the
Church, there is no true visible Church, and consequently Separation must be
made from it.

But here in England are such Church Officers, as Archbishops, Bishops etc.
and Priests.

Ergo, here in England is no true visible Church, and consequently Separation
must be made from it.

To this argument thus formed I answer, first by denying the Mayor Proposition:
which in that you go not about to prove, you commit that fault in reasoning
which Logicians call Petitionem Principij, taking that for granted which is
most questioned. For suppose that Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests were
superfluous officers, yet it is not every superfluity in a Church that takes
away the nature and essence thereof: and even they who mislike the present
Church government, do not all of them, as you Separatists do, infer
thereupon a nullity, but only a corruption or aberration in the Church. It
would have been much more to the purpose, if you could have demonstrated that
the Church of England is defective in such officers as are essential, and
without which a Church cannot be. Here therefore I must entreat you either to
acknowledge your rashness, or else to bestow a little more pains in the
proof of that which without evidence of reason will never be yielded you.

Again I deny the Minor Proposition, affirming contrarily that Archbishops,
Bishops, and Priests are lawful Church Officers, and may be both set over and
retained in the Church. For I hope you understand these terms not cauillingly
and equiuocally, but according to the meaning and definition of the Church of
England. Otherwise you shall but iangle about words, and bewray that you have
more desire to pick quarrels, then ability to justify your Separation. But you
endeavor to fortify your Minor by twelve reasons supplying in the tale if
ought be wanting in the weight. Let us examine them severally. The first is
this.

1 No Antichristian ministry may be set over the Church of Christ, nor
retained therein. 2. These. 2.3.4.11.12. To. 14.9 10. with Ex. 4.5. Deuteronomy. 7.26.
Ps. 119.21.128.


But the Ministry of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops and Priests is Antichristian,
because the Churches of Antichrist cannot be complete, if they have not this
Prelacy, as appears by the Popes Canons and Pontifical, and by their
Church-Constitution.

Therefore they are not to be set over the Church of Christ, nor retained
therein.

What mean you by the word Antichristian? For although I know well what
properly it signifies, yet I doubt much what you understand thereby: it being
your manner either through negligence or ignorance too often to speak
improperly. If you understand it properly, and as you ought, for that which is
against Christ and his ordinance, or, as your men sometimes express
themselves, which is a special part of Antichrists apostasy, then I yield you
your Mayor, and confess that no such Ministry may be set over the Church nor
retained therein. But if you mean thereby either that which was first
instituted and deuized by Antichrist, or that which being formerly instituted
is used and approved in the Church of Antichrist, then I deny the Mayor. For
first, every thing (by Antichrist ordained) is not presently unlawful and
Antichristian, no more then every act of a tyrant is unjust and tyrannous. How
many good and wholesome laws were enacted under the reign of Richard the
third, who yet was a most bloody and cruel tyrant? Neither were they afterward
repealed by succeeding Kings, but stand still in force notwithstanding his
tyranny: for they proceeded from him non qua tyrannus, not as he was a tyrant,
but as he was a wise and politic governor. In like manner, not every thing
ordained by Antichrist is forthwith to be rejected, but only that which he
does qua Antichristus, as he is Antichrist, and is merely Antichristian. It
is a great folly to refuse good counsel because it is given by an evil man.
Wise men will consider non quis sed quid, not so much who does a thing, as what
is done. For as truth is Gods in whose mouth soever it be found: so is good
also whosoever be the Author thereof. Again, if those things whereof
Antichrist is the first founder be not therefore by and by unlawful, much
less are those things so, which being of a former institution are only used
and observed by him. Were it otherwise, how many ordinances of God himself,
and wholesome constitutions of the primitive Church would prove unlawful being
still retained in Popery?

This Mayor you endeavor to fortify with sundry passages of Scripture. But as
Cassius of old was wont to say, Cui bono? to what end? For if you would prove
it in the sense granted you, they are alleged needlessly: if in the sense
denied, friuolously; and to speak the truth every way vainly and
impertinently, as the very reading of them will manifest to any one that will
but take the pains to peruse them. But this is the manner of your men to paint
your margents with multitude of quotations nothing to the purpose: whereas one
allegation directly concluding is more then a hundred demonstrations, as being
the words of the first and infallible verity. What you intend hereby I wot not,
whether to amuse the Reader and ouerwhelme him with your numbers, or to win you
credit and estimation with the vulgar, as if you were the only skillful
Text-men. But sure I am that such sleighting of Scripture is no less then the
taking of Gods Name in vain: which whosoever does, the Lord professes he will
not hold him guiltless. Scripture is not made nor appointed for pomp and
show, but for conquest and victory.

To the Minor Proposition I answer negatiuely, The ministry of Archbishops,
Lord-Bishops, and Priests is not Antichristian, whether you understand it as
first invented by Antichrist, or against Christ. That it is not of Antichrists
invention is as clear as the Sun. For first Priests are of divine
institution, being no other then those Presbyters or Pastors, to whom the
administration of the Word and Sacraments is committed, and who are ordained by
Christ for the building up of his Church unto the end of the world. The Priests
of the Church of Rome indeed are of Antichrists founding, whose office is to
sacrifice and offer up Christ himself in the Mass unto his Father both for
the quick and the dead. But our Priests have nothing common with them save the
name only: their idolatry we detest and abhor, although we retain the
name. Theirs are Mass Priests, ours are Preaching or Ministering Priests.
Neither let the name offend you: for notwithstanding Papists have abused it to
signify a Sacrificer, yet properly it does not so, being originally derived
from Presbyter, neither among us is it now so understood. To say nothing that
the ancient Fathers (who I presume were not Antichristian) usually call the
Ministers of the Gospel Sacerdotes, Priests. As therefore you cannot without
great absurdity reason from the name to the thing, thus, your Ministers are
called Priests, Ergo, your Ministry is Antichristian: so neither can you
without greater absurdity separate your self from the thing because of the
name, and because our Ministers are called Priests withdraw your self from our
Ministry.

Secondly, Archbishops and Bishops if they be not of divine institution, yet
were they some Centuries of years before ever Antichrist appeared in the
world, as all antiquity and Ecclesiastical Story testifies. That most famous
first general Council of Nice assembled by Constantin the Great about the
year of our Lord 327 not only approves them, but also affirms that the
Church anciently and long before that time had been governed by them.
Epiphanius and Augustine both reckon Aerius among the number of Heretics, for
denying the then-receiued and allowed distinction between a Bishop and a
Presbyter. But to speak my mind plainly, I am for my part persuaded, that the
superiority of Bishops over the Ministers was of Apostolical institution.
Those Angels to whom Saint John in the second and third of the Revelation is
commanded to write, what other were they then the Bishops of those Churches of
Asia? In Ephesus, one of those seven Churches, it is reported by S. Luke that
there were many Presbyters, and I doubt not but it was so in other of the
Churches also: howbeit the Apostle writes unto one only whom he calls the
Angel, as being singular and eminent above the rest. And the ancient story of
the Church records the particular Bishops of every one of those Churches
together with their successors for a long time. So that Bishops being in the
Apostles time, and successively continued in the Primitive Church, without any
contradiction either of the Apostles themselves or any other, yea rather with
their approbation and allowance, as appears by those seven Epistles unto the
seven Angels, and all the writings of the ancient Fathers: how can it be
imagined but that Bishops and their superiority over others was of Apostolical
institution?

Now if Priests or Pastors (for as we have said, in substance they be all one)
were ordained by God himself, and Bishops derive their pedigree also from the
holy Apostles of God: it follows by necessary consequence, that as our
Ministry is not from Antichrist, so neither is it against Christ. Were it
against Christ, it would be either because he has forbidden it, or for that it
destroys rather then edifieth the Church. But it is no where forbidden. If it
be, show the place, and we yield. Neither does it hinder the edification of
the Church. For first it is the office both of Bishops and Priests to preach
the Gospel of Christ, and to administer his holy Sacraments. Secondly, the
advancement of one Presbyter above the rest, was for the prevention of Schism.
For when Factions began to arise in the Church, some saying I am of Paul,
others I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas: then, says Hierom, was it decreed
through the whole world, that one being chosen from among the Presbyters should
be set over the rest. Who being so preferred, his duty is to ouersee the rest
of his brethren, that they carefully discharge the office imposed upon them,
and frame their lives according to the worthiness of their calling: All which I
am sure furthereth the building of the Church, so far is it from destroying:
so that nor Priests nor Bishops, whether ye regard their offices, or the end
of their ordination, can be said to be against Christ.

Peradventure (for I would willingly let nothing pass unanswered) there lies a
mystery in the word Lord-Bishops, and you intend that they are the more
Antichristian for that they are so called. Surely if they should ambitiously
affect the title of Lord, Mat. 23.
as the Pharisees sometimes did the title of Rabbi, it were great pride and
vanity in them: and if they should (...), Lord it, and as it were domineere
over the flock of Christ as if the inheritance were theirs, it would be
intolerable presumption and tyranny. But, that a title of honor may be given
unto Bishops in regard of their honorable place and calling, as there is no
reason to the contrary, so it must needs proceed from much envy or
frowardness to deny. Genesis 31.35. 1 King. 18.7.13.
Let it not be displeasing in the eyes of my Lord, says Rahel to her Father.
Art not thou my Lord Elias? And again, Was it not told my Lord what I did when
Iezebel flew the Prophets of the Lord, said good Obadiah unto the Prophet? If
Laban because he was a natural Father unto Rahel, and Eliah, because he was a
Prophet might justly be so styled: why may not Bishops also, who are the
spiritual Fathers, and Prophets, yea and Angels of the Church? Luc. 22.25.26.
you will say, our Savior expressly forbids them to be called Gracious
Lords. I deny it. For although it pleased the translator so to render the
original word (...), because anciently it was a title of honor given unto
Princes: yet does it not properly signify so, but Benefactors, or Wel-doers.
Nevertheless suppose it so signified, yet is it not simply the title, but the
ambitious affectation of the title which Christ disliketh. Act. 10.38.
If a man imitating Jesus Christ should go about (...) doing good, were it a
sin trow you to give him his deserved name and to call him (...) a wel-doer?
Had it been simply unlawful for a Minister to be called Lord, would Paul and
Silas have admitted it, and not rather have reprehended the keeper of the
prison saying unto them, My Lords, Act. 16.30.
what ought I to do that I may be saved? Our Savior Christ says unto his
disciples, Be not ye called Masters, Be not ye called Doctors: Mat. 23.8.10.
and yet among you some Ministers are called Doctors, and all Masters. So that
it appears by your own practice, that the name of Lord makes not Bishops
Antichristian, but as we have said, it is the affecting of the name which is
forbidden. And thus you see your Minor is no way true.

Notwithstanding you endeavor to prove it thus, Because the Churches of
Antichrist cannot be complete without this Prelacy, as appears, you say, by
the Popes Canons, and Pontifical, and by their Church-constitutions. A seely
and sorry argument. For first, the Ministry of the Church of England is so
far from being a complement of the Churches of Antichrist, that the Church of
Rome does Anathematize and accurse it, esteeming us (right as you do) to be
no Church at all because we want their Ministry. Again, may not I with as
good reason as you argue thus? The state and Kingdom of Antichrist cannot be
complete without the authority of Civil Magistrates: Ergo, Civil Magistrates
are Antichristian. If this kind of reasoning be not good, neither is yours;
for they are both of one mould. Lastly Antichristianity being a Mystery, and
not an Heathnish or Turkish opposition unto Christ, it cannot be complete
except it retain many of Christ's ordinances, which therefore I trust you will
not say to be Antichristian. A lie cannot subsist but upon truth, nor evil
but in good: nor Antichrists hypocrisy but upon the Religion and discipline of
Christ. And thus have I fully answered your first argument: whereon I have been
the longer because it is the Basis and ground as it were of all the rest, and
the answer thereunto will in a manner serve them all, or the most part of them.
Your second argument is this.

2 Because it cannot be approved by the testament of Christ, as the Ministry
had in his Church may and ought to be. Ephesians. 4.11.12. 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6.28.29.
To. 12.7.8. 1. Tim. 3. and 5.3.9.17. and 6.13.14.
And if such (as could not prove by their genealogy that they were of Aaron)
were deposed from their Ministry under Moses Law Ezr. 2.62.63. Heb. 3.2.3. and
2.1.2.3. and 12.25.
, much more should such be now deposed, as have not their offices warranted by
Christ's Testament.

If we reduce your argument into form it is this, That Ministry which cannot
be approved by the Testament of Christ is not to be allowed in the Church.
But the Ministry of the Church of England cannot be approved by the Testament
of Christ. Ergo, it is not to be allowed in the Church. The Minor which you
might be sure we would deny, you have left naked to the wide world without
proof: the Mayor which you saw we could not well deny, you endeavor to
fortify with a double reason. Let it be supposed then that it is denied how
prove you it? First, The Ministry had in the Church may and ought to be so
approved. How does this appear? By the places quoted in the margent? Nothing
less: They approve indeed certain officers in the Church: but affirm not
that every officer ought to be so approved. Secondly, if, say you, such as
could not derive their genealogy from Aaron were deposed, much more are they to
be deposed who cannot warrant their offices by Christ's Testament. A poor
argument God wot. For in the law there was an express commandment that none
might execute the Priests office but he that was of the lineage of Aaron: but
that no office might be admitted nor retained in the Church unless it were so
commanded, I find no where in Scripture. Wherefore to argue thus, Nothing that
is against Gods Word may be allowed, Ergo, nor any thing that is not
commanded, is a plain Non sequitur, and it follows not. Thus you see, if a
man were so disposed, how easy it is to quarrel with your Mayor, which yet
simply I deny not.

Briefly therefore to clear all, I distinguish of these terms, Approved and
Warranted by the Word. A thing may be said to be warranted or approved by the
Word two ways, both when it is commanded, and when it is not forbidden: for
things neither commanded nor forbidden, are indifferent, and subject unto the
Churches power. Hereupon thus I answer, if you mean it in the former sense
only, then prove your Mayor that what is not by commandment approved is
unlawful: if in the latter then I grant you the Mayor, that whatsoever is
forbidden is unlawful. But withal I deny the Minor, that Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests are forbidden, requiring you to prove it, which I know you can
never do. For as touching so much of their duty as is common to them all, to
wit, the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments, they
are all Pastors and Teachers, and so warranted in the Texts by you quoted: but
in regard of preeminence and superiority one above another Bishops are no other
then were the Angels of the seven Churches, as we have above demonstrated.
Howsoever, if Bishops be not commanded, yet are they not forbidden: and their
office making not against edification, but for it rather, it cannot being
ordained by the Church but be lawful. Your third argument.

3 Because the Church is the Spouse, Kingdom and Body of Christ, and therefore
may not have Antichrists Hierarchy and ministry set over it, or retained in
it. For what concord has Christ with Beliall?

Antichrists Hierarchy and Ministry may not beset over the Church nor
retained in it. Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, are Antichrists Hierarchy and
Ministry. Ergo, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, may not be set over the Church
nor retained in it. The Mayor of this Syllogism you are very careful to
maintain, because the Church is the Spouse, the Kingdom, the Body of Christ:
as also because there can be no concord betwixt Christ and Belial. But to what
end all this? and with such a stir to prove that which no man gainsayes? for
we confess Christ's Kingdom may not be governed by Antichrists policy. You
should rather have labored to strengthen the Minor, that Archbishops, Bishops,
and Priests are Antichrists Hierarchy and Ministry: for you might be well
assured we would never yield you that unless by strength of reason you
constrained us. Here therefore against the rule of Logic again you beg the
principal matter in question, taking for granted that those offices are
merely Antichristian. But you must prove it, and not look that whatsoever you
fancy to be true, others upon your bare word must presently believe and take
to be true. See the answer to the first argument. I proceed to the fourth.

4 If when a King substituteth Judges, Justices etc. no subjects may either
refuse to be governed by these, or set over themselves officers of other
Kingdoms, as the Roman tribunes etc. how can it be lawful for any Christians?
etc.

It is an old saying that Symbolical divinity is no argument of proof: and
that Similitudes serve rather to illustrate and clear a man's meaning, then to
prove and convince the understanding. In regard whereof if I had so pleased, I
might well have slighted this fourth reason, and not have vouchsafed it any
answer at all. For what is it other then a bare and naked Similitude?
nevertheless for further satisfaction let us try the strength thereof. Two
things you avouch, first that Christians may not refuse to be governed by
those officers which Christ has set over them: secondly, that Christians may
not set over themselves officers of Antichrists kingdom. The former I confess
is true, but nothing to the purpose. For we reject not the officers ordained by
Christ, nor refuse to be governed by them. If we do, so have all Churches also
done, down from S. John's time unto this present age. within which compass you
cannot name any one Church at any time molded after your platform: and I am
sure all orthodoxall Churches have ever been governed by the same officers
that ours is. Whence it follows that if for want of such a Polity and such
Officers as you dream of we have in England no true Church: neither has there
been for certain hundred of years above a thousand any true Church through
the whole world. Which how it can agree with the word of God affirming that of
his kingdom there shall be none end, I cannot conceive. For by your reckoning
the kingdom of Christ ceased soon after the departure of the Apostles, and
suffered an interruption of about fourteen hundred years until Brown and
Barrow began to play the Schismatickes.

The second Proposition I acknowledge also to be true but withal deny that we
have set over our selves any Antichristian or foreign Officers. For as we
have above both said and showed, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests are of divine
institution: and now I further add that they were first bred in the kingdom
of Christ, and not taken from any other kingdom. your assertion to the
contrary without due proof argues that you build to your self castles in the
air, and have no ground for your presumption. Your fifth argument follows.

5. Because the Church being Christ's spouse, kingdom, and body must have his
Ministry set and kept in it, and no other. And if no man can make a finger or
the least member of a natural humane body, or add any other limme thereto
without deformity then God has created, and can much less give life to any
such counterfeit member of his own making: how is it possible that he can set
up another Ministry?

1. Cor. 12.12.20 27.28.
The argument is thus to be formed, The Ministry of Christ and no other is to
be set over and kept in the Church. The Ministry of Archbishops, Bishops, and
Priests is not Christ's. Ergo, it is not to be set over nor kept in the Church.
The Mayor I grant confessing that no office may be allowed in the Church but
that which is from Christ, either immediately, or mediatly, that is, from those
unto whose wisdom and discretion he has delegated some part of his authority
to order many things in the Church. For as the Church may not alter that
Ministry which Christ has settled to continue for ever: so may she by virtue
of her delegate authority ordain such offices as are not forbidden, and tend
to edification. And being so ordained they are though not immediately, yet
mediately from Christ. Neither yet does the Church so doing presume to make (as
you say) either a finger, or any other member or limme that is essential unto
the body, much less to give life thereunto: but only to provide a glove as it
were for the finger, or a suit of apparel for the body the better to preserve
it in life.

The Minor that the Ministry of Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests is not of
Christ, I deny, affirming the clean contrary, that they are those Pastors and
Angels authorized and allowed by Christ in his word. It is the greatest vanity
and idleness that can be in disputing, only with boldness to affirm that
which is denied, and never to endeavor the proof thereof: which yet is your
solemn fault almost in every argument. Your sixth reason.

6 Because Christians are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 3.16.17. 2.
Cor. 6.16. 2. These. 2.4. Col. 2.18. Act. 20.17.28.
and their consciences wrought upon by Ministry in the Church: and therefore
may not be defiled by the Hierarchy of Archbishops etc. whom the Holy Ghost
never made Overseers.

The argument in form stands thus, Those offices that defile the Temples of
the Holy Ghost and consciences of men may not be set over nor retained in the
Church. But the Hierarchy of Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests defiles the
Temples of the Holy Ghost and consciences of men. Ergo, the Hierarchy of
Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests may not be set over nor retained in the
Church. The Mayor we readily yield you: but how prove you the Minor, that
these Officers defile the Conscience? Forsooth because the Holy Ghost has not
made them Overseers. And how prove you this again? Because the Pastors of
Ephesus were made such Overseers. An Herculean argument I promise you. For what
lets but that he that made the Pastors of Ephesus Overseers, has made the
Pastors of England Overseers also? Alas, alas that upon such frivolous and
toying reasons so dangerous and offensive Schisms should be made. And take
heed how you quench or grieve the Spirit of God, who if you have in you any
measure of knowledge or spark of grace, has wrought it in you by our
Ministry. For preaching which is the ordinary means to beget faith, I suppose
you have not had elsewhere: and it is no less then blasphemy to call the
working of Gods Spirit by his Holy Word upon the souls of men, the defiling of
the Conscience. The seventh argument.

7 Because Christ alone is the Head of the Church in whom all fullness of power
dwells, Ephesians. 1.22.23.4.11.16. Col. 1.18.19.2.8.9.10.18.19.1. Cor.
12.4.5.6.12.27.28. 1. Tim. 3. and 5.8.6.13.14. Rev. 11.13.18.8.14.8.17. and.
18. and 19.
and from whom alone the Church receives her life and power, so as none may
be subject to any power or head in Religion, save only to him. And therefore
no Ministers or Officers in the Church are to be set up or retained who derive
not their power and functions from Christ, which the former do not: and
therefore they are not etc. but to be abandoned as enemies of Christ's
sovereign authority, and making their hearers and submitters to them guilty of
high treason against our Lord Christ Jesus.

It is true, there is but one Head of the Church from whom she receives life
and Power: yet are there also under Christ governors in the Church, who by
virtue of that power which they have received from him may ordain many things
touching the well government thereof, and to submit our selves thereunto is not
to be subject to another power or head, but to the ordinance of Christ
himself. But it is false that Bishops derive not their power and function from
Christ, as we have already manifestly proved. If you have any thing to the
contrary, I hope we shall hear of it another time: for hitherto you have
only said, but showed nothing. As for those words, that Bishops are to be
abandoned as enemies of Christ's sovereign authority etc. they savor more of
passion then reason, and deserve rather to be pitied then answered. The eigth
argument.

1. Cor. 18.27.28. Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.
8 Because God only must have this preeminence to dispose the members every
one of them in the body of the Church at his own pleasure: so as either it
must be showed that God has placed the Hierarchy of Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, or they are not to be set up or retained or approved.

We have satisfied you in this already, if happily you will be satisfied. For
we have showed, first that the Ministry of Archbishops, Bishops and Priests
is of divine and Apostolical institution: and secondly, if the superiority of
Bishops be not immediately from God, yet being not forbidden, and tending to
edification, the Church under God has power to ordain them. Hereunto we
expect your answer. The ninth argument.

Mat. 22.25.26. Ep. 4.8.11.12. Ps. 68.18. To. 14.23. Heb. 11.16.
9 Because none can of Faith join unto the Hierarchy aforesaid, because they
are not warranted by the Word, being not from Heaven but from the earth.

The Ministry aforesaid is warranted by Gods Word, as we have oftentimes
said, and so is from Heaven not from earth: and therefore you may of Faith
join unto it. Had it not been a plant of Gods own setting, doubtless it
would have been rooted out of the Church long since, and not have continued
fifteen hundred years together. The tenth argument.

10 Because none can submit unto or have spiritual communion with the
Hierarchy and Ministry aforesaid, Rev. 14.9.10.11.
but he shall worship the Beast and his image, spoken of in the Revelation,
and receive his mark in his forehead or hand: and so make himself subject to
the wrath of God.

This argument though differing in words, yet in sense and meaning is all one
with the first. For how can it be conceived that they who submit themselves
unto our Ministry worship, as you say, the Beast and his Image, unless it be
for that it is Antichristian? For avoiding of Tautologie therefore, I refer
you unto the answer of that argument, where I plainly demonstrate that it is
Christian not Antichristian: so that in communicating with it, there can be no
danger either of worshipping the Beasts-image, or receiving his mark, or
incurring the wrath of God. But whereas you talk of worshipping the Beast, you
much mistake the matter. For by the Beast is understood not Antichrist but the
Roman Empire whereof the State of Antichrist is the image. Neither can you
show, Rev. 18.4.5.6 2. Cor. 16.17.18. Ioh. 10.5. Number. 16.1.26.40.18.4.5. Ezeh
44.7.18.4.5. Mat. 15.13. Es. 11.4. and. 13. and. 14. Ier. 15. and. 50. and.
51.2. These. 2.3.4.8. Rev. 14.6.7.8. and. 17. and. 18. and. 19.
if our Ministry were Antichristian, how by retaining it we should worship
the Roman Empire. The eleventh argument.

11 Because all are straightly bound and charged by the Lord to depart from and
witness against the aforesaid Prelacy and Priesthood being a strange
Ministry, and such as is opposed against and exalted above the holy ordinance
and Ministry of Christ, and shall be abolished by him appearing in the light
and power of the Gospel.

Our Ministry neither is a strange Ministry, nor opposed or exalted above
Christ's Ministry, but Christ's own Ministry, as now once again I tell you:
and therefore no man is charged either to depart from it, or to witness
against it. But you are a strange disputer, who so peremptorily affirm that
which has ever been denied, and never go about to prove it. As for that you
say our Ministry shall be abolished by Christ appearing in the light and
power of the Gospel, it bewrayes what you desire should be, but is no
certain Oracle of what indeed shall be. Sure I am our Ministry has subsisted
this fifteen hundred years, and the light and power of the Gospel hitherto
has not abolished it, but it has still published and propagated the Gospel.
Happily when the Church shall cease to be militant, and Christ shall deliver up
the Kingdom to his Father, that God may be all in all, this ministry shall
have an end. But till then, Credat Iudaeus Apella, Non ego, let Brownists and
Barowists believe it, not I. Your obstinate begging of the principal matter in
question conuinceth you to be but a bad disputant, and this rash and unadvised
prediction now dubbeth you for a false Prophet also. The last argument.

2. King. 23.5. Ps. 101. Pro. 16.10.11.12.25.2. 5 Rev. 17.16. Deu. 17.18.19.20.
To. 12.7.8. Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. 1. Tim. 3. and. 5.9.17.6.13.14
12 Because it is the duty and in the power of Princes to suppress and root
out of their dominions all false Ministries: and therefore these as well ^s
Abbots, Friars, Nuns, Cardinals, etc. Whereas it is not in their power, or of
any under Heaven to abolish the offices given by Christ to his Church.

Here again you take for granted that our Ministry is but a false Ministry,
and that Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests are no less Antichristian then
Abbots, Friars, Nuns, Cardinals, which is ever denied but never confirmed by
you. Vain man, prove our Ministry to be false, and we will grant it is to
be rooted out: otherwise outfacing and desperate asseueration will not serve
the turn.

And thus have I briefly examined all your twelve reasons whereby you go about
to prove the Minor of your principal Syllogism, namely that our
Church Officers Archbishops, Bishops and Priests are not to be set over nor
retained in the Church. Whereupon I infer, seeing your Mayor is barely
affirmed being untrue, and your Minor so weakly and insufficiently proved: you
have not as yet soundly concluded the lawfulness and necessity of your
separation. Let us proceed to the second ground which you conceive in these
words, A true visible Church is a company of people called and separated from
the world by the Word of God, Act. 2.39.19.9. To. 1.6.7.10.14.15.16. Job.
17.14.20. Ezekiel. 36.38. Phil. 1.5. Act. 2.41:42.47.11.21.24.13.4.34. To. 12.5.
2. Cor. 9.13. Ps. 110.13. Es. 14.1.44.5.60.8. Zach. 4.6.8.21.22.23.
and joined together by voluntary profession of the Faith of Christ in the
Fellowship of the Gospel. Out of which if I mistake not you would conclude the
iustnes of your separation thus.

Where there is not a company of people called and separated from the world and
joined together as above, there is not a true visible Church, and consequently
Separation ought to be made from it.

But in England there is not a company of people so called and separated from
the world, and so joined together.

Ergo, in England there is not a true visible Church, and consequently
separation ought to be made from it.

I distinguish of the middle term Called: for there is a double calling, the
one is Gratiae oblatae, where by God only inuites men unto Christ, and offers
them Grace, the other Gratiae inditae and infusae, whereby he not only offers
but infuseth grace also into them. The former Calling makes not a man of the
Church: for he that is no otherwise called, answers not by Faith, nor
comes unto Christ, but remains still in infidelity, and so is utterly
excluded out of the Church. Of the latter Calling I distinguish again, for it
is either that whereby he bestows upon man Faith of Doctrine, or that
whereby over and above he gives them Justification together with true
Sanctification. Faith of Doctrine is either a Partial or an Entire Faith: a
Partial Faith whereby part only of the Christian verity is held, or an Entire
Faith by which the whole saving truth is believed and professed: And this
again either in Unity or in Schism, in Unity with other Churches of God, or
in Schism with Separation from them. Now all these and eueryone of them are of
the Christian Church: for they are neither Gentiles, nor Jews, nor Turks,
being by the calling of grace brought to the profession of the Christian
Religion. But yet among them there is exceeding great difference: for they that
hold the entire truth of Christ are of that Christian Church, which is called
Oxthodoxall: they that hold it in part only, are of that Christian Church
which is Heretical. They that entirely hold the truth in Unity with other
Churches of God, are of that Christian Orthodoxall Church which is Catholic:
they that hold the same whole truth in Separation from them are of that
Christian Orthodoxall Church which is Schismatic. And such is the Church of
Brownists to which you have adjoined your self. But they who hold the whole
truth of Christ not only in Unity but also in Sincerity, being truly justified
by Faith and Sanctified in the lauour of Regeneration, they I say are of that
Christian Orthodoxall Catholic Church which is Invisible and known only unto
God. For although both the persons and profession of those that are thus
called, be visible, and may by outward sense be discerned, whereby in the eye
of Charity they are to be counted Gods elect people: yet the inward truth and
sincerity of the heart is to us invisible, and seen of none but only him who
tries the heart and raines, and so alone knows who are his.

These distinctions thus promised I come at length to answer your Syllogism,
and demand of you which of these Callings it is that you mean. If the last,
whereby we have received entirely to believe the whole truth of Christ, and
that not only in Unity, but also in Sincerity and with a sanctified heart:
then I deny the Mayor, for it is not the Visible but the Invisible Church alone
that co^sists of such members. Neither can such a Visible Church be found upon
the face of the earth: for here corn and cockle, chafe and wheat, Saints and
hypochrits are mingled together, neither can you affirm other of that Church
whereunto now you associate your self. If you mean any other of the Callings
above mentioned, or all of them besides this last, then I deny your Minor. For
here in England we are a company of people to whom not only grace has been
offered, but who also have received grace to believe the truth of Christ, and
therefore are not Infidels but of the Church of Christ. Again we have received
to believe the whole truth, and therefore are an Oxthodoxall not an Heretical
Church. Lastly, we hold the whole truth of God in Unity with other Churches,
and amongst us there are thousands also who profess the same with sincere and
sanctified hearts, and therefore we are not a Schismatic as you are, but a
true Catholic Church. This Minor thus denied you go not about to strengthen
with so much as one argument, and yet hither should you have bent all your
forces. About the Mayor you bestow a little more pains, endeavoring to fortify
it with six reasons: which although they be to little purpose, yet to give
you the more satisfaction, let us briefly examine them. And first that which is
in order first.

1. Cor. 12.27. Exodus 19.5.6. 1. Cor. 14.33. 1. Tim. 3.15. Mat. 13.24.31. Psalm.
46.4.5.80.1. 1. Pet. 2.5.9. Rev. 1.11.12.13.20.
1. Because a true visible Church is the body of Christ, a Kingdom of Priests,
a Church of Saints, the household of God, the Kingdom of heaven, the City of
God, the sheep of the Lord, a chosen generation, a golden Candlestick etc.

These titles properly belong unto the invisible Church consisting of those who
are effectually called by saving grace. And when they are said and affirmed of
any visible Church, you must understand that the denomination is in regard of
the better part thereof, namely those Saints who have received the spirit of
adoption, the earnest penny of their everlasting inheritance, not that no evil
men are mixed with them. In Corinth and Galatia as there were many holy and
faithful servants of God, so were there many lewd and ungodly men also: for it
is well known that they were much pestered both with error in doctrine, and
corruption in manners. And yet the Apostle S. Paul never sticks at it to
acknowledge them visible Churches: which I am sure he would not have done, had
he thought that the mixture of bad and good in the same society did nullify a
Church. Nay rather if he had been of your humor he would have aduized a
separation.

1. How should it else have Christ for the Prophet, Priest, Heb. 3.1.2.3. and 5,
6.9. and. 12.28. Mat. 28.18.19.20. Ps. 110.1.4.1. Pet. 2.4.5.25. Act. 2.41.47.
Ephesians. 1.22.23.2.19.22.
and King thereof? or how should men know where to join and become members of
the body of Christ, with assurance to have him their head? etc.

It is the Invisible Church, the Church of the first borne, as S. Paul calls
it, whose names are enrolled in heaven, Heb. 12.23.
unto which Christ properly and univocally is a Prophet, Priest, and King. For
he is a Head in such manner unto those only who are knit together with him in
the same mystical body by the unity of the same spirit, and to whom he
communicates from himself the sweet influence of life, sense, motion, even
grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16.
as S. John speaks. Is he not then a Head also of the visible Church? yes, as
it is a Church: it is a Church equiuocally, and so is Christ the Head thereof.
For hypocrites and wicked men mingled with the good are not members of Christ,
as Ambrose says, but of the devil, and therefore Christ properly is not their
Head, Head, and Body being Correlatiues. Who are Elected and by true Justifying
Faith are ingrafted into Christ's body you may charitably judge, but cannot
certainly know: for God only knows who are his. Nevertheless where you see a
Society of men professing entirely and in unity the truth of Christ, join your
self unto them, knowing that they are a Christian orthodoxall Catholic
Church. And assure your self that there are among them sundry who are the
dear Saints of God and profess the truth in sincerity and vprightnes of heart
also: which if you shall do together with them, you need not doubt but you
shall have Christ to be your head.

Mat. 28.18.19.20. 2. Cor. 6.17.18. Lev. 26.11.12. Ps. 46.4.5. Es. 59.20.21.
Ez. 37.27.28. and 48.35.
3. How should it else have assurance of the promises and seals of Gods
Covenant, presence, and blessing to belong and appertain unto them?

The promises of Christ are proclaimed in such mixed companies unto all on
condition of faith and repentance, though actually performed unto those only
who actually have performed the condition by repenting and believing. And to
these the Seals of the Covenant of grace, the presence of God, and his
blessings do appertain also. If then you would be assured that both the
promises and seals belong unto you, join your self to such companies, and
perform the condition with them, and the Spirit of adoption will certify and
assure you thereof. If you will not, you must seek out of the world, or hang
ever in doubt: for in the world there are none but such companies.

Act. 2.41.42.47.11.21.24.18.27. Mat. 18.17.20. 1. Cor. 5.4.5.12.13. Ps. 149.9.
4. How else should it have or use the power of Christ to receive in members
joining unto them, or to cast out such as are obstinate offenders?

It is true there is a power given by Christ unto the Church ^o receive into
their Society such as profess the entire Faith of Christ in Unity: but whether
they profess the same in sincerity also, that the Church cannot tell, and yet
receives them. Again she has power to censure and cast out obstinate
offenders: but yet hereby it appears that the Church visible is a mingled
company, and that offenders are to be accounted members thereof until by a
legal proceeding they be cut off. Suppose that the Church grow remiss in
denouncing offenders, and tolerate them too much: this argues that corruption
is crept into the Church, not that is no Church.

5. Because that every Church as they have Communion with Christ, and are one
body with him: 1. Cor. 10.16.17. Hag. 2.12.14. 1. Cor. 5.6. Number. 19.13.20.22.
and 5.2.3. Heb. 12.15.
so have they Communion also one with another, and are all one body: and by
communion with open wicked retained among them are all defiled.

The members of every Church have (I grant) both Union and Communion one with
another: the Christian Church in the Christian Faith, the Orthodoxall Church in
the entire Christian Faith, the Catholic Church in the entire Christian Faith
with Unity, the Invisible Church in the entire Christian Faith with Unity and
Sanctity. This last Union and Communion is only among the Saints: the former
may be both between good and bad. That if you speak of, you speak not of a
Visible Church; and so nothing to the purpose: this if you speak of, you
speak untruly, as we have showed.

Moreover, to say that the toleration or presence of open wicked sinners in the
Church defiles either the godly or the holy things of the godly, is to make the
sin of the wicked more powerful to hinder the descent of heavenly blessings,
then Christ's love and union with us is auayleable to convey them unto us. And
then was Christ much to blame, who suffered the Sacrament even at the first
institution to be polluted with Judas presence. But you should consider that
private conversation is one thing, and public Church-meetings another; which
you ignorantly confounding beguile your self. Privately you may refuse at
pleasure to converse with the wicked: in public assemblies you cannot avoid
them. That is in your own power, but to remove them thence is in the
Magistrates only.

Ps. 84.10. Cant. 16.7. Os. 2.2.19.20. 2. Cor. 6.15. Reu. 1.11.12.20.17.1.5.
6 How else should a true and visible Church be truly and rightly
distinguished from all false Churches?

Here at length have you discovered unto us the very ground of your error, in
that you cannot see how a true visible Church can be distinguished from a
false, if notorious offenders be suffered to have any communion therein.
Learn then that true and false Churches are differenced by having or wanting
the form and essence of a Church. The Christian Church is discerned from
Heathnish, Jewish, Turkish congregations by the Christian Faith; an Orthodoxe
Church from an Heretical by an entire Faith: a Catholic from a Schismatic
by an entire Faith held in Unity: and the Invisible Church from all other by
the Sanctity of every member: but this is known to God only, the rest may be
discerned by man also. You ought therefore to put a difference between a
Corrupt Church and a false Church. A false Church wants the essence and
therefore is no Church: a corrupt Church wants only the purity it should
have, yet having the essence it is a Church. Which if you had well considered
you would not have condemned our Church (if yet so corrupt as you ween) for no
Church, unless you would also say a sick man were no man: much less would
you have rent your self from it.

And thus you see your second ground fails you also, and that you have not
demonstrated that sound members are to separate themselves from the communion
of the whole body because of a few rotten members. Now therefore except you have
stronger arguments then here you have sent me, or can add more strength and
virtue to these: I must entreat you to remember your promise that if it could
appear by evident remonstrance that your grounds were sandy and deceitful,
you would retire your self into the bosom of that Church out of which you
have so scandalously withdrawn your self. Which if you shall sincerely do,
you shall both quit your self of the fearful sin of Schism into which you
are fallen, and reunite yourselfe unto as glorious a Church, as I verily
believe has been since the Apostolical and Primitive times.

Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent.

Revel. 2.5.
OF VOWS AND SPECIALLY THAT OF VIRGINITY.
YOUR desire to be resolved touching the vow of Virginity or Single life, both
how lawful it is, and how far it binds. I will endeavor to satisfy you as
breefly and plainly as I can: first showing you what is the nature and
definition of a vow in general, and then applying it unto your particular
question for the more easy and fuller determination thereof.

1. A vow rightly defined is a promise made unto God of things lawful, by such
as have power so to do, thereby to testify their affection and duty toward
him. This short definition containing the whole and entire nature of a lawful
Vow, I will for your better understanding unfold in the several parts thereof.

2. I call it a Promise not a Purpose: for a Purpose being only an inclination
of the mind to do something, binds not unto performance, and is alterable
without sin: But a Promise comprehends both a Purpose and Obligation also,
binding the Conscience unto performance: absolutely, if the form of the
Promise be absolute, conditionally if conditional.

3. And this promise whether it be internally conceived in the heart or
externally uttered by the mouth, it is all one unto God, who understands as
well the language of the one as of the other. Yet as in Praying so in Vowing
speech is not unprofitable, the solemnity thereof both more inwardly affecting
our selves, and by example more edifying others.

4. The Party to whom Vows are to be directed is God only: for it is a part
of divine worship, and enjoined in the third commandment. A part of divine
worship I say simply if it be of things commanded, if of things indifferent
accidentally only, inasmuch as it is referred to the worship of God, and
therefore cannot without sacrilege be given to any creature.

5. Theol. Pract. comp. tract. 2. c. 8. art. 33.
How then can the Popish Church vowing unto Saints quit herself of notorious
Idolatry? specially seeing by the confession of Molanus a principal champion
of hers, a Vow is an act of latria, that is of such worship as is due unto God.
Neither can she cloak her Superstition, with any show of Scripture: De cult.
Sanct. c. 9.
for Bellarmin himself freely acknowledges, that when the holy Scriptures
were written, the custom of vowing unto Saints was not yet begun.

6. The matter of a vow is things lawful, whether they be necessary as being
commanded, or arbitrary as being neither forbidden nor commanded. For that
duties commanded may be vowed appears even by the vow in Baptism. In Psalm.
46.
And although virtues, as Chrysostom says, be due unto God albeit they be not
promised: yet what lets but what God binds us unto by precept, we by vow
as by a new knot may also bind our selves unto.

De Monach. c. 19.
7. Bellarmin indeed is bold and affirms that it is the common opinion of
Divines, that the Promise in Baptism is not properly a vow: Instit. Mor. l.
11. c. 14.
but Azorius his fellow. Jesuit can tell him otherwise, that the ancient
Divines together with the Master of the Sentences seem to think that Baptism
is a vow properly and truly so called.

8. That things of an indifferent and middle nature may also be Vowed is
granted of all hands, God having permitted unto the Church and members thereof
judgment and dispensation of them. Yet this must be understood with caution:
for seeing as Saint Paul says, those things that are lawful are not always
expedient, and things otherwise lawful may in regard of circumstance become
unlawful, those indifferent things that are invested with such circumstances
cease during the while to be the matter of a Vow.

9. Justly therefore are excluded from being the matter of a Uow, first all
such actions as are in their own nature evil, next such as hinder a greater
good, then those that cross the general Vow made in Baptism, farther such as
are impossible and out of our power, moreover such as are frivolous and
unprofitable, finally those things that are naturally necessary, and if there
be any other besides of the like quality.

10. I add farther by such as have power so to do: for none may Vow but they
who by their vocation have liberty thereunto. Now this vocation in regard of
things commanded extends universally unto all, and therefore it is free for
every man to vow them. But in respect of things indifferent it stretches not
so far: For first they who by reason of age or distemper have not the use of
reason or judgment, secondly they who are under the authority, and jurisdiction
of others, having not power of themselves because of their calling may not nor
cannot lawfully vow without the consent and good liking of their superiors.
Number. 30.


11. This condemns the impious practice of Popish Friars, who inueigle young
youths from the obedience of their parents, and without their consents entangle
them in the vow of Monastical life, treading directly in the steps of their
Great-grand-father Eustathius, against whose wicked doctrine the Council of
Gangra thus decreed, Can. 16.
If any children shall forsake their Parents especially being faithful upon
occasion of Religion thinking it just so to do, and shall not rather perform
due honor unto them, reuerencing even this in them that they are faithful let
them be accursed.

12. Finally the End of a Vow is partly to testify our affection to God, as
namely our thankfulness for benefits received: and partly our duty in
carfulness to prevent sin, and to preserve and increase Gods graces in us.
In a word it serves as an instrument or helping means to further our obedience
to Gods Laws. And because the End it self is of greater importance then the
means conducing unto the End, surely Obedience must needs be better then
Sacrifice, that is, then the Vow which fitteth only unto it.

13. The Romish Church therefore teaching that vows are of greater perfection
in this life, and deserve an higher degree of glory in the next, then the very
works of the Moral law, cannot be excused of manifest blasphemy. Comment. in
Mat. 19.
Which it seems Cardinal Cajetan also saw when he said, that Christ
prescribes no vow to him that will obtain perfection of life: because the
obtaining of perfection consists not in the bonds of vows but in the works
themselves.

14. This being the true nature and definition of a vow, I conclude as touching
the Obligation or bond thereof, that every vow thus made unto God, in such
Form, of such Matter, by such Persons, to such End, as we have said, binds
the Conscience unto performance: in so much as the breach thereof is no less
then mortal sin, and very dishonorable unto God. For if lawful promises are
to be held with men, much more with God. Psalm. 15.
And if we be slack to pay them he will surely require them of us, and so
should it be sin unto us.

Deuteronomy. 23.21.
15. But what if a man have rashly vowed that which is unlawful? Surely in such
a case it is better to retract the vow, then by keeping it to add sin unto
sin. For a vow, says the Canon, may not be the bond of iniquity: and
excellently to this purpose counsels Philo the Jew, De leg. spec.
Let such a one therefore abstain, says he, and humbly entreat God of his
Clemency to pardon the unadvised rashness whereby he was so headlongly carried to
swear: for to double the offense when thou may discharge thy self of the
one half, is extreme madness, and scarcely ever curable.

16. Now let us apply what has been said unto the particular vow of
virginity, or single life. And first whereas nothing may be the Matter of a vow
but that which is lawful, and things lawful are of two sorts, either simply
and morally good, or arbitrary and indifferent: surely Virginity cannot be
ranked in the first order. For to use no other then Gersons reasons, P. 3. de
Consil. Euang. and stat. perfect.
Moral virtues are commanded, and are not destroyed but by vice, and being
lost may be recovered by repentance. But Virginity is no where commanded, and
is destroyed by Matrimony which is no sin (although Pope Syricius heretically
call it uncleanness and pollution of the flesh) and being lost cannot possibly
be recovered. And therefore howsoever it may give a kind of luster and grace
unto virtue, yet virtue it can be none.

17. Hereupon it follows that Virginity and Marriage are not in themselves
acceptable unto God one more then another, but that it is the mind which
rightly uses both the one and the other which is pleasing unto him: and that
they are rather diverse sorts of life, then differences or degrees of living
better or worse. Specially, seeing as Gregory Nazianzen says, In laud Basil.
A man may in marriage attain as great glory of virtue as in Virginity or
single life. In a word it is only a matter of indifferency.

10. And being indifferent, although in it self to be lawful and free, yet
(according to the nature of indifferent things) circumstance may alter the
lawfulness and freedom of it unto particular persons. As namely to those who
want either the Calling, or the Gift: the Gift by which they know themselves
able to contain, the Calling by which they are in their own power, and to
dispose of themselves for their state of life.

19. That every one has not the Calling because it is evident; I will spare
labor to prove it. That every one has not the gift, our Savior Christ
himself witnesses saying, Mat. 19 ^1.12.
All men cannot receive this saying but they to whom it is given, and again,
He that is able to receive this let him receive it: 1. Cor. 7.7.9.
and Saint Paul, Every man has his proper gift of God, and if he cannot
contain. Whereupon Saint Hierome, Contr. Iouin. l. 1.
If all could be Virgins our Lord Christ would never have said, He that can
receive it, let him receive it: Contr. Julian. l. 5. c. 10.
otherwise as Saint Augustine says, He might have said, All receive not this
saying but they that will, if it be true which they say.

20. Now they that want the Calling and yet Vow so, transgress the fifth
Commandment withdrawing their obedience from their superiors in those things
wherein they owe obedience. Ep. 199.
In regard whereof S. Augustine sharply reproves Editia for Vowing continency
without her husbands consent. And they that want the Gift so doing intolerably
abuse, and in most presumptuous manner tempt the Divine Majesty, promising unto
him impossibilities, or which they are not assured they can perform. So that
unto those which either want liberty by reason of the Calling, or ability in
respect of the Gift, such a Vow is utterly unlawful.

21. But perhaps you will say, the Gift may be obtained by Fasting and Prayer,
Christ himself having thus promised, Ask and you shall have. First grant it
be so, yet is it very preposterous first to vow, and then to seek for the
Gift: Pro. 20.25.
for as Solomon says, It is a snare for a man after the vow to make inquiry.
Otherwise I deny not but a man may vow Continence if he be already assured of
the Gift, and that he can contain.

22. Neither does it follow that every one which by Prayer seeks the Gift
shall obtain it. For the promise is to be understood of those necessary gifts
without which there is no salvation, and not of those extraordinary and
peculiar gifts, the want of which no way hinders salvation. Those if we ask
in Faith we shall surely obtain: these if we ask we have no assurance to
obtain, In carm. de rebus suis and decalam animae suae. Ad Eustoch. de custod.
virg.
because we may be saved without them. Surely Gregory Nazianzen much
complayneth of the inordinate boiling of his lusts in his old age, which he had
happily repressed in his youth. And Hierome also confesses that
notwithstanding he had been the companion of scorpions and wild beasts in the
wilderness, notwithstanding his face was pale with fasting, his body cold, and
his flesh dead, yet the fires and heats of lust still were burning in him.

23. But says Doctor Bishop, Continency is necessary to salvation unto all
those that have Vowed it: for the breach of the Vow is dishonor unto God, and
damnation unto themselves, and therefore being necessary, we shall using the
means assuredly obtain it. This is right to subject the providence of God in
the dispensation of these peculiar gifts unto our temerity and rashness. I
beseech you, if a man have vowed to prophecy, or to speak with strange
tongues, or to work miracles, must God needs bestow those gifts upon him upon
his importunate suite, least otherwise he should break his vow, and hazard
his salvation?

24. Nay rather let such a one humbly repent and beg pardon for his rashness,
that he has so unadvisedly entangled himself in such a desperate snare: and
let him in the Name of God use the remedy which God has appointed; that is as
Saint Paul says, to marry, For says he, If they cannot contain, let them
marry: 1. Cor. 7.9.
for it is better to marry then to burn.

25. This indeed, they say, is good and wholesome counsel for others: but as
for Votaries, it is a greater sin, Sleid. com. l. 4.
says Cardinal Campegius, for them to marry then to keep many whores at
home. A Priest marrying, says Coster, sins more grievously then if he keep
a Concubine. Euch. c. 15.
Both are evil to marry and to burn, says Bellarmine, but the worse of the
two is to marry. Thus you see, having once past the bounds of modesty, how
egregiously impudent and shameless they are grown.

l. 1. ep. 11.
26. But of a far different opinion was Cyprian, If they who have dedicated
themselves to Christ cannot or will not persevere, it is better for them to
marry, then through wantonness to fall into the fire. Haer. 61. Apostoli^i.
And Epiphanius, Better is it for a man that is fallen from his course of
virginity or single life, publickely according to the law to take a wife unto
him, and a long time to repent him of falling from virginity, and so to be
restored into the Church again, and not daily to be wounded with secret
darts, by the wickedness which the Devil brings upon him. Thus the Church
uses to teach and with these medicines she heals. The same is the counsel
both of Hierome and Augustine.

27. And what madness is it for a man having inconsiderately vowed that which
he cannot perform, not to remedy himself by marriage which is the ordinance
of God, but by fornication, whoredom, and unnatural Sodomitrie, which are the
works of the Devil? Is not this with the old Giants furiously to war against
God himself? And what barbarous cruelty is it so to tyrannize over the
Consciences of men in regard of their unavoidable infirmities, that either they
must inwardly burn in the scortching flames of filthy lust, or quenching them
with the sins of fornication or adultery or that which is worse thrust
themselves headlong into the unquenchable fire of Hell? But were it not for
this doctrine of Devils we should want one principal argument to prove that
Church to be Antichristian.

28. Which Antichrist, together with his Devilish doctrines, as thou have
already begun to consume with the blast of thy mouth: so Come Lord Jesus come
quickly, that thou may finally also abolish them with the brightness of thy
coming. In the mean season of thy goodness either grant us the Gift, or
sanctify the means unto us, that keeping our selves clean both in body and
soul, we may be presented unto thee as pure and unspotted Virgins in the
last day. Amen.

A LETTER.
Instead of a few words which I promised to write you, I have here sent this
little treatise, which if you diligently read and peruse, it will more fully
inform and resolve you then I should have done. Nevertheless, that I may in
some sort discharge my promise, and not altogether fail your expectation, in
few words thus. I would wish you diligently to remember that to be grieved and
troubled for sin is a necessary duty, and that it ought to be so. For as in
the poole of Bethesda there could be no cure wrought until the Angel had
troubled the water: so neither is there any remission of sins and healing of
the soul, until by the work of Gods Spirit the heart be bruzed and broken.
When such an Angel as Peter was, shall by his powerful preaching have pricked
the Conscience, and made men both to see their sin, and to feel the misery
thereof: then and not before do they cry out, Men and Brethren what shall we
do? Sorrow for sin is a blessed sorrow. A broken and contrite spirit God
never yet despised. Those, and those alone who feel the heavy load and burden
of their sins does Christ inuit unto him, and unto them does he promise
refreshment. He that oftentimes watered his couch with his tears, and as
oftentasted the sweet consolations of Gods blessed Spirit, has out of his
experience seriously affirmed that whosoever sows in tears shall surely reap
in joy, and a day of rejoicing shall ever succeed the night of mourning. And to
speak the truth, sorrow was made for nothing but for sin. A potion is made
only for that disease which it is able to cure: and sorrow for that only
which it is able to remedy. Loss of friends, health, wealth and the like were
never yet recovered with weeping: but the tears of true repentance have ever
cleansed the soul from sin, and purchased both pardon and favor from God.
Sorrow therefore was made only for sin. Mourn then in Gods name for your
sins: but yet take heed you mourn not as those that are without hope. You
cannot do a greater wrong unto the infinite mercy of God, and the inualuable
merits of Christ your Savior, then to think them less then your sins or
demerits. If Satan suggest any such thing unto you, spare him not, but tell him
he lies: for Gods goodness cannot be outreached by man's wickedness, and where
sin does abound, grace does much more abound. If your sins were as red as
scarlet, yet upon your true repentance God both can and will make you as white
as snow: And of your repentance you cannot well make doubt, there being in you,
as you have confessed unto me, both hearty sorrow for sins past, and
unfeigned resolution of amendment for the time to come, which are the two
essential parts of true repentance. Yea but you have committed that sin
which is unto death and can never be forgiven nor in this nor in the next
world. If so, to what end do you seek unto me for comfort? And why do I
wast paper in writing unto you? But upon what ground have you entertained this
conceit? Forsooth you have often sworn and forsworn against your knowledge. I
will not extenuate your sin: it is I confess grievous and fearful, neither
would I willingly hinder you from a long penance in sackcloth and ashes for
the same. Howbeit I would advise you to steer right between these two
dangerous gulfes: for as you must not make mole-hils of mountains, nor
frailties of furies, so neither must you of every sin, though otherwise
heinous and enormious make that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. It is
not often swearing or cursing, no nor forswearing or perjury and the like,
which God neither can nor will forgive. For then what should become of that
worthy Apostle Saint Peter, who forswore his Lord and Savior, even against his
Conscience, and that not once but thrice, with most horrible execration and
cursing? you have not sinned in so high a nature as Peter did, nevertheless
now that Christ looks back upon you as he did on him, touching your heart
with consideration of what you have done, I give you good leave to go forth
with him and to weep as bitterly as you can. But despair not of pardon, nor
count it the sin against the Holy Ghost, for so did not he. That sin is no
less then a wilful, malicious, and obstinate denying of the foundation,
namely that Jesus is the Mediator and Redeemer of the world. It is a total
apostasy from the Faith, when the whole man reuolteth from the whole Christian
Religion wholly, with an obstinate resolution never to return to it any more.
This sin I know you are far from, and you dare not say you have committed
it. Neither is it possible for him that is guilty thereof to do as you now a
long time have done, that is to mourn and lament for his sins. His stubborn
and reprobate heart is not so tender, but being past all sorrow and feeling
rather rejoices in his desperate and malicious obstinacy. More I might write,
but let this little book I send you be instead thereof. It remains that
henceforward you play the valiant soldier of Christ, and suffer not your self
any longer to be led by passion, but only by the rules and directions of Gods
blessed Word. For my part I will not cease to pray unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ for you, that this prick may be eftsoons taken from you: or if
for you further exercise and trial he delay you a little longer, that yet
your Faith may settle and rest upon that answer which God gave unto Paul being
in the like case, My grace is sufficient for thee. Farewell.

THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY IS TRVLY Deipara, the Mother of GOD.
THIS Proposition either in express or equivalent terms has ever been held
by all Orthodoxe writers both ancient and modern: specially those who have
lived since Nestorius broached the contrary heresy. This Nestorius about four
hundred years after Christ was Patriarch of Constantinople, who when his
Chaplain Anastasius had publicly taught, that the blessed Virgin Mary ought
not to be called the Mother of God, was so far, says Socrates, from
checking in him these blasphemies against Christ, L. 7. c. 32.
that he maintained him in it, and rejected himself the word Deipara, Euagr.
l. 1. c. 7.
or Mother of God. Wherefore he was banished into the I Will Oasis: where he
died miserably, having his accursed tongue eaten out with worms. But as I say
the Church of God has ever held and defended the contrary, which I prove by
unanswerable reasons. And.

Can. 1.
First by general Councels. In the Council of Ephesus it was thus decreed.
Whosoever confesses not the holy Virgin to be Genitricem Dei, the Mother of
God, let him be anathema. The Council of Chalcedon confirmed the same, Act. 5.
ratifying the Acts of the Ephesine Council. And the fifth Council of
Constantinople thus defines, If any say the glorious Virgin Mary is not truly
but abusiuely Genitrix Dei, that is, the Mother of God, let him be Anathema or
accursed.

Secondly, by ancient Fathers both before and since Nestorius, In ad Romans
who all style her Deiparam, the Mother of God. Origin largely discourses, and
renders many reasons why she should be so called. Eusebius Pamphili says,
that the Empress Helena honored Deiparae partum, In vita Constantini.
the birth of the Mother of God. Cyrill of Alexandria president in the foresaid
Council of Ephesus in his Anathematismes sent to Nestorius says that Marie
genuit, In Conc. Ephesians.
carnally begat him that was made flesh, even the Word of God: and
anathematizeth them that deny her to be Genitricem Dei, Epist. 1. ad. Chelid.
the Mother of God. Gregory Nazianzen, If any believe not the Virgin Mary to be
Genitricem Dei, the Mother of God, Ep. 97. ad Leon. Aug.
let him be separated from God. Leo, Accursed be Nestorius, who believed not
the Blessed Virgin to be Dei Genitricem, the Mother of God. John Cassian, It
is not lawful to say Christ and not God is borne of Mary. L. 2. de. Incar.
Prosper of Aquitani, The Virgin Mary bare Christ who is God of Heaven.
Hesychius, L. 1. com. in. Lev. 2.
Therefore to note the Nativity of Christ; the Sacrifice is said to be baked
in an oven, to wit in the Womb Genitricis Dei, of the Mother of God. Augustine,
Mary therefore begat, Cont. Faelic. c. 12.
and begat not the Son of God. She begat him when Christ was borne of her
according to the flesh: She begat him not when the Son without beginning
issued from the Father. Vincentius Lirinensis, Anathema to Nestorius denying
God to be borne of the Virgin. Many more Fathers I could easily allege, Ca 21.
but I presume one Decade of such witnesses is evidence sufficient.

Thirdly, by latter writers of the reformed Churches, Inst. l. 2. c. 14.. 4.
who maintain the same Faith of the Fathers. Calvin, We are to abhor the
Heresy of Nestorius, that was, that Mary is not the Mother of God. Again, He
that is the Son of God, the same is the Son of Mary. Beza, Referr. Scr.
The Church has rightly defined against Nestorius, In Luc. 1.35.
that Mary should be called (...), the Mother of God. Peter Martyr, We
confess that the Son of God is borne of the Blessed Virgin, neither doubt
we to call Mary (...), Dial. de Corp. Christ. loc.
the Mother of God. Sadeel, Justly was Nestorius condemned, denying the holy
Virgin to be Deiparam, the Mother of God, seeing our ancestors have constantly
defended that Mary is (...) the Mother of God, De ver. hum. not. Christ.
though not the Mother of the Divinity. Danaeus, In Aug. de haer. c. 91. Part.
l. 1.
It is manifest that Mary may and ought to be called (...) the Mother of God.
Polanus, It is rightly said of Christ that he is God borne of the Virgin. Loco
de Christ.
Bucanus places among doctrines repugnant to divine truth this of Nestorius,
that Mary is not (...) the Mother of God. Tilenus, The Blessed Virgin is truly
called (...) the Mother of God. Synt. de Not. Christ. n. 19. Ser. c. 18. On
Creed.
Perkins, Hence Mary is called (...) the Mother of God though she be not the
Mother of the Deity. And, She must be held to be the Mother of the whole
Christ God and Man: and therefore the ancient Church has called her the Mother
of God, yet not the Mother of the Godhead. Praemonit.
Finally the great Defendor of the ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith
King JAMES, I acknowledge her to be the Mother of God, seeing in Jesus Christ
the humane nature cannot be separated from the Deity.

Fourthly, by the Creed of the Apostles so universally received of all
Churches: wherein all true Christians profess, that they believe in Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of the Father, and that he was conceived of
the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary. If the eternal son of God were
borne of the blessed Virgin, then must she needs be the Mother of God. The
Creed therefore of the Council of Chalcedon thus expounds and opens it,
Borne of the Blessed Virgin and (...) Mother of God.

Neither may we think that the holy Church of Christ has unadvisedly or
rashly believed this doctrine: but upon firm and immovable grounds both of
Scripture and the analogy of Faith. For first Scripture evidently teaches it.
That holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of
God, says the Angel Gabriel: and Elizabeth, whence comes thus that the
Mother of my Lord should come to me? By which place says Beza, it is expressly
manifest against Nestorius that Mary is (...) the Mother of God. Again, if
Mary be the Mother of Jesus Christ, and Christ be God, it follows of
necessity that she must be the Mother of God. Nay does not the Prophet directly
say that the child borne unto us is the mighty God? In a word, Esa. 9.6.
it will not I trust be denied, but that Mary is the Mother of him that was
Crucified, that died, that shed his blood, that was seen with the eye, and
felt with the hand. 1. Cor. 2.8. Phil. 2.8. Act. 20. 1. Ioh. 1.2.
But it was the Lord of glory that was Crucified, that was obedient to the
death, that shed his blood: it was the Lord of life that was both seen and
felt. And therefore is Mary also the Mother of the Lord of glory, the Mother of
the Lord of life, the Mother of him that is equal with God, and consequently
God, seeing none is equal unto God but God.

As Scripture, so the Analogy of Faith also confirms it. For no reason can
be rendered why Mary should not be the Mother of God, but either because Christ
is not God, or because the humanity was the subject of Conception and Birth
before it was assumpted by the Word, or lastly because the Humanity was never
assumpted into the Unity of the same Person, but remained a distinct person by
it self: all which were the damnable blasphemies and heresies of Arius,
Photinus, and Nestorius, the first of Arius, the second of Photinus, the third
of Nestorius. Therefore contrariwise I argue thus, If Christ be God, and the
Humanity were at the first creation thereof prevented from subsisting in it
self, and never had subsistence but in the Word, so as both Natures constitute
one only Hypostasis or Person: certainly there cannot be two Sons, one of
God, and another of Mary, but the Son of God must needs be the Son of Mary,
and so Mary be the Mother of the Son of God. And as by reason of this
Hypostaticall union Christ himself doubted not to say, The Son of Man came
down from heaven: so the same analogy and proportion of Faith requires us to
say, The Son of God is borne of the Virgin Mary, which as Vincentius
Lirinensis says, is most catholickly believed, and most impiously denied.

Much more might be added hereunto: but to them that judge of persons by the
Faith this is too much, and enough even to them that judge of Faith by Persons.
Only from hence I infer first that Titius confounding Papists in open pulpit
for calling the blessed Virgin Deiparam, the Mother of God, either knew not
what he said, and so proved himself but a nouice in Divinity: or if he spoke
advisedly and out of judgment, it was no less then professed heresy. Secondly
that I disapprouing Titius therein, cannot justly be taxed of tricks or
niceties or spirit of contradiction, unless together with me, Councels,
Fathers, Protestants, the Apostolical and Chalcedonian Creed, Scripture and
the Analogy of Faith, undergo the same censure. Lastly, that as Seneca
(otherwise an excellent Moralist) spoke very irregularly when he said
Drunkenness would sooner be commended in Cato, then Cato condemned for his
Drunkenness: so you (though else I persuade my self a sound and Orthodoxe
Christian) much swarued from the rule of Piety and Faith, when you chose rather
to excuse Nestorianisme in Titius, then with me to condemn him for it. And all
least some who have over prodigally bestowed transcendent and immoderate
praises upon him, should seem either too weak in judgment, or too strong in
passion.

M. ANTONIUS MVRETVS his Institution for Children translated.
MY Son while you are young
These precepts learn of me:
Bear them in mind not on your tongue,
And let them practiced be.
First see you serve and fear
The God of heaven above:
Then Parents dear, and such as bear
The room of Parents love.
To lie count it great shame:
What thereby can you gain?
If you have erred confess the same,
So grace you may obtain.
Seek learning greedily:
Then learning what more sweet?
By it you may most readily
With wealth and honor meet.
If any shall you chide
When you have faulty been,
Thank him therefore and then take heed
He chide you not again.
The man that speaks you fair
Count him not straight your friend:
He hates the child that does him spare
When as he does offend.
Who once has you deceived
With flattring words and feign:
He when occasion is perceived
Will you deceive again.
If you be wise nor none,
Nor every one believe:
You loose your credit by the one,
The Other will you deceive.
If sin you should commit,
Or in your mind should plot:
God who sees all things sees it,
Though man perceive it not.
To none but friends well tried,
Your secrecies reveal:
And what you would have others hide,
First you your self conceal.
Fix not your eye on things,
Uncomly to be done:
By wanton sights young tenderlings
Soon take infection.
Refrain and turn your ear
From filthy ribaldrie:
Such as delight therein forbear
To keep them company.
Unpleasant if the root
Of study seem to you:
Yet doubtless sweet and wholesome fruit
In time from thence will grow.
If you in play delight,
That pleasure soon decays:
If in your book, the benefit
Thereof remains always.
If rest be moderate,
Health it and strength does breed:
But duls the spirits and does rebate
Wits edge if it exceed.
Whiles others good you seek,
Good to your self you gain:
Unless you loving be and meek,
Love can you not obtain.
Wonder not when you see,
How wicked men do thrive:
God will at length revenged be,
Though he a while repriue.
If rest you seek and ease,
Spare you no pains in youth:
For after labor quietness
With dignity insueth.
Look often in your glass,
And beauty if you find,
Beware you do it not deface
With vices of the mind.
But if therein you see,
Your self deformed and foul:
Let that defect supplied be
With virtues of the soul.
Do not what you would dread
To do if men did see:
And let your self to you instead
Of many a witness be.
To show you much should hear,
And few should be your words:
Nature to you a double ear,
And but one tongue affoords.
Have care you often behold,
What you would safe should be:
Thieves seldom are with those things bold
Which often the eye does see.
Sloth fawnes at first and fleeres,
But ever ends in shame,
Industry rigorous first appears,
But breeds immortal fame.
Or taste no wine, or it
With store of water drench:
For youth in wine to take delight
Is fire with fire to quench.
Let your looks modest be,
Your speech courteous and kind:
So doing shall you easily
Much love and friendship find.
In your desires let not
Wealth more then virtue sway:
Virtue by wealth cannot be got,
But wealth by virtue may.
What so you learn that strive
To hold fast in your mind:
Else draw you water in a sieve
And vainly beat the wind.
Indiscreet anger flee:
Then wrath what fouler vice?
What moves thereto great praise will be
To you if you despise.
Elms high on mountains placed
With storms are often beat:
Whose fury shrubs do seldom taste
That low in vales are set.
So at the great man's gate
Great dangers do attend:
But ever to the mean estate,
The heavens more safety send.
A few words seasonably
If children speak is fit:
The one does argue modesty,
The other argues wit.
The way to honest fame,
Would you feign learn of me?
It Is this, be you in truth the same
You would be thought to be.
Who fears his Masters charge
The rod he needs not fear:
Who that contemnes and runs at large
The smart of this must bear.
Thrice happy child that grows
In virtue more then years:
Deserved praise each one bestows
On him above his peers.
On him they look, to him
They wish all happiness:
But none vouchsafes speech to them
That rust in idleness.
Them all men do despise,
The vulgar them de^ide:
Their parents scarce with patient eyes
Their presence can abide.
Sin hurts not then alone
When we the same commit:
For use of sin makes us more prone
And apt again to it.
What so is good pursue,
If hard at first it seem,
Yet after use and practice due,
You easy will it deem.
The good turn you receive
Extol you and confess:
What you have done give others leave
To praise, make you it less.
When with vtility
Honesty cannot stand:
You may not doubt but honesty
Must have the vpperhand.
And thus to you my child
These few rules I commend:
Which well observed strange fruit will yield
Unto you in the end.
Mean while that God above
Whose mighty word and will
What ever is does rule and move
Bless your endeavors still.
Whom early in the morn
When you your bed forsake,
And late at night when you return
Sweet sleep again to take.
Meekly upon your knee
With humble vows attend:
So pregnancy of wit will he
And health of body send.
Yea better things then these
Will he unto you spare:
Only refer all to his praise
Both what you have and are.
To my Daughter E. D. Written on her Bible.
Since you my child the child of wrath were borne,
From sinful flesh deriuing sinful stain:
Into Gods favor can you not return,
If of the spirit you be not borne again.
None are newborn but of immortal seed:
That seed immortal is this word of truth.
By it next under God I trust to breed,
Your second birth who bred your former ruth.
This will in you subdue each sinful lust,
Your mind enlighten, and your heart create
Pious to God, toward your neighbor just
And to your self sober and temperate.
This season will your greener years with grace:
And crown your head when you have run your race.
A Prayer.
MY sins o Lord have me unworthy made
To lick the crumbs that from thy table fall;
My guilty soul dares not for comfort call,
That Now through famishment my strength does fade:
But thou dear Lord that vaild in mortal flesh
For man's offense on bitter cross did bleed:
With bread of life my starued soul refresh.
My soul does thirst like to the parched ground,
And humors moist are turned to summers drought:
Thy burning wrath this inward heat has wrought,
And fear of Hell my conscience does confound.
But lord thou art an everlasting well,
Whence purest streams of living waters flow:
O quench the flames wherein my heart does glow,
And on thy banks let me for ever dwell.
Through stranger countries harborles I stray,
From Paradise exild, my native land:
And angry Cherubin with burning brand
Of my return does intercept the way.
Thou art the way sweet Jesus thou the door,
Yet harborles wast in a manger borne:
O let my soul faint, weary, and forlorn,
By thee reenter, then retire no more,
Ah who is me, for opened are mine eyes,
And now with shame my naked shame I see:
My soul abasht feign would thy presence flee
And sorry figleaues to her shame applies.
But Lord thy wardrobes store can nere be spent,
And whitest raiment thou do sell for naught:
O let the robe of justice forth be brought,
Therewith t'inuest this thriftles penitent.
My soul, o Lord, is filled with strange disease,
And cruel thieves have wounded me so sore,
That naught but wound I am and bloody gore,
And on my life eternal death does seize.
But Lord thou art that good Samaritan,
The skilfulst leach to salve a wounded heart:
O let thy precious balms soon ease my smart,
And dying soul preserve from endless bane.
In deepest dongeon comfortles I lie,
Ne of my debt can pay the lightest grain:
My Iailour Satan is, my sin the Chain,
And bound with sin who can the bonds vnty.
But thou dear Lord have broke the gates of Hell,
And with thy dearest blood our debts do pay:
O cancel thou my bonds my debts defray,
And from my heart all servile fear expel.
Pinde, thirsty, exild, naked, sick, in iaile,
Feed, quench, return, cover, recover, bail.
A Hymn unto Christ.
LVte awake,
Why sleep thou so long?
Come let us music make,
And chant some holy song.
My heart and voice shall with thy strings accord,
To sing the praise of Christ my King and Lord.
Brightest beam,
Of brightest glory bred:
The everlasting stream,
From purest fountain shed.
The light, the life, true God, chief good thou art.
And of thy good to each wight do impart.
Then thou wast
When time was not begun,
Without thee nothing past,
By thee all things were done.
The earth, the sea, the air, the heavens above,
By thee does stand, does flow, does breath, do move.
God thou art,
Yet did our nature take,
Enduring bitter smart,
A peace for us to make.
Thy Cross, thy Wounds, thy Blood, thy Death, thy grave,
Our sinful souls from endless death do save.
Glorifide
Thou now in heaven do reign,
And for thy Saints provide
A place there to remain,
Where King is three in one, and one in three,
Law perfect love, and term eternity.
Lachrymae.
IF by sighs, or tears, or cries,
I could discharge the weight of grief,
Which on my soul so heavy lies,
Soon would I find relief.
My sad heart would vapor sighs,
Mine eyes would stream forth floods of tears,
My voice with shrikes and doleful cries
Would vent mine inward fears.
But my soul too deep is wounded,
Nor can my troubled sprite
By sighs, or tears, or cries be lightened
Of those sorrows me affright.
Shallow are those foords that murmr,
Slight sorrows soon complain:
My heart, mine eyes, my voice astonished are
With extreme disease and pain.
Thus my woes emprizned in my breast.
Still on me tyrannize:
Happy, happy whose cares are blessed
With sighs, with tears, with cries.
Once dear Lord unworthy me
With gracious eyes thou did respect:
Thou shewdst me joys that none can see
But Saints in Christ elect.
Now alas why do thou frown?
Why do thou gnash thy teeth at me?
From highest bliss why am I thrown
To lowest misery.
Shall thy wrath exceed thy mercy?
Can pity cruel prove?
Shall death and hell, and flames that never die
Seize whom thou sometime did love?
Ah sweet Jesus be my Jesus,
Though sin my soul have slain,
Thy wine, thy oil, thy balm may life renew,
And close up my wounds again.
Why then am I with despair possessed
Since hope and grace I see?
Kill me, kill me yet will I rest
My steadfast faith on thee.
The Spouse of Christ longing for, and rejoicing in her marriage with him.
COme return, have away,
O thou whom my soul does love:
Lo thy spouse night and day
Longs to rest with thee above,
While thou tariest all too long,
Cruel tyrants me oppress,
And triumph in my sad distress:
Come therefore avenge my wrong,
Ease my heart brimfull of grief,
O have thee Lord and bring relief.
Welcome joy, farewell woe
Hither lo he speeds a maine,
Swift as heart, swift as roe,
Skipping high on Bethers plain.
Nightly shades are fled and gone,
And now dawnes that blessed day,
That weds me to my love for aye.
Now my foes lament and moan,
Justly doomd to darkest Hell,
But I with Christ in heaven shall dwell.
An Evening Prayer.
O Holy and eternal light
Defend us now this darksome night:
Grant inward peace to troubled heart,
To wearied sense sweet sleep impart.
Whilst heavy eyes sleeps comfort take,
O let our souls still on thee wake.
Let thy right hand keep and protect
From sleep of sin thy Saints elect.
When sleep of death shall close our eyes,
O let our souls ascend the skies.
Mean while frail flesh shall rest from strife,
Till death be swallowed up of life.
A Soul distracted between Hope and Fear.
HAte I deserve and yet for love I sue,
I beg for life and yet death is my due
Worthy I am that thou should me reject,
And yet I claim the crown of thine elect.
Alas how may so bold a suit be heard?
And sinful wretch obtain a Saints reward?
Nay shall I not thy kindled wrath inflame
Craving all good deserving naught but shame?
Sin bids me fear yet still I hope for grace;
Grace bids me hope, yet still I fear disgrace:
While fear does hope and hope does fear restrain
'Twixt fear and hope my heart is rent in twain.
Will thou sweet Jesus plead my cause for me?
Alas my bare estate affoords no fee:
Yet if in form of poor to thee I fly,
Thy word is past thou can me not deny.
Thee then mine advocate I entertain,
By thee an easy suit I shall obtain:
So double comfort shall my heart enjoy
Of present grace and hope of future joy.
Hope of Pardon.
SHould I O Lord excuse or cloak my sin?
Are thine eyes so dim that thou can not see
Can guilty soul thy gracious favor win?
Or by righteous doom just reputed be?
Thy crystal eyes my secret thoughts behold,
Yea thou know them long ere they be conceived:
Thou art not man to be corrupt with gold,
Not by vain excuse can thou be deceived.
Yet will I not despair to gain
Pardon for my great offenses,
Though justice doom eternal pain,
With justice mercy still dispences.
When shall I then to those high joys aspire
Which in heaven above thou reserust for me?
Mount up my soul with wings of high desire,
Till thou heaven enjoy what joy can there be.
On barren earth sin is the seed we sow,
And the crop we reap is but sorrows gain:
And if sometime from sin short pleasures grow,
Sinful pleasures end in the eternal pain.
Then since on earth we reap no grain
But short joys long sorrows bringing:
O let me live where Angels reign,
Then endless Alleluiah singing.
The Epicure and Christian.
Time does haste,
Life as a shadow flies:
Breath as a vapor soon does wast,
And none returns that dies,
Come let us banish woes,
And live while life does last:
Crown we our heads with budding rose
And of each pleasure taste.
What though precise fools do us blame
Shall we forgo content?
Pleasure is substance, virtue name,
And life will soon be spent.
Time shall cease,
Archangels tromp shall sing:
Death shall his prisoners all release,
And them to judgment bring.
Then shall these sinful joys
To endless wayling turn:
And they that scorned virtues choice
In brimstone flames shall burn.
Then they that erst fond Stoics
Shall wisdoms children prove:
When they among the Saints esteemed
Shall reign with Christ above.
A Sinners appeal from Justice to Mercy.
AY me from me my wonted joys are fled,
And saddest grief on my poor heart has seazd:
Thy mortal sting o sin this woe has bred,
And dreadful wrath of my dear Lord displeased.
I see his sword vpreard me to confound,
And guilty soul attends her deadly wound.
Oh then my soul where can thou rest secure?
Where will thou fly from his revenging ire?
If up heaven, there enters naught impure,
If down to hell, there flames eternal fire.
Nor deepest sea, nor shade of darkest night
Can secret thee from his al-seeing spright.
Yet from thy self thy self a refuge art
When from thy justice to thy grace we fly:
O gracious Lord to thee my pensive heart
With tears of true remorse for grace does cry.
Thy mercy Lord my soul from death may save:
O rid my dying soul from lowest grave.
A Caroll for the Nativity.
A Wonder strange this day was wrought,
Exceeding man's and Angels thought:
Though domb have spoke, and blind have seen,
And they revived who dead have been,
Yet never virtue like to this
Whereby was wrought man's endless bliss.
Behold then and amazed stand,
This is the finger of Gods hand:
A virgin pure without man's aid,
Has borne a child yet still a maid:
Which babe this day began to be,
Yet was from all eternity.
A King of Kings, and yet a thrall,
Possessing naught, yet Lord of all:
Creator, yet a creature,
Light of the world, and yet obscure:
Most beauteous, and yet without form,
Adored of Angels, yet a worm.
Omnipotent, yet frail and weak,
The eternal Word, yet could not speak:
Most quiet calm, yet without rest,
The food of Saints, yet sucked the breast,
Embracing all, yet but a span,
Immortal life, yet mortal man.
Man, yet in God subsisting aye,
God, yet confined to case of clay:
Both God and man 'twixt both to treat,
And firmest league 'twixt them to set.
That mercy might with justice meet,
And peace and truth each other greet.
O blessed dame whose lips might kiss,
whose paps did nurse this babe of bliss!
O blessed babe whose joyful birth,
Has changed our sighs to tunes of mirth!
Who now thy sweets may taste and prove,
By faith on earth, in heaven by love.
Christ comforting a distressed soul.
SIgh no more soul, oh sigh no more,
Despair not thou thus ever,
Thy God has grace for thee in store,
His mercy fails never.
Then sigh not so,
Let sorrows go,
Sing in the highest Hosanna,
And change thy doleful sounds of woe
Into Halleluiah.
Manifold are thy sins I know,
And deep in crimson died,
Yet whiter shall thou be then snow,
In my blood purified.
Then sigh not so, etc.
Heaven against thee shut by sin
Have I for thee unlocked,
Since thou so kindly letst me in,
When at thy heart I knocked,
Then sigh not so, etc.
Come to me, lo thy Savior cries,
Thou can not be refused,
For never did I yet despise
A broken heart and bruised.
Then sigh not so, etc.
There in peace shall thou live and reign,
And never more be sorry,
Above the measure of thy pain
Shall be thy weight of glory.
Then sigh not so,
Let sorrows go,
Sing in the highest Hosanna,
And change thy doleful sounds of woe
Into Halleluiah.
THE FIRST PSALM.
BLessed yea thrice blessed are they
That lewd counsels have not traced:
Nor have stood in sinners way,
Nor in scorners chair are placed.
But in Gods laws they delight,
Them they study day and night.
These like trees stand evermore
By the rivers freshly springing:
Pleasant fruit in plenteous store
Duly in their season bringing.
Never shall their leaf decay,
What they do shall prosper aye.
But the wicked are like dust
To and fro with tempest driven:
Neither shall they with the just
Stand when judgment shall be given.
For God knows the just man's way,
And them stroyes that from him stray.
Psalm. 12.
Since on earth all friends do fail,
Proving faythlesse and unkind,
Since now every where prevail
Flattring lips and double mind,
Lord send help from heaven above,
Who alone art perfect love.
But these false dissembling tongues
God eftsoons will root them out;
Those that triumph in their wrongs,
Uttering proud words and stout,
Who shall curb our tongues say they,
Ours they are and they shall sway^s.
For when once the poor does cry,
And to God his vows address:
Now, says God, arise will I,
Him to save, them to repress.
God whose word is silver tried,
And in seven fires puri fide.
Lord perform as thou have said,
Save and keep thine heritage:
Help the poor so much dismayed
From this lewd and sinful age,
Which base men does highest raise,
And to vice gives virtues praise.
Psalm. 13.
LOrd how long will thou delay?
Shall I never comfort find?
Can thine endless grace decay?
Or thy kindness prove unkind?
Why then hidest thou thy face,
Careless of my care and grief?
Why withholdest thou thy grace,
And deniest me due relief?
Shall my fruitless counsels still
Thus torment my troubled sprite?
Shall my foes triumph at will,
While thy terros me affright?
Hear O Lord behold my plight,
Speedy help of thee I crave:
Light my dim decayed sight,
That I sleep not in the grave.
Lest my foes with proud disdain
Boast as if they did prevail:
Ioying in my saddest pain,
When my feeble steps do fail.
But I joy and hope always
On thy grace and saving health,
And my heart shall sing thee praise,
The only worker of my wealth.
Psalm. 23.
HOw can I lack what may content,
My boundless greedy heart?
Since thou O All-sufficient
My careful shepherd art.
When I on tender grass have fed
Thou foldst me safe and sure:
And when I thirst thou do me lead
To streams Chrystalline pure.
Thou do my wandering soul reclaim
When from thee I do stray:
And thou my steps even for thy name
Do guide in righteous way.
Were I to pass through shade of death
No danger would I fear:
Thy rod thy crook me comfort.
Thy help is always near.
Thou have a plenteous table spread
For me before my foe:
With precious balm thou dew'st my head,
My bowl does over flow.
And while I live thy bounteous grace
Shall never me forsake:
But ever in thy dwelling place
Will I my dwelling make.
Psalm. 119. Beth.
HOw shall a young man prone to ill
Cleanse his unruly and unbridled way*
If that he learn to know thy will,
And from thy sacred laws go not astray.
Thee have I sought with perfect heart
In whom does rest my full content:
O let me never from thee part,
Nor err from thy commandment.
Thy words deep in my heart are bid,
That from thy precepts I may never swerue:
O gracious Lord as thou have bid
Teach me thy Precepts ever to observe.
Thy righteous judgments and thy ways
which of thy grace to me thou do bewray.
My lips created for thy praise
Shall never cease to publish night nor day.
My hearts desire and whole delight
Upon thy statutes fixed are:
No worldly treasure in my sight
May with thy precepts once compare.
As on the lodestar of my life
So on thy laws my steadfast eyes are set:
And in my thoughts they are so rise
That I thy precepts never can forget.
Psalm. 125.
THey whose hopes are mounted high,
Raised with wings of faith and love,
Stormy tempest, thundering sky,
Trembling earth can never move.
They though hell against them band,
Steadfast like Mount Sion stand.
As about Jerusalem
Mighty hills advanced are:
So does God inuiron them
That on him rely their care.
He from danger does protect
And secure his Saints elect.
Though a while fierce tyrants prey
On Christ's flock with furious rage,
Their proud scepter shall not sway
Always on his heritage:
Lest forlorn and in contempt,
Sinful counsels they attempt.
Lord let them thy bounty taste
That are pure and poor in sprite
Whose wrie steps writ paths have trac't.
Range them with the hypocrite:
That the chafe purged from the grain
Israel may in peace remain.
Psalm. 130.
OVt of the deep O Lord, to thee I cry,
Give ear and hear the voice of my complaint:
If thou severely mark iniquity,
Who can be clear and free from sinful taint?
But mercy Lord with thee remains in store,
That men may fear thee and thy name adore.
On thee I wait and on thy righteous word,
More then the morning watch for dawning day.
Let Israel likewise trust in the Lord,
With him redemption and much grace does sway.
And though his sins in number pass the sand:
He shall redeem him with his mighty hand.
Psalm. 131.
LOrd thou know who have me tried,
That my heart swells not with pride:
I look not high, nor do I stretch
My thoughts too far beyond my reach.
Have I not like weaned child
Evermore been meek and mild?
Yea sure I have my self demeaned
Like infant from his mother weaned.
Israel do thou likewise,
Learn in meek and humble guise
Like babe new weaned from the breast
Still on thy God thy hopes to rest.
Psalm. 133.
O Come behold what thing it is,
How good, how sweet, how full of bliss,
When discords and dissensions cease,
And brethren love and live in peace.
Much like the precious oil that is shed
Upon the high Priests sacred head:
Which dewes his beard and thence does reign
Down on his holy vestments train.
Much like the pleasant morning dewes
Which Hermons fertile top renewes:
Or that which falls on Sions hill,
And does her horn with plenty fill.
O blessed they that can agree
To dwell in peace and unity?
For there the Lord gives evermore
Both happy life and plenteous store.
FINIS.

