A TRVE RELATION of the right Christianly departure, or Death, of the most
Noble Earl Philippus Lodouicus, Earl of Hanaw and Rieneck, Lord of
Muntzenbergk, etc. Uncle to the Count Palatine.

Who blessedly deceased, in the Lord, on Sunday the ninth of August 1612.
betwixt eight and nine of the clock in the Morning, being returned from his
great Embassage for England.

Faithfully penned by IOANN APPELIVS Preacher at Alten-Hasell.

Translated out of the Germane tongue by S. R.

PSALM 146. 4. 5. Man's breath departs, and he returns to his earth: then
his thoughts perish.
Blessed is he that has the God of JACOB for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God.
LONDON: Printed for NICHOLAS BOVRNE, and are to be sold at the entering in of
the Royal Exchange, and at the sign of the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1612.

To the Christian Reader.
WHereas other men have laudably described the Art of well living and well
dying; I hope it will not be misconstrued if we do verify the same, by the
examples of those, whom we have seen depart Christianly. Know you therefore
(loving Reader) that the departure of my noble and gracious Lord (of blessed
memory) is described by us, to the end that it might serve unto my Noble and
Gracious Lady and her dear Children (as unto a distressed VVidow and Orphans)
for a godly Instruction and Consolation unto Patience: considering also, that
particular examples move the heart more effectually, then general Precepts or
Rules; and because the departure of my gracious Lord is full of Comfort and
Edification, we thought it not amiss (being induced by many
religiously-affected minds) to communicate the same also unto others, which
(no doubt) will be taken in good part by all religious Christians, as it is
meant by us.

Farewell.
TITUS 1. 15. Unto the pure are all things pure: but unto them that are defiled
and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled.
A TRVE RELATION of the Christianly departure of the Noble Earl Philippus
Lodouicus, etc. Uncle of the Count Palatine.
THE Noble Earl of Hanaw and Reineck, having happily ended aiourncy of great
weight, and being by Gods grace returned unto his Dominions, did take againc in
hand the careful government of the same.

The Air being very hot, his Excellency, toward the evening, went diverse
times, in his Coach, into the Woods to recreate himself. It happened the 29.
day of July last past, that his Excellency went with some of his Co^nc^^ and
Servants from his Court to a Pond (called Krebsbach) where Lobstars are fed,
and feeling himsclfe some what ill did take his rest a little in the fields.

The next day notwithstanding he went to the accustomed Weeke-Sermon, and unto
public Prayers at the Church in the old City: but the Sermon being ended,
he felt himself not well, and went to rest on his bed.

The 31. of July and first of August, the weather being very hot, and he
feeling great heat in his body, was led into diverse rooms for to rest and
take the fresh air.

The 2. of August, by the counsel of Physicians, he was let blood, and took
Physic, whereby he found himself so restored that he put on his garments,
and went to visit his loving Wife, lying in Childe-bed, who some few days
before was delivered of a goodly Son.

On the same day his Excellency called to him one of his Counselors, and
reasoned with him about diverse matters, but chiefly concerning the Church of
Hanaw.

The third day of August being Monday, his Excellency fell sick again, and
began to prepare himself for a blessed and Christian departure, with a
wonderful constancy and courage, giving an account of his faith with a
singular zeal in the presence of his Wife and Children, who were called to him
for that purpose. And although he had comforted his wife in very good sort,
admonishing her also unto Christian patience, yet notwithstanding (she being
retired) he took his leave of his Children, and others that were about him,
in the presence of diverse of his Counselors and Courtiers, in a very
religious manner he spoke unto every Child in particular, praying over them,
and giving his blessing unto them, adding thereunto his fatherly admonitions
unto true piety and virtue, thus committed them unto the protection of
Almighty God through Jesus Christ: Even as we read Genesis 49. of the holy
Patriarch Jacob. All this he did with such comfortable words, and resolute
mind, that the whole room was filled with the sighs and tears of the
beholders, who wondered at the same, and thankhd God for that rich measure of
his spirit bestowed on him.

The heaviness of our sorrow made that we could not remember the very words
of his prayers and admonitions, but the Christian Reader may partly understand
what they were, by that which follows, and happened the Thursday following.

The speech unto his Children being ended, he spoke unto his Council in
general, and unto every one in particula^, of those things that concerned the
Church and School, the Country and Subjects, and so took his leave of them.

The Council being retired, diverse Gentlemen, Courtiers, came unto him at his
request, and with many tears and sighs, taking their dear Lords hand, went
with a sorrowful heart from him.

Diverse Citizens dwelling in the old and new Town, came at his citation also
before his bed, he spoke very comfortably unto them, and stretching his hand
out unto them, with much sorrow, they took their leaves of him: this being
done, his Excellency asked whether there were any body else to take leave of
him.

The Preachers of both the Cities were likewise called for, and he declared in
their presence, that his singular desire was, to receive yet once before his
end (with his house) the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as the Lord
Jesus had ordained the same shortly before his death and Passion. He added
hereunto a farther exposition of his demand: that his request was not grounded
on Superstition, or on that error, that ex opere operato, the same were
meritorious: but whereas he had been a certain time in foreign Countries,
and had not found the fit occasion to receive the same in the Church and
Congregation of the faithful, his request was to receive, for the
strengthening of his weak Faith, and to testify his Profession yet once
again before God and the World.

The Preachers had nothing to reply unto such a reasonable and religious
request, and therefore performed the same out of hand.

The Confession which his Excellency at that time uttered with Christian
attention, was after this manner: viz.

I Thank my GOD from the bottom of my heart, in the Name of my Lord Jesus
Christ, that I have lived unto this day: in which I am able to receive, yet
once again before my departure out of this world, the holy Supper of my Lord
Jesus Christ. I never had a more joyful banquet then this: I have sitten at
the Table of great Kings and Princes, where all things were costly, and
pompously prepared, but the cheer of the Cross of Christ, as now it is set
before the eyes of my Soul, appears more glorious unto m^ O my dear
Preacher, I protest before thee, as the ordained Minister of Jesus Christ, that
I do speak these words without hypocrisy, from a true joy, and desire which
I have to enjoy the body and blood of Jesus Christ in Faith, through the
operation of the holy Spirit.

Afterward he continued his speech thus:

I Praise and thank my God, that he has created me a man, with reason and
understanding, that he has preserved my body, Soul and limbs until this
hour, delivered me from many sorrows and dangers, bestowed on me very much
good, exalted me unto great honor; and chiefly, that he has so directed
the going out and in of my late Voyage, that I am returned unto mine in good
health and disposition.

And whereas now a days many and diverse Religions are found in Europe, I
thank my God, that he has let me come unto this Religion, where I do seek
my salvation only in his mercy declared unto us in Jesus Christ. For I know by
experience, and do also testify the same openly, that I have found in all my
griefs and temtations, a firm comfort in the confession of this my Faith,
being grounded only on the Writings of the holy Prophets and Apostles of the
old and new Testament I am therefore assured in my heart that this is the true
Religion and Confession of God, whereby sure salvation is to be found, and
hoped for.

I thank likewise all those good men, whom God has employed as means and
instruments, by whosecare, service and diligence I was brought unto this
profession. I will also that my Children be brought up and persevere therein.
Besides this I admonish you Pastors to be faithful and diligent in your charge
as hitherto you have been, that so you may give a good account unto God. And
now I place my self before Gods face, as a poor sinner that has deserved
Hell and eternal death: but I believe firmly that Jesus Christ, true God and
Man, is my Savior: (who as the Lamb of God, has boren my sins upon the
Cross, and delivered me out of the power of Satan) and that he will, before
my end, strengthen my weak faith with his holy Supper. I testify also before
God and you his Ministers, that I have forgiven, and do forgive with my heart
all those that have offended me: and I pray likewise for pardon, for we are
men, and the righteous man falls seven times a day.

And because many men have thought that I bear an evil heart against my dear
brother Count Albrecht, etc. I protest that I always was truly and brotherly
affected, and my Conscience does witness unto me, that concerning our
controversy (which I have submitted unto the Law) I am not altered against
him: and I do not in that regard fear the judgment seat of GOD: Have you
therefore a care to tell him thus much from me: Pray and admonish him also to
let the Law have his course, and to deal faithfully with my Widow and
Orphans, the Lord will reward him for it, and he shall keep a good
conscience.

Finally, I testify by this holy Supper, that if it please the Lord to restore
unto me my health, (which I do fully leave to his good pleasure) I will to
his praise and honor amend my life, endeavoring that which is good, and
shunning all wickedness; yet all this only by his help, grace and assistance.

Thus did his Excellency give a true and constant profession of his Faith, not
with one breath, but at diverse times as his strength would permit.

The dutch Preacher of the old City, before the Communion made a short Sermon:
some fourteen did communicate: the action was concluded with the accustomed
thanksgiving and prayers.

Monday about the Evening, his Excellencies Steward came unto him, and
conferred with him about matters that belonged to the Court, and the education
of his children: but that night he could not sleep, therefore he caused godly
psalms to be sung, and he himself sung also.

Tuesday the.4. of August, having passed a heavy night, he found himself
reasonable well, so that he clothed himself, intending to visit his wife,
but being ouer-wearied he left it. He caused diverse letters to be brought
before him, which he sealed with his own hand, and went to take the air at
the window: toward night he felt himself again weak.

The 5. of August, he caused his last Will and Testament, which was sealed up,
to be brought unto him, and did read the same, and willed something to be
added thereunto, concerning his Chamberlain, which being done, he gave the
same unto his Chamberlain, charging him to deliver the same unto his Counsel.

Next morning there came unto his Excellency the Noble Lady Emilia of Orange,
Sister of his wife, from Heydelberg, whom he received with tears, and said:
Many have stood weeping about my bed, but none could break my heart, and
provoke my tears but your Ladyship. About the same time came diverse of his
servants home from the Sermon made on the monthly prayer-day, and his
Excellency would hear of every one of them some good doctrine, or comfortable
sentence brought from thence, which being performed by them, he heard it with
great contentment. His wife came also the same day again to visit him, whom
he received with kind and comfortable words, and shortly after she went from
him.

The evening and night approaching his Excellency became very heavy, so that
not only the Physicians with their Art, but also the Divines with their
consolations had enough to do: at his Excellencies request diverse penitenciall
Psalms were sung, namely, the sixth, thirty-eight, and others. I took occasion
at the same time to comfort his Excellency with the hope which yet we had
that God would prolong his life, and make him ouer-goe, by patience, the
smarting pains and weaknesses of his body, but when as I perceived by his
words and countenance that such comfort was not acceptable unto him, I went on,
and said that his Excellency had not only to look what were good for
himself, but also for his Country and poor people, affirming, we do not
envy heaven and life everlasting unto your Excellency, but what if the Lord
God would preserve you to be a comfort and protection of this Country and
Church yet certain years, as it happened in Ezechia, would not you follow
this will of God? The King Ezechia himself required such prolongation
chiefly, for the Church and Countries sake.

The same night I propounded unto him the words of our Savior Math. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. The Doctor
rehearsed the sentence Ioh. 6. 37. Him that comes to me I cast not away.
Whereupon his Excellency repeated often these words, Come, and Not cast away,
resisting therewithal his tentations, and said finally, Ah my Lord Jesus, I
come unto thee, thou will not cast me away.

Besides this, he said unto the Preacher of the old City, Now I seele your
comfort, the virtue of Christ's blood does now refresh my heart, I feel now
the forgiveness of my sins, and that I am a child of God and heir of life
eternal.

The next Morning his Excellency desired to be removed into a large room
newly built, because (as he had told unto his Chamberlain) the dead body might
the easier be prepared by the Physicians for the burial.

In this new room, came unto him his wife, with the aforesaid Lady of Orange,
and there he subscribed and sealed diverse Letters.

^ The sixth of August, before the breaking of the day, came unto him at his
request the Lady of Orange, and he spoke with her about the Prince Palatins
widow at Herdelberg, the Duchess of Bouillon, and other friends, telling her
what he would have said and written vntothem: hereupon he said unto her in
french Ah my loving and virtuous Lady, I am a sick man! Rehearse unto me some
comfortable sentence. She answered: My dear Lord and Brother, I see you so
richly furnished with the comfort of Gods holy spirit, that I cannot comfort
you any further. His Excellency urging to have from her, out of Gods word,
some sentence, she aleadged the words of our Savior, John 3 16. God so loved
the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life: and added,
comfort your self heerewithall my dear brother: his Excellency answered,
well said my Lady; This is the greatest and surest comfort of the faithful:
with this comfort will I dye happily: I beseech my loving God from my heart for
such a blessed departure, through the virtue of the satisfaction of my Lord
Jesus Christ. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it
unto you. O Lord Jesus Christ I commit my Soul into thy hands, now and at all
times.

His Excellency caused the Germane Bible to be given to me, and desired to
hear some observations on the 91. Psalm, but the french Preacher entering,
drew him some comforts out of the 90. and 91. Psalm: Then his Excellency said
unto the Preacher, Ah, I am a very sick man! I have had a heavy night, but I
confess that my sins have deserved this and more then this; yet I comfort my
self with the mercy of my Lord Jesus Christ, by whose virtue and intercession,
no heavier cross shall be laid on me then I shall be able to bear; he knows
what is best for us, he dissembleth not with us, I rely on him.

The Preacher answered, your Excellency be comforted and be patient: Christ is
that good shepherd that gives unto his sheep everlasting life; he has
received them into his hands from his Father, and keeps them faithfully, that
none of them be taken out of his hands: your Excellency has heard, believed
and followed the voice of the said Shepherd.

That is it (said his Excellency) which now the devil sets before me, and
troubles me, because I have not heard and followed the voice of my Shepherd.

The Minister answered: The Devil always follows his old custom, from
whence he is called a Liar and a Murderer: for he lies accusing your
Excellency not to have heard nor followed at all, the voice of Christ your
shepherd. It is plain that your Excellency never despised the same, but
heard and followed it, though it may be not always with such earn^^nesse and
zeal as was required. And what if your Excellency had not yet heard nor
followed the voice of that good shepherd? it is not yet too late to do the
same: you read in the 95. Psalm, 7. 8. To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your heart: This present hour and moment is promised in the holy
Scriptures. Pray yet in Christ Jesus his name for the pardon of your sins,
and this day they shall be pardoned unto you, for so speaks and promises
God: As true as I live, I desire not the death of sinners, but that they repent
and live.

The Lady Emilia being present, his Excellency said unto her, this night I
could not understand nor receive consolation, but now I understand and receive
it very well. Heerevpon I answered, The Lord be praised, that now your
Excellency receives the same, Confirmet Deus quod operatus est. Psalm. 68.

This day his Excellency caused certain little Prayer books (with which he
often had used to exercise himself) to be brought to his bed, and ordained
for every Child one, for a remembrance, writing therein their sundry names,
and adding there unto his Christian vow and fatherly admonition.

The eldest Son Philippus Mauritius, received from his Father the Germane
Bible, which his Excellency had taken along with him in Bohemia, France,
England, and other Countries, and in the which he did read, or caused to be
read every Morning and Evening certain Chapters, whereof he noted with
black, green, or red Incke, the chief heads, and on the Margin wrote the
true uses thereof in short words, as a faithful Minister should do in his
calling. Hence it appears that his Excellency has sought the Lord Jesus his
Savior (according to his commandment John 5.) in the Scriptures only, and
has found him, and in him life eternal and true salvation.

The words written for his eldest Son were these:

MY Son PHILIPPUS MAVRITIVS, Count of Hanaw: Fear GOD, and keep his
Commandments. I have been this night in great anguish, I have thought on
many things, which I wish you could know, my Child; yet this I tell you: Keep
thy self all thy life time close unto thy God, his help and assistance is
necessary unto thee, would to God that I could write, the great richesse of his
mercy, goodness and faithfulness, experimented by me these former days. I
have the foretaste of the eternal glory: The Lord help thee unto me in due
time. Amen. In these pangs of death I do desire to be delivered, and to be
with my Lord Jesus Christ. O Jesus Christ thou faithful Savior, how do I
love thee? thy promises are true, thy love is great, thy heart is faithful
toward me; I commend my Spirit into thy hands, thou faithful God, thou have
delivered and sanctified me. Lord, I wait on thy salvation.

Thy faithful Father PHILIPPUS LODOVICVS.


The second Son Willelmus Reynhart received his book with these words:

MY dear Son, serve thy God with thy whole heart, in spirit and truth; I have
destinated thee thereunto: Esteem it not to be a shame for thee to serve GOD
and his Church. GOD is the greatest Lord, thy Creator: Keep in honor the true
service of God: Obey and serve thy dear Mother, under whose heart thou have
line: Honor and serve thy eldest Brother as thy Lord, for such is the
ordinance, and also my will: Bear with him; if thou be in the right then art
thou happier then he: if thou do not walk uprightly in thy ways, then art
thou not happy. Love thy Brother and Sisters from thy heart: Love thy house, do
good unto the poor according to thy ability, then shall the Lord bless thee:
Beware of drinking, dissolutenes and unclean speeches, as of fire: Honor thy
state: Be industrious in all things: Read and practice continually the 119.
Psalm: Let thy Astrologians be the 28. Chapter of Deutronomium.

PHILIPPUS LODOVICVS Thy faithful Father unto death.


The eldest Daughter, Lady Charlotte Loisa, received her book, with these
words:

Fear, Honor and love thy GOD from thy heart: have his Commandments
continually before thine eyes; take thy delight therein: Honor with a filial
obedience thy loving Mother: Keep thy mouth close with a lock: Esteem
honesty and modesty above all the treasures of the world. God bless thee my
loving Child.

Thy faithful Father unto death.


The second Daughter, Lady Amalia Elisabetha, received her book, with these
words:
Have GOD before thine eyes: Honor thy Mother with obedience: Keep honesty
and modesty, that will be thy best jewel and riches.

Thy faithful Father unto death.


The youngest Daughter, Lady Catharina Iuliana, received her book with these
words:
Dear Child, be virtuous; Have thy Creator before thine eyes; Fear thy God
all the days of thy life; Love thy Savior, who shed his precious blood for
thee; Break thy evil will; Be humble and obedient: Humility, Honesty, and
Silence do more adorn a Lady, then either Pearls or other costly jewels.

Thy faithful Father unto death.


His Excellency caused also the lately borne Lord to be brought before his
bed, he sighed heartely over him, touched him with his hand, and prayed, that
the Lord would also bless that Child, and give it grace to be well and
Christianly brought up.

These Children being thus blessed by his Excellency, and committed unto God,
I do not doubt but that these sighs and prayers are pierced through the
clouds and come unto God, yea are written in his book, and that we shall see
in due time the effects thereof abundantly, according to the true promise of
God, Esa. 65. 23. My elect shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth in fear,
for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their buds with them.
Also Psalm. 145. 19. The Lord will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he
also will hear their cry, and will save them.

The Lord, according unto his great mercy, grant unto these blessed Children,
even the same spirit, by whom they must be blessed, that they may always have
before their eyes, the zealous prayers and sighs of their father, for to
stir them up unto true piety and virtue, not despising and leesing (as
wicked Esau did) the blessing, but keeping it on them, according to the
promise: I show mercy on thousands that love me and keep my commandments.

His Excellency being risen a while, that his bed might be made, looked on
his new Chamber-clarke, stretched his hand out unto him, and said, I have not
yet taken leave of you, I will do it now. Think on your Oath, and calling;
hold God before your eyes, be faithful unto him, and you shall keep a good
conscience, and, no doubt, be faithful unto me and mine. The Lord give thee
grace thereunto.

Due of his Counselors coming into the Chamber as his Excellency was to lie
down again, his Excellency stretched his arms out, and said, with great
affection. Ecce Diuinum Miraculum, Hominem iam mortuum, viribus tamen adhuc
integrum. Lo a divine miracle, a man already dead, yet having his full
strength: for his Excellency did feel himself yet strong, thence he feared a
heavy departure.

His Excellency caused diverse things to be read unto him, out of a little
Song-booke Printed in Lubeck, Anno 1607. which begins thus:

Ach Got wenn sol ichs klagen.
Mein Angst vnnd Ellend schwer
Ich mocht wol gar verzaghen
Wann Herr dein trost nicht were, etc.
And took the same unto him, and in the margant wrote these words, This song
have I used many years: and commanded as soon as he should be departed, to
lay the same (the book being opened) upon his heart.

On the said day did his Excellency call before him all the Ministers of the
old and new City, whereunto were joined some Country Ministers, with whom his
Excellency did discourse of the true faith and christian departure, and told
unto them, that he would not be in this his weakness without a Preacher.

His Excellency did often sigh, and pray from his heart, for mitigation of his
pains and shortning of the pangs of death, as also for an understanding end,
besides this, uttered many excellent and comfortable speeches, to the joy and
admiration of the assistants, which were not remembered, nor noted, because no
body did think that death was at hand, yet whereas many of them were repeated
by him the Friday ensuing, I have set them down in writing.

On Friday the 7. of August, when his Excellency no doubt did feel that the
hour of death did approach, and that his heart was full of Godly comfort, his
Excellency began again to speak with a singular zeal, of the misery of
this life, of the death of a Christian, and of eternal salvation: I was
present at that time, and did admit no other then my self: from that time
forward, the chiefest speeches which I noted were these.

Should I not keep that which I have promised unto my God? I have promised to
follow him, when and whether soever he do call me. He calls me now, I am
now upon the way, should I turn back again? Should I thrust my self again
into such unquietness? I thank God that I am thus far delivered thereof.
Should I polute my self again with sin, from the which my Lord Jesus Christ
has freed me? Ah my dear friends (thus he spoke unto us the assistants) how
well should your matters stand, if they stood, as mine do? Ah loving Sirs, I
have seen the glory of God, what care I for this world? I have kissed the hem
of the garment of my Lord Jesus Christ, I do now clime on the Ladder of Jacob
unto heaven, toward my God and Savior, should I be so sottish as to take a
piece of wood for a piece of Gold? What if many millions of Gold were given
unto me to spend, I would account it nothing: worldly things do perish.

Whilst his Excellency was speaking these things, he cast his arms from
him, and said, all things do now stincke unto me: tell this unto my Children,
and chiefly unto their Steward, that they do not endeavor for worldly
matters, but that they put their trust on God. Ah my dear people, how much
trouble have you with me miserable creature? I will thank you all in heaven,
some of you will shortly follow me. My wife gave me leave to travail into
England, why should she not give me leave to go unto my loving God, yea, said
I: into that Celestial Engelland where the holy Angels praise God, as they did
at Bethlem?

And when I would comfort his Excellency with the hope of recovery of his
health, he answered very earnestly these words.

My loving Minister, can you counsel me with a good conscience, that I should
thrust my self again into this wicked and troublesome world?

On Friday Morning his Excellency charged to shut all the doors and to admit
no man unto him, that he might not be seen uncovered because of the exceeding
great heat. But about the Evening, beginning again to speak very comfortably
of eternal life, he cried twice with a loud voice, Open all the doors, let
all my people come in, that they may see how joyfully I dye, that they all, may
be comforted by my example. He thought also on his Wife in Childebed, and
said: How well and wisely does the Lord ordain all things? he has delivered
my Wife from the pangs and labor of Childe-birth, that she should not have
two griefs at once: she will the sooner pass over the grief of my departure.

The Physicians counseled his Excellency not to ouerweary himself by too
much speaking, whereunto he answered, Should I not speak of my loving God? he
has given me a tongue to that end.

They did likewise dissuade him from taking the fresh Air, by opening of a
window: his Excellency answered, Should I not behold the fair heavens,
whether I shall come anon?

When his Excellency did see, through the window, his new built Turret, and
spoke of it: I said, This is a fair Turret, but your Excellency knows well
which is the spiritual Turret of our souls, from thence shall you receive
help and consolation: his Excellency said heerevpon, Goodnight, and caused
the window to be shut, and looking on his bed, said, Christ has suffered for
me at the fearful Cross, I am not worthy of this ease: I answered, your
Excellency is worthy of it, and seeing God has given you the same receive it
thankfully.

Lying on his bed he stretched his right leg on the side, stoke his hand on
it, and said, O you dear leg, you have had a long time no rest, your rest
draws near. One of his Exceilencies seruing-men going out of the Chamber,
his Excellency commended unto me his diligence and faithfulness.

His Excellency did lift up to heaven his hands and eyes very often, and said,
O thou great and strong God, Thou almighty God, Thou holy God, Thou good and
true God, and added always thereunto some short and fervent prayer. Docter
Luther calls such prayers Stossgebete, that is, thrusting, or thronging
prayers, because they come from the zealous heart with force, and are cast out
before the mercy seat of God, according unto the speech of the 55. Psalm,
Cast thy burden upon the Lord.

His Excellency did also often repeat these sentences, Psalm 50. verse 15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Psalm 91. 15. He shall call upon me, and I will hear him, I
will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and show him my salvation.
Philip. 1. 23. I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ. Psalm 27. 14. Hope
in the Lord, be strong, comfort thine heart, and trust in the Lord.

I depart in peace and in joy, should not I be glad? I have obtained of my God
what I demanded, yea, more then I requested.

His Excellency could not be satisfied with the 23. Psalm The Lord is my
shepherd: he caused me to read the same three times: and as once I read
these words, yea, though I should walk through the dark valley, his
Excellency said, that dark valley is now unto me reasonable light. O Lord
stay (thine anger) from me, that I may be refreshed before I go hence. He
made likewise very good use with the two last verses of the 38. Psalm. Forsake
me not O Lord, be not thou far from me my God.

Haste thee to help me, O Lord of my salvation.

Hence it appears that man consists of flesh and spirit, that the old and
new Adam dwells in him, and that these two are always in combat one against
another, as long as man lives here. And when man is cast, by the Counsel of
God, into the Oven of misery, and is tempted by the heat of the Cross, then
Soul and Body, Flesh and Spirit fight one against the other. The worldlings
have no feeling of such a Spiritual combat, but Gods children feel the same
every day, and pray, O Lord, Lead us not into temptation* yet lead us
according unto thy will, but deliver us soon from the Euill-one, and from all
that might hinder our salvation.

Hence it comes that the true believers when they feel such a combat betwixt
the Spirit and the Flesh, or see and hear it in others, that they hold it for
a good token, according unto the saying of Saint James, Cap. 1. 2. My Brethren,
count it exceeding joy when you fall into diverse tentations. Also verse 12.
Blessed is the man that endures tentation. The unbelieving worldlings, and
Hipocrites, who know not how wonderfully God deals with his Saints, hold it
for an evil sign or token, and speak with derision of it, which they would
not do if they understood the example of our Savior Jesus Christ, who was
tempted three times by the Devil. Also, if they knew that all things do turn
good unto those that love God. Also, that they must be made like unto the Image
of his Son, Romans 8.

Hence it fell out, that his Excellency, besides these excellent speeches of
consolation (feeling in his heart the testimony of Gods holy Spirit) did utter
sometimes words of complaint and sorrow, by the frailty of his sinful
siesh, and of old Adam, yet sought finally the victory. He complained
sometimes of the misery of this life, of the manifold sins whereunto the
corrupt nature is subject, of the fearfulness of death, of the pains of
hell, and said: Ah I miserable sinful man: O Lord have thou forgotten me,
will thou show no more mercy? Is thy mercy turned to anger? etc. even as David
speaks in the 77. and 88. Psalms, Also my pains are too great, I can suffer
them no longer.

And whereas these words did seem to come from vnpatience against the gracious
help of God, his Excellency was comforted and admonished by me and other
assistants, with many good and holy sentences, unto Christian patience: it is
not need to set them down here. His Excellency did receive this comfort, and
did correct his former vnpatience with these words.

Ah, I do provoke my God unto anger by my vnpatience, I will do it no more.
If I have received from God good things, I will bear patiently the evil: he
will not forsake me, he has not forsaken me yet, I will prescribe unto him no
measure: forsake me not O Lord, that I forsake not thee. Besides went on thus:
Ah what a heavy battle is before me? whereupon I told him, your Excellency is
now in the estate, wherein your Lord Jesus Christ was when he was in the
agony Luke 22. 44. the said Lord Christ has ouer-wonne, he calls now unto
himself, all those that are weary and laden, Mat. 11. 28. he is the Captain
in this combat, follow you him with patience and faith, and no enemy shall be
able to hurt you.

His Excellency did not fear death, for he was ready and willing to die, but
only the terror of it, setting death before his eyes (by the weakness of the
flesh) as a fearful Tyrant, and as the Giant Goliath, who terrified the
Israelites. But I comforted him immediately, as follows. Death indeed was
terrible because of our sins, but she is no more horrible unto those that are
in Jesus Christ, for he (as the true David) has vanquished death. Did not your
Excellency hitherto pray for a blessed end? Has not Christ promised, that he
will give whatsoever we do pray for unto the Father in his name? Ioh. 16.
Does not the 145. Psalm say, that God does what the good demand? and the 12.
God hears the sighs of the faithful? and the 34. God delivers the
righteous out of all fear. Your Excellency will not tread under feet your
prayers and deep sighs, for they are pierced through the clouds. I will
says the Lord, up, and set him at liberty, Psalm. 12. Besides I propounded unto
his Excellency the comfort of the 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory? Hence I took occasion to show to compare the
death of the faithful, unto a bold and proud Soldier who has no weapons,
and whose threatenings are in vain.

These words took away that fear of his Excellency, and after diverse
gronings, keeping himself quiet, he said: One combat is now past: which words
I heard with great joy, and thanked God for it.

The Satterday drawing near, his Excellency was desirous to speak again
with his wife, and the Lady of Orange. They came presently, and with them the
Lady Charlotte Loyse, he spoke with them in order, and they with comfortable
speeches and abundance of tears took their leave again of him: he said unto
his daughter Charlotte, Well, my dear daughter, remember me thy father, who
always intended to do thee good, fear the Lord: be virtuous and honest, and
no good shall fail thee.

On Satterday the 8. of August, did some of his Council ask what they should
say unto his loving Brother Count Albrecht, if it would please God to take his
Excellency unto himself, he answered: Tell him good night, and let him know
that I have always meant well and brotherly, though he and some others could
or would not always acknowledge the same. It needs not to write of this
matter any further.

His Excellency charged them also to say farewell, in his name, unto the
Archbishop and Prince Elector of Ments, the Abbot of Fulda, the Count Wolffgang
E^^est of Henburgk, etc. and told his Chamberlain, by whom, and on what
occasion this should be performed.

On this Satterday his Excellency caused, for a time, all the assistants to
void the chamber, and I remained alone with him, he began to enter with me
into an holy discourse of the estate of the souls of the righteous in heaven,
and how far we are bound, and able, as long as we are in the militant
Church, to pray for our selves and our brethren; yea, for all men: I made along
discourse hereof unto his Excellency, wherein he had a very good liking.

The greatness of his pains made him to complain, yet by my comfort did
gather courage, and said in Latin, Mors mea gloriosa erit, my death shall be
glorious, as if he would have said; What do I trouble my self? all will be
well and glorious.

On Satterday night, the Sunday approaching, and the hour of death drawing
near, a very great conflict was seen in him, and said in his lamentations:
Ah, God has forgotten me! it is impossible that I should be succored, I
cannot hold fast your consolations: thus turned himself from me, and
complained of an unspeakable heat and cold, and how he stood with one foot
only, upon a high mountain, and was to leap over a water that sprung out of
the mountain. These words did much move the hearts of the assistants, and of
me likewise; chiefly because his Excellency said that he could not receive
my consolations.

Heerevpon I told him that he was to bear those suffrances, that made him
complain, as our Savior did upon the Cross, My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me? and the Prophet David, Psalm 18. The sorrows of death compassed
me about, etc. And whereas his Excellency had turned himself from me, and
could not receive comfort, I went to the bed, fell about his neck, and spoke
in great earnest these words.

My gracious Lord, I beseech and admonish your Excellency to take to your
heart my consolations (which I shall draw out of Gods holy word) as from the
Minister of Christ. It is now Satterday, the Sunday is at hand, then do we
speak in the Church, in the exposition of the Catechism of the crucified Lord
Jesus Christ: let us now also speak of him. These words moved his Excellency
to turn himself again toward me, and to give ear unto those comfortable
grounds and sentences which I did allege out of Gods holy word, as the Lord at
that time did put into my heart: and I did chiefly draw some meditations from
the 23. Psalm, (in which Psalm his Excellency did much delight, as we said
before) saying, your Excellency shall now be brought unto those green
Pastures, and sweet waters, that refresh the soul, whereby your soul, to the
praise of God, shall also be quickened. It is true that the way unto those
blessed Pastures and springs, is a dark valley of death, full of thorns, the
door also is very narrow. But your Excellency be of good cheer, for you have
hitherto courageously overcome the thorns of sin, and the darkness of the
terible death, through Jesus Christ, who is the light, the way, the truth and
the life. Go on fight on, in Jesus Christ's name, you are almost at the end,
there remains but two steps, and two blows, then all is woone. Your
Excellency sets now his right foot out of the dark and thornie valley,
into the pleasant pastures of God. Jesus Christ our Savior (who also went this
way, yea, a far painefuller) stands in the midst of these pastures and
the holy Angels with him, they wincke at you, and call you unto them, and do
long to receive you into their company. There is prepared a Table for your
Excellency to sit at, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: you shall drink there
the ouer-flowing Cup of Heavenly Joy, your head shall be anointed with the
true oil of gladness, seeing you have fought and overcome so valiantly in
Jesus Christ.

By these zealous speeches, and other, was taken away the tentation and fear
of Hell, through the grace of our Lord Christ, who permits us not to be
tempted above our ability and power. His Excellency laid both his hands in my
right hand, and I laid my left hand on his head, and thus gave a very good
attention unto those things which were alleged by me.

The Physicians did admonish his Excellency to sleep, whereupon I said, in the
name of the Lord Christ do I lay my hand on your head, I beseech him to
strengthen and refresh you. Thus he took a little sleep, and I went out of
the room: but being awaked again, I was called for, and his Excellency said
unto me, that I should lay again my hand on his head in the name of the Lord
Christ, I did it, and he fell in sleep again.

On Sunday about nine of the clock in the morning, (which was the day of his
deliverance) something was brought unto him for to eat, and to get rest, the
Physicians said, that then all would be well. His Excellency answered, if it
should be better after my sleep, then I desire no more of this, only I wish
for so much strength, that I may commit my soul unto my Savior, and speak
yet once with my wife. Thus did we void the room in hope of rest, leaving
only his Steward with him.

When we thought that his Excellency took rest, Lo, his Steward kneeled
before his bed, and said with his Excellency the Lords Prayer. We being
entered his Excellency lift up his head and eyes, and cried out with a joyful
voice, Now am I once delivered, and stroke his breast with his hand, saying: O
dear heart, how have thou been tormented and martyred? thou shall now be
comforted. Then called he for his Wife, but for certain reasons, and for to
decline those heavy lamentations, it was not done. Then said his Excellency
unto his Steward, bid my Wife good morrow, and tell her I leave this world
joyfully and willingly.

The Bell rung for the Sermon in the old City: his Excellency said, Never
did that Bell sound so in my ears as now it does: I answered, This Bell
calls your Excellency now, to the song of Angels, of which you told me
before yesterday. Then said his Excellency, Well, Let us sing: thus laid down
his head, and began to sing the song of the Angels, Luke 2. (which is used in
the Germane Churches) Glory be to God in the high heavens, etc. We followed
after him. Then began his Excellency to sing the 118. Psalm, verse 24.

This is the joyful day indeed,
Which God himself has wrought,
Let us be glad and joy therein,
In heart, in mind and thought.
We followed again, with a low and wear voice. Then came his Excellency to
the 116. Psalm:

I love the Lord because my voice,
And prayer heard has he, etc.
Thus was to be seen the Spirit of Adoption in the heart of his Excellency.

And when we spoke together for to prepare our selves to prayer, His
Excellency noted the same, and commanded us to kneel down, and to pray: he
repeated every word zealously, but chiefly the Lords Prayer, and the Articles
of Christian faith: and when those that were about him did comfort his
Excellency with some good sentence, he repeated the same after them, as long
as his tongue could do it.

I feared that too much speech might have hindered his Excellency, therefore I
brake of, and after a while rehearsed unto him the words of our Savior, Ioh.
3. God so loved the world that he has given his only begotten son, etc. And
I asked whether his Excellency understood them: then he turned his eyes on
me and said the word, I have told it. These short words did I report unto the
assistants, and added, that his Excellency had abundantly declared which was
his Faith, Hope, and Comfort, wherein he lived and now was to dye, namely, the
only begotten Son of God.

Besides this, I cried often unto his Ercellencie these words. O Lord Jesus
Christ, I commit my Spirit into thy hands, thou have delivered me, thou true
and faithful God. Whilst this was repeated unto his Excellency he rendered
his spirit quietly, and blessedly. The words of our Savior, wherewithal I
comforted him at his last hour, were before (without my knowledge) propounded
unto him by the Lady of Orange, and by himself written in his Germane Bible,
so that by Gods providence the same were alleged by me: for he intended to
dye therein both willingly and happily.

Thus departed his Excellency, after the ending of the Sermon in the old
Church, and the Prayer conceined for his Excellency and other Christian
Maiestrates.

And this is the plain and true relation of the blessed departure of his
Excellency, out of this wicked world, from whence we have to take instruction
and example to live according unto Gods holy will, preparing our selves, as he
did, tunely, with true Faith, Hope, and Love, that when the hour of death
comes, we may in Christian patience depart well comforted, both willingly and
blessedly. This grant unto me and all believers, the father of mercy by his
holy Spirit, for the only propitiatory Sacrifice of his dear Son, and our
Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
MATTHEW 10. 22. He that endures to the end, he shall be saved.
APOCCALIPSE 2. 7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.
FINIS.

