Two Sermons preached, the one at S. Mary's Spittle on Tuesday in Easter week.
1570. and the other at the Court at Windsor the Sunday after twelfth day, being
the viij. of January, before in the year. 1569. by Thomas Drant Bacheler in
Divinity.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis per Decennium.

To the right worshipful 1. Thomas Henneage, treaurer of her Majesty's
honorable chamber, increase of worship, with an earnest zeal to Gods Gospel.
THese two Sermons (right worshipful Sir) after that once I was persuaded to
have them Printed, I thought to commend unto you. That I may dedicate a
divinity Sermon I am clearly resolved: because S. Luke did dedicate his
Gospel to Theophilus. The causes why I should offer the^ to you are these:
First, many gifts worthy much commendations in your self: then that I was
your servant, and in deed it shall not but delight me to call you, and
esteem you as my Master: then that at all times you both have deserved, and
been willing to deserve well of my studies. Of the Sermons I will say no one
word, they are Printed, and men have eyes, God give them judgment: this one
thing I must needs say, my health was very ill, both when I made these, and is
yet still, it has spoiled me of my Lecture at Paul's, my being in the City,
peraduentures, shortly of the country, and my life too: If God shall bless me
with better health, I would be glad (though most of all unworthy) to be some
instrument for the kingdom of heaven: if not, it is not amiss, his blessed
will be done. I wish charity from God to the world, peace at length to his
warfayring Church, confusion of all manner of hypocrites, favorable
inclination, and judgment of great personages to his word, and the godly
traueilers in his gospel. Long life and most prosperous reign to our loved
Sovereign Prince, and to all her subjects that wish the same, and all the
elect of God, and eue^ with my whole heart I pray God the father, the God of
heaven, and his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to hold strong the sweet lines
of our predestination, to be a bright pillor to us in the dark wilderness of
this world, and to make all his chosen people at his time, parteners of a
joyful and comfortable resurrection.

Farewell.

Your worships ever to be commanded Thomas Drant.

Faults escaped.
C. i. a. lin. xi. for rougher hunters, read rough hunters. D. i. b. lin. vi.
for balde solisismes, read bad solisismes. D. i. b. lin. xxiij. for Bruntius,
read Brentius. D. iii. a. for Iacobus Andrae, read Iacobus Anrdeae. in the
margent. E. ii. b. lin. viii. for show white, read snow white. F. i. b. lin.
xvi. for fecis^m, read fecissem. F. i. b. lin. xix. for credidiscem, read
credidissem. F. v. b. lin. xxviii. for Ierustikaker, read Ierushkaker. F. vi.
a. lin. xi. for Bethanem, read Bethauen. G. i. b. lin. xvi. for sely cloister,
read sely cloysterer. G. v. b. lin. xviii. for before Jacobs face, read before
Esaus face. G. vi. a. lin. xv. for the lesser, read the looser. H. ii. a. for
the outcry of the beggars, read the outcry of the beggars wrongs. in the
margent. H. v. b. lin. xvi. for Mengrem, read Migrim. H. v. b. lin. xxiii. for
muthering re^mes, read murdering rew^es. K. vi. a. for (...), read (...).
Cant. 5. Formosissima mulierum, quo nam abijt dilectus tuus? Quonam abijt, and
quaeremus eum? Cant. 6. Dilectus meus discendit ad ariolas aromatum, vt pascat
in hortis, and vt colligat lilia.
This text (men and brethren, and very Christian audience) is read almost after
one sort, saving that some for the word [BELOVED] say [SPOVSE]: And for that
word [gone aside] other say [gone downe]. Pagnine says [Lilies]. Munster says
Roses. And diverse other say Uiolets. But I will trust Pagnine in this matter,
and go through with his exposition in this sort.

Fairest of all women, whether is thy Beloved gone? whether is he gone aside?
tell us, and we will seek him with thee.

My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of his spicerie, to be
fed in gardens, and gather up Lilies.

THe occasion of this Scripture The argument or occasion o^ the place of Script
thus written, is, that the Church of God, which is named here to be the
fairest of women, had wonderfully commended her beloved Christ. For (says she)
my love is white and red colored, a goodly person among ten thousand. His head
is like fine gold, his locks black bushed. His eyes like doves eyes, washed
in milk, and like pearls in gold. His cheeks like a garden bed, planted
with all sweet things. His lips like Lilies. His hands like precious
stones. His body pure Yuorie, over decked with Sapphires. His legs pillars of
Marble, set upon sockets of gold. His face as Lybanus. His words are sweet.
Such a one is my love (quoth she): Such a one is my love.

Now, the other Churches, which in some translation are signified under the
word, adolescentulae, when they hear the beloved Christ thus commended, they
lif^ up their ears, and burn in their breste^ to know more of such a
delightful belo^ ued, and so trim a spouse. And there^ fore they ask
whether he is gone, an^ whether he is gone aside: and promise^ that they will
make after him, and seek^ him, even as Germany began to prea^ Christ, and to
praise him in other sort, then the world had heard tell of before. And
therefore neighbor countries, as our England, and the rest began more and
more to have hasty ears, and hot hearts, to hearken after the beloved
Christ, and to seek after the beloved Christ, whom Germany had so loudly, and
largely commended. But because this people which I speak to, is a great
people, and the time that I have to occupy is long, and the matter much, let
us all, ye honorable, and ye also beloved people, join together in calling
upon the name of God. And first to pray unto the holy Ghost, that as he is
called an ointment, so he will make supple and tender our hearts, and make them
hearts of flesh. That as he is called a fire, so by him our hearts may be
eaten up, and devoured, in excess of charity. That as he is called the
comfortour, so he will comfort, and enable ^e a man of such and so much
sickness, to ^eare up his name, and to speak his ma^ifolde praises to the
sons of this gene^ation Then let us go forward to pray ^or the whole state of
Christ's congrega^ion, being yet far from her country, encompassed round
about with Cayns, and Esawes, and Basan Bulls, and all kinds of deadly foes,
she being sperpled as yet wide where upon the great face of this earth. More
specially let us pray for the Churches of England, and Ireland, and as the
duty of our love, and subjection most of all requires, let us pray for her
most excellent Majesty, Elizabeth by the grace of God. etc. That Gods enemies
and her enemies may be made his, and her footestools. That her scepter may
grow green, and florishe like a Palm tree well and moystly planted, and that
her seat may never totter, or nodde, but stand stedy as the seat of Solomon,
and fair as the sun. That the days of her regiment may be as the days of
heaven. Let us pray for all the Nobility, and genterie of this land, that they
do not live as the Giantes or noble men before Noes flood, without reign, or
rule: le^t that as those Giantes brought down upon the heads of the world a
flood of water: so some of our English Giantes do bring upon us a flood of
fire: That they may remember that saying of Dauid^ I said you are Gods, because
the word i^ come to you. If the word come to them, Gods word makes noble men
and gentlemen.
or they to the word, then they are Gods Gods, and Gods gentlemen: if it come
not to them, nor they to it, then they are the Heraldes Gods and the Heraldes
gentlemen. Pray for them that they may be to their prince, as Thomas was to his
master Christ: Let us go and let us dye with him. That they may remember that
Gods book of life is better then the Heraldes book of arms, and that neither
house, nor blood, can save or withholde their souls from the hand of hell, but
only that just blood, of the just man Jesus Christ. Let us heartily wish to
her majesty's most honorable Counsel the spirit of council and direction,
that they may be as Iosephes in Egypt, faithful, and careful to provide for
the necessities of the realm, specially, that men's souls be not starued with
hunger and pine of the word of God. Pray for all us of Christ's Ministry:
that as we are called ^ightes, so we may give light: and as we ^re called Gods,
so we may continue to ^aster the world by the word: as we are ^alled
Ambassadors, so we may be chea^ie to speak from God to man: as we are called
dogs, we may bark: and as we are called watchmen, so we may carke and keep,
and that that voice may ring through and through our heads. O Tymothie keep
that which is committed. Pray for both twain the Uniuersities, of Cambridge
and Oxenforde, or as the Scripture calls the^, the families of the sons of
the Prophets, that they may grow on from strength to strength in courage of
spirit, and from wisdom to wisdom in plenty of judgment, that they may be
able me^, to teach, and reprove, to plant, and destroy, and that like young
Samuel they may profit in favor with God, and man. Pray for all the whole
world, that they may open the gates of their hearts, that the prince of glory
may have entrance in, and that being entered, he be not bound, and pinnioned as
sometime he was in Cayphas his entresse, but that he may be frank Christ and at
liberty, and rule from one corner of our consciences unto an other. Likewise
for th^se that suffer trouble, or gr^uance in soul or body: but specially
thos^ that groan under the cross of Gog (...) Rome, and Magog of
Constantinopl^ that they may be assisted with might, or delivered with speed,
and that as Ioell says: the house of Jacob may be a fire, the house of Joseph
may be a flame, and the house of Esau may be stubble. Lastly, let us yield up
thanks to the high throne of our heavens father, for those our brothers and
sisters that are gone to God out of this lamentable maze of misery. Desiring
God, that the north wind may give, and the south wind do not retain: that y^
whole sheet with all y^ four corners, of beasts clean and unclean, may be
taken up into heaven: that Christ may be king from sea unto sea: that nations
may be given unto his inheritance: that the holy Ghost may stir, and the
father draw, and the son thrust no man out that comes unto him: that the
workmen may be many: that the nets may be full: that his will may be done in
these Saints in earth, as in those above in heaven, where doubtless nothing
is done against Gods will: that we full of the fear of God, and full of faith,
may be gathered together to our forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For
these and what soeue^, the holy Ghost, that best doctor, and spirit of
wisdom shall prompt into our spirits, I pray you all say the Lords prayer.
Our Father. etc.

Fairest of women, whether is thy beloved gone? etc.
Here are four things (as I take it) Division.
to be noted. And in the first place, because there is a question asked:
Whether is thy beloved gone? I will endeavor my self to speak of questions,
and demaundes. Secondly, because the question is asked of the fairest of women,
that is, of Christ's Church, I will speak of the Church: which Church is a
woman, and which not: which is fair, and which not: and then of the authority
of the Church, because here the question is asked of the Church, and the Church
seems to keep the determination in the goinges of the beloved, that is, in
matters to be known of Christ. In the third place comes to be handled the
answer given by the Church, which is: My beloved is gone down to the beds of
his spicerie, etc. Lastly (though not by the order of the text, yet by order of
matter) I will speak^ upon these words: Tell us, and we will seek him with
thee. Howbeit these latter words shall not grow into any long process. Only
I will give charge, and vehement exhortation to the world, to seek Christ, and
make after him. I will tell them if they seek him, they shall find him, and I
will not stick to swear if they find him, they shall find the whole
complishment of their hearts desire. In the mean season, fear ye not (good
presence) that I should kill you, with lothsomnesse and length. For I will
post through my many matters with what possible speed I can.

And first touching questions, and things to be demanded, it is well said of
Paul concerning questions of edifying: In these things I would have thee
confirmed: these be good and profitable for men. But folishe questions, and
questions of natiuities, those shun: for they be unprofitable and vain. Good
questions and profitable are to be demanded.

So the kings in old time were wont to ask the Prophets of their battles,
and affairs.

So Naamans servant asked Elizas the Prophet: Whether if his master should go
up to the Idol temple and worship, he might do so, or no?

So the Eunuch asked Philip the exposition of these words: Ductus est sicut
ouis ad mactationem. etc.

So John asked a question: T^ ne is es? etc. Art thou he that shall come, or
shall we look for an other?

So Mary asked a question: How can these things be done unto me, since I have
no knowledge of man?

So Philip asked a question: Lord tell us the way, that is, Lord what is the
way?

So the elders went up to Jerusalem to ask of Iudaisme.

So Peter asked a question: Lord whether shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life.

So Nicodemus asked a question: How can a man be borne in his age?

And again: How can these things be done?

These questions be good and profitable to men. But vain, and unprofitable
questions are to be shunned.

Such a vain question it was that the Serpent demanded in Paradise: Why has
God forbidden you to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil?

Such a vain one moved the Apostles: Lord when will thou restore the kingdom
of Israel? Whom Christ controlleth: It is not yours to know times, or the
momentes of times.

Such a vain question did Peter ask of his fellow John: Lord what shall
this John do?

Such an one moved y^ S^duces: Lord if a woman have seven husbands, who shall
be her husband in the latter day?

Such an one moved Job* Wherefore have thou brought me out of my mothers womb?

Such an one moved Asterius* Whether that Christ's flesh was, when it was not?

Such an one moved Philasterius: Why men and Angels were not made both of one
matter?

Such an one moved Marcellus: Whether God be alone, or has more Gods with him?

Such an one moved Donatus: Whether the Church can be in any other place then
in Afric?

Such an one Iouianus: Whether the virgin Mary were corrupted in bringing forth
her son, or no?

Such an one Valentinianus: Whether the word were changed into bones, flesh,
or hear, or no?

Such an one the Euchitae: Whether that when a man is purged with baptism, an
hog go forth of his mouth, or no?

Such an one moved Potentinus: Whether the holy Ghost do weep in men, as he
does speak in men?

Such an one moved the Aeriani: Whether marriage be lawful, or no?

Such an one moved Precillianus: Whether the world be made by the devil,
because it is an ill world?

Such an one moved Manichaeus: Whether Christ be the Sun that rises and
sets, because he is called the light of the world?

Such an one moved Arrius: Whether the holy Ghost may be commanded by the
Son?

Such an one moved the Nazarens: Whether a man may profess both Iudisme, and
Christianisme?

Such an one moved Pelagius: Whether that by free will a man might ketch the
kingdom of heaven?

Such an one moved Nestorius: Whether the honor of Christ's divinity were
given him of duty, or no?

Such an one moved Cresconius: Whether a sinner ought to be bapti^ed? because
it is said: the oil of a ^inner shall not fatten thy head.

Such an one moved Vincentius: Whether man's soul deserved to sin before it
did sin?

Foolish questions, and unprofitable questions ought to be shunned. And of all
foolish questions, what say you to the ^oolishnesse of our scholishe
questions, set a ^oote by those subtle, and deep doctors, commonly called
Scholemen?

As: Whether there were any instant in the generation of God the second person?

Whether in Christ there be more fi^iations then one?

Whether God the father hates the ^onne?

Whether Christ might possiblye ^aue taken upon him the likeness of an ass,
of a woman, of a feend, or o^ a goorde?

How that Goord should have preached down miracles, or have hanged upon a
Cross?

And what Peter should have consecrated if he had consecrated, what time
Christ's body hung on the cross?

Or whether Christ being so transformed into a goorde, he might at the same
time be called man also?

Whether after the resurrection, me^ do eat and drink, or no?

Whether it be less sin to slay (...) thousand men, then once on a Sunday to
cloute a poor man's shoe?

Whether men's souls be bred within them, or come from without into them?

What year Christ will come unto his judgment?

Whether the star that did shin^ to the wise men at the birth of Christ* were
a star, or an Angel?

Whether a Mouse can eat Christian body, or no? And if she do eat it* what
danger can be levied upon he^ head.

Such men, such questions, fond men, ^nde questions, foolish men, scholishe
^uestions. But if Pasquin could now ^e reseued from death, or if some were as
^lithelie disposed to demand questions ^s Pasquin, I ween those merry kind of
^uestions would carry away a great deal ^ore of edifying, then these foolish
scholish ^uestions.

As whether that the Bishop of Rome ^eing Antichrist, can be Christ's vicar ^r
no?

Whether that when David says: (...) will give them a tyrant to ride over
their heads, it may not be vnderstan^ed of the Bishop of Rome, since he ^ath
of so long a time over ridden all ^ur heads in regiment, and besides that in
session, rides upon men's shoulders?

Whether that, that Bishop of Rome which said, spirita sancta, for spiritus
san^tus, and fiatur, for fiat, were in danger of that which was objected unto
Paul, that too much study would make him ^adde?

Whether that, that Pope which did ^arnally know the grandmother, the mother,
and the daughter, did mak^ him self an Eunuche for the kingdom^ of heaven?

Whether that Pope Leo that was s^ forgrowen with fat, that he could^ not
wallowe up two stairs in the Capital, or Ecchius that had so large^ strouted
belly, or those drinking Sorbonistes that made the best wine i^ the town to
be called, vinum Theologicum, that is, divines wine, and tha^ were wont to eat
while that they were satur vsque ad guttur? The Sorbonistes Latin.


Whether these men be those tha^ M. Harding speaks of, that do wean^ the^
selves for the kingdom of heaue^^

Whether that Bishop that was s^ fretting fell for loss of his Pecock^ pie,
did possess his soul in pacience^ or no?

To what purpose general Councel^ serve, if that Popish judgment ca^ not
swerve?

Whether in the last Counsel at Tren^ it can be likely that there could b^
good rule kept of the rest of those hol^ fathers, since that in the said
Coun* cell one of the fathers being taken i^ adultrie, was hanged, an other
sticked and an other father, as it is thought, by the rest of the fathers was
let slinke, and slip away?

Whether the Orator Bishop in the said Council, that called the Pope of Rome
the Light, and the Spouse, were adrad of that which Job said: Destruction is
theirs which give titles.

Whether that the Inquisitours of Spain may not more properly be called
rougher hunters then Nemrod?

Whether the said Inquisitors, if they had Jesus of Nazareth in Italy, they
would not ten times more rigorously put him to death, then they did sometimes
in Iewry?

Whether that, that Duke of Alua which now lives, and is the proppe of
Papistrie, is not more fitly to be called Esaus son, then that Duke Alua
which the Genesis speaks of, since Duke Alua. Genesis 36.
that Duke of Genesis did but come by ^ine from Esaus loins, and this Duke of
Louane expresses Esau most naturally in persecuting Jacob, and making his
father sad?

Whether Hosius, and Harding, who say the sentence against Christ was ^ustly
given, and one Vause that writes a Cathechisme from Louane, and has wiped out
the second of the ten Commandments, and divided the last into twain, or the
Jesuits that begin to count Saint Lukes and S. Marks Gospells, as
hangbies, and make Saint Paul's writing to be but Scripture at their lust: I
say, whether that Hosius, Harding, Vause, or the A brow of dishonestie.
Jesuits, have frontem meritricis, or no?

Whether that Doctor Sanders that has written one book de duabu^ missis in
vno templo simul celebrandi^, and has brought not one jot, or small tittle of
Scripture to make for his purpose, do not represent the state of a^ Papisticall
writers, whose custom i^ not much to meddle with Scriptures*

Whether that the Papists (as the world now is) could for any money be hired
to let pass poisoning, and man killing, since that these be the great test
schole points of their Church?

These questions have their edifying and edi^ more ritchly then these scho^
questions. But the question of princip^ litie is thus: Whether is thy beloue^
gone? Our questions must be of the g^ inges of the beloved, and the doings of
the beloved, of Christ's iourneyes, and Christ's ghestes. And as questions may,
and must be asked, so it must be for learninges sake: so then learning ought to
be in all states and ages. And where as he said: D. Co^.
Verily ignorance is the da^me of all devotion, I say to the contrary, verily
ignorance is not the da^me of right devotion, certainly the Scriptures in all
corners of the^ do excite all kind of people to knowledge. Esaie says: An non
quesitum ibit populus ad Deum suum? Shall not the people go to seek after
their God? Again: The people that sit in darkness see a great light. Again:
The earth shall be filled with much knowledge. Again, Christ says to all that
receive the Communion: Mortem eim annunciabitis. etc: Ye shall show forth his
death till he come. How can they show forth or talk of his death, except they
have knowledge? Again: Cauet^ de Pseudoprophetis: Take ye heed of ^alse
Prophets. How ca^ they take heed, except they have learning? Again, it is
said: Nonne legistis? Have ye not red? Peter says: Regale sacerdotum sumus: We
are a kingly Priesthood. We are all Priests, and Priests must be learned.
Again, it is said in the Canticles: Sinescis te (O formosissima mulierum)
egredere a me: If thou know not thy self, O thou fairest of women, get thee
from me. Paul says: Omnia probate: Prove all things. It is said of Christian
people: Ne simus paruuli intelligentia: Let us not be little ones in
understanding. Again: Unus loquatur alter diiudicet: Let one speak, and the
other judge. How can those judge that have no learning? Peter wills every man
to be ready to render a reason of his faith. It i^ said in Genesis, that
Abraham went to the hill of Moreth, that is, to the hill o^ showing. So we must
search the Scriptures till God be showed unto us, and there we must farie.
Saint John sayth^ Omnes erunt dociles Dei: They shall be all Gods scholars.
Again: Si quis vo^ luerit voluntatem eius facere. etc: If any man will do his
will he must know o^ his doctrine. Again: This is eternal life to know thee,
and whom thou ha^ sent Jesus Christ. Again: I write unto you my little sons,
I write vnt^ you fathers, I write unto you young men, I write unto you
children. Again, he writes unto a chosen Lady and to her children which abide
in the liberty. So that he writ to all states and sects, to the intent they
should have knowledge. In the Acts of the Apostles, when Paul preached, the
people opened their books and conferred the places. S. Hierome says: that
Scripturaru^ ignorantia est ignorantia Christi: the ignorance of Scripture is
the ignorance of Christ. S. Hierome writ to Paula, to Eustochium, and
Marcella, women. S. Hierome says: Let the Plough man holding the hale, sing
some Psalm of David. S. Hierome translated the Psalms into the Sclauonian
tongue. Origin in an Homily of the book of Numbers, says: That the devil
possesses all their souls that live in ignorance. The said Origin did
always wish that he could pour all his knowledge into all kind of me^.
Tertullian writ a book of a learned argument unto his wife. Ambrose did
instruct Monacha S. Augustines mother in religion. Augustine writes in the
Psalm, that the kingdom of ignorance is the kingdom of error. Other men
may conjecture more.

But these two causes I think to be the special two causes why that the world
living Two special causes of Papisti^all ignorance.
as it were in a war of ignorance, does call such and so much evil, peace.
The one cause is, the vulgar translation of the Bible: the other, the
worshipping of God in a strange tongue. Touching the vulgar translation, that
is the matrix and conceptorie place of very error, and ignorance. Hence
Dunce, hence Dorbell, hence Houlcotte, Briccot, Tappar, Cappar, Ecchius,
Pighius, Coclaeus, and Hofmiester, have founded, and find out many a fond
argument. Hence wrangle the Jesuits, hence wrestle the Sorbonistes, hence the
horn of Rome is most loftilie exalted. This is thrust upon the world by the
Inquisitors of Spain, dubbed only good, and authentical by the Council of
Trent, and who soever will not receive this, he stands accursed from the face
of the said Council, with the fearce thunderbolt of Anathemysation. Besides
that, this translation takes away and adds to the text, more then many
hundreds of words. There is no leaf throughout the whole Testament, but it
has in this translation some great and grievous error. Whereas the Hebrew
translation says: Melchisedec protulit Faults in the vulgar translation in
the Bible.
^ane^. And so says Ambrose, he brought forth bread: Josephus says, he
ministered bread. The vulgar translation says: He offered up bread. And hereupon
they would devise their Mass offertorie. The Hebrew translation says:
Osculemini filium: Kiss the son. The vulgar translation says: Apprehendite
disciplinam: Take ye discipline. The Hebrew translation says: Filij hominum
vsque quo gloria^ meam in ignominia^? Sons of men how long shall my glory be
turned into reproach? The vulgar translation says: Sons of men how long will
ye be of an heavy heart? The Hebrew translation does say: The kings of hosts
are fled are fled, and the she dwellers in the houses have divided the spoils.
The vulgar translation says: The kings of virtues of the beloved of the
beloved. etc. The Hebrew does say: Ye have slept amongst the midst of the
pottes. The vulgar does say: Ye have slept amongst the midst of the Clergy.
The Hebrew does say: To envy fat hills. The vulgar does say: To look upon
lumpishe hills. The Hebrew does say: I will turn thee from Basan, I will turn
thee from the depth of the sea. The vulgar does say: I will turn thee from
Basan, I will turn thee into the depth of the sea. The Hebrew does say: The
Crow went going forth, and came again. The vulgar does say: The Crow went
forth, and came not again. The Hebrew does say: In all the land of Egypt
there shall be bread. The vulgar does say: In all the land of Egypt there
shall be hunger. The Hebrew says: They have possessed me from the beginning.
The vulgar says: God created me from the beginning. The vulgar translateth
that word to bow down, unto these words, to make Adoration. Hence springs
their servile Adoration. The vulgar translateth the word fit, into the word
worthy. Hence comes their fancy of condignitie. The Greek says: Gather not
to your selves gold, and silver. The vulgar says: Possess ye nor gold, nor
silver. Hence rises their fancy of wilful frierishe poverty. The Greek
says: I would you were without carfulness. The vulgar says: I will have you
without carfulness. Hence sprung the fancy against marriage of some. This
vulgar translation is (as I say) the brood mother of many errors. And
therefore that great costly edition of the Bible in the Hebrew, and Greek
tongue to be Printed from Louane, if it have this vulgar translation adjoined
unto it, I ask quid Saul inter prophetas? What does this base translation
amongst such precious tou^ges? Their new Concordance which they say likewise
is toward, and all the books that they all write, are all naught, void of
Gods meaning, and Gods divinity, if they be founded, or grounded out of this
vulgar translation.

Concerning the service to be had, and the worshipping of God to be in a
strange tongue, that is in deed a thick bushel to hide the candle, or rather
a leude effectual means to pluck away both the candle and the candlestick,
making the house of Jacob Gods church as Egypt full of darkness, even to be
groaped with our feet. Most certain it is, that S. Paul does beat out the
matter wonderful towardly for us. He will needs drive it to this, that Gods
worship should be in such sort, that the people may perceive it, and say, Amen.
Just of that mind is Justinian the Emperor, who made an Edict to that
purpose. Just so is Chrysostom, so Hyerom, and so Basil. Augustine upon the
psalms says: It behooves us after man's manner, and not after the fashion of
birds to sing: for Iayes, Vssells and Rauins are taught to pronounce they wot
not what. Of a trusty troth even their own Mass book does give up evidence
against them selves, and will needs likewise prove, that the people ought to
understand the contents of the Mass. The Mass book says: let us pray. The
Priest says: the Lord be with you. The Mass book bids the people answer.
The Mass book bids them lift up their hearts. The priest says: pray for
me brethren and sisters. How can the people pray? how can they answer? how can
they pray for the priest, except they have understanding? Justinius Marty^
says: Vbi sacerdos gracias agit, populus vni^ersus cla^at. Amen. When the
priest gives thanks, all the people cry. Amen. Chrysostom says, that the
priest, and the people talk together in their mi^eries. This unknown tongue of
theirs ^ust needs be that Babylonicall confusi^n. For the confusion of Babell
is not ^n the many tounges, but in unknown ^peeche, which is not understood.
Christ ^ayth in S. John? Vos adoratis quod nesci^is: you adore you wot not
what. So ^ay it be said to these: you chaunt you ^ot not what, ye pray ye wot
not what, ^e prattle ye wot not what. It is not ^afe enough to mean well, that
I can tell them. In the first chapter of the prophet ^say it is said: I am full
of the fatness ^f tuppes. In the 43. chapter it is said: ^hou offeredst me no
sacrifice, and ^hou did not gloryfie me with thy ^urnt offringes. They offered
while^ Good intent is not enough.
God was full and weary, and yet they offered nothing, because they offered not
as God ^ommaunded them. For so he says him self: I made thee not to serve in
obla^ion, and I did not weary thee with ^rancumsence. Saul intended well, but
that ended not well. Gedion made an E^hod of the Kings that was in the ears
^f the people, but it was a cord both to him, and to his house. Bishop Leo in a
sermon he made de passione Domini, of our Lords passion, says: that Peter in
cutting of of Malchus ear, had intent good enough, but he must smart with the
sword because he had smit without knowledge with the sword. Doctor Sanders in
an Oration that he made in D. Sau^ders behavior.
the face of Louane, has much wrested his wit to prove that those things
which are done in the Church ought to be done in the latin tongue. The
arguments that this Doctor brings are but few, and those but fond, and
except a couple, and scarce too that couple, are worth y^ re citall. The one is
this, out of Paul: Nam tu been quidem gratias agis, sed alter non (...)*
dificatur. etc. Thou do well give thanks, but in the mean time an other is
not edified. That which the Apostle says to be well done (says Sanders) these
youngling divines call unprofitable. But let this old Sanders that seems for
age to be crooked in divinity, harken to S. Paul. I had rather, says he,
speak ten words to the instruction of others, then ten thousand with a tongue.
This old Doctor, this good ^huser, Master Sanders takes that which is ten
thousand times worse, and ^eaueth that which is ten thousand times ^etter, so
choisly has he chosen in this ^ase. But his choice is not S. Paul's choice, and
therefore we are youngling divines ^y his verdict, for choosing as Paul did. An
other argument grows from Master Sanders. Paul went over many coun^ries, as
Pamphilia, Capadocia, Phrygia, etc. but he spoke not, says he, to every one in
diverse tou^ges, therefore some were spoken to in an unknown tongue which was not
their own. This is the ^ne force of Sanders most fine wit, in ^nding out
fetches, and winding in stuff ^o strengthen and fortifye Antichristia^isme,
and Papisme. But why could not Paul do it? Say good Doctor Sanders, ^f thou
be a good Doctor: and why would ^e not do it? say Doctor Sanders, if ^hou
be a good fellow. Certainly Fredericus Furius, a man of as great doctorship
as Doctor Sanders, a Spanyard, dedicated his book to Cardinal Burgensis (...)
Spanyard, tells us a tale of quite co^^rarieties. For, says he, Andrew
Peter's ^rother preached unto the Scythi, Sogdi^ni, and Sacci in their tongue,
Jacob (...) the twelve trybes in their tongue, Barthelmew to the Indians in
their toun^ Thomas to the Parthians in their toun^ to the Meades in their
tongue, to t^ Persi, Hercani, and Bracchi in their toun^ But put case Fredericus
Furius we^ a tounglesse man, and had now yet sa^ nothing, I wene, that place of
the Acts (...) the Apostles will easily choke Doct^ Saunders, and all these
troublous ba^kers Louanians. The people there (...) thus: Non omnes qui
loquu^tur linguis Galilei sunt. etc. Are not all these that speak^ here, men of
Galile? is it not much the every one of us does hear our own^ vulgar and
mother tongue? We Parthi^ans, Medes, Elamites, of Mesopotamia, of Jury,
Capadocia, Pontus, of Asia, Phrygia, Pamphilia, and Aegipt, o^ Lybia, Rome,
Crete, and Arabia: w^ hear these men speaking the nobleness of matters divine
in our own^ tounges. But they have other argume^t^ There is one God, therefore
the service must be in one tongue. I deny t^ argument: let it lie whilst it be
helpe^ Master Harding has two argument^ The one is, the title of the Cross w^
^ritte^ in Greek, Hebrew, and Latin tounges: and therefore the service ought to
be in one of these three tou^gs. The^ the ^ewes, Greeks, and Latinistes will
never ^gree which tongue shall serve for y^ turn. ^et Master Harding make his
argument ^hus: It was written in Greek, Hebrew, and Latin: therefore it was
written to ^e understood of all men, and therefore ^eruice must be in such a
tongue that it may be understood. The Hebrew vo^alls (says he) were not set
down to the ^onsonantes by the Rabbis, because the ^xposition of the
Scriptures should not be ^nowne to the people. Thus Mast. Har^ing is a Papist,
a Jew, and all that naught (...). If he will have his argument assoiled, ^et
him remember the Iudaisme, and Christi^nisme are dissiblable. The Jews durst
^ot look on Gods face, but we have ^eene his glory, as the glory of the on^y
begotten of the father. The Jews ^urst not pronounce the word Iehoua, ^ut we
do it commonly. The Jews ^ept ^id their mysteries in shadows: Christ said:
Go ye and preach ye. No ^ew did enter into the Sanctuary but t^ high Priest
once a ye^are. Our Sanct^ry Christ says: Every one that comes unto me I will
not cast him forth. It is even so as I tell you good people. H^ that is
ignorant in papistrie, is like the woman of Samaria, which stands (...) the
fountain, and is a thirst, and yet f^ leth her self not to be a thirst. They
a^ like those people that say: Palpamus part tem sicut caeci: we groape at the
wall lik^ blind men, and we stumble in the noone time as though it were in the
night. They be like unto those of whom it is said: The light came into the
worl^ and they did not receive the light like unto the Apostles, who in the
dar^ night took Christ to be a ghost: like (...) those of whom Tertullian
speaks of (...) the Gentiles: They do amiss because they know not. They be
like to hy^ that abides in darkness and knows not whether he goes. Those
that abu^ these ignorant folk be as (Esaias says that mingle the spirit of
sleep to t^ world, and give them words in a boo^ closely clasped. They be
like to that Painter that Plutarke speaks of, that had (...) uill fauouredly
proportioned a pain^ Hen, and therefore chased away the lively Hens, lest
that his evil woorkmanship should be perceived: those chase away Gods word,
lest their fancy should be discovered. If they be blind leaders, then there
is an hole in hell, and thither rushe down both the leaders, and the parties
missed. If they see, and will not let others see, then they be as churlish as a
dog, who when he is smit of a serpent, will not ^ate the herb Canaria in the
sight of ^an, lest that man in such distress should ^e thereby relieved. They
be like these hypocrite Pharisees, that made fast the kingdom of God against
them selves, and against all others. But to thwite and vpbraide them by their
ignorance, would be thought but to be untrue and ^alumnious. And that voice of
Master Harding from Louaine, saying: Verily ^he greatest learned men in
Christen^ome have been of our part, does seem ^o some a voice of great truth
and verity. Without all peraduentures, there has ^ene of Master Hardinges
side so long a ^atalogue of so unlearned, and insensible ^ryters, as I think
by art memora^iue, they cannot be comprehended. That which Aloes is to the
lips, which galli is to the tongue, which a carcass smell is to the nose,
which a cockatrise to the eyes, which a naked dagger is to the heart, that it
is, and even that comfort it is, to be conuersaunt in the base barbarismes, and
balde solisismes, and balde sillogismes, and whole dungeons of the Duncerie of
Hardinges companions. Let them not be to shrill The Papists have not had, nor
have the best learned men on their side.
in crying out, and craking of their learning, as likewise not to shrill to
weaken and impair our side. That which Erasmus said sometimes of Prudentius:
Ibi^ quouis seculo inter doctos, Prudenti, tho^ shall always Prudentius, go
for a learned man: so may I likewise say thus The world will never be so
learn^ Martin Luther, but thou shall be cou^ ted learned, thou shall be called
learne^ Zuinglius, and thou excellent well lea^ned Oecolampadius, learned Buce^
learned Phagius, learned Emanuel^ learned Pellicane, and learned Pome rane, and
learned Bruntius. A m^ would think you had goodly learni^ Cassander,
Bibliander, and Burrau^ Bullinger, Gualter, Wulfius, Lauat^ rus, and Simlerus.
Divines of Sureck^ I think have more divinity then man brag doctors that
ride aloft in Papasie. What age will deny thee to be learned David Chitreus, or
thee Victorinus Strigelius, or thee Flaccius Illyricus, or thee Westimerus, or
thee Hemingius, or thee Hiperius, though Doct. Sanders say nay and swear nay.
Thou have a trusty tongue in divinity most reverend Master Sanders says
earnestly that Calvin is unlearned. Let him go about to show how and he shall
be answered.
Calvin. And Theodore de Beze, thy breast is better ballased with godly
learning, the^ the breasts of many a glittering Pope, who are said to contain
so many godly matters in the bag of their breast. Peter Martyr, or the Bishop
of Saris bu^y are alone able to confute all the Sor^onistes. Musculus yeldeth
better suck and sense from the scripture, then all the ^esuites: nay, then all
the writers of all ^he papasie. But if they will needs here ^ell of some
learned men of our side, what ^ay they to Mu^ster, to Scheggius, to Ges^er, to
the two men of many blessings ^obart, and Henry Stephanus? What (...) Johannes
Sturmius? and what to ^etrus Ramus? I tell them the great ^eauclarkes and
captain scholars of all ^ristendome are ours, and on our side, ^icus
Mirandula of a miraculous wit, and abundant learning, was ours. Erasmus the
worship of the world, and Melancton the Phoenix of Germany, John Reuclin the
Hebrew father, and William Budaeus the Greek father, were ours. Ye
groundselles of learning, ye kindlers of light, in deed ye be ours. Na^istes
had lived still without learning if it had not bin for protestants.
These Papists have lighted their candles at your candles, and whetted their
weapons at your stones, and sucked up their learning at your feet: Even so
Thomas Harding sucked up his learning at Peter Martyrs feet, and Thomas Watson
his learning at Sir John Cheeks feet: Baldwinus his learning at Caluins
feet, and Fredericus Staphilus at Melanctons feet, Saunders, and the Jesuits
have their Grecismes and their Hebraismes by immitation of Musculus. Our
Erasmus set Latin a flote, our Reucli^ hatched Hebrew, our Budaeus gage^
Greek, our Melancton regendred arte^ and sciences. Papists, from us ye hau^
had it, or by our examples ye have spye^ it. It is ours, it is ours, it is all
of it our^ Crows leave your cackling, or geu^ you home again your borrowed
fether^ But admit we were men of no laudab^ learning, and that we could not
rightly plead it: yet Quis tulerit Gracchum de seditione loquentem? Varrem de
furto? Who can brook that Gracchus should speak against sedition? Varres
against theft? or Papists against ignorance? The chief Rabbie and most
frolic divine of all their side Hosius, how has he concluded of this saying:
Obey those that be over you: therefore Prelates must be princes? Or how can he
be learned that thought king David to be unlearned? Those arguments are to be
found out gathered by Iacobus Anderae.
For, giving his judgment upon David's psalms, he says thus: Scribimus
indocti doctique poemata passim: we write poemes of all hands, learned and
unlearned: as though David's psalter were an unlearned Poesy. What learning is
there in rearing up of this argument? Caiphas prophesied once: therefore what so
ever the bishop of Rome speaks, is true. Or this argument. The gates of hell
shall not prevail against the church: therefore the church can never be under
foot. Yet S. Paul says: I am sure that no creature can separate me from the
love of God. And yet though God loved Paul well, Paul was under foot. Or this
argument. Heretics have always appealed to the scripture: therefore who so
ever appealed to the scripture, are heretics. So drunkardes are commonly
drunken with wine: therefore all that drink wine are drunkardes. Or this
argument: Christ did sit down with his twelve disciples only when he said:
Bibite cx hoc omnes: therefore the clergy only ought to have the cup given
them. And so this profane bishop wretch might urge only to the clergy: Edite
ex hoc omnes: eat ye all of this. So only the clergy should be partakers of
the bread too. The Council of Constaunce and the Council of Basil do reach
the tuppe to the Laity. Or this argument: He is blessed that is always
fearful: therefore a man ought to have a fearful and a trembling faith. Or
what learning was it in him to say, that Commune and Catholicum were not all
one? and that vices when they are common, cannot be called catholic* Doctor
Saunders has a trim head, and a pure fine wit (as they say). But let them take
a taste how learnedly he has behaved him self in his reasoning in his book of
Transubstantiation, as in this argument: Man was Sanders reasoning.
forlorn for eating with his mouth: therefore man must be saved by eating with
his mouth: therefore there must be Transubstantiation. Again, the Roman
bishops sent the Eucharist to stranger bishops abroad: therefore it was an holy
thing: and therefore it was transubstantiated, or else it could not be holy and
worthy the sending. Again, the Apostles were simple men, and Idiotes, says
he: therefore they could not understand this proposition: this is my body, if
the sign were taken for the thing. Again, Vlpian the Lawyer says, the names
of things be unchangeable: therefore the words must needs be as they are
spoken and written. By this pritie devise he may banish all figurative speech
from the scripture. Again, the Greek word (...) which signifies a figure in
English, is called (...) of turning: but God is not turned (says he) therefore
he uses no trope in this place or figure. This argument if it were marked,
would be laughed at with an whole months laughter. In his fourth book he
comes of with arguments more then a good pase* God is omnipotent: Ergo,
there is transubstantiation. Again, Christ spoke these words in the night
time: therefore the matter was great: and it could not be great except there
were transubstantiation. Again, there were twelve disciples, the number was
great, therefore the matter was great: and then it must needs be
transubstantiation. Again, Christ desired to eat it, therefore it was a great
matter: therefore it was transubstantiation. Again, Christ loved them in the
end in pertaking it: therefore there was transubstantiation. Again, Christ
washed feet, set down, rise up, girded him self, washed and dried, therefore
the matter was great, therefore transubstantiation. Again, their Parlar
wherein they supped was near to the mount Syon, therefore a great matter:
therefore transubstantiation. Again, he blessed it: therefore he
transubstantiated it. Again, the people say, Amen: which is, it is true, or I
would it were true: therefore the bread was truly transubstantiated. Again,
Abell offered a sacrifice, and then after was offered: therefore Christ was
offered in the Mass. Again, he says: if the bread be but a figure: then none
can be condemned for eating of a figure. Yet as I remember, the Propitiatory or
Arc of covenant was but a figure: yet he smarted that abused that figure.
Again, the Apple of the knowledge of good and evil, was but a figure of good
and evil: yet it was not very good for him that abused that figure. I tell
them it is death to abuse such figures. Now good people do not these Doct.
Sanders arguments smell freshly of learning? Was not that Pope learned that
said, fiatur, for fiat, and that Pope that translated Cephas, a head? Was not
Petrus a Soto divinely learned, when he said: the spirits of general
Counsels ought not to be tried? Notwithstanding these words be general: Try
the spirits whether they be of God or no. What books in all christendom have
been written with so sleeke and slight a divinity, as those books of B.
Osorius? Sir Tho. More is always wrangling and iangling, harping and ^arping,
about No, and Na, yea, and yes, the word, and, that word, an Elder and an Elder
stick. And as Rachell mourned for her children, because she had them not: so
Sir Thomas More might mourn for more divinity, because he had it not. D.
Fisher has alleged many things most improperly, out of the vulgar
translation: It is easy to be showed, his doctrine is not learned, and
therefore ought not to carry credit with me^ of learning. What grou^^nes is it
in that fat Ecchius to prove a sacrifice out of the hebrew word Gnasha? or
Sanders out of this, cu^facia^ vitula profrugibus, to prove a sacrifice? It
must needs be for lack of learning, that that Lordly priest bishop Gardener
alleged the third book of S. Augustine, de sermon Domim in monte, and yet
there were but two books written, that he alleged Theophilus Alexandrinus for
Theophilactus, there being hundreds of years b^twixt their ages? I say it must
needs b^ lack of learning, for his soothing pag^ say, that his memory was
infinite, so tha^ he could not perdy forget him self. What* was it learning in
Doctor Smith to allege the council of Nice for Transu^stantiation: and than
not to be able t^ show one word for that purpose* Again, that Doctor
Ogelthorpe said openly in great assemble: Ostende mihi, qualis (...) corpus,
qualis est corpus? Is it not learnedly concluded of Prierias: The church
founded pardons: Ergo, the church is greater then Christ? Is it not excess of
learning that makes Durand and the rest of their rationals thus to dispute:
God made heaven and earth in the beginning, and not in the beginnings: therefore
the Pope must be sovereign? Or thus: God made two lights, a greater and a
less: therefore the Pope is bigger then the Emperor, as the Sun is bigger
then the Moon? Or thus: princes shall eat the fat things of Ashur: therefore
princes sons must be Cardinals to The grounds of papistry.
have rich temporalities in the church? Or thus: Jacob laid his hands
thwartlinges or a cross, upon Ephraim and Manasses: therefore the wodden
cross is venerable? Or thus: when one shall go over unto the Lord, let his
covering be removed: therefore he that becomes a priest must shave his crown?
Or thus: The Lords is the earth and the roundnes thereof: therefore the Oste
must be round? Or thus: the Ethnickes must lick the dust of Isreal's feet:
therefore all men must kiss the Popes feet. Or thus: he shall sprinckle many
nations: therefore there must be holy water. Or thus: we sin by word, work,
and heart: therefore we must say thrice Kyrielison. Or thus: the Law goes
before the Gospel, or John before Christ: therefore the Epistle must be red
before the Gospel. Or thus: the Gospel lightneth the world: therefore waxen
Tapers must be lightened before the reading o^ the Gospel* Or thus: the Lord
paised the earth with three fingers: therefore we ought to cross our selves
with three fingers. Or thus: God said to the north wind, give: therefore the
Gospel must be red with the priests face northward* Or thus: A smoke came up
from the prayer of the saints. Apoc. 8. therefore there must be s^nsing in the
church. Or thus: Mary went not forth to meet^ Christ: ergo, there must be close
Nuns. Or thus: Elias went to see Gilgal, Bethel, and Ierico: therefore there
must b^ pilgrims. Or thus: the feet of those that preach peace are
beawtifull: therefore Bishops must wear purple sandals. O^ thus: the rock was
Christ: therefore the altar must be of stone. Oh high mist^ries of learning, and
profound depthes of learning, and surpassing fathers in respect of learning.
Should we not now strike down, and sacrifice a great huge forfatted bull to
these worthies of learning? Or should we not take a shril trompet and blow up
from a lofty Theater: All hail Learned doctors, Venerable doctors, Reverent
doctors, Doctorall doctors, Doctorly doctors, Irrefragable doctors, Impregnable
doctors, Seraphicall doctors, Angelical doctors, Magistrall doctors,
Illuminate doctors, Autenticall doctors? etc. But see the learning of these
doctors in the epistles of obscure men, and in a dialogue between Reuclin and
Erasmus.

Thus have I spoken (good people) of questions, that they may be asked, and
that they may not be asked. That they should be asked for learning, that
learning should be, that ignorance is hurtful, that the adversaries are
unlearned, or learned by us. Touching the unlearned state of their Clergic,
which has been now many a year, I may well say that which Rabbi Aggai said of
the unlearned Jews: Our foreelders (said he) plowed, and sowed, made furrows,
and mowed, made flowers, and threshed, winded and grinded, and baked, and set
bread before you: but ye Jews, ye had no mouth to eat it. So of these
Papists, they had Augustine, and Chrysostom, the Gregory's, Basil,
Theophilact, and the rest that plowed and sowed, made furrows and mowed, etc:
but their mouths were stopped with steples, they had no mouths to eat it.
England, to thee as thou now art, thou have even at this day plowers and
sowers, flowerers and mowers, threshers, winders, and grinders, bakers and
bread makers, bread of zealous doctrine, and bread of life. Open thy lips:
God send thy lips open, O England: God send thee good England, God send thee
mine own dear country, lips to be opened, mouth to receive this bread,
chappes to contain it, teeth to chewe it, palate to taste it, tongue to support
it and to order it, throat to convey it, stomach to welcome it, to digest
it, to turn it into an heavenly juice, to supernatural humor, to spiritual
blood, to life, to bliss, to spirit, to comfort, and joy.

Fairest of all women, whether is thy spouse gone? The second part.

Here is to be noted that the Church is a woman, and that she is fairest of
women, and of the authority of the Church, because the question is demanded
of the Church in this place. And first that the Church is a woman, I will go by
the four Hebrew names of a woman: only I will compare the Church with a woman
as she is (...). The appetite of a The church and a woman compared.
woman ought to be to her husband: the appetite of the Church ought to be to
Christ. The woman brings forth her children in sorrow and pain: the Church
brings forth in grief of members, and loss of limnies. A good woman must
call her husband Lord: a good Church must call Christ, and make Christ her
Lord. A good woman must be obedient to the voice of her husband, and learn of
her husband at home: the Church that is good must be ruled by Christ, and not
rule Christ, Christ's scholar, and not Christ's scholemaister. Where it is said
to Abraham: Abraham hear the voice of thy wife: The Papists must consider
that Christ does not ouersee him self as Abraham did, and therefore needs no
advertisement from his wife the Church. Again, women be fearful: so Jeremy
says: The strong men of Babell shall be fearful like women: so the Church
and every member of the Church is fearful. So it is said: Fear not Mary:
Fear not Joseph: Fear not Abraham: Jeremy be not afraid of their faces: and
to Saint Paul amongst the Corinthians: Be not afraid. It was great shame in
the old time for a woman to be barren: it is great shame for any Church not to
teach the laws of God to their sons, and their sons sons, for that
engenders new churches. It is as I say: the Church of Christ is a woman, and
has womanhead toward her beloved. The Church of Antichrist or Rome, is a
drab, and has no womanhead, but fornication betwixt her pappes, and adultery
betwixt her scirtes: And even at the last Council of Trent, they called the
Pope the spouse of the Church. I require all that ^e of honesty, what
womanhead there is in that to have two spouses at once, to commit adultery
wit^ Images, to ouerrule the words of her husband, to add and take to and fro
the words of her husband, to burn and buffet her husband in his members. This
is me thinks a shrowde wife and most unwomanly woman. This is a woman
according to that saying: A woman shall hunt for the precious soul of a man,
that is, an harlot shall hunt for the precious soul of a man. Or according to
that: Give not thy substance to women, that is, to harlottes. She is a woman,
as Antichrist is a woman, that is to wit, the whore of Babylon. And even as
Rome, Venice, Paris, and Corinth, when better means of prosperity did want,
made their cities to be frequented through fair harlots, and beutifull brave
^urtisans: so these Papists have drawn after them such a riotous route
through ^he painted bravery of this their brothell woman. The Church of Rome
is a woman, but an harlot, but the Popes concu^ine. She has womanhead, but it
is a ^rothels browe. She learnes of her husband, but when she list. She holds
her ^oung in respect of her husband, but I ^ake a lie. She is subject to her
husband Christ, but Christ bears the strokes. She is no woman, nor has any
womanhead, nor is she fair or fairest, but by way of painted fayrenesse. The
Church of Christ is a woman, has womanhead, The names of Gods church in
scriptures.
and is fair and fairest of all women. For her loveliness she is called a
Dove: for her pretty trimnesse she is called a Roo: for her fruitfulness she
is called a Vine: for her safenesse she is called Mount Sion: for her holiness
she is called a Priesthood: for her royalty she is called a Queen: for her
qualities she is called Sweet, Comely, Perfect, and most Blessed: for her
glittering she is called an Iuorie Tower: for her brightness the Morning: for
her bravery the Sun: and for her beutie she is here called the Fairest of
all women. They say the Ceder tree is fair to be seen amongst shrubbes and
bushes: the Lilie of the valleys amongst lesser flowers: Mount Sion is
peerless amongst monntaines, and Jerusalem amongst cities: Behemoth is
marvelous in the land, and Leuiathan in the sea. Dina was fayrer then the
daughters of the land: Iudeth fayrer then any Holofernes had seen: and Hester
pleasing in the eyes of Artaxerxes: none so fair as the Sunamite to be found
out for the contentation of King David: and no Church so fair as this Church
of Christ, which is in true speech called the fairest of all women: not so far
does pass noble Sarai base Hagar: nor Rebecca those of Abimeleckes court: nor
well favored Rachell the blere eyed Lea, as this woman for her beutie
surmounteth all women. But the beutie of this woman is not in outward face, but
in inward grace: Omnis decor filiae Sion The beutie of y^ church.
abintus: All the beutie of the daughter of Sion is from within her. This is
that woman that is clad with the Son Christ, and therefore must needs shine
and show trim. This is she that is married to Christ in mercies and pities,
in faith and justice. Faith purifieth the heart, the mercy of God working by his
bloodshed, scoureth all filth and reformeth all the deformities by sin in
this woman. This woman therefore must needs be fair and fairest of all women.
Oh fairness of man's face, of woman's face. Oh treasure for a time. Oh fair
f^lishe vanity. A little cold does pintch thee, a little heat does partch
thee, a little sickness does match thee, and a little of sores does mar
thee. But the fairness of Christ in this woman, or in his elect, may be
soyled, but it will be washed: it may be black, but it will keep a good
favor: may be made red as scarlet, but it will be renewed woll white and show
white.

The Church of the beloved is fair and fairest of all women. Idolatrous The
first reason to prove the church of rome foul.
Churches are foul and evil favored women: and of all foul and evil
favored, I think the Church of Rome to be one of the foulest of women. The
evil fauorednesse Mahomets and the Popes churches foul alike.
of Mahomets woman or Church is in this evil favored Romish woman. That evil
favored Mahomets woman or Church, defends many wives: This Romish Church
defends stews, and strompets, curtizans, concubines, and boy harlots.
Mahomets woman dreameth heaven to be a place goodly of rivers, pleasant
Apples, young delicate women, and fair fruits: The Popes woman does say and
hold, that S. Dorathey made baskets of Apples that came down from heaven.
Mahomets woman defends works: The Popes woman defends works. That woman
from the 5. chapter of the Alcaron believes Purgatory: The Popes woman will
needs have Purgatory. Mahomets woman curses all those that think not of
Christ as Mahomet does: The Popes Church curses all those that think not of
Christ as the Pope does. Mahomet in the 15. chapter of the Alcaron allows no
disputing in religion: The Popes woman gaggeth men's mouths, lest peradventure
they speak. Mahomets Alcaron was published in the night time: So the Popes
doctrine in the time of darkness. Mahomet says, Buy heaven: The Bishop of
Rome practices a sale of heaven. Mahomet says, he is bigger then all the
kings in the world: The Pope ^ayth, that he is lord of lords, and king of
kings. Thus then I may say that the Popes woman The Jews church and Popes
church foul alike.
or Church, is as foul as the Church of Mahomet, and as foul as the Church of
the Jews: and who soever will prove this to be true, shall compare her
traditions and the Jews traditions by the view of a book written by Petrus
Galatinus, of y^ Jews. That comparison I go by with silence, for I can not
tarry in every thing.

Again, that woman that has a foul head, is a foul woman: The woman or The
second reason.
Church of Rome has Antichrist to her head: therefore she is a foul woman.
That Antichrist is a foul head, I prove: because Christ is a fair head.
Antichrist and Christ be contrary. Again, that Antichrist is the head of this
woman, I refer me to Bullinger and Gualter that have treated that probation,
and to a book called Antichristus, sieve de fine mundi.

Again, if Peter were a fair head, then this woman has had many a long The
third reason.
day a foul head, and so has been a foul woman. The proof of this point
stands in this, to show that Peter and the Popes of long time have been
contrary. And it is easy to be showed. Peter is as Contrariety betwixt old
and young Peter.
much to say as a rock. Peter was in deed a rock: but this Pope of late
days has been a reed in religion, or else irreligious. Peter is called Simon,
that is, an auditour of Gods word: This is a corrector and burner of Gods
word. Peter was Called to be an Apostle: This thrusts in by simonie, and
coniuring, and poisoning, as Cardinal Benno can tell* Peter was an Apostle:
this an Aposta^ or renegate, as the Apocalypse ca^ tell. Peter was a man: this
is a woman. Peter was a man: this is a beast, as the foresaid Apocalypse can
tell. Peter preached to the Jews: this neither to Jew nor Gentile. Peter
healed the sick and the s^re: this wounds and kills body and soul. Peter
loved Christ best of them all: this the world most of them all. Peter would
not have captain Cornelius to croutch to him: this will have Kings and
Keysers prostrated at his feet. Peter could brook to be blamed of Paul: this
will not be blamed, though he draw thousands to hell. Peter had neither gold
nor silver: this has shod his concubines rich Palfries with silver. Peter had
caetera, that is, gifts and graces: this has neither gift nor grace, but
only to say: I am rich and welthie, and I sit like a Queen. Peter wept
bitterly by way of repentance at ye cocks crow: this never repe^teth, the
greater part of Christendom crying and crowing against him. Peter was somewhat
ambitious for the Primateship, because he had left all and followed Christ:
this leaves nothing, nor follows Christ, and yet his ambition is infinite.
Peter would not have him self washed of Christ: this man will not have him
self justified of Christ, but by his own merits. Peter would have his head
washed beyond Christ's commandment: this man enlarges Christ's
commandments even at his lust. Peter did sin with love toward his
Master, forbidding him to go up to Jerusalem: the Pope will have his to
suffer nothing, and to live most pleasauntly in all things. Peter denied
Christ thrice: the Popes life is naught but a denying of Christ. Peter when his
Master was in ieoperdie, said: behold two swords: the Pope when there is no
ieoperdie to Christ, but upon his own lust, vnshetheth many thousands of
swords. Peter went with an uneven foot to the Gospel: the Pope with a most
crooked f^te, or rather is a very Nemrod to chase away the Gospel. Peter would
not blame those that took his part in Iudaisme: the Pope will strike league
with the stews, if they will be Popish enough and Romish Catholic. Thus if
Peter be a little foul, the Pope is ten times more foul. Where Peter is
fairest, y^ Pope is foulest. If Peter be fair, the Pope is foul. The Pope is
the head of this woman: therefore this woman has a foul head: therefore she
is a filthy Church and a foul woman.

Again, if the Devil be foul, then The same reason other ways proved.
the Bishop of Rome is a foul head: and so this woman is a foul woman. The
probation of this, is to prove a likelihode and great agreement betwixt the
Devil and y^ Bishop of Rome. Now me thinks The devil and his pope semblable.
that in deed there is a great agreement. For the Devil is called Satan,
that is, an hinderer: the Pope is Christ's greatest hinderer and chiefest
hurter. Again, the Devil is called Diabolus, that is, a sclaunderer: the Pope
sclaundereth us whilst we live, and sclaundereth us when we dye: as the death
of Luther, Zuinglius. etc. The Devil is called Inimicus homo, that is, the
envious man: the Popes rancor is the destruction of the Church. It is said of
the Devil: Satan fell like lightning: it is said of the Pope and his, vidi
stellas cadentes e c^lo. The Devil was a lier from the beginning: it is said
of the Pope, that he speaks great things: that is, lies and blasphemies. The
Devil did not stand in the truth: no more did the Pope according to that
saying: This day is poison entered into the Church. The Devil is a roaring
Lion: So the Pope, so his Spanish Inquisitors. The Devil is that Serpent which
persecuteth the woman in the earth: the Church in this earth has no such
persecuting Serpent, as that Serpentine persecuter of Rome. Paul when he
inueyeth against Elimas and calls him the Devils son, in the Acts of the
Apostles, he seems to expound this word, the Devils son, in this
definition: Plenus omni dolo. etc. A man full of all manner of disceite, an
enemy of all justice, and one that ceasseth not to make ill the right ways of
God. This definition touches the Pope of Rome most nearly in every point. If
this be the definition of the Devils son, he is undoubtedly the Devils own
dear son. The Devil promised Christ all the wealth of the world: the Pope
promises Bishoprics, Abbeyes, Prebendes, etc. The Devil is called a Whale,
because he rules in the tumultuous waves of the sea: the Pope is a Whale,
because he bears a swinge in the vain waves of this busy world. The Devil
is called a Dragon, because he deuoureth souls: the Pope is a Dragon, because
he deuoureth both bodies and souls. The Dragon drew the third part of the
Stars out of heaven: the Pope withdrewe by liuinges and geuinges, the third
part of the best learned men in Christendom from the true doctrine. It is said
that the Devil should be let loose in y^ latter days. Bibliander says, that
Pope Hildebrand was the Devils self set at liberty. So that now I say again,
the Pope is a foul head, because the Devil is a foul head: And this woman or
Church of Rome is as foul as the Devil, because her head the Pope is as foul
as the Devil.

Again, those that preach and bring The fourth reason t^ prove ^er foul.
peace, are sayre, according to that: Fair are the feet of those that bring
peace. If those that bring peace be fair, then those that bring war be
foul. But the Church of Rome has always brought war both bodily and
ghostly: therefore she is foul. Now, concerning this saying: That the Church of
Rome has always brought bodily war: it should behoue me to go down by a
long descent, and to tell a long story what warriers and fire brandes of war
these Popes of Rome have been. But to make a short speech, and to make forward
as fast as I can: I say that the nature both of the most Popes, and of this
bloody woman Church of Rome, is represented in the voice of Pope Paulus, who
when he was offered either peace or war, he cried out mightilye and loudly:
War, War. To let pass that which is past, and to come to these our days:
What wars (good people) and rumors of wars, what murtheringes and
manquellinges has this foul and unpeaceable woman brought to pass in our
times? Fitly says Gregory Nazianzene: their glosing is of peace, but their
glory is in blood: through the bloody feet of this unquiet woman. Low lies
now that Heroical personage Jews Prince of Borbon. This foul strompet has
eaten up y^ young Prince of Spain, a Prince of hope, and that goodly and godly
Lord Regent of Scotland. This foul strompet, and most bloody Church, caryeth
them all the day long like sheep unto the Shambles, and in deed this wretched
warly brothel makes Christendom nothing else but a butcherie of Saints, and
a Shambles of Martyrdom. But after a few years they shall answer God and
us. Concerning spiritual wars, this woman does bring it. For touching peace
of the mind and peace of conscience, she never yet brought it. She teaches
false lies of man's Justice, of Satisfaction, of contrition, of supere^ogation,
of bulls, indulgences, tendringes Papal, and tendringes Legautine: which all
things be but a broken staff (as Esaias terms weak helps) and will in the
end plunge man's soul in desperation, in conflict, and in hell. Such peace
tasted Franciscus Spira of, that died in desperatio^, tasted Ecchius of, that
dying, uttered desperate words, tasted Sadoletus of, that dyed in a weak
faith, tasted Latomus of, that roared like an Ox in his death bed, and as
some think, tasted Bish. Gardener of. Those of that Church do fremere vt vrsi:
do rore like Bears: and those of our Church, and those that be the members of
our fair woman, they do as the Prophet says: Gemere vt columbi: Mourn like
Doves. They die therefore like our Savior Christ: Ego vado ad patrem, taking
death to be no more but a passage to the father. They die like Paul: There is
laid up for me a crown of glory. They die like Steven: Lord I betake my soul
to thy hands. They die like Polycarpus: Lord make me a partner of thy
resurrection. They die like Luther: God is the great Bishop of my soul, and
let him take carke of my soul. They die like Calvin: (...) have holden my
peace Lord because thou have done this. This woman this Church brings war
to the body and war to the soul, and therefore she is (...) foul woman.

Again, if sin do make foul and unclean, then is this woman that way^ The
fifth reason.
very foul and unclean to. In respect o^ sin, Tertullian and Hierome call
Rome, Babylon. But if they will be so impuden^ as to deny their ugly and
monstrous rac^ of sin, then let Barnard speak that says: There is no
healthful place in that Church from the top to the toe* Nay, go ye then to
and speak even ye Italian writers, speak Boccas, speak Petrach, speak
Mantuan, and speak Pallengenius. Howbeit, it is vain in m^ to bid them
speak, who commonly throughout all their works do burste out into most
bitter speeches against the enormious life of the Church of Rome. But admit
these men had never spoken any one word against that church, yet do but look
over Bales book of Votaries, and a book called, A Cataloge of witnesses
against the Pope of Rome, and then I doubt not but you will subscribe that this
church of Rome is a most sinful woman. In the mean time, upon the witnessing
of so many witnesses, in great earnest I tell you that she is a most sinful
woman, and therefore spiritually a most foul and deformed woman. Those things
that they object to our church are but freckes and speckes in comparison of the
Botches and Biles of their own church. And for our further purgation, I report
me to a little book of Master Calvin, de sca^d^lis nostrae ecclesiae: of such
reproaches as may be intended against our church. Now if they will say that
their church is fayrer, because she is trimly attired, because she has curious
copes and velvet vestmentes, sensing and singing, and much ioly ringing: it may
please them to understand that all this fayrenesse is not fayrenesse from
within the church, but an outward fayrenesse, and a painted fayrenesse. And all
those reasons which Peter Martyr in the book of kings does bring, that a woman
ought not to paint her face, may be alleged against them, that they ought not
to paint their church. And if ever they will prove their church to be a fair
church, they must first make this good, that painted beawty is a good beawty.
And thus much have I said in these two points: that Christ's church is a woman
and has womanhead: that Antichrists church is a drab and a shameless
brothell: that Christ's church is fair: that Antichrists church is foul. And
now let me speak of the church, and of the authority of the church which I
The authority of the church.
confess to be some, because here the church or fairest of women is asked and
does give answer of the beloved and doings of Christ. Touching their
arguments whereby they would give so great an authority to the church: they
be light and nothing such as they are esteemed. To come to their first
argument, which is: Thou art Peter, and upon thee Peter, I will build my
church* it does not serve for their turn, even by the testimony of the better
sort of the fathers. For Augustine upon John says: Non a petro petra, sed
petrus a petra. The rock takes not name of Peter, but Peter of the rock. And
again he says: I will build thee upon me, and not me upon thee. Such like
words has Origin: and so Hierom to Iouianus. who in an other place says:
that the church is founded upon all the Apostles. But they have an invincible
argument out of S. Augustine: I would I would not believe the Gospel. etc.
not believe the Gospel except the authority of the church did move me. I
will not expound S. Augustine, nor they shall expound him, but S. Augustine
shall expound S. Augustine. And here I Mar^e this answer throughout.
let them understand by S. Augustine, that he uses to sp^ake in the
preterimperfectence for the preterplup^ctence. So in the first book of his
confessions and ^enth chapt. speaking of his youth, he says thus: Non enim
dicerem nisi cog^r: Which can not be truly expounded but thus: Non didicissem
nisifuissem coactus: I should never have learned, except I had been driven
thereto. Again, in the second book and third chap. he says: Erubescerem for
Erubescebam: I should blush, for I did blush: so that there he straineth the
moodes. In the eight chap. he says: Si tunc amarem poma illa qua furutus sum,
which cannot be expounded thus: If I then would have loved these aples which I
have stolen: but thus: If I had then loved those aples which I had stolen: so
that we must read amarem for amassem: I had loved, for I should love* In the
tenth chap. he says thus: Ego solus illud non facerem: which must needs be
expounded thus: I would not had done so. So that here we have facerem for
feciscem, the imperfectence for the pluperfectence. No otherwise must needs be
said: Euangelio non crederem, that is, non credidisce^. The Papists say, I
would not believe the Gospel except the authority of the church did move me to
it. I by the circumstances of that plac^ and by likeness of these other places,
do say, it can not be expounded but thus: Non crederem Euangelio, id est, non
credidiscem Euangelio. So that the mere and unbroken sense of S. Augustines
words be these: I should not had believed, or I should never had believed the
Gospel except the authority of the church I should not had believed the
gospel. etc.
had moved me thereto. So that all the authority that they can gain for the
church out of this place, is but this: The church was an introduction to Saint
Augustine to believe the Gospel: therefore it is of more authority then the
Gospel. So they may say that the star did show the wise men the way unto
Christ: therefore the star has more authority then Christ. ^o John bare
witness of the light, and therefore was of more authority then the light it
self. So in the first of Peter and the third chapter it is said: That men
should be won to the word without the word, by the conversation of women: so
that the conversation of women should be of more authority then the word. But
it must be considered that this argument is not good: The authority of the
church to Saint Augustine being a puny and a nouice in matters of religion,
was greater then the authority of Christ: therefore the authority of the
church is simply greater then the authority of Christ. No more then this
argument: John was in better credit with the Jews then Christ, when he ^are
witness of Christ: therefore John his witnessing ought to be the better. Or
this argument: women's conversation moves some men more then the word: therefore
it does move or ought to move simply more then the word. But even as John that
bare witness of Christ, did confess that he was not worthy to loose Christ's
shoe latchet, no more the church though it bear witness of Christ in respect
of credit and authority, is not worthy to loose Christ's shoe latchet. And
even as when Christ put forth him self and began to be known to the people,
John said: it behooves me to wax less, and him to wax greater: so when the
church has given a man to understand of Christ, and that Christ begins to
appear unto us, the church decreaseth in authority and estimation like John,
and Christ increases and waxes greater in authority and credit. Even so do
the Samaritanes in the fourth of John, that were brought to Christ by the woman
of Samaria say thus: we do not now believe for thy talk: for we our selves have
heard and do know. And yet S. Augustines case and ours is not like. For he was
moved by the authority of that church which persuaded him to the Gospel: the
authority of the church of Rome does bend it self, and is directed to move us
only to the church of Rome. Besides that, that church did compel no man as he
writes to Fundamentus in the 4. epistle: the church of Rome does compel us to
believe their church, or compel the soul to forsake the body. Again, they
reason that the Church shall be a city The Church an hi^ City.
standing upon a mountain: and therefore it must always be visible, and no
church (say they) is so but the church of Rome. The very true exposition of
this place is this, as it may appear by all good expositors, that the Apostles
are called the city upon a mountain, and the salt of the earth. So that the
true meaning is this: a good Apostle is salt, and therefore let him season: a
good Apostle is a mountain, city, or a high city, and therefore let him show
and shine so in works, that he may glorify God his heavenly father. And in
deed this text is expounded naturally thus, and without violence. For it is
very strange to a divine to think that Gods church should be a mountain,
city, or a mounting city, a high thing, or a renounded thing, or a thing
glorius in the world. For the church of God is represented Gods church not
mounting but miserable.
in the burning bush of Moses, it is never without fiery persecution: it is
like the white horse in the Apocalips, that is always chased with a red horse:
it is like the Arc of Noah, that is tossed in the sea, and this is tossed in
the world: it is compared to the Moon that waxes and wants by the presence
or absence of the Sun: It is like Jacob that sleapeth How gods church is
mounting and famous.
on a stone: It has semen sanctum subsistentiam eius: holy seed and holy men
the substance, and not commonly great personages and solemn personages the
substance. I know the church of God is oftentimes famous: but that is thus:
ascendamus in montem Domini. etc. Let us go up unto the mountain of the Lord,
and he will teach us of his ways. The teaching of Gods ways makes Gods
church a famous mountain. If Gods ways be not truly taught, though she sit
upon seven hills, as the church of Rome upon seven hills, she is not a
famous mountain, but an ignominious valley. Then they reason thus: Christ
prayed for Peter that his faith should not fail: therefore Peter nor the Pope
can err. Christ prayed likewise for all those that Christ prayed. etc.
shall believe hereafter: then they may thus conclude, that all those which
have, do, or shall believe, ca^ never err. The^ they reason thus: Dic
ecclesiae: Tell the Church. Tell the church.
(...) say that must be done when it may be done. In the time of Constantius
whom would they tell but Arrius, for he bare all the countenance of the
Church: his Church stood then rather upon a mountain then any other Church,
for it was the highest and most mounting in men's eyes. They reason again, that
y^ Church The church a pillor.
is a pillor. But I reason that Christ is the rock. Take away the rock, and
down comes y^ pillor. The rock is well enough without the pillor, the pillor
can not be without the rock.

But besides all this, they have a perilous interrogation, by which alone they
think to master all the world, to make us all stark dumme, and for ever to
lock up all our lips, and that is: In such and such years where was your
Church? Where was your church?
And this is that choking interrogatorie: where was your Church? I answer
them even from the very Articles of my Creed: Credo sanctam Catholicam
ecclesiam: I believe that there has been, is, and shall be, a holy catholic
Church. My sense can not show it, and therefore I believe it: for if I see it,
belief is in vain: for where sense fails and can go no further, there
belief begins. Nor is i^ necessary that I should from time to time see the
Church, but I should from time to time believe there is a holy catholic
Church. But in deed they, and such like brimme persecutors, have of so long
time kept under the Church, that we are driven to belief only, for they have
left scarce any sense, or memory of the true members of Christ's Church. But
they cry still a loud: Where was the Church? I tell them that it is said of
God: Tu es vere Deus absconditus: Thou art verily a hidden God. So the Church
is oftentimes hidden. The husband of an hidden condition, and the spouse of an
hidden condition. Where was the Church? Christ stood in the midst of them
and they knew him not. The Church was in the midst of them and they knew it
not. Where was the Church? Venient dies in quibus raedices aget Jacob: There
shall come days in which Jacob shall take root. Where was the Church when the
Church had taken no root? Where was the Church? Erat in vobis, sed non erat ex
vobis. It was amongst you, but it was not of you. Where was the church? Ubi
duo vel tres congregati erant in nomine eius: Where two or three were gathered
together in Gods name. But where were these two or three gathered together in
Gods name? Mundus non nouit vos: The world knows you not. Where was the
Church? Suruewe Foxes Martyriologe and the Cataloge of witnesses against the
Pope, and there see, for there is to be seen where was the Church. But where
soever else it was, the Church of Rome this many years The Church of Rome not
the church.
was not the Church. The best argument they have for the Church of Rome, is
because it was once a holy place, and the sound of the Gospel went thence, and
therefore still Rome must be the brood mother of religion, and that there
needs must be the Church. And peradventure they will make it of the nature of
Rome, that Rome has the best religion: then we may thus say: Mount Flascon
has the best wine, the Athenians the best honey, Persia the best oil, Babylon
the best corn, India the best gold, Tirus the best Purple, Basan the best
Oaks, Libanus the best Ceders, Persia y^ best jewels, Arrabia the best spices,
Tharsis the best ships, England the best sheep, Saxony the best oxen,
Cicilia and Dalmacia the best horses, Pirones the best fish, Ithaca the best
swine, and Rome the best religion. Or thus: the Italians be most witty, the
Spanyardes best water skirmigers, the Frenchmen best keepers of holds, the
Scot with his Lance, the Irishe man on foot, the Germane in voice, the
Mirmadons in strength, the old Romans best suffering of hunger and cold, and
the new Romans are most religious. Or thus: the Egyptians have no Beaues,
Affricke has no Bores, the country Helaeus has no Mules, the Macrobians have
no Iron, Athens has no Owls, England no Wolves, Wight no Foxes, Ireland no
venomous beast, nor Rome no bad religion. But because I do see in the
Scriptures, that Jerusalem was turned into Ierustikaker: that is, the valley of
vision was turned into the valley of confusion: and the fine valley of Siddim
into the valley of salt: that Lucifer did sin in heaven, and Adam in
Paradise, and Lot in the holy Mount: that the mountain Garezin where the
fathers prayed, became a profane dwelling of the Samaritans: when I read that
Mount Sion became a place for Foxes, and Bethel the house of God became to be
Bethanem, the house of iniquity, then me think I think of Rome, as Jeremy
did of Jerusalem: Facta est meritrix ciuitas fidelis: That City which was once
faithful is become an harlot. These places were altered for wickedness, and
Rome is altered for wicked life and wicked religion. And now me think of these
Romans I may thus say: The Moors are a vain people, the Phrygians fearful,
the Israelites of an hard neck and laden with sin, the Athenians
vaineglorious, the Grecians light, the Galathians dullardes, the Carthaginians
falsifiers of their faith, the Cretes liers, the Sodomits full of bread, the
Jews usurers, the Persians wasters, the Spanyardes lechers, the Flemminges
drinckers, the English glottons, the Germans uncivil, the Lacedaemonians
thieves, the Canibals cruel, and the Romans Idolaters. So may I say, and even
so do I say: for undoubtedly y^ Church of Rome is not Christ's true Church.
Christ's sheep hear his voice: but the Arguments.
Church of Rome hears not his voice: therefore it is not the true Church. She
writes in her coin, that kingdom and people that do not obey me, shall be
rooted out: contrary to that: the kings of nations bear rule over them, but
ye shall not do so: therefore she is not the true Church. Ambrose says, that
the true Church is the mother of the living: but those that be in this Church
are dead, for they have no faith because they have no knowledge: therefore this
Church is not the true Church. She commits Idolatr^ and spiritual adultery
many ways: therefore she is not the true Church. The Church of Rome n^bers her
multitudes, as David numbered his soldiers: and therefore she is not y^ true
Church. These Papists are like Cockels, they carry their house about with them,
and they their Church. Aspalathus will not grow but in Boetia: ye kill these
men if ye take away y^ couerture of the Church of Rome. This Church is the
rich Arras that covers all their faults and follies. But admit (good
people) that we were wonderful burom and obedient to this Church, and most
willing to come again to the skirt of this Church, and to ask of her
questions and demaundes, as these young women ask of this fairest of women. I
protest before heaven and earth, and the founder of them both, that I think it
not good we should be bold in asking, for the great and eminent danger in her
aunswering. For if we ask whether Jesus be Christ or no, this Romish woman or
The answer of the Church of Rome in special points of belief.
Church gives out her answer, that the Bishop of Rome is the high priest,
and that the said Bishop has the strength of the kingdom of Christ and the
infallible verity of a Prophet, and therefore they allow him to ouerrule
Christ by adding and taking to and fro his word. If we ask if Christ were the
only oblation offered up once for all for the sins of the world, her
answer is very dangerous, that the Mass is a sacrifice for the quick and
the dead, and she falls in commendation of her wheaten God, and does
attribute the health of the world to that unbloody bread Idol. If we ask
her, i^ Christ be the intercessor to God, she answers then most wickedly:
iure matr^ impera: that Christ forsooth shall command his father by the right
of his mother. If we ask her of the state and condition of man since the fall
of Adam, she answers that he may overtake heaven of him self, and well
enough by him self work out his own salvation. Ask her what faith is, and
she will tell of an implicit thing, and of a general faith, that is, that
good Christian folk ought to believe that the Church can not err, nor yet the
Pope: but touching Christ's merits to be applied to us by faith, and to be
holden fast by that hand, there she keeps glomme silence, and is as
speechless as a fish. If we ask her what the law is, she lodeth our
shoulders with the heavy ceremonies of Iudaisme and Paganism. If we ask her
what the Gospel is, she makes boyde Gods promise with her own justice. If
we ask her of good works, she answers just like S. Lukes Pharisie: then
again she deuiseth good works to be thus: to hyre certain men for money to
pray and to mumble up much quantity of Psalms in a covert tongue: to keep huge
troughes of Ling and Saltfishe many years, to wax horce with mutch chaunting,
to wax speechless with seldom speaking, to wax lame with mutch sitting, to
use many knottes in their girdles and many windows in their shows, to be
buried in Monkishe wedes and Nunnishe cowles, etc. If we ask her of the number
of Christ's Sacraments, ^he answers that there are seven: without Scripture
she has added five to Gods two, as though God had let her his two Sacraments
to usury. If we ask her whether we go after this life, she tells us of
Virgils, Platoes, and Mahomets Purgatory. If we should say unto her, fair
Church of Rome, whether is thy beloved gone, she would say he went in his body
to harrowe hell: And then I will ask her how she can auuswere to Signum Ionae
and signum Lazari, the sign of Jonas and the sign of Lazarus, that Christ
should be three days in his grave. If we would say, fair Church of Rome,
whether is thy beloved gone, she will say to heaven: but then she dreameth gro^
of heaven as Mahomet, and besides that in every hill altar and grove altar, she
will say here is Christ and there is Christ. The more she answers, the more
she answers of le^nges. Uneth has she now these many long years answered
any thing truly of the goinges of the beloved, of the doings of the beloved.
Believe me truly, O world, it is danger to ask her: it is next to deaths
door to hear her: it is damnable death and hell to believe her. Let it stand
then for true, that the fairest of women, that is, the Church of Christ must
first give the answer of the believed Christ. But when she by her aunsweres
and instructions has once informed a man t^ Christ, then Christ him self does
for ever afterward give answer out of his blessed word to the full edifying
and contentation of our minds and consciences.

He is gone down into his garden, to the beds of his spicery, to be fed in
gardens, and to gather Lilies The ^nswere of the church.

The whole contents of this scripture seem to be these: That Christ came
down from heaven to be refreshed in the world. And in true deed the
redemption of the world and the gathering together of mankind which strayed,
erred, and wandered, is a like refreshing to Christ, as the gathering of Lilies
is to man. I am not to run through all words and all points of this text,
for that were to full of busy labor. I will therefore say nothing, that he came
down, from what place he came, to what place he came, from what company he
came, to what company he came, to what smarting interteining he came: Nor will
I speak that he came to his garden, and that the whole earth is a garden, that
God gives increase to this garden, and is the Landlord of y^ garden, of ye
plenty, variety, and delicacy of the garden, of the gardiners, of our rent to
be paid to our Lands lord GOD, of the usage and misusage of this garden, of
God punishments that will come upon those that do not thankfully enjoy the
garden. These things I might, but yet will not speak of. Only will I speak
of these points: That he came amongst spicery, that he was fed in gardens, and
that he gathered Lilies: Then will I bid the world seek after him, according
to that: Tell us and we will seek him with thee, and then will I eftsoon make
an end. And first concerning that clause that he came among the beds of his
spicery, Hugo de Lira and Gilbertus, call the beds of spicery, the cloisters
of monks: and even with a^ good judgment might I or any other call Lillies
Nuns, and so the great mystery of Christ's coming down into the earth, and
the absolute pleasaunce of his refreshing should be abridged in this, that
Christ sometimes kept within Monks cloisters, and some times went abroad to
gather up Nuns, and so then should be nothing but a sely cloister, and a sely
Nun gatherer: and so Monks should be spice, and Nuns Lillies: Monks
should please the mouths of the beloved, and Nuns the nose of the beloved.
But this to think is to think a world (...) absurdities, and to be short and
sharp, Lira delirat and Gilbardus est bardus Lyra doteth and Gilbardus is a
dol^* Again, Barnard, Agathius, and Harphius say, that the beds of spicery
were the Apostles and ministers, and it may s^ be, as they are called a burning
and shining lincke in the person of the Baptist and as they are called the
chariotes and horsemen of Israel in the person of Elias: as they be called
fathers in the person of Paul, John and Elias, as they be called Gods in the
person of Moses, as they be called salt for their seasoning, and mountain
cities for their showing in the person of the Apostles, as they are called
Ambassadors for their bold speaking, and dogs for their barking, friends of
the spouse for their loving: so they may be called spice and beds of spicery
for their ^ast giving, and for their sweet smelling: so it is said: nos sumus
bonus odor vitae ad vitam: we are a goodly smell of life unto life. But S.
Hierome and the better sort think y^ the beds of spicery are most of all men
that be Gods elect, that those ^e Gods spices, those be Gods Lilies and Gods
flowers. And if that woman Hele^a said wantonly in a fleshly cogitation.

Ergo ego sum virtus, ego sum tibi nobile regnu^.
Disperiam si non hoc ego pectus amem.
Then I am to thee virtue, to thee I am a noble kingdom.
I would I were dead, if I would not love that thy breast.
If she so said, how much more ought we in an high couched conceit, and in a
spiritual kind of wantonness say, and say again: beloved Christ, we are thy
spices, we are thy Sinnamon, we are thy Balsamon, we are thy Uiolets, thy
Roses, and thy Lilies: so sauery we are to thee, and so smelling we are to
thee. It were more then time that we were dead and destroyed, if we love not
that loving breast of thine, O beloved, and make the our beloved, and make after
thee our beloved. In deed the prayers and almes^ deeds of Cornelius is
music to God^ ear* Out of Noah's sacrifice he smelled (...) sweet smell:
even so it is very comfortable, and delectable to Gods senses, that (...)
christian man lives a good life conformable to Gods word. The good life of a
christian man is spice to Gods mouth, and spice to Gods nose. The odor of a
sweet^ field which is commended in Genesi^ the odor of incense in Numery, the
odor (...) fragrant waters in Job, the odor of tha^ oil that ran down Aarons
board, (...) that oil that Mary shed upon Christ^ head, the odor of spike and
vine flowe^ commended in the canticles, the swee^ balm in ecclesiasticus, and
the smell (...) Libanus that Ose speaks of, the smell of Noah's sacrifice, the
smell of best burnt sacrifices is not the like good smell to Gods nose, as the
smell of a good life rising from a good belief, for that is Hostia Deo in
odorem suauitatis: a sacrifice to God, unto a sweet savior. Whole grocers
shoppes of spicery, all the flowers in Priapus garden, all the flowers that
Naiades, and Draiades, and Satyrus, that is, all the flowers in hills, and
flowers in dales, and flowers in many a grene forest, are not so delightful
and smelling. The violet has not the like savor, the Rose has not the like
savor, the Lily the like smell, the Giliflower the like sent, as good life
through good faith yeldeth to Gods nostrelles. And as good life yeldeth (...)
good savor to God, so evil life, to God ^eldeth an evil savor. So is it
sometime ^ayd of evil livers: ye made us smell before the Lord. The voice of
the mur^her of Abel, the voice of the sin of the ^ngodly ones in the
Apocalypse, the voice of the sin of the Sodomites, the voice of the sin of
the Ninevites was not music to Gods ear, nor the smell of England is musk
to Gods nose. But if good life make good smell, and evil life make evil
smell, how smelles England? how smells it? It smells, it smells. I have said as
much as I can with curtesy say: non redolet sed olet: it smelles not sweetly,
but it smelles. But if I should hear the voice of the good spirit that
speaks unto me (and indeed I will hear it and speak as it speaks) I
should thus say: it smelles like a carcas, it smlles like a a carrion, it
smelles lik a dounghill. And the cause of this so smelling, is sin. Now the
world will cry out upon me as they cried out upon the prophet Miche: Quod
scelus? quod crimen? what sin, or what offense? And even as that prophet
answered Jerusalem et Samaria: Jerusalem and Samaria: So I answer London,
York, Carlill, and Canterbury, Norwich, Lyncolne. etc: those sins. For even
as Lucane speaks of a body sore wounded, totum est pro vuluere corpus, all
the body was as one wound, and our Savior Christ bearing the sins of the
world, was by Paul called sin: So the prophet Miche being asked what sin
said Samaria and Jerusalem, as though for their sinfulness they were nothing
but mere sin. So if they ask me in these days what sin: I answer London,
York, Dover. etc. I mean these cities are so sinful, that they are sin.

But if the world have so longing a lust to trouble me with asking what sin
Sins of this time.
and what sin: then be thou strong my spirit, and go and fly out my voice,
to tell the sons of this earth this, sin and that sin: and first if the
papists will desire Papists sins.
to know of me what sin: I tell them that idols do cleave still in their
minds, which is as sweet a sin as the name of idols in the hebrew tongue is
a sweet word, which signifies a more unsweet place then I can honestly
rehearse: That sin. Qui sordescebat sordescet adhuc. He that was a papist in
Queen Mary's time is still a papist: that sin. Again, those which had
tasted of a good light of the Gospel are run back again to their own
vomet: that sin. He that ever stood before is now fallen: that sin.

If our protestants ask me, what Protistantes sins.
sin? I will tell the^ our protestants are most of them all like unto mice.
Mice will be still in the house, but never be acquainted with the master of the
house: s^ are our protestants to godward: that sin. They are like to Judas,
they kiss Christ and give him gentle outward interteinment, but it is for 30.
pence or 30. pound vauntage, or money more or less: that sin. They are like
that Egle which the prophet Esaias speaks of: The egle which is with thee, is
not on thy side: that sin. They are like the princes of Jury that believed in
Christ, but dare not confess for the Pharasies: that sin. They are like
Simon Magus that walks with Philip like an Apostle, but works with money
like a worldling: that sin. They be like Ananias and Saphira that dare not
venire all they have with Christ and the Apostles and hang clearly upon Gods
providence, but will be sure to keep one piece for after clappes: that sin.
Our protestants are, the most that ever I see, like to Acabbes wife, she never
put on d^e apparel but when she spoke with the prophets: so these men are
never holy but at sermon times and in presence of those whose holiness they do
reverence: that sin.

But I will say perticulers. If the great men of the Land ask me, what sin? I
will then tell them thus: The great Sins of great men.
men of the Land seek to rear up houses of Sicamore trees, and new baked
brick battes, and to grow into such rank revenues in their counties and
sheeres, that they fear nether God in heaven, nor prince in earth, nor feend
in hell: that sin. It is a tickling pleasure, and most of all cordial to
some of those, to make princes glad of an unprofitable title of clemency, so
that they will not distribute one philip of correction to Gods long continued
idolatrus enemies: that sin. Through some of these and other violent welthy
worldlines, all Westminster hall, and other places of help, are not able to
keep Naboth his vineyard: alas, and more then thrice alas. Naboth loses his
vineyard and his vine, his sheep and his kine, his coat from his doublet, his
doublet from his shert, his shert from his bare naked skin: that sin. Again,
they keep the clergy, and men of God so far from the access to the prince,
that they are far from the state of other prophets. Elizas bad his hosts
ask of y^ king what she would and he would dispatch it. Now Elizas must
dispatch from the king what he can, and not what he would. I say not but that
Elizas can do some thing by courtly friends, and other means, but Elizas in
the name of a prophet, and as he is Elizas, can do now a little or nothing:
that sin.

Again, if those of the ministry demand of me, what sin? I will answer
Sins of clergy.
for us all: we are all of Peter's mind, bonum est nobis hic esse: we think it
a merry life to be still in this world, and to build our nestes as high, as
warm, and as during as we can: that sin. We be like Ely, he durst not
sharply enough correct his children, nor we control our auditors. Jacob fell
down seven times before Jacobs face, but we make seventy seven low down
crouching courtesies to every noble man, before we will tell him of his duty how
undutiful so ever he be: that sin. Again some that go for our brethren, and
of the ancient sort of us, count us very indiscreet and but stark fools when
so ever we begine to practice some little of that which we should do: that
sin. An other sort broch and brabble many foolish fronticke follies in
divinity: that sin. Every Christ's cross losell has a church plot in his
head, without all subjection of spirit to spirit, does think them selves even
peers to Primates: that sin.

If Magistrates, judges, and Iusti^rs Sins of Magistrates.
request of me, what sin, that which our Savior in S. John said to the
Maiestrates: None of you all performs the law, may be said to rightly upon
these: that sin. They are like the Maiestrates that Esai calls
Apostatantes: they wax worse. The longer they tarry in their rooms, the
lesser they become: the more exercise they have in this world, y^ greater
worldlings they be: that sin. They be Maiestrates like Judas the patriarch,
that will judge Thamer to the fire before Thamers cause be heard or known:
that sin. Specially if Potiphars wife sue to Potiphar, then Joseph goes to
gyues be he never so just: that sin. They judge not as the prophet biddes them,
to the widow and the fatherless, but they judge to them selves, to their
wife, to their children, to their leases, to their feefermes, to their purse,
to their kitchen, to their stable, to them and to theyrs as much as they can:
that sin. They do facere homines peccare in verbo. etc. They trippe men in
their words, and trounce men in their reasoninges: that sin. Under the word
[law] they banish the things right, yet Tertullian against the gentiles does
say: Non liber est index in eo quod lege cautum est illi: It is not always
charter enough to the judge that he have law on his side: that sin.

If the whole world, if y^ whole realm ask me, what sinn^? I tell them that
the Catholic sins.
whole realm and the world trembles like the leaf of a tree of wood at every
war, and buzzing of war, as though Gods arm had lost the length and
strength: that sin. There is much idleness: that sin. There is a sleepie
oblivion of all Gods benefits, and a great Noah's flood of manifold vanities:
that sin, and that sin. There is cutthrote usury, fullness of bread, and
drunkenness in the day time: that sin, that sin, and that sin. There is
fleshelust, eyelust, lifepride, and no bowels of pity: that sin, that sin,
that sin, and that sin.

Ask me not, ask me not (O) what sin, I lack wit and memory, sides, and
strength: I die, I faint, I should famishe to stand still, and hold out in
telling the world their particular sins by that sin, and that sin. But
specially the lack of bowels of pity is so much, that Christus no^ pascitur
in hortis: Christ is not fed in our gardens: Christ is not fed amongst us.
But what feeds Christ, and how is he fed? The feeding of Christ is after
three sorts: and in one point I may compare him to Mithridates wife, who
though he eat not that which is poisoned as she did, yet eats he that which
is rank and vicious. So it is said of the time of Messiah, that he should
eat Bulls, Buckes, and Bores: so of the godly ones in the Apocalypse, that
they should eat the flesh of stalien horses. Now that Christ and the godly
preachers should eat Bulls flesh, and Horse flesh, is, that they should
consume with teaching and preaching, the rank and riotous humors that abound
in men's natures, that the Lion might be brought to eat hay like an Ox, and
the Wolf become an unhurtful neighbor to the Lamb, that Egles might be made
innocent like Doves, and all that is savage lay down his nature. But still we
see that Bull^s be as much Bulls as ever they were, as full fatted as the
Bulls of Basan. Bores be still brockish, Buckes rank, Egles violent, Kites
greedy, Gripes ravenous, Cormorantes griple, the most of men like Horse and
Mule. This beast linesse in men is not consumed by preaching and teaching, and
therefore Christ is not fed, the world is this way fat still, and therefore
Christ is lean still. The fatter the one, the leaner the other. I speak now
to the world and beastly worldlinges, Bulls, Buckes, and Bores, Egles,
Gripes, Kites, and all ye haggarde birds of Rauin, turn not. O turn not, as
in Ouids Metamorphosis, out of me^ into beasts, but return ye out of beasts
into men: suffer ye Christ, and Christ's godly Prophets, to feed upon your
flesh, and eat up your vile vices: conform your selves to the form of the
doctrine of the Gospel of Christ Jesus: suffer your bodies to be chastened and
to be brought under into servitude. I will tell you that which is true to be
told. Gods heaven is a coluerhouse, it is not a room for Egles, for Gripes,
for Cormorantes. etc: it is a caul for Sheep, and not a staule for Bulls,
not a pale for Buckes, not a stye for Bores: talium enim non est regnum
coelorum: for such truly the room of heaven serves not.

Again, Christ is fed with justice and righteousness, with good life and
true religion. So God is called an husbandman that planted a Uine, and thought
to have drunk of the wine, but the Uine brought forth sower Grapes* Let no man
deceive him self: leude faith, and lose life is ill grapes and sower grapes.
Let us then bring forth good grapes, and grapes of repentance, grapes to feed
God, and grapes to content God, or else short words will come upon us: a
hatchet and a fire, a hatchet and a fire. Every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, shall be cut up and cast into the fire. Our beloved Christ is dry
for good life, give him not sower grapes. He is dry, clappe him not on the
lips with eisill and Gaul. He is hungry for justice, as Amos says: turn
not justice into Wormwood. Sower grapes are not delicate to man, nor Idolatry
to God. Eisill is bitter drink to man, and evil life is to God. Wormwood is
bitter to man, and so is injustice to God. And yet Christ is fed an other third
way, or rather was fed, or rather is and was fed, as when he was at
feasts, and when he was with his disciples: so when he cursed the fig tree:
but that hunger of his is now foredone, and as he says by his Prophet: Si
esuriro non dicam tibi: If I should hap to be hungry (people) I Psalm. 50.
would not tell thee. Then how is he now hungry, and how is he now to be
relieved? He is hungry in his needy Ministers, in selie destitute Orphans,
and in impotent poor creatures. He that receaueth those, receaueth Christ. He
that slaketh their hunger, slaketh Christ's hunger. He that quenches their
thirst, quenches the thirst of Christ the beloved.

Touching Gods Ministers in these days, benefactors in old time have had
toward them a most liberal devotion: and hereupon it comes to pass, that
though very much has been withdrawn, yet somewhat remains: yet I do not say
that Christ in this kind of people is now specially hungry. Howbeit I am not
ignorant that many a poor Minister of these times, is like Elizas. He had not
pe^, nor incke, nor table, nor candlestick, but as his hosts allowed him: and
these poor Gods men must be helped by their host or hosts, or one fre^d or
other with coat, and cappe, and cup, and candle, and study, and table, or
else they shall be altogether harbo^lesse and helpelesse. And needs must I
further yet say, that in many a poor scholar of the Uniuersities, Christ him
self is full of hunger and necessity. These be ye noble sons of the
Prophets, and most apt of all others to be builders of Gods temple: yet have I
seen many a good wit, many a long day, kept low and lean, to be made broken
with hunger, and abiecte with poverty. I do not now know the liberality of
this City toward both those places: only this can I say, that less then
the tenth part of that which is nothing but surfitte and sickness to the great
excessive eaters of this town, would cherishe and cheer up hungry and thirsty
Christ, in those his hungerstarued members right well.

Touching the hunger of Orphans, and such as be fatherless, I do not think
but that it is very great, and I have no great hope that it will be much less.
The fathers them selves in this world have much ado to shift for them selves:
therefore it must needs be ye condition of these poor selie ones to hunger,
to thirst, to pine, The boys of Christ's Hospital.
and to starve. Yet the example of this good gentleman Alderman Dabbes and his
ever laudable goodness to this little poor people, was likely to have stirred up
many after this time to have done the like. But I trow, for all that we can
preach and exhort, it will be true, that when the son of man comes there
will be but little faith and little good works too. This man in these Orphans
has clad Christ, and fed Christ. She that shed oil upon Christ's head, shall
have a good name where soever the Gospel goes, and the sheding of this
relief upon Christ's members is a thing of fame, and very worthy of standing
memory.

Concerning impotent persons, and poor in general, though many Hospitals have
been for them erected, and her Majesty, and her Majesty's Counsel, have had
by one Act of Parliament to their relief a goodly respect, yet Christ this
way and in this people, is more hungry then Lazarus, and more needy then Irus.
And as the Scripture says: Abels bloodshed cried to God: so me think the
hunger of this hungerstarued generation, should cry a loud to God. And i^
they will turn over to me the penmanship or indictment of their bitter
exclamation, me think I could for their purpose contriue no more fitly, then
in these words, and thus: Lord we do hear The beggars outcry or rather the
outcry of the beggars.
and understand that the earth is thine and the fullness thereof. And though it
be that we deserve no more then we have, yet turn down thine eye, and do but
see what manner men they be, whom thou have blessed with wealth, how they grope
their souls with rest, and how they eat their bread alone. Why Lord? here is
no Abraham to enterteine thy messengers, nor Lot to compel thy ministers to
come in: but many a rich glotton to make fast the doors upon them, and to
cause them to keep without. The Prophet Elias lacks his hosts of Serapta.
The Prophet Elizas lacks his hosts the Sunamite. Paul can not find the
Purpurisse, nor Peter the Currier: Job we have not, nor Toby we find not:
Captain Cornelius is a black Swan in this generation: here is no Philip to
feast the poor, but each rich glotton does give interteinment to his equal
or better: no Martha is there to give thee curtise interteinment, nor Mary to
pour any thing that sweet is upon thy head. Lazarus lies still before the
doors, and can not with long loud crying, come by the crommes of their
tables. In us Lord thou art day and night tumbled miserably before their
doors: In us thy down bed pillowes are hard pauement stones: thy warmth is
hail, snow, and what so falls from heaven: thy wealth is want: thy food is
hunger. Truly this land is a land of no charity, for even of purpose they
devise, good Lord, to make havoc of all things, that we may be relieved
with nothing. Havoc in their own apparel, their wives, childrens and
servants apparel, outrageous havoc in their diets, yea too much havoc to
many ways. Their horses chewe and spewe upon gold and silver, and their
mules go under rich velvet. Dogs are dear unto them, and feed much
daintily. Courses and Kites cost them many a round pound. There is none but
thy Majesty that knows all things, that knows all their hauockes and
vain expenses, so that we can get nothing: specially, good Lord, O good Lord,
this London people, though it draw near thee with lips, and have a name to
live, yet has it a most flintie and uncircumcised heart, and is in deed a
people of no bowels. Lord here is the rich glotton to be seen up and down,
and round about the town. Here is scarce any thing in the upper sort but many
a foolish Nabal scraping and scratching, eating and drinking, and sodeinly and
unworthily dying. The eyes of Judah were said to be red with drincking, but
mutch of this people have their whole faces fire red with continual quaffing
and carousing. Sodom and Gomorra were said to be full of Bread, but these
Londoners are more then full, for they are even bursten with bancketing, and
sore and sick with surfeting. Lord thou whistlest to them, and they hear thee
not, thou sendest thy plague amongst them, and they mind thee not. Lord we
are lean, Lord we are faint, Lord we are miserable, Lord we are thy
members: Lord therefore thou art lean, Lord thou art faint, Lord thou art
miserable: rise good Lord, arise, and judge thine own cause. And thus much of
Christ a beggar in these beggars. And now will I speak of Christ a Lilie
gatherer.

And to gather up Lilies.
Of gathering of Lilies, many things may be spoken many ways. And what Lilies
do signify in this place, I am to say as before: that when the beloved goes
down into his spicery to be fed in the Orchardes and to gather Lilies, is no
more but that he goes to be refreshed in the earth. Howbeit the fathers have
made a further process in this matter, and some yield one sense, and some an
other. But for my self I would not for any thing rehearse opinions upon
opinions, and notes upon opinions, and exhortations upon notes, for that
would be now long and werisome: only I will say something of one exposition
which Rabbi Iarhi and S. Barnard do seem to embrace: that is, to gather up
Lilies, is to gather up men: and yet even in this one exposition rests to be
handled that Christ is a gatherer, and men be flowers. If Christ be a gatherer,
then is he no disperser. In deed it is meet that the shepeheard should gather
his sheep, and the hen her chickins, and the husbandman the grain into the
barn. Even so the Prophet Ezechiel says: That Christ should gather his sheep
out of all lands, and gather Ezech. 34.
them into their own land. So does he him self say with an affection of most
deep love: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee
together, as the hen gathers her chickins under her wing, and thou would
not. And as Lilies grow dispersed here one, and there one: so good men grow
rare and thin. And as Christ picketh Lilies from among thorns (for they
grow among thorns): so picked he Abraham from the thorns of Chaldee, Job
from the Hussites, Hiram from the Tirians, Naaman from the Syrians, the
Ninevites from the Assirians. Lilies grow rare, and good men grow rarer:
Lilies amongst thorns, and good men amongst thorns. And as the gathering A
man A Lily.
of Lilies and men be like: so men and Lilies be very like. I will speak a
thing of marvelous troth: A man is but a Lily, the pride and glory of a man is
but the pride and glory of a Lilie. Solomon is a Lilie, King Solomon is a
Lilie, King Solomon in his glory is a Lilie, King Solomon in all his glory is a
Lilie. Sons of vanity to whom it is delightful to have feathers to dance in
your Pride dashed.
tops as big as Ajax shield, to have your heads turkish, and your backs
spanish, your wastes Italian, and your feet Uenetian, with such a world of
your hose^ glory about your loins. Sons (I say) of vanity, ye are but
Lilies. Solomon in all his glory is but a Lily. Solomon in his worst workeday
apparel, is better the^ the best of you all. Solomon in his best holiday
apparel, is not so brave as a Lily: ye therefore in the huffe of your ruff are
nothing comparable to a Lily, no not to a field Lily. Daughters of vanity, and
dames of delicacy, ye think it fine an^ featous to be called roses, primroses,
and Lilies: and in deed it is true, in respects you are roses, primroses and
Lilies. When ye have gotten all upon your heads and backs which English
soil does yield, and many a merchant has fetched full far, when all your
tailors have broken their brains about contriuing of forms, and fashions, yet
then are ye nothing so tricksy trim as the Lily. The best of ye all in all your
best bravery, is not like to a field Lily, which hapely to morrow is plucked up,
and flung into the for^ace. Prick and prune your selves to the day of doom,
ye will never be like to the field Lily. For the Lily of this our flesh is not
so goodly gay, as the Lily of grass: otherwise and in many imperfections we
are very perfect, and true Lilies. The Lily of grass shoots up for a time,
but then he lays down his top, and is made even to the floor. The Lily of
flesh florisheth for a time, but then by houering death he is taught to poer
upon the ground, and to let down his top like a Lily. The wrath of winter does
conquer and kill the Lily of grass: there be more then many occasions to
vanquish, and kill the Lily of flesh. Barnard says, that there is a worm that
eats up the root of the Lily of grass: each Lily of flesh has his worm and
consumer. Julius Caeser, Hercules, and Mahomet have the falling sickness,
Mecaenus has a three years agew, Orestes has y^ frenzy, Speusippus has the
palsy, Heraclitus and Aristarcus y^ dropsy, Marcus Crassus the stuffing in the
head, Hieroboam the withered arm, Lazarus and Job, biles and botches,
Aristotle an evil stomach, Euripides putrefaction of lounges. Coruinus the
lethargy, Anacrion lack of sleep. Agesilaus and Ptolomeus the gout, Naaman
and Mary the leprosy. But what do I say that every Lily of flesh has his
worm and consumer, since I may truly say that every part of every Lily of
flesh has his diverse worms and consumers. The head has the Apoplexia, the
Epilepsia, and the turnabout sickness, the eyes have the Opthalmia and the
Mengrim, the neck has the Palsy and the conuulsion, the nose has the
Polipus, the pallat has the vuula, the gu^mes have the canker, y^ teeth have
the toothach, the throat has the angine, the tongue has blisters and
swelling, the stomaks has the motive cause of the cardiacall passion, and
muthering rewmes (the students sickness), the sides have colickes, stitches,
and prickling pleurisies, the reins have the stone, the legs have dropsies
and crampes, the feet and hands have the knobbed gout. Besides that the Lily
of flesh has worms of mind and worms of conscience, many worms and sore
worms. The Lily of grass has his own worm, and the Lily of flesh has his
thousand worms: the Lily of grass can not live from that one worm, but will
be smitten of it, nor the Lily of flesh shall escape all these worms. Again,
all the grass Lilies are dead and gone that have grown on the face of the
earth, and all flesh Lilies are dead that lived upon this earth. Abraham Gods
friend, and Noah that walked with GOD, Aaron full of dignity, and Moses full of
authority, holy Melchisadech, and just Job, strong Sampson, and huge Ogge,
vaunting Goliath, and disdainful Senacharib, fair Absolon, and sweet lovely
Ionathas, wise Solomon, rich Cresus, and wealthy Crassus, lucky Pompey,
victorious Julius, riall Augustus, and triumphant Emelius, all these have had a
time like a Lily, and dyed in time like a Lily. They have had the spring of
their budding, and the summer of their blossoming, they have likewise come to
the Autumn of their parching and the winter of their perishing. O all ye, all
ye men, that draw breath under the cope of the skies, ye spring up like Lilies,
and go down like Lilies, ye flourish like Lilies, and deflower like Lilies.
Pindarus said thrice, Ma^mea, Ma^mea, Ma^mea. Jeremy cried thrice, Earth,
Earth, Earth: so I, Lilies, Lilies, Lilies, and then a second time Lilies,
Lilies, Lilies, and for that I would have it remembered, I cry again, Lilies,
Lilies, Lilies, and then thus, O men, O Lilies, O men, O Lilies, O men, O
Lilies. O field grass, O flowers of decay. Yet came Christ among such Lilies
to gather up such ^eting flowers of flesh, and to be conversant among his
spicery.

The duty of the world and church is, that when they are told where he is,
they should make after him and seek him. He is not now in the spicery and
Lilies of this earth, that is, among the sons of men: he is not in personal
presence, as the papists or Vbiquitaries feign him, but he has overtaken the
heightes of heaven, and stands where Steven saw him, and where Esaias saw him,
among Angels and Archangels, and all the glorious millions of his saints, him
self more then most glorious. There seek him, seek him, there, (O world) and
together make after him. And in deed some part of the world does seek Christ,
and are in a kind of quest and inquiry of Christ, but not in a like sort and
after one fashion: some seek him with staves, and with lanternes, like the
vilanous Jews to beat him and buffet him, to canuas him and kill him. So
seek thee (O Lord Christ) the Spanish Inquisitors with staves and with
torments: So many a proud Nimrod does hunt thee, and seek thee. Again, some
seek him like Judas for money and for wealth, and to get vauntage by their so
seeking: but (Lord Jesus) those shall or never find thee, or be flung flat on
their backs when they find thee. And yet (Lord) too, there is an other kind
of people that seek thee. Lord we read that Joseph and Mary did seek thee
Dolentes, that is, mourning* so we seek thee in these days of tears, against
so many dangers, against so many ^pprobries, in so devilish a generation, in so
combersome a world, in so strait a way, in such contrary law of our members
and of our spirits, in such haling back of the world and worldly frenship,
that dolentes quaerimus te, (alas good Lord) with great heart break, we seek
thee. Lord give strength to our faith and kindle courage in us, to make after
thee and seek thee. Lord if we seek thee, thou have promised we shall find
thee: all thy words are truth it self, therefore we will make after thee and
seek thee. We read that Joseph and Mary sought thee with sorrow, but found
thee with joy. We know (Lord) that the griefs of this iorny are nothing worthy
the joys that thou yeldest to them that have found thee. He Solomon.
that had his ears full of the world, and his arms full of the world, and his
belly full of the world, and his eyes full of the world, and all the best
pleasing pleasures in the world, he has cried out against them, vanity of
vanities, and all is but vanity. O Lord, all other thoughts are vain, and
most extreme vain. O thou only worthy to be sought, and none but thou worthy
to be found, height nor depth, heat nor cold, egde nor point of sword, foe
nor friend shall never prevail against us, but we will make after thee and
seek thee. O that we may find thee: grant (O good Lord) that we may find
thee. He that has found thee, has found the Shiloh and Messiah of the whole
world: he has found the Lion of the tribe of Judah, that is able to master all
the beasts of the field: he has found a rock, a buckler, a shield, and a
horn of health, and one that will lift up his head, so that he need to fear
foes no more: he has found that pearl which a wise man would sell all that
he has to buy, so that he need to bestow his love upon no Jewel else any
more: he has found the Lamb, after whom he shall for ever walk in innocence
in white apparel, so that he shall not be troubled with rebellious motions of
his flesh any more. He has found the healthful tree of life, in the midst of
Paradise, so that he shall not see death any more: he has found him out, of
whose belly gush floodes of life yealding waters, so that he shall not be dry
any more: he has found him that will wype away all tears and all
infirmi^ies, so that he need not to be drou^ie and heavy any more: he has
found his own wisdom, his own sanctification, his own Justice: he has
found the strong God, the only wise God, the Lord of worlds, the Prince of
peace, the father of eternity, the glorious Angel of the great Counsel, to
whom, with God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, three pers^ and one (...),
be all honor and dominion both now and ^uermore.

Amen.
^en. 2. Erant vterque nudi, Adam and Eua, and non erubescebant.

They were both naked, Adam and Eve, and blushed not.


TO the opening of this mat^ ^ght honorable and (...) Christian presence) I
can not mutch speak, except I should tell you a great long story, how that
Adam and Eve were first planted and placed in Paradise. What a rich thing
Paradise was, what a pleasant thing it was, what safety Adam and Eve lived
in, what blessedness they lived in: yea and in so great good case and
integrity, that they being even at the worst, that is, even starcke naked,
needed not to blushe. But neither need I say any thing more, neither will I.
And me think even fitly enough of it se^ without further exposition, my matter
may suffer a division. And I know no fitter division the^ if I should first
speak (because the text says: Adam and Eve were both naked, and blushed not)
first who was naked, then what it is to be naked, and thirdly, the effects of
being naked. Which The division.
in a clear and crimelesse conscience, is, not to blushe, and in a criminous
conscience, is, to blush. Now, when I come to tell who was naked, I say that
Adam and Eve were naked, and I will not make one particular ^tise of Adam, and
an other of Eve, but as the Scripture in the first Chapter of Genesis calls
the man and the woman Adam, and as they were man and wife together, so shall
they be one together for me in this treatise. Or else, if I should talk both of
Adam and Eve, and be but so large as I well might, it would not be very well,
for the season is very cold, and I most sickly to speak, and besides that,
our scantling to preach in the Court is a most short scantling. Now, if ye ask
what it is to be naked: I say it is to be without armor, it is to be without
apparel, and so says Chrysostom, and ^o Musculus. The effects of being
naked, is to blush or no^ to blush, so says this text on one part, so says
reason, and so says a Greek S^phist writing hereupon. But before I shall
proceed to make further speech in this process, I shall pray you most heartily
to assist me with your devout prayers, to be delivered up to the throne of our
almighty father in heaven. In which prayer. etc.

Adam and Eve were both naked, and blushed not.

Now, it is not to ask me who was naked, The first part, who is naked.
for I have concluded to say that Adam was naked. And what is Adam to be
expounded? Adam is red earth, man is red earth. Here then falls out to be
considered the baseness and badnesse of man's metal. Here then first in the
very The baseness of man.
thresholde of my sermon, let us see, that even as the earth by his natural
course is borne downward, and is lowest of all elements: so man borne by the
tallent, and motion of his flesh, is beyond horse and Mule, and is by the
Prophets warned to learn wisdom by the Swallow, by the Ant, by the Spider,
by the Ox, by the Ass, and almost by all the beasts in the field. Man is
base earth. David speaking contemtuously of Gods enemies, likeneth them to the
dust before the face of the wind. The Prophets to bring down the looks of
the proud worldlinges, do call them the sons of the earth. David says, that
their honor shall lick the dust. In Genesis y^ most base and contemptible
Serpent, to fill him yet more full of contempt, was enjoined to eat the dust
of the earth. Such base dust as is driven before the face of the wind, which
the ungodly do lick, which the Serpent does eat, even such dust i^ Adam, such
dust is man, such dust are al^ men: and harken to it all men. Rich m^ are rich
dust, wise men wise dust, wor^ shipfull All is dust.
men worshipful dust, honorabl^ men honorable dust, majesty's dust, ex*
cellent majesty's excellent dust. Sera^ that had a thousand thousand men, an^
Xerxes that made y^ sea land with ships* are both of them dust. Alexander tha^
called him self Gods son, was dust Senacherib that wrote him self the great
king, was dust. The Bishops of Rom^ that write the^ selves (...). All these be
dust. The Latin Docto^ that call the^ selves authentical doctor^ magistrall
doctors, seraphicall doctors, and irrefragable doctors, dust. He of Rome that
called him self most holy, most blessed, Gods vicar, Christ's pewfellowe, more
then a mere man, and many great names, dust. Man is dust, all men are dust. And
besides that all men be dust, and base and badde dust, yet there is a further
thing, that in this dust of theirs they In this our dust is much misery.
are full of misery: And therefore where as in the Hebrew tongue a Be has her
name of the order of her working, and an Adamant for strokes bearing, gold for
being yelowe, a Grassehopper for eating, a Lamb for having soft woll, a Dove
for supplenesse, a Horse for hynning and iolitie of his head, a Serpent for
curious marking, and an Ant for gnawing, man has but two names, and y^ one is
Adam, that is, red earth: the other is Enoshe, that is, miserable. And so
these fathers almost in that order that I will rehearse them, called their
sons. Seth called his son Enoshe, that is, misery. Enoshe called his son
Cainan, that is, lamentation. Cainan called his son Mathusalem, that is,
pearsing death. Mathusalem called his son Lamech, that is, poverty. Lea
called her son Bononi, that is, my sadness. These foreelders had foretasted
in their own bodies the miseries of man's nature, and not doubting but their
sons should taste of the same, they shope them names according. But if men
will not believe by their own experience, that men are miserable, then let men
listen to the voices of men. Abraham says now and than: Domine tu ^iuisicasti
me: Lord thou have quickened me. If Abraham were now and than quickened in his
life time, then Abraham through misery was now and than dead in his life time:
then Abraham had his part of misery in his life time. Father Jacob says: Dies
mei pauci sunt and mali. i. My years are but a few, and those full of
miserye. David calls him self a dead dog, the son of death, a worm and
no man, a wretch, and one that is crooked even to the end: one that has his
loins full of illusions, and no health in all his flesh. And generally of
man's misery he says: The days of our years in them selves are three score
and ten years: but if one rub out whilst fowerscore, whatso ever is more, it
is but travel and sorrow. Jesus the son of Sirach pronounces in many words
upon man's misery, but I will make them short: Occupatio magna (says he)
creata est omnibus hominibus. etc. It is a great ado that all men have in
Eccles. 40
this world, and a heavy yoke there is upon all the sons of Adam, even from
that day that a man comes out of his mothers womb, until that day that a
man return unto his common mother the earth: from him that wears purple and
bears the crown, down to him that is clad with meanest apparel, there is
nothing but garboyle, and ruffle, and hoysting, and lingering wrath, and fear
of death, and death it self, and hunger, and many a whip of God. Solomon said,
that he was weary of his life, because that all that ever he saw under the
Sun, was nothing but vanity, and grief of the ghost. Job said, that he had
vain days, and toylesome nights: When I sleep (says he), I say, when shall
I rise, and then again must I look for night, and be filde with sorrow
whilst it be dark. The Prophet Elias says: I have lived enough, I pray thee
Lord take away my life. Jonas say: It is better for me to die then to live.
Jeremy cursed the day that he was borne. Our Savior Christ was seen often to
weep, but never to laugh. Paul said: Miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the prison of this death? Augustine tells of pitiful
tragedies past in his youth whilst he and his mother Monacha wa^dred up and
down. Hierome writing of hy^ life with his Monks, says that there was
forrow^s in his face, and Iseickles from his lips, with continual sorrow.
Origin is thought of some to have dyed for pure hearty sorrow. Basil was made
old, and unprofitable before his time, for Gods Church, for travel, and for
sorrow. Chrysostom calls the days of his life, the days of his sorrow.
Nazianzene says in his Epigra^mes, that his earthly body did bear down his
heavenly soul, and asks wherefore his mother did bring him forth into so
black and miserable a day. Barnard in his second book of consideration
writes on this fashion: Consideranti quid sis, occurit tibi homo nudus et
pauper. etc. Considering with thy self what thou art, there comes before thine
eyes a man, naked, poor, and miserable, mourning that he is a man, blushing
that he is naked, weping that he was borne of a woman, for therefore he was a
sinner, living a short time, and therefore he is fearful, replenished with
many miseries, and therefore he weepeth, and is a wretch. And verily and in
deed he is full of many and manifold miseries: the miseries of the body, the
miseries of the heart, miseries in doing, miseries in suffering, miseries
whilst be waketh, miseries whilst he sleapeth, misery it is to what so ever
he turns him self. Alas, Alas, every son of Adam, is but to much miserable.
Neither can Adam, or Adams sons continue yet, Man can not continue in his
base misery.
or go on in this misery, but they must be delivered of that base and bad
earth, and of this misery: that though they of their own folly did delight in
it, yet it must needs be so that there must be a seperasion. All is misery
that they do enjoy, neither can they long enjoy that misery. They are ashes,
and they must return again to ashes. Job says: that our house of clay and
our foundation of earth must be broken up. Paul very learnedly does call the
day of his death the day of his dissolution. David says: that man must go
again into his dust. David dying says: I do go the way of all earth. And do
not think that because I say Adam is red earth, and it is said that Adam is
ashes, and shall return into ashes, therefore none but red earth and red men
shall dye. Of a truth it is so that Adam (that is red, earth) and Melancthon
(that is, black earth) and Leucthon (that is, white earth) must dye too. They
must all learn to tread the way of al earthes. Yea (Madams think it to be so
as I say. Red earth, black earth, and white earth must go David's way. Yea
verily rosiall colors, and cri^nson cheeks must go David's way, must go the
way of all earthes. Think upon your death, and upon the next life, for ye must
dye, ye must dye, there is no remedy. David and Job prayed God to remember
them, because they were earth and ashes. God him self does pray, and warn
this forgetful world to remember the^ selves, that they are earth and ashes.
It is said: remember thy last end, and thou shall not sin everlastingly. But
I warn men to remember their beginning, and they shall not sin
everlastingly. For then they shall be burdened with the remembrance of the
baseness and badnes of their metal: they shall be burdened with the
remembrance of the misery in their base and badde metal, and so be driven
for relief to Christ the refresher, and all that come unto him he will not
cast them out. And thus much upon that point, who was naked.

Now, let me say a while, what it is The second part what it is to be naked.
to be naked. It is, as I said, to be without weapon, to be without weed. So
was Adam in his first state, so was Adam in his best state. And here the
Anabaptists (a people full of frenzy and furor) would be glad to help them
selves in their fancy, that no man ought to wear weapon, because that Adam in
state of iunocencie wore not weapon. And besides The Anabaptists reasoning
against war.
that that they have this argument, lest they should seem to be empty handed,
they allege further reasons of this probation: as thus out of Esaias: Mine is
the vengeance, and I will require them. Again, out of the said Esaias: that
Christ's kingdom is like y^ waters of Shiloah, which wa ters do run quietly and
with out hurly burly. Again, out of Michah: that speres shall be turned into
shares and swords into mattockes. Again, out of our Savior Christ: If any
man give thee a blow on the right side, turn thou the left side. Again: He
that smyteth with the sword must perish with the sword. Again: Let not the
cockle be pulled out till the harvest time. Again, out of S. Paul: our weapons
are spiritual weapons. But ye shall have answer to these arguments out of
Augustine to Marsellinus in the fifth epistle, and to Faustus Manichaeus in the
22* book, and in Chrysostom upon these words: do not resist the evil. For I
can not now my self stand upon them, and these reasoners them selves are so
unreasonable, and so void of all credit, that to name them and their
arguments, is to discredit them and their arguments. And in deed it is easy
to prove the contrary doctrine to theyrs. For Ecclesiastes says: Tempus belli
and tempus pacis: A time of war and Reasons for war.
a time of peace. David says in the 144. Psalm: Blessed is God which teaches
Psalm. 144
my hands to fight, and my fingers to battle. David's fingers were fighting
fingers, yet David's fingers were holy fingers. In the book of Kings, David
says to Saul: thou fightest the Lords battayles. And Abigail says to David:
thou fightest the Lords battayles. If some wars be Gods wars, then all
wars are not forbidden. The Baptist does seem to allow of soldiers, for he
gives them rules of life, as that they should smite no man, and that they
should be content with their own wages. Paul would have him self led to
Cesaria by strength of soldiers. Our Savior does say: Give unto Caeser that
which is Caesers. That which was given to Caeser was tribute given to find
soldiers, as Augustine does often say. Now, reasons why there should be
weapons, there be many. But this is the special reason which the Cantons,
where every man wears a weapon, allege for their so doing: that the
magistrate and country may be assisted and defended. And if it be so, that
every man do wear weapon, and ought to wear weapon for the magistrate, and
ought not only to wear it, but also to draw it at the magistrates voice, and
to do as it is said in the 3. book and 4. chap. of Esdras: If the the king
alone say do kill, they do kill: If he say, do forgive, they do forgive: If he
say smite, they do smite: If he say, banish, they do banish: If he say, cut up,
they do cut up. I say, if the people ought thus to do for the prince and
magistrate, to draw their weapon in his cause, and to lay down their life at
his foot: how much more ought the magistrate for his own cause, and for all
their causes, to bear weapon, and not to bear it in vain? but to purpose.
For some one stroke, at some one time, to some one person, from the princes
hand, does let many thousands of vuff^ts, and blose, which otherwise must be
dealt else where, bear them of who can. But they will tell me, which they tell
the prince commonly, that she has a goodly amiable name for mildness, and
that now to draw the sword in this sort were the loss of that commondation. It
is to be hoped that notwithstanding the love, and delight in names and titles,
that the prince will do no more then that which by Gods word she can, and to
the health of her self and her country she may. These great merueilers at
mildness, must remember that mildnes to some is often times vnmildnes and
cruelty to many other. And I dare Po^icy and divinity would have misedocrs
punished.
warrant the prince this, before God and man, that it is both good policy and
good divinity, to punish Gods enemies, and her enemies: and that her majesty
punishing even to the uttermost Gods enemies, shall nevertheless by Gods word
retain the name of a mild, and merciful prince. She may be just and severe,
and yet she may be merciful, and mild: this is it that I will defend. It is
good policy to punish them, as I think. Ulysses in whom the poets did feign
to be a whole form^ of policy, when Troy was taken and Andromaca mother to
Astianax was a great suter that the boys should not be cast down headlong from
the turrettes top, and that he should not be put to death: of truth woman (said
he) thy tears do move me much, but yet the tears of al my country women ought
to move me more, to whom this boy in time may bring much indamagement. In this
saying is two arguments: the one: the tears of more ought to move more: the
other: the tears of countrifolkes then of foriners, of true subjects then of
false rebels. Thus thought Ulysses, thus thought wise Ulysses. It is to be
thought that now to her majesty there will be mourning, and moning for
husbands, and sons, for kinsmen, and friends, men's eyes will be moysted with
tears, and wemens cheeks will be bedewed: but the prince shall do well to
remember that Ulysses said: The tears of more ought to move more, and a greater
regard ought to be had to the tears of those that be loyal and subject, then
of those that be stubburne and rebellious. And as it is good policy to punish
this misliued folk: so it is good divinity. Artaxerxes writes to Esdras
after this sort: Omnis qui non fecerit lege^ Dei tui et legem regis diligenter
I. Esd. 7.
etc. Who so ever (Esdras says he) does not the will of thy God, and of the
king with diligence, let him have judgment without delay, whether it be unto
death, or to be rooted out, or to have his goods confiscat, or to be put in
prison. Prison was the least punishment that Esdras should put them to: Prison
is the greatest punishment that we can get them to, yea, and so easy, and so
gentle a kind of prisonment, that it is much better and wealthier then many of
our liberties.

And now to speak of that, that ye prince may be just in punishing, and yet be
still The prince may punish justly, and yet be mild and merciful.
called a mild, and a merciful Prince, it is said of David: Lord remember
David and all his mildness. Yet in the 101. Psalm. the said David does say: In
the Psalm. 101
morning I did kill all the sinners of the earth, that I might destroy from the
City of God all that do evil. David destroyed all Gods enemies: her Majesty
has destroyed none of Gods enemies. David did it in the morning of his
kingdom: it is now farreforth days since her Majesty began to reign, and
yet it is undone. David thus doing was a man according to Gods heart. Let no
Prince look to have Gods heart, if he do the contrary to David. And if a Prince
lose Gods heart, he loses more then man's heart can think. It is said of Moses,
that he was the most mild of all men that ever ^aried in the earth, yet Moses
killed an Egyptian that molested his cou^treymen: and Moses when the golden
Calfe of Idolatrye was erected, willed them to arm their hands, and to hide
their swords in the flesh of their near kinsmen, and to make havoc of
their lives: And so there was killed three thousand, and Moses said they had
made holy their hands to God. The mildest man that ever was in the world thus
behaved him self to Gods enemies, and not withstanding the just punishment of
all these Idolaters, Moses shall ever keep still his praise, and be called
justly mild Moses. Solomon that was so mild in his laws, and so mild in his
sawes, when as an evil hauty har^ed subject named Adoniah, through feasting
and bancquetting, and popular behavior, had strengthened him self in
frendships, and partly through kinsmen, and partly through frendships, being
drawn into a great spirit to gape for the crown, had gotten the kings own
mother to speak for him to marry the Sunamite, by whom he might make title to
the crown: then mild Solomon thus answered his mother: God do so, and so 3.
Reg. 2.
to me, if Adoniah have not spoken this word against his own life. Now
therefore, as the Lord lives, which ordained me, and set me on the seat of
David my father, and made me an house, as he promised, Adoniah shall dye this
day. And he sent by the hand of Banaiah the son of ^ehoiada, and he smote
him that he dyed. Solomon can not abide that Abisag should be asked to wife for
Adoniah. For, give him that wife, and give him Salomons kingdom. Abisag is no
wife for Adoniah, Abisag is no wife for Adoniah. Thus, Solomon was wise, yet
Solomon could punish. King David him self says, that his song Psalm. 101
should be of mercy and judgment: so that that music s^andeth upon two
stringes, mercy one, and judgment the other. King David touched both the
stringes, and stroke them both, and therefore in his regiment there was a good
music. Our Prince has yet but stricken ye one string, and played upon mercy:
but if she would now strike upon both the stringes, and let her song be of
mercy, and judgment, then there would be a goodly music in her regiment, and
all things would be in a much better tune then they now are. S. Ambrose in his
book of Offices says: Beatus qui tenct mansuetudinem and rigorem. etc.
Blessed is he that keeps both mildness and rigorous justice, that by the
means of one, innocence be not oppressed, and by the means of the other,
discipline be kept. Gregory says: Let so rigor rule mildness, and so
mildness In his Morals.
beutifie rigor: let the one so take his commendation from the other, that
neither rigor be to rigorous, nor mildness to loose. Though I do not like
the Council of Trent, nor ca^ speak any great good of the Bishop of Bipont,
because he is Papisticall, yet for the execution of strait justice, doubtless
he spoke there thus very worthily: Where (says he) severity goes in
looseness, there edifying goes into destruction, custom into corruption,
law into contempt; mercy to be laughed at, godliness into hypocrisy,
preaching into silence, God into the Epicure, and the savor of lise into the
savor of death. Nazianzene says, that only force of discipline will
compresse rebels. And I do verily think that as Eleborus does best purge the
head, Aloes the stomach, Tamarisc the spleen: so discipline is the best purger
of the weal public. Ben sira an Hebrician, in his moral precepts says
thus: Correct a wise man with a nodde, and a fool with a clobbe. If these
Northren rebels had had any sober wit in their head, by this time so many
noddes, and so many nots, would have stayed them. But it is well enough
considered, I think, of those that have most cause to consider it, that
nodding will not serve, nor becking will not serve, nor checking will not
serve, therefore it must be a clobbe, or it must be an hatchet, or it must be
an halter, or something it must be, or else of a surety some of their heads
will never be quiet. As it is true, that two and two make four, that when the
sun is in the midst of the heaven, it is noonetime, that every part of the
circle differs equally from the center, that when the sun rises it is
morning: so it is infallible true, that no perfect Papist ca^ be to any
Christian Prince a good subject.

Every one that is a good subject must The first reason.
be upon a right conscience a good subject: But all those of the Papistrie
have their consciences sered with that hot iron whereof Papists can not be good
subjects.
Paul speaks, they have adust and corrupt consciences: therefore they can be
no good subjects.

Again, who soever will be a subiect^ The second.
for conscience sake, as all true subjects must be, that conscience must be
informed by the word of God: (...) Papists are not informed by Gods word but
falsely informed: therefore they can not be true subjects.

Again, he can not be a true subject The third.
that can loose him self from his duty to his Prince when he list: but the
Pope at all times will dispense with his, and discharge them of all duties to
all men: therefore they can be no good subjects, but by the Popes permission
are subjects or not s^ctes, and play at under and over with their Princes as
they list.

Again: No man can serve two masters. The fourth.
The Pope is one master, and the Prince is an other (for their laws be in
diverse points quite contrary) therefore he that will be a perfect Papist,
must ned^s be an halting subject to our Prince.

Again, they hold this for infallible The fifth.
and unflexible, that, Fides non est seruanda cum haercticis: troth is not to
be kept with heretics: But our Prince is a Gospeller Prince which they call
an heretic: therefore they mean infallibly not to keep any troth with our
Prince.

Again, both they and we hold this, The sixth
that none ought to keep company with any exco^m^icate person: But her majesty
self is excommunicate by the Pope, and they think in conscience y^ the Pope
can not err: therefore their conscience, whilst they are Papists, will not
let the^ think the Prince worthy of their company: then they will not be her
subjects, and her vassals, as in deed they ought to be.

The worst traitors to God, and most rebels to the Prince, are those Papists.
Upon them therefore first, and principally let her draw out her sword, and by
^en siras counsel, since they be so great fools, and will never learn their
duty, let them in Gods good name feel the punishment of a clubbe, an hatchet,
or an halter, and in so doing, I dare say God shall be highly pleased. And thus
much of being naked one way, that is, to be without armor: of bearing of
weapon: of fighting: of y^ prince to draw forth her sword: that mildness^ and
justice may kiss one an other, and be in one personage right well, that
policy and divinity would have Gods and the Princes enemies punished: that
the ^pistes are those chief enemies, and therefore first to be punished.

And now will I speak that Adam was naked without apparel. And here it That
Adam was without apparel.
shall not be needful to confute the Anabaptists, that would have men to go
naked, because Adam was so in ye first and best state of man. I need not to
busy my self in this point, because our Savior him self went apparelled in
this world: for we read of a woman that touched the hemme of his garment. And
Peter, like a good shamefast man, when he had been a fishing with his coat of,
he dressed him self, and so came to our Savior. The use of apparel is very
lawful, and the abuse very unlawful. And because I do undertake to speak of
apparel, and in the Court of apparel, the Court will look that I should
handle the matter somewhat solemnly: but not hanging on the courts doom in
divinity. I will go forwards (in deed) to speak of apparel: and to begin,
I will divide. All apparel is either Churchly, or civil: Touching Apparel
divided.
churchly apparel, after a fashion it is ordered. Touching civil apparel, it
is either for war, or peace. Warly apparel I have spoken of in that branch
of my sermon going before. Then, to speak of civil apparel, in peace: that
is, either abroad, or here in the princes house. To speak of apparel, or
things abroad, as they do not move the eye, because we see them not: so
neither commonly the mind, because we mark the^ not. But to speak of things
here present as the eye does see it, so happily by Gods grace your minds will
mark it. And now I have made but a poor remainder to my self to speak of.
For what have I left my self to speak of? Against the abuse of apparel in
the princes house. And they make it doubtful, whether I may speak against
that, or no. For all those that be in kings houses do account of them selves
as exempt persons from controlement of preachers, and they will seem to be
privileged from the xj. chapter of Saint Matthew: where it is said: They that
wear Mat. 11.
soft clothing, are in kings houses. But, me thinks our Savior Christ him
self should not have seemed to speak these words to serve their turn that
be in kings houses. For me thinks he should reason thus: John the Baptist
eats wild honey, and is clad in hard apparel, and not such soft raiment as
these tender courtlinges do wear: therefore it is likely that John is no
reed, but a constant man in religion. An other argument may be drawn fitly by
this. Courtiers in kings houses do wear soft and delicate apparel, and fare
not so hard, nor wear not so heard as John does: therefore these milkesoppes
are likely enough to prove reeds, (if they come under duresse) and not hard
rocks in religion. If I reason with Christ, I may properly thus reason: and if
I should reason without Christ, me think you Christians should have no further
delight to here me reason. But let me take some further pain with this
proposition. Those that be in kings houses do wear soft apparel: ergo they
may wear soft apparel. If those that be in kings houses be logitians, they
will never let this go for an argument. For what an argument is this? It is
worn in a kings house: therefore it may be worn. Or thus: It is Practices in
kings houses are not presidentes.
done in a kings house: therefore it may be done. Many things have been done
in kings houses, that might not be done, and then this argument is naught.

In king Abimelechs house, Abraham so godly and worshipful a father, could
scarsely be admitted to the kings presence, to deliver up his words to the
king self, because peradventure he had not courtly port enough about him. In
king Pharaos house, Joseph swear by the life of Pharao, and therefore it was
likely that the rest of the courtiers swear lusty oaths round about the court.
In an other king Pharaos house, Iannes and Mambres wrong and shouldered at the
truth, and were borne out by the courtiers to do so still. In king Alexanders
house, there was one Philalexander, and an other (...), one loved Alexander
well, the other loved the king, one loved the man well, the other the man's
honor well: but he that loved the man well, (...) down him that loved the ma^s
honor well, even to the hard walls. In king David's house, Ioab abused y^ kings
favor to bring in Absolo^ a (...) traitor, which a^r had like to have been an
utter neckebreake to the whole state. In king Ezekias house, Ezekias him self
lay^ (...) heart to his gold, and thought it an heavens bliss to survey his
iewelles. In king Nabuchadnezers house, the diet was so much, that Daniel was
feign to draw him self a side to an other kind of table. In king Achabs
house, the prophet that came to give the king counsel, was taken by the sleeue
by one of the courtiers, and demanded in Gods name, who should make him the
kings counselor. And generally in kings houses, The condition of all
Preachers that preach the truth.
of the preachers this is true which Martial the poet said of his friends: My
friends, ye will me to speak the truth, and enbolden me to speak the truth.
The truth is this, that you cannot abide to here the truth. In king Herodes
house, my lady Herodiada could command half a realm, for footing and
frisking. Amos spoke of those in kings houses in his 6. chapter, when he spoke
thus: ye that sleep in beds of Iuory, Amos. 6.
and play the wantons on your conches: ye that warble to the tune of the Vial,
and quaffe of wine by whole goblettes full: ye that supple your joints with
the best kind of oil, and have no carke upon the smart of Joseph. In kings
houses commonly be such

(...) of the time. But I will show them of a better new apparel, and if they
once take conceit in that, they will easily here us speak against these
trifels, and esteem them as trifles. And though it be but one suit of apparel,
yet Iwys it is better then all the gorgious wardrobes that be here in our
Queens court: and Tertullian has shaped them that suit. In his ^ooke of the
attire of women he writes ^hus: Prodite vos feminae. etc. Come ye forth ye
women, having your bewties bettered with the helps and ornaments of the
Apostles, taking whitlines of simplicity, and rednes of shamefastenes, having
your eyes painted with shamefastenes, and your spirits with secrecy, putting
into your ears the word of God, tying to your necks the yoke of Christ. Put
under your necks to your husbands, and ye shall be well apparelled. Have always
what to do in your hands, and fasten your feet at home, and ye shall be
better liked of, then if ye were in gold. Clad your selves with the silk of
sincerity, with the satin of sanctity, with the purple of probitie: Thus
prune and prick ye up your selves, and God him self shall become your
paramour. Concerning both men's, and women's apparel, this may be said. Saint
Paul says: God made meats, and God made the belly, and that God will destroy
both the meats, and the belly. So say I: God made apparel, and God made the
back, and he will destroy both the one and the other. Yea, those heads that
are now to be seen for their tall and bushy plumes, and that other sex that
have fire fresh golden caules so sheene and glosing, give me but an hundred
years, nay, half an hundred years, and the earth will cover all these heads
before me, and mine own to. And thus much of apparel.

And now of the effects of being naked: which is to blushe, or not to blushe.
The clear and crimelesse conscience does not blushe. A criminous conscience
does or should blushe. So Adam afterward blushed, and the Publican durst not
lift up his eyes. And Paul writes of the sins of the Romans: In quibus
nu^c erubescitis. For which sins ye Romans do now blush. Jesus the son of
Sirach says, that we should blushe of whoredom before father and mother, to
make a lie before a Prince, to sin before ye people, to offend before the
congregation, to do unrighteously before a companion or friend, to be reproved
for giving or taking, to lie with a man's elboes upon the bread, not to salute
one that has saluted, to look upon harlots, to turn away thy face from thy
kinsmen, to look upon other men's wives, to trifle with maidens, to take and not
to give, to vpbraide thy friend with that thou have given, to brute fames
abroad, or to disclose secrets. These things (says he) are shameful
things, and matter of blushing. More then these things he does not rehearse.
But the catholic and common corruption of this world does yield forth far
many more blushing matters, and mutch greater blushing matters. O, if I should
go about, to bid all states and sorts of people to blushe: and if I should do
it, as it should be done, and in so many points as I should bid them, I should
find it a too too cold occupation, and a deed of least thanks: but of that
I least reckon. But I say very truly, that if my flesh were flesh of stones,
if I had that ruffling tongue which Esaias had, or that noble eloquence which
Nazianzene had, or that heroical spirit which Martin Luther had, If my tongue
were many tounges, and my mouth an hundredth mouths, if my voice were of good
strong iron, and my sides of steddie brass, yet it were in vain for me to
undertake to make a great number of enormious malefactors to blushe, so
graceless are their foreheades, and so untaught to blushe. Howbeit to those
that be of a more honest nature, and prone to repentance, I will make most
fair besechinges, and pray them most heartily, to rem^ber their manifold
former sins, the filthiness, ugliness, and uncleanness of sin: to blushe
at that which is past, and to be ashamed of that which shall come. And I will
tell ye one general way, the which if ye take, ye shall not blushe, neither in
this life, neither in that day when shame and confusion shall come upon the
wicked: if ye take it not, blushing and confusion of saces shall be yours for
ever, and that is out of the Prophet David: Tunc non erubesca^ cum respexero ad
omnia mandata tua: Then shall I not blushe (says he) when I have a regard to
all thy commandments. To him that would avoid that shame, then the which
there is no greater punishment, he must not be a mongrell, or a mean man, but
he must run to all the commandments, even as the Cherubins did ouerlooke
all the propitiatory, even as ye Paschall Lamb was all eaten up: so says
James in his second chapt: He that offends in one of these, is guilty of all.
So in the 20. of Deuteronomie, he is cursed that does not all Gods
commandments. Those Kings of Israel that took down the Idol of Baal and
yet worshipped y Calves of Jeroboam, are despised of God. Tertullian in a book
of the Trinity says thus: You must not lean unto one part, and lean from an
other part. He shall not hold the perfect truth who ^tteth out any portion of
the truth. Nazianzene to the Arrians says: Aut totum honora aut totum abijce.
Either honor Christ wholly, or cast Christ wholly away. I can not abide half
holiness, I would have thee wholly holy. Again, as we ought to run to all
Gods commandments, and embrace all the truth: so we ought to do it with all
our body, with all our soul, and with our tongue, that we ought to believe the
truth, and to speak the truth. There be many Gospellers at these days that
will be content to take that name, and as they say believe so: but they will not
make their talk of Christ, or of divinity, for that is no gentlemanly talk,
no fellowlike talk, no courtlike talk. But ye truth is, the truth must be
believed, and the truth must be talked. If they be ashamed to talk of Christ
before men, Christ will be ashamed to talk of them before his heavenly father.
Tertullian in his book of prescription against heretics, says thus: It is
not expedient for him to leave speaking of the truth that does remember the
latter day, where an open reason must be given of the truth. The Euaungelist
does say? Ye shall show forth his death whilst he come. Even to the coming of
Christ our talk ought to be of Christ, and of Christ's death. Basil in a
certain Epistle does say: They be traitors to the truth whosoever do not
answer readily and truly of religion, and matters in divinity. Prosper
Acquitanicus in his sentences says: He that seeks peace from God, let him be
at peace with him self, so that he have not one thing upon his tongue, and an
other in his heart. The truth is truly to be believed, and truly to be spoken.
Vigilius in the end of his second book, says thus: Nihil cordi prodest
credere. etc: It is to no purpose for a man to believe with his heart to justice,
except confession be made with his mouth to salvation. Thereupon David says: I
have not hidden thy justice in my heart, thy truth and thy saving health have I
spoken.

Of the greuaunces that this Realm feels at this time, and is like yet more
to feel, other men will allege other causes: but if my life lay on it*, I
would answer that these two things have been the causes of this plague of
pestilence of this rebels sword, and what soever mischief is else to come: The
one cause, that men have not gone entirely to all Gods commandments, but
like mammerers, mongrels, and halters, taking, and forsaking at their own
choice, and by their own man's judgment: The other, that though they have
taken on them a pro^ession of the truth, and have not denied any part of the
Scripture, and have been well enough content that Gods word should run, yet
them selves are in Gods cause so faint and couragelesse, that they will not
open their lips to speak for Christ. And because we have halted with God,
and dealt losely with God, therefore God has duly dealt thus with us. To us God
might cry: Expectans expectaui, or Tollerans tolleraui: I have long looked for
your ame^ding, and I have long borne with your evil doing. But it is truly
said of God, that as he has leaden feet, so he has iron hands. He commes
slowly, but when he commes, he pays home surely. For this x^. years now
past, who has led the life of delights? What nation under heaven has been
happy but our English nation. Our God loved us, our God bare with us, and our
Gods face was upon us. But even as the Trojans, when their City was flung
flower flat to the ground, and leueled to the soil, then they began to speak
thus: Troia fuit, Troia fuit: There was a Troy, there was a Troy, or we had a
Troy, we had a Troy. So we may say: Facies Dei fuit: We had Gods face: we had
it. As much to say, as now we have it not. But what is Gods face? That which is
described in the xxvi. of Leuiticus. Respiciam ad vos and fecundabo vos. etc. I
will turn my face to ye, and I will make ye fruitful: I will give ye rain in
season, and peace in the earth. The sword shall not rain in the land, if ye
will walk in my statutes and keep my precepts. Plentifulnesse and goodness,
and all Gods benefits: that is Gods face. That face we have now lost. And
what have we then found, or what shall we have? If the face be gone, the back
must come: we shall have Gods back. But what is Gods back? Even that which
is written in Leuiticus: Gods back.
If ye turn your backs to me, I will turn my back to you, and those that
hate you shall ouerrule you. I will Leuit. 26.
send the pestilence in the midst of you, and you shall be given over into your
enemies hands. I will make your heanen iron, and your earth brass. I will
break the staff of your bread, and ye shall never be full. This is Gods
back. But what is Gods back? That which may be said out of Job: An houngry
people shall eat your harvest, and one in armor shall drink up your riches,
God will write bitterness against ye, and consume you with the sins of your
youth. There shall be a sound of terror in your ears: fire shall dry up your
branches, you shall conceue sorrow, and bring forth iniquity. Your wrinckels
shall bear witness of your misery: your chappes shall be smitten. They shall
rush upon you like gyantes. Shame shall be powered out upon ye, and reuiling
mouths open at you. Canker shall be your father, and Consumption shall be your
mother. Your light shall be put out, and your flame shall not be bright. Hunger
shall sit upon your ribs, and devour your beauty, and consume your arms.
Your bread in your belly shall be turned into gaul, and your riches which you
have eaten up, shall God put out of your paunches. You shall no more see rivers
of flowing, nor brooks of honey. Ye shall smart, and yet be not consumed,
according to your many misdeedes you shall be many ways punished: this is Gods
back. But what is Gods back? That which the prophet Esaias says: you shall be
sold in your wickedness, and ye shall be turned over in your sins, and your
flood shall be dried ^ac. 3.
up etc: that is Gods back. But what is Gods back? That which the prophet
Jeremy said in his fifth chapter: In thee Ierem. 5.
will I bruise the horse, and the horseman, the wagon and the wagoner, the man,
and the woman, the oldeman and and the child, the young man, and the maid,
the husbandman, and his yoke oxen, the captain and the magistrate, one post
shall meet an other and one messenger shall come after an other, to bring
tydinges to the king of Babylon that his battle bars are broken, and that
his chief cheuelers are sore troubled: This is Gods back. But what is Gods
back? That which the prophet Ezechiel said. Tertia pars tui morietur peste.
One of thy three parts shall dye with the plague of pestilence in the midst of
thee: an other part shall dye with the sword round about thee: the other part
I will scatter into every wind: that is, I will destroy by every easy
occasion. This is Gods back. But what is Gods back. That which the prophet
Os^ said in his fifth chapter: I will be a moth^ (...)* im, and I will be a
canker to the house of Judah. But what is Gods back* That which was said in the
first chapter of Miche. I will lay down Samaria like Iich. 1.
a heap of stones, I will draw her stones down into a dale, and I will make
naked her foundation. But what is Gods back? That which the prophet Sophoni
Sophoni. 1
said in his first chapter to the tribe of Judah: I will make them smart that
have sinned from the Lord. Their blood shall be powered out like earth, and their
bodies like dust. But what is Gods back? That which the prophet Zachary said
in the eleventh chap: Assumam mihi duas virgas: I will take to me two whippes,
that is, many whippes. But what is Gods back? That which the prophet Nahum
said in his 3. chap. to Nah. 3:
Niniuy: Uox flagelli et vox impetus rotae: The voice of a whippe, and the
voice of a rumbling wheel, the praunsing of horses, the iumping of chariotes.
The horsemen lifting up both the the brandishing blade of the sword, and the
glistering spear, many men wounded, many corpses, and carcases without number.
But what is Gods back? That which the prophet Malechy Malac. 3.
said in his third chapter: Accedam ad vos in iudicio: I will come unto you in
judge meant, and I will be a swift witness against al of you. But what is Gods
back? That which I will tell you. Our wickdnesse shall eat up this best
religion, eat up our best most dear, and natural prince, eat up all our
good counselors, all our wise and faithful preachers, and eat up all that
good is in this common wealth. This is Gods back. This, this, good christians
is Gods heavy back. Heavy it is, God wott to those that shall feel it* and I
dare not say to England that it will be any lighter, because England will be
come no better. But when that heaviness shall come upon England, which has
come upon other realms, for the same causes that it may worthily come upon
England, let England then remember it was foretold her that God had a heavy
back. And let no man here present, or where so ever else, think that it was
womanish or childish in hagar to weep, Quia vidit tergum Dei* because she did
see Gods back: for if God do turn his back so long upon England as he has
turned his face upon England.

Quis mirmidanu^ dolapu^ue aut duri miles ^lissi temperet a ^achrimis?

What Mirmadon soldier is he, or what soldier of Dolap land, or which of
flintie Ulysses soldiers that shall be able to forbear weeping? Nay it will
wring tears from the eyes of the most retchlest Atheistes, and obdurable
Papists in all this realm, be they never so forlorn and flintie. But these
things be heavy things An abridge meant of the (...).
and matters of weeping: howbeit if men will reform themselves to do better, I
will speak more cheerie, and sweeter. For if Adam will know the baseness, and
badnesse of his metal, the misery that he has in this base and badde flesh,
and that long he can not tarry in this base, bad, and miserable flesh, if
being thus heavy and ouerloden, he will resort unto Christ the comforter, if
as God has permitted the use of weapon, to man, so weapon may be worn, and
vnshethed to the strengthening of the realm, and wars may be fought, that
Gods praises may be quietly celebrated in great congregations, if Princes and
Magistrates will wear their weapons to purpose, and draw them out for Gods
sake, if the safety of the people may be minded, and names of mildness and
mercifulness not blind Princes eyes, and withdraw them from their duties, if
Gods enemies, and lawless leude persons, may be punished, if Papists, who be
so, may truly be taken to be greatest traitors to God, and greatest to the
Prince, and feel and be fed accordingly, if men will labor to lead such lives
that they need not to blushe, if those which have loved evil will fall to some
honesty, and blushe and be ashamed of that which is past, and likewise shame
to do the like hereafter, if they will so run to all Gods commandments,
and so entirely, and without hypocrisy, with zzeale and courage of spirit,
profess God with all the functions of body and soul, as they ought to do:
then no more of Gods back, we may dry up our tears, God him self most
willingly will do away his own back. ^arken (O loving and loved Christian
brethren) we shall escape Gods back, Gods heavy back, we shall see Gods
face, Gods cherefull face: as All these speeches are in the prophets.
the Prophet David says: We shall see ^ the brave beutie of our God. (...) ^al
see it, and clap our hands to have seen it. We shall have as much
blessedness in seeing, and ioying in our noble Queen, as ever (...). Salomons
servants had* in seeing the face of their sovereign master. Gods word shall
ru^ne, our sun shall rise, and our sun shall set no more, we shall wash our
ways with butter and honey, and oil will gush out of our stony rocks. Our
peace shall be like a flood, and the justice of the land shall be like gulfes
of the sea, the seed of our people shall be as the hears of their head, as
the stars of the sky, as the sand of the shores, as the grass of the
ground, and our race shall never be raced out. Our soul shall be led into a
fair green field, and Christ our great shepeheard will make us draw near to
the waters of comfort, he will make us lie down on the soft wholesome grass,
he will take us and feed us, and we shall be fed full, even in the fat
mountains of Israel, he will kiss us with a kiss of his own mouth, his
right hand will take hold on us, and his left hand will uphold us, he will
call us his beloved, and let us sleep as long as we list, we shall sleep in
great safety, for the Sun ^ by the day time, nor y^ ^ us by the night time.
^ we shall, though it be (...) ^ the Cockatrice, and w^ ^ ^rample on the
Dragon, (...) the (...) Lion. God will so ravish us in t^ ^weetenesse of his
ointmentes, that our days shall be as the days of heaven. The wisdom of God
will delight to play amongst the sons of men, the strength of God will be
the chariots and knights of Israel. It is in vain for man to be against us,
for he will be our Emanuell, that is, God with us: To whom the prince of
peace, the father of eternity, the glorious messenger of the great coun cell,
be all honor and dominion both now and ever more.

Amen.

