AN ALARVM TO THE LAST IVDGEMENT.

OR An exact discourse of the second coming of Christ, and of the general and
remarkable Signs and Forerunners of it past, present, and to come; soundly
and soberly handled, and wholesomely applied.

Wherein diverse deep Mysteries are plainly expounded, and sundry curiosities
are duly examined, answered and confuted.

By T. D. Bachelor of Divinity.

LVKE 21.28. When these things begin to come to pass, then hold up your heads,
for your redemption draws near.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Fox in Paul's Churchyard. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND REligious, the Major, and Aldermen of Harwich in
Essex, and to all the devout and zealous Christians and Parishioners, both of
Douercourt and Harwich, a plentiful increase of all inward and outward
happiness.
ALBEIT (Right Worshipful, and most dearly beloved) some have causelessly
doubted of, and others have damnably denied, a maine and principal Article of
the Christian Faith; namely, the visible and glorious descent of our Lord Jesus
from heaven to judge both the quick and the dead, whose coming we thirstingly
and continually expect and pray for; yet it is clear and very demonstrable, by
the current of sacred Scripture, and by due observance of the ruinous estate of
the world, and the daily accomplishment of the forerunners and general Signs
of the last day; that the ends of the world are come upon us, 1. Cor. 10.11.
That the end of all things is at hand, 1. Pet. 4.7.
and that these are the very last times: For

First, if in the Apostles times it was so near his period and consummation,
yea consumption; how much more near is it in our times, since that so many
hundreds of years are long ago expired? And what if the Lord seems to stay
long, and to defer his coming, yet this delay is nothing, being compared
with Eternity, and a thousand years with God are but as one day, 2. Pet. 3.8.
and the Lord will in the mean time, have the number of his Elect fulfilled,
and the sins of the Reprobate grow to their full measure and ripeness.

Secondly, it is certain that the glorious Gospel has, even in the Apostles
times, been solemnly published and proclaimed to the whole (habitable) world,
so that such a solemn and general Legacy and Embassage is not again to be
expected.

Thirdly, the ancient and mighty Roman Empire, that in former ages had the
command of some two hundred and fifty Countries, Kingdoms and Provinces, is
now so impaired, wasted and weakened, that it has lost all his former Majesty
and Dominion, and retains only a bare and naked image, and picture, of that
it formerly enjoyed: 2 Thessalonians. 2.^.
So that that, which by it puissance kindred Antichrists coming, being taken
away, and the thousand years of Satan's binding being expired, Apoc. 20.2
Antichrist is confessedly come.

Fourthly, Antichrist (I mean that Italian Priest and Romish Caiphas) has
been (by his excess of tyranny and superstition) revealed, even in the year
of Christ, 607, and sithence; but from the year 1517, unto our days, he has
been not so much discovered, as by the Breath of Gods mouth, that is, by the
Preaching of the Word, been confuted and confounded: and not withstanding that
the busy and restless. Jesuits, Priests, Seminaries, study and strive to
recover their losses, and heal the wounds of the euer-dying Beast, yet it is
but a lightning before death, and periturum gaudium. Ester 6.13.
The Romish Haman has begun to fall before Mordecai of the seea of the
Jews, yea, to fall before the reformed Christians, and therefore he shall
never prevail against them but certainly fall before them.

Fifthly, sin and iniquity every where abounds, and is grown excessive and
impudent: all things are out of square, all flesh has corrupted his way, and
(whether we respect Doctrine, Discipline, and (specially) corruption of
manners) in most Coasts and Countries, there is almost no faith left on the
earth.

Sixthly, All the Elements, all the creatures, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Plants,
Birds, Fowls, Fishes, etc. groan grievously under the burden of man's sins,
Romans 8.20.21.22.23.
and are wonderfully perverted by man; yea, exceedingly decayed in their
proprieties, virtues, efficacies, and therefore watchfully wait for their
plenarie and final deliverance from this bondage of corruption.

Lastly, (to pass over in silence many other Arguments, yea, and some few
Signs shortly to be fulfilled, whereof I distinctly entreat in the ensuing
Treatise) the just Judge of the world must needs give perfect rest and glory to
his troubled Saints and servants; 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8.
and of necessity render vengeance unto his, and their, implacable enemies.

Wherefore (my dearly beloved Brethren and Parishioners) let us be wise
hearted and awaken our selves; and the rather, because God (in his wisdom)
has deservedly concealed and kept from us, the knowledge of the set hour,
day, yea year, let us (casting away all unprofitable and vain curiosities)
take notice of the accomplishment of the Signs and Tokens of the last
judgment, as they are revealed in the volume of the Bible, and seeing the last
of them to begin only to come to pass, let us reioycingly hold up our
heads, Luke 21.28.
knowing that the day of our (full) redemption draws nigh.

And that you might be more plainly and plentifully, directed and instructed
in these Doctrines and Duties, I have (in my love and Pastoral care) been
moved, to Print, Publish, and Inscribe unto you, this small Treatise following,
purposing (if need require) hereafter to enlarge it. And seeing that, by
Divine Providence, the ample charge of Douercourt and Harwich is committed unto
me, a poor Minister of the Gospel, I therefore, by the help of God, will
carefully and conscionably discharge my Office and Ministry. And I doubt not,
but that you generally, having with such contentment received my doctrine, and
so kindly and respectively entertained me, will continue, yea, happily proceed
in the work of your love; which will greatly redound unto Gods glory, and much
tend to my encouragement. If my reverend, grave, learned, and diligent
Predecessor, your late Pastor of blessed memory, has planted you, I will do
my best endeavor to water you, and build you up in the faith, referring the
success and increase unto the blessing of the Almighty.

But being so well persuaded of you all, and expecting all good things from so
well disposed and zealous people, I cease to use further speech, and I withal,
betake and commend you unto the direction and protection of the Prince of
Pastors, the Bishop of your souls, our Lord Jesus Christ, who always bless
and preserve you. From Harewich in Essex June 12. 1615.

Your loving and careful Pastor: THOMAS DRAXE.

An Alarm to the last Judgment.
THE FIRST CHAPTER Containing the Preface.
BEFORE that we treat and discourse of the general Signs and Forerunners
of the Last Judgment, it shall not be impertinent, in few words, to show and
demonstrate the Subject it self: for where there is no Substance, there are no
Accidents; and where there is no Foundation, there is no House, or Building.
Therefore that the truth of these Signs may more manifestly appear, and that
we may more orderly proceed; I thus, by warrant of Gods Word, and weight of
invincible arguments, euince, and prove, these three maine principles of Faith
and Religion. First, that there shall be an universal Judgment, wherein all
reasonable creatures shall be called to an account. Secondly, that JESUS CHRIST
the Son of God, is appointed of God, to be the Judge of the Judge, both of the
quick and the dead. Lastly, that this world (in respect of the fashion, form,
and corruptible qualities thereof) shall have an and, and come to destruction.
That there is a set and prefixed day of Judgment (though unto us profitably
unknown) and that there shall be a general Judgment, I thus declare.

First, the sacred Scriptures are pregnant and plentiful in this point, Job
19.25. Psalm. 9.8. Isa. 66.15. Dan. 12.2. Math. 25.31. Luke 18.17. John
5.28.29. and chap. 12.44. Act. 17.31. Romans 2.16 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.17. and chap.
5.2. 1. Pet. 4.8. Tit. 2.13. Apoc. 20.11. 12.13. Heb. 9.27.28.

Secondly, the doctrine of the last Judgment, Heb. 6.2.
is a very ancient, and principal Article of the Apostles Catechism; and
therefore no person, unless he be a mere Athiest, or Infidel, can, or will
deny it.

Thirdly, the General Resurrection, the necessary and immediate antecedent of
the judgment, Sublatis destinatis ad finem, tollitur finis.
and those that shall arise and appear in judgment, who are the proper object
of it, do enforce it; yea, and what arguments serve to prove the Resurrection,
the same justify the last judgment.

Fourthly, the general and particular judgments, calamities, and punishments,
both in the old and new Testament, and in all succeeding ages, are Types,
Similitudes, and Foresignifications of it. Of this kind were Noah's Flood (or
Deluge) wherein the world was drowned; the ouer-whelming of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians in the red Sea; the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah; the destruction
of Jerusalem; the ruin of the four great Monarchies of the world, that
afflicted Gods chosen; and of late time, the sinking and dispearsing of the
Spanish invincible Armado, Anno Christi 1588, in the English Seas, and by the
coasts of Ireland.

Fifthly, unless there should be a final judgment, wherein every man is to
receive a reward according to his works, God could not declare himself
perfectly just. For all sins in this world committed, come not to light:
neither are all punished that are apparent. Tyrants, and Oppressors; yea
Christ's Arch-enemies, the Turk and Pope, etc. live long, and prosper in their
wickedness. And if God should censure all sins that are done in the earth,
then no other judgment would be expected: wherefore the Lord bears long
with sinners, and suffers the offenses of the Reprobate to grow rotten ripe,
that he may fully and finally punish and plague them at the last day.
Forbearance is no quittance: Christ comes with woollen feet (i. fair and
softly) but strikes with Iron hands, that is deadly.

Sixthly, unless there come a day of general release and absolution for the
godly, yea a day of full deliverance, and glorious triumph, God cannot declare
himself completely and infinitely merciful. For it seems to go well with
the wicked, in this world, and ill with the good: The godly are oppressed and
persecuted, troubled and tormented, molested, martyred, massacred, and both
inwardly and outwardly afflicted; therefore the just Lord cannot but at length
reward the patience and piety of his servants: Great shall their reward be in
heaven: Math. 5.5.
He shall recompense the lightness of their momentany afflictions, Rom 8.18.
2. Cor. 4 17 18.
with an exceeding and super-excellent weight of glory.

Seventhly, the fear, trembling, astonishment, horror of conscience and
dreadful despair in many malefactors (specially persecutors and murderers)
even of those that escape the judgment of the Magistrate, does evidently argue
that there will come a day of reckoning, and that there is an hell fire,
whereof these are certain flashings, and forerunners.

Lastly (to be brief) the children of God look and long for, groan and pant
for this day and time; which is the day of their Marriage, of the bodies ascent
into heaven, and of their entrance and inauguration into the Kingdom of Glory.
These spiritual sighs and sobs, Romans 8.22.
are special effects of Gods spirit, infallible characters of Gods children,
and the very earnest of our inheritance. Inward desires make a louder sound in
Gods ears, then bare words uttered with the tongue, and therefore cannot miss
the mark, viz. eternity of blessedness.

Now that Jesus Christ, not only as he is God, whereby in the decree,
efficacy, and authority of the judgment, he is equal with God the Father,
and the Holy Ghost; but also as he is man, in regard of the sentence to be
pronounced, and the visible execution of the judgment; is and shall be the
Judge both of the quick and dead, the Scriptures put it out of question, Dan.
7.9.10. Ioh. 5.27. Act. 10.42. 2. Cor. 5.10. 2. Tim. 4.1.

Secondly, it is an Article and foundation of faith, firmly to be believed.

Thirdly, it is one end, and that a principal one, of Christ's Resurrection and
Ascension: It is a part of his Kingly Office which he shall then most openly
and eminently execute.

Fourthly it stands with all equity, that He that, when he lived on earth,
Mat. 26.64
and was most unjustly judged, accused, indicted, condemned and executed,
should at length, gloriously, and in the view of all the world, judge,
arraigne, condemn, and fee execution done upon his enemies.

Lastly, to stop the mouths of, and to put all Atheists to silence, the
Heathenish Prophetess Sibylla testifies as much, saying (...), etc.
(...).


That is: Christ shall come in the clouds
In glory, with his sinlesse Angels.


And that this miserable and corruptible world, with all the contemned
creatures shall (not in respect of matter and substance, but outward form, and
accidental qualities) have an end and consumption, thus I compendiously make
it manifest. First, by express Scripture: Secondly, by Argument. Heaven and
earth shall pass away: Mat 24.35 1. Cor. 7.31 2. Pet. 3.10
The fashion of this world passes away. The heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, the elements shall melt with heat, the earth also and the works
that are therein, shall be burnt up. Apoc. 20.11
I saw (says Saint John) a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from
whose face the heaven and earth fled away, and there was found no place for
them. Secondly, by argument, I thus make good my assertion. The world being but
a creature had a beginning, and therefore it shall have an end; Omnia orta
intereunt. The world as in the several parts, so in the whole, daily fades,
decays, weakneth, and is in an irrecouerable consumption, therefore it must
needs, at length, come to an end. A ruinous house will in tract of time fall,
and a sick body cannot hold out long. The world must be renewed at the last
day; 2. Pet. 3.
for there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth: Generatio vnius est
corraptio alterius.
Ergo the old heaven and earth must (of necessity) be first abolished. Lastly,
some of the Pagan Philosophers and Poets (whenever, or wheresoever, they had
so much light) acknowledge as much.

The Platonists held, that the world should be destroyed: so did the Sibyls
Prophecy: The Poet Ovid in the first book of his Metamorphosis, and Lucan in
the first book belli Pharsalici, justify as much; and man's sin has justly
deserved and procures it.

CHAP. II. Of the Signs and Forerunners of the last judgment in general.
ALBEIT the day and hour of the last judgment is unknown to all men, to the
very Angels of heaven, Mat. 24.36
yea albeit the Son himself being on earth knew it not; Mar. 13.32
yea, although no man knows the year when the Son of man will come to
judgment (For it is not for us to know the times and seasons which the Father
has put in his own power) yet the Lord Jesus, Acts 1.7.
that he might not so much leave the wicked his irreconciliable enemies,
without all excuse and pretense of ignorance, and withal appall, affrighten
and astonish them, specially when his second coming nearly approaches, does
kindly and lovingly forewarne his children, that they should neither be amated,
nor found unready (for a man forewarned is half armed.) And that he might
comfort and encourage them against the manifold scandales, troubles, and
miseries of this present life; He has (I say) in the Scriptures, left and
given them many general and notable Signs, Tokens and Forerunners of his
coming, which they daily do, and always ought, to take notice of, that when
they see these things come to pass they might hold up Luke 21.28.
their heads, knowing that their Redemption draws near.

These Signs and Prasagia are like to so many tender Green, Mat. 24.32
and leauy branches of the Fig Tree that shewerh the Summer of their happiness
to be nigh. These are like the white and yellow ears of corn that declare
the Harvest to be at hand; and these are (as it were) so many sounding
Trumpets, or Alarums, A similitude.
to awaken us. And as the Sun being about to arise, first sends forth his
bright beams a far off, and enlightneth the East; so our Lord Jesus the
Sun of righteousness, does before his second coming, send certain general
Signs, and (as I may say) Herbingers, that men might the more carefully wait
for, and more dilligently address and prepare themselves against that time.
The Tempests threaten before that they arise: the Houses crack before they
fall, and the Smoke goes before the flame: So these Signs and Fore-warnings
go before the consummation of the world.

These Signs and Forerunners are of three sorts: namely, those that are
already accomplished and fulfilled: Secondly, those that are mixed signs and
praedemonstrations in continual action and motion; and those that yet remain
in their due time to be performed. Of these plainly, and in order: But (that I
may clear the coast, and proceed with more dexterity and profit) two
principal questions by many moved, are to be seasonably decided. Questions
First, why God does not, and will not, reveal unto any the hour, day, year,
and time of the last judgment. Secondly, why the Lord seems so long to delay
and put off that day and judgment; especially seeing that he promises to
come quickly, and that his children so long wait and so earnestly pray for
that time.

I answer to the former question: The Lord will have the day, hour, year, etc.
of the universal judgment concealed. First, because it is the Glory of God to
conceal a thing, Prou. 25.2.
and not to reveal some things before the event, which is the best and surest
interpreter. Secondly, that he might bridle and repress the impudent
boldness, and rash curiosity of those, that vainly, yea presumptuously, pry,
and search into things forbidden, unnecessary, and impossible to be known, and
in the mean time neglect the searching out of, and the due practice of things
in the word of God revealed and commanded. Thirdly, and lastly, not only to
try and make known the modesty and humility of his dear servants, whether
that they will break into the closet of his secrets or no; but also to keep
them from the slumber of security, and to stir them up to watch for, and
prepare themselves against that day. Vtiliter (says an ancient Father) latet
vltimus dies vt obseruentur omnes dies: That is, it is for our profit that the
last day is unknown, that we may observe and watch all days.

The second question.

Why does the Lord so long defer his coming to judgment?

Ans. First that the Prophecy of the Revelation, Apoc. 6 11 and 11.10.
and of other Scriptures should be fulfilled: For heaven and earth shall pass
away, Mat. 24.35
but no point or tittle of Gods word shall pass away unaccomplished.

Secondly, that the sins and abominations of the wicked and profane, who
abuse and despise the riches of Gods goodness, Romans 2.4.
forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
them to repentance: and who mispend and lavish their time that God has
allotted for their repentance; Ioh. 14.22.
might be left without plea or excuse, and that their sins being heaped up to
heaven, might be punished with eternity of torments.

Thirdly, that none of the Predestinate should perish, 1. Tim, 2, 4
but that in this world they should come to the acknowledgement of the truth,
2, Pet, 3, 9.
to repentance, and so consequently to salvation.

Lastly, to try, declare, cherish, and exercise, the patience, faith, hope, and
charity of his chosen, that live amongst such an infinite number of lewd,
Atheistical, scandalous, superstitious and venomous people, and yet by the
grace of God, directing and preserving them, are blameless, Phil. 2.15.
harmless, without rebuke, and shine as light in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Nation.

CHAP. III. The first general Sign, the desolation and destruction of the
Temple and City of Jerusalem, and the utter overthrow of the Jews
Commonwealth.
THE first general Sign of the end of the world, Mat. 24.12
is the utter ruin and laying waste of the City of God, Mat. 13.12
Jerusalem, of the holy Temple, and the ruin of the Jews policy and
Commonwealth. Dan. 9.26.
The Temple and City was destroyed by Titus and Vespasian, Roman Emperors,
the nine and thirtieth year after the Ascension of our Lord into heaven: And
the Jews ever since have been led away captive into all nations, Luke 21.24
and Jerusalem has been trodden down of the Gentiles, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.
and the wrath of God is come upon them to the full, now whether the believing
Jews shall toward the end of the world, be temporally restored into their
own Country, rebuild Jerusalem, and have a most reformed, and flourishing,
Church and Commonwealth (as some by extraordinary expositions, seem to gather
out of the Scriptures) the issue and event will discover. But (to finish the
point in hand) the desolation of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, by reason
of the similitude and correspondencie, of things, persons, and events, is a
type and figure of the destruction of the world.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Preaching of the Gospel unto all Nations.
THE second general Sign is the publishing, Preaching, and proclaiming of the
blessed Gospel in and through all (the habitable, Mat. 24 14
and then known, especially the Eastern) world, by the Ministry of the
twelve Apostles: These as Christ's Ambassadors, and like twelve Beams of the
Sun of Righteousness, being effectually called to this heavenly Function,
furnished with most rare, extraordinary, and miraculous gifts above all former
Prophets, and having a Charge and Commission, with a promise annexed, Mat.
28.19.
to Teach and Baptize all Nations, Distributive*
and to Preach the Gospel to every (reasonable) creature; did accordingly
perform it, and sealed and confirmed it with their blood and martyrdom; Psalm.
19.6.
so that the line of the Apostles went out into all the earth, Col. 1.6.
and their words unto the end of the world, Romans 10.18. and prospered and was
fruitful: And since that time he that sits on the White (Triumphant) Horse,
and has a Bow in his hand, Apoc. 6.2.
and a Crown on his Head, i. the Lord Jesus, and his Vicars, viz. Christian
Kings and Emperors, have gone forth Conquering and to Conquer.

Lastly, the Lights, Lamps, Fathers and Pillars of the Primitive Church, Saint
Origin, Saint Ierom, Saint Ambrose, and others, write, and auow, that all
Nations were enlightened by the Apostles; so that the Apostolical calling and
gifts being ceased, and the Gospel once universally having been published, no
such solemn Legacy is the second time of us, or our Successors, to be
expected.

I. Aetiologia.
The Lord would hereby enlighten all Nations, and by the Arm of his Gospel
draw all the elect effectually unto him: Romans 1.16.
For the Gospel is the power of salvation to every one that believes, to the
Jew first, and also to the Greek. This is the Golden Scepter of Christ's
Kingdom which when it is holden forth, Psalm. 110.2.
and by the elect touched, it is the instrument of their salvation.

II. Aetiologia.
Secondly, the Lord would, and will, have the Preaching of the Gospel to all
Nations, to be a Testimonial, Mat. 24.14
(at least of conuincement) unto them, that they should pretend no ignorance,
nor have any thing to say in their defense: For they that know, or (at least)
have sufficient means to know Gods will, and do not embrace and execute it,
shall be beaten with many stripes: Luke 12.47
i. their pains in hell shall be greater then of those, who never enjoyed the
means of salvation: yet they sinning without Law, shall perish without Law.
Romans 2.12.


Question.
It seems that the Gospel hitherto, has not been known, much less Preached
by the Apostles, to the Americans and West Indies, those huge and vaste
Countries, for there is no monument or record of any such matter: and therefore
the time is to come when they shall be enlightened, and receive the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus.

Ans. I must in this difficult point answer, as distinctly, so by distinction.
First, I answer that the Apostles and Evangelists, having taught and Preached
the Gospel, to the most famous, known and populous Kingdoms, Provinces,
Cities, and Towns, it is very probable that they, or their Successors, did
Preach the Gospel to the unknown, obscure, and most barbarous Nations, such
as are the Americans, West Indies, and North Parts of the world: And what if
now either driven thitherby Tempests, or forced by enemies, they might in time
grow barbarous, and loose all knowledge of Christ? Again, I deny not but that
the Gospel may, and shall be at length published and made known to the
Americans, if they never formerly heard of it; for the mercy of God in Christ
is of infinite extent. And if the very Jesuits (though arch-heretickes, and
the firebrarnds of sedition) perhaps sow some seeds of Christianity amongst
them: How much more purely and plainly, may the English, Hollanders, and other
Professors, in time, perform it? Fourthly, it diverse parts of Europe, have
within these hundred years last expired, since the revealing of Antichrist,
and the dispersion of the mists of Popery, been so greatly illuminated: why
may not (specially after the general calling and conversion of the Jews,
which we continually expect, and pray for, and which shall be the Enliuing and
Resurrection of the world) the Americans, Romans 11.12
West Indians, and other Nations; yea even in the Turks Dominions, be
enlightened?

Lastly, it is sufficient to convince the world of unbelief, and to leave the
Inhabitants without excuse, if only the Fame, Rumor, and Report, yea the very
Sound of the Gospel has come unto them: For they might have enquired,
traveled, and proceeded further. But time and experience will clear this
doubt.

CHAP. V. Of a general Apostasy from the Gospel of Christ.
THE third general Sign, already past, is not only the decay and ruin of
the ancient and mighty Roman Empire, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
whereof now a name and a shadow, and not the tenth part of the Demaines and
Dominions remains, that by the overthrow of it Antichrist might arise, Apoc.
13.14.
prevail, and tyrannize; and the Turk likewise dominere, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
but a general, Apoc. 9.1.2.
and almost universal Apostasy, revolt, and departure of all Nations, Apoc.
13.7 8.
from the Gospel of Christ, partly to Mahomet, as we see is come to pass in
the East parts of the world, and partly to the Romish Antichrist as we see
verified in the Western parts. cap. 18.3.
This Apostasy began Anno Christi 606 (or there-abouts) Forerunners whereof
were, and foundations whereof laid long sithence, those proud, ambitious, and
erroneus Prelates, that taught Justification before God to proceed of man's
works; that taught invocation, and worshipping of Angels and Saints; that
brought in Traditions; adored Relics; immodestly, and immoderately extolled
single life, against Gods express Word, forbad meats, and marriages, defended
the doctrine of Free Will in the work of our salvation, brought in an infinite
number of old and idle ceremonies; yea, overmuch magnified the Sea and Primacie
of Rome. Nemo repent fit turpissimus: The Mystery of iniquity began in the
Apostles times, and went on by degrees, and (at length) the venom and poison
of false and damnable doctrine did infuse and diffuse it self into all the
veins and vital parts of the Church: so that that of Isaiah is verified in
the Romish Synagogue, From the sole of the foot even to the head, Esaias 1.6.
there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises and putrefying soars.
Neither ought this to seem strange unto us, seeing that before the Incarnation
of Christ, the like Apostasy befell to us Gentiles, about the year of the
world 2455, and continued about foureteen hundred years: and the like
apostasy or revolt happened to the ten Tribes, Anno Mundi two thousand nine
hundred sixty five, and lasted some thousand years. For it pleased God in his
justice by leaving men to their own wills, and by sending them strong
delusions, to vindicate and revenge the contempt and refusal of his holy
Gospel once offered unto them, and sincerely Preached amongst them.

CHAP. VI. Of the revealing and discovery of Antichrist.
2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
THe fourth general Sign already (at least in great part) accomplished, Apoc.
11.4 5.6. chap. 14. a v. 6. ad 12.
is the displaying and discovery of Antichrist by the Ministry of Gods word,
etc.

This Antichrist, Bishop, or Pope of Rome, is that Great Star (or Bishop)
that when the third Angel sounded, Apoc. 8.10
fell from heaven ( i. the Church) burning, viz. before his fall, as it were, a
Lamp, and fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of
waters: i. Corrupted and poisoned the Church, and the Bishops, Pastors and
Ministers of it. This is the Angel of the bottomless Pit: i. came from
thence, and thither will return, with all his favorites and followers. This
is the King of the Locusts, Apoc. 9.11
i. the Head and Prince of the Monks, Friars, Jesuits. This is that Man of
sin; 2 Thessalonians. 2 3.
i. nothing but sin; yea a Teacher and Commander of it. Passive and active.
The Son of Perdition: i. that is damned himself, and draws innumerable
with him to the same destruction. He opposes himself, Ver. 4.
and exalts himself above all that is called God: i. Kings, Emperors,
Princes, and Angels, that are in Scripture oftentimes styled Elohim, Psalm. 82.1.
or Gods. He sits in the Temple of God, i. (as most Interpretors, old and
new, expound it) the Church of God, because it was a true Church, and is so
reputed; and a true Church lurketh amongst them: Showing himself that he is
God: that is, not only assumeth to himself the title of God, viz: Holiness,
and so to be called; but taking upon him power to Change times, Place and
displace Kings; Forgive all sins; dispense with the degrees of Marriage
forbidden in Moses Law; To command the Angels: to allow all villainy, and
(without control) to do what he list. His will stands for a Law: And
forsooth the Holy Ghost dwells in his breast; and he cannot err ( viz. but
damnably.) His Seat is the new Babylon, i. Rome, that is seated (or was so in
Saint John's days) upon seven known Hills, and then reigned over the Kings of
the earth; for some 250 Provinces and Kingdoms, were subject to the Roman
Emperor. In a word, all the Popes from Boniface the third, unto the now Pope
Paulus quartus, are that great Antichrist, in a continued seat, succession,
tyranny, false doctrine, and Regiment, that Saint Paul, and Saint John so much
speak of.

He has been revealed some three hundred years ago, by worthy John
Wickliefe, and others: But specially and notably from Anno Christi 1517, until
this present date 1615, by Apostolical Martin Luther; and by many most
learned, holy, and famous Doctors and Pastors in Germany, France, England,
Bohemia, and other Countries and Kingdoms. The light of the Gospel, and the
exact knowledge of the fountain Languages, has, and daily does, discover,
dispell, and scatter, the darkness, shades, mistes, and clouds of Popery.
God (in mercy) continue and increase, amongst us the number of such worthy
instruments, and grant that these flying Angels, may, without interruption,
pass through the midst of this (Europaean) Heaven, Apoc. 14.6
and Preach the everlasting Gospel to all Nations, Languages, and People, and
that they may speedily and zealously embrace and retain it, Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of the great persecutions under the Roman Anti christ.
THE fifth general Sign, already (at least for the most part) accomplished,
are the great persecutions, massacres, murders, wars, poisonings, rackings,
excommunications, banishments, imprisonments, and all kind of cruelties against
Protestant Princes, Prelates, Pastors, Professors, Churches, Kingdoms,
Provinces, under the Romish Fox, Wolf, Antichrist, and his Butcher-like and
bloud-sucking followers; especially (over all Europe) in these last hundred
years immediately expired. Their Religion is rebellion, their faith is
faction, their badge is blood. Apoc. 18.24.
Rome has been, and (to their power) yet is, the Shambles and Slaughterhouse
of the Saints. How many hundred thousands of Christians in Europe has not that
viperous and bloody generation slain and destroyed? But we see and hope that
the most part of these troubles are ouer-blowne; Apoc. 6.11
that the Church has and shall have a further rest and breathing time: Mark.
13.7
that the Papists shall be drunk in their own blood, and Babylon shortly be
burnt with fire. And admit that the Romanists (for our trial, or, to punish
our coldness and remissness in the profession of the pure worship of God)
practice, or attempt ought, in Germany, France, the Low Countries, or, our
secure, England; yet we trust it is but a Lightning before death: and a
principal means to put an edge to our prayers; to scowre off the dross of
our drowsinesse, and to enkindle the zeal of Protestant Kings, Dukes, Pastors
and Professors against them, to their fatal and utter ruin; which the
Almighty grant, for Jesus Christ his beloved Sons sake, Amen.

And thus much of the general Signs of the last day, perfectly fulfilled,
which is the first part of the Treatise.

The second part of the Book touching mixed Signs in continual motion.
CHAP. VIII. Of the vanity, corruption, and manifold abuse of the creatures.
THE first general mixed Sign in continual action and motion, is the vanity,
decay, mortality, and marvelous abuse of the creatures, daily growing and
prevailing until the consummation and end of the world. The world waxes old
as a garment; it, and all the parts of it, fade, waste, consume, and draw
toward their fatal period. All things (by sinful, licentious, and rebellious
man) are abused, perverted, mis-applyed (against the Creators scope, and the
creatures desire) to unlawful, or immoderate profit and pleasure; yea to
revenge, and open persecution. The Sun and Moon, The Sun and Moon.
those two great Eyes of heaven, are often darkened, and fearfully eclypsed,
and (as learned Astronomers have observed) many thousand miles nearer the earth
then in times past. The Planets and the other Stars, Stars.
like so many Candles and Spangles in the heavens, are much decayed in their
virtues and operations, and by hurtful effects and influences, often annoy
corn, man, beasts and plants.

The Air.
The Air that we breath in, is often troubled, infected, and consumes into the
clouds; and many frightfull and ominous fights appear in it.

The Earth.
The Earth, the common mother of us all, is many ways cursed, it is sore
weakened, shaken eft-soones by earthquakes, the Sea often encroacheth upon it,
and marreth the beauty of it, deadly dampes proceed out of it: it is in many
places much more barren then in former times; or else abounds with weeds,
thorns, and unprofitable things.

The Sea.
The Sea ebbeth and flows, it corrodeth and eats upon the firm Continent,
roareth, is tempestuous and unquiet, and drowneth both men and Ships.

Rivers are often dried up, Waters.
and change their channels.

In Plants, Plants.
Herbs, Trees, there is not the same vigor, efficacy, feeding, and medicinable
virtue, which was in times past.

Men are not so tall of stature, Men.
not so long lived, not so strong as in the days of old: They are more frail,
feeble, mortal; and though they are more illumined, more witty, and learned,
by many degrees, then in old time; yet they generally are more crafty, wicked,
mischeiuous: they have science, but not so much conscience.

Excess in Building and Apparel, Building.
sunt aegrae Reipub. indicia, that is signs of a sick state: They serve rather
for show then substance, and are more glorious then lasting. Many Chymnies and
little Smoke, fair houses and small hospitality; gallant houses and great
enclosures, often eat up men, and dispeople the Land.

Apparel.
Apparel is used more for neatness then necessity, for garishnesse then
seemelinesse; fair feathers make farie fools, and now a days apparel makes
a man: For matter, men (and especially the womankind) that often carry all
their riches on their backs, and that have decked bodies but deformed souls,
exceed their calling and ability, they cut not their coat according to their
cloth; and this the poor Tenants find and feel. Alas poor souls! And as
for fashion and form (now the Fashions kill an horse) the French, Spanish,
Italian, and every new fangled form, is in request. If they were as monstrous
in their bodily shapes, as they are prodigious in their attire, all men might
justly wonder at them, and abhor them. The Peacock is a goodly Bird but has
foul feet: and they that affect finenesse in apparel, neglect the
sanctification of the soul; and (in a word) the leuity of Apparel, does argue
the lightness and changeableness of the mind.

Marriages are more desired for riches then Religion, Marriages
for goods then goodness; Genus and forma sine re vilior alga est.
and the face is more respected then grace; but like beginnings have like
endings, and like cause like effect, like parents, like posterity.

Diet.
In Diet many great and rich men observe no time, order, measure; they look
that the meat be rather toothsome then wholesome; they pamper the body but pine
the soul; they stuff themselves but sterue the poor; hence ensue surfets,
sicknesses and untimely deaths.

Drinks.
And touching drinking, men were never so much given to immoderate drinking, and
to be drowned in drunkenness, as in this dropsy age; not the fiery Tragon
(yet there are too many ominous fires) but the watery Trigon reigns: Men make
their bodies Tuns to receive the Wine and the Ale, and when the Wine and Ale is
in, the Wit, yea Grace is out: They drink away all grace out of their hearts,
money out of their purses, honesty out of their lives, and oftentimes die, and
are damned in their drunkenness.

And that Indian, Tobacco.
and costly, weed, now only and commonly in request, whereof so many thousands
live (and yet they sell nothing but smoke, that though it came not out of the
bottomless pit, it leads many into it) I mean that smoking and
deuill-choaking Tobacco: For if the smoke or vapor that came out of the liver
of a Fish could drive the devil out of Tobias daughter: Of how greater force
is the Nicotium or Tobacco? Tob. 6.16.17.
This Simple and Drugge serves to dry up the drunken dropsy, that men may
gull in the more drink. It is a nourisher of lust and drunkenness; yea of all
idleness and prodigality, and a shortner of the life, rather then a lengthner
of it.

Docet experientia rerum. O would some strait and strict Statute were made
against this waste-time and waste-mony Tobacco; for now it is a raging and
unruly evil, better beseeming Pagans then Protestants.

CHAP. IX. Of the daily weakening and wounding of Antichrist.
THE second general Sign in continual and present motion is the daily
weakening and wounding of Antichrist and Popery in Christendom, by Writing, by
Disputes, and by the Word and the Sword. The breath of the Lords mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
i. the mighty and powerful Preaching of the word of God must consume him:
viz. by degrees and times. And hence it is, that the Pope and Papists are such
deadly enemies to the sincere and plentiful Preaching of the Word. The three
orders of Angels, Reu. 14. v. 6. ad 11.
i. of Pastors and Preachers, must reveal, prophecy the ruin of Antichrist,
and under pain of damnation, labor to revoke the favorites of Antichrist
from their pernicious errors and heresies.

The Christian Magistrates, Princes, Dukes, Judges, Captains, etc. must and
shall lead the Babylonians into captivity, slay diverse of them with the sword;
render double unto these seducing idolaters; chap. 18.6. chap. 17.6.
hate the whore, make her naked, eat her flesh and consume her with fire: And
this is in continual execution; and both Magistrate and Ministers, Captains
and Colonels, are in the Scriptures commanded and enjoined to prosecute this
business. God stir up their zeal and resolution; Judge. 5.23.
For Cursed is he that helps not the Lord against the mighty, Ier. 48.10.
or, that goes negligently about the work of the Lord.

CHAP. X. Of the falling of particular persons from the revealed truth, and
their return to the errors of Antichrist.
THE third general Sign, in continual motion, is, that in the latter days,
certain shall depart from the faith; 1. Tim. 4.1.
some Princes, some Prelates, some Ministers, some Professors. They affect
not, nor love, the sweet and sugared Gospel of Christ, but rather delight and
doat upon sense-pleasing superstition; 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12.
and hence being justly forsaken of God, these ignorant and unstable souls
return with the dogs to their former vomit, and with the swine to their
wallowing in the mire of Popish defilements. 2. Pet. 2.


These that thus fall away in this great light of the world, whether to
Antichrist or to Epicurisme, and Atheism, are Comets soon consumed, and not
fixed Stars that always abide in the Firmament. These are like Chafe blown
away with every blast of trouble, Psalm. 1.4.
but not good Grain that abides. Finally, they are they that build their
house upon the sandy foundation of man's inventions, or at least of Historical
and Temporary Faith; Mat. 7.26 27.
and therefore as soon as the winds blow, Math. 13.10. and 21.
and the waters flow, it falls. For if they had builded it upon the Rock
Christ, and kept Faith and a good Conscience, they had stood firm and fast,
like the Mount Syon, Psalm. 125.1
which stands fast for ever and can never be removed.

But, thanks be to God, this wind shakes no corn: though the Church of Rome
gain in one place, it loses in another: that which is gained in the shire is
lost in the hundred.

CHAP. XI. Of a general corruption in life and manners, which is more to be
feared in these latter days then corruption in doctrine.
THE fourth general Sign in daily motion and increase, is the inundation of
all manner of sin and wickedness, and a general corruption of men's manners.
This plague reigns and rages: vices and abuses creep upon men by stealth,
by their contagion infect them, and pass from one to another. Our age is (as
it were) the Sink of all former ages, into which all filthiness runs. The
more Light we have, the more Lewd we are: the more we are warned, the more
wicked we show our selves. Men indeed have a Form and profession of
godliness, 2. Tim. 3 1.
but deny the power thereof in their hearts. Men generally so now live, as
though there were no Judge to call the^ to an account, no heaven for reward,
and no hell for punishment: and, as though the Preachers threats and
thundrings were but scare-bugs; yea, as though God had granted out a general
indulgence unto all manner of sin.

Mat. 24.11
Charity is waxen cold, yet self-love abounds. Usury by the Scriptures, all
ancient Fathers, and Councels, condemned to hell, and in former generations
scarce heard of, is now become a common Trade. O Legal, nay o Lawless
thieves! Might ouer-ruleth Right; the poor is the rich man's booty. Idleness,
excessive pride in apparel, blasphemy, Saboth-profanation, lying, yea, and
drunkenness, abound and are unpunished. These are privileged sins, and
seem to have some special charter and immunity, yea impunity. But the
judgment of God sleeps not, and one day shall pay for all. What should I
speak of fraud, deceit, filthy living, backbiting, malice, envy, and going to
the Law (to feed the greedy Griffins) for every trifle? Men (in a manner) mind
nothing but eating, drinking, buying, selling, building, marrying, and giving
in marriage; Luke 17.26.27.28.
planting, setting, etc. not dreading the last day (though nearly approaching)
much less preparing themselves by faith and repentance, against the second
coming of our Lord Jesus. But when they shall say peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
peace, sudden destruction shall come upon them as the travail upon a woman
with child, and they shall in no wise escape. Finally, there is no truth in
men's promises; whereas in time past every man's word was thought as good as an
Obligation. There seems almost no faith left upon the earth, whether we
respect God or man: Good men decay and evil men abound; yea, one may with
better like and applause live loosely then Religiously: For every religious man
(though never so discreet) shall usually be mistermed a Puritan, a
Precisian, a Schismatic, a factious and seditious person. And alas! what ill
have these honest and harmless men done? or who are these that so exclaim
and declaime against them, but Libertines, Atheists, Papists, Drunkards,
Gamesters, Epicures, and the like, whose tongue is no slander? What shall we
conclude of all these, and the sins of all Callings and Trades, in Church,
Family, and Commonwealth, which would be too long now to recite, All these
daily and wonderously increasing, do presage and euince that the end of all
things is at hand; and therefore we should be sober, and watch and pray, 1.
Pet. 4.7.8.
but above all things have fervent charity amongst our selves.

For as ulcers and bodily diseases A similitude.
coming thick, and members out of joint, are forerunners of death near at
hand: so these common and prodigious offenses and scandals evidently argue,
that the day of the Lord is not far off.

It shall be our wisdom, and good for us in this common pestilence of
Manners, to get and preserve the Antidotes and Counter-poisons of faith and a
good conscience; that though we live in all evil world which will grow worse
and worse, yet we be not infected by it: And it is the greatest trial, yea
and the highest commendations for any man to be godly, good, and devout,
amongst those that are openly wicked: For it shows that grace in him is more
strong to preserve him, then wicked and profane men to poison, or pervert him.

The third part of the Book touching general Signs yet for to come.
CHAP. XII. Of the utter ruin, sacking, and burning of Rome, the seat of
Antichrist.
THE first general Sign of Christ's coming, that is yet not begun, is the
ruin and utter desolation of the City Rome: For the Throne of the Beast must
grow dark; Apoc. 16.10
Babylon must fall, it must fall, and come into remembrance before God: Apoc.
18.8
at one instant must her plagues come, viz famine, mourning, death; it must be
burnt with fire, Ver. 12.13.
and all her precious things, all her Musical instruments, and idol furniture
be wholly consumed, and ever after unto the coming of our Lord, Baybilon must
be an house of devils, Ver. 2.
and a Cage of every hateful and unclean Bird: Some of the ten Horns: i. one
of the last Emperors, or some valiant Duke, must be the chief instrument to
execute Gods fore-determined vengeanee upon her. The Romanists and Italians and
others, that are willed to come out of Babell, Ver. 6.
and to render Double unto the Whore for that she had done unto them, shall
assist the principal instrument.

That Rome shall (literally understood) be utterly desolated before the end of
the world; not only all Protestant Interpreters of the Revelation hold, but
also the Sibyllae; Lact. de diu. praemio. lib. 7. c. 11.
yea diverse chief Papists, as namely, Vega, Ribera, Bellarmine, the Rhemists,
and others confess.

Touching the year and point of time, when Rome shall be destroyed, albeit
we dare not (as some do) determine of some thirty years hence, The time of
the burning of Rome.
and some more probably of a shorter time, yet we are persuaded that it is
near at hand, and (perhaps) much nearer then most imagine. For the power of
the Pope in foreign Kingdoms is much lessened; his authority in civil
causes every where falls to the ground; yea in his own Dominions, in Venice,
Florence, Millain, etc. Many that have been by him seduced begin to kenne
and smell him out; To speak nothing of England and other Protestant Kingdoms
that have wholly forsaken him. Now let us come unto some forcible reasons and
arguments, whereby we may make strong our assertion.

I. Reason.
All Kingdoms and States have their set Periods and Fatal years, which being
expired, they must needs fall and come to naught, and lightly in the space of
500 years there is seen an alteration in all States, and why not in Rome?

II. Reason.
All tainted, unsound, and putrified bodies, having the beginning and matter of
their destruction in themselves, do at length (though no man hurt them) vanish
and die: But Rome and Popery, is such a tainted, unsound, and rotten body; yea
an old wind-shaken and ruinous house; which though the Jesuits, and others,
seem to prop up for a reason, yet down it must, and fall it will, and so let
it in Gods name.

III. Reason.
Eastern Babell in Chaldaea, a figure of this Romish and new Babell, is long
sithence fallen (though in villainy, cruelty, and idolatry nothing comparable to
it) and therefore it must needs come to desolation. The Type and the
Arch-type, must needs answer and agree. Babylon in Chaldaea was laid waste by
the Medes and Persians, and so shall Rome be by the Christian Princes.

IIII. Reason.
God, that is truth it self, and whose absolute threatenings are always
executed, Apoc. 18.21
has foretold a secular ruin of Rome; therefore it must needs come to pass.

V. Reason.
God is infinite in power, Apoc. 18.8
and able to bring it to pass, therefore it is not impossible, though in our
weakness, we do, and may, cast many doubts.

VI. Reason.
Romish Babel is already fallen in many Countries, Kingdoms, Provinces, and
States, of Europe, viz. in Germany, Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, Hungaria,
England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, in diverse Provinces of the Lower Germany,
and in a good part of France, etc. And why shall it not by the like reason (in
due time) fall in Italy, Spain, Portugal, etc. Parium similis est ratio.

VII. Reason.
The sins, treachery, idolatry, cruelty, pride, blaspemy, lust and
abominations of Rome are so ripe and grown to such an head and impudency, that
they overcome the patience and long-suffering of our Lord, and provoke and
enforce him to descend unto visible and horrible execution, and revenge: For
the just Judge of the world must needs do Justice, Genesis 18.
and be avenged of his enemies: Let us therefore say, Psalm. 68.1.
Exurgat Deus and dissipentur inimici. i. Let God arise and let his enemies be
dispersed.

VIII. Reason.
The Antichrist does with all maine and might (whatsoever the Fox pretends)
set and oppose himself against our Lord Jesus Christ, against his Gospel,
Discipline, Church and Members; Therefore our Almighty JESUS cannot but
confront and confound this his Arch-enemy.

IX. Reason.
The wailing and lamentation of the (Popish) Kings, Ab euentu.
Merchants, Mariners, etc. beholding a far off the burning of Rome; Apoc
18.9 11.17.18.
and contrary-wise the rejoicing of the Prophets and Apostles (per
prosopopeiam) and of the Pastors and Church of God, Apoc. 18.20.
for the desolation of Rome when it is come to pass; demonstrate the certainty
of this future Judgment.

Lastly, certain of the nearest forerunners of Romes ruin. First a sudden
departure of many Christians out of Rome, by the instinct of Gods Spirit; like
whereunto was that of the godly Jews departing from Jerusalem, a little before
the Siege of it. Secondly, a division of the City (or Citizens) into three
parts; a figure whereof was the division of Tongues when the Tower of Babell
was destroyed. Genesis 11.
Lastly, a most terrible and ominous Earthquake, Apoc. 16.18.
Such as there was never since men were upon the earth, do evidence it, and
will give the godly the watchword.

CHAP. XIII. How after the destruction of Rome the Papists, and lovers of the
Whore, shall practice, by violence, utterly to root out all Christians, but
shall be finally and utterly overthrown.
A Second general Sign of Christ's coming, not yet begun to be fulfilled,
is the utmost endeavor and practice of the Romanists (that shall survive when
Rome is burnt) to root out and extinguish by the sword, all Christians: And
this clearly appears, out of the 19 chapter of Saint John's Revelation, and
by the consent of diverse learned and judicious Interpreters.

The Beast ( i. the second beast the Pope) and the (Popish) Kings of the earth,
Apoc. 19.19.
and their Armies (viz. huge and many) gathered themselves together to make
war against him that sat on the Horse (i. Christ, and Christian Princes his
Instruments) and against his Army, 1. All Protestant Soldiers. But behold, and
wonder at the event, and give the Lord the glory of the victory: The
Protestants shall Eat (i. destroy) the flesh of (Popish) Kings, Verse. 18.
Captains, Mighty men, of horses, horsemen, bond, free, Verse. 20.
great small: Then the beast and the false Prophet shall be taken. Judge. 5.
vlt.
So perish all thine enemies o Lord; but let them that love thee, be as the
Sun when it goes forth in his might.

So you see that the Papists shall seek by a general consent, to recover their
ruins and regaine their losses, but with no success; yea with their fatal
overthrow: It is no striving against the Lord.

CHAP. XIIII. A third general and memorable Sign of the approach of the last
judgment; namely, the conversion of the Jews.
A Third general and eminent Sign, not yet fulfilled, is the general Calling,
2. Cor. 3.15
and Gathering of the whole Nation of the Jews unto the faith, and into the
Church of Christ: And this is pregnantly gathered of Scripture: Isay 59.20.
Ioh. 10.16. There must be one Fold (of Jews and Gentiles) and one Shepherd.
Romans 11.25
Every Tribe must mourn apart, Zach. 13.2.
for Christ (by them crucified) the parents (by the Sword of Gods Word, chap.
13.3.
at least) must thrust through the false Prophet when he Prophecieth: The
Prophet shall be ashamed of his vision (i. his false doctrine) lay aside his
rough garment (taken up by apish imitation Ver. 4.
of the true Prophets) and return to his former husbandry. Ver. 5.
Then shall we see (in earth) The holy City new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21.2.
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her
Husband: whereof so many glorious things are spoken in Scripture, and literally
to be understood in many points.

These upon the fame and brute of their first conversion, and the report of
their purpose to return into their own Country; near whereunto, and in the
Confines whereof many of them dwell, shall be assaulted by the great Turk,
Dan. 11.44 45.
the King of the North, who with all his forces shall endeavor to extinguish
them, and kill every mothers son: so that there shall be such a time of
trouble to them, Chap. 12.1
as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time; But then
Michaell the great Prince, i. The Lord JESUS or his mighty instruments, shall
Stand up and (finally) deliver them. None of all these Prophecies are yet
performed, therefore they must, of necessity, be fulfilled in their appointed
times.

The Jews being once converted, shall be a most famous, reformed, and
Exemplary Church of all the world, Isay 2.2.
and all Nations shall flow unto it, and it shall be, as it were, a visible
heaven upon earth; but it shall not (perhaps) many years continue. For the
further proof of their further conversion (to omit sundry glorious promises of
God in Esaias, Ezechiel, the Psalms, and which are thought hitherto but in
(small) part to be performed) I allege these reasons ensuing.

I. Reason.
The Apostle S. Paul infers that the Jews are not universally forsaken,
because he being an Israelite, Romans 11.1.
and of the Tribe of Benjamin is not forsaken.

II. Reason.
The same Apostle says, that there is a Remnant reserved, A pari.
and as it were some seed of election in the multitude, Ver. 5.
though yet not seen nor discerned.

III. Reason.
The calling and conversion of some Jews to the Christian Faith in all ages,
does conclude that the Jews are not wholly forsaken, but are rather the first
fruits of a greater Harvest, and the Forerunners of a greater Conversion.

IIII. Reason.
The First Fruits, viz, the holy Patriarchs are holy, and therefore the Lump,
Romans 11.16
i. the multitude of them for the time to come, is holy: The root (Abraham) is
holy, and therefore (some) Branches.

V. Reason.
It was a special end of Paul's Ministry to win his Countrymen the Jews;
Ver. 13.14
and it is (or ought to be) the scope of our zeal and good example, to gain
them: But this end and scope, being of God, cannot be vain and frustrate.

VI. Reason.
The Fullness of the Jews converted shall be the Riches (the occasion of
knowledge and grace) of the world; Ver. 12.
and their taking (into the Church) shall be life from death, Ver. 15.
the reviving and springing again of the whole world consisting of Jews and
Gentiles.

VII. Reason.
Ver. 23.
God can convert them and graft them in again, therefore it is not impossible.

VIII. Reason.
When the Fullness of us Gentiles is come into the Church, Ver. 25.
id est, some remaining Nations, as perhaps Spain, Italy, Portugal, or the
like Countries: then shall all Israel ( i. a great or greatest part of the
Jews) be converted.

Quest. 1. What shall be the place of their calling?

Answ. The Eastern and Western parts of the world in respect of Iudaea and
that are near unto it.

Quest. 2. When shall they be generally called?

Ans. When Rome, whose Idolatry so hinders their conversion, shall be burnt,
and the full number of us Gentiles, that shall provoke them, is come in.

Quest. 3. Shall the Jews be restored into their Country?

Ans. It is very probable. First, all the Prophets seem to speak of this
return. Secondly, they shall no longer be in bondage. Thirdly, God having for
so many ages forsaken his people shall the more notably show them mercy.

CHAP. XV. Of the extreme and final desolation of the Turk and his Monarchy.
THE great Turk, who in Daniel is called the King of the North, Dan. 11.40
and all his innumerable Army, shall in a place called Armageddon i. the
Mountain of Delight, Apoc. 16.16.
Beauty, or Holiness, or Iudaea, lying between the (Syrian) Sea, Dan. 11.45
and the great River Euphrates, be utterly confounded. (...)
For this Turkish Gog and Magog shall plant his Palace there; he shall gather
the (converted) Jews to battle, Apoc. 20.9
he shall go upon the breadth of the earth, and compass the Camps of the
Saints about, and the beloved City: i. Jerusalem, or the Church of the Jews:
For he shall fear least the Jews, so infinite in number, gathering themselves
together should come, or conspire, to dispossess him of his (usurped)
Kingdom: wherefore he shall do his utmost, utterly to extinguish and root out
these (poor) Jews: then there shall be such a time of trouble, as never was
heard of (in that Nation) but Michael the great Prince (whether the Lord JESUS,
Dan. 12.1.
or some powerful Instrument of his) shall stand up for his chosen, and
deliver them: Fire shall come down from God out of heaven, Apoc. 20.9
and devour their enemies; Ezech. 38.9.
that is, (as Ezechiel more fully speaks of the matter) though he come like a
storm against the people of Israel, Ver. 16.
and as a Cloud to cover the land, yet God will make a great and general
shaking in the Land of Israel; 19
He will call for a Sword against him, 22
he will plead against him with Pestilence and with blood; he will rain upon
him and his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, Dan. 11.45
an ouer-flowing rain, and great haile-stones, fire and Brimestone. Finally,
there he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

He is an arch-enemy of the Lord JESUS and his Church; he began with the
Romish Antichrist, and why then shall not he be confounded with him, or not
long after him?

CHAP. XVI. Of the false Christ's, and the false Prophets (their ministers) that
shall arise in the last age of the world.
EVEN as (Tipice) between the death of Christ, and the destruction of
Jerusalem, there arose false Messiasses in that generation: so correspondently,
in the last generation of mankind, not long before the end of the world, Mat.
24 24
there shall arise false Christ's (that shall take upon them the very person of
Christ, and usurp his name) and false Prophets ( viz. their Ministers) that
shall say they are sent of Christ, that shall win credit unto them, and do
great Signs and Wonders to deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect. And
this God shall suffer to come to pass, to try, prove, and make manifest,
whether his elect people will assent unto, and be carried away with such false
Christ's, and false Prophets, or no? And to vindicate and (spiritually) punish,
in the Reprobate and Unbelievers, the refusal and extreme contempt of his
sweet and blessed Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12.
Preached amongst them, and offered unto them.

Quest. But how may these false Christ's that shall be raised up by the devil,
in the last age (or how shall they) be discerned and distinguishd, from the
false Messia's before the destruction of Jerusalem that drew great multitudes
after them?

Ans. These last shall be false Christ's taking upon them the very name of
Christ, but the former were false Messiae, that imagined Christ to be a mere
man, neither did they assume unto themselves the Title of the Son of God.
Secondly, our Lord Prophecyeth of false Christ's that shall arise in the end of
the world, and seduce, as well the Gentiles as the Jews; but those before the
overthrow of Jerusalem only deceived the Jews. Lastly, those false Messiae
did show forth no Signs or Wonders, and therefore could not so effectually
deceive others; But these false Christ's, by fained Miracles, satanicall
illusions, and efficacy of error, shall seek to win them credit and
authority; and therefore of this time that saying of our Lords shall be, or
may be, (specially) verified: Luke 18.8.
Shall the Son of man when he comes find faith upon the earth?

Quest. Shall the miracles of these false Christ's and false Prophets be true
and Divine, as those of our Lord IESV, and of the Apostles, were?

Ans. No: The Miracles done by CHRIST and his Apostles, were true miracles in
matter and form, having their beginning from God, setting forth the glory of
God, and confirming the truth: But the Miracles of these false Christ's and
false Prophets, shall be lying Miracles, illusions, or cunning conclusions,
proceeding from the devil; not profitable and wholesome, but rather pompous and
permicious, and tending only to confirm and mainetaine lies and errors.

CHAP. XVII. Of the strange Events, Signs, Prodigies, and fearful wonders of
the last age.
A Sixth general Sign not yet fulfilled, but to come to pass, are prodigies,
strange things, and ominous and most fearful events. These shall presignifie
the change and end of all things to be even at hand, in so much that the very
brute creatures shall feel the power of Christ ready to come to judgment. Of
this sort are terrible Sights in the Air, Luke 21.11.
dreadful earthquakes, frequent and fearful fires; Verse. 25
upon the earth distress of Nations with perplexities, the Sea and the waves
extraordinarily roaring: 26
men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which
are coming on the earth: Mar. 13.8.
Famines, troubles, Wonders in heaven above, Act. 2.19.
and Signs in the earth beneath blood and fire, and vapors of Smoke. The Sun
shall be turned into darkness, 20
and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord
comes; the Stars shall fall down from heaven: i. either such in show and
appearance, or Meteors and blazing Stars. Of this sort also are thundering
Winds, and troublesome Tempests, inundations of waters, Lact. de diu. praemio.
lib. 7. c. 15.
excessive Rain, drying up of Fountains, failing of Beasts, Birds, Fishes:
unequal and unnatural Seasons of the years, Winterly Summers, and
Summer-like Winters, extreme barrenness of the earth, and horrible confusions.

Use 1.
Let all good Pastors and Preachers fore-warne their hearers hereof, and when
they perceive the accomplishment of them, labor to awaken them out of their
deadly lethargy by zealous and due application hereof.

Use 2.
They much mistake the matter, and are foully ouer-seene, that expect a golden
world, and expect an heaven on earth, and an exquisite reformation of all
things: whereas in so declining a world, they shall see the Lord coming in the
clouds sooner then this their dream come to pass.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the general and marvelous deadness of heart, and senseless
benummednesse of the last times.
A Seventh general Sign, shall be a dead slumber, spiritual Lethargy, and
a brutish security in all sorts of people; which, though it has been in the
time of Noah, Luke 17.26.27.
not long before the universal Deluge; and in the time of just Lot, at the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and in other ages of the world; yet it shall
most apparently reign and prevail in the last age; So that no Alarums, no
thundering judgments, no strange Sightes, Monsters, Wonders, Doctrine,
Counsel, Admonitions, Warnings, shall be able to arowse and waken them from
this sluggish and deaf security: They shall drown themselves in pleasure and
in drunkenness; mind nothing but the world, wealth, oppression, revenge: But
the Son of man shall come to such, in an hour they wot not of, and shall
find them sleeping: Mar. 13.36 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
The day of the Lord shall come as a Thief in the night: For when they shall
say peace and safety, Ver. 3.
then sudden destruction shall come upon them as travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape. Securitas initium calamitatis: God give us
grace, to watch and wait for that day, and to attend to the sound of the
Trumpet, that being found watching and well-doing, we may stand before the
Son of man, Luke 21.36
and enter into our Lords joy. Amen.

CHAP. XIX. Of the graduall, yet sudden darkning of the lights of heaven.
THE last general Sign is, not only the wonderful roaring of the Seas, but
a graduall, yet sensible and strange darkening of the lights of heaven; this is
the nearest general Sign, and the more to be heeded when it comes: For
presently after shall come our LORD JESUS, who by the brightness of his
coming, shall (utterly) obscure and hide the light of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. Neither must this seem incredible or impossible, for the like has
been seen in time past (though not universally over the whole world, but in
some kingdom and particular place of it) At midday, Act. 26.13.
as Saint Paul went to Damascus, he saw in the way a light from heaven above
the brightness of the Sun, shine round about him and the^ that iourneyed
with him: If it exceeded the brightness of Sun, then it obscured the Sun, and
(as it were) put out the light of it.

Secondly, at the death of Christ, the Sun was darkened and terribly
eclypsed: Mat. 27.44.
And darkness was upon all the land (of Iudaea) from the sixth hour to the
ninth: i. from noone to three of the clock in the afternoon.

Thirdly, strange and wonderful sightes and prodigies were forerunners of the
destruction of Jerusalem: and why not likewise of the end of the world?

Lastly, the poor Mariners and Seafaring men have particular and lamentable
experience of such darkness, when suddenly the storm arises, and all their
lights are put out, and they oftentimes are ouer-whelmed. In Saint Paul's voyage
to Rome, when he and his company were exceedingly tossed upon the Seas,
neither Sun nor Stars in many days appeared. Act. 27.28.


Use (...)
Let us therefore as the children of the Light, and the day, put on the Armor
of light, that this darkness when it comes discomfort us not, much less
be a forerunner of everlasting darkness, Amen.

CHAP. XX. Diverse difficult and curious questions, soberly handled, and
religiously resolved.
I. Question.
How, and with what truth, could Saint Paul in his time teach, 1. Cor. 10*
that the ends of the world were come on them: and S. Peter write that the end
of all things was then at hand; 1. Pet. 4.7
seeing that from that time unto ours, have passed about one thousand six
hundred years, and we certainly know not, how many years remain to be
accomplished?

I Answer* First, from Christ's Birth (or Death) unto the end of the world is
counted but an age, or the last, though (perhaps) the longest, age of the
world: Seeing we are not to have, nor expect, any new Christ, new Gospel, new
Sacraments, new Scriptures, new Apostles, new Evangelists, new Miracles; but
content our selves with those that Christ has unchangeably left unto us.

Secondly, this last age of the world is not confined and limited to a certain
stint and set number of years, as the former ages are, and were: because we
should always be prepared, and in continual expectation when it should end,
otherwise men would more delay and post of (from time to time) their conversion
unto God: Therefore, as the last age of a man (to wit old age) cannot be
determined by a certain number of years as the precedent ages of a man;
August.
namely, childhood, striplings state, youth, and ripeness of age can: Even so
the last age of the world, cannot be determined and defined by certain and
express years.

Lastly, Chrysostom. hom. 33. in Iohannem.
as we call the end of the year, not the last day but the last month, though
containing 30 days: So we may, and do, call the last quarter of the world,
the end of it, though it be of longer extent then any age from the beginning of
the world unto Christ his Incarnation.

A second Question.
Whether that this world shall last and continue (at least) seven hundred
years, seeing that in the 20 chapter of S. John's Revelation, express mention
is made of two distinct thousands of years; Apoc. 20.
the former whereof, is thought to take his beginning at the reign of the
Emperor Constantine, and to end about Wickliefes time, Anno 1300, and in all
this time the Church declined; and the second millenarie, or thousand, wherein
the Church shall be renewed and flourish, began only (as it is collected)
about the year of our Lord 1300, so that seven hundred years yet remain.

Ans. True it is that mention is made of two thousand years, and diverse of the
ancient Fathers did acknowledge as much, but misunderstood, and mis-applyed,
the same, being carried away with the error of the Millenarij, that imagined
that the people of God should after the Resurrection, live a thousand years in
this world in pleasures and joys.

But, I answer first, that it is not agreed amongst Interpreters, when the
first thousand should begin, whether when S. John wrote his Apocalipse, or
rather Anno 300 when Constantine began to reign.

Secondly, for the Elects sake, least all flesh should perish, these days
shall be shortened, as well as those of the Jews misery at the destruction of
Jerusalem Mat. 24.22
were abridged: For the shortning of the former is a type and figure of the
shortning of the latter. Now how many years, or, whether certain hundred of
years, God best knows (if not only knows) and the end and issue will make
manifest.

Thirdly, if the end of the world should continue so long, and this should be
notified, and publicly signified to the world, they would take occasion to
live much more licentiously, to defer their repentance; yea, many would
Atheistically infer, that Christ would never come to judgment: And therefore
the Holy Ghost keeps us in suspense, and still in the Scripture tells us,
that the Hour draws near, that the Day is at hand, and that the Lord will
come quickly, to the intent we should always be ready.

A third Question.
Whether that the world shall end in the year of Christ two thousand thirty
nine, that is some four hundred and five and twenty years hence, seeing that
from the beginning of the world, to that date, are accomplished the 6000 years
of the worlds full continuance; figured (as diverse old and new Writers think)
by the six days of the creation.

Ans. First, from the six days of creation to conclude of six thousand years
of the worlds continuance, it is no certain rule, or axiom, but only a
conjecture. And whereas Saint Peter says; That a thousand years with the Lord
( viz. being compared with His Erernitie) is but as one day, 2. Pet. 3.8.
and one day as a thousand years; he neither alludeth to the six days
wherein the world was created, nor does determine how long the world shall
endure.

Secondly, our confident persuasion is, that the world shall be consummate
before this long date, for the days must be shortened, otherwise if the world
hold on his hold, there should no faith be left, or found upon the earth.

Thirdly the Wise Virgins, that is, the holy Professors of sincere Religion,
Mat. 25.6.
shall nictare, id est, nod and slumber (though their hearts shall wake) and
therefore they have no certain knowledge of any year when the Lord will come
to judgment, Luke 12.39
otherwise they would the more rowse up themselves.

Lastly, the sixth Angel has already blown, or sounded with the Trumpet, and
when the seventh shall but begin to blow (which time is shortly expected)
then the Mystery of God shall be finished, Apoc. 10.7
( i. the world shall be ended) as he has declared to his Servants the
Prophets, i. will reveal to the godly learned Pastors and Ministers, who (no
doubt) some of them will take special notice of it, that they may more
painefully perform their Office, and more preuailingly stir up their hearers.

A fourth Question.
Whether that the world shall end in the year of Christ 1699 or 1700,
especially seeing that from the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the abomination of desolation set up, shall be 1335 days, which
some interpret so many years, beginning the account in the year of Christ
367, when the Jews, by the grant of the Emperor Julian, repairing the Temple
of Jerusalem, were dispersed by fire sent from heaven?

I Answer, that most, and almost all Interpreters understand those 1335 days,
not for so many years, but literally, for three years and an half, with the
addition of 45 days, in the end whereof Antiochus the chief enemy of the Jews
should die; and being fulfilled in Antiochus, why, or by what reason, should
any man extend them further?

Secondly, it is generally held that (the doctrine and mention of the last
judgment excepted) that Daniels Prophecy ends either at the death of
Christ, or (at the furthermost) with the destruction of Jerusalem.

Thirdly, Master Napier, a learned Scot, counting the beginning of these 1335
days (and interpreting them for years) anno Christi 360, will have the world
to end, about the year 1695; But Master Brightman makes this date the
beginning of the general conversion and flourishing state of the Jews, which
he holds shall continue diverse hundred years afterward.

Fourthly, it was a received opinion that the world should end 1588, and the
event descried the vanity of their collection: And why may not they err
(though they cannot so much err coming nearer the end of the world) likewise,
that define that the world shall certainly end between the years 1688, and
1695?

Lastly, it is not for us (specially that live not in the very last age of the
world) to know the times and seasons, Acts 1.7.
which the Father has reserved in his own power; therefore let us not be
ouer-curious, but wise to sobriety.

A fifth Question.
Whether (as some Phantasticks are reported to hold and defend) the world shall
end before the years of Christ 1630?

Ans. First, to arguments unknown we cannot give particular answers.

Secondly, this opinion is private and singular, and, perhaps, only one man is
the Author of it. An ille solus sapit? who has told him?

Thirdly, all the remaining Signs, not yet begun to be accomplished,
cannot, in any probability, be fulfilled in so short a scantling of time; or,
if they can, let him assign the particular year of Romes ruin, of the Jews
conversion, of the coming of the false Christ's; if he cannot resolve us in the
smaler point, how shall we credit him in the greatest?

Lastly, when the Jews are converted, it is most likely they shall (at least)
continue glorious on the earth for one generation, that Gods mercy may more
evidently appear, and that all the world may take sufficient notice of their
general calling, and hereupon be either converted or (at least) convicted.

A sixth, and more material Question.
Whether the very age (which some, Deu. 15.16
reckoning according to the Iubile account, restrain to 50 years) wherein our
Lord shall come to judgment, either now is, or, hereafter may, or shall be*
revealed to any; especially seeing that our Lord, speaking of the Signs of the
last days says; That this generation, ( i. the age or time of a man's life)
shall not pass until all these things shall be fulfilled?

Ans. I answer, First, that to restrain a generation, or, age of a man, to 50
years, may seem too short an account; rather 70 or 80 years may make a
generation.

Secondly, the age wherein Christ shall come may be known, because our Lord
only excepteth the day and hour.

Thirdly, the Scripture expressly says, that in that age in which the false
Christ's and Prophets shall arise, all shall be fulfilled.

Lastly, when the seventh Angel shall begin to blow, Apoc. 10.7
the Mystery of God shall be finished, etc.

CHAP. XXI. The wholesome Application, and profitable Uses of all these Signs
and Forerunners.
I. Use.
HERE are condemned Aristotle and his followers, who imagining that the world
had no beginning, held that it should never end.

Secondly, here are taxed all Atheists and Scorners, that either will not
believe, or be persuaded, that there shall be a second coming of Christ, and
an end of this world; or else, with those scoffers in Saint Peter's time, say;
Where is the promise of his coming? These be like unto one Manlius who said;
Non alium videre patres, aliumue minores aspicient.

II. Use.
The doctrine of these Signs serves to check and reprove all Curiosists and
rash Spirits, that by conjectures, Arithmeticall numbers, and misapplying and
wresting of the holy Scriptures, seek to search out, yea to determine the day,
as Bellarmine (by consequence) does: For he, misunderstanding the Scriptures
both of Daniel and the Apocalipse, touching the continuance of Antichrist, does
hold that the imaginary Antichrist which he and his followers yet expect to
come, shall reign just three years and an half, Dan. 12.11 12.
and that just in the end of them Christ shall come to judgment, or (at the
utmost) there shall be a distance of 45 days for warning and preparation; so
that by this account a man may know the very day of the last judgment, which
Christ in his humility knew not, and which the heavenly Angels are ignorant of.
Let us content our selves with the knowledge and practice of things revealed,
and and in other matters be wise to sobriety; otherwise if we come too near
to the Arc of Gods secrets, we shall be consumed; if we come too near to
this Flame we shall be burned: Let us not approach too near this
bottomless pit, least we be drowned.

III. Use.
The meditation of the coming of Christ, of the near approach of it, and of
the terror of the last judgment, must awaken us from the slumber of security,
and spur and stir us up to amendment of life, to prayer, sobriety, and
watchfulness, that we be not taken tardy nor found unready, but waking and
well-doing. Mar. 13.33 35.
And the less that the point of Christ's coming is known unto us, the more
let us watch, and prepare our selves. Let us live well and we shall die well,
and as we die and make our last end, such shall our judgment be at the last
day. Finally, let Saint Hieromes holy and blessed meditation be ours also,
that every one of us may say with him; Quoties diem illum considero, Hier. in
Math.
etc. that is; As often as I consider that day I tremble in all my body, for
whether I eat or drink, or what else souer I do, me thinks I always hear
that terrible Trumpet always to sound in my ears; Arise ye dead and come to
judgment.

IIII. Use.
Seeing that our Lord in his love toward us, has left us certain Herbingers,
and Forerunners, of his second coming, for our full redemption, and for our
inauguration into the Kingdom of heaven, let us search the Scriptures, and
take due notice of these Signs, and the accomplishment of them; and the nearer
that that day approaches, so much the more let us hold up our heads: For the
glory, happiness, triumph, and immediate fellowship with the blessed Trinity,
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we shall then enjoy, shall infinitely
exceed (whether we respect quantity, quality, or continuance) all the troubles
and trials of this mortal and miserable life: And the serious meditation
hereof will make us hopeful and patient in all afflictions, and when death
approaches, make us willing to go to God, and to cry come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, Amen, Amen.

An effectual Prayer according to the argument, and containing the Sum of
the whole Treatise.
O LORD our God, and most merciful Father, thou art indeed great and terrible,
of pure Eyes, and can not behold evil: Hardening, blinding, forsaking,
punishing, and in thy Justice taking vengeance on thy adversaries, Nah. 1.2.
and art in thy wrath a consuming fire, Heb. 12, 29
and art notwithstanding, in thy only begotten and most dearly beloved Son
JESUS CHRIST, a most loving, gracious, and kind Father to all thy Church and
children, not wishing, much less working, their misery, ruin, and destruction;
but calling, justifying, sanctifying, directing, protecting, and glorifying
them; yea, thou do most lovingly fore-warne them of the evils to come, Psalm.
46.1.
and in the midst of their miseries and distresses, assist, comfort, sustain,
support, and deliver them. Cant. 1.3.
This sweet Ointment and perfume of thy mercies does draw us after thee, and
these thy high, and altogether undeserved, favors, we confess and
acknowledge with all thankfulness, and acclamation. And more particularly,
seeing that thou in thy wisdom (to check and correct, our vain curiosity,
and rash presumption) does conceal and keep from us the knowledge of the set
hour, Mar. 13.32
day, yea year, when the Son of man shall come to judgment; that we should
be ready and prepared at every moment, and withal, that we (after the manner
of the wicked thy enemies) should not be suddenly surprised, Luk 21.25.26.
nor distressed and perplexed with fear and astonishment, but be encouraged
in well-doing. Mat. 24.32
And that we should gather certain signs of the Summer of solace, and
Harvest of Happiness at hand; and that we should be preserved from all
atheism, doubting, mis-beleefe, thou have, in thine unspeakable mercy, left
us in the sacred Scriptures sundry general and undoubted Signs, tokens, and
Forerunners, of the last Judgment: Whereof diuersare already past, as the
destruction of the four mighty Monarchies; the desolation of Iudaea and
Jerusalem, the extinguishing of the large Roman Monarchy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6.
whose power and Majesty hindered the coming of the Romish Antichrist; the
universal and solemn Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles and their
Assistants and Successors unto all Nations; Mat. 24.14
Finally, the revealing, yea, general weakening and wounding of Antichrist: 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
And whereof some are yet in continual motion and progress, as the reiection,
and dispersion of the Jews; Romans 9.27.31.
the inundation and deluge of all impiety and iniquity; Romans 8.22.23.
the vanity, abuse, corruption, and decay of the creature: And whereof certain
remain yet to be accomplished; namely, the ruin of Rome; the overthrow of
Mahomet and his Alcaron; the general calling and conversion of the Jews unto
the Christian faith; Romans 11.25 26.
and (that which is the plague and poison of the declining, apostaticall,
contemptuous and unthankful world) in the last age of the world, Mat. 24.21
the arising of False Christ's and false Prophets, their instruments, that shall
show great (Diabolical) Signs and Wonders; insomuch that (if it were
possible) they shall deceive the very elect: Lastly (near the point of Christ
his glorious appearance) the strange, sudden, and fearful dimming and
darkning of the Eyes, Ver. 29.
Lamps, and Lights of heaven; therefore be thou entreated (most merciful
Lord) to enlighten all our blind understandings, to mollify, purge, and
prepare all our hearts, and effectually to stir up and rectify all our wills,
desires, affections, that we may make true, godly, and seasonable use of all
these soundings of the trumpets, and fore-running signs. Grant us grace, that
by the due observance of the signs expired, and in continual act, we may
certainly expect and wait for the performance of those, that are promised,
and yet for to come: Heaven and earth shall pass away, Mat. 24 35
but thy words shall not pass away. And because thy Church on earth, Ephesians.
6.10.11, 12, etc.
is in such continual trouble and warfare; thy Saints and servants so much
oppressed, Apoc. 6.9.10.
wronged, yea, massacred and Martyred; and the world of the Atheists,
Idolaters, Hypocrites, profane and wicked ones, live in so dreadlesse security,
1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
and thrive in all manner of sin and ungodliness: we therefore, thy poor and
imperfect children, do so much more humbly and earnestly beseech thy good
Majesty to hasten the coming of thy Son, to shorten (for thy Elects sake)
these days of sin, Mat. 24.22
bondage, corruption; and, in demonstration hereof, to destroy and abolish the
tyranny of the Turk and Pope thy Arch-enemies. For this end stir up the
zeal and courage, and prosper the heroical designs and endeavors of
Christian Princes and Worthies; Apoc. 17.16.
convert (according to thy general promise) Romans 11.25
the long seduced and miserably scattered nation of the Jews, and take away
the veil of Moses from their eyes, that their receiving into the Church may be
to them and us, the increase of the Church, Ver. 12.
life from death, the reviving of our faith, and the multiplication of the
common joy, when there shall be one Fold and one Shepherd. Likewise all the
subsequent and nearest signs, in due time fulfill; and give us such wisdom
and due regard and attention, that when we see and observe the last and most
immediate general signs to come to pass, we may be more vigilant and
fervent, in piety, prayer, charity, and for joy, lift up our heads, knowing
that our (full and final) redemption, Luke 21.28.
from all sin and sorrow, draws nigh.

But because it may be that none, or not many of us, that are now living,
shall surviue unto that day, but be prevented by death; and seeing that the
last day is but a manifestation of our estate in death, and as death shall leave
us, in such condition shall the last judgment find us, therefore (good Lord)
give us grace and conscience to redeem the time: to provide our selves of the
Oil of Faith in the Lamps of our profession; Mat. 25.4.
to procure the wedding garment of holiness, and with all expedition to make
our selves ready against that day, that we may be accounted worthy to escape
al those things that shall come on the world, Luke 21.36
and to stand before the Son of Man* and hear that gladsome sentence of
Absolution; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world. As for all thy enemies, o Lord, in
whom thou have no part, let them betimes hear and receive that terrible
sentence; Mat. 25.41
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared the devil and his Angels: let
them go to the place, in thy justice, appointed for them, and let the smoke of
their smoke ascend up for evermore, Apoc. 14.11
that they for whom Christ never made any satisfaction, John 17.9.
and they that never rested in Christ his all-sufficient expiation, may by
eternity of torment satisfy for all their abomination.

Give a blessed assent (most gracious Father) to these our imperfect prayers:
Pardon all our transgressions, supply all our wants, make us truly and ever
thankful for all thy blessings in heavenly and earthly things, fulfill all
the remaining signs, and in the time appointed, after that we have suffered a
while, and made our selves ready, bring us unto, and translate us into, thine
everlasting Kingdom of glory, for thy only begotten and most dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ his sake, merits and intercession, to whom with thy
eternal Majesty, and God the holy Ghost, be given, rendered, and ascribed,
all Power, Wisdom, Honor, Glory, Praise and Thanks in the Church, from
Generation to Generation, Amen.

FINIS.

