THE CHRISTIAN ART OF THRIVING: WHEREBY A MAN MAY become rich to God.

Or,

A Sermon upon MATTHEW. 6. 33. Preached, and dedicated to the Right Worshipful
Company of Haberdashers in London, by G. D.

First seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1620.

THE CHRISTIAN ART OF THRIVING.
MATH. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness;
and all these things shall be added unto you.
THe very foundation of a Christian conversation, is a right persuasion
concerning our happiness. This therefore being a matter of so great
consequence, our Savior Christ endeavors in the latter part of this Chapter,
to rectify our judgments therein: showing both wherein we are not to repose
our felicity, and also wherein we are to place our happiness. Lay not up
(says he) treasures to your selves on earth; that is, place not Verse. 19, 20.
your treasure, your chiefest good, your happiness in any earthly things,
which are transitory and momentany; but lay up your treasure, that is, place
your happiness and felicity in heaven, where perfect and eternal happiness
is only to be found. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also: Verse. 21.
that is, Whatsoever you esteem your happiness or chiefest good, on that your
heart will be set; unto that, your desires, your studies and endeavors will
be referred. If therefore your judgment, which is the eye of your mind, be
sincere, Verse. 22.
and judge aright of your chiefest good; the whole body (as it were) and course
of your life and conversation will be suitable thereunto. But if your eye Verse.
23.
be evil, if you judge peruersly of your happiness, placing your chiefest
good in earthly and worldly things: then will your conversation be worldly and
wicked. As for example: If a man set his heart on pleasure, as his chiefest
good, the whole frame of his life will be voluptuous: if on riches, the whole
course of his life will be covetous: if on honor and promotion, his whole
carriage and deportment will be ambitious. But if a man shall esteem the
eternal salvation of his soul, as his chiefest good: his life will be
spiritual and religious, as having his conversation in heaven. Now if Phil. 3.
20.
any man shall think (as it is to be feared, too many do) that he can take a
wiser course, then that which our Savior prescribes; for he will place his
treasure and happiness both in heaven and in earth too: our Savior tells
him, that this cannot be: for this were to serve two masters that are Verse. 24.
at variance. You cannot serve God and Mammon: you cannot be worldlings, and
true Christians. You cannot prefix unto your selves two supreme ends, which be
repugnant one to the other. If therefore your heart be chiefly on the earth,
then is not your happiness in heaven.

Our Savior having laid this foundation concerning the supreme ends; in the
next place, he gives direction concerning the means deftinated and referred
thereunto; showing, that as our treasure is not to be placed on earth, so our
chiefest care should not be set on earthly things. Therefore I say unto you,
Take no thought for your Verse. 25. to 33.
life, etc. And on the other side, as our happiness is to be reposed in
heaven: so we should first and principally seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness. And if any shall demand, Alas, how then shall we live, what
course shall we take to thrive in this world? Our Savior answers, that if
we first seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, all these things
shall be added unto us.

These words therefore contain two things: a
Precept. Promise.


The precept is twofold; the one, Negative, which is but implied; the other,
Affirmative, which is expressed. The Negative, (That we are not first to seek
the things on earth) is implied partly in the aduersatiue conjunction But,
which Luke 12. 31. (...).
presupposes a Negation going before; and partly, in the word First: for if
we are first to seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, then are we
not first to seek earthly things.

But here it may be demanded, Whether our Savior Christ do forbid al care for
the things of this life: for fo he may seem, verse. 25. Wherefore I say unto
you, take no thought for your life, what you shall eat or drink, or wherewith
ye shall be clothed: for if we may not take thought for necessaries, then
much less for superfluities. And Ioh. 6. 27. Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but labor for that which endures unto everlasting life. I answer
by a twofold distinction: First, that he forbids (...), (for so he speaks,
verse. 25. and 31.) (...). so Phil. 4. 6.
the immoderate, the carking, the distrustful care, whereby the heart is
divided, (as the word imports) and removed from God: not the moderate and
provident care, which elsewhere is commended in the Scriptures. Secondly, that
he forbids inordinate and preposterous care, whereby earthly desires are
more cared for, than the glory of God in our salvation: not the orderly care of
earthly things, which is fubordinated to the glory of God, and our own
salvation, which seems to be implied both in this place, and in the 12. of
Luke. For, sirst, seems to have relation to a second: and therefore when he
bids us, Primum relative dicitur adsecundum. Nic. Lyr.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, he does not forbid, nay, he seems to
imply, that in the second place, and in a secondary respect, we should seek
the things of this life: the former (as Augustine says) vt bonum nostrum, the
latter, vt necessarium De Sermon. Dom. in monse. lib. 2.
nostrum, necessarium autem propter illud bonum: the former, as our chief
good; the latter, as necessary helps and supplies whilst we are in this life,
as in the way toward happiness. In the 12. of Luke having in like sort
dissuaded from worldly cares, in the 32. verse he says: But rather seek the
kingdom of God: and so is the exhortation, John 6. 27. to be understood
comparatively, Labor not so much, or labor not chiefly for the meat that
perishes. For our Savior himself in this chapter having directed us, first,
after Gods glory, to seek his kingdom and his righteousness; his kingdom in
the second petition of the Lords Prayer, his righteousness in the third: in the
fourth petition he teaches us to ask, and by asking, to seek the things of
this life. And what we are to ask in prayer, we are to seek and to labor for
in our practice, and to endeavor in our lives, lest we may seem to tempt God.

From the immoderate and preposterous care for the things of this life, our
Savior disswadeth by two arguments; the one, because all such care is vain
and superfluous; the other, because it is heathenish and not beseeming
Christians. That it is vain, he proves by four reasons: first, a maiori,
from the more, or greater. The life is more then the Verse. 25.
meat, and the body then raiment: therefore he that gave the life, will
provide food to sustain it; and he that provided the body, will give raiment
to clothe it, namely, to them that moderately and orderly seek it.

The second and fourth, a minori, from the Verse. 26.
less. God feeds the Fowls without their carfulness; Verse. 28, 29, 30.
and does not only clothe, but also adorn the Lillyes of the field, which are
of no value in comparison of men. Which as they were made for man's use, so are
they supplied with necessaries for man's sake. If therefore God provide for
them, how much more will he provide for us, if we shall depend upon his
providence in the moderate use Verse. 27.
of lawful means? The third is from the like. For God has set to all men a
stiat, as of their stature, so of their estate: as therefore it were a vain
and idle thing for a man to carke and care for the increase of his stature; so
likewise for the advancement of his state above that pitch, which God has
limited.

The other argument is, because such care is no way beseeming Christians:
first, because it is Heathenish. The Gentiles, that do not know God, nor Verse.
32.
acknowledge his providence, seek immoderately and preposterously after these
things. But you must not be like unto them, as before he had said. Secondly,
it becomes Christians, who have a heavenly Verse. 8.
Father, which knows what is needful and expedient for us better then our
selves, to cast their care upon him, and to depend upon his Fatherly
providence. Children that have wise, loving and able parents, do not use to
take thought for their food and raiment, or other necessaries, but depend upon
the provident care of their natural Parents. How much more ought we, who are
the children of God, to depend upon the providence of our heavenly Father? For
if earthly Parents do know to give good things to their children; Math. 7 11.
how much more will our heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him?
who in love, wisdom and power does infinitely more excel earthly Parents,
then the heavens exceed the earth.

But this argument, that God is our Father, may yet further be enforced. Is God
our Father in Christ? then has he given his own Son forvs, that by him we
might be made the sons of God. If therefore (as the Apostle argues) God has
so loved us, that he spared not his only begotten Romans 8. 32.
son, but gave him over unto death for us; how shall not he with him give us
all things that are needful and expedient for us? Again, is God our Father?
then are we his sons: and if sons, then also heirs, Romans 8. 17.
heirs of God, and coheires with Christ; and therefore to us also belongs
that comfortable exhortation of our Savior Christ, Luke 12. 32. Fear not,
little flock, be not distracted with distrustful Luke 12. 32.
care, or fear of want, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom.
For if God will give us an heavenly and everlasting Kingdom; can we imagine that
he will deny unto us the petty commodities of this life? So much of the
negative precept or dehortation.

In the affirmative precept or exhortation, we are to note three things. The
object, or thing to be sought, the duty of seeking, the order and degree,
first, The object is twofold, the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness.

As touching the former: there are two kingdoms in the world; the one of
darkness, the other of light. The former is the kingdom of Satan, who is
called the Prince, yea, the god of this world, Ioh 12. 31. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians.
2. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 26.
who rules effectually in the children of disobedience, carrying them captive
to the obedience of his will: unto this kingdom all men naturally, since the
Fall of Adam, are subject, and in that subjection do remain, until they be
translated into the Kingdom of God. The consideration whereof ought to move
all, that are not in the state of grace, earnestly and speedily to seek the
Kingdom of God. For until they belong to Gods Kingdom, they are subjects of
the kingdom of Satan.

The Kingdom of God is twofold,
Universal. Special.


His universal Kingdom is called the Kingdom of his power and providence. Of
which it is said, Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the
Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all: unto this Kingdom all creatures
whatsoever, be they never so rebellious, are subject. For although in respect
of their intent, they set themselves against the will of God; yet in respect of
the event, they become (though unwittingly) the instruments of God, to bring to
pass his good purposes. Of this kingdom our Savior speaks not in this
place. Neither shall we need to seek it, but voluntarily to submit our selves
unto it, whereunto all creatures of necessity are subject.

His special kingdom is that whereby he rules over his Elect, who are not
only his kingdom, but his Family also, whereof one part is in heaven, which
is the Church triumphant; the other Ephesians. 2. 19. Gal. 6. 10.
on earth, which is the Church militant. In regard whereof the special
kingdom of God has two parts; the kingdom of Glory, and the kingdom of
Grace. The kingdom of Glory, to the Elect, is a state of Glory, and eternal
happiness in heaven; where they having union with Christ, and by him communion
and fellowship with the whole Trinity, enjoy the chiefest good, which is God
himself, in whose presence there is Psalm. 16. 11.
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

The kingdom of Grace, unto the Elect, is a state of Grace, and by it, of
happiness begun in this life, standing in the means and degrees of salvation,
wherein we having by the Spirit, union with Christ as our Head, who is our
life, and with whom our life is hid in God, Colos. chap. 3. verse. 3, 4. and
having also communion with him in his merits, to our justification, and in his
grace and efficacy of his Spirit, to our sanctification, do pass the time of
our pilgrimage, as in his fear, so also in expectation of everlasting
happiness. 1. Pet. 1. 17. Tit. 2. 13.
The former kingdom is to be sought as our supreme end, and absolute
felicity; the latter, as the means destinated thereunto. Yet both as our
happiness: that, vt beatitudo patriae; this, vt beatitudo viae; that, as the
happiness comprehensorum, who are in actual possession; this, as the
happiness viatorum, who live in expectation: and therefore both also are to be
first sought: that, in intention, as the end; this, in execution, as the means
to the end. For whosoever desires to be an inheritour of the Kingdom of
Glory, where God unto his Saints is all in all, must first be a faithful
subject in the Kingdom of Grace, wherein God rules in his Saints by his Word
and Spirit.

But our Savior requires us to seek, not only the Kingdom of God, but also
his righteousness. Where perhaps it may seem strange, that this addition is
here made, seeing righteousness is included in the kingdom. For as the Apostle
says, the Kingdom of God stands not in meat or drink, or in other things
appertaining to this life, Romans 14 17.
but in righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Nothing therefore
being idle and superfluous in the Word of God: we are to conceive, that this
addition, for more distinct explication, was needful in respect of our
corruption; who would all of us be thought to seek Gods Kingdom; whereas but
few (in comparison) do care for his righteousness, which notwithstanding is
in execution and practice, first to be sought as the chief thing in the
Kingdom of grace, (the other two, viz. peace, and joy, being the fruits and
consequents Romans 5. 1, 2.
thereof) and as the high way to the Kingdom of glory. Now the righteousness
which we are to seek, is not our own, but his righteousness: as the Gloss
has observed, Iustitiam dicit eius, vt per eum, non per vos iusti sitis: That
we may be righteous, not in and by our selves, but in and by him. For Christ,
who knew no sin, was 2. Cor. 5. 21.
made sin, that is, a sinner for us, by imputation of our sin unto him,
that we, who are sinners in our selves, might be made the righteousness of God
in him, that is, righteous before God in him, by imputation of his
righteousness unto us. The righteousness therefore, which we are to seek, is
not the righteousness, which is of the law, for that is called our
righteousness: the which, if we shall seek with the jews, to be justified
thereby; we Romans 10. 3.
shall with them miss of the righteousness, which is of God. But it is the
Evangelical righteousness, or that which is revealed in the Gospel, which we
are commanded to seek, which is called the righteousness of God. The which, as
it is the chief subject of the Gospel, as the Apostle shows; I am not
(says he) ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for therein Romans 1. 17.
is the righteousness of God revealed: and again, that we are not justified by
the righteousness of the law, but by that righteousness which without the law is
Romans 3. 21, 22.
revealed in the Gospel, even the righteousness of God, which is by faith in
Jesus Christ: so is it first and principally to be sought: and in comparison
thereof, we are with the Apostle to esteem our own righteousness, and
whatsoever privileges we may seem to have by the law, as dung, as loss: that
we may win Christ, and be found in him, not having our Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.
own righteousness, which is of the law; but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; that we may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship or communion of his
sufferings, being made comfortable to his death. And this righteousness is
twofold, being either imputed through faith, or infused by the Spirit: the
former, is the righteousness of justification; the latter, of sanctification.
The former is called, the righteousness of God, not only because it is from
God, and accepted of him, as the latter; but also because it is the
righteousness of Christ, who is God: in which sense the blood of Christ is
called the blood of God; for Christ is called Jehovah our Act. 20. 28. Ier. 23.
6.
righteousness: and he was given unto us of God, to be our righteousness. Not
that we are justified by 1. Cor. 1 30.
the essential, or uncreated righteousness of the Deity (which was the error
of Osiander,) but because Christ, by whose righteousness we are justified, is
God. For to speak properly, we are justified by that righteousness, which
Christ performed in his humanity, in the days of his flesh, both passive and
active: whereupon the Apostle faith, that we are justified by his blood, that
is his passive righteousness, and by his obedience, that is Romans 5. 9.
his active righteousness. For as by the disobedience Romans 5. 19.
of one, (the first Adam) many are made sinners; so by the obedience of One,
(the second Adam) many are made righteous. The righteousness therefore, by
which we are justified, is the righteousness of Christ, who is God, without
us, in him. The righteousness of sanctisication is in us, from him: for of his
fulness we have received grace for grace. For by the merit of Christ his
obedience, death, and Ioh. 1. 16.
resurrection apprehended by faith, and imputed unto us, we are justified: and
by the virtue, power and efficacy of the same obedience, death, and
resurrection applied unto us by the holy Ghost, we are sanctified. The former
is perfect, but not inherent: the latter is inherent, but not perfect.
Therefore of justification there are no degrees; but of sanctification there
are, according to the measure of grace received. By the former, we are
entitled unto Gods kingdom; by the latter, we are fitted and prepared
thereunto: for no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of God. The former
is the title whereby we claim our inheritance, the latter is the cognizance of
those which are heirs: therefore it is said, that by faith we receive Act. 26.
18. and 20. 32.
remission of sins, and inheritance among those that are sanctified. And
therefore also it is called the inheritance Colos. 1. 12.
of the Saints.

These two sorts of righteousness, though different in themselves, must concur
in the same subject: and therefore we are to seek the one, as well as the
other; and not like carnal gospellers, to be all for justification, and
nothing for sanctification. For Christ was given unto us of God, as well to be
our sanctification as our justification: and out 1. Cor. 1. 30.
of his side there issued, as well the water of ablution, 1. John 5. 7.
as the blood of redemption. Yea, he has redeemed us, as well from the
dominion of sin, as from the guilt of it. And therefore no man can be assured
of his justification, who is not in some measure sanctified. For God has
sworn, that whom he redeemeth, to them he will give grace to worship him in
holiness and righteousness. Whosoever Luke 1. 73, 74, 75 2. Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 5.
24. Romans 8. 1.
is in Christ, is a new creature. Whosoever are Christ's, they crucify the
flesh with the. lusts thereof, walking not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit. And as the righteousness of sanctification is an inseperable companion
of justification, in so much as no man is to be counted righteous, but he that
does righteousness: 1. John 3. 7.
so is it a necessary forerunner of glorification. Without holiness no man shall
see God: and, Unless Heb. 12. 14.
a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom Ioh. 3. 3.
of God. Knowye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?
So much of the object. 1. Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 5. 21.


The duty is to seek: which word presupposes a loss of those things, which
we are commanded to seek. For by sin all of us naturally are exiles from the
Kingdom of glory, fallen from a state of grace and happiness, into a state of
disobedience and misery, deprived of the glorious Image of God, wherein we
were created in true righteousness and holiness, and have got unto our selves
the ougly shape of Satan. In so much that our natural and carnal wisdom is
devilish: the very (...) of our corrupt nature, the natural Iam. 3. 15.
inclination and disposition of our minds is not only an enemy, but enmity
against God. In Romans 8. 7.
which respect our Savior doubted not to say unto Peter, Auant, Satan, for
thou do (...), mind, savor, Math. 16. 23.
affect not the things which be of God, but those that be of men. This our
loss and misery is seriously to be acknowledged, and bewailed of us; that by
the acknowledgement and sense thereof, we may be stirred up studiously to seek
the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness which we have lost. For Christ our
Savior came to save those which were lost, to redeem captives, to justify
those, who by sin were guilty of damnation, to sanctify those which were
defiled and polluted with sin. Wherefore if we be not lost in our selves, we
need not a Savior; nor a Redeemer, if we be not captives; nor a Iustifier, if
we be not guilty; nor a Sanctifier, if we be not polluted; neither shall we
seriously seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, if we do not
truly acknowledge that we have lost them.

Now this word Seek, imports a studious desire, care, and endeavor to find
and to recover that which we have lost. The studious desire must be expressed
in hearty, earnest, and faithful prayer unto God. For what we ask in prayer,
we do seek at the hands of God. Our care must show it Math. 7. 7.
self in a studious meditation, and serious purpose to use all good means,
and to avoid the impediments. Our endeavor must appear in the careful and
diligent using of the means, and avoiding the impediments, and in doing
whatsoever lies in our power, and not to be wanting to our selves in any thing
which we are able to perform. For we are not so to cast the care of our
salvation upon God, that we should neglect it our selves. He Augustine.
that made us without us, will not save us (I speak of such as come to years
of discretion) without our own endeavors. For though in respect of some men's
extraordinary calling, as also in regard of the first granting of the means of
salvation, to those which before sat in darkness, it be true, that God is
found of them who sought him not; yet, where the ordinary means of salvation
are affoorded, men are bound to seek God in his ordinances, and carefully to
use those means which God has graciously vouchsafed. Neither have any a
promise that they shall find, unless first they seek.

Thus then we are to seek, the Kingdom of glory, and the eternal salvation
of our souls. First, by begging this mercy at the hands of God, which he has
promised to them that call upon him. Secondly, by seeking the Kingdom of Romans
10. 13. Luke 23. 42, 43.
grace, and his righteousness, as the means thercto; that is, by an earnest
desire, a serious care and a true endeavor, to attain to the means and
degrees of salvation in this life, viz. our Vocation, whereby we are brought
into his Kingdom; our Justification and Sanctification, whereby we are made
partakers of his righteousness. Thirdly, by endeavoring and giving all
diligence to make our Election, Vocation, and Justification sure unto us by the
works of Sanctification, that is, of piety and righteousness. For if we do
these things, an entrance shall abundantly be ministered unto us, into the
everlasting Kingdom of 2. Pct. 1. 10, 11.
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And to encourage us carefully and
diligently to seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness; let us
remember, that he which has commanded us to seek, has also promised that we
shall find. Math. 7. 7, 8.


But the chief thing which we are to insist upon, is the order and degree of
seeking, required in the word first. For where we are enjoined to seek first
the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, two things are implied. First, in
order, before all other things, that is, in the first place: and first, in
degree, above all other things, that is, chiefly and principally. As touching
the former; It may be objected, that in the Lords Prayer we are taught, to
seek first, not the Kingdom of God, or his righteousness, but the glory of
God in the first Petition, his Kingdom in the second, and his righteousness in
the third. It is true indeed, that among all things whatsoever, the glory of
God is first to be sought, as the supreme universal end, whereunto our
salvation it self is subordinated. But here our Savior teaches us, what to
seek first, in bonis nostris, in those good things which appertain unto us:
and so our eternal salvation and happiness is first to be sought, as our own
chief good, and as the Philosophers call it, (...).

Now that we are first, and without any further delay, to seek the Kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, it appears, first by the commandment of God,
not only in this place, but elsewhere also in the Scriptures. Esa. 21. 12. If
you Esa. 21. 12.
will seek, seek, return, come: for this (...), as we call it, imports
haste. As if he had said, If ye will seek the Lord indeed, seek him without
delay, return by repentance, come by faith. Esa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord whilst
he may be found, and call upon him whilst he is near. Psalm. 95. To day if
ye Psalm. 95. 7.
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, (as they do, which delay to
yield obedience to his Word) but whilst it is called to day, even to day,
before Heb 3. and 4.
to morrow, turn unto him. And agreeable to the Canonical Scriptures is that
exhortation of the son of Syrach: Delay not (says he) to turn unto the Lord,
and put not off fro day to day: for suddenly shall Ecclus. 5. 7.
the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed,
and perish in the day of vegeance.

2 By the practice of the faithful, and namely, Psalm. 63. 1.
of David, who professes, Psalm. 63. 1. that early he would seek the Lord.
And Psalm. 27. 8. when the Lord said, Seek ye my face, his heart made answer
to God with this Echo of a ready mind, Thy facc, Lord, will I seek.

3 By other pregnant reasons, whereby is manifested the absurd folly of those,
who put off their conversion, and care of their salvation until their old age,
or last sickness; as if they meant to do that last (if ever they do it)
which Christ requires to be done in the first place. For that which is
commonly said, is most of all verified in this particular: Mora trahit
periculum, Delay breeds danger. And that because of the uncertainty both of a
longer life, and of repentance to be attained after delay. For we have no
charter or lease of our lives, but are tenants at will: who must give up our
souls into the hands of God, whenever it shall please him to call them,
having no assurance that we shall live until to morrow. And therefore it were
extreme folly to defer our conversion unto God, or seeking of his Kingdom
(whereupon our salvation depends,) though it were but until to morrow. But
suppose we should live so long as we vainly promise to our selves; what
assurance have we, that we shall then repent? For first, it is not a thing in
our power to repent when we list, but it is the free gift of God, which
ordinarily he offers in the means of our salvation. But if we harden our
hearts against those means, as those do, which voluntarily delay their
turning unto God: what hope will there be of our future conversion, when the
means ordained by God for our salvation, by our delay become a means of our
obduration; when the Word of God, which to the faithful is the savor of life
unto 2. Cor. 2. 16.
life, through our default becomes unto us the savor of death unto death?

2 Again, if we will not accept the grace of God, when it is offered, as daily
he entreats us by his Ministers and Ambassadors, that we would 2. Cor. 5. 20.
be reconciled unto him; what assurance have we, that hereafter we shall have
so much grace as truly to desire it. Or if we seem to desire, and to beg it
at the hands of God, how can we promise to our selves, that if we will not
hear God when he speaks unto us, he should hear us when we speak to him?
Does not the wisdom of God protest against impenitent sinners, (as those Prou.
1. 24, 28.
are which delay their repentance) that for as much as he called, and they
would not hear; therefore, when in their distress they should call upon him,
he will not answer, neither will be found of them when they should seek him.
And to the same purpose the Prophet Zachary concludes: Therefore it is come
Zach. 7. 13.
to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts.

3 Moreover, God seems to deal with us, as Popilius Lenas, the Roman
Ambassador, dealt with King Antiochus, who giving a dilatory answer Hieron.
in Dan. 11.
to his message, with his staff he drew a circle about the King, and required
him in the name of the Senate and people of Rome, to give him a direct answer,
before he came out of that circle. So the Lord has enclosed us in a small
circle of time, which is called the day of our visitation, and the acceptable
time, which at the most is the short Luke 19. ^1.
period of this transitory life, which vanishes like 2. Cor. 6. 2.
a vapor: requiring us, when with Antiochus we Iam. 4. 14.
seek delays, before we come out of that circle, to give him our answer. For
if when the Lord gives us a time to repent, as he did to that Iezabel, spoken
of Apoc. 2. 10. and we do not repent, we Apoc. 2. 10.
are to fear the like judgments, that are there threatened against her; or the
like curse which Christ gave to the fig tree, having, like an hypocrite,
leaves, but no fruit as yet; Let no fruit Mauh 21. 17.
grow on thee from hence-forward for ever.

4 Again, repentance by delay grows more difficult. For when repentance is
delaied, sin is nourished, and being nourished, gets strength within us,
growing in strength, as we grow in years. Therefore as crooked plants,
whilst they be young, may easily be bowed or broken at your pleasure, the
which if you suffer so to continue until they be grown trees, you shall not
be able to stir: so whilst our sins are but young (as by original sin,
if it be not increased by practice and continuance, they are but evil
inclinations and dispositions) they are more easily subdued; which if by
continuance they grow to be confirmed habits, they will subdue us. For custom
becomes as it were another nature, so that a man will as easily forgo a
member of his body, as forsake a sin whereunto he has been accustomed. Can
the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard Ierem. 13. 23.
his spots? then may you also do good, that are accustomed to do evil, as
the Lord says by his Prophet Iereney.

5 But suppose, that thou may seem to repent at the last, which many (alas)
do not so much as seem to do, dying either desperate as Judas, or senseless
as Nabal: yet what assurance have thou, that thy repentance which is wrung from
thee by extremity of affliction, will be sound? Does not the Psalmist
testify, that the Israelites, Psalm. 78. 34, 36.
howsoever in outward semblance and profession, when the Lord did slay them,
they sought him, and enquired early after God; notwithstanding they did but
flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues: for their
heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant? Does
not woeful experience show, that many, whilst they are in any extremity by
sickness or otherwise, will seem very penitent, and promise great matters, if
God would be pleased to restore them to their former estate; who when they are
restored, return to their former courses, and perhaps become worse then ever
they were before. Even as water that has been heated, when it cools again,
is colder then before? For as when a man draws a bow, it follows his hand:
but when he lets his hand go, it returns to his former estate: so, many,
whilst the hand of God is upon them, whereby he seeks to draw them unto
himself, do seem to follow his hand; who when the Lord takes away his hand,
return to their former condition, and perhaps turn aside like a deceitful
bow: which is a fearful sign, that when Psalm. 78. 57. Hos. 7. 16.
they howled unto the Lord upon their beds, they cried not from their heart, as
the Prophet Hosea speaks, and that when they seemed to turn unto Hos. 7. 14.
the Lord, and to seek him early, their heart was not upright, as David
testifies of the Jews. The Psalm. 78. 37.
which I speak, not to censure those which be gone, but to admonish us, that
we do not presume. For howsoever we are in charity to judge the best of them,
who before their departure have seemed to repent; yet we are to be jealous of
our selves, and to fear, if we never have repentance until by strong hand it
be extorted from us; lest perhaps it will not be sound. And this was the third
reason manifesting the folly of them, who defer this duty of seeking Gods
Kingdom from day to day.

4 If we first seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, we shall not
only find them; but also all the things of this life, which are expedient for
us, shall be added over and above them by way of advantage, as our Savior here
promises. But on the other side, if we first seek the things of this life,
and put off the care of our salvation to our latter days; as we shall be in
great danger, for earthly things which are vain and momentany, to lose an
eternal kingdom in Heaven: so have we no assurance, that we shall obtain our
worldly desires. For it is the blessing of God that makes rich. But if we
belong unto him, we are to make account, that he will cross our preposterous
desires, and by crosses and afflictions, as it were by weeping cross, bring us
to himself, and weane us from worldly desires, that we may mind and affect the
things which are above.

5 But suppose we attain to our vvorldly desires, having not yet sought the
Kingdom of God, nor cared for the salvation of our souls: then will not these
worldly goods be good unto us: for as the wise man says, All these things are
Ecclas. 39. 27.
for good to the godly, so to the sinners they are turned unto evil. For to a
worldly man that seeks not the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, what is
pleasure, but the lust of the flesh; what riches, but the Mammon of iniquity;
what honor, but the pride of life; what learning and wisdom, but armata
nequities, whereby men are enabled to do the more hurt; what long life it
self, but a longer continuance in sin? But on the other side, if we first
seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness; all these outward things shall
be added unto us, as blessings and favors of God, and pledges of his love: or
if we may seem to want any temporal blessings, the seeming want thereof shall
not hinder our happiness. Blessed are you, says Luke 6. 20. 21.
our Savior to the faithful, though you be poor; blessed though you mourn,
etc. for though they seem poor, yet are they truly rich; yea, rich to God,
Luke 12. 21. not only because they have a treasure laid up in Heaven, but also
because godliness with contentednes is great riches, neither 1. Tim. 6. 6.
is any man so rich as he that is contented: though they be abridged of
worldly pleasures, yet they only have the true delight: to them a good
conscience is a continual feast, and having peace Romans 5. 1, 2. and 14. 17.
of conscience, they have also the joy in the holy Ghost, which, as S. Peter
says, is unspeakable and 1. Pct. 1. 8.
glorious. Though they may seem base in the eyes of the world, yet who are so
truly honorable as they, who are the sons and heirs of God, and coheires of
Christ? Though they are simple, yet Romans 8. 17.
who so wise as those that fear God? who so learned as those who know God to
be their Father, Psalm. 111. 10.
Christ to be their Savior, and the holy Ghost to be their sanctifier? Though
their life sometimes be short, yet is it recompensed with immortality; and who
may be thought so long-liued, as those in whom our Savior has begun a
spiritual life, which never shall have end?

6 Until we seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, we remain in the
kingdom of Satan, and in the state of damnation, out of which we have need to
haste.

7 Lastly, until we seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, we do
nothing but sin, this duty being the first which we can do without sin.
And therefore by delaying this duty, which ought first to be done, we do
nothing but add sin to sin, and hoord up wrath against the day of wrath.

You see what our duty is; let us now consider our practice. Do not very many
that would seem Christians, defer their seeking of Gods Kingdom, and care
of their salvation, until their old age or time of sickness; making choice of
that time, which is most unfit to begin their repentance? and yet when age or
sickness comes, they still defer their turning unto God and seeking of his
Kingdom, so long as there is hope of life. For what is the course that these
men take, when God by sickness summoneth them as it were to appear before him?
first, they send to the Physician. That they send to the Physician, I mislike
not, so it be done in due order. But first we should labor to make our peace
with God, humbling our selves under his hand, confessing and bewailing our
sins, whereby we have provoked him to anger, turning to him that smites us,
and flying unto him by hearty, earnest and faithful prayer for the pardon of
our sins, that the cause of our affliction being removed, the affliction it
self may either be removed or sanctified unto us. Then are we to use Physic
and other lawful helps, depending on the blessing of God in the use of them.
But these men first send to the Physician, and whilst they have any hope of
life, they never seek to God, nor take care what shall become of their souls.
But when the Physician gives them over as past recovery; then, and never till
then, they send for the Minister; then, and never till then, they seek God and
his Kingdom. As though their meaning were, when they leave to live, then only
to begin to live to God, and having all their time led the life of the
Reprobate, to dye nevertheless the death of the just. But be not deceived,
qualis vita, finis ita; such as has bin the life, such commonly is the end:
and ordinarily the Greek saying is true, (...), Of an evil life, there is an
ill end. I take not upon me to reftraine Gods mercy from those, who at the
last turn truly unto him: but I speak of that which is ordinary. It is to be
feared, that not one of an hundred, who have al their life time deferred their
repentance, does repent at the last hour: and therefore it is an hundred to
one, that thou shall not then repent, if thou deferrest till then.

But the Kingdom of God is also to be sought first, above all things, that is,
chiefly and principally, and that for these reasons. 1. Because the salvation
of our souls in the Kingdom of Glory, and the degrees of salvation in the
Kingdom of Grace, is our true happiness. The former, as beatitudo patrie: the
other, as beatitudo viae: and Regnum ergo and iuslilia Dei bonum nostrum est,
and boc appetendum est, and ibi finis constitue^dus, propter quod facimus,
quaecunque facimus. August de sermon. Domini in Mont. hb. 2.
being our happiness, and consequently our chiefest good, are in our
judgments to be esteemed, in our affections to be desired, in our endeavors
to be labored for above all other things; nothing else being to be desired or
sought for otherwise, than as it may be a furtherance, or at least no
hinderance thereunto. As for the things of this life, they are so far from
being the chief good, as that to them that set their hearts upon them, and
seek them chiefly, they are not good at all. All these things (says the Wise
man) are Ecclef. 39. 27.
for good to the godly, but to the sinners they are turned into evil. For to
those that seek them chiefly, they are not only vain and unprofitable, as
Solomon testifies, but through their own default, Ecclef. 1. 2. and 2. 11.
hurtful also and pernicious unto them; as being not only thorns to choke
the seed of grace in them; but also the baits of sin, and snares of the
devil. For which cause Solomon says, The Pro. 1. 32.
prosperity of fools destroys them. Again, The salvation of our soul is an
eternal good. These To happiness two things required, fullness and
perpetuity. Psalm. 16. 11.
things, if they be good, are but momentany. For as the whole earth, compared
to the heavens, is but as a point of no sensible quantity; so our whole time
upon the earth, is but as a moment or point of time, in comparison of eternity.
Who therefore would prefer the momentany vfe of earthly vanities in this
world, before the everlasting fruition of the superexcellent eternal weight of
glory in heaven?

Thirdly, consider the wickedness and profane folly of those who chiefly seek
worldly things. For first, their eye being evil, their whole life is
answerable, as was said before. 2. They, which Ver. 23.
profess religion, and chiefly seek earthly things, as all worldlings do,
are notorious hypocrites; giving their face and outward profession to God, but
their heart, with all their chief desires, studies and endeavors to Mammon. 3.
Those that 1. Ioh. 2. 15, 16.
chiefly love the world, and the things of this world, the love of God is not
in them. Yea, being Iam. 4. 4.
lovers of the world, they are found to be haters of God; for the amity of this
world is enmity against God. 4. Those who removing their hearts from God, do
set them on the world, are Idolaters, or as Saint James calls them,
Adulterers, who have no inheritance in the Kingdom of God. 5. Those who
chiefly affect the world, do subordinate the profession of Religion, and the
care of keeping a good conscience to worldly desires; and therefore in time of
trial they fall away. Whereas contrariwise, they whose treasure is in heaven,
and have their Anchor of hope fixed there, will not suffer themselves either to
be allured to that which is evil, by the desires of the world: which they
esteem as vanities, in comparison of heavenly happiness; or to be terrified
from that which is good, by the afflictions and calamities of this life, which
are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed. 6. That which is Eccles.
10. 9.
said of covetous persons, is true of all worldlings, that they have set their
souls to sale, taking for them (as the price thereof) the vanities of the
world: And therefore are more foolish and profane than Esau, who sold his
birthright for a Genesis 25. 33, 34. Heb. 12. 16.
mess of pottage. For these men (for matters of like value, and less
necessity) make away an everlasting inheritance in the Kingdom of heaven.

Finally, those, which professing themselves Christians, do chiefly seek
earthly things, do cast away their souls; not only losing their inheritance
in heaven, but also plunging themselves into hell. For they which walk, that
is, make profession of religion, and yet chiefly mind earthly things; the
Apostle says, that their end is Phil. 3. 19.
damnation. And they which sow to the flesh, Gal. 6. 8.
must look of the flesh to reap corruption.

Fourthly consider, the doctrine of the Gospel teaching us to deny all worldly
lusts, Tit. 2. 12. the vow of Baptism, to renounce them: the duty of all true
Christians, and the practice of Gods children. For so many of us as are true
Christians, are also to be persuaded, that we are elected, called, redeemed,
regenerated unto life eternal in the kingdom of God. And consequently, that
we are heirs, yea, Citizens of heaven, and pilgrims Phil. 3. 20. Heb. 11. 13.
and strangers upon earth, who ought to use bac vita, vt via, this life, as a
way to a better life; and the things of this life, as helps only, and not as
hindrances in our way; not to set our hearts upon Heb. 12. 1.
them, but to use the world, as not abusing it, 1. Cor. 7. 31. Psalm. 131. 2.
Col. 3. 1, 2.
being weaned from worldly desires, and minding the things which are above. For
it were a foul shame for us, who are appointed to heaven, and called to Gods
Kingdom, to be wholly or chiefly addicted to the earth, like earth-wormes, or
Serpents that crawle upon the earth; like unclean fishes, which wanting
finnes, do lie in the mud; like blind beetles, which having wings,
notwithstanding are, for the most part, poring in the dung of the earth.

And lastly, consider the practice of the Godly; of Moses, who when he was
forty years old, refused Heb. ^1. 24, 25, 26.
to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: esteeming the reproach of Christ (so he calls the afflictions of the
members of Christ) greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. And the reason
of all this was, because he had respect to the recompense of reward; that is,
preferred the salvation of his soul to all worldly respects: for he that has
an eye to the reward both of the godly and wicked, will not only choose to be a
bond-seruant among the people of God, rather then to be a Gallant in Pharaohs
Court; but he will also choose to be as poor a Lazar, as Lazarus himself,
rather then to be another Dives. Luke 16.


Of David in the fourth Psalm: There be many that say, Who will show us any
good? seeking Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
chiefly after worldly profit. But, Lord, says he, lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon us, show thy self favorable and gracious unto us in
Christ our Savior. This he would more rejoice in, then the worldlings
themselves in all their prosperity. For, though he were a great and glorious
King, yet he reposed not his happiness neither in profit, nor in pleasure, nor
in promotion: Psalm. 32. 1, 2. and Psalm. 119. 1
but in the salvation of his soul, and the degrees thereof, as justification
and sanctification. And in Psalm. 27. 4. This is that one thing which he desired
Psalm. 27. 4.
of the Lord, and which he says he would seek after; being indeed that one
thing, whereof by the testimony of our Savior there is necessity. Luke 10. 42.


Of the Apostles, who forsook all they had in this world, to follow our
Savior Christ. But chiefly of the Apostle Paul, who though he had Phil. 3.
8, 9.
many things to glory in: yet he esteemed all as dung, yea as loss, in
comparison of his justification and salvation by Christ.

The use hereof is twofold; reproof of worldlings, instruction to our selves,
And first, we are to reprove the folly of worldlings, who throughout the whole
book of the Proverbs are Salomons fools: who are not, as we say, penny-wise
and pound-foolish, but body-wise and soule-foolish. For what greater folly can
there be, then for momentany fruitio^ of earthly vanities, to lose an
everlasting kingdom in heaven; for the pleasure of a moment (as this whole
life is no more, nor yet so much, compared to eternity) to incur everlasting
misery; for the trifles and vanities of this world, to make away our soul,
which is of more worth unto us, then all the world besides?

And secondly, the profaneness and wickedness of worldly-minded men; who
either prefer the obtaining and enjoying of their worldly desires, before not
only the means of their salvation, Math. 22. 5. Luke 14. 18, 19, 20.
as those in the Gospel; but also before the glory of God, and their own
salvation: or else subordinate their profession of Religion to their worldly
respects: who when they ought to affect the things of this life, so far only
as they concur with their spiritual good: contrariwise affect and profess
Religion only so far, as it may stand with the obtaining or enjoying of their
worldly desires. And therefore even in their profession To these men, not
Godliness is gain, but gain (...) godliness, 1. Tim. 6.
of Religion, wherein they would seem to seek the Kingdom of God, they
chiefly seek (like hypocrites) their worldly ends.

The instruction which we are to learn from hence, is also twofold. For
first, if we are chiefly to seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
then must we hunger and thirst after the grace of God, and his spiritual
blessings in heavenly things, above all the things in this world. Then our
chief care also must be, to keep a good conscience, and to use all good means
whereby our salvation may be furthered: to enter into a religious course of
life, wherein we may walk before God in sincerity and truth: to make choice
of our calling, of our company, of our marriage, as may best stand with our
spiritual good. But chiefly and above all, to avoid those things which do
hinder the salvation of our souls. Now the soul is lost by sin; for the
soul that sins, shall die. Seeing therefore the soul, which is of more
worth unto us than all the world besides, is lost by sin; we ought every one
to have this unfeigned purpose and settled resolution, not to sin wittingly
and willingly, though we might gain the whole world thereby; and much less
the particular and petty desires thereof. Should we not sin to gain the
whole world; and shall every trifle in the world move us to sin? For what is
that which by sin we gain, in comparison of the world; and what is the
whole world to a man's soul? For what will it profit a man, if he shall Mark.
8. 36.
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?

Secondly, we are to learn (as we have been taught) to place our happiness
and felicity in the salvation of our souls. For then the eye of our mind shall
be single and sincere, and the whole course of our life and conversation will
be spiritual and religious. Then will all our desires, cares, studies and
endeavors tend chiefly to this end. Then shall we always, with Moses, have an
eye to the recompense of reward; and with our Savior Christ, for the joy that
is set before us, despise all earthly things, Heb. 12. Then shall we pass the
time of this our pilgrimage, in a longing expectation of everlasting happiness.
And therefore thrice happy are they, who have laid up their treasure in
Heaven, and reposed their felicity in the salvation of their souls.

Now follows the promise which Christ has annexed to his commandment: And
all these things shall be added unto you. Where, before we come to the words,
we may, out of the promise in general, not unprofitably observe two things:
viz. the gracious dealing of God with us, and our ungracious indisposition in
respect of spiritual things. For whereas God, in respect of his absolute
dominion over us, might enjoin us those things which appertain to his glory
only, without respect of our good, as men use to deal with their servants;
yet he commands us such things as do tend to our own good. And that he
might allure us to seek our own good, he adds gracious promises thereunto.

The thing which our Savior here enioyneth, is, That we should seek our own
happiness. And that we may be allured thereunto, he has promised, that seeking,
weshall find. And not only that, but because we are sensual, and too much
addicted to the things of this life, he promises, that if we shall first seek
our true and everlasting happiness, we shall not only obtain it; but in the
mean time he will give unto us a supply of all these outward things, which
naturally we do so much desire. Wherein the Lord deals with us, as loving
Parents deal with their children: who use to allure them to learn or practice
some thing which may be for their singular good, by promising unto them some
pretty or pleasing reward, wherewithal as children they are more affected. The
which gracious goodness of God should allure and encourage us, to seek first
his kingdom and his righteousness. Secondly, we may observe our own untoward
disposition to that which is spiritually good. For whereas all men naturally
and necessarily desire happiness: yet when we are informed, that our happiness
consists in spiritual blessings in heavenly places, we have no mind
thereunto. Neither can we, to the seeking thereof, be moved either by the
commandments of God, though wholly intending our good, or yet by the promise of
spiritual blessings, which are vvorth many worlds; but the Lord must be
feign to allure us to seek our eternal happiness, by promising unto us
temporal rewards; which are but trifles to please children vvithall, in
comparison of the other. And yet such is the vvayvvardnes of a great number,
that neither by the commandments of God, nor by his threatenings, neither by
the promises of a better life, nor by the promises of this life, they can be
moved to affect or seek spiritual things. The which untoward indisposition is
so much the more absurd, because it is contrary to the profession of
Christians. For Christian religion teaches us to deny worldly lusts. And Tit.
2. 12.
in the vow of our Baptism we have promised to renounce the^. And professing
our selves Christians, we profess our selves pilgrims in this world, and
citizens of Heaven: and therefore ought to be weaned from earthly desires, and
affect and mind the things which are above. But to come to the promise it self.

In handling whereof, I will first explain the words as they lie in order, and
then confirm the truth of this promise; that it may serve as a forcible
argument to move us, to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.

The conjunction And, is here used as a note of consequence; as ifhe had said,
Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then all these things
shall be added unto you. Which teaches us, that these temporal benefits, by
the promise and blessing of God, are consectaries of spiritual grace; that is,
do follow upon our study and care in seeking first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness: idest, says Augustine, Consequentur, si ista quaeretis. But if
any man shall hereupon infer, that then (belike) the things of this life are
promised to them that shall neglect them altogether: I answer, They are
promised, not to those that tempt God, or live inordinately: but to them that
seek them in a secondary respect, and subordinate their desire and care in
seeking of them, to their spiritual good. God would have every man ordinarily
to live in a lawful calling, and to be industrious therein: to get his
liuelyhoode in the sweat of his brows, and walking ordinately, to eat his
own bread, 2. These. 3. 11, 12. Act. 20. 35. Ephesians. 4. 28. The slothful persons
are sent to the Pismire to school, of her to learn industry and providence,
Prou. 6. 6. The Householder is bound in conscience to provide for his Family,
and the Father for his children, 1. Tim. 5. 8. 1. Cor. 12. 14. and the good
housewife is highly commended, Prou. 31. Our Savior Christ commands us, by
prayer to seek our daily bread; and what we desire in our prayer, we are to
seek in our practice. This promise therefore seems to be the same in effect
with that, Psalm. 128. 1, 2. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and
walks in his ways; for thou shall eat the labor of thine hands. That is,
If we first seek his Kingdom, and his righteousness, he will bless our
labors and endeavors for these outward things. They shall follow upon our
piety and chief study for heavenly things, without our carking and immoderate
care; but not ordinarily, without our provident care and honest endeavors. We
are therefore first to seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and
then to seek, in a secondary respect, the things of this life, as helps in
this our way to a better life. For as I faid before, the word first, seems to
have relation to a second; and when we are commanded to seek heavenly
blessings first, it is implied, that in a second place we are to seek the
blessings of this life. This if we do, we are in the use of honest means, to
depend on the blessing of God according to his promise, casting our care upon
him, and referring the success unto God, not troubling our selves, or taking
thought That is, (...), sorbid den, Luke 12. 29. Tu praesens cura, Domine
commit futura.
what shall be the event, the knowledge whereofbelongeth only to God.

These things] Which be needful and expedient for this life. For God has not
therefore commanded us first to seek his kingdom, and the life to come, that
we should want the necessary helps of this life: but that having sought that
first, we might more fully enjoy these, with the favor and blessing of God.
As if he should say (says Chrysostom) I forbid you to seek these things;
not that you may not receive them, but that you may receive them more
abundantly. For so he says,

All these things] God therefore deals liberally with us, giving us richly
all things to enjoy. If 1. Tim. 6. 17. Psalm. 23. 1.
he be our shepherd, we shall lack nothing, Psalm. 23. If we fear him, there
shall be no want unto us, Psalm. 34. If we walk uprightly before him, he
Psalm. 34. 10.
will deny nothing unto us that is good, Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84. 11.
Come to our Savior therefore, you who say, Who will show us any good? and he
will show you the Christian (...), or Art of Thriuing. First Psalm. 4. 6.
(says he) seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. For indeed, Godliness (with contentedness) is
1. Tim 6. 6. (...), 1. Tim. 4. 8.
great Thrift, having the promises not only of the life to come, but of this
life also. This then is the most compendious way for a man to be rich unto
God, and to attain to all things that are needful and expedient, and to enjoy
them with Luke 12. 21.
the favor of God, whose blessing makes rich. Prou. 10. 22.


But the principal word to be observed here, is, added. All these things
shall be added unto you. For first, by this word is presupposed, that those who
seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, shall obtain those
things which they principally seek; and over and besides them, all these
outward things shall be added unto them. As to Solomon, when he asked wisdom
of God, the Lord did not only give him wisdom, but 1. King. 3. 13.
thereunto added riches and honor. This therefore must stir us up, seriously
and cheerfully to seek, knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. I said not to the seed of Jacob, 1. Cor. 15. 58. Esa. 45. 19.
Seek ye me in vain, says the Lord. For as he has commanded us to seek;
so he has promised, that seeking, we shall find, Math. 7. And in Math. 7. 7,
8.
this place, that we shall not only find his kingdom, and his
righteousness, which chiefly we seek; but that thereunto shall be added all
the things of this life which are expedient for us.

Secondly, whereas he says not, All these things shall be given, but that they
shall be added, he teaches us, that temporal blessings are not promised as
the principal reward of our seeking: but as accessaries and additions given
over and above the principal, by way of advantage. As (...), au^arij, v^l
Mantisz (...).
Tradesmen, when they will deal bountifully with their buyers, do use by way
of advantage, to add something to the number, weight, or measure of that
commodity which they utter. So that spiritual blessings in heavenly places,
are the rewards which principally are given; temporal blessings are but petty
rewards, and additions, which are added by way of advantage. This therefore
teaches us again, that the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, are
principally to be sought, as the principal blessings; and that they deal
preposterously and absurdly, who chiefly seek the temporal, or for their
sakes seek the spiritual: seeing the temporal are but small additions, and
accessories, and auctaries, appendices and consequents of the former.

To you] namely, that seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness.
For neither the kingdom of God and his righteousness are promised as the
principal; nor temporal blessings, as additions and auctaries: but only to
those who perform the duty, which is the condition of the promise. But against
the truth of this promise, two things may be objected. The former, that to
many, who do not first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, all
these things are given. The latter, that to many, who do seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, all these things are not given.

To the first I answer, that when worldlings, who do not first seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, abound with worldly benefits: it may
first be doubted, whether they be given unto them of God. For if they be
gotten by unlawful means, they are not received from God as his gifts, but
rather from the devil, as the prices for which they sell their souls unto
him. Or secondly, if they be given of God to a man that sets his heart upon
the world, immoderately and preposterously seeking the same, it is to be
doubted, that they are granted of God in judgment and anger; as to one whom he
has given over to his own lusts. And therefore that they are but (as they say
of the gifts of enemies) (...), blessings Prou. 1. 32. Psalm. 73. 17, 18. Ier.
12. 3. Numb. 11. 33.
which are turned into curses. Thus the Lord granted Quails to the Israelites,
importunately desiring and longing for them, when they had been better to have
bin without them. Those that chiefly set their hearts upon the world, and do
enjoy their hearts desire, are to fear lest they be like the cattle, which
going in yt best pastures, are fatted for the slaughter. But suppose, that the
Ier. 12. 3.
Lord does give the^ as temporal rewards of moral virtues, or wages for some
outward and te^poralseruice: yet this promise is not verified of the^. For to
them, these things, though they be given, yet they are not added, because they
are given alone. For alas, these men have their portion in this life, Psalm.
Psalm. 17. 14.
17. and all their good things they receive whiles they live here, Luke 16:
and in this life, as our Luke 16. 25. Math. 6. 2, 5.
Savior speaks of other hypocrites, they receive all their reward. But these
are not the portion or reward of Gods children, whose inheritance is in heaven:
but small additions unto their principal rewards. Greater blessings are
promised and given to them, to which these are added.

To the second I answer, that promises of temporal benefits, which are not
absolutely good, are not to be understood absolutely: and that to the godly,
who first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, all these things are
added, so far, as they are expedient for Gods glory, and their own spiritual
good: so far, as they are blessings, and not curses; so far, as they do, or
ought to seek or desire them. For with these limitations, all promises of
temporal blessings are to be understood. For these outward things, if they be
not subordinat to Gods glory, and our own spiritual and everlasting good, they
are not to be esteemed good things, nor blessings. And therefore, as they are
not within yt verge of Gods promise; for promises are of blessings, not of
curses: so they are not, or ought not to be within the compass of our desire.
For they that first seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; in so
doing, subordinate all their worldly desires to Gods glory, and their own
spiritual good: desiring nothing in this world, but so far as it may stand
with Gods glory, and their own salvation.

Now it is manifest, that it is good many times for the children of God, to be
under the cross: and to be afflicted with want of some outward things. But
this want, these crosses, do not hinder their happiness, but further their
good. For they are happy, notwithstanding them, Luke 6. 20, 21. And therefore to
the promise of temporal blessings, Mark. 10. 30.
made to those which first seek Gods Kingdom with purpose to renounce all for
Christ's sake; God has annexed the promise of the cross. God in love does
chastise his children for their Heb. 12. 10.
profit: and they cannot deny, but that it is good Pss. 119. 71, 75. Lam. 3.
27.
for them that they are afflicted. Yea, David pronounces them happy, whom the
Lord does Psul. 94. 12.
chastise, and teach them out of his Law. Those that first seek the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, have this privilege; and as Esaias calls it,
this heritage, that as nothing shall Esa. 54. 17 Romans 8. 28.
hurt them; so all things whatsoever, as well adversity as prosperity, shall,
by the merciful dispensation of Gods Fatherly providence, work together for
their good. This therefore is the disposition of all those, who first seek the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. Not to affect, either with covetous
worldlings, abundance, or with superstitious phantasticks, voluntary poverty.
Nor to seek to be their own caruers, and much less to resolve, that they
will attain to great matters in this world (for they that will be 1. Tim. 6. 9.
rich, whether God give them lawful means or not, do fall into the snare of
the Devil, and are ready to swallow his baits) but to submit themselves to
the good, and most wise providence of God, seeking and expecting from him such
a measure of temporal blessings, as he in his Fatherly wisdom does know to
be most expedient for them. This was the prayer of the wise man, Pro. Pro. 30.
8.
30. And this is the prayer, which by the direction of our Savior Christ, we
are daily to make: Give me not abundance, nor give me not penury, but, Feed me
cibo dimensi mei, which our Savior calls (...), that is, that portion of
temporal Math. 6. 11.
benefits, which God knows to be most fitting and expedient for us. Therefore
notwithstanding these objections, this promise made to those, which first seek
Gods Kingdom and his righteousness, is most true; and as it properly
belongs to them, and not to worldlings: so is it ever performed toward them.
Psalm 9. 10.


And that we may not only give undoubted credit to this gracious promise, but
also, in sure affiance and faith therein, be moved to seek first the Kingdom
of God and his righteousness; let us not only consider his truth in his
promise, Math. 7. 7, 8. Psalm. 34. 10. Heb. 13. 5. Pro. 10. 3. Psalm. 9 10.
but also his fidelity in performance, Psalm. 37. 25. His all-sufficiencie, in
being a plentiful reward to those that seek him, Genesis 15. 1. and 17. 1. His
bounty, giving all things abundantly to enjoy, 1. Tim. 6. 17. His providence,
both general, who gives all things to all; all things that are needful and
expedient, (Act. 17. 25.) to all creatures, even to those which were made for
man's use. Math. 6. 25, 26, etc. the which providence of God, the brute
creatures seem to acknowledge, Psalm. 104. 27. and 145. 15. That those men may
know themselves to be more brutish then the brute Psa 145. 15, 16.
beasts, who do not acknowledge Gods providence, and in some measure depend
thereon. And also special, toward the faithful, Psalm. 106. 4, 5. and 34. 16.
For they are of his family, and therefore no doubt he will provide for them, 1.
Tim. 4. 10. He is their Pastor, and therefore they shall lack nothing, Psalm.
23. 1. He is their heavenly Father, and therefore will supply their wants,
Math. 6. 32. and 7. 11. They are his children in Christ, and in him have right
to all things, 1. Cor. 3. 22. and therefore, in his justice, will not deny
them any thing that is good for them, Psalm. 84. 11. To them he has given his
only Son; and therefore, with him, will in his love give all things
profitable, To. 8. 32. To them, according to his good pleasure, he has
appointed a Kingdom. And therefore they need not fear, but that they seeking
it first, both that Kingdom shall be given unto them: and that all these
things also shall be added over and above, by way of aduanthge, Luke 12. 31, 32.

The Lord for his mercies sake give us all grace, first to seek his Kingdom,
and his righteousness: that we may obtain his righteousness in the Kingdom of
grace, whereupon will follow peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghoft,
with a supply of all needful blessings in this life: and may in the end
attain to everlasting happiness in the Kingdom of Glory, where we shall have
the fruition of God himself, who is the chiefeft. Good, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and only Savior. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all
praise and glory for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

