A TREATISE CONCERNING ANTICHRIST, DIVIDED INTO TWO BOOKS, THE FORMER, PROVING
THAT THE POPE IS ANTICHRIST: THE LATTER, MAINTAIning the same assertion,
against all the objections of Robert Bellarmine, Jesuit and Cardinal of the
Church of Rome.

By GEORGE DOWNHAM, Doctor of Divinity, and lately reader of the Divinity
Lecture in Paul's.

Apoc. 18, 4. 6. Come out of Babylon my people, that you be not partakers with
her in her sins, and that you receive not of her plagues, etc. Render unto
her as she has rewarded you, and repay her double according to her works.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Cuthbert Burbie. 1603.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY, MOST CHRISTIAN AND WORTHY KING, JAMES, by the
grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the
faith, etc. All prosperity and true happiness in this life, and eternal
felicity in the life to come.
THE blessed dispensation of Gods most gracious providence toward this land;
(for which his holy name is always to be praised in his church) in bringing
your Highness unto this kingdom, in the beginning of this seventeenth century
after Christ, seems to presage, that the happy reformation of the church,
restitution of the Gospel, consumption of Antichrist, decay of Babylon happily
begun in the last centenary, shall in this age or century receive a notable
confirmation and increase, if not a perfect consummation. For howsoever whiles
the darkness of Popery over spread the Christian world, not only the
inhabitants of the earth were made drunk with the goulden cup of the whore of
Babylons Apoc. 17. 2, and 18. 3.
fornications, but the Kings also and Princes of the earth having drunk of the
same cup, committed spiritual whoredom Apo. 17. 13
with her, (...) (...) (...) power to support (...) (...): (...) when as it
(...) God (...) enlighten the world with the bright beams of his glorious
Gospel, then Antichrist began to consume, and Babylon to decay: the Preachers
discovering Antichrist, the people coming Apoc. 1^. 1. and 14. 6. 3.
out of Babylon, and the Princes which before had assisted Antichrist, setting
themselves against him. This great work of God in the full consumption of
Antichrist and confusion of Babylon, the Ministers of God, that is to say,
Princes and Preachers, are Romans 13. 4.
to accomplish and bring to pass. The Preachers, by preaching the everlasting
Gospel; at the sound whereof Babylon falls, as once Apoc. 14. 6. 7. 8.
the walls of Jericho at the noise of the Trumpets sounded by the Priests: and
by the ministry whereof as it were the spirit of the Ioh. 6.
Lords mouth, Antichrist falls into a consumption, as Dagon 2. These. 2. 8
once did fall before the Arc. Th Princes, partly by their godly example,
going out and in before the people in the sincere profession 2. Sam. 5.
of the truth, and detestation of popery; partly by their authority, providing
faithful Ministers, countenancing their Ministry, oppugning Antichrist in
his religion and in his members, bereauing the whore of Babylon the Popes
concubine of her means, Apo. 17. 16
and lastly sacking her and consuming her with fire. For which cause as I
thought it my duty (being called to read a Lecture in divinity) when I
perceived the Papists within these few years (I know not upon what other hopes
then of raising their fortunes out of the ruins of this whole Island) grown
more insolent then in former times, to make the best opposition I could against
them, and to that end handled this maine controversy concerning Antichrist
(whereupon all Popery depends) both (...) proouing the affirmative, viz. that
the Pope is Antichrist, and also (...) disproouing the negative against the
objections of Bellarmine the Goliath of the Papists: so being now at the
instance of many well disposed persons, to publish this treatise, I have
thought good to dedicate the same to your Majesty, as the chief patron and
defender of the faith and Gospel of Christ (upon earth) against Antichrist and
his adherents. For hereby not only your royal courage may be stirred up, and
your godly resolution in oppugning Antichrist (according to the prophecies of
the scripture, foretelling the duty of Christian Princes in this behalf) more
and more confirmed: but also it may most evidently appear to all men, that
upon most just and weighty considerations, you and your people renounce all
communion with the Pope and church of Rome, and by all good means do set our
selves against them. For if the Pope be Antichrist (which is proved in this
Book) and consequently the church of Rome, the whore of Babylon, and synagogue
of Antichrist: the papists, (who call themselves Catholics, and us Heretics)
the limbs of Antichrist; the religion and doctrine of popery, the mystery of
iniquity and mere Antichristianisme: it follows necessarily, that Christian
princes are not to tolerate either the religion of papists or their persons
within their dominions. The religion Deu. 13. 1. 5
of papistry being a Catholic Apostasy from God, consisting not only in
respect of the worship, of manifold superstion and most gross idolatry; but
also in respect of the doctrine, of many hundred Antichristian errors and
doctrines of devils. The persons of Catholick-papists, being Catholic
heretics and reuolters from God, members of Antichrist, palpable idolatours;
many of them (especially the Seminary priests and Jesuits) perswaders of
others to idolatry and apostasy from God. Not to speak of the treason against
Christian Princes which is enclosed in the bowels of popery, and bosoms of
papists. For they teach that all Christian Princes who acknowledge not the Pope
for their supreme head and Lord, (as no true Christians do) are Schismatics
at the least, and consequently that the Pope has authority to depose them,
and to absolve their subjects from their allegiance: and that the Pope when he
proceeds to the sentence of excommunication and deposition of them (as he did
against your sister of blessed memory Queen Elizabeth, and does, so often as he
dares, against others) he does not err in his definitive sentence. And
therefore (whatsoever they pretend to the contrary) it is certain, that they
being the marked slaves of Antichrist, wholly devoted to his will, are also
willing and ready (when means and opportunity fail not) to put in execution
his Antichristian censures, and devilish designements. In consideration
whereof, Christian Princes and people, are not only bound to come out of
Babylon, and to renounce Apoc. 18. 4.
all communion with the Pope and Church of Rome, but also they are to reward
the where of Babylon, as she has rewarded us, Apoc. 18. 6.
yea to repay her double: and not only to hate her, but also to make her
desolate and naked, to eat her flesh and consume Apo. 17. 16.
her with fire. And hereof Christian Princes are to be assured, that as those
which join with the Pope in persecuting the faithful, do fight under the
banner of Antichrist the beast, against Christ the Lamb: so they in oppugning
the Pope and Church of Apo. 19. 19
Rome, do fight the battles of Christ against Antichrist. And consequently
are to promise to themselves undoubted victory: they fighting under the banner
of the Lamb, who shall be sure to overcome, seeing he is the Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings: Apo. 17. 14.
and those also that are with him, though esteemed of Antichrist Qui monet vt
facias, quod iam facis, ipse monendo Laudat, and ^atu comprobat acta su^.
and his adherents, as Schismatics and Heretics, yet are they called, elect,
and faithful. Encourage therefore your self most Christian King (as we doubt
not but you do) to maintain for ever the truth of Christ, against the
falsehood of Antichrist. And doubt you not both of happy success and victory
in this life, and of an immortal crown of glory in the life to come. The God
of all mercy and power, who in his unspeakable bounty toward us, has placed
your Highness over us in peace, make both you and us truly thankful to his
majesty for this inestimable benefit: and establish your Highness and your
Royal posterity in the throne of this Kingdom, to the glory of his great
name, advancement of his Kingdom, propagation of the Gospel, confusion of
Popery, consolation of all true Christians, and your own everlasting comfort.
Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject GEORGE DOWNHAM.

Faults escaped in the Printing, are thus to be corrected.
In the first Book.
Page 7, lin. vlt. read the Apoc. Page 1^, l. 9, (Apocal. 13) In margin, li.
6. ad Marecl^ P. 14, l. 4. atq (...), l. 9. which with, l. ^0. which word,
l. 12. superst ^ous, p. 15. l. 6. (...), P. 17. l 18. Pannonia, P. 21. marg. l.
3. Algasiam, P. 24, l. 1 for as, and marg. lin vlt hist. ^otor. p. 28. l vlt P
(...). p. 29. l. 10. would, p. 31, l. 3. as (...), l. 25. hinder d then, page
35, l 9. donation, l. 16. Exarch, p. 36. l. 23. Luttp^dus, p. 40 marg. l. 16.
^aleu, p. ^2, l. 16. Seleucidae, p. 47. l. 22. blot out the one vvhiles. p. 50.
marg. l. 6. Mat. 4. 9, p 59. marg l. 2. Lubb, p. 69. l. a fine 5. Cooks,
with, p. 70, l. 9. Monstrance, and in marg. l. a fine. 4. arcu, page 71. ad
lin. 2. in marg. scribe, (...) can. sub sinem extravag. loan. 22. Tat. 14.
(...) significatione C. cu^ inter, p. 74. marg. l. 16. Electi potest, p. 77 l.
6. ipsissimum, p. 78. l. 7. eight, p. 80 marg l. 7. Na^r, p. 83, l. 16. blot
out (...), and in marg. l. vlt. refer subtiliss ad lin. a f. 7, p. 86. l. 7.
Tecetius, p. 90. l penult Donation, p. ^1. l. a. f. 8. first and second, p. 92.
l. vlt. Lando, p. 94, l 2 unto, l. a. f. 5. and 4. Benedict, p. 100. l. a. f.
10. Impleu^ris, p. 104. marg. l. vlt. Non nos, p. 106. l. 6. we are, p. 110. l
23. Babylons, p. 123. l. 5. This, l. a. f. 11. received, p. 128. l. 22. (...),
p. 129. l. 19. other names, p. ^38. l. 18. There.

In the second Book.
Page, 6. l. 13. that he is, p. 10. l penult. another, p. 11. l. 11. prefixed,
p. 13. l. 27. the King is supreme, p. 16. l. a f. 4. revealed: as, p. 20. l.
19. (...), p. 21. l. a f. 5 prefixed, p. 25. l. 4. (...), l 11. beast, p 27.
marg l 3. for 2. read lib. 1. cap. 4. 2, p. 28. l. 21. he sees, p. 30. l. 6.
revolted, p. 32 l. 19. own, p. 37. marg l 5, Annal Boior, p. 41. l. 14.
women with child, p. 46. l. 8. come: sor, p. 48. set chap. 16. against line
12, p. 60. l. 1. of the 13: I, and marg. l. penult. can. p 70. l. 11. Neuerthe
esse, p. 72, l. a. f. 13. time. unto, p. 73. l. a f. 5. adornc, page 77, l. 10.
seems, p. 80, l. 1. blot out of, p. 82, l. 24. men, l. 26. out, p. 85, l. 24,
in marg. dele 3. p. 89. l. a f. 8. lizen. sse, p. 97, l. 15. (...), l. 20,
Dicl^, l. 23. Luthers, l. 24. Lulter, p. 98, l. 15, be come, p. 102. l. 18.
pronounce, p. 106, l. a f. 14. says he, p 109, l. 3. were, p. 110, l a f. 4.
bload shed, p. 114, l. 21. or altogether, p. 124, l. 19. spiritually, p. 125,
l. 18, Apoc. 17. 16. p. 133, l. 7. desolatours, p. 135, l. 1. Monarchs, p.
137, l. 2. a mere sable, p. 139, l. 15, and 141, l. 11. and 12, deprave p.
144, l. 13. aeque ac, p. 151, l. a f. 5. and therefore, p. 152. l. 17. and 18.
glorify, p. 156. l. 21 blot out ad, l. 23. d scribe, p. 157, l. 14. of
Babylons, p. 161. l. a f. 4. first, of, p. 162. l. 6. and 7. Omnes, p. 163. l.
penult. five, p. 168. l. 7. and 22. Lagidae, p. 169. l. 1. vid^atur, l. 3 to
Porphyry, l. 7. Daniel. The, p. 175. l. 5. the land Tzebi, l. 6. eight horn,
p. 181. l. 1. and (...). Casleu, p. 188. Marg. l. 3. vid. Tremell.

The first Book, proving that the Pope is Antichrist.
The first Chapter, propounding the state of the controversy, and the grounds
of our proofs.
1. Whereas the holy Ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
2. 8. has foreshewed, that Christ our Savior shall consume Antichrist with
the spirit of his mouth, that is, by the ministry of his word, which Esaias
11. 4. is called the rod or Esaias. 11. 4.
scepter of his mouth, and the spirit of his lips: it cannot therefore be
denied, but that it is the duty of all faithful ministers, who are as it were
the mouth of christ unto his people, to set themselves against Antichrist; that
by their ministry his kingdom may be weakened, and the kingdom of Christ
Jesus more and more advanced. For which cause I took upon me in my public
readings not long since, to entreat of this maine controversy betwixt us and
the church of Rome, concerning Antichrist. But because my speech could prosite
only those that heard me, I have for diverse causes thought good by writing to
make the benefit of my labors common: First, that by this means the Papists
which be tractable may be reclaimed: Secondly, that those which be obstinate
among them may be confounded: Thirdly, that Protestants and professors of the
truth which be found and resolute, may be more and more confirmed: lastly and
especially that those which be weak and wavering may be stayed, and preserved
from falling into that fearful judgment, which as the Lord has threatened 2 Thessalonians. 2. against unsound professors in these latter times, so has it within
these few years fallen upon very many, who having by the great mercy of God
been delivered out of the more then Egyptian bondage of Antichrist: and being
set in the way toward the celestial Canaan and land of promise, seemed with
the unthankful Israelites to be weary of the celestial Manna the food of
their souls, and desired to be again among the fleshpots of Egypt. For
seeing they had not received the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore God has sent upon them the efficacy of error 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11.
12.
that they should believe lies (meaning the lies of Antichrist) that all they
might be condemned, which believed not the truth, but delighted in
unrighteousness, meaning the mystery of iniquity whereof he had spoken verse.
7. that is to say, Antichristianisme or 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
Popery.

2 And that we may proceed in order, we are first to set down the state of this
controversy, which in deed is the cheese of all controversies betwixt us and
the Papists, and of the greatest consequence. For if this were once thoroughly
cleared, all others would easily be decided. Our assertion therefore in few
words is this, That the Pope of Rome, who is as it were the God of the
Papists, is that grand Antichrist, who according to the prophecies of the holy
Ghost in the Scriptures, was to be revealed in these latter times. The Papists
hold the contrary. And whereas we say and prove that their Lord God the Popes
holiness in Antichrist, they affirm that our assertion is blasphemy, and our
arguments dotages. Rhemist. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Bellarmin lib. 3. de Pont. Romans
sieve de Antichriste cap. 18.
But if it were no harder a matter to demonstrate the truth of our assertion,
then to prove their conceit concerning Antichrist and the proofs thereof to be
mere dotages; I should very easily put this Question out of controversy; that
the Pope is Antichrist.

3 But first our assertion is to be expounded, and afterward proved. As
touching the name we agree (says Bellarmine) in Lib. 3. de pont. Romans c. 2.
this, that as the name Christ is taken two ways, to wit, commonly and
properly, so also the name Antichrist. The name Christ commonly belongs to
all that are anointed of God; and that either to the special calling of a
King, Prophet or Priest, or to the general calling of a Christian. And in this
sense it is taken either Psalm. 105. 15.
more largely for the whole body of those that profess the name of Christ,
whereof some are members of Christ in title and profession 1. Cor. 12. 12.
only; or more strictly for the society of the elect the citizens of heaven,
who have the mark of God, and are not only Apoc. 9. 4.
in show and profession, but also indeed and in truth members of the mystical
body of Christ. Peculiarly and (...) the name Christ belongs to Jesus the
son of God, who was anointed with the oil of gladness above all his
fellows, and is the Psalm. 45. 7.
head, after a general manner, of all Christians, but more specially of the
elect. In like sort the contrary name Antichrist belongs commonly to all that
be enemies to Christ; and those either open and professed enemies as the Jews,
Turks, Infidels (in which sense the word is not used in the Scripture) or
else covert, professing themselves Christians, and under the name and
profession of Christ, oppugning Christ and his truth. And so it is taken 1.
John. 2. 18. 22.
either more largely to signify the whole body of Heretics (as in the
Epistles of John) or more strictly the society of them who having made an
apostasy from Christ, have received the mark of the beast. Properly or rather
peculiarly and (...) it belongs to the man of sin, the son of perdition:
who after 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
a more general manner is the head of all Heretics, and more specially of
that society, which has the mark, the number and Apoc. 13. 17.
name of the beast. The society or body of those who having made an apostasy
from Christ to Antichrist, and the Antichristian state which in the Scriptures
is called the whore of Babylon, we hold to be the apostatical church of Rome.
The head of this Antichristian Apoc. 17.
body and catholic apostasy, we hold to be the Pope of Rome; and
consequently that the Pope is that graund Antichrist, whom the holy Ghost in
the Scriptures has described unto us; And that he (...) is called the
Antichrist, not only because he is the head of the Antichristian body, but
also because he being in profession the vicar of Christ, is in deed Aemulus
Christi, that is, an enemy opposed unto Christ, in emulation of like honor, as
if we should say, a counter-Christ, as the word Antichrist does also signify.

4 But when we say that the Pope is Antichrist, we mean not this or that
Pope, howsoever some of them have been more notorious Antichrists then others:
as for example Siluester the 2. Gregory the 7. alias Hildebrand, Boniface 8.
John 22. alias 24. Alexander 6. etc. but the whole row or rabble of them, from
Boniface the 3. downward. For although the Antichrist be but one person, yet
he is not one as Christ the head of the Christian body, is one, Christ because
he lives for ever has no successors, and therefore is one in nature and
number, as being one singular and definit person. The head of the Antichristian
body, which is to continue to the end of the world, is continued not in one
singular and definit person, but in a succession of many, who are mortal and
momentary; which successively have been, are, or shall be the heads of the
catholic apostasy: of any whereof indefinitely, or of all commonly, the word
Antichrist is understood. For even as the Pope or vicar of Christ according to
the Popish conceit, is one person not in number and nature, but by law and
institution, one at once ordinarily, but many successively; so Antichrist is
not one singular person, but a succession of Antichristian Popes, which we
begin at Boniface the third. Because he with much ado, about the year of our
Lord 607. obtained from the Emperor Phocas, and al his successors since, have
challenged unto them, the Antichristian title of the head of the catholic or
universal Church, or oecumenicall and universal Bishop. Which title of
blasphemy, as Gregory calls it, befitting Lib. 4. epist 32. and 34. and 38.
him that resembles Lucifer in pride, when as John the Bishop of
Constantinople had challenged not long before, to wit, about the year 600. in
the time of Mauritius, whom Phocas cruelly murdered, Gregory the great then
Pope of Rome affirmed confidently (for so he says, Fidenter dico) that therein
he was the forerunner of Antichrist, who was now even at hand. Omnia enim Lib.
4. epist. 38.
quae praedicta sunt, fiunt. Rex superbiae prope est, and quod dici nefas est,
sacerdotum ei praeparatur exercitus. For all things (says he) which were
foretold, do now come to pass. The king of pride (meaning Antichrist) is at
hand: and that which is horrible to be spoken, an army of priests is prepared
for him. Whereby he would also insinuate, that he should be the prince of
priests. Now this is a principle in the church of Rome, that the Pope,
(especially such a Pope as Gregory the great, speaking definit^uelie and
confidentlie) can not err. And if this be true (as they may not deny, the Pope
being the foundation of all their truth) then must they needs confess that
Antichrist was come, almost a thousand years since, and that the Pope their
prince of priests, who not only succeeds John of Constantinople in that
Antichristian title, but also far exceeds him in all Antichristian pride,
challenging a sovereign and universal authority not only above all other
Bishops and priests, but also above all kings and Emperors, is that Antichrist.

5 To this testimony of Gregory I might add diverse other witnesses. But my
purpose is not to draw mine arguments from the writings, and as it were the
cisternes of men, who lived before the revelation of Antichrist, and therefore
except themselves had been prophets, could not fully expound these prophecies:
but from the pure fountains of holy scriptures expounded by the history and
event, the best interpreters of prophecies. For as Daniell says of the like
(or rather as the Papists say of these same Dan. 129.
prophecies concerning Antichrist) The words are closed up, and sealed, until
the appointed time. And accordingly was it said by Augustine, prophetias citius
impleri quam intelligt, that prophecies are fulfilled sooner then understood,
and by Irenaeus whom Bellarmine also alleges to the same purpose, omnes
prophetiae Lib. (...). aduers. haeres. c. 43. Bell. de pont. R. lib. 3 c. 10.
(says he) priusquam habea^t efficaciam, aemgmata sunt and ambiguitas
hominibus, All prophecies before they have their complement, are unto men dark
and doubtful speeches. And therefore speaking of some part of the prophecies
concerning Antichrist, he Apoc. 13.
says, Certius and sine periculo est sustinere adimplet ionem prophetiae, quam
suspicari, etc: It is more sure and safe to wait for the fulfilling of the
prophecy, then before hand to deliver uncertain ghesses. Lib. 5. advers.
hares. page antepenult.
Omitting therefore the uncertain conjectures of men (for such are diverse
opinions of the fathers concerning Antichrist, as Bellarmine confesses of
some,) from the sacred scriptures, the Lib. 3. de pont. R. c. 10.
undoubted oracles of God, I frame this demonstration;

6 Unto whomesoeuer the prophecies of holy scripture describing Antichrist the
head of the Antichristian body, do wholly and only agree, he is that graund
Antichrist who is foretold in the scriptures. Unto the Pope of Rome the
prophecies of holy scripture concerning Antichrist the head of the
Antichristian body, do wholly and only agree: therefore the Pope of Rome is
that graund Antichrist which is foretold in the scriptures. The proposition I
take for granted. For seeing the holy ghost has of purpose in diverse places
of the scripture taken upon him fully and sufficiently to describe Antichrist,
and that to this end, that he might be known; we need not doubt, but that
this description of Antichrist is so perfect and so proper unto him, as to
whom that description agrees not, he is not Antichrist: and contrariwise whom
it wholly and only fitteth, he must be held and acknowledged to be that
Antichrist. All the controversy therefore is concerning the assumption,
namely, whether the descriptions of Antichrist in the scriptures agree to the
Pope or not. Antichrist is described by the holy ghost, especially in three
places, viz. in the second chapter of the second epistle to the Thessalonians,
in the thirteenth of the Revelation from the eleventh verse to the end, and in
the seventeenth chapter of the same book. For I omit those places in the
prophecy of Daniel which usually are alleged, (because they speak properly
of Antiochus Epiphanes, Chap. 7. and 8. and 11. and 12.
who was but a type of Antichrist, as Bellarmine also confesses,) and the
ninth of the Apocalypse, because it is by some expounded Lib. 3. de pont. R. c,
18. and 21.
of the Turks.

7 And that the description of Antichrist in the scriptures fitly agrees to
the Pope, it appears by this induction. For whereas all the arguments and
notes whereby Antichrist is described in the scriptures, may be reduced to
these heads, to wit, the place or seat where we are to find him; the time, when
we were to look for him; his condition and qualities, that he is an adversary
opposed unto Christ in aemulation of like honor, a man of sin in general,
and more particularly an horrible Idolatour: his actions and passions, that is,
such things as he shall either do or suffer: I will make it evident by the
help of God (whose all-seeing spirit I humbly beseech to guide me into the
truth) that all and every one of them do so fitly and properly agree to the
Pope of Rome, that in the descriptions of Antichrist in the scripture, the Pope
may behold himself as it were in a glass.

Chap. 2. Of the place or seat of Antichrist.
1. ANd first as touching the place or seat of Antichrist, I reason thus,
Mystical Babylon spoken of in the seventeenth and eighteenth of the
Apocalypse, is the seat of Antichrist:

Rome is Mystical Babylon, spoken of in the seventeenth and eighteenth of the
Apocalypse. Therefore Rome is the seat of Antichrist.

As touching the proposition, you are to understand that Babylon in the
scriptures is taken sometimes literally, and sometimes mystically: literally,
for Babylon either in Chaldaea, or in Egypt. Babylon in Chaldaea was the
Metropolis or imperial city of the Babylonian and Assyrian Monarchy. Babylon
in Egypt is called Babylis and Cayrus, of which some understand the Apostle
Peter to speak 1. Epist. 5. 13. Babylon mystical in the Apocalypse, is the
seat or chief city of Antichrist, resembling the 1. Pet. 5. 13. Apoc. 17. 5.
Assyrian Babylon in pride, idolatry, filthiness, and especially in most
cruel persecution of the church of God. And for the same causes Apoc. 11. 8.
is called spiritually, Sodom and Egypt. Sodom, Ap. 11. 8.
for pride and filthiness: Egypt, for idolatry and for cruelty toward the
Israel of God. And as the church of Christ in the Apocalypse is called
Jerusalem mystically, or the holy city: so the church and especially the
Metropolis or chief city of Antichrist, is mystically called Babylon. This as
it is the received opinion of the faithful, so may it evidently be gathered
out of the seventeenth and eighteenth of Apocalypse, which without all doubt
are prophecies concerning Antichrist, and the Antichristian city and seat, as
the Papists themselves often confess. Bellarm. lib. 3. de P^t. R. c. 2.
Sander. demonstr. 13. and 18. etc


2 For that which the Papists sometimes object, That by Babylon is meant not
any one city or company, but the universal company of the reprobate, it is
unworthy the answering. And the argument which our Rhemists bring to prove
their assertion, is without sense, to wit in their annotation upon Apoc. 18.
21. where the Angel throwing a great stone into the Sea, says, with such
violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown, and be found no more. By
this (say they) it seems clear, that the Apostle means not any one city,
but the universal company of the reprobate, which shall perish in the day of
judgment. But I answer, that the destruction of the universal company of the
reprobate in the day of Judgment, is described afterward chap. 20. 11. And
this destruction, as appears plainly by the circumstances of the text,
especially in the ninth verse, and those which follow unto the eighteenth,
shall be before the day of Judgment, and therefore is not the destruction of
the universal company of the wicked. For if the universal destruction of the
wicked were here signified, then none of the wicked should ^uruiue after this
destruction to lament the same, as there shall, verse. 9. 10. 17. And that the
universal society of the wicked is not meant by Babylon, evidently appears
by the whole discourse, chapters 17. and 18, where the holy ghost speaks of a
city ruling over the princes of the earth, situated upon seven hills, sitting
upon many waters, that is, ruling over many people, nations and languages, with
whom all princes and inhabitants of the earth have committed fonication, whose
destruction is bewailed of all sorts of the wicked, none of which people or
princes, or wicked ones that mourn for her, should be of the universal
company of the reprobate (as undoubtedly they are) if Babylon signified the
whole number of the wicked. And whereas they allege Ierem. 52, where only
the history of the Babylonian captivity is recorded, to prove that Babylon
signifies the whole number of Gods enemies: it argues, that they have not so
much as any show of reason to object against the truth of this proposition,
namely that mystical Babylon is the seat, or as they speak, the Sea of
Antichrist, See^. 18.
and therefore from henceforth until something further be objected, I will
take it for granted.

3. But let us come to the assumption, viz, that Rome is mystical Babylon:
which I will prove by three arguments. First, because the description of
Babylon, and of the whore of Babylon set down by the holy Ghost, Apoc. 17.
agrees in all points to Rome and the Roman state. But most plainly in these
two; First that the whore of Babylon is that great city which in the Apostles
time, had the kingdom over the Apoc. 17. 8.
Kings of the earth. And secondly, that this city is situated on 7. hills:
which two notes most properly describe Rome. Apoc. 17. 9.
And so Propertius describes it,

Septem vrbs alta iugis, toti quae praesidet orbi, That is the city Eleg. 10.
lib. 3.
mounted on 7. hills, ouer-ruling the whole world. That Rome was the Imperial
city of the world, and the Metropolis of the Roman Monarchy, it is out of
Question, neither is there any of our adversaries either so ignorant o^so
shameless as to deny it. Pro^ hence therefore I reason thus: That city which in
the apostles time had dominion over the Kings of the earth, is the whore of
Babylon. Rome is that city which in the apostles time, and since also under the
Pope, had the dominion over the kings of the earth: therefore Rome is the whore
of Babylon. And that Rome also Georgic. 2. in fine.
was situated on 7. hills, it is most manifest. Of her Virgi^ says, Scilicet
and rerum facta est pulcherrima Roma,
Septem quae vna sibi muro circumdedit arces.


Varro speaking of a festival day, which among the Romans Lib 5. de ling. la^.
was called Septimontium, he says it was so called, ab his 7. mo^tibus in
quibus vrbs sit a est. that is, of the 7. hills whereon the city was
situated. And Plutarch upon the same occasion calls Problem, Romans Romae
inst^. lib. 1, number. 65.
Rome (...). 1. Septicollem, that is Seven hilled. Blondus says, Montes in
vrbe septem numerantur, The hills within the city are seven in number. and
the names of these 7. hills are commonly known, and usually named in Roman
authors, viz, Palatinus, Capitolinus, Qutrinalis, Coelius, Esquilinus,
Viminalis, Auentinus.

4. Yea but say our English Rhemists, The Angel himself In Apo. 17. 9.
here (...) ^eth these 7. hills to be allone with the 7. heads, and the 7.
kings. And yet the heretics take them literally for 7. hills: whereas the
number of 7. is mystical, signifying universally all of that sort. And they
might mark, that the Propets visions here are most by seven, whether he talk
of heads, horns (which notwithstanding are not 7. but 10.) candelsticks,
churches, kings, hills. For answer whereunto, we must know that the beast
whereon the whore of Babylon sits, is generally the Empire of Rome, but more
specially vrbs Romae, the city of Rome, which was the imperial, and is the
papal seat. This beast is said to have 7. heads: which the holy Ghost
expounds two ways. 7. capita vrbis, the 7. heads of the city, are 7.
hills: the 7. heads of the Empire or people subject to Rome (which also are
compared to waters whereon the whore sits) are 7. kings, Apo. 17. 1. 15.
that is seven several regiments, or heads of government, (for so the holy
Ghost elsewhere calls them,) whereby the Empire or Dan. 8. 21.
people of Rome has at diverse times been governed: to wit, Kings (which also
were seven.) Consuls, Decemuirs, Tribunes (not tribuni plebis, but tribunt
militum consulari potestate), Dictators, Emperors, and Popes. Now the Apostle
does not say, the seven heads are seven hills, and the seven hills are seven
Kings: but the 7. heads are seven hills, and they (namly seven heads) are
(also) seven kings, as Bellarmine also acknowledges. For this interpretation
which they give to Lib. 3. de pont. Romans cap. 5.
the Angel, First, is inconvenient. For heads do more fitly resemble kings
which are the heads of the body politic, then hills do. And secondly false,
for if the hills be kings, then the city which is the woman verse. 18. sits
upon the seven kings, for she sits on the hills, verse. 9. Neither is this
interpretation of seven heads, that they be seven hills, any interpretation
Apoc. 17. 9. 18.
at all, except we understand hills properly. Moreover both the hills and
kings are said to be seven, not because 7. is a mystical number, signifying
all the kingdoms of persecutours, but because they are 7. indeed. Which also
may be said of the 7. candlesticks and 7. Churches. Apoc. 1. and 2. and 3.
which they bring for an instance. Of the hills there is no question: and it is
as true of the Kings, and therefore the Angel nu^b. eth them verse. 10. Five
(says he) are fallen, one is, and the other is Apoc 17. 10.
not yet come: which is verified of these 7. regiments whereof I spoke. For the
regiments of Kings, Consulles, Decemuirs, Tribunes, Dictators, were ceased in
the Apostles time: One (that is of the Emperors) then was, and the seventh,
that is to say, of the Popes, was not yet come. And as touching the Roman
Empire erected and revived by the Pope: it is the beast that was a flowrishing
imperial state, but is not Apoc. 17. 8.
indeed and in truth the Empire of Rome, but rather an image of it. Apocal.
13. although it be in name and title the Empire of Rome. This beast that was
and is not, it is also the eight head or regiment, and is one of the seven,
namely of Apoc. 17. 11.
Emperors.

5. Secondly that Rome is mystical Babylon, it may be Hieronym. in Esaias cap.
47. v. 1. item, in epist. ad Marcell^: quaest. 11. ad Algasiam: in praef. de
spirit. sanct. ad Paulin.
proved by the testimonies of very good Authors. Jerome says, Romanam vrbem
in Apocalypsi Ioannis and Epistola Petri Babylonem specialiter appellar^, that
the city of Rome is called Babylon specially, in the Revelation of John, and
epistle of Peter. Augustine calls Rome the second Babylon, and Babylon of the
West. To these we may add Tertullian, Primasius, Victorinus (who says, the
seven heads are the seven hills on De ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 22. and 27.
which the woman, that is, the city of Rome does sit) Prosper, and many
others, Sibylla also oftentimes expressly calls Rome Babylon. Lib. aduers.
Indaeos 3.


6. Thirdly, by the confession of our adversaries themselves. De promiss. and
praedict.
For first to prove that Peter was at Rome, they say, that by Babylon
mentioned, 1. Pet. 5. 13. is meant Rome: although there can no sufficient
reason be given, why the Apostle if he had meant Rome, should not rather have
used the name of Rome, then of Babylon. Secondly, the Rhemists convicted with
clearenesse of truth writing on the last verse of the 17. of the In Apoc. 17.
18.
Apocalypse confess, that if by Babylon is meant any one city (which before
we have proved) it is most like to be old Rome. And on the 5. verse they do
confess, that as the persecuting Emperors, which (as they say) were figures
of Antichrist, did principally sit in Rome; so it may well be, that the great
Antichrist shall have his seat there. And again on the 18. verse they allege
a reason For (say they) by the authority of the old Roman Empire, Christ was
put to death first: applying the prophecy of the 11. Chapt. verse 8. to Rome:
thereby at unawares confessing that Rome is that great city, which as in the
17. of the Apocalypse is called Babylon mystically, so in that place is termed
spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was also crucified. Thirdly, the
author of the Wardword, not knowing how to deny this so evident truth, is
content thus far to agree with us, that Rome is Babylon. For not only S.
John (says he) in the Apocalypse, but Peter also in his Epistle does call Rome
Babylon, and we do not deny it. Bellarmine also confesses so much, Per
meretricem intelligi Romain, that Lib. 3. de pont. R. c. 13.
by the whore of Babylon is to be understood Rome, and proves the same by the
testimony of Tertullian and Hierome. Therefore seeing mystical Babylon is the
chief city and See of Antichrist, as our adversaries cannot deny with any
show of reason: and seeing Rome is mystical Babylon, as has been proved not
only by reason and testimonies, but also by the confession of our adversaries:
the conclusion must necessarily be inferred, that Rome therefore is the seat
of Antichrist.

7 What then what ca^ the Papist answer to this syllogism? Mystical Babylon
is the seat of Antichrist,
Rome is mystical Babylon,
Therefore Rome is the seat of Antichrist.
It may well be, ^y the Rhemists, that the great Antichrist shall have his
seat there. And we do not deny says the author of the Wardword, but that
Rome is Babylon. And Bellarmine does not only say it, but prove it. How then?
Forsooth we must distinguish of Rome. For Rome is either Heathenish or
Christened. Heathenish Rome under the persecuting Emperors was Babylon: But
Rome Christened is the Apostolic See, and as it were the Jerusalem of the
Christians. But this cuasion of theirs, howsoever they please themselves in it,
is frivolous and absurd, as shall appear by these reasons. For 1.
first, if Rome be Babylon, as now at the length they confess, and
consequently the seat of Antichrist, as they cannot deny with any show of
reason: I would feign know of them, whether under the heathenish Emperors Rome
could be called the seat of Antichrist, because Antichrist did then sit in
Rome, or because he was to sit there after the Heathenish Emperors were
removed. If they say, because he sat there then, their answer is ridiculous,
and contrary to all that themselves hold concerning Antichrist. Therefore they
must needs confess, that Rome is called Babylon and the seat of Antichrist;
not because Antichrist sat there whiles it was heathenishe, but because he was
to sit there after the Emperors were removed.

8 And that the holy ghost by Babylon does not mean Heathenish Rome under the
persecuting Emperors, either only or principally, but Rome christened under
the Pope, it may further appear out of the whole discourse of Saint John in
the seventeenth and eighteenth of the Apocalypse. The whore of Babylon is the
great city, which in the Apostles 2.
time, and since under the Popes, reigned over the kings of the earth; called a
whore, and the mother of fornications: not only because her self has by
spiritual fornications played the strumpet, according to that which is said of
Jerusalem: Fidelis ciuit as fact a est meretrix, The faithful city is become
an Esaias. 1.
harlot: but also infected al kings and nations, subject unto her, with her
superstition and idolatry. But Rome heathenish, which neither dealt by whorish
sleights and allurements, but by martial policy and power, neither had
professed her self to be the Church and spouse of Christ, could not so fitly
be called an harlot, whereby is signified an adulterous and apostaticall state.
And besides, Heathenish Rome for the most part permitted to every country
their own religion: and was so far from enforcing her religion upon other
nations subject unto her, that as in her was erected the Pantheon in honor of
all the Gods (which Boniface the fourth having obtained of Phocas Marcellin.
lib. 16. Rosin. lib. 2. c. 9.
consecrated to the virgin Mary and all the Saints) so she admitted the
idols, religions, and superstitions almost of all other countries, excepting
the religions of the Egyptians and the Jews, because they did not forsooth
beseem the majesty of the Empire. But Popish Rome, of Bethel is become
Bethauen, and of a faithful city an harlot, exceeding all others in whorish
entisements, cousenages, impudencies, cruelties, and all filthiness: insomuch
that we may truly say with Mantuan, Roma est iam tota lupanar, Rome wholly is
become a stews: and with Petrarch, that she is scelerum aetque dedecorum
omnium sentina, The sink and sewre of all villantes and shameful practices:
and has not only played the harlot her self, but is become the mother of all
fornications, that is, idolatry and superstitions, and the fountain of all
other abominations in the christian world. With which the cup of her
fornications inebriateth (which more argues the sottishnes of the Romish
religion) all kings and people that consent unto her, and with fire and sword,
obtrudeth her superstitions and Idolatrous religion, unto all nations that they
can make subject to that See.

9 Again, if John had spoken of old Rome, which then openly persecuted the
saints, then had he not spoken of a mystery 3.
(as he does) neither would he so greatly have wondered to Apoc. 17. 5. 7.
see the whore of Babylons eitheir idolatry or cruelty, against the Saints (as
he does verse. 6.) if by the whore were meant old Rome, whose Idolatry and
cruelty to John was not strange. And further that the holy ghost by Babylon
means Popish 4.
Rome, it may be proved out of the rest of the 17. chapter beginning at the 8.
verse: where the Angel declares unto John the mystery of the beast, whereon
the woman sits, which has the 7. heads and ten horns. For although this
beast, as appears by conference with the thirteenth chapter, may signify in
general the Roman state as it is opposed to Christ, Apoc. 13. 1. 2. etc.
which in respect of the regiment, has been subject to seven heads of
government, in respect of the imperial city is seated on seven hills, and
in respect of the Empire was divided in the Apostles time, into ten provinces
or kingdoms, as Strabo and others testify: yet, here the Angel speaks
especially of the Roman state and Empire renewed, and as it were re^ed by the
Pope. To the which, as also to the Papacy (which is the second beast in the 13.
of the Apocalypse) though they be either of them but several heads of the
beast (verse. 10, and 11.) yet the holy ghost gives the name of the beast. For
this beast says he, on which the woman sits, was and is not, and shall
arise out of the depth: and again, that it is the beast which was and is not,
though it be. And verse. 11. having showed that the 7. heads of this beast
signify both the imperial seat standing on 7. hills, and also 7. kings, that
is, 7. chief governments: he says, that this beast which was and is not, is
the eight (namely head of government, or (...), for he speaks in the
masculine (...)) and is one of the seven, namely of Emperors. All which cannot
be understood of the Roman Empire, as it was heathenish, but as it is Popish.
For this head which had been and after was not (for it lay void from the time
of Augustulus unto Charlemaigne, the space of 325. years, viz, from the year
475, unto the year 800) was after to arise (for so he says (...)) being
revived by the Pope, who was to put Ap. 13.
life into the image of the former beast. For this Empire erected by the Pope,
although it has the name of the beast ascribed unto it, yet it is but the
image of the former beast, and therefore is not, in truth and imperial
authority and dominion, the Empire of Rome, although in title it be. And
further it is said, that this beast is the 8. head, and is one of the 7. which
cannot be understood of the heathenish Emperors but of the Popish. If therefore
this beast whereupon the whore of Babylon sits, ruling and guiding the same,
as the rider does the beast on which he sits, be not the old Empire but the
new, erected by the Pope: then the whore of Babylon is not old Rome under the
heathenish Emperors, but Rome christened under the Pope. But the first is true,
therefore the last.

10 And siftly the ten homes (says the Angel) which thou saw are ten kings,
that is, the chief governors of the ten provinces 5.
or kingdoms, who before the dissolution of the Empire in Apoc. 17. 12.
the west, had not as yet received the kingdom; because they still remained as
proco^suls or propraetors, that is deputies and lief tena^ts under the Emperor.
But after the Empire was dissolved in the west, they received power as kings
about the same time with the beast. i. Antichrist the Pope (for so Antichist
both in the 13. chap. and in the 17. is considered, 1. as a head of the beast,
and 2. as a beast by it self.) For albeit neither he could reign in Rome,
nor they in the provinces, by soueraign authority, while the Empire stood in
the west, and flourished; yet when it was once decayed, (but especially when
the Emperor also of the cast had by the Popes means lost his title in Italy
and Rome, and was by him bereaved, as the author of the book called
fasciculus temporum says, of the western Empire) then he seizes on Rome, and
a great part of Italy, and they on the several provinces. And that these ten
horns are the heads of ten kingdoms, which together with the beast (meaning
Antichrist) shall divide among them the Roman Empire, (for that is signified
when it is said that they receive power as kings, that is, sovereign
authority, the same hour with the beast) it is the received opinion of the
best writers. Yea Bellarmine himself says, Ioannes dicit december reges, qui
sibi diuident Romans imperium, odio habituros purpuratam meretricem. i. Romam,
Lib. 3. de Pont. R. cap. 13.
et eam desolatam facturos, John does say that the ten kings which shall divide
among them the Roman Empire, shall hate the harlot arrayed with purple, that is
(says he) Rome, and shall make her desolate. And therefore the holy ghost in
that place speaks not of Rome as it was under the Heathenish Emperors, nor
of the Empire as it was Heathenish, for then it was not dissolved; and long
before the dissolution, had Rome ceased to be Heathenish: but of the Empire
erected and renewed by the Pope; which although it neither enjoys Rome it
self the imperial seat, nor yet the provinces which in times past belonged
to the Empire, yet has the name and title thereof. And consequently, he
speaks of Rome as she should be, not only after the dissolution of the old
Empire in the west, but also after the erection of the new, that is to say of
Rome Popish.

11 Of these ten horns it is further said, that they have all 6.
one mind, being all of the same Popish religion, al of them Apoc. 17. 13.
with one consent wholly devoted to the Pope, and sworn unto him. To whom for
a time they give over themselves, and their whole power to help and support
the beast, thinking themselves bound (as he has persuaded them) to exercise
their temporal sword, that is, their civil power, for the De maiorit. c. unam
sanctam.
church, meaning himself, and at his beck and commandment. And being joined
to him and united one with another by holy leagues (as they call them) make
holy wars, forsooth, against Apoc. 17. 13. 14.
Christ the lamb in his true members. But when as Christ shall begin to
consume Antichrist with the preaching of his word, (as he is sure to overcome
because he is the Lord of Lords) then these ten horns which before had joined
with Antichrist, and had committed spiritual fornication with the whore, shall
begin to hate the whore and to leave her desolate and naked. Which cannot be
understood of old Rome, but of Apoc. 17. 2.
that which now is, whereof this Prophecy already is in part fulfilled. For
since the revelation of Antichrist in these latter times, the Pope has lost,
as Bellarmine co^plaineth, magna^ Germaniae partem, Suetiam, Gothiam,
Noruegiam, Dania^ vniuersam, bona^ Lib. 3. de pont. R. cap. 21.
Angliae, Galliae, Heluetiae, Poloniae, Boemiae ac Pa^noniae partem, that is, a
great part of Germany, al Sueuia, Gothland, Norway, Denmark, a good part of
England, (but he might as well have said all England, and thereunto added,
Scotland and Ireland) a good part of France, Heluetia, Polonia, Boemia, and
Pannonie. So that diverse of these 10. Kings have already forsaken the whore of
Babylon, and have bereaved her of a great part of her maintenance, and left
her, as much as in them lies, naked, and the rest in Gods good time will
accomplish his will.

12. Seventhly, It is apparent that John his treatise of Rome, 7.
extends until the destruction thereof. If therefore by Babylon Apo. 17. and
18.
is meant only heathenish Rome under the persecuting Emperors; then the
destruction which the holy Ghost denounces against the whore of Babylon, did
befall Rome, whiles it was heathenish. But it is absurd to say that this
destruction befell heathenish Rome. For first this destruction is an utter and
final destruction. Apocal. 18. 21. 22. 23. And before this destruction the
Empire was to be divided into ten kingdoms, which first should join with
Antichrist, and afterward oppugn him. Which is utterly false of Rome
heathenish, but yet is begun to be fulfilled of Rome Popish, and will in
due time be accomplished. And again it is most plain that John 8.
entreats of the state and condition of Rome, as it shall be in the time of
Antichrist. But Antichrist, as the Papists themselves confess, was not to come
whiles Rome was heathenish, but after the dissolution of the Roman Empire. And
lastly, Hierome and other of the fathers, in whose times Rome was not
Heathenish, do notwithstanding call it Babylon. Not that 9.
then it was, or had been before, but because it should be according to the
Prophecies of the holy Ghost, the seat of Antichrist, whose coming he and
other of the fathers supposed not to be far of: and therefore Hierome in his
Epistle to Marcella, uses this argument as the principal to persuade her to
come from Rome (which then was not Heathenish) because it is Babylon.

13. These arguments might suffice to prove that not Rome Heathenish under the
Emperors, but Rome Christened under the Popes, is mystical Babylon the chief
city and See of Antichrist. But yet for better evidence of this truth, and
for the clearer manifestation of Antichrist, I will further prove unto you,
that Rome Christened and professing her self to be the Church of Christ, is
the seat of Antichrist. For if Antichrist shall sit at all in Rome, then
shall he sit in Rome Christened professing her self to be the Church of
Christ. But he shall sit in Rome (as has been proved in part and shall
further be cleared) therefore in Rome christened, and professing her self to
be the Church of God. The proposition is built upon this foundation, that
Antichrist shall sit in the Church of God, and therefore if Antichrist shall
sit at Rome, he shall sit in Rome professing her self the Church of God.
Now then that Antichrist shall sit in the Church of God, I prove by the
testimony of Saint Paul, affirming 2. Thessal. 2. 4. that Antichrist shall
sit in the temple 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
of God. But because the Papists labor by might and maine to extort this
place from us, as serving rather to prove their conceit, that Antichrist shall
sit in the temple of God at Jerusalem: I will therefore deliver the place
from their corruptions, and also make good our interpretation. For first, the
temple at Jerusalem, and city it self, as it was a type of the church of
Christ: so when the church of Christ was once planted by the preaching of the
gospel throughout the world, it was utterly and finally to be abolished,
according to the Prophecy of our Savior Christ, Mat. 24. 14. And then shall be
the end, namely of the temple and city of Jerusalem. For after the temple was
once utterly destroyed by Titus Vespasian, as Christ Mat. 24. 2.
had foreshewed, it is never to be reedified. For as Daniel says, according to
the vulgar translation, which with the Papists is the only authentike Text of
Scripture, Chap. 9. 27. Et erit Dan. 9. 27.
in templo abominatio desolationis, and vsque ad consummationem and finem
perseuerabit desolatio, And there shall be in the temple the abomination of
desolation, and unto the consummation and end, the desolation shall continue:
or as Hierome speaks In Dan. 9.
more plainly, Vsque ad consummationem and finem mundi perseuerabit desolatio:
The desolatio^ shall continue unto the co^summation and end of the world. Our
Savior Christ also Luo. 21. 22. 24. foretold, that Jerusalem being destroyed
by the Luc. 21. 22. 24.
Romans, should be trodden under foot by the Gentiles, until the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled, that is until the second coming of Christ, which in
the next words is described. Wherefore when as Julian the Apostata endeavored
by the Jews to reedifie the temple that he might convince the preaching of
Christ of falsehood, ((...) Lib. 3. cap. 20. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 20. Sozom.
lib. 5. cap. vlt.
(...), as Theodoret speaks) which he could not do, unless Christ had
taught that it should not be reedified. Our Savior Christ by fire first from
heaven, and after out of the earth, and by a fearful earthquake hindered this
enterprise, thereby approving his godhead, and showing that he was not pleased,
as Sozomen says, with the renewing of the temple. It seems also to have been
the judgment of Cyrill with many others in the primitive church, that the
temple should never be reedified: and Hierome says, that the opinion which is
Ad Marcell.
for the restoring of the temple, is a Jewish fable. Whereas therefore the
Papists teach, that Antichrist shall cause this temple to be built, and that he
shall have his seat there, which they know shall never be: what do they else
but make a mockery of all the prophecies of the holy Ghost concerning the
coming of Antichrist, and with Julian go about to give the lie to Daniel and
our Savior Christ.

14. Again, if the apostle had by temple meant such a temple as should be built
by Antichrist, he would not have called it the Temple of God, but rather of
the Devil. Non enim templum alicuius idoli (says Augustine) aut daemonis, De
ciuit. Dei lib. 10. c. 19.
templum Dei Apostolus diceret. For the temple of some idol or Devil, the
Apostle would not call the temple of God. Neither are we by the temple of God
to understand a material building, for such (as Bellarmine truly says) are
not called the temple of God in the new Testament. And therefore the more
gross is he to understand it of a material temple, and of a corporal
sitting. For first, material temples in the writings of the apostles are not
called the temples of God: but the congregations of Gods people are the temple
of God. See 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17. 2. Cor. 6. 16. Ephesians. 2. 21. Apoc. 3. 12. And
according to the Scriptures phrase speaks Lactan^us, Sol^ Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 30.
(says he) catholica Ecclesia est, quae verum cultum retinet, hic est fons
veritatis, hoc est domicilium fidei, hoc templum Dei. It is the catholic
Church alone which retains the true worship: this is the welspring of truth,
this is the house of faith, this is the temple of God. The temple of God
therefore signifies the congregation or company of them which profess the
name of Christ. In this temple Antichrist sits, that is, rules and
reigns. For we are not to understand it of the corporal gesture, as
appears by that which follows, he shall sit in the temple of God as God,
that is, he shall rule and reign as if he were a God: for that is meant by
Gods sitting, who does not sit after a corporal manner. In the temple Psalm.
9. 5.
of God therefore, which is his Church, Antichrist sits, that is rules and
governs, challenging a sovereign and universal dominion over all those that
profess the name of Christ, as being the head, husband and Lord of the
universal church: which agrees most fitly and properly to the Popes of Rome.
Neither are we to omit the phrase of sitting. For whereas princes are said to
reign so many years, the Popes are said to sit, and the chief place of
his dominion is called his Seeds, that is Sec or seat.

15 And this our interpretation is confirmed by the testimonies of the
ancient. The temple of God (says Theodoret) he calls the churches, wherein
Antichrist shall challe^ge to himself in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the first seat, endeavoring to show himself to be God. And again, Dei autem
templum vocat ecclesias, The temple of God Epitom.
he calls the churches. Hierome, and in templo Dei (says he) vel
Hierosolymis vt quidam putant, vel in ecclesia vt verius arbitramur: Ad
Algasiam quaest. 11.
And he shall sit in the temple of God, either at Jerusalem as some think, or
in the church, as we more truly suppose. Chrysostom, in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
(...), where it seems (...) is put corruptly for (...), for so the greek
scholiast, who usually reports word for word, out of Chrysostom says,
(...) see Oecumen. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
(...), In the temple,) He says not in the temple at Jerusalem, but in the
churches of God. And likewise Theophylact, not in the temple which is at
Jerusalem in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
specially, but simply in the churches and in every temple of God. Augustine of
these words says, But in what temple of God he shall sit as God, it is
uncertain; whether in that ruin of De ciuit. Dei lib. 20. c. 19.
the temple which king Solomon built, or else in the church. For the Apostle
would not call the temple of an idol or devil, the temple of God. Whereupon
some (to whose judgment not only Augustine in this place, but Primasius also
subscribeth) some I say by Antichrist in this place will have understood not
the prince Bellarmine cites it, as Augustines own judgment. cap. 13.
himself, but his whole body after a sort, that is the multitude of men
pertaining unto him together with the prince himself. And they think it might
better be read in the latin as it is in the greek, non in templo Dei, sed in
templum dei sedeat, tanquam ipse sit templum Dei quod est ecclesia. Sicut
dicimus sedet in amicum. i. velut i amicus, etc. He sits not in the temple
of God, but as the temple of God, as if he were the temple of God which is the
church, even as we say sedet in amicum, that is, he sits as a friend. Which
exposition most fitly agreeeth to the Pope, and church of Rome who esteem
themselves alone to be the catholic church, and all others professing the name
of Christ, to be heretics and schismatics. By this which has been said, it
is plain that by the temple we are to understand the church of God. And yet
this does no more prove the church of Rome to be the true church of God, then
they can prove the temple of Antichrist at Jerusalem, where they say he should
sit, to be Of this see more in the 2. book, and 13. chap.. 4. 5. and 6.
the temple of God. It is sufficient that the church where Antichrist sits,
has been the true church, and still is in title and profession; although in
truth it be but an Apostaticall church. Eor Antichrist, as he was to sit in
the church, so he was to be the head of the Apostasy, and of those that fall
from god: who notwithstanding (according to that exposition in Augustine) shall
sit in templum Dei as though they alone were the true church of God.

16 But the Papists confirm their exposition, viz, that the temple of God
signifies the temple at Jerusalem, out of the Apoc. 11. 8.
eleventh of the Apocalypse and eight verse. Where John shows (say they) That
the bodies of Enoch and Elias being slain by Antichrist, shall lie in the
streets of Jerusalem. Whereunto I answer, that John in that place neither
speaks of Enoch and Elias, not yet of Jerusalem. And whether he speak of the
persecution of Antichrist, there may be some doubt; because he seems verse.
2. and 7. to speak of the same persecution of the holy city that is the
church, under the heathen; and namely the persecuting Emperors, for 42.
months, which is mentioned Apocalypse 13. 5. But supposing it to be understood
of Antichrist his persecution, let us consider the force of their argument.
Where the two witnesses of God are slain by Antichrist, there is (say they)
the seat of Antichrist: At Jerusalem the two witnesses of God shall be slain,
therefore at Jerusalem shall be the seat of Antichrist. The proposition they
take for granted, the which notwithstanding is not generally true. For the
two witnesses of God may be slain in that place by the authority and
commandment of Antichrist, where his proper seat is not. For as our Savior
Christ was put to death, by the authority of the Roman Empire, at Jerusalem,
where notwithstanding was not the imperial seat of the Emperor: So the
witnesses of our Savior Christ might be slain by the authority and
commandment of the Antichrist of Rome, either at Jerusalem or else where,
where notwithstanding is not the proper seat of Antichrist, This alone is
sufficient to overthrow their whole argument. For if their proposition be not
generally true, then their whole argumentation from a particular proposition is
mere sophistry.

17 Notwithstanding, their assumption is also to be denied, because the holy
ghost speaks not of Jerusalem (as Hierome proves) but of Rome, or rather of
the Empire of Rome. Yea but (say they) Christ also was crucified where the two
witnesses should be slain: at Jerusalem Christ was crucified, and not at
Rome, therefore at Jerusalem the two witnesses should be slain. I answer to
the assumption: Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, and in the great city also,
that is to say, within the Roman Empire, wherein and by authority where of
our Savior Christ was put to death. In which sense the Rhemists seem to apply
this prophecy to Rome. If by the great city (say they) is meant any one city,
it is most like to be old Rome, For by in Apoc. 17. 18.
the authority of the old Roman Empire Christ was put to death first.
Whereunto I might add, that even in Rome it self Christ has been crucified
in his members: and that within Jerusalem Christ was not crucified Heb. 13. 12.
Now that Jerusalem is not here meant, but Rome, or rather, the Roman Empire, I
prove; first, because it is called the great city. By which title throughout
the Apocalypse is meant Babylon or Rome, as appears by conference of these
places. Apoc. 14 8. and 16. 19. and 18. 10. 16. 18. 19. 21. but especially
Apoc. 17. 18. where the woman, that is, the whore of Babylon is said to be the
great city which reigns over the kings of the earth: And of this great city*
i. Empire of Rome (which as it is called Sodom, which is the name of a city,
so also Egypt, which is the name of a kingdom) the streets may fitly signify
the cities or towns of the several provinces. Once only is this title given
to Jerusalem, and then not to the earthly Jerusalem, but to the heavenly. Ap.
21. 10. And so Augustine expounds this place, In pla Homil. 8. ^n. Apoc.
te is ciuit at is magnae. i. in medio ecclesiae, in the streets of the great
city, that is, in the midst of the church. Saving that by the name church; he
must needs understand an adulterous and apostaticall church (which elsewhere is
called the whore of Babylon), because as it follows in the text, it is called
spiritualy Sodo^ or E- For even as in the midst of the church even at
Jerusalem christ was crucified, so also the two witnesses of Christ were to be
slain in the midst of the church, and even in that city which professes her
self to be as it were the Jerusalem of Christendom. Secondly, the great city
whereof he speaks, is called spirituallie Sodom or Egypt. Sodom, for her
pride and uncleanness, Egypt for her idolatry and cruelty toward the Israel
of God. Which titles most fitly agree to Rome: which is not inferior either to
Sodom in pride and uncleanness, or to Egypt in gross idolatry, and savage
cruelty toward the Mat 4. 5. Mat. 27. 53.
church of God. But they are not in this place ascribed to Ierusa lem, which in
the Apocalypse and elsewhere in the new testament, is called the holy city,
even then when it had crucified our Savior Christ. And not to seek further,
even in that eleventh chapter of the Apocalypse verse. 2. neither is the city
of Jerusalem in the Apocalypse any where spoken of in the ill Hicrome ad
Marcell.
part. This is also Hieroms argument in his Epistle to Marcella. None of the
holy scripture (says he) can be contrary to it self, and much less the same
place of scripture. For about ten verses before, Jerusalem is called the holy
city. Now if it be called the holy city even after the passion of our Lord, how
is it again called Cap. 13.
spirituallie Sodom and Egypt? But Bellarmine answers, that Hierome did not
write this in good sooth: by which answer it were easy to elude any
testimony: as though Hierome made no conscience to write untruths, especially
in so weighty a Irenaus.
matter, although in the name of others. Thirdly, before the time of this
revelation which was in the latter end of Domitians reign, the temple and city
of Jerusalem were utterly destroyed, and never so to be reedified as to become
the seat of Antichrist, therefore this place cannot be understood of Jerusalem.
Wherefore these objections notwithstanding, our assertion remains fi^e and
steadfast, that Antichrist was to sit in Rome christened, and professing her
self the church of God. Even as the Bishops of Germany in Auentinus applying
both this prophecy of Paul, and that of John Apocalypse 17, to the Lib. 5.
hist. Boe.
Antichrist of Rome, In Babylonia say they, in temple Dei sedet: he sits in
Babylon in the temple of God.

18. Now let us further consider what other euasions they use to avoid this
truth. First they say, that Babylon did not signify any one city, but the
whole society of the wicked. Secondly, if it signified any one city, that
then it was old Rome. Now thirdly, if the whore of Babylon do signify Rome
christened, that yet notwithstanding it is not (as Bellarmine De Pont. Romans
lib. 3. c. 13.
is not ashamed to say) the seat of Antichrist. But if Rome christened or
Church of Rome be the whore of Babylon (as we have proved though our
adversaries should not confess it) then is it so called because she is an
adulterous and apostaticall church, which has fallen from Christ to
Antichrist, whom in steed of Christ she acknowledges to be her husband and
head: then is she the mother both of all fornications, Apoc. 17. 5.
that is of all superstitious and idolatrous worship, and also of al
abominations, as Atheism, Machiauellisme, Sodomy and Antichristian heresies,
with whom the Kings and inhabitants Apoc. 17. 2. 4.
of the earth have committed fornication, being made drunk and intoxicated
with the golden cup of her fornications, that is, of her glorious idolatries
and Antichristian heresies: who as she is clothed with Scarlet, so is she died
red, and Apoc 17. 4. 6.
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus: as being that city and church wherein the two witnesses of Christ are put
to death. Apoc. 11. And ca^ she then be the whore of Babylon, and not the
Antichristian city and state? especially considering these two things which
the Papists themselves are forced to confess, first, that the state of Rome is
here figured as it shall be in the time of Antichrist: secondly, that Antichrist
shall be one of the seven heads, and namely the last head of the Roman beast,
and consequently shall have Rome for his principal seat. Let us see then
whether the Jesuit be able to bring so much as a show of reason against this
truth. For it may be you expect his proof. Antichrist, says he, Lib. 3. de
pont. Romans cap. 13.
making his collection out of Apoc. 17. 16. shall hate Rome, and shall fight
with her, and shall make her desolate, and burn her. Whereupon it follows
manifestly, that Rome shall not be the seat of Antichrist. But it should seem
the Jesuit was in a dream when he framed this argument. For it is evident that
not Antichrist, but the ten horns, that is the ten Kings, shall hate the whore,
that is, the Antichristian city and president thereof: and accordingly
Tertullian, Prostituta illa ciuitas, a decemregib. dignos exitus referet, That
city which has prostituted her self to De resurrect. carn. c. 25.
play the harlot, shall from the ten Kings receive her deserved end. And so in
another place himself being better awaked reasosoneth from that place. The ten
kings (says he) which shall divide among them the Roman Empire, and in whose
time Antichrist shall come, shall hate the purple harlot that is Rome and make
her desolate, how then shall she be the seat of Antichrist? Whereunto I
answer, that the very contrary is to be inferred upon that place: where it is
said that the 10. horns, that is the 10. kings, which shall divide among them
the Roman Empire, shall in deed for a time join with Antichrist, and give
their power unto him. But when as Christ shall begin to waste and to weaken him
with the spirit of his mouth, that then these 10. Kings shall oppose themselves
against the Antichristian city and the head thereof. Which, event and
experience in part has proved to be true in some of these 10. Kings, as has
before been showed. From that place therefore we. 11.
may reason thus; The purple harlot which the 10. Kings shall assault is the
city of Antichrist. Rome is that purple harlot, as the adversary himself
confesses, therefore Rome is the city of Antichrist.

19. Their last refuge is this: that Rome Christian, where the Pope sits,
does not stand upon 7. hills, but is removed from the seven hills into the
plain of Campus Martius: and that the Pope sits on the other side of the
river upon the mount Vatican. Saunders therefore thought it to be but a
childish argument to prove from the 7. hills that the seat of Antichrist is
at Rome. But we would know of him whether it be the same Rome where they say
Peter sat or not. If it be the same, then it stands on seven hills, if it
be not the same, how is it then the Apostolic seat and chair of Peter?
True in deed it is, that in the time of the Emperors the Pomarium of the
city was enlarged, so that it enclosed a good part of Campus Martius: and
that since some more ancient parts of the city being decayed, the greatest
part of private buildings stand in the plain. Yet notwithstanding even to
this day, the seven hills are enclosed within the walls of the city, and
upon them there do yet remain, besides some of the Popes palaces and courts,
diverse churches and houses of religion and other buildings of note: as that
learned divine of blessed memory D. Fulke particularly shows In Apoc. 17. 9.
in his answer to the Rhemists. Neither does the enlarging of the city in one
part, and the decaying of it in another, prove it not to be the same city.
And although the Pope does live in the Vatican, or in any other palace of his
whersoeuer: yet who knows not, that Rome is the Papal or as they call it the
Apostolic seat, appointed as they Rod. Cupers de eccles. page 37. number. 1.
say by Christ himself. Neither can the Pope as Cupers dae eccles. p. 226. number.
16.
they teach change his seat: or if he should, he should cease to be the
successor of Peter. For whosoever is chosen Bishop of the city of Rome, he
(say they) is the successor of S. Peter, the vicar of Christ, and Bishop of the
world. And as Rome in general is the Popes seat, or See; Cupers page 37. number 4.
so more specially the cathedral church of Laterane, whereof more properly the
Pope is Bishop, as the husband of one wife. Cupers. page 221. n. 31.
In which respect they say, that as S. Peter and his successors be the head
of the whole church or university of the faithful, so the Laterane church
being referred to other material Cupers. page 106. number. 11.
churches, is the head of all churches of the world. Unto this church was
adjoined the chief palace of the Pope, which was inhabited by them until the
time of Boniface the 9. as Onuphrius testifies, that is to say 1400. years
almost after De 7. vrb. eecl.
Christ: howsoever since the time of Leo the 10. who lodged therein, it is
within these last hundred years decayed. Now it is well known that the
palace and church of Laterane stands on the mount Coelius in the most remote
part of the city, and furthest distant from the Vaticane. So that all these
shifts and euasions of the Papists notwithstanding, it is evident, that Rome,
which we have now proved to be the seat of the Pope, is by the former reasons
alleged, the seat of Antichrist.

CHAP. 3. Concerning the time of the Revelation of Antichrist.
1. AS from the place we gather the Pope to be Antichrist, because the seat of
Antichrist is Rome christened, or professing her self the church of Christ: So
the consideration of the time joined with that of the place, does make this
truth much more evident. Rome Christened is the seat of Antichrist: but when
does Antichrist sit, that is, reign there? I answer that he could not
exercise Antichristian dominion there, whiles the Emperors had their seat in
Rome. But when the Emperors were removed and the Empire in the West dissolved:
then did Antichrist succeed them in the seat, that is, in the government of
Rome. And this may be proved first, by the testimony of S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
8. And then that outlaw, meaning Antichrist, shall be revealed. And when 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
is that? When he that hinders shall be taken out of the way. And who is that
which hinders the revelation of Antichrist for a time, that he might be
revealed in his due time? Who this was, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6. 7.
the Apostle had told the Thessal. by word of mouth, and therefore forbear for
just causes to tell them by writing which they knew already, to wit, that he
might not incur the needless 2 Thessalonians. 2. 5. 6.
hatred of the Romans. But that which he had told them, in all likelihood, was
continued in the church. For although this place in it self be most difficult,
yet generally it is understood of the Empire and Emperors of Rome by most of
the ancient writers of the Church. Tertullian: who shall be taken out of the
way, but the Roman state? whose departure being divided De resurrect. carn.
among ten Kings shall bring in Antichrist. Ambrose, After the decay of the
Roman Empire, Paul says that Antichrist In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
shall appear. Chrysostom on these words, Only he that holds that is (as
he expounds) hinders now until he In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
be taken out of the way: (...) (says he) (...), that is, the Empire of Rome,
when it shall be taken out of the way, then he (meaning Antichrist) shall
come, and worthily. For whiles men shall be in awe of the Empire, none will
hastily be brought in subjection to Antichrist. But when the Empire shall be
dissolved he shall seize upon the vacancie, and shall challenge to himself the
Empire or rule both humane and divine. Hierome speaking of these words, And now
what hinders you know, that he Ad Algas. quaest. 11.
might be revealed in his time: that is (says he) what the cause is why
Antichrist comes not yet, you know very well. Neither could he plainly say
that the Roman Empire is to be destroyed, which the Emperors think is
aternall. Wherefore according to the Apocalypse of John, there is written in
the forehead of the harlot clothed with purple, a name of blasphemy, that is,
Romae aeternae, to Rome aternal. And afterward these words only he which
holds now must hold until he be taken out of the way, and then that out
law shall be revealed, he expounds thus, only that the Roman Empire which
now holds (that is, governs) all nations, depart and be taken out of the
way, and then Antichrist shall come. Cyrill, Antichrist shall come, when the
Catech. 15.
times of the Roman Empire shall be fulfilled. Primasius, The kingdom of the
Romans shall be taken out of the way, before in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Antichrist be revealed: Theophylact, when the Roman Empire shall be taken out
of the way, then shall Antichrist come. The in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
greek scholiast on those words, that which holds etc. he in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6.
means says he (...) that which lets and hinders. And what is that?
Many understand the holy ghost, others the Roman Empire, whose judgment is
the better? For until that be dissolved, Antichrist shall not come. And for
this cause blessed Paul spoke so obscurelie, because he would not incur
unseasonable enmity with the Romans. For when they should hear that the
Empire of the Romans shall be dissolved, they would persecute him and all the
faithful, as being such as looked for the dissolution of the Empire. But if he
had spoken of the holy ghost, what let him to have said plainly, that the
grace of the holy ghost did hinder him that he should not appear? To which we
may add, that in the sixth verse the Apostle speaks in the newter gender, and
in the seventh in the masculine: the former whereof may signify the Empire,
the latter the Emperor, of whom the holy ghost speaks, as of one man ((...))
as he uses to speak sometimes of Antichrist and we of the Pope; although both
by the one and the other is signified not one man, but a state or succession.
Augustine in deed says of De ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. c. 19.
these words, but he that hinders shall hinder. I do confess that I am
utterly ignorant what he says. Some think that this is spoken of the Roman
Empire, and that Paul the Apostle would not therefore write it plainly, least
he should incur this slander that he was an ill willer to the Roman Empire;
which men hoped to be aternall. Notwithstanding this seems to have bin his
judgment also, for afterward he thinks those words may thus be expounded of
the Empire of Rome, tan^u^ qui modo imperat, imperet etc. only he which
reigns must reign (for so (...) also may signify, and to the same purpose
Primasius expounds those words, tantu^ vt qui tenet nunc, sc. imperiu^, only
he which holds now, to wit the Empire) until he be done, that is taken, out
of the way; and then that outlaw shall be revealed, whom no man doubts to
signify Antichrist.

2 But what need I to be so diligent in gathering testimonies for the
confirmation of this truth, seeing it is not only confirmed by the former
assertion (for how could Antichrist reign in Rome while the Roman Emperors
remaind or raignd there) but also is confessed by Bellarmine himself, namely
that by this let, is to be understood the Empire of Rome. Rather let us
consider when there the Empire that hindered, be taken out of the way, or not.
Beliarmine understands this taking away, of an utter abolishing Cap. 5.
of the Roman Empire, so that there should not remain so much as the name of
the Emperor or King of the Romans. From whence he would prove that Antichrist
is not yet come, because the Roman Empire is not yet abolished. We confess
that the Roman Empire which hindered the revelation of Antichrist was to be
dissolved, and also divided among ten, that is many kings (for so this number
of ten is often used indefinitly): Number. 14. 22. Job. 19. 3. Nehem. 4. 12.
which is all that can be gathered either out of the scriptures or fathers. But
that there should be such an utter abolishment of the Roman Empire, as that
there should not remain so much as the name or title of the Emperor or King of
the Romans, we do utterly deny. It is sufficient that the Emperor was so far
See a. book. chap. 5.
forth taken out of the way as it hindered the Revelation or dominion of
Antichrist, And so much the phrase of the Apostle seems to import, (...)
until he be done out of the way, (or as the Rhemists themselves do read,
until he be taken out of the way) as may appear by conference of like places.
Let us then consider, in what sense the Roman Empire did Mat. 13. 49. Act. 17.
53. and 23. 10.
hinder, and was to be taken away, and in what sense it hindered not, and was
to remain: For the better understanding whereof we are to distinguish betwixt
the old Empire and 1. Cor. 5. 2. 2, Co^. 6. 17.
the new. The old Empire, as it hindered the dominion of Antichrist, was to be
taken out of the way, that it might be no more an hinderance thereunto. The
new Empire in the west erected by the Pope hinders not the dominion of
Antichrist, but rather supporteth him, and therefore together with Antichrist
was to remain. Neither does the Apostle speak of the new Empire, but of the
old, as shall appear by these reasons;

3 First the Apostle speaks of the Empire which hindered 1.
or held then, and of that only: for so he says, only he which now lets will
let until he be taken out of the way. And Hierome expounds those words, and
now what hinders, you know, after Ad Algas. quaest. 11.
this manner, quae causa sit vt Antichrist us in praesentiaru^ non veniat optime
nostis, You know very well what the cause is that Antichrist comes not now:
But the old Empire hindered them and not the new. And therefore the Apostle
speaks of the taking away of the old Empire and not of the new, Again when he
says 2.
the Empire hindered, he means the imperial authority and dominion, and that
at Rome, not the title or name thereof in Germany. For it is not the name or
title of an Emperor in Germany, that can hinder the dominion of Antichrist at
Rome, and much less at Jerusalem, where the Papists say his seat shall be.
Thirdly, 3.
Antichrist appeared and showed himself (and in that sense was revealed)
before the erection of the new Empire. For the new Empire is the image of the
former beast: which Antichrist the 2. beast Ap. 13. causes to be made. And
whereas Antichrist is (as the Papists also co^sesse) the 7. head of the beast
which has heads, the Empire renewed (which is the beast that was and is not
though it be) is the 8. in order, though in name it is one of the 7. and in
that sense is to be referred to the sixth head, namely the Emperors. Fourthly
the whore of Babylon, that 4.
is the Antichristian state, was to sit upon the beast which afterward was
to ascend, that is, the Empire renewed. Therefore with Antichrist there was to
remain an imperial state, though much abased under him. Fifthly, the Empire
renewed is the 5.
beast whereon the whore of Babylon sits. And therefore is Joan de
turrecrem. lib. 2. c. 114.
so far from hindering Antichrist, that it supporteth him, as the beast does
the rider. And to that end in deed was this Empire erected in the west, that it
might support the church of Rome. For when as the church of Rome was oppressed
by the king Adrian. 4. in epistol. ad archiep. German. apud Auenlin. lib. 4.
of the Lombards, it sought aid of the Emperors of Constantinople; and when
they would not defend the church, the Pope translated the Empire to the French
king: and from him upon the same occasion to the Germans, and that to this
end, vt Did. 96. c. si imperator, in glossa.
Rex Teutonicorum foret imperator and patronus sedis Apostolicae, that the king
of the Almaines might be Emperor, and patron of the Sea Apostolic. And for
the same cause the Emperor 6.
is called of them procurator sieve defensor Romanae Ecclesiae, the proctor or
defender of the church of Rome. Sixthly, the Papists themselves do hold that
the Empire which now is, shall continue unto the end of the world. For they say
that in the second of Daniel (as many others also have said) is described a
succession of the chief kingdoms or Monarchies of the earth, which should
continue until the end of the world: the last whereof is the Roman Empire,
Seauenthly, the destruction of the Roman Empire (which the fathers say shall
go before the revelation of Antichrist), is the dissolution and division
thereof among ten kings, which in deed long since happened to the old Empire,
but cannot happen to the new: unless we can imagine that ten mighty kings
shall arise out of the bare name and title of an Emperor divided among them.
When as the Papists therefore teach us not to expect Antichrist until the
Empire that now is either be divided into ten kingdoms, they are ridiculous;
or utterly abolished which they say shall continue to the end, they are absurd,
and in both impious, making (as it may seem) a scorn of the prophecyes
concerning Antichrist, which they make to imply impossibilities and
contradictions.

4. By this which has been said it plainly appears, that howsoever the old
Empire in the west, which hindered the dominion of Antichrist, was to be taken
out of the way before Antichrist should be revealed; yet notwithstanding even
with, and under Antichrist there was to be an imperial state in name and
title, which is the beast whereon the whore of Babylon sits, and therefore is
so far from hindering Antichrist, as that it supporteth him. Let us then
consider how the Empire which hindered the revelation of Antichrist was taken
out of the way, and how afterward Antichrist was revealed. Of the taking away
of the Emperor, as also of the revelation of Antichrist there are two degrees.
The Roman Emperor was first taken out of the way, when the imperia^ seat was
by Constantine the great translated from Rome to Bizantium or Constantinople,
and that to this end, as they have set down in the forged donation of
Constantine, that he might leave rowme to the Pope. Because forsooth where the
princehood of priests, and head of Christian religion Did. 69. c.
Constantinus, and de electione c. fundament. in sexto.
was by the heavenly Emperor placed, there it is not just that the earthly
Emperor should have power. Secondly, after the death of Constantine the great,
and of Flauius Valerius Consta^tinus his son, the Roman Empire being divided
into 2. parts the Eastern and the Western, and by division being weakened,
the Western was overthrown in the year of our Lord 475. and Rome it self
taken by the Goths. So that neither in Rome any Roman afterward had his
seat of authority, until the Pope took upon him the souerainty: neither in
the West was there any Roman Emperor until Charles the great, that is to
say, from the year 475. unto the end of the year 800. In the mean time Italy
was governed first by the Goths, and afterward a great part thereof by the
Lombards. And howsoever the Emperors of the East had recovered Rome, and some
part of Italy, which because they governed by exarches having their seat in
Rauenna, was called the exarchat of Rauenna, the Lombards, enjoying the rest:
yet before the renewing of the Empire in the West, the Emperor of the East had
lost all Italy and Rome, and that by the Popes means. For when as Leo the third
called Isaurus, Emperor of Greece, had held a counsel at Constantinople of
330. Bishops, wherein was decreed that all images within the Empire should be
destroyed and burnt: and afterward put the same decree in execution: the Popes
of Rome first Gregory the 2. and after Gregory the 3. excommunicate him,
forbidtributes to be paid him out of Italy and Rome, absolve his subjects from
their allegiance unto him, and having stirred up not only the Italians, but
Lombards also against him, the exarch of Rauenna is slain, and the Emperor
deprived of all his dominion and revenues in Italy and Rome. So that howsoever
the Empire in the East stood all this while: yet according to the prophecy of
the apostle, he which hindered the revelation of Antichrist, that is to say, the
Emperor of Rome, was taken out of the way; First, by removing to
Constantinople from Rome, where Antichrist could not usurp that dominion and
soueraintie whiles the Emperor had his seat there, which afterward he did.
Secondly, because the Empire of the west, which properly was the Empire of
Rome, was dissolved, and the Emperor of the East lost his title and interest
in Italy and Rome.

5. Of the revelation of Antichrist there be also two degrees. The first, of
his reigning and showing himself in his colors: the second, of his
acknowledgeme^t. Of his reigning there be 2. degrees also. The first, when he
challe^ged supreme authority over the universal church of Christ. Which he did
when he usurped the title of universal or oecumenicall Bishop or head of the
universal Church: which was done as we said about the year 607. About which
time besides other prodigious sights Anno. 607.
there appeared a terrible comet, and the^ we hold that Antichrist (to wit, the
head of the Antichristian body) was borne. True it is that the seeds of
Antichristianisme were sowe^ before his time: and even from the apostles time
the mystery of iniquity, that is, Antichristianisme, was working although more
covertly, and preparation was made toward the birth of the great Antichrist,
partly by heresies and some declinatio^s in the church of Rome in religion from
the purity of the primitive church, partly by the ambition of diverse of the
Bishops of Rome, who aduauncing themselves as Socrates says, beyond the limit
of priesthood into foreign dominion, contended to have the primacy above Lib.
7. c. 11.
all other churches (and that is the chief scope of many of their Epistles
decretall) and to the same end forged a Canon of the council of Nice, when
their ambition was curbed by other general councels. And lastly by the
indulgence of devout Emperors and Princes, who have by great devotions and
privileges advanced that church. Notwithstanding we hold that Antichrist was
not revealed, until he showed himself by usurping an universal dominion over
the church of God.

6. But notwithstanding this great title and authority, Antichrist was yet but
in his nonage, and under the government not only of the Emperor, but also, for
a time, of the Emperors Lieftenant in Italy the Eparch of Rauenna, by whom the
election of the Pope (made by the Clergy and people of Rome) was of necessity
to be ratified and confimed, until Benedict Anno. 684.
the 2, obtained this privilege from the Emperor Constantine 4. called
Pogonatus, that the election of the Pope by the clergy and people of Rome
should be good without the confirmation of the Emperor. Upon which privilege
obtained, the Pope began to care little for the Emperor, holding himself
henceforth to be (...) or rather as the apostle speaks (...) 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
without law, and subject to the judgment of no man, as they profess in
diverse of their canons. Not long after they began to advance themselves both
against and above the Emperor. Constantine the 1. suffers the Emperor
Iustmian to kiss his feet, about the year of our Lord 710. Within three
years after the same Anno. 710.
Constantine sets himself against the Emperor Philippicus Bardanes in
defense of images, as did his two successors Gregory the 2. and third against
Leo Isaurus in the same quarrel. In whose three times, (that we may know Rome
to be the mother of spiritual fornications) were held three Councels at Rome,
wherein worshipping of images is approved and the oppugners there of
excommunicated. And we must note that about this time (says the Author of the
book called Fasciculus temporum) the Popes began above their wont to oppose
themselves even in temporal matters against the Emperors: because of their
unsoundness in the faith (for so he calls their oppugning of images) and to
translate the Empire from nation to nation, as time required. As for Gregory
the 2. he was the first which anouched himself supcriour to the Emperor; who
Anno. 723.
also excommunicated Leo the 3. because he sought to abolish the idolatry of
his time, which they call worshipping of images. But his successor Gregory the
3. not only excommunicated the said Emperor for the same cause, but also
forbad any tributes or duties to be paid unto him out of Italy and Rome, and
absolved his subjects from their allegiance unto him. Whereupon Rome (being then
a Duchy) with diverse other cities in Italy, reuolting from the Emperor, swear
obedience to the Pope, Who Anno. 727.
by the defection of the Italians, and help of the Lombards, dispossesseth the
Emperor of all his revenues in Italy; and consequently (as the popish author
of the book called Fasciculus temporum says) totum regnum occidentis ab eo
abstulit, He took from him the whole kingdom of the West. But when as the
Lombards held the exarchat of Rauonna which the Pope intended to himself, and
sought to rule over all Italy as the Goths had done, not exempting Rome or
those other cities which had revolted to the Pope; first, Gregory the 3. when
Rome was besieged by Luitprendus, used the friendship of Carolus Martellus
Anno. 732.
to free him from the siege. Whereupon the Pope remoueth the tuition of the
Church of Rome from the Emperor of Greece unto Carolus Martellus the great
Master of France, and to his son Pipinus after him. Whom that the Pope might
bind unto him, and find a sufficient defense against his enemies, he (namely
Zacharias) having (as themselves testify) Cause. 15 quaest. 6. c. alius.
deposed Childerick the King of France from his kingdom, and absolved his
subjects from their allegiaunce (because Anno. 750.
forsooth he was too simple to rule) makes him (namely Pipin) King of France.
Who afterward when his help was entreated by the Pope Steven the third,
against Aistulphus the king of Lombards, enforced the said King to yield up the
Anno. 754.
exarchat of Rauenna, and Pentapolis, which he gave to the Pope. This donation
his son Charles the great confirmed and enlarged with a plentiful addition
(reserving notwithstanding to himself the royalties of those possessions) when
he had at the entreaty of Adrian the Pope ouerthrown the kingdom Anno. 773.
of the Lombards in Italy. For which cause, as also for that he assisted the
Pope Leo the third, against the insurrections of the people of Rome, punished
his adversaries, and caused the people of Rome to swear alleagiance to the
Pope: The Pope (namely Leo the third) crowned him Emperor of Rome, translating
Anno. 800.
that title from the Emperor of the East to him, and in him renewing the
Empire of the west, which had been void since the time of Augustulus. And as
he made him Emperor, so to him was committed by Adrian and Leo, the
confirmation of those which were elected to the Papacy. Which yoke as the Popes
following often strugled against: so at the last, they shook it off. And
whereas, in former times, the Pope was subject to the Emperor, and being
elected was confirmed by him, Adrian. 3. an. 883.
afterward it came to pass that as the Empire was renewed in Charlemaigne,
and after revived in Otto the great, and that to this end that it might support
the Papacy; so the Pope (namely Anno. 960.
John the 12, alias 13.) causes the Emperor to swear unto him to that end,
takes order for the election of the Emperor, Gregory. 5.
appointing 7, electors, reserving the coronatio^ of the Emperor Anno. 995.
and confirmation of the election unto himself; and at the length subiecteth
the Emperor unto him as his vassal, challenging both swords and usurping an
universal dominion and sovereignty over all the christian world, not only over
ecclesiastical persons, as Bishops and Priests, but also civil, as princes,
Kings, Emperors, whom he esteems as his vassals, and makes them kiss his
feet, as we shall show more fully when we come to speak of his Antichristian
pride. Unto this Monarchy C. Fundamenta. de elect. in sexto.
(as they call it) not only of spiritual but also of temporal power, they
long aspired, but never fully attained, until the time of Gregory the
seventh, in whom Antichrist was Anno. 1073.
come to his (...) or full growth, wherein he flourished, until our Savior
Christ the king of kings and Lord of Lords began to waste and consume him with
the breath of his mouth. This is that which Auentine says, Hildebrand who also
is called Lib. 5. annal. Boior.
Gregory the seventh, first established the Pontifical Empire. which his
successors for the space of 450. years (that is to Auentine and also Luthers
time) so held, in spite of the world, and maugre the Emperors, that they have
brought all both in heaven and hell into bondage etc. at their pleasure they
cast men headlong from heaven to hell, and again from hell advance to heaven. The
Emperor from henceforth is nothing but a bare title without body or show.

7 But no sooner was Antichrist come to his full growth (whereby he plainly
revealed and discouerd himself) but straightwaies he began to be acknowledged,
which is the 2. part of his revelation, whereof also there are degrees. For
first he was acknowledged particularly die diverse learned and godly men in the
time of Gregory the 7. and in every age since until the time of Luther. As for
example, the Bishops of Germany affirm Gregory the 7. to be Antichrist.
Antichristu^ esse praedica^t. Under the name and title of Christ (say they) he
co^triueth the business of Antichrist: he sits in Babylon in the temple of
God: he extolleth Aue^tin. annal. Boior. lib. 5.
himself above all that is worshipped, as if he were a God, he boasts that
he cannot err. And afterward Auentin either in his own name or in the person
of Sigeberius, speaking of the times Lib. 5. annal. Boior.
of Gregory the 7, All men almost (says he) that were good, open-hearted,
just, ingenuous, and single hearted, have left in writing, that the Empire of
Antichrist did then begin, because they saw those things which our Savior
Christ so many years before had prophesied unto us, to happen in that time.

The Bishop of Florence, in the time of Paschalis the second, preached that
Antichrist was come, meaning the Pope. Anno. 1119. Catalog. test. Anno. 1120.
Catalog. test. and Magde, centur. 12.


Honorius Augustudonensis applies the prophecies in the Apocalypse concerning
Antichrist, to the Pope and church of Rome. Dialog. de lib. arb. and praedest.
Bernard in his time acknowledges a general apostasy, and complains of the
state of the church as Antichristian Anno. 1140. Sermon. 33. in Cant. in conuers.
Pauli sermon. 1.


Ioannes Sarisburiensis taught that the pope is Antichrist, and the city of
Rome the whore of Babylon. About the same time Petrus Blesensis wrote, that
Rome is that very Babylon whereof John speaks in the Apocalypse. Anno. 1157.
Polan. in Dan. Anno. 1158.


Gerhardus and Dulcinus Nauarrensis preach that the Pope is Antichrist, and
that the clergy and prelates of Rome were the very whore of Babylon prefigured
in the Apocalypse. Ex I Fox.


In the time of Alexander the third, the Waldenses teach that Anno. 1170. Ex I.
Fox and catal. test. Roger Houeden in Ricardi. 1. Bal. centur. 3. c. 35. in
appe^d. Anno. 1189. Catalog. test.
the Pope is Antichrist, and Rome Babylon.

Ioachim the abbot, being demanded of Richard the first king of England, now
going toward the holy land, concerning Antichrist, answered thus; Antichrist
is already borne in the city of Rome, and is advanced in the Sea
Apostolic. And in certain Germane verses also published at Francofurt, he
affirms that the Pope and his priests are Antichrists.

Eberhardus archiepiscopus Iuuacensis, Hyldebrand (says he) about an hundred
and 70. years ago did first, under the show Anno. 1241. Auentin. annal.
Boior. lib. 7.
of religion, lay the foundation of Antichrists kingdom. And straightwaies
after, those priests of Babylon (says he) covet to reign alone, they cannot
endure an aequall. Neither will they cease until they have trodden all under
their feet, and do sit te in the temple of God, and be extolled about all that
is worshipped. Their hunger afterwealth, and thirst for honor, is insatiable
etc. he that is the servant of servants desires to be the Lord of Lords, as
if he were a God. And again, he wastes and spotleth, he deceives and
kills, I mean that man of perdition whom they call Antichrist, in whose
forehead a name of blasphemy is written, I am God, I cannot err, he sits
in the temple of God, he rules far and wide.

Robert Grosthead, the worthy Bishop of Lincoln, on his deathbed
complaining of the Pope, and bewailing the loss of Anno. 1253. Mat. Paris. in
Henr. 3.
souls which happened through the avarice of the Popes court, with sighs he
said; Christ came into the world to gain souls: therefore if any fear not to
destroy souls, is not he worthily to be called Antichrist?

Guilie^s de sancto amore, a master of Paris and chief ruler Anno. 1260.
of that university, called the monks and priests the subjects of Antichrist.

One Lawrence also an Englishman and master of Paris, proved the Pope to be
Antichrist, and the synagogue of Rome the great Anno. 1290. I. Fox.
Babylon. About the same time Maenardus Tyrolius in a public edict calls the
Popes effeminate Antichrists. And again, if they be not Antichrists, I pray
you what are they? Auentin. annal. boior. li. 7.


Michael Cesenas principal of the gray friars, wrote against the pride,
tyranny and primacy of the Pope, accusing him to be Anno. 1322. 1. Fox.
Antichrist, and the church of Rome the whore of Babylon drunken with the blood
of Saints. Hayabalus a friar in the time of Clement the sixth, preached (and
that, as he said, by Anno. 1345. Henry. de Herford. in Chronic. Catalog.
test. 1. Fox.
commandment from God) that the church of Rome is the whore of Babylon, and
that the Pope with his Cardinals is the very Antichrist. Wilh^lmus
Occomensis, as Auentine calls him, wrote a book against Charles and Clement
the sixte, wherein he calls the Pope Antichrist. Auentin. annal. Boior. li. 7.


Briget, whom the Papists worship as a canonized Saint, calls the Pope a
murderer of souls, more cruel then Judas, Anno. 1370.
more unjust then Pilate, worse then Lucifer himself. She prophecieth 1. Fox.
that the Sea of Rome shall be thrown down into the deep like a millstone,
(according to the prophecy of Saint John, Apocalypse. 18. 21) About the same
year, Matthias Parifiensis, a Bohemian, writing a book of Antichrist, proves
that he is already come, and noateth him to be the Pope.

Franciscus Petrarch, in many places of his writings, calls Anno. 1374.
the court of Rome the whore of Babylon, the mother of the fornications and
abominations of the earth.

Vrhanus the sixth, and Clement the seventh two Popes at once, call one the
other Antichrist. As Bernard before had called Baldus. de vit. pontif.
Anacletus, against whom Innocentius the second was chosen as Antipope. That
beast says he in the Apocalypse, to Anno 1378. Anno. 1130. Epist. 125.
whom is given a mouth speaking blasphemies, and to war with the Saints
(meaning Antichrist), occupies the chair of Peter, as a Lion ready for the
pray.

But most effectually does our godly and learned countryman John Wicleffe
discover the enormities and heresies of the Anno. 1383. Bellar. de pont. Romans
lib. 3. c. 1.
Pope whom he pronounced to be Antichrist. Artic. 30.

His judgment as in other things, so also in this, that worthy Martyr of
Christ John Husse followed. Who affirms in his Anno. 1405.
book de ecclesia, that he was troubled because he preached Christ, and
discovered Antichrist. That the Censures of the Romish church were
Antichristian, and proceeding from Antichrist: and (as Gerson and the Parisians
object against him Art. 16) that in those times and many ages before, there had
bin no true Pope, nor true Roman church: but the Popes were Antichrists and
the church of Rome the synagogue of Satan. Whose judgment many in Bohemia
followed. Sir John Old^astell, the Lord Anno 1413. 1. Fox.
Cobham, that famous and noble martyr of Christ, prosessed to K. Henry the 5.
that by the Scriptures he knew the Pope to be the great Antichrist, the son of
perdition etc. Hieronimus Sauanarola taught that the Pope is Antichrist,
because he did attribute Anno. 1500. 1. Fox.
more to his own indulge^ces and pardons then to Christ's merits.

About the year of our Lord 1517. Luther began to preach against the Popes
indulgences, and afterward against other Anno. 1517.
errors and abominations of the Pope and church of Rome, discovering more
plainly then any had done before him, that Rome is Babylon, and the Pope
Antichrist. Since whose times this truth has been almost generally
acknowledged by the true and reformed Churches of Christ.

Seeing therefore we have proved, that Antichrist was to sit in Rome
professing her self the church of God, and that after the taking away of the
Roman Emperor whom he was to succeed in the government of Rome, and there to
be revealed both by his own showing himself in his colors, and also by the
acknowledgement of others: it cannot be avoided but that the Pope is
Antichrist. For he and none but he sits, that is reigns in Rome,
professing her self the church of God, and that after the taking away of the
Roman Emperor, (not only by the removing of the imperial seat, but also by
the dissolutio^ of the Empire in the West) whom he succeeds in the
government of Rome, where he has been revealed not only by his own showing
himself in his colors, but also by the acknowledgement of others.

8. Unto the former place of the Epistle to the Thessal. we will add two other
places out of th'apocalyps, from whence both the place and time of Antichrist
may be jointly gathered. The former place is in the 13. of th'apocalips, where
two beasts are described, signifying two estates of the Roman government 2.
as they are opposed unto Christ: the former represents the persecuting
Emperors, the latter Antichrist. Of the former he says thus, I saw a beast
arising out of (...) sea (that is, of many and diverse peoples which it had
vanquished.) Now the description of this beast contains in it the
resemblances of those 4. kingdoms which are described in Daniel, the Roman
Empire far surpassing the^ al. The first of the beasts in Daniel, signifying
the kingdom of the Babylonians, is compared to a Lion: The 2. resembling the
kingdom of the Medes and Persians, to a Bear: The 3. representing the
monarchy of the Macedonia^s, to a Leopard: The 4. figuring the kingdom of the
Seleucidae and Lagidae, to a beast with 10. horns, resembling so many of their
kings, who should tyrannize over Iewry. The Empire of Rome therefore, as if it
were compounded of them all, is resembled to a beast having ten horns with so
many diademes upon them, both in respect of the ten persecuting Emperors,
answering the 10. Seleucedae and Lagidae, as also in regard of the 10. kingdoms
or provinces wherinto the Roman Empire in those times was divided; being also
like a Leopard, having the feet or paws as it were of a Bear, and the
ravening mouth of a Lio^. And besides all this, is said to have seven heads,
which afterward (chapt. 17.) are expounded to be 7. hills, and also 7. heads
of government etc. and to this beast was given authority or power, over every
tribe, Verse. 7.
language and nation etc. al which are proper to the Empire of Rome. The former
beast therefore signifies the Roman state, especially as it was under the
persecuting Emperors, as Bellarmine Lib. 3. de pont. R. cap. 15.
confesses.

The second beast, described verse. 11. and so forward to the end of the
chapter, is (as Bellarmine says all men do confess) Antichrist: who also is,
by the confession of the said Bellarmine, De pont. Romans lib. 3. c. 10. and 15.
one of the heads of the former beast. By the description of this beast (that
we may now note that which serves for the present purpose, reserving the
residue until their due time and place) it is apparent, that there is one and
the same principal seat of both the beasts, that in that seat the second
beast succeeds the former, practicing all the power or authority of the former
beast and Verse. 12.
that before him, that is to say, even at Rome: and that his chief endeavors
te^de to magnify the beast, that is the Roman state; as in making me^ to
worship it, in causing me^ to make an image of and to the beast, whereunto he
gives spirit and speech, and enforcing men to worship the same: finally in
compelling men to take upon the^ the mark of the beast, his name, and number
of his name. All which as they argue Antichrist to be a Roman, succeeding the
Emperors in the government of Rome: so also they fitly and properly agree to
the Pope, who succeeds the Emperors in the government of Rome, where he
usurps all and more then all the power of the Emperors, chale^ging a more
universal and sovereign, or rather divine authority, then belonged to the^;
whose maine endeavors are to advance the Roman state, which he calls the Sea
Apostolik, and which he makes al me^ to worship: causing them also to make an
image of the Empire (which was the head that had received the deadly wou^d) to
and in behoof of the Roman state; an image I say, partly in the Emperor of
Almaine, rese^bling the title ornaments and show of the former Emperors:
partly in his own courts not only in Rome, but in all other countries
represe^ting the former imperial authority and tyranny both in Rome it self,
and in the provinces thereunto belonging. This image both in the Empire and
popish courts he animateth and authorizeth. For as there is no question to be
made hereof in respect of his courts, so is it as true in respect of the
Empire, if that be true which themselves profess. Namely, that what the
Emperor has, he has it wholly from the^: that the Empire in the West was
renewed by the Pope, who translated the title of the Emperor of Rome from the
Emperor of the East, first to the French, and after to the Germa^s: that the
Pope caused this new Emperor to be made, that he crowned and authorized him,
that he appointed 7. Electors in Germany, reserving the confirmation of the
election and coronatio^ of the Emperor to himself: of which points we shall
hereafter speak more at large. Further, he causes al me^ to worship the image
by him Chap. 7.
erected, and co^pelleth all men to receive the mark of the beast, as also the
name of the beast (which ca^ be no other but either Roman or Latin,) and the
number of his name. i. to live insubiectio^ to the Sea of Rome, and to profess
themselves to be Romans and Latins in respect of their religion, as herafter
shall be showed. Chap. 8.


9. The same is proved out of the 17. chap. of th'apocalyps, 3.
where be reckened 7. heads, that is 7. kinds of principal rulers as it were
heads of government, whereby Rome has been governed, every one succeeding
another. The sixth head being the Emperors, the seventh Antichrist which is the
Pope. For Antichrist is one of the 7. heads of the beast which has 7. heads
and 10. horns. And this beast signifies the Roman state, therefore Antichrist
is a head of the Roman state. All which Bellarmine after a sort confesses.
Now it is most certain that Antichrist is Lib. 3. de pont. R. c. 15.
none of the first 5. heads, for they were past in the apostles time: neither is
he the sixth head which was of the Emperors, that then was; for that was to be
done out of the way, as the Papists themselves do teach, before the revelation
of Antichrist. It remains therefore that the seventh head which is the Pope is
Antichrist. The eight head, which also is one of the seven, is the Empire
renewed by the Pope, and is said to be the beast, which was and is not though
it be, whereon the whore of Babylon sits. If it be objected that the seventh
head whereby Antichrist is signified, was to continue but a short time, as it is
said verse. 10: and that this therefore cannot agree to the Pope, who has
reigned already in Rome many 100. years: I answer that this is spoken of
purpose to arm the faithful with patience, who otherwise would think the
reign of Antichrist very long, and our Savior Christ also to be slow in
coming. Whereas in truth neither is our Savior Christ slow in coming as
Peter shows, neither is 2. Peter. 3.
the kingdom of Antichrist long. But in respect of God with whom a 1000.
years are as one day, and in co^patison of the eternal kingdom of Christ
(with who^ the faithful are to reign after they have suffered under
Antichrist,) it is to be accounted very short. And surely if the whole time
from the Ascension of of our Savior until his return unto judgment, is noted
in the Scriptures to be very short, and that to this end that we should not
think it long, then is the reign of Antichrist (which is but part of this
time) much more short. The holy Ghost in the beginning of the Revelation
signifies that the time of fulfilling Apoc 1. 3.
the prophecies therein m^tioned was at hand. And our Savior Heb. 10. 37.
Christ promises by the Apostle, that after a very little while he would come:
and in the last chapt. of the revelation, he says, yea, I Apoc. 22. 20.
come quickly. And John likewise in his Epistle notes that the (...). John. 2.
18.
whole time of Antichrist was but a part of the last hour.

10. And further whereas the Papists object, in respect of the time, that
Antichrist is not yet come, because the Roman Empire is not yet dissolved, and
consequently that the Pope is not Antichrist: it may notwithstanding evidently
be showed out of the same chapter of the Apocalypse compared with the Apoc. 17.
event, both that the Empire is dissolved, and that Antichrist is already come.
For the Empire is then known to be dissolved, when it is divided among ten who
shall have received power as kings, as John notes, the fathers teach, and the
Papists themselves confess. But it is most certain that the old Empire of of
Rome is divided among ten kings at the least, who before the dissolution had
not sovereign authority: and that the Empire which now is, being but a title,
and containing no such kingdoms, is not capable of such a partition. And that
Antichrist also is come it is as evident. For those ten horns which in the
Apostles time had not received the kingdom nor sovereign authority, but were
governors of the provinces by deputation from the Emperor, were after the
dissolution of the Empire to receive power as kings with the beast; or, as the
Papists read, after the beast, that is Antichrist, If therefore the governors
Ap. 17. 12.
of the kingdoms whereinto the Roman Empire was divided, have received power
as kings, then it is certain that Antichrist is already come. For oither after
him, or at least with him they were to receive their sovereignty. It is as
certain therefore that Antichrist is come, as it is sure that the governors
of the provinces which once belonged to the Empire are sovereign princes and
not liefetenants under the Emperor. And that this Antichrist which is already
come is the Pope, it is plain enough by the same chapter. For whosoever
succeeds the Emperors (who were the sixth head) in the government of Rome, as
the seventh head of the Roman state, he is Antichrist. But the Pope as the
seventh head of the Roman state succeeds the Emperors (who were the sixth
head) in the government of Rome; therefore he is Antichrist. If you say, the
seventh head was not come in the Apostles time verse 10. and yet there were
Bishops of Rome then: I answer that the Bishops of Rome, in the first three
hundred years, were mean men in respect of their owtward estate, and nothing
less then heads of the Roman state. And that howsoever afterward they
obtained great authority, and more and more aspired unto the sovereignty:
notwithstanding, until the sixth head was taken out of the way, the 7. was not
revealed. But after the sixth head was gone, the 7. succeeded in the government
of Rome. Cupers de eccl. p. 37. n. 9. vrbem Romanam ad papam pleno iure
spectare constat. and page 258. n. 7. Romana vrbsita Papae dominio cessit, vt
Caesari nil iuris in ^areseruelur.
Insomuch that now for a long time the city of Rome has so wholly belonged to
the Pope, as that the Emperor has no manner of right therein. To conclude
therefore, If Antichrist was to sit in Rome professing her self the church
of God, and that after the taking away of the Roman Emperor whom he was to
succeed in the government of Rome, as has bin proved: it follows
necessarily, seeing these notes agree to the Popes of Rome and to none but
them, that therefore the Pope is Antichrist.

Chap. 4. Of the conditions of Antichrist, and his opposition unto Christ.
1. NOw if to those former notes of place and time, we shall ad the rest, and
find them al properly to fit the Popes of Rome, then may it not be doubted, but
that the Pope is Antichrist. In the next place therefore let us consider his
co^ditio^ and qualities, in respect whereof he is called the man of sin. For
first Antichrist in respect of his oppositio^ to Christ, he is (...) an
adversary, in respect of his pride and ambition, (...) lifted up above all that
is called god etc. From these 2. notes therefore we may argue thus; He that is
such an adversary as the scriptures desoribe opposed unto Christ in aemulation
of like honor, he is Antichrist: The Pope is such an aduersaie as the
scriptures describe opposed unto Christ in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
aemulation of like honor: Therefore the Pope is Antichrist. The truth of the
proposition is testified by the Apostle, employed in the name (...) which
signifies hostem and aemulum Christi, and confessed by the adversaries. The
assumption Bellarmine would disprove by this slender argument; because the Pope
forsooth professes himself the servant of Christ. For even as he professes
himself to be Christ's servant, so he terms himself; Of this see more in the
2. book and 1. chap. Genesis 9. 25.
the servant of servants, (which is Chams title) when as in truth he would be
esteemed Lord of Lords. But this is so far from disprouing the assumption, as
that the Pope could not be such an adversary as is described in the scriptures,
and consequently not Antichrist, unless he professed himself to be the
servant of Christ. Let us therefore consider what manner of enemy Antichrist is
according to the scriptures. First, he is an Apostate or reuolter: 2. a
disguised enemy or hypocrite; that is, one that is fallen indeed from god and
his truth as it werea star from heaven, yet retains the name and profession
of Christ; under which name and profession he oppugneth christ and his truth:
Eue^ as a rebellious subject, when he presumes without commission to leuy a
power of men against his Sovereign, that he may deceive the rest of the
subjects, abuses the name and authority of his prince to color his rebellious
practices. And that this is the property of Antichrist, Hilary has well
observed: It is Ad Auxentiu^
the property of Antichrists name, to be contrary to Christ. This is now
practiced under the opinion of counterfeit piety: this, under a show of
preaching the Gospel, is preached, that our Lord Jesus Christ may be denied
whiles whiles he is thought to be preached. Tract. 3. in I^an. Epistol.
Augustine says, we have found many Antichrists which confess Christ with
their mouth.

2. First I say he is an apostate, yea the head of that Apostasy 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
or falling away from the truth, mentioned 2. T^hess 2. insomuch as some of the
learned as Chrysostom, Augustine, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius by that
Apostasy understand Antichrist Lib. 3. de pont, R. chap. 2.
himself. Yea Bellar. himself affirms that by Apostasy in that place
Antichrist himself may be most fitly understood. But the Papists, which falsely
hold that the visible church of Christ cannot er, and much less fall away,
expound this Apostasy or defection, to be a revolt or falling away from the
Roman Empire. Neither do we deny but that also there has bin a defectio^ from
the Roman Empire: but yet we deny that it is understood in this place. Ambrose
says, then shall desolution draw near because In 2 Thessalonians. 2. De ciuit. Dei
lib. 20. c. 19.
many falling by error shall revolt from the true religion. He calls him a
reuolter, says Augustine, namly from the Lord God. Cyrill, Now is the
Apostasy, for men are revolted from the true Catech. 11.
faith. Chrysostom and Oecumenius, the Apostasy he calls Antichrist
himself, because he shall cause many to revolt from In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Christ. Or else he calls apostasy (...), the departure from God and the
thing it self. The same has Theophylact in effect. And likewise Theodoret on
this place. The defection (says he) he calls Antichrist himself giving In
2 Thessalonians. 2.
him a name from the thing it self. For his endeavor is to withdraw men from
the truth, and to cause them to revolt. Primasius by Apostasy understands the
forsaking of the truth, and Lyra, the departure from the Catholic faith. But
to omit In 2 Thessalonians 2.
humane testimonies, the holy ghost who is the best expounder of himself,
shows what kind of defection he speaks of For afterward in the same
chapter he notes this Apostasy 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. 12.
to be of those, who because they have not loved nor believed the truth that
they might be saved (but have taken pleasure in vnrigteousnes) are therefore
given over by the just judgment of God to believe the lies of Antichrist to
their damnation. But more plainly the same Apostle speaking of that Apostasy
which in these later times was to accompany the revelation of Antichtist: he
says 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. The spirit speaks evidently 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
that in the latter times some shall make an Apostasy from the faith,
attending to erroneous spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having their own conscience seared.

3 Now the Papists are as ready to object this Apostasy to us, as we to them.
How then shall we discern whether we or they have made this revolt? The
Apostle in the same place sets down two of those doctrines of devils, as
certain notes whereby those which make this Apostasy may be discerned.
Forbidding (says he) to marry, and commanding to abstain 1. Tim 4. 3.
from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving. The
former where of Hierome also has noated to be a In Dan. 11.
mark of Antiehrist. Nota est Antichristi prohibere nuptias. But these notes
agree not unto us, who neither forbid marriage, nor command abstinence from any
meats for religion sake. As for the Papists (especially since the times of
Gregory the seventh, they forbid marriage to some men at all times, and
certain meats to all men at sometimes and that for religion sake: esteeming of
marriage in their clergy worse then adultery or Sodomy; and eating of flesh in
Lent, or other forbidden times, as a mortal sin. And as touching the falling
away of the Church; certain it is, that although neither the invisible 1.
John. 2. 19.
church in general, nor any one sound member thereof ca^ fall away from faith
either totally or finally: yet not only the members of visible churches, but
also the churches themselves consisting of hypocrites, as of the greater part,
may fall away. As the Church of England which was in King Edwards days,
revolted in Queen Mary's time, from Christ to Antichrist. So has the church
of Rome (which once was famous for her Romans 1.
faith) as may appear not only by those notes set down by the Apostle 1.
Tim. 4. 3. and some others which hereafter See the 2. book chapt. 2.
shall be noted: but also in those innumerable particulars both in doctrine and
manners wherein they have revolted from the purity of the primitive Church. And
of this catholic Apostasy the Pope is head.

4. Secondly, Antichrist is not an open and outward, but a covert and disguised
enemy, oppugning Christ and his church not by open violence, but with all
deceiueablenes of unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
For he is not so foolish as to profess himself to be Antichrist. Neither
could that be which the Apostle testifies (as Radulphus Flauiace^sis says)
that Antichrist should attain unto ecclesiastical In Leuit. lib. 18 cap. 1.
apud Magdeburg. centur. 10.
honors, and in the temple of God that is the society of the faithful, should
take the chair of honor, unless having first pretended a kind of co^formity
with the faithful he should deceive those of whom he is to be ordained.
Therefore Antichristianisme is called the mystery of iniquity: whereupon the
Gloss says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
The impiety of Antichrist is mystical, that is, cloaked under the In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
name of godliness. And, as in the Popes miter was wont, so also in the whore
of Babylons forehead is written a mystery. Apoc. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Augustine.
Primas^: and gloss^in Apoc. 13.
And Antichrist himself is deciphered as an hypocrite, sitting in the temple
of God, professing himself and his followers to be the only true church of
God, using the two Testaments, pretending himself, as Hierome says, to be
the Prince of the covenant, And consequently head of the Church: deceiving
unsound In Dan. 11.
Christians with a glorious profession of religion (signified by the Apo. 17.
golden cup) and with a show of cou^terfait holiness (otherwise he could never
so effectually deceive many christians, as that the elect Mat. ^4. 24.
should be in any danger to be seduced) speaking lies in hypocrisy, oppugning
Christ and his truth under the outward show 1. Tim. 4. 2.
and profession of Christian religion, having two horns like the Apoc. 13. 11.
lamb, cou^terfeiting in some things the humility and meekenes of Christ, and
yet challe^ging that double power both spiritual and te^porall which belongs
to Christ the la^be, as our chief priest and king: and not only that, but
speaking also like the dragon. Which is to be understood partly of his
blasphemous speeches which he does utter, partly of the doctrines of devils
which he 1. Tim. 4 1.
does teach, partly of those hellish curses which he thundreth against the true
professors of the faith, partly of those great promises, which like the prince
of the world he makes to those Mat. 9 4
that will adore him. These things need no application for those to whom the
disguising and more then pharisaical hypocrisy of the Pope and Papists is
known. For must not his holiness be called sanctissimus, most holy, when he is
most wicked? does not he call himself Seruu^seruoru^, the servant of servants,
when in truth he makes himself the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? And as
Faber has observed, the Pope in word says that he is the servant of servants,
but in deed he permits himself to be adored, Praesat. instit.
which the Angel in the Apocalypse refused. From which fact of the Pope, as if
it were a rule of justice, Antoninus concludes, that Su^. part. 3.
there is no less honor due to the Pope then to the Angels. Whereupon ^it. 22.
(...). 4.
(says he) he receives from the faithful adorations, prostration or falling
down before him, and the kisses of his feet; which the Angel permitted not
to be done unto him by John the Evangelist. Neither was Bernards complaint
either unjust or Apoc. 22. Sermon. in conuers. Pauli.
untrue, Heuheu, Do^ine Deus etc. Alas Lord God, that they be first in thy
persecution, which seem to love the primacie in thy Church, and to bear rule.
And else where, A silihy contagion (says he) spreads it self now adays
through the whole In cant. se^m. 33.
body of the Church etc. All are lovers, and all enemies, all friends, and al
adversaries; all domestical or of the household, and none peaceable: all
neighbors, and yet all seek their own: they are ministers of Christ, and
they serve Antichrist. And such was the complaint of diverse Bishops in their
Epistle to Pope Nicolas recorded in Auentine: Thou bear the person An. Do.
862* Annal. Boior. lib. 4.
of a Bishop (say they) but thou playest the tyrant: under the habit or attire
of a pastor, we feel a Wolf: the lying title calls thee Father, thou in
thy deeds boastest thy self to be another Jupiter. When as thou art the
servant of servants, thou striuest to be the Lord of Lords etc. He
counterfeiteth the Lamb, in calling himself the vicar of Christ, and
exercising the very same office which Christ himself had Bellarm.
whiles he was upon the earth. And because, by horn, in the Scriptures often
is meant power: he may be said to have two horns like the Lamb, whiles he
challenges that twofold power which is peculiar to Christ the Lamb as our
King and Priest, and usurps both the swords, I mean both spiritual and
temporal. He speaks like the Dragon, in teaching those doctrines of Devils,
mentioned 1. Tim. 4. 3. (forbidding to mary and commanding abstinence from
meats) in belching forth most horrible blasphemies (whereof we will remember
some in the next chapter:) in his devilish curses against the Saints, and
Satannicall promises of the world and kingdoms thereof to them that will
adore him. Luc. 4. 6.
Ecce in potestate nostra est imperium, vt demus illud cui volumus Auentin.
Annal. Boior. lib. 6.
says Adrian the Pope, Behold the Empire is in our power, that we may give
it to whom we will. And whereas Hierome writing of those words, 1. Tim. 4.
They speak in Hypocrisy (says he) who, being not continent, would seem to
be so chaste, as that they condemn marriage, and so abstemious as that they
judge those who use the creature sparingly; whereas themselves are given over
to belly cheer, what could have been spoken more fitly to show forth the
hypocrisy of the Pope and Papists. For do not they, whiles they condemn and
contemn marriage, under the show of vowed chastity practice all uncleanness;
and whiles they condemn all moderate eating of flesh, do not they under a
color of fasting, feast and feed themselves with the choicest dainties? Do
not many of them under the pretense of voluntary poverty gather infinite
riches? And does not all their religion stand in Opere operate, in the bare
performaunce of the outward work, that is to say, in hypocrisy? Neither are
we to omit an hypocritical policy which of late they have used. For when
as they could not prevail with their Sophistry, that is to say, with their
Books of controversies: they hoped to prevail among the simple with their
hypocrisy, that is to say, with their books of devotion. Wherein there is a
notable show of counterfeit devotion, zeal and holiness, to bleare the eyes
of the simple and unstaid. But it were to be wished, that as they are, so they
were esteemed to be no better then baits of Antichrist, serving to allure men
under show of devotion, unto idolatry and apostasy from God: especially if we
consider that the principal of these books were set forth by Parsons and
other Jesuits, who Quodlibet etc.
are plainly discovered even by some of their own side, to be mere
Machiuilians and wicked Atheists.

5. Thus you see what manner of adversary Antichrist is. Now we must show in
particular wherein he is opposed to Jesus Christ. He is opposed unto him as he
is Christ, and as he is Jesus: as he is Christ, that is, as he was anointed
of God to be our Prophet, our King, and our Priest; in which respect especially
he is called Antichrist. He is also opposed unto him as he is Jesus, that is to
say, as he is our Savior. So that Antichrist opposes himself both to the
offices of Christ signified in the name Christ, and also to the benefits
signified in the name Jesus. Now these things also most fitly agree to the
Pope: who opposes himself to Christ in all these respects, not indeed
aperto Mart as an open and professed enemy, (for so it becomes not
Antichrist, who was to be an hypocrit sitting in the Church of God etc.) but
covertly and cunningly. For we must remember that Antichristianisme is the
mystery of iniquity, wherein Christ was in word and show to be professed, but
indeed and truth, denied. First, the^ to Christ our Prophet he is opposed,
partly as he oppugneth the prophecy of Christ, and partly as himself is a
false Prophet. He oppugneth the prophecy of Christ; First, in denying Christ to
be our only Prophet (whose voice in the canonical Scriptures concerning
matters necessarily to be believed unto salvation, we ought only to hear)
whiles he and his followers do teach that the scriptures are not perfect, and
that besides the Apocryphal writings (which they have matched with the
canonical) their own traditions also are necessary, and of equal authority
with the scriptures. Secondly by withholding from the people the scriptures
(which contain the whole doctrine of Christ our prophet) in a strange
language, and also by reading and preaching unto them their own fancies and
inventions, out of the legends and lives of saints, and festiualls etc. in
steed of the sincere truth of God. And by these two practices, the Pope,
whiles he leaves to Christ the name and title of being our prophet, he takes
the thing to himself. Again he is opposed to Christ our prophet as himself
is the false prophet spoken of in the Apocalypse, teaching Antichristian
errors and doctrines of devils. For so many errors, as are taught and held by
the Pope and church of Rome, are so many oppositions betwixt him and Christ our
prophet. Of the errors of the Romish church there be many centuryes or
hundreds, and diverse of them fundamental. In respect whereof we may truly
say that the catholic Apostasy (for so I call the Romish religion) is the
common sewre of many gross heresies.

6 But it will be said, that howsoever the Pope holds diverse errors, yet he
teaches not those, which the holy ghost has noted as the peculiar doctrines
of Antichrist. Whereof the author of the Wardword reckons up three, and
Bellar-mine has a fourth: But neither of them durst mention those two
doctrines of devils which Paul assigns to that Apostasy, 1. Tim. 4. 3.
whereof Antichrist is the head, The first doctrine of Antichrist (say they)
is, to deny Jesus to be Christ. Which they Of this see more in the 2. book and
14. chapter.
would prove out of 1. John. 2. 22. and 4. 3. and 2. John. 7. But the Pope (say
they) does not deny Jesus to be Christ. To the prosyllogisme or proof of the
proposition I answer, that these places of the Apostle John do not speak
properly of the graund Antichrist, who is the head of the Antichristian body,
but of certain petite Antichrists, or heretics of those times, which denied
either of the natures of Christ, (for he speaks of such as were then already
come into the world:) and therefore from thence it cannot be proved that the
great Antichrist shall directly and expressly deny Jesus to be Christ.
Notwithstanding, seeing they are called Antichrists not only because they
belong to the Antichristian body as inferior members thereof, but also as it
may be thought, because they did after a sort deny Christ as the great
Antichrist also should do, although not after the same manner: I do therefore
thus far grant the proposition it self, that Antichrist was in some sort to
deny Christ. For John speaks not of the manner how he does deny Christ.
Neither are we to think that Antichrist will deny him after every manner,
but in such sort as shall be most consonant to the whole mystery of iniquity,
and suitable to the rest of his lying and deceit. That is to say, in outward
2 Thessalonians. 2.
show and semblance to profess Christ (as those Antichrists did, of whom John
speaks) but in deed and in truth to deny him. To come therefore to the
assumption: let us consider whether the Pope and church of Rome do not in some
sort deny Christ, Christ may be denied, either in deeds or words. Quisquis
autem factis negat Christum, is Antichrist us est, And whosoever in deeds
(says Augustine) denies Christ, he is Antichrist. Let us therefore mark
(says he) who it is that denies, and Tract. 3. in Epist. Joan.
let us not attend to his tongue but to his works. I regard not what he
speaks, but how he lives. Works do speak, and do we require words? He is
the more lying Antichrist, who with his mouth prosesseth Jesus to be Christ,
and by deeds denies him. According to the Lawyers rule, it is more to testify
a matter by deeds then by words. And Tullie says, that where the things
themselves Contra Salust.
bear witness, words are needless. And as Antichrist was thus to deny
Christ, both as he is the man of sin, and an adversary oppugning Christ and his
church: So does the Pope, howsoever in word he professes Christ. For even the
devils themselves have in word confessed Christ, whom notwithstanding by their
deeds they deny. If therefore the Pope be a man of sin (which we shall prove
anon) and an adversary opposed unto Christ, (which now we have in hand to
prove) then it cannot be denied but that indeed he denies Christ.

7 Secondly, Christ may be de denied in word and doctrine, and that either
indirectly and by consequent, or else directly and expressly. He that denies
Christ by consequent, howsoever openly he does confess him, does indeed deny
him; as those which deny either of his natures, or any of his offices. For such
is the necessary coherence of truth within it self, as nothing can by
necessary consequence be deducted from it, which is not also true. And
therefore it is impossible that the consequent should be false, the antecedent
being true. Whereupon it follows, that whosoever denies the consequent, does
indeed deny the antecedent. Jesus is Immanuel, and consequently God and Man. He
is Christ, and consequently anointed of God to be our King, our priest, and
our prophet. He therefore that denies any of these, denies Jesus to be
Christ. And further, is Christ truly God? then is he also Jehovah, one that is
of and from himself, namely as he is God: the^ is he also the Lord and creator
of al things, governing all things with his presence and providence. Is he
truly man? then has he a true body consisting of three dimensions, length,
breadth, thicknes, circu^scribed, visible, con^ined in one place at once, as
being but one body not discontinued. Is he the true Messiah and Mediator
betwixt God and man? then is he the only mediator, for there is but one.
Wherefore 1. Tim. 2. 5. Act. 4. 12.
whosoever says, that Christ is not (...) God of himself, he denies him to be
God: or prefers any creature before him either in heaven or in earth, he
denies him to be the Lord and maker of al; or assigns a vicar unto him to
supply his absence on earth, denies his omniprese^ce. Again, whosoever says
that Christ his body does not consist of 3. dimensio^s, that it is not
circu^scribed, that it is not visible, that it is not contained in one place as
al other bodies, yea as al other finite natures are; he denies Jesus to be
truly man, and consequently denies him to be Christ. Lastly whosoever adioyne
other mediators unto Christ and in some respects preser others above him, deny
him to be the only mediator; and therefore deny him to be the true mediator, for
there is but one, and consequently deny Jesus to be christ. And thus as the
Antichrists whereof John speaks (according 1. John. 2. 22. Lib. 3. de pont.
Rc. ap. 14.
to Bellarmin his own exposition) did, and as the graund Antichrist (according
to our confession) does deny Christ, not only in deed, but also in word and
doctrine, although not openly and expressly yet indirectly, and by consequent:
So does the Pope and church of Rome, deny Jesus to be Christ. For, what a God
and Lord, what a creator and governor of all things the Pope and Papists make
our Savior Christ, you may easily conceive; First, when they de^y him to be
(...) God of himself, and consequently Jehovah. For whosoever is Jehovah, he
is of, and from himself. True indeed it is, that Christ is filius a patre, sed
Deus a se, quate nus est Deus: that is, son of and from his father, but God
of and from himself, namely as he is God. And if he were not of and from
himself, he were not God. And although in the concrete we may and must say
with the council of Nice, that Christ is God of God, that is, Christ who is
God, is from the father who is God (the word God being taken (...)
personallio) because the person of the son who is Deus genitus God begotten
is from the person of the father who is Deus gignens God begetting: yet it is
not likewise true in the abstract. For howsoever the Godhead is communicated
from the father to the son by eternal generation, and from the father and
the son to the holy ghost by eternal procession, yet the deity of the son
and so of the holy ghost, being the self same infinite eternal and
indivisible essence of the father, is from, and of, and by, and for it self.
And who knows not that such is the simplicity of the divine nature as that
God is the godhead, and the godhead is God, and consequently that Christ as he
is God is the Godhead, which is of and from it self. And therefore to
conclude, Christ is God of God, in respect of his person, and he is also God of
himself in respect of his essence which is of it self: he is God of God, the
name God being used personally and relatiuely (for he is God the son, of God
the father: and God begotten, of God begetting) and he is God of himself, the
name God being taken (...) essentially and absolutely, namely as he together
with the father and the holy ghost is one and the same eternal Jehovah and
only true God. In which respect if the Papists deny Christ to be God of
himself, as they do when they accuse this our doctrine of heresy, and deny
him so to be (...) (God of himself) as we affirm, they do also deny him to be
God. Secondly, when as not only in heaven they set above him his mother whom
they call the Queen of heaven, desiring her to command him, and to show her
self to be a mother (as though Christ were as they paint him a baby under his
mothers government) for so they say, Iube natu^, and iure matris impera, and
again monstra te esse matre^ etc. but also on earth, when every shaueling
priest ca^ by breathing out a few words out of his unclean mouth, create his
maker (for so they teach, Sacerdos est creator creatoris sui, that is, the
priest is maker of his maker. And again, Qui creauit Stella clericor. sermon.
discip. sermon. 111. apud Iuellum.
vos, dedit vobis creare se, He which made you, gave you power to make him,)
and when he has so done, offer him up to his father. Wherein every priest
among the^, being the sacrificer, is after a sort preferred above Christ, who
is the sacrifice. Thirdly, when as they appoint unto Christ a vicar to supply
his absence, unto whom they assign all power which is in heaven and earth, yea
Vid. Cap. 5.
infinite power, which they say is translated from Christ unto him, what do they
else but make Christ a titular king, and with the Epicures an idle God, who
has as it were resigned al his right and authority to the Pope. What a man
they make our Savior Christ who knows not, when they hold, and with fire and
faggot persecute those that will not hold the same, that his body is
multipresent, that is, present in many or rather infinite places at once, and
that disco^tinued: for they say that it being in heaven is also present really
and corporally upon the earth, wheresoever their Mass is celebrated or their
host reserved, howsoever it is not in the space betwixt heaven and earth, nor
in those places where the host is not* which is to assign many or rather
innumerable bodies to our Savior Christ. And further that his very body, which
they say is really present in the Mass, is void of quantity and quality,
(...) not circu^scribed, not visible, nor any way sensible, and consequently,
no body. The which in effect is as much as to deny that Christ is come in the
flesh, which is the doctrine of that Antichrist whereof John speaks. And here
by the way note the absurdity of Papists, 1. John. 4. 3. 2. John. 7.
who circumscribe the deity of the father whiles they resemble the same by
pictures or images, and deny the humanity of the son to be circumscribed:
and consequently against all reason make the deity finit, and the humanity
infinite. The office of Christ is his mediation. Now what a mediator they make
him you may easily judge, when they join infinite others with him. For the
Apostle says, that there is but one mediator 1. Tim. 2. 5.
betwixt God and man, and this one alone our Savior Christ is, or else he is
none at all.

8. Again, Christ may be denied directly and expressly: and that may be done
either secretly and in private, or else openly and in public profession. After
the latter sort Antichrist was not to deny our Savior Christ: because he was
to be an hypocrite and a disguised enemy as has been proved. Neither was it
necessary that he should deny Christ expressly and directly, and yet this also
may be proved of diverse Popes. Who howsoever they professed publicly that
Jesus is Christ (which is all that our adversaries allege in this case, and
yet that all is nothing, for the Devils themselves have publicly professed
Jesus to be Christ) yet privately and among their fauourets they have denied
Christ, and not that only, but have showed themselves also to have been mere
Atheists, and devils incarnat. For to omit John the 22. who denied the
immortality of the soul, and of some is called the 23. of others 24. were not
Alexander the 6. and Sixtus the fourth, Julius 2. and Paulus 3. besides diverse
others, very Atheists? were not more then twenty of them known Necromancers
and sorcerers? not to speak of them which were not known, which renou^cing
Christ our Savior, betook themselves to the Devil. As namely Siluester 2.
Benedict 9. Gregory 5. and Gregory the 7. who also in a rage cast the
Eucharist, that is according to their opinion the very body of Christ into the
fire, because it did not answer to his questions when as he consulted
therewith. And what may we think of Clement the seventh? who, when he was at
deaths door, said he should now be certified of three things whereof he had
doubted al his life, viz. whether there be a God, whether the soul be
immortal, and whether there be a life after this life. Or of Julius the 3. who
being forbidden by the Physicians the use of Porke, commanded his porke to be
set before him, Al dispette di Dio, In despite of God? As for Pope Leo the 10.
he did plainly enough deny Christ when as more then once he called the
Gospel, the fable of Christ, For when he had received an incredible sum of
money for indulgences, he said to Bembus, O quantum nobis Ex. Sibrand. ^ull. de
pap. Romans l. 10. c. 18
profuit illa de Christo fabula! O how much that fable of Christ has profited
us! And another time when Bembus alleged for his comfort a testimony out of
the Gospel, he answered: Quid mihi narras fabulamilla^ de Christo? What do
thou tell me of that fable of Christ? If therefore this be a property of
Antichrist to deny Christ, then it cannot be avoided but that according to our
adversaries own grounds, the Pope who so many ways denies Christ, is
Antichrist. And so much of his opposition to the Prophecy of Christ. For of
the other three doctrines which the Papists assign to Antichrist, See book
(...). chap. 14.
we are to entreat when we come to answer the objections of the Papists.

9. To the Priesthood of Christ our only priest and mediator, who according to
the Scriptures with the oblatio^ of himself once made has perfectly redeemed
us, are opposed. 1. Heb. 10. 12. 14
Their priesthood, whereby Christ is daily offered and his sacrifice repeated in
their abominable sacrifice of the Mass propitiatory as they say both for the
quick and the dead: 2. Their own satisfactions as prices of sin opposed to
the satisfaction of Christ: 3. Their adjoining unto Christ other intercessours
and mediators, by whose not only intercession they hope to be heard, but also
merits, hope to be saved. Of Gregory they say thus in their prayers, Hic nos
saluet a peccatis,
vt in coelo cum beatis
possimus quiescere.


That is, Let him save us from our sins, that in heaven we may rest with the
blessed. Of Thomas Becket th'archbishop of Canterbury, because he died in the
Popes quarrel, which like a rebel he maintained against his sovereign king
Henry the second, they say full devoutly, Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te
impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
That is, By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did spend,
Make us Christ to come whither Thomas did ascend.


Of Peter and Paul, Concede vt ambo^u^ meritis aeternitatis gloriam
consequamur. Grant that by the meries of them Ex. Romans Breuiar.
both we may obtain eternal glory. To Mary the blessed virgin whom they
idolatrously call our Lady and the Queen of heaven, they pray thus, O vnica
spes miserorum, libera nos Ex compassionib. Mariae.
ab omni malo, O thou that art the only hope of them that are in misery,
deliver us from all evil. And elsewhere they call her, Desperatorum spem
vnicam, peccatorum salvatricem, Innoc. in orat. de 300. dier. indulgent. In
orat. de 5. vnb^rib.
The only hope of them which are in despair, and the Savior of sinners.
Again, Mediatrix Dei and hominum, salus and spes in the sperantium, O thou the
mediatrix betwixt God and men, the salvation and hope of them that hope in
thee. And somewhere it is said: O regina poli, matter gratissima proli
Spe^ere me noli, me commendo tibi soli.


O Queen of heaven, mother most dear to thy son, do not thou despise me,
unto thee alone I commend me. And again: Cum nulla spes sit altera
nisi tu virgo puerpera In missali Paristensi.

patris parens and filia
cui me reconcilia.


Seeing there is no other hope, besides thee O virgin mother, the mother and
daughter of-thy father, to whom I pray thee reconcile me. And to conclude (for
innumerable such speeches might be produced,) they say; O foelix puerpera
nostra pians scelera Ibid.

iure matris impera
redemptori.


O happy mother which do purge away our sins, by thy motherly authority
command our redeemer. So that sometimes they do join unto our Savior
Christ other mediators not only of intercession, but also of redemption,
(which indeed is presupposed in the former) sometimes also they exclude our
Savior Innocent, in orat. in laudem virginis.
Christ, when as they say that Mary purges away the sins of all the faithful,
and that she and no other is the only hope of them that are in misery and
despair. And not to speak of their blasphemous psalter, wherein they turn
that which is spoken in the Psalms either of God or Christ, to the virgin
Mary: some of them say, that whereas the kingdom of Christ consists in two
things, justice and mercy; Christ reserueth justice unto himself, and mercy
he has given up to his mother. And therefore one says, A foro iustitiae Dei
appellundum est ad Bernardinus in Mar^al.
forum misericordiae matris eius. From the court of Gods justice, we must
appeal to the court of his mothers mercy.

10 As touching the kingdom of Christ, what does not the Pope oppugn in it?
The realm and kingdom of Christ is his church which he rules by his spirit
inwardly, and outwardly by his word, which is both his scepter and his law,
and also by such officers and ministers as he has ordained both in the church
and common wealth. The church and people of God this son of perdition seeks
to destroy. First by killing the bodies of the true servants of Christ that
refuse his mark, in respect whereof he may most worthily be called (...) or
abaddon that is, a destroyer, and his church the whore Apoc. 9.
of Babylon, which is drunk with the blood of Saints and of the Martyrs of
Jesus, as shall be shown in the second book and seventh chapter. And as he
kills the bodies of those that will not receive his mark, so he murdereth
the souls of them that submit themselves unto him, poisoning them with his
damnable errors and making them drunk with the wine of his fornications,
after which they shall drink of the cup of Apoc. 14. 9.
Gods wrath. Now in making havoc of men's souls he takes such liberty unto
him, as that if he should draw with him innumerable souls into hell, yet no
man may say unto him Domine cur ita facis? Sir, why do you so? And in the
Canon, Si papa did. 40. it is said, If the Pope do carry with him innumerable
Gloss^iur. ca^.
peoples by troops into hell, no man in this world may presume to reprove his
fault, because he is to judge all, and to be judged of none, unless he be
found to err from the faith, which the Pope as he is Pope cannot do. Hereunto
Bellarmine answers that the words of this Canon be not the words of any
Pope, Cupers. page 18. number. 12.
but of Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz. Yea, but say I, the Lib. 3. de pont.
Romans cap. 21.
Pope has so approved this speech being delivered by another, as that he
has canonized it, and appointed it for one of the canons of his law. Which is
more then if it had bin spoken by himself. But Bellarmine replyeth; If this
sentence of Boniface be not true, why do you object it: if it be true, why do
you not receive it? I answer, because it being not only false, but
blasphemous also and Antichristian, is notwithstanding by the Pope authorized
for a Canon in his law. Moreover, one of the chief works of Gods spirit the
spirit of adoption, which is special faith, apprehending the righteousness of
Christ to our justification, he labors to extinguish in the hearts of men,
calling it presumption: acknowledging no other faith Iam. 2.
but such as is common to the devils (which consists only of knowledge and
assent), and yet not requiring that in the lay people whom under the name of
implicit faith, he nuzleth in palpable ignorance, and leads them being
blind, as Elizeus did the Aramites, even whether it pleases 2. King 6.
him. The pure wheat of Gods word he suppresseth and keeps from the people
in an unknown tongue, and see death them with the mast of their Legends and
festiualls and lies (I should have said lives) of Saints. The laws of Christ
he partly dispenses with, and partly abrogateth, making them of none effect by
his own constitutions and traditions. In the church, in steed of the offices
and functions ordained by Christ, he has created a new priesthood, erected
an hierarchy, consecrated orders and religions of his own. In the common
wealth he absolueth the people from their obedience to their princes if they
shall displease him. And it is a principle among them, that it is lawful for
him to depose Emperors and Kings, and to absolve their sworn subjects from
fidelity and allegiance toward them. And thus you see how the Pope opposes
himself to the prophecy, priesthood and kingdom of Christ. Whereunto I might
add how he is opposed to these offices of Christ, not only in these respects
allreadie mentioned, but as an aemulus, as an antiprophet, an antipriest, and a
counter king seeking in his Antichristian pride to match our Savior Christ in
all those offices: but hereof I shall have occasion to speak in the next
chapter. Now to the benefits of Christ he is opposite, as he is an enemy to
the grace of god: as he takes away Christian liberty, and takes upon him to
make new laws, to bind the conscience: as he abridgeth the merits of Christ,
and ascribes the merit of salvation not only to our own works prescribed
of God, but also to such as have been in superstition, will worship, and
idolatry, devised by themselves: as he teaches men to seek salvation
elsewhere then in Christ. All which oppositions of the Pope to Christ,
whosoever shall duly consider, he will not seek further for Antichrist.

Chap. 5. Of the pride and ambition of Antichrist, advancing himself above all
that is called God, etc.
1. But Antichrist is not only hostis an enemy to Christ, but also (as our
adversaries confess), aemulus Christi, that is, such an adversary as is
opposed unto Christ in aemulation of like honor, as the word Antichrist does
also signify. It remains therefore that we should speak of the pride and
ambition of Antichrist^, whereby he seeking to match Christ our Savior,
aduaunceth himself as the Apostle speaks Above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped, insomuch that he sits in the temple 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
of God, as God, showing himself that he is God, or as the Papists themselves
read, as though he were God. Where (for avoiding of error) we are to
understand the pride of Antichrist Vulgat edit. ^em.
to be described such as is incident to a wretched man, a man of sin, a son
of perdition. And the greatest pride that is incident not only to any man, but
to any creature, be it the devil himself (whose Satanicall pride Antichrist
was to imitate and not to exceed) is this, to seek to be as God. When as Es.
14.
therefore it is said that Antichrist aduanceth himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, it is not meant that he shall seek to
advance himself, above God or the deity it self: For God being infinite in
goodness, excellency and power, there cannot be conceived a better, a
superior, a greater. And therefore we cannot imagine how Antichrist should
advance himself above God. And it is evident that the height of Antichrists
pride here spoken of, is noted in these words, Insomuch as he shall sit in
the temple of God, as God, By all therefore that is called God, we are to
understand all those to whom the name of God is communicated: not essence, for
that cannot be communicated to any that is not god. Now the name of God is
communicated to Angels in heaven, Psalm. 8. 5. cum Heb. 2. 7. and Psalm. 97. 7.
cum Heb. 1. 6. and to princes and magistrates on earth, Exodus 22. 28. Psalm. 82.
1. 6. And whereas it is said that he shall advance himself above all that is
worshipped, we are to understand by the word (...) not God himself, but any
thing that is worshipped as God, or wherein God is worshipped. So Wisd. 15. 17.
images, and Act. 17. 23, altars among the heathen are called (...). Such in the
church of Rome, are Saints, images, the cross and relics of Saints, the
eucharist, etc. The meaning then of the Apostle is this, that Antichrist being
a wicked and wretched man, shall advance himself above all that is called God,
as Angels and Kings, or that which is worshipped, as Saints and images and
altars, the cross and eucharist it self, insomuch that he shall sit in the
temple of God as God, that is, he shall rule and reign in the church of God,
challenging a sovereign, universal and divine authority over al those that
profess the name of Christ, as if he were a God upon earth, showing himself
whether by words or by deeds that he is god, or which is all one, behauing
himself tanquam sit Deus, As though he were God. The like things were foretold
of Antiochus Epiphanes, who is thought to have been a type of Antichrist. Dan.
11. 36. But (to come to the application of this prophecy) if Antiochus were
comparable to the Pope in aduauncing himself above all that is called God: or
if I shall not prove out of their own (I mean popish) writings, that he has
lifted up himself in such manner as is scarcely credible to be incident unto a
mortal man; then let not the Pope be deemed Antichrist, but rather look for
some other, who shall go beyond him in Antichristian insolency and Satanicall
pride.

2. From this place therefore of the apostle, I argue thus: Whosoever aduaunceth
himself above all that is called God or that is worshipped, insomuch that he
sits in the temple of God, as God, taking upon him as though he were a God,
he according to the testimony of the apostle, is antichrist, that is, Aemulus
Christi, such an enemy as in a kind of emulation seeks to match Christ and
to be equal to him. But the Pope of Rome (as shall be proved) aduaunceth
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, insomuch that he
sits in the temple of God as God, taking upon him as though he were a God
upon earth, therefore according to this testimony of the apostle the Pope is
Antichrist. And first that the Pope aduaunceth himself above all that is
called God, it is plain, because he lifts up himself not only over Kings
and Emperors on earth, but also above the Angels in heaven. Of his lifting up
himself above Kings and Emperors is the testimony before alleged 2 Thessalonians.
2. 4. Papa superioritatem habet in imperium. Clemeatin. Pastoralis de re Iudic.
especially to be understood. For he speaks of such an advancement whereby
Antichrist should be revealed, as was to be hindered for a time by the Roman
Empire. Let us then consider how he aduaunceth himself above Kings and
Emperors who are called Gods. The Pope if you will believe him and his
followers, is the Paulus 4. ad ducem Floret. in bulla. Rod. Cupers. merito rex
regu^ and dominus dominantium censetur Papa, reque ipsa existit. page 43. number.
39. c. solitas, extr. de mayor. and obed. etc. per venerabile^ opt. qui filij
sunt legitimi. Antonius de Rosellis.
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, by Lib. Carem.
whom Princes reign, and from Clem. 5. in council. vienn.
whom the right of Kings depends. For you must know that as they full
solemnly dispute, the R. Cupers. page 251. nu^. 62.
Empire or temporal rule, as well as the priesthood or ecclesiastical
dominion is translated unto the successors of Peter: that the Idem page 52.
number. 28. and p. 1. 251. n. 63. and 64.
right of rule and direct dominion of the Empire and kingdoms belongs to the
Pope, howbeit he commits the exercise thereof to Emperors and Kings: that
Idem page 28 number. 7.
Emperors, Kings, and all Princes receive their right of governing their
kingdoms from the Pope, and that by him they are confirmed, and by him deposed:
that to him Emperors and Kings as being but his vassals are bound to swear c.
tibi domino. did. 63. etc. 1. de iuretur.
allegiaunce and sidelity: that he so far surpasses the c. solitae de
mayor. and obed.
Emperor as the Sun excels the Moon, that is, according to their
Astronomy, G^oss. ibid. Sta^st. Orichovius quantum Deus praestat sacerdoti,
tantu^ sacerdos praestat regi. qui rege anteponit sacerdoti, is anteponit
creatura^ creatori. Apud Iuellum.
seven and fifty times, or rather as the creator is superior to the
creature. Therefore Kings and Emperors Li. ^erem. 1. sect. 5. cap. 3. and lib.
3. sect. 1. cap. 3.
when they come into the presence of his holiness, must, after obeisance done
in three several distances, fall down before him and kiss his foot, even as
Mantuan says of him, Ense potens gemino, cuius vestigia adorant
Caesar, and aurato vestitimurice reges.
And if they be in presence when he takes Lib. 1. c^ere^. sect. 2. c. 3.
horse, the Emperor or chiefest Prince that is present must hold his right
stirrup, and when he is mounted must hold the bridle, and play the lackey for a
certain space, and likewise when he lights off, must hold the right stirrup;
which if he happen to mistake as being not used to service, he must look for a
check, as we read Helmoldus Chron. Slauor: l. 1. c. 81. and Bal: de vit. pont.
of Hadrian the 4. who bitterly checked Frederick the Emperor for holding the
stirrup on the wrong side. Or if it be his pleasure to be carried alost on men's
shoulders, lib. caerem. 1. sect. 2. and 5. de processione pontifi^s and
Caesaris per vrbem. Lib. 1. c. 8. caerem.
the Emperor, kings, and princes that are present, must put under their
shoulder and help to carry his holiness for a space, and whiles he is on foot
the Emperor or chiefest Prince must bear up his train. If the Emperor be at
the Popes L^b. caerem. 1. sect. 3. Antonin. sin. part. 3. ^it, 22. cap. 5..
13. E. venerabilem de elect.
feast, his duty is before dinner to hold the Pope water to wash his hands,
and to bring in the first mess. For in deed Imperator est minister Papae, The
Emperor is the Popes minister.

3. These are but matters of ceremony. But as he vaunteth that all the right of
kings depends on him, so he challenges authority and power to translate
kingdoms, to create and depose Kings, to translate the Empire from nation to
nation, and to give the same to whom it pleases him. The Emperor (says
Hadrian, apud Auent^n. lib. 6.
he) is Emperor by us. Whence has he the Empire but from us? Behold the
Empire is in our power to give it to whom we well. And accordingly he has
Bellarm. de pont. Romans lib. 3. cap. 16.
deposed diverse Kings and Emperors, and created others, as I shall not need
to prove, for both they and their followers boast thereof. And if you desire
some other examples of their insolent and Antichristian behavior toward
Emperors and Kings, did not Gregory the seventh make Henry the Emperor, who
came in all humility to submit himself unto him with his wife and child,
dance attendaunce at his gate bare-foote and barehead by the space of three
days, before he would grant them any access unto him? When as the Emperor
Frederick Naucler. generat. 40.
Barbarossa was excommunicated by the Pope, and his son taken prisoner in
Venice, he came to the Pope Alexander the third, into the Church of Saint
Mark there, to the end that he might be absolved, and his son restored.
Where, before all the people, the Pope having commanded the Emperor to
prostrate himself upon the ground and so to ask pardon, he sets his foot
in the neck of the Emperor, saying, it is written, Super aspidem and
basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis Leonem and Draconem, Thou shall walk
upon the Aspe and Cockatrice, and shall tread upon the Lion and the Dragon.
Which indignity when the Emperor being not well able to brook, made answer,
Not to thee but to Peter, the holy father treading on the Emperors neck
replied, Et mihi and Petro, Both to me and to Peter. And when as Henry the
sixth came to be crowned Emperor, and to that end kneeled before Celestin the
third sitting in his pontisicall chair, did not he after he had set the
imperial Diadem on his head, and as some say with his feet, kick it of with
his foot again? What should I tell you of Innocent the second, how he caused
his own with the Emperors picture to be set up in the Palace of Laterane,
himself sitting in his pontifical throne, and the Emperor kneeling before
him and holding up his hands as unto God, with these verses subscribed,
Rexvenit ante sores, iurans prids vrbis honores,
Post homo sit Papae, sumit quo dante coronam,


That is, The King of the Romans comes before the gates, swearing first to
the honors and privileges of the city, afterward he becomes the Popes man,
of whose gift he receives the imperiallcrowne.

4. And thus has the Pope lifted up himself above all that is called God upon
earth, that is to say, Kings and Emperors: let us now consider whether he
exalts himself above those which are called Gods in heaven, that is to say,
the Angels. First, in general it is avouched by himself and his approved
writers, that the power of the Pope is greater then all other created power.
Antonin. s^m. pact. 3. lit. 22. c. 5.
Potestas Papaemaior est omni alia potestate creata: Council. Laterane^s. sub
Leo. 10. sess. 10.
That unto him is given all power above all powers as well of heaven as of the
earth. Qui totum dicit nihil excludit, He that says all excludes nothing:
Innocent. Papa. extr. de constit. R. Cupers. page 28. number. 5.
that to the vicar of the creator, that is the Pope, every creature is
subject: and more particularly, that he has Felinus apud Iuellu^.
vi^riatum Christi, Christ's vicarship, not onley about things in heaven, in
earth, in hell, but also above the Angels both good and bad: Nicolaus Egmu^danus
apud Bal. de vit. po^l.
Pontificem Romanu^ habere imperium in angelos ac daemonas, That the Pope has
rule over the Angels and Devils. That he has power to command the Angels, for
so they say, Gregor. Haimburg. in appellat. Sigism. apud Iuell.
Papa Angelis habet imperare, and Camotensis.
Papa angelis praecipit. And according to these testimonies which avouch his
right, is the Popes practice. For not only he callengeth greater honor and
reverence to be done to himself then is due to the angels (for he admits of
adorations and fallings down before him, which the angels refuse because they
are our fellow servants:) but also he takes upon him to command the holy
Angels at his pleasure to remove souls departed out of purgatory into heaven.
Clement the 6. in his bull concerning those which should come to Rome to
celebrate the Iubile, he commands the Angels of heaven, that if any of the^
should die in that lourney, to bring their souls being wholly freed from
Purgatory into the glory of Paradise. His words be these: Prorsus mandamus
angelis paradisi, quatenus animam a purgatorio penitus absolutam, in paradisi
gloriam introducant.

5. It remains that I should show how the Pope aduanceth himself above the
(...), that is the things wherein God is worshipped, or which are worshipped
as God in the church of Rome, as namely the Saints, the cross, the altar, and
their God of bread. As for the saints they are subject to the Antonin. part. 3.
lit. 22. cap. 5.. 5.
Pope quoad canonizationem, standing at the courtesy and free disposition of
the Pope whether to be deified that is as they speak to be canonized, or to
be deposed. For such is his authority Troilus Maluil. in tract. de canonis.
sanct. 3. dub.
(if you will believe him) in canonizing of Saints, that he can canonize whom
he will, yea of a damned person cast into hell he can make a saint in heaven,
and contrariwise he Antoninus part 3. lit. 22 c, 5.. 6.
can vnsaint those which before wore canonized. The cross which they say is to
be worshipped with divine worship, is notwithstanding made an ensign of the
Popes authority, Traianum Gregorius per orationem sud a poena inf^rni quae
infinita est absoluit.
and is borne before him as the mace before the magistrate, or the sword before
the prince, and when their procession is at an end it is laid under his feet.
And that he may be known even literally so to sit in the material temple as
if he were a God, it is to be noated that his seat in the church is above the
altar. But their chief (...) is their God of bread, which because they imagine
it to be Christ himself it is worshipped among them as their maker and
redeemer, notwithstanding in the Popes processions and iourneyes it is made an
attendaunt on his holiness. For I shall not need to tell you now which you
heard before, how Pope Hildebrand, when it did not answer his demands as being
not used to speak, did cast it into the fire. It is worthy to be remembered
which is reported by Ioannes Monlucius the Bishop of Valence, who was the
french Lib de religione ad Reginam matr^. Fulmen brut. page 12. and 13.
kings Ambassador at Rome, and testified by others, that when the Pope is to
travel abroad, three or four days before, he sends the Eucharist (that is
Christ their maker) on horseback accompanied with muletors and horsekeepers,
and courtisants and cooks with sumpterhorses and all the baggage of his court.
Afterward the Pope who professes himself his vicar follows, attended with
Cardinals, Primates, Bishops, and Potentates. And when he comes near to the
place whether he trauelleth, their Christ is brought to meet him on the way
that it may be carried before him into the town. But with what difference of
honor is he and his attendant carried in such solemn processions? The Pope
either rides on a goodly white horse under a stately canopie, or else is
carried aloft upon noble men's shoulders in a chair of gold, when the Christ of
the Papists, the Popes attendaunt is carried upon a simple hackney in
comparison, with no such magnificence* and yet that hackney is the Popes vicar
appointed in his steed to Stapleton in epist. ded cat. ante p^incip. do^in.
ca^ie the Monstrame. In a word, he is supremu^ numen in terris the chief or
supreme (...) that is to be worshipped on earth.

6 But let us come to the height of Antichrists pride, For it is not sufficient
for the Pope to be lifted up above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, unless he take upon him as if he were God, and seek to match
himself with Christ, as the name Antichrist imports: that unto him the
height of Antichrists In c. ecclesia, vt lite pe^dente, and in Council. Lateran.
sub Iu^o. Bald. in l. barbar. de off. praet.
pride may also be applied, which is described in these words, insomuch that
he sit teth in the temple of God as God, behauing himself as if he were god,
or (which is all one) showing himself that he is god. For of his followers and
flatterers he is said to be all and above all, the cause of causes, and the
first Gomesius de regul. cancel.
cause. Bald. in c. ecclesia vt lite pendente, that he is numen quoddam,
visibilem quendam Deum praese serens, a certain divine majesty showing himself
to be a certain visible God. Agreeable to the prophecy 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. (...),
that is as Beza translateth praese ferens, hebr. moreh i. facrens se apparere
of some he is called Decius c. 1. de constitutionib. Ca^dill. pro council
trident. Bald. Cod. sentent. rescindendi. 1. vit. and de electione. Felin. c.
ego. N de iureius.
terrenus Deus or Deus in terris, a God upon earth. In the council of Laterane
it was said to him, and he heard it willingly, Christoph. Marcellan con^l.
Lateran. sess 4. In arca triumph. Impress. Lug^uni (...). 1555
Tu es alter Deus in terris, thou art another God upon earth: in honor of that
hellhound Sixtus the 4. it was written, and presented to his view, that he is
worthily believed to be a God upon earth, Orac'lo vocis mundi moderaris
habenas,
Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.


By the oracle of thy voice thou gouernest the world, and worthily art thou
believed to be a god upon earth.

The Canonists call him, Our Lord God the Pope. For so it is written not only
in diverse old editions, but also in that new edition which by the authority
of Pope Gregory 13. was corrected and published, Credere dominum Deum nostrum
Papam, conditorem dictae decretalis and istius, no sic potuisse statucre prout
statuit, haereticum censeatur: to believe that our Lord God the Pope the
author of this, and the aforesaid decretal, could not decree as he has
decreed, it ought to be indged heretical. And as they willingly hear
themselves called God (and not only themselves hear or read it, but by
their authority appoint the same to be published unto the world) so they are
content to be worshipped and adored as God. Neither was the complaint of
Frederic the second untrue; Pontifices Romanos affectare dominationem and
diuinitatem, atque In Epist ad Othon. Bauar. duc. apud A^entin. lib. 7,
vt ab hominibus haud aliter, imo, magis quam Deus timeantur, That the Popes of
Rome affect Lordshippe, and divinity. and that they may be feared of men no
otherwise, yea more then God. Franciscus Zabarella a Cardinal of Rome says,
The Popes have been made to believe (such is their pride) that Apud Iuellum.
they can do all things what they list, even unlawful things, and that they
are plusquam Deus, more then God. These are more then sufficient to prove that
the Pope takes upon him as if he were a God, although he should not in word
affirm any such thing of himself. But so shameless is this Antichrist,
Gregor. 9. de translat. episc. c. quanto. and canter corporalia
that he affirms the like things of himself. As namely that those things
which he does, be done by a divine power: and the reason is given by his
Lawyers, because the Pope canonicallie elected, is a God upon earth. Whereupon
Innocentiue. 3. uses vt eccles. benesic. c. v^ nos^u^. Capistran. fol. 23.
these words, vt nostrum prodeat de Dei vultu iudicium that our judgment may
proceed from the face of god: That Peter and con sequently his successor the
Pope (for to that purpose it is alleged) is assumd into the fellowship of the
undivided unity. And in Bonifac. in 8. de elect.
one place he not only affirms, but by testimony also confirms C.
Fundamenta in sexto.
that he is God. Satis euidenter (says he) oste^ditur, a seeulari potest^te n^
ligart prorsus, nee sol^i posse pontifice^, que^ constat Distinct. 96. c. satis
cuidenter.
a pio principe Constantino Deu^ appellatu^: nec posse Deu^ ab hominibus
iudicari manifestu^ est. Where the Pope proves he cannot be judged by any
secular power, by this reason. God cannot be judged of me^. The Pope is god,
therefore the pope may not be judged of me^. assumption he approves by the
forged testimony of Constantine. And therefore not unworthily by a worthy
Bishop in Auentinus, the Pope is said to be Antichrist, in whose forehead
this name of blasphemy is written: Deus sum, errare non possum. Lib. 7.
Eberhardu^ Ep. sil^sourgensis.
I am God, I cannot err.

7 But as I said, the name Antichrist signifies such a one as seeks to match
Christ. Let us therefore farther consider how this agrees to the Pope. For if
the Pope do seek to match himself with Christ, then by this argument alone
if there were no more, he may be certainly convinced to be Antichrist. In
Christ we consider his natures and his offices, As touching his nature the
Pope if you will believe their blasphemies, Extrau. in Joan. 22.
aeque ac Christus Deus est, ens secundae intentionis compositum ex Deo and
homine. As well as Christ he is god, a being Vid Erasm. annotat. in 1. Tim. 1.
Papa stupor mundi. Clemen. in pro aem. in gloss.
of the second intention compounded of god and man. And as Christ in respect of
the one nature is greater then man, and in regard of the other less then God,
so they say of the Pope, Joan. a Capistr de Papae and ecclesiae authoritate.
Est quasi deus in terris, mayor homine, and minor Deo, plenitudinem obtinens
potestatis. He is as it were a god upon earth, greater then a man, and less
then god, having the fullness of power. That he is a man I shall not need to
prove, howbeit some of his followers cannot well tell what to make of him. They
say he is the wonderment of the world, Nec deus es, nec homo: quasi neuter es
inter v^rumque.
neither God nor man, but a neuter betwixt both. That he would be supposed
and acknowledged as a God, besides all the allegations in the former section,
it appears also by the divine properties which are attributed to the Pope.
His holiness (that is to say) the Pope, (for his holiness is himself,) is
Ps. 94. 1. Rod. Cupers de ecclesia page 61. number. 52.
Deus vindictae the god of revenge, true without error, yea without
possibility of erring, for he cannot err, whose Sub finem tit de censib.
exact. and procur in Clement. ad verbum volumus and Abb. Panorm. de constitut.
de translat it. episc. c quanto in gloss.
will must stand for reason as if it were the rule of justice. For even as
some of his Ger^chus apud Auentin. lib. 5.
friends say he often beats upon that of the Satyr, Sic volo sic iubeo, sit
proratione volunt as.


So I will, so I command, my will must stand for reason. And therefore it were
no better then Did. 40. non nos in gloss.
sacrilege to call in question any of his doings. For power, whether you
understand potestatem, or potentiam, that is authority or might, he would
seem to be infinite in respect of both, for Lib. caerem. 1. sect. 7.
infinite power is given unto him. And if unto Christ Cupers de eccl. page 50.
number. 45. 46. De mayor. and obed. c. vnam sanctam in gloss.
was given all power in heaven and in earth, then the Pope who is his vicar
has the same power. He forsooth is the Bald. c. ecclesia. vt lite. pendente.
cause of causes, of whose power none must enquire, seeing of the first cause
there is no cause: yea to In L. sacrilegij. c. de crim. sacril.
doubt of his power, is no better then sacrilege. Panormit. ex Hostiensi.
extr. de translat. praelat. c. quanto. and de electi. c. licet.
Excepto peccato potest quasi omnia facere quae potest Deus, Sin excepted,
the Pope may do all things as it were which God may do. He can change the
nature of things, yea De translat. episc. c. qua^to in gloss.
of nothing he can make something, and of injustice righteousness, for he
has the fullness of power.

8. If you respect his office he has the same Bellarm. de pont. Romans l. 5. c.
4.
which Christ had whiles he was on the earth, howbeit there is great odds in
their outward estates. R. Cupers de eccl: page 50. number. 45. 46. Bellarm. de
council, l. 2. c. 17. and de pot. Romans lib. 2. c. 31. Joan. de turrecre. sum. de
eccl. lib. 2. c. 27. and cap. 80. R. Cupers. page 34. number. 1. Bonifac. 8. c.
quonia^ de immunit. in 6. Panormit.
For it is not sit that the Pope should rese^ble Christ who now is glorified in
heaven, as he was conte^ned, but as the Pastor of the whole world supernal and
heavenly, and as he shall come to be our judge, to whom it is certain that all
men of necessity must obey. For it is evident that the work of redemption
being accomplished, the power of Christ was extended as well in heaven as in
earth. Mat. 28. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Which power
is translated unto his Vicar, etc. In respect of his office therefore, he is the
foundation, the head, the husband, the Lord of the universal church, in unction
Christ, and is therefore to be called R. Cupers. de eccl.
Christus Domini, the Lords Christ. Now if it be objected that Christ alone is
the head Ephesians. t.. 21. 22. 4. 15. 5. 23. Col. 1. 28.
of the Catholic Church and so of the Ephesians. 5. 24. Joan. 3. 29. 2. Cor. 11. 2.
1. Cor. 3. 11. 12.
rest: answer is made, that R. Cupers. de eccl. page 128. number. 36.
Christ and the Pope in the Church are vnu^ and idem caput, one and the same
head, and do make one and the same consistory: Idem page 30. number. 8.
for it were a monstrous thing that the Church should have two heads. And to
the same purpose says a 1. de. turrecre^at. sum. de eccle. lib. 2. c. 26.
Cardinal of Rome, The judgment of the Pope is reputed the judgment of God,
and his sentence, and his consistory, the consistory of God: and therefore
Christ and the Pope are not properly two heads, but one, as Boniface the eight
declares, In extrav. c. vnam sanctam. But to speak more particularly of his
offices. For prophecy, he is the universal or oecumenicall Bishop, and
Pastor of Pastors, Orat. Cornelij episcop^ (...). in council. ^rident. sub. Pau.
lo 3.
the Ordinary or Bishop of the whole world: Who is oom a light into the world,
but men have loved darkness more then light, who has the supreme authority
of interpreting the scriptures, who is the supreme judge in controversies of
religion, having De translat. epise. c. quanto in gloss.
an heavenly arbitrament, and as it were a divine and infallible judgment, who
is above Decret. Greg. l. 1. de elect and (...) o^ c. significa^ Council.
Florent. and T^dent.
general councels, for R. Cupers de ^ccl. page 31. number. 23. Pig^. lib. 6. c.
13.
although in a general council the universal Church is represented, in
Cupers. page 125 n^. 9.
so much that nothing is greater then the Council, Tamen Papa eidem omnimoda
supereminet authoritate, Notwithstanding Cap^. sol. 23. C. de sum^. trinit. l.
1. in. f.
the Pope surpasses the same in all manner authority, whose judgment is to be
preferred before the judgment of the whole world, insomuch that if the whole
world should determine against the Pope, we must stand to his sentence, for
so they say, R. Cupers. page 11 (...). 18.
Papae sententia totius orbis pl^to prefertu^: And again, 1. de turrecrem.
lib. 3. c. 64.
Si totus mundus sentiret (or as the In c. nemo. 9. q 3.
gloss reads senten^iaret) contra Papam, videtur quod senten^ae Papae
standum esset, vt 24. q. 1. haec est fides, haec gloss. Baldus.
who is of greater authority then all the Saints, and in respect thereof is of
1. de turrecrem. sum. lib. 2 cap. 26.
great perfection then the whole body of the Church besides. But it is not
sufficient for this Antichrist to prefer himself above the whole Church
which is the body of Christ, unless also he sought in respect of the
prophetical office to match himself with Christ the head of the church, yea
and in some respects to ouermatch him.

9. He seeks to match himself with Christ, 1. in taking upon him to make
new articles of Eaith, and to propound doctrines not contained in the
Scriptures as necessary unto salvation. 2. In making five Sacraments more then
Christ appointed, (some whereof he prefers above baptism) and those two
which Christ has ordained he has so altered and changed as that the one is
scarcely, the other not at all the same. And whereas Christ ordained the
Sacrament of his body and blood in two kinds, they not withstanding his
institution will have it administered to the people but in one kind. For so it
is professed in the Council of Constance, that although Christ administered
this venerable sacrament ^ss. 13.
unto his Disciples under both kinds of bread and wine, and although in the
primitive church this sacrament was received of the faithful in both kinds,
notwithstanding this custom of receiving the bread only was upon good reason
brought in, for the avoiding of some dangers and scandales. 3. In making their
own devises, decretals and traditions of equal authority with the word of God.
Innocentius 3. commanded that the words of the canon Joan. Bal: in eius vita.
of the Mass should be held equal to the words of the gospel. Agatho the Pope
decreed that all the constitutions of the Sea apostolic are to be received, as
authorized by the divine voice D stinct. 19. c. sic omnes. Joan. de turrecrem.
lib. 2. c. 108.
of Peter himself. And in the same distinction, this is the title or argument
of one chapter, Inter canonic as Scripturas, decretales epistolae
connumerantur, that is, Among the Canonical scriptures the decretall epistles
are numbered. Which in D^st. 19. c. in canonic^.
the chapter it self is absurdly proved out of Augustine misalledged. And as
touching traditions (whereby are meant De doctr. Christi. l. 2. c. 8.
all points of popery, which as themselves confess are not contained in the
written word) the holy Council of Trent has ordained that they are to be
received, and honored Pari pi^tatis affectu ac reuerentia, With as great
affection of Sess. 4.
piety and reverence, as the written word of God. Which decree when as a
certain Bishop misliked, Ceruinus the Popes Iacobus Nachiantes Clodiae follae
episcopus. Bal. in vita Marcell^ secundi.
legate (who afterward was Pope, called Marcellus 2.) caused him to be
expelled out of the Council. And lastly, least he should seem in any thing to
be inferior to Christ our Prophet, he confirms his doctrines by miracles as
they call them.

10. And thus the Pope matcheth himself with Christ our Prophet: let us now
consider how he aduaunceth himself above him. Which he manifestly does in
preferring his own and the churches authority above the scriptures. And if the
Hervaeus de potest. Tap. e. and R. Cupers. Petrus de palude, de potest. Papae.
^t. 4.
church be above the Scriptures, then much more is he. For he not only
virtualiter est tota ecclesia, that is, virtually the whole church, but also
his power alone exceeds the power of all the whole church besides. Now that
the authority of the church and much more of the Pope who is superior to the
church, is above the scripture, it is both generally affirmed and by some
particulars confirmed, Cardinal Cusanus entitleth his book, De authoritate
ecclesia and concilij supra and co^tra scriptura^, Of the authority of the
Church and council above and against the Scripture. Syluester Prierias master
of the Popes palace says, That indulgences are warranted unto us, not by the
authority of the Scripture, Contra Lutheri conclusiones de potestate Papae.
but by the authority of the Church and Pope of Rome, which is greater.
Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz says, That all men so reverence the
Apostolic See of Rome, that they rather desire the ancient institution of
Christian religion from the Pope, then from the holy Scriptures. This saying
the Pope has so approved, that he has caused it to be inserted into the Did.
40. c. si Papa.
Canon law. The particulars which prove the Pope to advance himself above
the Scriptures are these. 1, Because he has as they say authority to add to
the Canonical Scriptures, other books that are not in the Canon. And that
those Did. 19. c. si Romanorum. Joan. de turrecrem. l. (...). cap. 112.
which be in the Canon, have their Canonical authority from him. In the 19.
distinction cap. Si Romanorum, Pope Nicolas not only matcheth their decretall
Epistles with the holy Scriptures, but also affirms that the Scriptures are
therefore to be received, because the Pope has judged them canonical. Another
says, Whosoever rests not on the doctrine of the Roman church and Bishop of
Rome as the infallible rule of God, Syluester Prierias contra Lutherum.
a qua sacra scriptura robur trabis and authoritatem, From which the sacred
Scripture draws strength and authority, he is an Heretic. Eckius says,
Scriptura nisiecclesiae authoritate non De ecclesia.
est authentica, The Scripture is not authentical but by the authority of the
Church. For I will not tell you how some of them have not been ashamed to say,
that the Scripture without the authority of the Church, is of it self no
better worth then AEsopes fables. Pighius says, The authority of the church
Vid. Chemnit. exam. part. 1. page 47.
is above the Scriptures, because the authority of the Church has given the
Scriptures canonical authority. Secondly, whereas the Scriptures are not the
words and syllables, but the true sense and meaning thereof. They teach that
the scriptures are to be understood according to the interpretation of the Pope
and Church of Rome: and that sense which the Pope assigns to the Scriptures,
must be taken for the undoubted word of God. The Pope (says one) has
authority so to expound Heruau^ de potestate Papae.
the scriptures, that it is not lawful to hold or think the contrary. A
Cardinal of Rome says, If any man have the interpretation of the church of
Rome concerning any place of scripture, although he neither know nor understand
whether and Cardinal. Hosius de expresso dei verbo.
how it agrees with the words of the scripture, notwithstanding he has
ipsimum verbum Dei, the very wordof God: And if the sense, which they give, be
diverse according to the variety of their practice and diversity of times, we
must acknowledge that the scripture is to follow the church and not the church
to follow the scriptures. Whereupon Cardinal Cusanus, It is no Nicol. Cusanus
ad Bohem. epist. 7.
marvel (says he) though the practice of the church expound the scriptures at
one time one way and at another time another way. For the understanding or
sense of the scripture runs with the practice. And that sense so agreeing
with the practice is the quickening spirit. And therefore the scriptures follow
the church, but contrariwise the church follows not the scriptures. And this
is that which one who was no small fool in Rome avouched, The Pope says he
may change the holy gospel, and may Henricus Doctor magister sacri palatij
Romae ad legatos ^ohemicos sub Felice Papa. 1447.
give to the gospel according to place and time another sense. And to the same
purpose was the speech of that blasphemous Cardinal, that if any man did not
believe that Christ is very God and man, and the Pope thought the same, he
should not be condemned. To conclude therefore with Cardinal Cusanus, This is
the judgment (says he) of all them that think rightly, Cardinal. s. Angeli
ad cosde^ legatos Bohemicos.
that found the authority and understanding of the scriptures in the allowance
of the church: and not contrariwise lay the foundation of the church in the
authority of the scriptures. Ad Bohemos epist. 2.


11 Thirdly, the Pope challenges authority above the scriptures, when he
takes upon him to dispense with the word and law of God. For whosoever takes
upon him to dispense with the law of another challenges greater authority then
the others, and it is a rule among themselves, In praecepto superioris, non
debet dispensare inferior, the inferior may not dispense Antonin. part. 3.
lit. 22. cap. 6.. 2.
with the commandment of the superior. That the Pope does dispense with the
laws of God it is evident. For scarcely is there any sin forbidden there,
where with he does not sometimes dispense, nay whereof he will not, if it be
for his advantage, make a meritorious work. Incest is an horrible sin,
forbidden by the law of God and by the law of nature. And yet there is no
incest, excepting that which is committed betwixt the parents and the children,
which he has not authority forsooth to dispense with: for as they say, he
may dispense against the law of nature. The Pope dispensed with Henry the
eightth to marie his sister in law, and 25. q. 6 authoritatem in gl^ss.
with Philip the late king of Spain, to mary his own niece. Pope Martin the
fifth dispensed with a certain brother that Antonin. sum. 3. part tit. 1. cap.
11.. quod Papa. sum. angel. di^t. Papa.
married his own sister. And Clement the seventh licensed Petrus Aluara^lus
the spaniard for a sum of money, to marie two sisters at once etc.
Disobedience to parents, perjury that is breaking of lawful oaths, rebellion
against lawful princes, murdering of a sacred prince, are condemned by the
law of God as heinous offenses. But if children shall cast of their parents to
enter into a Sodomiticall cloister, if the Pope shall absolve the subjects from
their oaths and forbid them to obey their princes, if he shall excommunicate
a lawful prince, or suborne a wicked traitor, to murder his sovereign: then
disobedience to parents, perjury and rebellion in subjects, murdering of
sacred Princes, is not only a warrantable but also a meritorious act. For as
you have heard Papa ex iniustitia potest facere iustitiam. The Pope of sin
can make righteousness. And that the Pope may thus dispense with the word of
God, his canonistes and divines do diuersely dispute. One says, Michael
Medina, Christian. paraenes. lib. 7. c. 17. Gratian. part. 1. page 76.
Potestas in diuinas leges ordinary in Romano pontifice residet. Power over
the laws of God remains ordinarily in the pope of Rome. Others say, Papa
potest dispensare contra ius diuinum. 16. q. 1. de decimi^, in ^loss. Did. 34.
c. Lector. 15 q. 6. authoritatem.
Priuilegium contra ius diuinum concedi potest. The Pope may dispense, or grant
a privilege against the law of God: Abb. Panorm. extr. de d(...). cap. sin.
that is, as another says, he may dispense against the law of God in
particular, but not in general. Papa potest dispensare contra Apostolum, the
Pope may dispense against the Apostle. Felin. de constitut. cap statuta canonum.
The Pope may dispense against the new testament upon a great cause. eThe Pope
may dispense against the Epistles of Paul. And to put this matter out of doubt
which is so doubtfullie handled by some popish writers, this question in summa
angelica is determined and decided, out of diverse authors approved in the
church of Dictione, Papa.
Rome, That as in the precepts of the second table the Pope cannot dispense
universally (for that were not to dispense with them, but wholly to abrogate
the laws themselves) but in particular cases vbi ratio legis desicit, where
the reason of the law fails: so hec may dispense with all the precepts of
the old and new testament. But how shall we know where the reason of the law
fails? This may partly be known by those examples in the scripture where God
himself dispensed with his laws. But where there is no example of Gods
dispe^sation in the like case, then it appertains to the Pope alone to
declare, when and in what particular case the reason of the law fails. And I
sirmelie believe (says the author of that book) that if any man, craving a
dispensation in any case against the law of God, interpose not importunity of
reward or suite, but simply put himself into the hands of the Pope by
declaring his case, that God will not sufter his vicar to err in dispensing.
So that whereas the laws and commandments of God are to be understood with
this exception only Nisi Deus ipse aliter voluerit, unless God himself
otherwise appoint, because he alone may dispense with his own laws:
notwithstanding by the popish divinity they are to be understood with this
exception, unless the Pope otherwise appoint: that is, we are bound to keep
every commandment of God, unless the Pope interpose his authority betwixt
God and us (as the tribunes of the comunalty among the Romans were wont to
intercede against other magistrates) and exempt us from the obedience thereof.

12 And as the Pope may dispense with all the laws of God, so in the last
place, he may and does take away some, and abrogate others. Papa potest
tollere ius diuinum ex Felinus de mayor. and obed. cap. sin.
part non in totum: the Pope may take away the law of God in part, but not in
whole. Thus he takes away the second commandment out of the decalogue,
because with it his Idolalatrie cannot stand: and to make up the full number of
ten he divides the last commandment into two, against all reason and
authority of antiquity. But that commandment concerning images and diverse
others the Pope also abrogateth by his countermaunds. God forbids us either
to worship or to serve any but himself. Mat. 4. 10. 1. Sam. 7. 3. Ex. 20. 3.
The Pope commands us to worship Angels and Saints, yea and the relics
of Saints. God forbids the making and worshipping of images, the Pope
commands the contrary. God condemns stews, the Pope allows them, yea
Six. 4. Concil^trid. sess. 5.
one of them built a famous stews. God condemns concupiscence as a sin,
the Pope allows it for no sin. God commands all the faithful to drin^
of the cup in the Lords supper: the Pope forbids the same. God commands
every soul to be subject to the higher powers: the Pope exempteth his clergy
a iugo seculari, from the secular yoke. God commands all to mary, who have
not the gift of continency: the Pope forbids all his clergy, though never
so incontinent, to mary. Besides, it is evident that the Popes laws in the
church of Rome are in greater estimation the^ the laws of God, the obedience
of them being more straightly urged, and the disobedience thereof more
severely punished, then of Gods laws. As for example, it is more safe for a
man in the church of Rome to be a mere Atheist and a worshipper of no God,
then not to be a worshipper of their God of bread, though otherwise a good
Christian: better for a priest to be a So domit, then to mary: better to be a
drunkard and whoremonger then to eat slesh in Lent: better with the begging
friars Anno. 1254. Matthew. Paris. 1254.
to set forth a new gospel (which they called the gospel of the holy ghost
and the eternal gospel, wherein they taught that Christ is not God, and that
his gospel is not the true gospel, Na^r. t. 2. 3^6.
and no more to be compared with their gospel then the Bal. in lib. de vitis
pontif. in append. (...). Fox.
nutshell is to be compared with the kernel) then for that learned man
Guilielmus des. Amore to write against them and their gospel, for him the Pope
disgraded and deposed from al his dignities when he would not suffer them to be
disgraced: him he sent into exile, when he retained them in his high favor.
Yet because he had rather be Antichrist, then seem so, he caused the friars
Gospel, when it was complained of, to be burnt, yet secretly; that his Friars
might not be disgraced nor scandalized. Better for private men to read any
books of ribaldry or any villainy whatsoever, then to read any part of the
scriptures in their own tongue. To these, many other particulars might be
added wherein the Pope aduanceth his own laws above the commandments of God,
and his own authority above the authority of the Scriptures. Let us therefore
humbly conclude according to the popish humility, that as the Pope is above
the Church, so the Church is above the scriptures. Humiliter confitemur (says
a Papist) ecclesiae authoritatem Joan. Maria verractus apud Iuellum.
esse supra Euangelium: We humbly confess that the authority of the church is
above the gospel.

13. To his prophetical office let us add his priesthood. Amicij epistol.
dedi. ad Gregor. 13.
For the Pope forsooth is Pontifex Optimus Maximus (an epithet which the
Heathen give to their chief God Jupiter) he is that great priest according to
the order of Melchisedec, whose foot must be reverently kissed of his
Cardinals when Lib. carem. sect. 12. c. 5.
he rides into any city in his Pontificalibus, and the Bishop of the city
beginning this Antheme, Ecce sacerdos Magnus, c. fundmenta. de elect. in 6.
Behold the great Priest. He is the Prince of Priests, and head of the
Christian religion. He is that Priest of Priests, who remitteth both fault and
punishment both to quick and dead: whereas Christ remitteth only to the
living: and (as they say) forgiueth the fault but not the punishment, neither
does this indulgent father grant pardon alone for sins past, but also for
offenses to come.

14. But I hasten to his kingly office. For he forsooth is the Paul. 4 ad
ducem Florentin. in bulla.
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the Stenchus. and Sim. Begnius in orat. in
council. Lateran. sess. 6.
Lion of the tribe of Judah, to Lib. 1. carem. sect. 7. Pius 5. in bull. ad
regem and regina^ matre^ Galliae. Antonin. in sum. part. 3. tit. 22. ca. 5.. 1.
and 5. and 6. Psalm. 8. Heb. 2. 8.
whom all power is given in heaven and in earth, yea and under the earth. For
as he has a triple crown, so he has a triple Empire, in heaven and in
earth, and (where Christ has none) in purgatory. His power is greater then all
other created power, extending it self in some sort unto things Celestial,
terrestrial and infernal: So that of his power that may be verified which is
said in the Psalm of Christ, and that aptly because he is Christ's vicar, Thou
have put al things under his feet. The beasts of the field, that is, men
living on the earth: the fishes of the sea, that is to say, the souls in
purgatory: the fowls of heaven, that is to say, the Angels and the souls of
the blessed. Another wrote and taught that the Pope Nicol. Egmundanus apud
Bal^m.
is the Lord of things in heaven, on the earth, and under the earth. In
heaven, for as you have heard he has power over the Angels and Saints, and
souls departed. Papa angelis praecipit, Camotensis.
and potestatem habet in mortuos, The Pope commands the Angels, and has
power over the dead. In earth, for he is, Epist. ded. Amicij ad Gregor. 15.
praefix. Capistr.
Totius orbis Dominus, the Lord of the whole earth, having De Mayor c. vnam
sanctam.
caelestis and terrestris potestatis Monarchiam, The Monarchy of the heavenly
and earthly power, Extra de statu regular. pericu^. in gloss.
obtaining the kingdom of the whole world, unto whom forsooth belongs that
prophecy, Lib 1. caerem. sect. 7. and capistran. fol. 57.
Dominabitur a mari ad mare and a flumine vsque adterminos orbis: He shall rule
from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the world: his Capistran.
(...). 2. fol. 24. Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22.. 8. Alexander dis^buted the new
found world, betwixt the kings of Spain and Portugal. Lib. 1. caerem. sect.
1. c. 4. Cardin. Episcopus. Hostien^.
power reaches over all the faithful principally, and secondarily also over
the infidels: for under his feet, that is, under his jurisdiction are put the
beasts of the field that is the Paganes, oxen that is Jews and Heretics, and
sheep that is Christians, and it extends it self unto all the parts of the
world, not only known but also unknown, insomuch that the parts of the new
found world are at his disposition to distribute and bestow. And that the
Paganes are subject to the Pope it appears, because the Pope rules the world
in steed of Christ. But Christ has full jurisdiction over every creature.
Seeing therefore the Pope is Christ's vicar, no man may lawfully withdraw
himself from his obedience, even as none may lawfully withdraw himself from
the obedience of God. Anton. part. 3. tit. 22.. 8. The Deacon which invested
the Pope was wont to use these words, I inuest thee into the Papacy, Vt praesis
vrbi and orbi, That thou may rule both the city and the world. And likewise
the Cardinal Bishop that anointeth him, uses this form of words, Egot^inungo
in pontificem vrbis and orbis. Now this Cupers. de ec^les. page 337.
Empire or Monarchy which the Pope has over the whole world is twofold, for
he has the two swords as it is stoutly proved out of the gospel, where one
of Christ's disciples says, Boniface 8. de mayor. c. ^am sanctam.
Ecce duo gladij, behold two swords, civil and Ecclesiastical. For as Pope
Nicolas says, Christ us beato aeternae vitae clauigero terreni simul and
coelestis imperij iura^commisit. Christ has Did. 22. c. 1. omnes.
given to blessed Peter the key bearer of eternal life (and so to Io^. de
Parisijs de potestat. Pap. cap. 20. Joan. Mayor. 4. sent. q. 2. did. 20.
the Pope) the right both of the carthly and heavenly Empire. Civil, as has
been showed over al Kings and rulers, in respect whereof he writes himself
King of Kings, for all secular power is immediately given to the Pope: and he is
above kings even in temporal matters, yea he alone is the true Lord of
temporal things. Wherefore Pope Boniface the eight, sent unto Philip the
French king and told him, That he was Lord Martinus Polonus. and in epist. ad
eunde^, s^ire te volumus, quod in spiritualibus and temporalibus nobis subes.
Nicol. Gillius. anna^ium gallic, scriptor.
both in spiritual and also in temporal matters, throughout the world. And
therefore that the King should hold his kingdom at his hand, and honor and
worship him, Vt dominum regni sui, as the Lord of his Realm. Stenchus. for
otherwise to think and hold (he said) it was Heresy. And as touching the
Roman Empire, the government thereof belongs to the Pope, being Gods vicar
on earth: as unto him by whom kings do reign. And surely whosoever denies
the temporal sword to be in the power of Peter, does full ill attend to the
Caeremon. lib. 1. cap. 2.
word of the Lord, saying unto him, Put up thy sword into the sheath. And
did not the Lord I beseech you (as some of the De mayor. and obed. cap. v^
sanctam.
Popes fauourits full sole^nely dispute) command Peter Luke 5. 4. to launch
into the deep, that he might signify the height of power Joan. Capistr. de
Pap. and eccl. author. 1. 2. sol. 21. and 122. duc in al^ designaret
altitudinem potestatis etc. s. 15.
in Peter. And again, Why did the Lord send Peter only to the Sea to fish
with an angle or hook, but that he would insinuate that he intended to set
Peter over the whole surging Sea of this tempestuous world? and why does he
command him to fish with an iron hook, but that he was disposed to commit
unto him the sword both of the spiritual and temporal Empire? Hereunto we
may add that worthy dispute of Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, part. 3. tit.
22. cap. 5.. 17, That the Similiae argumenta habet (...). de turr^. in sum. and
al^. Subtiliss.
Pope being the vicar of Jesus Christ in the whole world, has, in stead of the
living God, the universal jurisdiction both of spiritual and temporal things.
But the immediate administration of temporal things he receives not unless in
the regio^s of the Western Empire by reason of the grant made to the church
by Constantine. Now, that he uses not the temporal administration in other
countries, but only in the parts of Italy etc. this is not for want of
authority, but that he would nourish in his sons the bond of peace and
unity. For since the Empire was divided, and of diverse in diverse parts
diversely and tyrannically usurped, the Church to avoid the scandal of the Jews
has made her self tributarie with Peter etc. And as touching those which say
the Pope has dominion over the whole world, not in temporal matters but in
spirituallonely, they are like the counselors of the king of Syria, who said
1. King. 20. their gods are gods of the mountains and not of the valleis.
For so they say the Popes are gods of the mountains, that is of spiritaull
goods, but they are not gods of the valleys, because they have not the
dominion of temporal goods. And in the same place he adds; That from the
sentence of all Kings and Princes men may appeal to the Pope. Astouching his
ecclesiastical authority which (as some Th. Aquin. in 2. sent. in fine.
Antonin. part. 3 tit. 22. cap. 6.. 6.
say) is the foundation of the Church, he is superior and greater then all
the residue of the universal Church, and this is proved by seven arguments, 1.
Because he is the Pastor of the universal Church. 2. Because he is the head
of the 1. de turrecrem. in sum. de eccles. lib. 2. cap. 80.
universal Church. 3. Because he is that prelate which has authority over the
whole Church. 4. Because he is the prince of the universal church. 5. Because
he has supreme power in the Church. 6. Because he alone has fullness of
power in the Church. 7. Because he is Christ's vicar general in the whole
universal Church. For in the Apostolic See the Lord Did. II. c. nolite
errare.
has placed the princehood of the whole Church, and therefore worthily is he
called Ecclesiae princeps ac rex regu^ torra, I. de turrecrem lib. 3. sum.
cap. 9.
The prince of the church and king of the kings of the earth; yea Amicij epist.
dedic. ad Gre, gor. 13. praefix. Capistr.
Princeps optimus maximus, D^st. 40. c. si Papa, et R. Cis. pers page 29. Joan.
Andreas in c. quanto de translat. Panorm. c licet. de elect.
Of who^ the salvation of the church universal after God depends. He is the
head, the root, the Monarch, the fountain of ecclesiastical power, having the
same consistory with God, and judgment seat with Christ For so they write: I.
de turrecrem. sum. lib. 2. cap. 8. and R. Cupers. page 29. n. 16. and 42. n.
14.
Idem tribunal Christ's and Pap^ ^erris: Inter Papam and Deum vnum and idem fit
tribunal, vnumque and idem consistorlum. He makes laws which bind the
conscience and that with guilt of mortal sin, R. Cupers. page 62. n. 66. de
constitut. c. licet in sexto. R. Cupers. page 29. n. 1.
he is the living law, yea he has all laws in the closet of his breast, and
he can dispose above law and retains the fulness of power so as he needs
no addition, I de turrecrem. l. 3. c 64.
he alone has the fullness of power, as being the prince of the churches
laws. And even as the first moouer R. Cupers. de eccl. page 166 n. 28.
governs the church triumphant, so does the Pope rule the church militant.
For seeing in the church Clement. lib. 5. de haereticis. c. ad nostrum in gloss.
triumphant there is one sovereign prince to whose obedience that whole church
is most perfectly subject, that is to say, God: it follows necessarily that
one sovereign prince rules over the whole milita^t church, that is to say the
Pope, whose co^mandeme^ts all are bound to obey. And thus much of the Popes
power, in heaven and in earth: in respect whereof it is said that the
jurisdiction and care of the Antonin. sum part. 3. tit. ^2.. 1.
whole world is committed to the Pope, not only as by the name of the world is
imported the earth, but also as by the name of the world is imported heaven,
because he has received jurisdiction over heaven and earth.

16 There remains the third part of his kingdom which he has in
purgatory. For as one of their approved authors Angelus Parisiensis.
says, Purgatorium est peculium Papae, Purgatory is the Pope's peculiar:
where, as also in hell he has so great authority, as that by his indulgences
he is able to deliver thence so many souls Fulm brut. ex. bulla Clement. 6.
as it pleases him, and to place them in heaven and in the seats of the
blessed. Insomuch as this is become a problem in the church of Rome, whether
the Pope may empty all purgatory wholly and at once: and by Antoninus the
Archbishop of Floence it receives this determination under a threefold
distinction, namely, that in respect of his absolute jurisdiction the Antonin.
part. 3. tit. 2^. cap. 5.. 6. and 7.
Pope may be communicating his indulgences absolve all that are in purgatory
from that pain, and so make a jail delivery. For seeing Gregory the Pope by
his prayer absolved Traian from the pain of hell which is infinite, therefore
much more may the Pope by communication of indulgenoes absolve all that are in
purgatory from that punishment which is but finite. And forasmuch as Christ
may take away all pain, therefore the Pope also who is his vicar may. This the
Pope may do in respect of his absolute power. But if you regard the orderly
execution thereof, in that respect the Pope may not nor ought so to do.
Neither in deed is he pleased to let out any from the pains of purgatory
unless he be well pleased for his indulgences and pardons. Howbeit I must
needs confess, it was a cheap year of souls when Leo the tenth sent
Torelius about with Bal. in vita Leonis 10. and 1. Fox.
his pardons, offering to every one for the payment of ten shillings (but not
a penny under) to set at liberty the soul of any one which they should name
in purgatory And lastly if you respect Gods acceptance, that is, whether God
would take it well that the Pope should release all that be in purgatory at
once, or not, Antoninus answers, he cannot tell. And to conclude this kingly
office of the pope with that venerable acclamation of the reverend fathers in
the council of Laterane, Thou art all and above all, Sess. 10. in orat. Steph.
Patracensis.
to thee all power is given in heaven and in earth. And again, Sess. 10. in
orat. Steph. Patracensis.
In the pope is all power above all powers in heaven and in earth. And thus it
appears evidently that the Pope is Antichrist, not only because he is (...),
that is an adversary opposed unto Christ, as was proved in the former chapter,
but also because he is aemulus and as it were a counterchrist, who seeking to
match our Savior Christ, aduanceth himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped, insomuch that he sits in the temple of God as god,
showing and demeaning himself as though he were a God upon earth.

Chap. 6. Of other vices or sins of Antichrist.
1. NOw are we to entreat of other vices and sins of Antichrist. For albeit
by the application of the two former noates concerning the opposition of
Antichrist unto Christ, and his incredible ambition in advancing himdelfe above
all that is called God, it plainly appears that the Pope of Rome meriteth to
be called by that peculiar title of Antichrist the man of sin, because those
two notes wherein the Apostle insisteth as sufficient 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. 4.
proofs thereof, do most properly agree unto him: notwithstanding, many other
notorious sins of the Popes may be produced for the further evidence of this
truth. Of which sins some are common to very many of them, and some are common
to them all. For howsoever the crimes and enormities of such deep dissemblers,
as these Antichristian Popes have been, were many times either not commonly
known to the world, or being known were not communicated to posterity, the
writers of those times being for the most part the servile flatterers of
Antichrist: yet notwithstanding many of them were known, and of those which
were known many are recorded to have been guilty of fearful crimes, besides
those which either were not known or not recorded. For to begin with their
horrible impiety toward God, have not many of these most holy fathers bewraied
themselves to be very Atheists and scorners of religion? Such were those which
before I Chap. 4.. 8.
named, John the 24. Alexander the 6. Sixtus 4. Paulus 3. Clement 7. Julius 2,
and 3. Leo 10. and besides them John 12. alias 13. who used to blaspheme God,
and at his dice to call upon the Luitprandus lib. 6. Fascic, temp.
devil, and in his feasts to drink unto him. Many of them also (as commonly
those which renounce god betake themselves to the devil) have bin known
sorcerers and necromancers, besides those which were not known. It is recorded
even by Popish authors of Syluester the 2. that he did homage to the devil,
and that by the devil he was placed in the Papacy, to which end he had be,
Fascic. tempo. Stella. Platina. etc.
taken himself both in body and solue to the devil. Such a one was Gregory 7.
as Cardinal Benno testifies, and such also were all the Popes from Syluester
the 2. to Gregory the 7. But among them Benedict 8. alias 9. who before his
Papacy was called Theophylact is most worthy to be remembered. For he was wont
in woods and mountains to sacrifice to the devil, and by magical art to
allure women unto him: he kept a sparrow which brought him news from alcoasts
And when he had sold the Papacy to Gregory the 6. for 1500. pound and thought
by soloery to recover it again as he first had gotten it, and to that end
consulted with the devil, he had his neck wrung in sunder; his successor
Gregory the sixth, being a sorcerer as well as he, and now as it may seem in
greater favor with the devil then he: and to these three which I have named
some twenty more may be added. But now I come to speak of their sins
against the second table.

2 For many of them have been murderers and otherwise barbarously cruel. As
for example Gregory the seventh, who poisoned six Popes to make himself a way
to the Papacy, and sought to murder Henry the Emperor as he was at his Bal.
ex Mario Mat. Paris. in Henr. 3.
prayers in the church. Innocentius the fourth sought to poison Conrade the
Emperor. Clement 6. caused the Emperor Lewis of Bauaria to be poisoued. King
John was poisoned by a monk when the Pope had given sentence that he should be
deposed, and so was Henry of Lucemburgh even in the eueharist, and that as
some report by the appointment of the Pope. By the Gregory. 13.
Pope was Parry suborned to murder our gracious Queen Elizabeth, so was the
Iacobine that murdered Henry the third Sixtus 5.
king of France. In the church at Florence a massacre was intended, and
Iulianus Medices murdered by the appointment Volaterran. geograph. lib. 5. and
Politianus de coni^ratione Pactiana.
of Sixtus the fourth, the elevation of the sacrament being made the sign or
watchword when this murder should begin. Alexander the sixth for 200000.
crowns poisoned the great Turks brother who was at Rome: he also, or as some
say his son appointed his servant to minister poison to certain Cardinals
and Senators whom he had invited: but the seruitors mistaking the cups and
giving him of the same, dispatched him, together with the rest. Paulus the
third poisoned his mother and his nephew, that to him might descend the Bal. de
Romans Po^t. actis.
whole inheritance of the Farnesian family. He poisoned his sister whom he
used as his harlot, because she fancied others more then himself: and that he
might more freely abuse his own daughter Constantia, he poisoned Bosius
Sfortia her husband. He poisoned one Bishop and two Cardinals because they
inclined to the gospel. I might be long in this argument, but these may serve
for a taste. But if besides these you desire to hear some other examples of
their cruelty, you may remember how Stephen the 6. caused the body of Formosus
the Pope to be taken out of the grave, and having cut of two of his fingers and
cast them into the Tiber, he buried the body among the Laity: which body eight
years after Sergius the 3. causes again to be taken out of the grave, and
having cut of the other 3. fingers, he casts the^ and the body it self into
the said river, and condemned him and all his acts, which other Popes not
withstanding as Romanus 1. Theodorus 2. John 10. ratified and approved.
Likewise Boniface 8. caused the body of Hermannus of Ferrara, who before had
been canonized for a Saint, after 30. years to be plucked out of his grave, and
to be burnt. Vrbanus the 6. cast seven Cardinals into prison because they
favored Clement the 7. and in spite of him put five of them into sackes and
drowned the^. And this is some part of their behavior among themselves. For of
their cruelty toward the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus who is able sufficiently
to entreat?

3. To their cruelty I will add their perfidious treachery, and traitorous
practices, especially toward the Emperors and Princes of Christendom. For
first, the Emperors of Greece, by the Popes rebellious opposition against their
sovereign Lords in the ungodly defense of images, were bereaved of their
dominions in the West. By which means the Empire being rent asunder and
weakened, way was made for the Turk. And howsoever at the first they seemed to
honor their newly erected Emperors in the West whom they created for their
own defense, yet afterward they never ceased until they had gotten
superiority over them. And ever since it has been their practice to strengthen
and advance themselves and their own See by weakening and deiecting the
Emperor and all other Christian princes. And this they had effected by diverse
devilish policies. As first they have used to pick quarrels against them, and
upon any pretext or color of a just quarrel to excommunicate them and to
absolve their subjects from their obedience. And if by these means they would
not be brought into subjection, then to depose the^ if they could, and to set
up others against the^. And if other means failed, to raise up wars against
them, and to send forth Croisades into all Christendom with large indulgences
and promises of heaven to all that would fight their battles. And besides this,
they have also forbidden al other chris^ia^s to use any traffic with them and
their subjects: and not only that, but they have exposed the princes
themselves, sometimes their subjects also, to the violence of murderers, and
their countries and kingdoms as a prey to spoilers, warra^ting any to bereave
the prince or the subject of their lives, and to take their kingdom as a prey.
Thus besides many others was Henry the 4. Emperor used by Gregory 7. and
Paschalis the 2. who not only excommunicated the worthy Emperor, absolved his
subjects from obedience, but also both under hand suborned such as should
murder him, and openly set up against him in the Empire, first Rodolphus the
duke of Sueuia, and then his own son: and in the end the good Emperor being
deposed, imprisoned, and dead in prison, his body might not for 5. years be
vouchsafed christian burial. Thus was Otho 4 used by Innocentius 3. and Lewis
the 4. by John 22. Benedict 12. and Clement the 6. by whose means also he was
poisoned. Thus diverse kings of France, besides him that now is, have been
entreated. But especially Lewis 12, a good king, by Julius the 2. a notable
Antichrist. For he not only excommunicated Lewis, and interdicted his land, but
also stirred up al Christians against him, promising great indulgence and
pardon of all sins, to every one that should by any means whatsoever kill any
French man. In his own person also he went to war against him, and as he
being armed brought forth his army on the bridge over Tiber, he cast his keys
into the river, and drew his sword, using this speech in the hearing of many
thousa^ds, seeing Peter's keys do naught avail us, I will therefore use Paul's
sword. And to conclude, thus also have our Kings been dealt with, as king
John, and Henry the 8. and our gracious Q. Elizabeth, whom (to omit the other)
the Popes have excommunicated, absolved her subjects from obedience, as much as
in the^ lies deposed her from her crown, exposed her to the violence of her
secret and open enemies, raised rebellions against her, suborned cutthroats to
murder her, sent forces into Ireland to win that kingdom from her, stirred up
the Spaniard and aided him against her, and lastly by an Antichristian devotion
given her realm of Ireland to the Spaniard. But who^ Antichrist cursed, Christ
blessed: insomuch that having through the Lords goodness ouerliued 8. Popes,
since she came to the crown, in the end after a long and happy reign she died
in peace. Another practice of Antichrist has been this, to bereave the right
owners of their crowns and kingdoms, and to set up others which had no right,
that they being adua^ced by his means, should be obliged as vassals and feed
men unto his See. And to this end, when co^tentions have risen betwixt
Christian princes, he has not only nourished the same, but also taken part
with the one against the other; that the one being by his means vanquished and
overcome, the other may acknowledge the Pope for his good Lord. To this end
was the title of the Roman Empire translated from the Greeks to the French in
Charlemaigne, and from the French to the Almaines in Otto, whom the Pope caused
to swear homage and fealty to him. To this end was Pipin crowned king of
France, and Childerick deposed and shorn a Monk. But I shall not need to
insist in the enumeration of examples: for scarcely is there any kingdom in
Europe, if any at all, which the Pope Vide Fulm. brutum page 74.
has not in former times by these and other means made subject and tributary
to his See, using the kings as his vassals and making the^ swear homage unto
him. A third stratageme which the Popes have used to weaken the Emperors and
princes of christendom, and strengthen themselves, has been this, to persuade
them to go with their forces and chief of their strength into Palestine for
the recovery of the Holy la^d from the Turks and Saracens; that in their
absence he might work his will in any part of Europe, not fearing their
strength if they should return, being weakened by those wars; but rather
hoping they should not return to make resistaunce. And to this purpose
consider only the dealing of Alexander the 3. and Gregory the ninth, with the
one and two Frederickes the Emperors. For Alexander the third fearing the
power of Frederick Barbarossa, by Hartmannus the Bishop of Brixia, persuades
him to go with his army into Palestine for the recovery of the holy Land:
the Pope in the mean time sends a picture of the Emperor to the Sultan,
persuading him, that by some secret ambushment he would apprehend him; which
happened accordingly. The Emperor being released by the Sultan, after his
return comes to Venice, where the Pope as you heard before treads on his
neck etc. The other Frederick being first excommunicated by Gregory 9. Bal. ex
Mario and Matthew. Paris.
because he went not to Palaestine according to his appointment, at the length
to satisfy the Popes pleasure, he took his voyage: and having recovered
Jerusalem and other places from the Sultan, and made truce with him for 10.
years, he sends these glad ridings to the Pope. Who having received the
letters causes the messengers to be slain, and gives out that the Emperor
was dead. For the Pope having a months mind to the kingdoms of Sicilia and
Apulia, whereof Frederick was the true heir, desired according to Saules old
policy against David, to have him dispatched by the infidels, and to that end
was so earnest to have him gone. For in his abse^ce he seized on those
kingdoms, and wrote to the Sultan that he should in no case restore Jerusalem
unto the Emperor. And when as the Emperor was returned, the Pope
excommunicateth him again, because he had made truce with the Sultan, and
would not absolve him until he had paid for his absolution on 100000. ounces
of gold.

4. But now the filthy leachery of these hollow fathers, who would seem so
chaste as that they condemn marriage in their clergy, offreth it self to be
spoken of. For although it be a rule among them, Si non cast, tamen caute, If
not chastely, yet charily, Nicol. 1.
and one of their Popes professes Honestius esse pluribus occulte implicari:
quam aperte in hominum vultu and conscientia cum vna ligari, That it is more
honest to have to do with many women in secret, then openly in the face and
notice of men to be tied to one, whether in marriage or otherwise: and
therefore in all likelihood, a small part of their uncleanness (which they sought
by all means to co^ceale) is known to the world: yet notwithstanding very many
of them have been detected and known to be most filthy fornicatours and
adulterers, besides John the 8. or rather Ioane who was a harlot in man's
apparel, and was delivered of a child in open procession. In this bedrole of
whoremo^gers and adulteres (besides those which I either know not or do not
remember) are numbered, by diverse authors, these which follow, Sergius 3. who
by the notable strumpet Marozia begot John 12, Zando, who in fornication begot
John the 11. and spent his time among harlots. Both these John's being as bad
or worse then their fathers. John 13. also was so given to whoredom as that he
is said to have turned the palace of Laterane into a stews. And being at the
length taken in adultery, by the husband of the adulteress he was wounded to
death. Such were John 14. and 19. and 21. and 24. Likewise Benedict. 6. and 9.
who by sorcery allured women unto him, and made them follow him up and down
like Cades. In like manner Benedict 12. who kept many strumpets, and among
others the sister of Frauncis Petrarch whom by great rewards he had purchased
of her brother Gerhard. Such were Christopherus 1. and Calixtus the 3. Gregory
the 6. and the 7. called Hildebrand, who as also Victor the 3. were very inward
with Mawde the countess. Innocentius 4. had many bastards, and so had
Innocentius the 8. who also used to paint his face. Nicolas 3. by his concubine
begat a child which in nails and hair was like a Bear, which some impute to
the pictures of bears which he being of the Vrsine family had caused to be
made in his house. And therefore Martin 4. who kept the same concubine, fearing
the like mischance, caused the pictures of the bears to be taken away.
Boniface the 8. kept many harlots, and had by them diverse nephews, for so
they call their bastards. Clement 5. was a common whoremonger and patron of
harlots, and so was Clement 6. Clement 7. and 8. was worse then so: and Clement
8. that now is, has been no better then he should be. And such were Pius the
4. who died betwixt 2. harlots, and Sixtus 5. of late memory, etc.

5 These are ordinary matters in the Romish votaryes, among whom those Popes
may be counted for men of the chaster sort, who have offended only by
fornication and adultery. But, as very many of their votaries, so also diverse
among the Popes have fearfully sinned against nature by incest and Sodomie.
Neither are we to marvel thereat, seeing they do not only embrace the means
of lust, as idleness, fullness of bread, and abundance of worldly delights and
carnal pleasures, but also reject the remedy appointed of God, which is
marriage; but especially because they being Idolaters are by the just judgment
of God given over to their lusts and to a reprobate sense, insomuch that they
commit abominations against nature. It is recorded of John the 13. and 23.
alias 24. that, besides all other their whoredoms and adulteries, the one
committed incest with Stephana his fathers concubine; and the other with his
brothers wife. Alexander the 6. not contented with diverse other strumpets
which he kept, by whom he had 6. bastards, committed incest with his own
daughter Lucretia. He also gave leave to Cardinal Mendoza to abuse his own
bastard son in incestuous Sodomy and Sodomiticall incest. Paulus the third
committed incest with two of his nieces, prostituted one of his sisters to
Alexander 6. to get a Cardinallship, and poisoned another because she affected
some other of her lovers more then himself, neither did he abstain from his
own daughter Constantia. Of Pius 5. it is said that he kept incestuous
company with his own sister. Sixtus 4. was not only a filthy whoremonger
and Sodomite himself, but also to incite and encourage others to the same
filthiness, he built a famous stews not only of women, but also of males
also. And he gave license to the Cardinal of Saint Lucie and to all his
family; that they might in the three hot months of the year freely use
Sodomie. Julius 2. abused unto Sodomie, besides others, two young noblemen of
France, whom Anne the Queen had sent to Rome and committed to a Cardinal to
be informed. Julius the 3. made his Ganymedes a Cardinal, and neither did he
as some write abstain from committing Sodomie with the Cardinals themselves.
His Legate at Venice (a fit cover for such a pot) Ioannes a Casa.
Archbishop of Beneuentum, set forth a book in Italian meter in commendation
of this sin, for which the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrhe with fire and
brimstone from heaven. Such sinners against nature were, as authors testify,
Bedict 1. Clement 7. John 13. 14. and 24. Leo 10. and Paul 3. whose bastard
son Petrus Aloysius I cannot pass over with silence: For he treading in his
fathers steps, and being greatly loved and advanced by him, besides incest
with his sister Constantia, and rapes with other women, and buggerie with
diverse men, he forced a Sodomiticall rape upon Cosmus Cherius a worthy
Bishop, using the help of his men to hold him by violence, whiles he
committed that outrageous act. But it is shame to speak that which they are
not ashamed to do.

6 And yet this is not all that is to be alleged against the Popes, that
diverse of them have been Atheists, many of them sorcerers, murderers,
traitors, Adulterers and Sodomits. For many of them have been most foul
monsters (as some of their own writers call them) compounded of these and
other horrible crimes. Such, besides others, were Sixtus 4. John 24. Alexander
6. Clement 7. and Paul 3. etc. Neither may it be objected, that although
diverse Popes have been men of sin, yet many of them have been holy men and
Saints of God, and consequently not Antichrists: For howsoever all the Roman
Bishops of the first 600. years are reverenced as Saints and so called of
Popish writers, as Saint Syluester, Saint Leo, Saint Gregory etc. a very few
only excepted, yet a very few of them which have lived this thousand years
are even by Popish flatterers esteemed Saints: and those few which be, are
honored among them not for any true holiness, Onuphr. Pontif. Romani.
Chronologia praefixa chatechismo Canisij.
but either for the Antichristian advancing of their See, or for some supposed
miracles which were no better then the lying signs and wonders of Antichrist.
But so far indeed these Apostaticall Popes have been from being Saints in the
sight of God, that all of them have deserved to be called men of sin, sons of
perdition, outlawes, although some of them were not so wicked as the rest. Men
of sin, because besides those peculiar sins wherewithal every of them were
severally infected, the whole order or succession ofthem has been guilty of
many other crimes also, as common to them al, diverse whereof the holy ghost
has set down as noates of Antichrist. As namely those which I have already
proved, to be in the Pope, heresy, oppositio^ or enmity to Christ, apostasy,
hypocrisy, satanical pride. For if the Pope be an heretic or false prophet
teaching the doctrines of devils, if a notorious hypocrite, if an apostate, yea
the head of the catholic apostasy, if an adversary opposed unto Christ, though
a covert and disguised enemy, if the king of pride advancing himself most
insolently above all that is called God, as we have proved him to be, then we
need not doubt, but that in respect of these sins though he had no more, he
deserves to be called the man of sin.

7 But unto these, diverse others may be added, as first and principally the
idolatry, superstitious and counterfaite religions of the Pope and church of
Rome. For the whore of Babylon, whereby is signified the Antichristian state,
is described in the scriptures not only as a spiritual adulteress, but also
as the mother of all fornications and abominations in the earth, which with the
golden cup of her fornications, that is idolatries Apoc. 17.
and superstitions, has made drunk the kings and inhabitants of the earth.
Now the idolatry of the Pope and church of Rome is manifold and grievous. As
first, to the bread in the sacrament, which being a small creature they
worship as their maker and redeemer, neither do they think that they can
worship it enough, and therefore in the worship thereof the chief part of
their solemn service consists. Secondly to the cross and crucifix, and
images of the trinity, all which as they teach are to be worshipped with
divine worship, and are so worshipped among them. Thirdly, to the blessed
virgin Mary, who has been worshipped among them as much or rather more then
God. Her they call their Lady and goddess, and queen of heaven. In her they
repose their trust and assiance, to her they fly in their necessity, of her
they crave all good things, and from her they expect remission of sins and
eternal salvation, in honor of her they have devised and used diverse
services, as offices, letanies, ^osaryes, psalters etc. full of blasphemous
idolatries. Fourthly to Saints departed, who have succeeded the tutelar gods of
the heathenish Romans, there being almost no cuntry, city, parish, trade or
profession which had not their several Saints to patronize them, no disease
nor other calamity in themselves or their cattle for which they had not their
peculiar saints, as it were Auerruncos deos to turn away those evils from
them. In the merits of Saints they trust for remission of sin and for
eternal life. Them they adore, to them they pray, and not only them do they
worship but their images also and relics. Wherein the Papists are more gross
idolatours then the very heathen. For the Gentiles did not worship the images
themselves, but the persons represented by them: but the Papists hold that the
very same worship is due to the image which belongs to the person whom it
resembles. To these notorious idolatries we may Papa solus nouas religiones
creat, and approbat.
add their diverse counterfeit religions and orders devised or authorized by
the Pope, which are so many by-pathes misleading men out of the only true way
which leads unto heaven, Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 21.
and besides them innumerable traditions, superstitions, tru^peries and
fooleries. Upon all which notwithstanding the fond people of al nations, in
these parts of the world, have so stra^gely doted, as that they may most truly
be said to have been besotted and made drunk with the wine of the whore of
Babylons fornications, that is to say, with the idolatries and superstitions of
the Church of Rome.

8. Upon their spiritual adultery, that is to say, their manifold and gross
idolatry, has followed their carnal adultery and uncleanness. For seeing by
their idolatry they had dishonored Romans 1. 24.
God, as the Gentiles did, therefore the Lord has given over them also to
their hearts lusts unto uncleanness. Neither have they only been guilty of
uncleanness in themselves, but also the causes thereof in others; whiles they
extenuate the sin of fornication as though it were but a venial sin, and
reckon Cap. at si clerici extra, de iudic.
adultery among the less and lighter offenses: whiles they dispense with these
sins and give men leave to commit them without controlment, or else assign
unto them ridiculous punishments: but especially whiles they forbid marriage
unto all their clergy, and mainteyne open stews. For in forbidding marriage
they open a gappe to all uncleanness. Toll de ecclesia (says Bernard)
honorabile coniugium and thorum In Cant. sermon. 66.
immaculatum, nonne reples eam co^cubinarijs, incestuosis, semini^uis,
m^llibus, masculoru^ concubitoribus, and omni denique genere immundorum? Take
out of the Church honorable marriage and the bed undefiled, and do you not fill
it with keepers of concubines, incestuous fellows, Gonorrhaeans and Sodomites,
and in a word with all kind of unclean persons? For proof hereof read but
the acts of English votaries, who yet may not be compared (...). Bale.
with those of hotter countries: remember the survey taken here in England
before the dissolution of Abbeyes, Vid. praesat. I. (...) (...) libri sui de
acti^ Pontif.
wherein our irreligious houses were found to be little better the^ stews of
both sorts; not to speak of their secular Priests who were known for the most
part to have been the towne-bulles were they dwelt. Neither will I tell you
of the innumerable murders of infants, besides those which died in their
mothers wombes to prevent their parents shame. As for common stews, they are
mainteyned not only in other popish countries and cities, but even in Rome it
self, and not only maintained by the Pope, but maintainers also of the Pope,
to whom they pay as if he were their bawd a yearly pension, which amounts
sometimes to 30000. sometimes to 40000. Ducates. It is said of Paulus the third
that in his tables he had the names of 45000. curtizans, which paid a monthly
tribute unto him. Which, besides his patronizing of filthiness, argues his
coveting of filthy lucre, of which we are also briefly to speak. For of him
in respect of these two vices, filthiness and covetousness, it was said in
old time, Eius auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis:
Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis. M^t. Paris^in ^nric. 3.



Neither does the whole world suffice his covetousness, nor all harlots his
l^chery.

9. Of the insatiable anarice of the Pope and court of Rome many instances
might be given. For they have found out innumerable ways and means to scrape
together incredible sums of money out of all countries, without measure or
modesty, without shame or show of honesty. But it shall be sufficient by
application of Peter's prophecy concerning (...). Pet. (...). 3.
false teachers in these latter times, to show, that through covetousness
they have with fained words and doctrines of their own coining made
merchandise of al those that would ^earken unto them. As sor example, they have
feigned that Peter was ordained of Christ the Monarch of the whole Church, that
to him was committed the right both of the spiritual and temporal Monarchy:
that in this Monarchy the Pope succeeds Peter, as Christ's vicar general, as
the universal Bishop, as the Lord of the whole earth. They have feigned a
donation of Constantine wherein he should not only give the City of Rome to
the Pope, but also resign unto him the whole Empire of the West. Upon these
grounds they have obtained both of Princes and Prelates, what their greedy
covetousness armed with such authority shamed not to demand. England,
France, Germany and other countries have been exceedingly; or, as some
speak, Ludouic. 9. (...). an. 1228. tit. de tall^.
miserably impouerished by the intolerable exactions of the Pope and his
Court. For first, the first fruits he claimed of all spiritual promotions:
which in these parts of Europe subject Jewel. ex legatione Hadrian. 6. excus.
VVi^tembergae. 1538
to that See, did amount unto two millions and four hundred and three score
thousand, eight hundred forty and three Florenes. The first fruits of the
spiritual livings in France, and the charges of obtaining the same livings,
have been observed Fulm. brut. ex postulatis sena^us Paris. Ludo^ 1^. delat^.
art. ^2. etc.
in three years, to amount unto nine hundred forty and six thousand, six
hundred sixty and six french crowns. By the same title he took upon him to
bestow or rather to sell openly and without shame the livings of the church:
and not only when they were void, but also before hand, and that to diverse
men. Insomuch that sometimes ten, sometimes twelve have purchased aduousons or
reuersions of the same Ibid. art. (...).
preferments against the next auoidance. But which of all them, when the living
fell, was to have the benefit of the Popes grant, that was to be decided at
Rome: whither they were to their great charge, but to the enriching of the
Romish Harpies, to repair. This gainefull trade may well be called making
Merchandise of men: for together with the benefices the poor people were
bought and sold. In respect here of Blondus says, That all Europe almost
sends tributes Romans in^. lib. 3.
to Rome, greater or at least equal to the revenues of the old times, Dum
singulae civitates a Romano pontifice boneficia sacerdotalia accipiunt, Whiles
the spiritual promoti^ in every City are received from the Pope. Moreover his
yearly perquisites of elections, preuentions, dispensations, licenses and many
such like merchandises the titles whereof, with their taxes or prices, are set
down in the book called Taxae cancellariae Apostolicae, are thought to
surmount nine hundred thousand Florenes: not to speak of his smoke-farthings
and Peterpence, which nevertheless did arise to no small sum. But besides
his ordinary taxations, his extraordinary exactio^s were intolerable. For he
has not been ashamed to demand the tenths of all spiritual livings, in some
whole realms, for many years together: yea sometimes the third part of their
living Mat. VVestmonast. a^. 1301. Mat. Paris. an. 1246. Syl^ ^otorum commu^.
In pr^fat. in lib. Steph. Gardener. de vera obedient. V^d: Muscull loc. comm.
de ^ccl. ministr. tit. Nundinati^ Romans pontif. and Fulm. brut. page 62. Io^
Mon^chus.
that were resident, and the half of theirs that were non residents, and that
for diverse years: and sometimes also all the money and goods of them that
deceassed. Out of France alone in the time of Martin 5. the Pope and court of
Rome received 9. millions: In England the Popes pray was almost as great as the
revenues of the crown, as Bonner testifies.

10. But his most odious merchandise is his setting to sale all manner of sin,
which is called Taxa poenitentiaria apostolica, whereby is promised impunity to
every one who having committed any sin, be it never so grievous, paieth
according to the rate for his absolution: as namely for adultery, incest,
Sodomy, the abominatio^ not to be spoken of committed with beasts, wilful
murder, pari^ide, perjury, and such like. Hereof a notable Canonist writes
thus, Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit and arcas:
Si bursae pareas, fuge Papas and Patrlarchas:
Si de deris ^arcas, and eis ^pleboris areas,
Culpa solueris quaque ligatus eris.


But with what difference I pray you were these crimes rated? Forsooth he that
would be absolved from adultery or incest, it must cost him four Turons: if
from both together, it must stand him in six Turons. And what if a Priest busy
the body of a party excommunicated in Christian bu^all, or if he chance upon
ignorance to say Mass in a place interdicted? Either of these faults must
cost him fix Tu^ons and two Ducates. And here it is to be noted that the
Pope in a covetous policy forbids many things which GOD does not forbid,
namely to this end that the straiter his prohibitions are, the oftener he may
have occasion to dispense there with. As for example, he forbids marriage in
kinsfolk unto the seventh degree: but for money he will dispense therewith in
all degrees of kindred, excepting that which is betwixt the parent and the
child.

11 They have with fained words through covetousness persuaded the world, that
the Pope has all laws in the closet of his breast, that he is the supreme
judge in all causes Antonin. sum part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 17.
and controversies, that to him lies appeal from all judges whatsoever, and
that immediately. By which channels have flowed abundance of riches into the sea
of the Popes treasury. And fitly is it compared to the Theodoric. Niem. tract.
6. c. 37.
sea whereunto all rivers flow, and yet does not ouerflowe. It is lawful,
says one of their own lawyers, to appeal from any to the Pope immediately:
which (says he) they have provided that they might draw controversies Petr.
Ferrariens. inform. sent. indesin.. sed ad que^cunque.
unto their court, and so might satisfy their own avarice, which
notwithstanding they shall never do, noting that it is insatiable. And
heereunto appertains that acclamation of one of their own chronographers:
for, having showed that searcely there was any spiritual promotion which was
not Abbas vrsperg. page 321.
become litigious, and the cause brought to Rome, but not with empty hand;
Rejoice says he our mother Rome, for the floudgates of the treasures in the
earth are opened, that unto thee may flow rivers, and heaps of money in great
abundance. Rejoice over the iniquity of the sons of men, because in
recompense of so great ouills there is a price or roward given unto thee. Be
glad for thy helper discord, which has burst out of the bottomless pilte of
hell, that unto thee many rewards of money might be gathered in heaps. Thou
have that which thon always thirsted after: sing a song, for by the
wickedness of men, and not by thy religion thou have vanquished the world.
Unto thee does not the devotion of men or pure conscience draw them, but the
committing of manifold crimes, and the decision of controversies procured by
money. Furthermore with fained words they have taught, that there is a p^gatory,
wherein the souls of many of the elect are tormented for a time: that out of
this purgatory the souls may be delivered by the prayers of the living;
especially, by the satisfactorie prayers of those whom they call religious, by
masses and trentalls of masses, by the works of supererogation and merits of
others applied unto them. By this conceit, which was the foundation of
religious houses, the Popes clergy had gotten the chiefest possessions of all
Europe into their hands. Monasteryes (says one of their own writers) were
founded in times past, for devotion, Petr. Ferrariens^in form. libell. quo
ag^tur ex substit.. ex suo corpore.
though now adays for rapine and covetousness: insomuch that they have at
this day destroyed the world, and brought to nothing the state of the Empire
and of all lay men. Wherefore all such places, as are or shall be made, may
worthily be called ^ettes framed to catch lay men's goods. In this small land
of ours the revenues of the irreligious houses, which were dissolved, did
arise according to the old rents (which are scarce the tenth part of the true
valewe) to the sum of a hundred thirty four thousand six hundred and three
pounds, two shillings fourepence halfepennie. Neither are the Popes own
revenues arising from these grounds to be omitted. For purgatory forsooth is
his peculier, and the merits of Saints and works of supererogation which are
the treasure of the church, are in his disposition. So that by his applying
thereof to whom ^ee pleases he can either shorten their time in purgatory,
or wholly set them at liberty by his indulgences and pardons accordingly as he
is paid for the same. And yet there are many more devises and sained words,
whereby the Pope makes merchandise of men for the enriching of himself and
his clergy. As by his iubileyes, and canonizing of Saints, by his promising of
remission of sins and eternal life to those that will fight his battles or
execute his wicked designs: by his doctrines of merits and works of
supererogation, of invocation of Saints, of adoration of images and relics,
of pilgrimages, and in a word by all the doctrines almost of Popery, I mean
those, which be peculier to the Pope and church of Rome, which are feigned
words douised in devilish policy to mainetaine their insatiable lust,
ambition and covetousness. By all this which has been said it plainly
appears that the Pope most worthily deserves to be called the man of
sin: especially if you consider that in respect of diverse of the aforesaid
sins, he is such a sinner as Jeroboam was, who caused all Israel to sin.
For he is not only an apostate, but also the head of the catholic
apostasy: not only an heretic, but the false prophet and brocher of popish
heresies: not only an idolatour and adulterer, but also the cause and author
of these abominations in all the Christian world, making all sorts of men
drunk with the wine of his fornications.

12 It remains therefore that we should consider whether the other two titles
of Antichrist do belong to the Pope, namely that he is the son of perdition,
and the outlaw or lawless person. As touching the former, there is no question
to be made but that if he be the man of sin as has been proved, he is also
the child of perdition, in that sense that Judas is so called. John 17. 12. And
that he deserves most justly to be called the outlawe or lawless person it
is most evident. Not only because he is a transgressour of the law (for
seeing every sin is (...) A transgression of the law, therefore he that is
the man of sin, must needs be (...) the outlawe) but also because he
professes himself to be the son of Beliall, that is to say a man without
yoke, who takes himself to be bound to no law, but chalengeth authority to
break al laws or at least to dispense with them. For first as touching the
laws and authority of men, Papa solutus est omni lege humana, that is, the
Pope is not bound to any humane law. Legi non Casus Papales apud Hostiensem
etc. Innocent. 3. extr. de concess. praebend. c. pro. posuit. Bald. in c. ca^*
super de causi proprict. and possess.
subiacet vlli, he is subject to no law. And according to the fulness of power
he may, as himself professes, de iure supraius dispensare, dispense with the
law above law: yea he may do all things, supraius, contraius, and extraius,
above law, against law, and without law. And therefore of all others most
worthily called the outlawe. And as for humane authority: he is to judge all,
but to be judged of none. Nec totus Cler^s, nec totus mundus potest Papam
iudicare aut deponere. Not the Petr. de palude, de potestate Papae art. 4.
whole clergy, nor the whole world may judge the Pope or depose him. Neither
does he indeed subject himself to the law of God. For, he not only takes
upon him to dispense with the word and law of God, as you heard before, but
also thinks he may lawfully break the laws of God. He has been made to
believe that he may do all things, even unlawful things, Francisc. Zabarella.
and that he is more then God, as Zabarella says. And therefore some of them,
when they have been admonished of their wicked practices, have used to
answer, Am not I pope? thereby Joan. 23.
signifying, that being Pope he might do what he list. Neither is he indeed
subject to any other law but to his own will or rather lust. In ijs quae vult,
est es proratione voluntas, In Extr. de transat. episc. c. quanto in gloss.
inter casus papales. Dan. 11. 16. R. Cupers de ecclesia page 29 number. 1. and 62.
vum. 66. de constitutionib. c. licet. in sexto. Hostiens. Francisc de Ripa. R.
Cupers. page 68. number. 32. and d^st. 40. non nos in gloss. Extra de concess.
praebend. c. proposuit in gloss did. 40. non nos in gloss. Joan. de Parisiis
c. 20. Council. com. l. in purgatione Sixti. Did. 40. Non os in gloss.
those things which he will, his will is unto him for reason. Legi non sub^acet
vlli: Iudiciumque est pro lege suum, He is subject to no law: and his judgment
is in stead of law. So that of him is verified that prophecy concerning
Antiochus the type of Antichrist, that he would do what him listed, and that
his will should be to him for a law. To this purpose his followers say, that he
is lexviuens, a living law, and has all laws in the closet of his breast,
that he can of wrong make right, of injustice righteousness, that to him all
things are lawful. That the Popes power is absolute, and extends as far as
him lists: that he may not be accused of Simon^e, nor murder, nor adultery,
nor any other crime, excepting heresy which they say elsewhere is not incident
unto him. Nay his actions may not be inquired into, neither may any man say
unto him, Sir, why do you thus? Yea it were no better then sacrilege to call
in question the Popes fact, and to judge of his actions est Ponere os in
caelum, it is to set a man's face against heaven: to accuse him is to commit the
sin against the holy ghost, which shall never be forgiven neither in this
world nor in the world to come. But what if it be apparent that he has
committed adultery or murder, or that himself is a wicked man, as indeed
many of them have been monsters of men? Forsooth the actions of the Pope must
be interpreted in the good part. For if a priest when he is seen to be
ouer-familiar with a woman must be thought to bless her, much mere is it to
be presumed in the Popes behalf. Or if they be so black as that they will
admit no other color, then the factes of the Pope must be excused, as the
murders Did. 40. Non nos in gloss.
of Sampson, the thefts of the Hebrews, and the adultery of Jacob. And to the
same purpose says another, Every fact of the most holy Father must be
interpreted in the good part, and Joan. de Paris^s de potest. reg. and papal^.
if it be theft or any thing that is in it self evil, we must interpret it
to be done by divine instinct. And as touching his person, the Pope be he
never so wicked, is always presumed to be good. Quis enim sanctu^ dubitet esse
quem apex Did. 40. Non nos. Papa semper praesumitur bonus ibid. in gloss.
tantae dignitatis attollit? In quo sidesint bona acquisita per meritum,
sufl^iunt quae a loci praedecessore praestantur. For who would doubt that he
is holy (says the Pope of himself) whom the height of so great honor
aduaunceth? In whom if good things gotten by his own merit be wanting, those
suffice which are performed by the predecessor in the same place, meaning
Peter. And again, There is a certain spiritualty according to De mayor. and
obedient. c. vna^ sancta^ in gloss.
state, when a man is in the most holy and most spiritual state, and in this
state is the Pope alone. And therefore every one must call him most holy
Father. Seeing therefore the Pope is the man of sin, and a most notorious
transgressour of Gods laws, seeing he holds himself bound to no law but
esteems his own lust for a law: seeing his transgressions of the law must
not be called into question, but either must be commended as virtuous actions,
or, excused as done by divine instinct, seeing himself though never so wicked
must be deemed most holy in that he is Pope, it cannot be denied, but that
above all men he most deserves to be called (...), the outlaw, or lawless
person.

CHAP. 7. Of the miracles, or rather lying signs and wonders of Antichrist.
1. ANd thus much may suffice to have spoken of the qualities and conditions of
Antichrist: now we have to entreat of his actions and effects. And first of his
miracles as he calls them, or rather, as the holy Ghost terms them, lying
signs and wonders. In speaking whereof I will not stick to use Bellarmines
own grounds. For whereas there are Lib. 3. de pont. Romans cap. 15.
three things (as he says) mentioned in the Scriptures concerning the miracles
of Antichrist, it shall appear by the help of God, that all which the
Scriptures have foretold concerning this matter, do most sitly agree to the
Pope and church of Rome. The first is, that Antichrist and his followers should
do many signs and wonders which they call miracles. For so says our Savior
Christ, Mat. 24. 24 (which prophecy, the Papists Mat. 24. 24.
themselves understand of Antichrist and his adherents) They shall work great
signs and wonders, insomuch that the very elect, if it were possible should be
seduced. He says, they shall work great signs, and not he, (says
Bellarmine) because not only Antichrist but his ministers also shall work
signs. And the apostle speaking of Antichrist, says, his coming shall be
according to the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
efficacy of Satan in all power in lying signs and wonders. And likewise John
Apoc. 13. 13. affirms, that Antichrist works Apoc. 13. 13.
great signs in the sight of men. And that this note agrees to the Pope and
church of Rome, it is most evident. For they abou^d with innumerable signs and
wonders which they call miracles. Insomuch that there is among them almost no
Saint or Author of any sect, who is not renowned for many fair miracles: no
temple or monastery of note, no image or relics of saints unto which the
people went on pilgrimage, which was not famous for miracles: no doctrine which
cannot be proved out of Scripture, that is to say, no point of popery which
they h^uo not commended to the people and authorized by such signs and wonders
as they call miracles. And in regard of these miracles (which they esteem as a
note of the true church) they contemn and despise all other churches, which
do not vaunt of miracles as they do.

2. And yet notwithstanding, al their miracles are nothing worth: First,
because they serve to confirm untruths as shall be showed, and therefore are not
to be regarded. Secondly, because the vain brag of manifold miracles among
those that profess the name of Christ in these later times (wherein miracles
need not for the confirmation of Gods truth, which heretofore has bin
sufficiently confirmed) is so far from being a note of the true church, as
that rather it is a plain sign of false teachers, and an evident mark of the
Synagogue of Antichrist. For their own devises indeed and doctrines of men do
still need signs and wonders to confirm the^. But the truth of the gospel
which we profess has bin sufficiently confirmed by the miracles of our
Savior Christ, and of his Apostles and Disciples. Whosoever therefore will not
believe this doctrine, thus confirmed, neither will he believe though one
should rise from the dead to preach unto Luke. 16.
him. Again miracles are granted not for the believers, but for the^ that
live in infidelity. And as Augustine says, Quisquis Tharasius in council.
Nicen. 2.
adhuc prodigia, vt credat, inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui mundo
credeme no^ credit: Whosoever yet seeks after wonders that he may believe,
is himself a great wonder, who when De ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 8.
the world believes, does not believe. And therefore in another place he
says, Contra istos mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus meus etc. Against these
miraclemongers my God has made Tract. 13. in Joan.
me wary, saying, There shall arise in the last days false prophets working
signs and wonders, that they might bring into error, if it were possible, the
very elect. Likewise Chrysostom, or whosoever Chrysostom homil. 49. in Matthew.
was the author of those learned Homilies upon Matthew in the 49. Homily
(where he proves that the true Church of Christ cannot now be known or
discerned by signs or other means, but only by the Scriptures) he says,
that now the working of signs and wonders is altogether taken away (namely
among the true professors) and and the working of counterfeit miracles is more
found among false Christians. And that, Peter in the history of Clement
declares, that unto Antichrist shall be granted the power of working full, that
is to say, profitable signs, So that now we cannot know the ministers of
Christ by this that they work profitable signs, but because they work no
signs at all. And the Papists themselves confess, yea Bellarmine would seem
to set it down as one of his grounds, that to Antichrist and his followers
shall be granted the power of working many and great signs and wonders. And
therefore unless the Pope and his followers did vau^t of their miracles, we
should want one good argument to prove the Pope Antichrist. And thus it
appears that the first point concerning the miracles of Antichrist does fit
the Pope, and so fit him, as that from hence he may be proved Antichrist. For
unto whomsoever in these latter times this properly and only belongs, to
boast of their miracles, they are Antichrist and the synagogue of Antichrist.
For the scriptures have foretold that by Antichrist and his adherents many
signs and wonders should be wrought in these latter times. But to the Pope
and church of Rome in these latter times this properly and only belongs to
vaunt of their manifold and great miracles. For the Jews want them: the Turks
disclaim the^, professing that their religion must be propagated not by
miracles but by force and arms. All other Christians which already believe the
truth, seek not signs which they know among true believers to be
superfluous, and in others to be badges of Antichrist; therefore the Pope is
Antichrist and the Church of Rome the Synagogue of Antichrist.

3. The second thing which the Scripture notes, is, what manner of miracles
they are which Antichrist was to work. This the Apostle (says Bellarmine)
declares in one word, when he calls them Lying wonders, or as the words
are, (...) signs and wonders of lying, that is most lying 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
signs and wonders. Now they are called lying wonders either in respect of the
end, which is to seduce men by confirming untruths; or in regard of their
substance, which is counterfeit. And thus Chrysostom expounds the words of
the apostle, (...), and he In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
says lying wonders, that is either false and counterfeit, or else leading
into falsehood. Augustine likewise recites these two expositions, that they are
called lying signs and wonders, because De ciuit. Dei lib. 20. c. 19.
he shall deceive the senses of mortal men by counterfeite shows and
appearances, that he may seem to do that which he does not: or else because
howsoever they shall be true wonders, they shall draw unto lies such as shall
believe that they could not be done but by the power of God, not knowing the
power of the devil etc. First I say they are called lying signs in respect of
the end, which is to seduce men Mat. 24. 24. to make them believe lies and to
deceive them 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. Apoc. 13. 14. For this is the end whereunto
the signs and wonders not only of Antichrist, but of all false prophets, are
referred Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. Out of which places of scripture we are to observe
that the Lord many times suffers false prophets and Antichrists to work
strange signs and wonders for the trial of the faithful, and seducing of
those that will not believe the truth that they might be saved. If there arise
among you (says the Lord) a prophet or dreamer of dreams, and give thee a
sign Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 3
and wonder, and the sign and wonder which he has told thee, come to pass,
saying, let us go after other Gods which thou have not known, and let us
serve them: thou shall not hearken unto the words of the prophet, or unto that
dreamer of dreams. For the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love
the Lord your God with all your soul, and with all your heart etc. Our Savior
Christ also has forewarned us, that in these latter times Mat. 24. 24.
there shall arise false Christ's and false prophets which shall show great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive even the
very elect. In like sort, the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. notes that the coming of
Antichrist shall be according to the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10.
efficacy of Satan in all power and lying signs and wonders, and in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish etc. on whom God
shall send the efficacy of deceit that they may believe lies. Likewise John
the divine prophecieth Apoc. 13. 13. 14.
of Antichrist that he should do great wonders, whereby he should deceive them
that dwell on the earth. Hereby therefore it is evident, that false prophets and
Antichrists many times have power to work great signs and wonders, not only
in show and appeara^ce, but in deed and in truth. Whereby they, indeauouring
to deceive all and to make them believe lies, are permitted both in the justice
of God to seduce the wicked, and in his mercy to try the faithful. And
therefore signs and wonders as they have not always bin signs and tokens of
true teachers and professors of the truth, but only then when they have
Miracles are divine testimonies whereby the Lord does bear witness to his
truth. Heb. 2. 4.
bin wrought for the confirmation of the truth: So in these later times, the
same being wrought for confirmation of untruths are undoubted signs of the
synagogue of Antichrist.

4 Let us then consider whether such signs and wonders be wrought in the
church of Rome. It is recorded of Gregory the 7. who was the first of the Popes
which was openly acknowledged to be Antichrist, that as he was a notable
sorcerer, so he wrought many signs and wonders: and among the rest he used to
shake fire out of his sleeves. And of his votaryes, after he had forbidden
marriage in the clergy, Auentinus writes that upon that occasion many false
prophets did as it were cast mists, and by Annal. Boior. lib. 4.
fables and miracles did turn away the people of Christ from the truth. And
again, False prophets did then arise, false Apostles, false priests, who by
counterfeite religion deceived the people, lib. 5.
wrought great signs and wonders, and began to sit in the temple of God, and
to be advanced above all that is worshipped. And while they endeavor to
establish their own power and dominion they have extinguished Christian
charity and simplicity. And since those times the church of Rome has much
boasted of her manifold miracles, which have been partly devised and partly
wrought for the confirmation of such Antichristian doctrines and idolatrous
superstitions as cannot be confirmed by the scriptures: as namely the absurd
doctrine of transubstantiation, and adoration of the breaden God, the
heathenish doctrine of purgatory, and superstitious prayer for the dead: the
idolatrous invocation and worshipping of Saints, the more then heathenish
adoration of images and rotten relics: the Antichristian advancing of the
Pope above all that is called God or worshipped: and such like doctrines of
devils and lies of Antichrist, for the confirmation whereof the miracles of the
Apostaticall church of Rome have bin invented. But how many miracles soever
they produce for the countenancing of such untruths, they are so many
arguments to prove their church Antichristian, and their Pope Antichrist.
Because as Antichrist and his followers were in these latter times to abound
with signs and wonders, but always such as serve to lead me^ into error: so
neither Turks nor Jews, nor any other churches of Christians, but only the
Pope and church of Rome, do vaunt of miracles: and yet all their miracles are
such as serve to deceive men, and to make them believe untruths. And therefore
although they were in respect of their substance neither counterfeit nor
fabulous (as in deed the most of the miracles in the church of Rome are) yet
were they to be esteemd as notes and signs of false prophets and Antichrists,
because their end is to seduce me^, and confirm lies.

5 Secondly they are called lying signs in respect of the substance, being (as
Augustine speaks) vel figmenta mendacium De vnitat. eccl. 16.
hominu^, vel portenta fallaciu^ spirituu^, either fictions of lying men, or
wonders of deceit full spirits. And such are the miracles whereby the
aforesaid points of Popery are warranted and confirmed. And of them there are
three degrees. For many of them were such fabulous fictions, ridiculous fables,
incredible lies, (whereof their legends and festiualls are full,) as none would
ever believe, were they not intoxicated, and made drunk with the whore of
Bylons cup of fornications, and also given over of God to believe lies. And
these loud lies and more then poetical fictions were in such request in the
church of Rome, that the records of them (I mean their legends and festiualls
and such like fabulous treatises) were both publicly and privately read in the
vulgar tongue, when as the holy scriptures were kept from the people in an
unknown language. The 1. degree then is of such miracles as never were indeed,
nor yet in appara^nce, but in the opinion only of men besotted and given over
to believe incredible untruths. The 2. is of such as were pha^tastical and in
appara^ce only as being crafty co^ueia^ces of deceitful men, or iugling tricks
of legerdemaine. As for example, the nodding or moving, the smiling or
frowning, the sweating or speaking of images, the apparitio^s of souls
deceased, the manifold cures supposed to be wrought by saints departed or their
images and and such like. For of these two sorts there be innumerable wonders
recorded, in their legends and festiualls and lives of Saints, which are either
altogether fabulous, as being reports of things which never were not so much
as in appara^ce^or if any such things have been done in the sight of men, they
have bin either praestigiatory conueyances of wicked men, or mere illusions of
the devil. The third degree is of such as were lying miracles in respect of
the form (as Bellarmine speaks) although true in respect of the matter. For
howsoever they were things truly done, yet they surpassed not the whole
strength of nature: whereas true miracles are supernatural, neither can be
wrought by any natural causes whether known or unknown, but only by the
omnipotent power of God. And such lying signs are the principal miracles of
the Apostaticall church of Rome. Neither is the Pope and al his adherents able
to produce any one true miracle wrought by the finger of God for the
confirmation of those doctrines which are peculier to that church, that is, to
speak more plainly, for the proof of any point of popery. But all their
miracles as they are lying signs and wonders in respect of their end, so also
in regard of their substance, being either merely fabulous and therefore such
things as never were not so much as in show and apparaunce: or merely
fantastical, that is such things as were in show only and not in truth: or
merely natural and therefore but counterfeite miracles effected by the power of
the devil.

6 Some of their own writers confess, that sometimes there is great deceiving
of the people in fained miracles by the Nicol. Lyran. in Daniel. 14.
priests and their adherents for temporal gain. And another says, in the
sacrament appears flesh, sometimes by the conueyance of men, sometimes by the
operation of the devil. I once did Alexander de Hales.
see an image of Saint Nicolas as it was said, when it with many others was
burnt in the market place at Chester by the appointment of my father then
Bishop there, which was made with such a devise that if one standing behind
did pull a certain string which was in the back part thereof, it would move
the hand as if it blessed the people. But that it may appear that in the
Church of Rome were lying miracles, and that the Popish people were given over
to believe lies, I will for a taste recite a few examples out of their own
records. Their Golden Legend (so called because as gold excels all other
metals so that Book Viz. in lying.
excels all other books) in the invention of the body of S. Fremin the
martyr, reports that after the Sun had miraculously sent his beams through
a stone wall upon the grave, and thereupon they had dug there to find the
body, there issued thence such a sweet smell as they weened they had been in
Paradise. Which odor spread it self not only through the city of Amiens
where the body lay, but also unto diverse other cities. The sweetness whereof
as it moved the people of diverse cities to bring their oblations to this
glorious Saint: so it cured some a far off (as the Lord of Baugency) from
their diseases. But when this body was taken up and carried in the city of
Amiens, strange wonders were wrought. For then (that I may use the words of
the English Legend) the elements them moved, by the miracle of this Saint. The
snow, that was that time great on the earth, was turned into powder and dust by
the heat that was then: and the yse that hung on the trees became flowers and
leaves: and the meadows about Amiens flowred and became green. And the Sun
which by his nature should go low that day, ascended as high as she is on S.
John's day at noone in the s^mmer. And as men bare the body of this Saint, the
trees inclined and worshipped the body, and all manner sick men of what malady
they had, they received health in the invention of the blessed body of S.
Fremin etc. In the Legend of S. Patricke the Irish Saint, by whose prayer
forsooth all venomous beasts were banished out of Ireland (for you may not
think it was so before) we read and reading smile, that on a time a sheep
being stolen, he admonished all the people that whosoever had stolen it
should within seven days restore it to the owner. The 7. days being expired,
the sheep was not restored. Then (says the Legend) S. Patricke commanded by
the virtue of God, that the sheep should bleate and cry in the belly of him
that had eaten it. And so it happened that in the presence of all the people
the sheep cried and bleated in the belly of him that had stolen it.

7. In the Legend of the Annunciation of our Lady, we are told of a noble
Knight, who betook himself unto an Abbey: and because he was unlearned,
there was a Master assigned unto him. But either he was so dull or the
inuenter of the tale so doltish, that in a long time he could learn no more
but these two words, Aue Maria. Which words as he always had in his mouth
whiles he was alive, so they grew out of his mouth when he was dead. For these
words (says the Legend) he had so sore imprinted in his heart that always
he had them in his mouth, wheresoever he was. At the last he died, and was
buried in the Church-yarde of the brethren. It happened after that upon his
grave their grew a right fair Flower de lyce, and in every flower was written
in letters of gold Aue Maria. Of which miracle all the brethren were marueyled,
and they did open the sepulcher, and found that the root of this Flowredelyce
came out of the mouth of the said Knight, and anou they understood, that our
Lord would have him honored for the great devotion he had to say these words,
Aue Maria. Likewise in the book of the conformities of S. Francis, which Book
I could wish were more common, that Popery might appear unto all in her
colors, there is a miracle recorded for the proof of transubstantiation; that
on a time friar Frauncis saying Mass did find a spider in the Chalice, which
he would not cast out but drunk it up with the blood. Afterward rubbing his
thigh, and scratching where it itched, the spider came whole out of his thigh
without any harm to either. But if the bread and wine after consecration be
turned into the very body and blood of Christ, then more marvelous and I am
sure more true is the story of victor the Pope, and An. 1154.
William Archbishop of York, and Henry of Lucemburgh the Emperor, all which
were poisoned, the two first with that which was in the Chalice, and the
Emperor with the host which a Monk had poisoned. And to these many more
worthy miracles of the Church of Rome may be added. But you-will say, that
howsoever their are many miracles wherein the Church of Rome glories, yet
notwithstanding those special miracles which are assigned to Antichrist in the
Scriptures, have not been wrought by the Pope or any of his followers.

8. This is indeed the third thing which Bellarmine observes, that whereas
there are three examples of Antichrist his miracles, specified in the
Scriptures: yet none of them have been wrought either by the Pope or any other
in the church of Rome. But I answer, that of these three miracles one agrees
not to Antichrist, as shall be showed hereafter, and the Lib. 2. cap. 15.
other two agree to the Pope. For howsoever Bellarmine and other Papists from
these grounds do argue, that the Pope The author of the Wardword.
is not Antichrist: yet from thence may the contrary be gathered. The former of
these miracles is, that Antichrist or at least his ministers shall make fire
come down from heaven. The second, that he shall cause the image of the beast
to Apoc. 13. 13.
speak. These two miracles Bellarmine understands literally, and from thence
argues thus; Antichrist or his ministers, shall make fire come down from
heaven, and shall cause the image of the beast to speak. But neither the Pope
of Rome at any time, nor any of his followers have caused fire to come down
from heaven, nor yet made the image of the beast to speak, therefore the Pope
is not Antichrist. The argument is grounded on Apoc. 13. 13. literally
understood. For such is the absurd perverseness of the Papists, that in
other parts of Scripture which are simple and plain they do hunt after
mystical and allegorical senses: but in this Book of the Revelation which is
most mystical and allegorical, without all reason they insiste in the
literal sense. As for example in that thirtenth chapter, where the holy Ghost
speaks of the mark of the beast, which the followers of Antichrist should
receive on their foreheads and on their right hands, they grossly understand
this of a real and visible mark wherewithal men of all sorts should suffer
themselves to be branded as the slaves or cattle of Antichrist. Where the
holy Ghost speaks of the image of the beast, which Antichrist puttoth life
into and causes to speak, they understand it of a material image animated
and made to speak. Where the holy Ghost speaks of fire to come down from
heaven, they understand it of material fire brought down from heaven. Which
course whosoever follows in expou^ding the prophecies in the Revelation, must
never look to see them verified in the event. The which I speak, not that
literally they do not agree to the Pope, but because (the mystical sense
being the more like to be true) our adversary groundeth his argument wholly
upon the literal interpretation. But I will make it plain that both these
miracles agree to the Pope not only in the mystical sense, but also in the
literal. And to that purpose let us consider these miracles severally.

9. And first as touching that of fire, which Antichrist shall cause to
descend from heaven, if it be literally understood, you shall perceive that
it agrees to the Pope, because in diverse Popish miracles there has been (as
they say) fire brought down from heaven. But seeing the place is rather to be
understood mystically and allegorically, as well as other prophecies of the
Revelation: we are not therefore by the coming down of fire to understand
literally a real descending of material fire, but that which mystically in
the Scriptures is meant by the coming down of fire from heaven. You are
therefore to be infourmed that descending of fire from heaven, in the
Scriptures signifies three things: 1. Gods approving of the religion and
sacrifices of his servant: 2. His sending down of the graces of his spirit
upon his children: 3. His vengeance executed from heaven upon his enemies. For
the first, it is clear that the Lord informer times used to testify his
approbation of the religion and sacrifices of his servant, by sending fire
from Heaven to consume their sacrifice: in which respect he is said to answer
them by fire from heaven. Leuit. 9. 24 1. Chron, 21. 26. 2. Chron. 7. 1.
whereunto some add Genesis 4, 4. Iud. 13. 19. When as therefore the people of
Israel halted between Jehovah and Baal^ Elias to prove that Jehovah whom he
worshipped was the true God, and his worship the true religion; by prayer
miraculously caused fire to come down from heaven to consume the sacrifice, 1.
King. 18. 38. Whosoever therefore does by such signs and wonders confirm that
doctrine and religion which 1. King. 18. 38
he professes, as though God answered him by fire from heaven, he may be said
to cause fire to descend from heaven, in the sight and opinion of men; who
think such miracles to be wrought by the finger of God, according to this
example of Elias, that is, so to have confirmed his religion in the opinion of
men, as if he had with Elias fetched fire from heaven. If therefore the Pope of
Rome or his ministers have, by as strange signs and wonders in the opinion of
men, confirmed their religion, as though God from heaven approved thereof, as
he was wont to signify his approbation in answering by fire from heaven:
they may be said to have made fire to come down from heaven, although they
never had caused material fire to descend. But if besides many other strange
signs and wonders which they call miracles, they have confirmed their
superstitious religion and Antichristian doctrines by bringing fire from
heaven; then can it not be denied but that this place does most fully and
properly agree unto them. But you must remember how Saint John says in the
sight of men, not that they have done so indeed, but only that they have made
men believe so.

10 As for example, to prove that their sacrament of the altar after the words
of consecration is the very body of Christ, and to be worshipped no otherwise
then Christ himself, we have a narration in their festival which was wont
solemnly to be read in the church on Corpus Christi day: the words whereof I
will recite unto you. Also we find (say they) that in Devonshire beside
Exbridge was a woman lay sick and was nigh dead, and sent after a holy person
about midnight to have her rights. Than this man in all have that he might,
arose and went to the church, and took God^ body in a box of Iuor^, and put it
into his bosom, and went forth toward this woman. And as he went through a
forest i^ a fair m^de that was next his way, it happened that his box fello^
of his bosom into the ground: and he went forth and wist it not and came to
this woman and heard her confession. And then he asked her if she would be
houseled, and she said, yea sir. Then he put his hand in his bosom and sought
the box. And when he found it not, he was full sorry and sad. And said,
dame, I will go after Gods body and come anon agine to you, and so went
forth sore weeping for his simpleness. And so as he came to a willow tree
he made thereof a rod, and stripped himself naked, and beat himself that
the blood ran down by his sides, and said thus to himself; Ah thou simple
man! Why have thou lost thy Lord God, thy maker, thy former and creator? And
when he had thus beat himself, he did on his clothes and went on forth.
And then he was aware of a pillar of fire that lasted from earth to heaven,
and he was all astonished thereof, yet he blessed himself and went thereto.
And there lay the sacrament fallen out of the box into the grass, and the
pillar shone as bright as any Sun, and it lasted from Gods body to heaven.
And all the beasts of the forest were com^n about Gods body, and stood in
compass round about it, and all kneeled on four knees, save one black horse
that kneeled but on that one knee. And that black horse was a feend of hell,
who had turned himself into that shape that men might steal him, as diverse
had done and were hanged for him, etc. If any man object that all this
narration is a foolish fiction, I answer that this was as verily believed as
it was solemnly read. And therefore to countenance their abominable idol of
the mass, they have in the sight, that is, in the judgment, opinion, and
belief of men, caused fire to come down from heaven that it might point out
the body, and from it reach to heaven.

11 To win credit to such Saints as they have canonized, and consequently to
cause men the more devoutly to pray unto them, to adore their images and
relics, to go on pilgrimage to them, they have coined in the life or legend
almost of every Saint, strange and incredible miracles. And this is the
ordinary conclusion of many legendes, Then let us pray to this worthy Saint,
or glorious martyr, that he will pray to God for us, that by his merits we may
have pardon and forgiveness of o^r sins, or something to the like effect.
We read of diverse of their Saints, who when they have been beheaded have
carried their Saint Justinian the monk. Saint Osi^a. Saint Fulcien and Saint
Victorice.
heads in their hands, some one mile, some two miles. And it is a wonder that,
hasting from so sharp a banquet, they did not leave their heads behind them
for haste. Among many other miracles they tell us of fire also which they have
caused to come down from heaven in the sight, that is judgment and opinion,
of men besotted and given over to believe their monstrous untruths. In the
life of Prothe and Iacinct, they make fire to come down from heaven to kill
Melancy the false accuser of Eugenne. They have brought down a pillar of fire
reaching from heaven unto the earth where the body of Saint Edward the Martyr
lay. Upon the head of Saint Martin as he was saying mass they have fetched
down a tongue of fire from heaven to make him equal as they say to the
Apostles. In the fable of Saint George they make fire to come down from heaven
to burn the idols with their temple and priests. In the life of Barbara we
read that when her own father being her persecutour had drawn his sword to
slay her, she was miraculouslie taken up in a stone and carried into a
mountain; where two shepheades were feeding their sheep. And when one of them
had bewraied her to her father, and she in her charity had cursed him, anon
his sheep became locustes and he consumed into a stone. Then her father
having apprehended her delivered her to the judge, who put her to death.
Whereupon they bring down fire from heaven to consume her father. Their
doctrine of purgatory and prayer for the dead, is confirmed by many wonders
and strange apparitions of souls departed, begging masses for their
deliverance out of purgatory. And in like manner it is reported that when
Birstan the Bishop of Winchester staying all night in the churchyard, as his
manner was, said over his psalms for the souls departed, coming to these
words requ^scant in pace let them rest in peace, he heard the voice of an
infinite number out of the graves crying, Amen. But to this purpose also in
their legend they have made fire to descend from heaven. When as they tell us
of a certain Bishop, who, appearing in the clouds of heaven to another here
upon earth, did let some fire drop upon him to give him a taste of the torments
in purgatory. Besides these examples many other might be found if they were
worth the seeking in their fabulous writings, as also in some other of their
stories which testify that diverse times in the church of Rome, fire has
been brought down from heaven. But these which I Joan. Linturius in appead.
ad fascic. tempor.
have recited may suffice: in seeking and setting down whereof I should have
thought my time and pains not well bestowed (such are the ridiculous fooleries
of popery, wherewith the churches in the time of darkness have been pestered)
saving that I considered that the more incredible the report is of Popish
miracles, the more evidently it is proved, both that the Pope is Antichrist,
and the Papists the followers of Antichrist, upon whom God has sent strong
illusions that they might believe lies. In the first sense therefore the
prophecy Revel. 13. does fit the Pope and church of Rome, who by great
signs and wonders do so confirm their Antichristian errors and superstitions
in the sight, that is, in the judgment, opinion, and belief of men besotted
and made drunk with the whore of Babylons cup of fornications, as though God
did seem to approve thereof in aunswering by fire from heaven. And this
interpretation seems to be confirmed by the words; for it is not directly
said that Antichrist should cause fire to come down from heaven, but only
thus, that he does great signs, insomuch that fire descends from heaven in
the sight of men. That is, insomuch that in the judgment of men God seems to
answer him by fire from heaven, and to bear witness to his doctrines by
miracles wrought by the finger of God.

12 But descending of fire signifies also the bestowing of the grace of Gods
spirit which is called fire Mat. 3. 11. Act. 2. 3. In which sense the Pope may
be said to make fire come down from heaven, but we must add before men,
that is in their opinion and conceit. For he forsooth, as the church of Rome
believes, gives not only the graces of the spirit to men, but also the
power of sanctification both to men and also to some creatures of his own, as
to his Ag^ Del, and his holy water sprinckle etc. And in this sense does
Primasius expound this place. Thirdly, the coming down of fire signifies the
wrathful vengeance of God executed upon his enemies, which often in the
Scriptures is called fire, to wit, the Apoc. 20. 9.
fire of Gods wrath. As Elias therefore brought fire from heaven to consume the
two Captains and their fifties: so Antichrist, according to this
interpretation, shall with a divine revenge, as it were with fire from heaven,
take vengeance upon his adversaries, but here also we must add before men, who
shall think that those against whom Antichrist shall send the thunderbolt of
his wrath, are punished with a Divine revenge, and as it were with fire from
heaven. This also is verified of the Pope of Rome, who with a divine revenge
(as he forsooth is Deus vindictae, The God of revenge) pursues his R. Cupers.
de eccl. page 61. number. 52.
enemies, but especially with the thunderbolt of excommunication as themselves
do call it. Which as it is terribly sent from this Jupiter of Rome, so is it
fearfully executed with Gregor. 7. in ep^st. ad German. apud Auentin. lib. 5.
putting out and casting down of lights from above, as if the fire of Gods
wrath were at their command, or as if with Gregory the seventh they could
shake it out of their sleeves. And well may this be reckened among the wonders
of Antichrist. For it were more then a wonder, that Kings and Emperors should
by excommunications from the Pope be either so daunted in themselves or
abandoned of their subjects as some have been, but that the Popes have
professed and their followers have believed, that God himself does whatsoever
is done by the Pope, who being Canonically elected is a God upon earth, and
has the same consistory and judgment seat with God himself, whose vicar he
would seem to be; and consequently that those Kings and Emperors were deposed
of God, who were excommunicated by the Pope: whereas other Princes and people
that are not made drunk with the cup of their fornications have esteemed
their bulls of excommunication as Bullas that is bubbles, and the fire of
vengeance which they cause to descend in the sight of men, as painted fire, or
as the thunder and lightning of Salmoneus, who (as the Poet describes him not
unlike to the Pope) Flammas Iouis Aeneid. 6.
and sonitus imitatur Olympi, Imitateth the lightenings of Jupiter, and the
thunder of heaven. But howsoever it is, whether this descending of fire from
heaven is to be understood literally or mystically, the prophecy of the holy
Ghost concerning this first miracle of Antichrist is verified of the Pope and
church of Rome, who have caused fire to come down from heaven according to the
literal sense: and according to the allegorical interpretation they have so
confirmed their doctrines by signs and wonders, as if God had answered them by
fire from heaven: and secondly they have taken upon them to bring down the
fire of Gods spirit, and to bestow his grace as it pleases them: and lastly,
they have according to the example of Elias with a divine revenge and as it
were with fire from heaven, taken vengeance of their enemies; not to speak of
his punishing with fire all those that will not adore him.

13. And thus much may suffice to have spoken of the first miracle. The second
miracle (says Bellarmine) is, that Antichrist or his ministers shall make the
image of the beast to speak. But never Pope nor any minister of his did make
an image to speak: therefore, says he, the Pope is not Antichrist. But I
answer that this prophecy even according to the Popish interpretation
agrees to the Pope and his followers, among whom it has been an usual
practice to put life as it were into images in the sight and opinion of simple
men, making them to sweat, to smile, to srowne, to nodde, to beck and many
times to speak, which might happen without a miracle, for the Devils sometimes
did speak in the images of the Heathen. Notwithstanding we are not after a
Popish, that is to say, a gross manner, but after a prophetical and
spiritual manner to understand this mystical prophecy of the holy Ghost
concerning the image of the beast. For if we understand the beast it self
mystically, as needs we must, or else we shall make but a beastly
interpretation of it: so we are in like sort to expound the image of the beast
with the life and speech thereof. The beast it self signifies the Roman^
state especially under the Heathenish Emperors as has been showed. The image
therefore of the beast must signify a state which has some resemblaunce
thereof, or at least the name and title of the Roman Empire, (as images bear
the name of that which they resemble) and is indeed but an image thereof. Thus,
besides the Popes courts both in Rome and other countries, is the Empire
renewed in the West, which besides the name and some titles and ornaments has
little or nothing of the old Empire. For the old Empire consisted in the
government of Rome and the provinces thereunto belonging, none of which the
Emperor has as a Sovereign Prince by right of the Empire, and therefore is
said to be the beast which was and is not though it be, being indeed, as it is
Apoc. 17.
here called, but an image of the former beast. The life of this Empire is the
imperial dignity, and the speech are his edicts. Whosoever therefore caused
this Empire, which in the west had lien void 325. years, to be renewed:
whosoever at the first created this Emperor, and since has taken order for
the election of the Emperor, and confirms the election, he may be said to
have caused the image of the beast to be made, and to have put life into it,
and to have procured authority unto it, whereby it speaks.

14. Now to whom all this is to be applied, let Bellarmine himself be judge.
For he, in his books De translatione imperij Romani, by many testimonies
labors to prove, first, that the Empire of Rome was translated, but he might
better have said renewed, in the West, and as it were revived by the authority
of the Pope, and that Charles the great in whom this Empire was renewed,
received the same by no other title but by the authority of the Pope. And that
is the sum of his first book. Secondly, that the Empire of Rome was
translated from the family of Charles the great, and from the French nation to
the family of Otho, and the nation of the Saxons and Germans, and that Otho
was advanced to the Empire by the Pope: which is the scope of the second
Book. Thirdly, that the seven Electours of the Empire were ordained and
appointed by the Pope, which is the argument of his third book. And in his
first book he sets down the state Chap. 4.
of that controversy thus: the question is (says he) who is the author of
this translation (or rather renouation: for the Emperor of the East continued
after until the year 1452. and before this time had by the Popes means lost
his right in Italy and Rome, and therefore nothing was translated but the name
and title) and who it was that gave the name dignity and power of the Roman
Emperor, and Caesar Augustus in the west, to Charles the great and his
successors. We answer (says he) that which the consent of al nations
proclaims, that Pope Leo 3. was either the only or the chief and principal
author of this translation: and that the Dutch nation is to acknowledge the
receipt of the Empire from the Pope. Unto the testimony of Bellarmine and of
all those authors whom he cites, we will add the profession of the Popes
themselves. Innocentius 3. says, the 7. Electours had their authority, Decret.
Gregorian. de electione. c. venerabilem.
ab Apostolica sede, quae Romanu^ imperiu^ in persona magnifici Caroli a
Graecis tra^stulit in Germanos, From the Sea Apostolic which translated the
Roman Empire in the person of Charles the great from the Grecians to the
Germans. Upon which translation says Bellarmine, The Roman commonweal
returned again De tra^slat. imper. li. 1. cap. 4.
to the same state wherein Constantine the great established it, and wherein it
remained from Valentinian the elder, unto Augustulus. Likewise Adrian 4. The
Roman Empire, says he, was Ad archiep. Treuir. Moguntin. and Agrippin. apud
Auentin. lib. 6.
translated from the Greeks to the Almaines, that the king of the Almaines
should not be called Emperor before he were crowned of the Pope. Before his
consecration he is king, after he is Emperor. Vnde igitur habet imperiu^ nisi
a nobis? From whence then has he the Empire but from us? By the election of
his princes he has the name of a king: by our consecration he has the name of
Emperor, Augustus, and Caesar. Ergo per nos imperat. Therefore he is Emperor
by us. Call to mind Antiquities. Zacharias adua^ced Charies and gave him a
great name that he should be Emperor etc. Imperator quod habet, totum habet a
nobis. What soever the Emperor has, that he has wholly from us. As Zacharias
translated the Empire from the Greeks to the Almaines; so we can translate it
from the Almaines to the Graecians. Ecce in potesta^ nostra est, vt demus illud
cui volumus. Behold it is in our power to give it to whom we will. For
therefore are we appointed of God over nations and kingdoms, to destroy and
pluck up, to build and to plan^. In the Clementines it is professed that the
Pope Cap. Romani de iureiuran do.
has translated the Empire from the Greeks to the Germans: that he has
given power and authority to certain of their princes to elect a king to be
Emperor: that the king thus chosen receives from the Pope the approbation of
his person unto the Empire, as also his anointing, consecration, and imperial
crown: and that in respect hereof the Emperors are to submit themselves unto
the Pope, and to bind themselves unto him by an oath of fealty and obedience.
And elsewhere in their law it is said, Imperator tenet imperium a Papa, vnde
tenetur praestare iuramentum homagij scil. quod vasallus praestare solet domino
suo. The Emperor holds his Empire from the Pope. Whereupon, he is bound to
perform the oath of homage, to wit, which the vassal uses to perform unto
his Lord.

15 Thus therefore this argument is returned upon the adversary. Whosoever
causes the image of the beast to be made, puts life into it and causes it
to speak, he is undoubtedly Antichrist: But the Pope of Rome has caused the
image of the beast to be made, put teth life into it, and causes it to speak,
therefore he is Antichrist. The assumption is proved, because the image of the
beast is the Empire renewed in the west: the life is the imperial dignity, and
the speech are the edictes thereof. This image the Pope causes to be made,
this he puts life into, this he has made to speak. For first he renewed
the Empire in the west, after it had lain void by the space of 325. years,
when he anointed and crowned Charles the great Emperor of the west, and so
caused him to be acknowledged: after he translated the Empire to the Almaines,
among whom he has appointed seven electours as it were to renew this image,
but so as himself puts life thereinto, by approving the person and
ratifying the election, and makes him to speak by anointing him Emperor and
giving unto him the name and title of Augustus and Caesar. Which things I shall
not need further to prove, because they are matters whereof the Pope and Papists
do greatly boast. And therefore from their own profession we may conclude that
the Pope is Antichrist.

Chap. 8. Of the name and mark which Antichrist shall impose upon men of all
sorts, with some other effects.
1. THe second effect of Antichrist is noted Apoc. 13. 16. 17. 18. And he
Apoc. 13. 16. 17. 18.
made all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a
mark in their right hand or in their foreheads. And that no man might buy or
sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast or the number of
his name. Here is wisdom: let him that has understanding count the number of
the beast: for it is the number of a man: and his number is six hundredth sixty
and six. Of which prophecy Bellarmine says thus. Fatentur omnes pertinere
omnino Lib. 3. de pontis. Romans c. 10.
ad Antichristum verba illa Ioannis Apoc. 13, etc. All men confess that those
words of John Apoc. 13. do undoubtedly belong to Antichrist. From this ground
therefore we may reason thus. Whosoever enforces all sorts of men according to
this prophecy to take upon them the name of the beast, or the mark or number
of his name, he is Antichrist: But the Pope of Rome enforces all sorts of men
according to this prophecy to take upon them the name of the beast, or the mark
and number of his name: therefore he is Antichrist. For the clearing of this
argument, two things are to be considered. First, what this name, number, and
mark is: Secondly, whether the Pope impose the same upon all sorts of men.
The number is expressed in the text, to be 666. And it is plainly said to
be the number of the name. That we may not think it to be the number of the
time when Antichrist should appear as some have imagined: neither can it in
any good sense be said that Antichrist inforceth men to take upon them the
number of that time. And it is called the number of the name, because in the
letters of the name this number is contained. For it is the manner of the
Hebrews and Greeks to use their letters for notes of number, according to
their order in the Alphabet etc. it is also called the number of a man, because
(as it may seem) the name of the beast, co^taining this number, is also the
name of a man. And this I take to be the most simple interpretation.

2 What the name is whereof the holy ghost here speaks, it may easily be
gathred out of the text. For 1. the holy ghost does not speak of Antichrist his
name properly, but of the name of the beast which Antichrist should cause al
sorts of men to take upon them. If therefore we know what the beast is, it will
not be hard to tell what the name is. The beast whose name Antichrist shall
compel men to take upon them, is the former beast described in the beginning of
the chapter. For so it is said, that Antichrist the second beast, exercises
the authority of the former beast, that he causes me^ to worship the first
beast whose v. 12.
deadly wou^d was healed: that he causes an image to be made v. 14.
to the beast, that he gives spirit to the image of the beast, that v. 15.
he suffers none to buy or sell which have not the name of the v. 17.
beast: which cannot be understood but of the former beast. Now that beast
described in the former part of the chapt. is without doubt the Roman or Latin
state, as has bin proved heretofore and the Papists so^times confess; the
name whereof without questi on is Roman or Latin. If therefore the name Roman or
Latin in the learned tongues contain the number 666. then the name of the
beast which Antichrist causes men to take upon them, is Roman or Latin. But in
what language are we to account the number of the beasts name? Surely either in
Greek which is most likely, because the revelation was written in greek: or in
Hebrew because the revelation (as some think) was given in hebrew to S. John
being an Hebrewe borne: or else we may take the beasts name according to his
own language set down in Hebrew characters, because the Latins do not use
their letters as the Hebrews and Greeks do in numeratio^. For seeing we know
what the beast it self is, we might well take that name which fitteth this
number any of these ways. Irenaeus (whose master Policarpus been Saint John's
disciple) reports, that those, who had seen John, face to face, did teach,
that the number of the name of Lib. 5.
the beast according to the computation of the Greeks by the letters which be
in it, shall contain 666. He therefore sets down three names in greek
letters containing that number: in two whereof there is no show of reason that
either of them should be this name, seeing neither of them (I mean (...) and
(...)) is the name of the beast. The third name, is (...), whereof he writes
thus: Sed and (...) nomen sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerum; and valde
verisimile est. Quoniam verissunum regnum hoc habet vocabulum, Latini enim sunt
qui nunc regnant. But the name Lateinos also contains the number 666. and it
is verse likely, because the most true kingdom has this name. For they are
Latins which now reign. Which in effect is as much as if he had said, the
name Latin is very likely, because it has the number 666. and is the name of
the beast which figureth verissimum regnum the most true kingdom, that is the
Latin or Roman state. The name of the beast Apoc. 13. 7.
therefore in greek containing the number, is (...), that is to say Latin.

3. In Hebrew the beasts name comprehending that number is (...) that is
Roman. For the beasts name being a nowne or name collectiue, may
indifferently, according to the manner of the Hebrews, be uttered either in the
Masculine or Foeminine gender. And the Foeminine termination does better fit
the prophecy, not only because it renders the just number, but also because
the beast as it is subject to Antichrist being the adulterous Roman state, is
elsewhere in the foeminine called the whore of Babylon, and the mother of
fornications. The most usual name of the beast in it own language, that is,
the Latin tongue, is Romanus, which in Hebrewe characters is, as Master Fox
supposes, (...) to the knowledge whereof as himself reports he attained by
earnest prayer. And that the name Latin or Roman in the learned tongues is
the name whereof the holy ghost speaks, it appears, because every thing
here spoken of the name, agrees fitly and properly thereunto. For first it is
the name of the beast. Secondly, is contains the number 666, as may appear
by this supp^ion ^ Thirdly, it is such a name as he, to whom all other notes of
Antichrist do agree, (I mean the Pope) enforces men to take upon them, as
shall be showed. Fourthly, because the name Latinus or Romanus is also the name
of a man. For Latinus was one of the ancient Kings of Italy, and Romanus was
one of the Popes. Wherefore I doubt not to conclude that the name is Roman or
Latins in the learned tongues. For howsoever many others names may be produced
which comprehend the number 666, yet either they are not the name of the beast,
or are such names as Antichrist was not to impose upon men. But Lib. 2. cap. 10.
of this, more here after.

4. Now let us see what that mark is whereof the holy Ghost speaks. Chara^t
or Character is as it were a cognizance and a note of difference whereby men of
any profession, or religion, are known and distinguished from others. And it
is partly in ward and partly outward. The inward is that which is imprinted in
the soul: the outward is that which is either expressed or received outwardly,
as namely in the forehead, or in the right hand. In the forehead that is by
outward profession, and in the right hand that is by operation, as the ordinary
gloss expounds. As for example, the character or mark of a christian or
servant of Christ is subjection unto Christ and acknowledgement of him to be
our head and Savior. This inwardly is the grace of a true faith wrought in the
soul by the finger of Gods spirit, whereby we believe in Christ our savior.
For those that truly believe are sealed or signed to salvation. That which Ephesians.
1. 13.
outwardly is expressed, is either by consession of the mouth, or operation of
the hands. In respect whereof, profession of the Christian faith may truly be
said to be the outward mark of a Christian, as also determinat us modus us
viue^di etc. (as the scholemen speak) the certain manner of living according
to the law and religion of Christ. So that he which believes with his heart and
confesses with his mouth that Jesus is Christ, and withal frames his life
according to the law and doctrine of Christ, he may be said to have the mark
of God Apoc. 9. 4. both in the heart by believing, and in the forehead by
profession, and in the right hand by operation. See Romans 10. 9. 10. and 2. Tim.
2. 19. And furthermore the outward marks received to testify our subjection
unto Christ and our communion with him, as also to distinguish us from men of
other religions, are the Sacraments of Christ, as baptism and the Lords
supper. And thus you see the mark of a Christian which is but one in
substance, namely the true acknowledgement of Christ, is thus diversely expessed
and testified.

5. The like may be said of the mark of the beast, which is also called the
mark of his name. The beast as we have proved Apoc. 14. 11.
is the Roman state, the name is Roman or Latin. The mark therefore of the
beast is that whereby they of the Romish or Latin religion whom we call
Papists, are distinguished from others, that is their subjection unto the Pope
as their head and acknowledgement of the Sea of Rome. This inwardly in the
soul is their implicit faith: whereby every Papist is bound hand over head to
believe whatsoever the Pope or Church of Rome believes: and the rather because
they are to be persuaded that neither of both can err. That which outwardly is
expressed is either by confession of the mouth or operation of the hands. So
that the profession of the Romish religion and certain manner of living
according to the Laws and customs of the Pope and church of Rome, may also be
said to be the mark of Antichristians: even as the observation of the
Heathenish rites is called 2. Macah. 4. 10. the Character of the Graecians. Who
soever therefore in heart believes whatsoever the Pope and church of Rome do or
shall believe, and outwardly professes the Romish religion and frames his
life according to the laws and customs of the church of Rome, as for example
to fall down before images, to adore the Eucharist, to frequent the Mass etc.
he may be truly said to have the mark of the beast. Moreover the outward marks
received to testify their communion with the church of Rome, are certain
sacraments of their holy mother church, which as they say do imprimere
charactere^ indelebilem, imprint a character that cannot be done away, and
therefore are not to be iterated, as namely their sacraments of co^firmatio^ and
orders. In the former whereof (which they prefer before baptism) all young ones
are anointed in the forehead with oil, which they call Chrisma salutis, The
Chrisme of salvation, and without which they will have none to be accounted
christians. Nunqua^ erit Christianus (say they in their law) nisi co^firmatione
De consecrat. did. 5. c. vt iciuni.
episcopali fuerit Chrismat us. In the latter, those of their clergy besides
their shauing on their heads, are anointed also on their heads, as Bishops, or
on their hands as Priests. Thus you see also how the Characteristicall note or
mark of Antichristians which is one in substance, namely subjection to the
Pope and acknowledgme^t of the Sea of Rome, is diversely expressed and
testified. Whosoever therefore since the revelation of Antichrist is a Roman or
Latin in respect of his religion, acknowledging the Popes supremacy, and
professing himself a member of the church of Rome, that is to say, in one word
every resolved Papist, has the mark of the beast, his name and number of his
name.

6. Now it remains that, by application of this prophecy to the Pope, I
should show that he causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond, that he should give them a mark in their right hand or in their
foreheads: And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or
the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Whereby thus much is meant,
that Antichrist by his usurped dominion and tyranny should make all sorts of
men subject unto him, and to testify their subjection both by words and deed:
and that he should suffer none to live among them or to enjoy the benefits of
humane society, but such as acknowledge the Sea of Rome, profess themselves
members of the Roman church, and use the Latin religion and service. All
which does fully and only agree to the Pope of Rome. For he, by his devilish
policy usurped authority, lying wo^d^rs and al deceiueablenes of
vnright^ousnesse, had not only brought all men both high and low into
subjection, but also persuaded the^ that upon necessity of salvation, and pain
of damnation, they were to subject themselves unto him, and both by word and
deed to testify their subjection. Hereunto belongs that oracle (for so
sometimes they call their their decrees) of Boniface 8. Subess^ (says he)
Roman^ pont^fici, omni humana creaturae declaramus, Extr. de Mayor. and obed.
c. vna^ sanctam.
dicimus, definimus and pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. To
every humane creatur^ we declare, affirm, define, and pronounce, that to be
subject to the Pope of Rome it is a matter altogether necessary to salvation.
Whereupon the gloss says, Quic quid saluatur est sub Romano pontifice.
Whatsoever is saved, is subject to the Pope. The same is concluded by Thomas
Aquinas, and others, That to be subject to the Pope is of the necessitis Lib.
de error. Graecor. c. 72. Antonin. sum. 3. part. tit. 22. c. 6.. 5. An. 884.
of salvation. Stephanus 5. alias. 6. decreed that such Canons as were
concluded upon and given out by the Sea of Rome, are of necessity unto
salvation to be observed. Calixtus 2. straightly forbad any to dissent from the
Church of Rome, for as the Son came to do the will of his Father, so
Christians must do the will of their mother the church of Rome. Ex. 1. Bal.
act. ponti^. Romans Capistran fol. 26.
For to gain^say the Church of Rome is Heresy. Those which deny the Pope to
have both powers, deny the Gospel: and they which deny the Pope to have the
primacy of the universal Cuper^. page 46. in summar. number. 9.
Church, their error is equal to the error of the Grecians, who deny the
holy Ghost to proceed both from the Father and the Cupers. page 56. number. 21.
Son. If therefore thou will not be an Heretic this must be thy faith, that
as there is one God immutable, so there is one vicar general of God upon earth
(namely the vicar of Rome) whose Capistran. fol. 32.
s^ip is stable. For seeing in the triumphant church there is one supreme
Clementin. lib. 5. de hareticis, cap. ad nostrum in Gloss.
prince to whose obedience all that church is most perfectly subject, to wit,
God: it follows necessarily that one supreme prince is pre^nt over the whole
militant Church, towit, the Pope, whose (...) all are bound to ob^y. And this
privilege Christ Anton. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 6.. 5.
has given to the church of Rome, that al must be obed^t unto it, a^ unto
Christ. Therefore he susteineth the sentence of conde^natio^ Ibid. cap. 5.. 17.
ex Gloss. ordin. Papae appli^ta.
qui conte^it f^i pontificis is obedientia^, tanqua^si contemneret Dei (...),
w^o (...) the Popes obedience a^ if he contemned Gods omnipotency. And to
conclude, as I began, with an other oracle or canon of their law, Peccatum
igitur paganitatis (...), quisquis dum Christianum se esse asserit, sedi
apostolica Did. 81. c. si qui sunt.
ob^dire cont^it, He incurreth therefore the sin of Pagani^, whosoever
professing himself to be a Christian, renounceth obedience to the S^
apostolic.

7 And as he has made all to subject themselves unto him, all I mean whose
names are not written in the book of the lamb, (for this is the universality
that the Papists brag of) so he has caused all both small and great, rich
and poor etc. to testify their subjection; as namely by pinning their faith
on his sleeue, and binding themselves to believe as he believes: by professing
his Antichristian faith and religion of popery; by observing his popish that
is to shy superstitious and idolatrous rites and customs, as frequenting
masses, adoring images and relics, worshipping the cross and Eucharist,
praying to Saint^ yea to stocks and stones, going on pilgrimage, praying in
latin and that on beads, etc. by taking his mark both on the forehead in the
sacrament of confirmation, and on the hand in the sacrament of orders, but
especially by taking an oath of fidelity and obedience unto him. For therein
especially they receive his mark both in the forehead by solemn profession,
and in the right hand which they lay on the book. This oath not only
graduates, priests, Bishops, but Kings also and Emperors were compelled to
take. And whereas it is Vid. Meditat. 1. Foxij in 14. cap. Apoc. Decret.
Gregor. libro 2. tit. 24. de iureiur. c. Ego N. Clementin. lib. 2. de iureiur.
c. Romani.
said that Antichrist should take order that none might buy or sell, unless he
have the mark, or the name of the beast or the number of his name: that
speech does so fit the Popes of Rome as that it might seem rather to be a
narration of that which they have done, th^n (...) prophecy of that which they
were to do. For Martin 5. in his bull annexed to the council of Constance
gives straight ch^rge to all governors, that they should not suffer any
Christians (such as John Wickleffe, John Husse and Jerome of Prage who in that
bull are condemned for heretics) who acknowledge not the Sea of Rome, nor
embrace the doctrines and traditions of holy mother church, not believing as
the church of Rome believes, nor living in the communion of that church, that
is to say, which have not the mark, nor the name of the beast, nor number of
his name, they should not suffer them I say, domicilia tenere, larem fouere,
contractus inire, negotiationes and mercaturas quaslibet exercere, aut humanit
at is solatia cum Christi fidelibus habere. To keep house nor harth, to make
contracts, to exercise any traffic or merchandise, or to have any comforts of
humane society with other Christians. In like sort Paulus 3. when Henry 8. of
famous memory had shaken of his yoke, and renounced his mark, he forbadde al
men to use any traffic or merchaundise, or to make any contractes or
covenants with him and his subjects: he deposed as much as in him lay, by his
bull of excommunication, the king, disabled his posterity, absolved his
subjects from obedience, exposed his subjects and their goods to violence and
spoil, according to the inscription in his coin, Gens and regnum quod non
serui^rit mihi exterminabitur, The nation or kingdom which serves not me,
shall be rooted out. The like thunderbolt Pius 5. sent out against our
Sovereign Lady of blessed memory Queen Elizabeth: and Sixtus 5. against
Henry the king of Navarre (now king of France) and Henry prince of Condee.
And heereunto serve their blodie inquisitours at this day: who are to suffer
none to live, or to have the benefit of humane society, who are but suspected
of schism or heresy. And who is an heretic? That does not believe as the
Pope and church of Rome believes; though he believe according to the
scriptures. And who is a schismaticke? That does not acknowledge the Antonin.
part. 3. tit. 22. c. 5.. 11.
Pope to be the head of the church. Seeing therefore the Pope of Rome causes
all sorts of men to take upon them the mark of the beast, and suffers none
to buy or sell that have not the mark or name of the beast or number of his
name, it cannot be avoided but that he is Antichrist.

8 And these were the principal effects of Antichrist noted in the scriptures:
whereunto some others may be added out of Apoc. 13. which have in part been
touched heretofore: as first, that he exercises all the power of the former
beast secondly that he causes men to worship the former beast, thirdly that
he forces men upon pain of death to worship the image of the beast. All
which, as well as the former, agree to the Pope. For as touching the first, who
knows not that the Pope has swayed the Roman state for many hundred years?
exercising a more sovereign and absolute authority over men of all sorts,
then ever the heathenishe Emperors did. For he forsooth has the authority
of the king Bald. in c. ecclesia, vt lit. pendent. Blood. Romans ins^aur. lib. 3.
of kings over his subjects; he is perp^uus dictator, whom the princes of
the world adore and worship: he is as Boniface the eightth in the great
Iubile Anno. 1300. (having showed himself the one day in his pontifical
vestimentes, and the second in the imperial robes) proclaimed of himself, I
am Pope and Emperor, I have both the heavenly and the earthly Empire, and as
they speak in their law, the Monarchy of both powers: he has the
princehood of the whole world, as we have heard before. And where does he
exercise this authority? in the sight of the beast, that is, at Rome, which is
his Papal seat, and in the gouernemente whereof he succeeds the Emperors.

9 And that the Pope makes the inhabitants of the earth to worship the former
beast, it is as evident; seeing his main policyes and chief endeavors serve to
magnify the Roman state. To this end, besides many other policyes in part
observed before, do his Iubileyes tend: wherein he uses to promise plena^y
remission of al sins to all that either come on pilgrimage to Rome, or
miscarie in their journey: as also the incredible indulgences and pardons which
he grants to those which shall come as Pilgrims to Rome, to visit the
holy places there, especially the 7. churches which are privileged above the
rest. To which purpose there is reported in an old English book, (and the
report no doubt was current in times Arnaldus Londinens.
of popery) the whole pardon of Rome granted by diverse Popes, a part whereof
I will breefly recite for their behoof, to whom the absurdities of Popery
are not known. The seven privileged churches, whereof not only that Author
speaks, but (...) also of late has wrieten a whole book, are 1. the church
of Saint Peter in the Vatican: (...). the De 7. vrbis eccles^.
church of Saint Paul without the walls: 3. the church of Saint Laurence
without the walls: 4. the church of holy cross in Jerusalem. 5. the church of
Saint Mary Mayor. 6. the church of Sait Sebastian without the city: 7. the
church of Saint John Laterane. To all them that daily go to the church of
Saint Peter, Syl^ granted the third part of all then sins released, 1.
and 2800. years pardon. And the (...) of as many Lentons or Quarins. Now a
Quarin says my author is to go woolward and barefoot seven year, and to fast
bread and water on the frydayes (...) to (...) one night where he sleeps
another, (...) co^ under no co^ed place unless (...) be to hear mass in the
church door or porche (...) (...) or drink out of no other vessel but in the
same that he mede his auowe in. He that does all these points seven years
together, death and ^inneth a quarin, that is to say, a Lenton. Besides, there
is an image of our Lord about the church door, having between his feet one of
the pence that God was sold for; as o^ as you look upon that p^ny you have
1400 years of pardon. In that church be eleven altars, of which 7. are
specially privileged with grace and pardon. At the first altar is the visage
of out Lord who looks on that, has 700. years of pardon, etc. Before the
quire door stand 2. (...) ^rosses; who kisseth the crosses has 500 years
pardon. From the (...) to the assumption of our Lady, hangs a cloth of our
Ladies own making before the quire, and as many times (...) a man beholds it
he has 400. years of pardon, etc.

10 They that visit the church of Saint Paul without the walls ha^ 48000.
years of pardon. Item on Childer^asse day 2.
4000 years of pardon. Item on the vias of Saint Martin when the church was
hallowed 14000. years of pardon, and as many quarins, and the third part of
all sins released. Those that visit the church of Saint Lau^ence, at the high
altar have 18000. 3.
years of pardon and as many quarins. And who goes thither every wednesday he
delivered a soul out of purgatory, and himself quite of all ^nes. In the
church Sanct^crucis that is of holy cross is given an hundred thousand years
of pardon and as 4.
many quarins, and every Sunday a soul out of Purgatory, and the third part of
all sins released. To the^ that visit the church of 5
S. Mary Mayor, is granted, at the high Altar 14000. years of pardon, and as
many quarins: And at the altar on the right hand 19000. years of pardon. And
Pope Nicolas the 4. and S. Gregory each of them granted thereto 10000. years
of pardon. And from the Ascensio^ of our Lord unto Christmas, ye have there
14000. years of pardon, and as many quarins, and the third part of all sins
released. To them that visit the church of S. Sebastian is granted 6
forgiveness of sins and all penance. At the high Altar is given 2800.
years of pardon, and at the first Altar in the Church, 2400. There is a vawte
where lie buried 49. Popes that were Martyrs: whosoever comes first into that
place delivers 8. souls out of Purgatory of such as he most desires, and
as much pardon thereto, that all the world cannot number nor reckon. And every
Sunday you deliver there a soul out of purgatory. In that vawte stands a
pit in which Peter and Paul were hid 250 years, he that puts his head
into that pit and takes it out again, is clean of all sins. To that
place sieve Popes each of them granted a thousand years of pardon, and as many
karins. And so the grace that is at S. Sebastians is grounded that it cannot be
taken away. To those that 7
visit the Church of S. John Laterane, Pope Siluester gave as many years of
pardon, as it rained drops of water the day that he hallowed the same Church.
And that time it rayned so sore, that no man had seen a greater rain before
that day. And when he had granted this, he doubted whether he had so much
power. Then a voice came from heaven, and said, Pope Syluester, thou haste
power enough to give that pardon. And God granted this much thereto, that if a
man had made a vow to Jerusalem, and lacked good to do his Pilgrimage, if he
go from S. Peter's Church to S. John Lateranes, he shall be absolved from that
promise. And any time that a man comes to Saint John Lateranes, he is quite
of all sins, and of all penance, with that that he be penitent for his
sins. Blessed is the mother that bears the child that bareth Mass on
Saterdayes at Saint John Lateranes. For he delivered all them that he desired
out of Purgatory to the number of 77. souls. Item on the tower of the Church
stands a double cross, that was made of the sword wherewith Saint John was
beheaded, and every time a man beholds that cross he has 14000. years
Pardon. At the high altar a man may have remission of all sins, and of all
penance, and innumerable pardon more then he needs for himself. There is a
grave wherein Saint John laid himself, he that puts therein his head he
has an hundred thousand years of pardon, and as many karins. These
indulgences with many such like (which for breuity sake I omit) my Author
says are written in a Marble stone before the Quire door etc. Besides these
seven, there are many inferior Churches whereunto great indulge^ces have been
granted by the Popes. There are named in the aforesaid Book 26. Churches,
wherein is granted, to them that visit any of them, 1000. years pardon, and
in some 3000, in others 5000. some, wherein promise is made of release from a
third part of sins, and in some from all sins. Here is a Church of Saint
Gregory, in which whosoever is buried, he shall never be damned. Thus (says
my Author) may a man have at Rome great pardon and soul health, blessed been
the people and in good time borne that receives these graces and well keeps
them etc.

11. Hereby it appears that the Pope causes the inhabitants of the earth to
worship the beast with seven heads, that is, seven hills: that with the city
of Rome (which we have proved to be the whore of Babylon) the inhabitants of
the earth have committed spiritual fornication, and that with the cup of her
fornications they have been infatuated and made drunk. And that the Pope has
caused men upon pain of death to worship the image of the 3.
beast which he has animated and put life into, it is easy to prove, whether
you understand it literally or mystically. For literally, as they have put
life and motion into images and made them to speak in the sight of men: so
have they suffered none to live that would not participate with them in their
idolatry which they call worshipping of images. Mystically the image signifies
either the Popes court, or Empire renewed, or both: the one resembling the
authority and power, the other bearing the name and representing the dignity
of the old Empire. Of the Popes court at Rome, and of his Legates and Officers
abroad there is no question to be made, but that none are suffered to live
which worship not them. And it is true also of the Empire. But by worshipping
the image of the beast, we do not understand obedience to the Emperor in his
lawful decrees: but the obedience performed unto him as he is an image of the
persecuting Emperors, inspired by the Pope, and serving as his minister to
establish and propagate the Romish religion. In this sense as he who obeys
him worshippeth the image of the beast, and is in the same predicament with
those that receive the mark of the beast, Apoc. 14. 9: So he that obeys him
not is put to death; and dying in this quarrel is in the same happy state with
Apoc. 14, 13. 15. 2.
those which refuse to receive the mark of the beast.

CHAP. 9. Of those things which Antichrist was and is to suffer.
1. WE have heard what Antichrist was to do to others: now let us consider
what the holy Ghost foretells shall be done unto him. There is mention made
Apoc. 17. 12. of the Apoc. 17. 12. etc.
ten horns, that is the rulers of the ten provinces subject to the Empire in
the West; who although in the Apostles time had not received kingdom or
sovereign authority, but were deputies only under the Emperor: yet after the
decay of the Empire in the west, they together with Antichrist divide the
Roman Empire among them, reigning by sovereign authority, he in Rome and part
of Italy, they in the other provinces, Of these ten horns it is said, that
they for a time should give their power and strength verse 13.
to the beast, meaning Antichrist: and that in his quarrel they shall fight
against Christ the lamb in his members. But the v. 14.
blood of Martyrs being the seed of the Church, and the truth prevailing when
it is most oppugned: Christ by the constancy of his Martyrs and preaching of
his word overcomes. For though in respect of the manner of his resistance he
seems a meek lamb: yet he shall be sure to overcome, because he is the
king of kings and Lord of Lords; being able by weak and foolish things (as
they are esteemed in the world) to overcome the wise and strong. And howsoever
those few in comparison that stood with him were condemned for heretics and
schismatickes, yet are they the called, chosen, and faithful servants of the
Lord. Whereas contrariwise the general multitudes (whereof the catholic
apostasy consists) are the slaves of Antichrist, and subject to the whore of
Babylon. For the waters whereon she sits, are peoples and multitudes,
nations v. 15.
and tongues. But when as our Savior Christ shall discover Antichrist, and by
the ministry of the word, as it were the breath of his mouth, waste and
consume him: then shall the ten kings, which before had joined with him, set
themselves against him: and those which before had committed fornication with
the v. 2.
whore of Babylon, shall hate her and make her desolate and naked, v. 16.
and shall eat her flesh and shall burn her with fire. And that this decay of
the Antichristian state does follow upon the preaching of the gospel, it
appears Apoc. 14. 6. 7. 8. where it is said that upon the preaching of the
everlasting Gospel, an angel says, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that
great city: for she gave to all nations to drink the wine of the wrath of her
fornication. v. 17.
For until this time that Christ discover Antichrist and in some measure
consume him with the spirit of his mouth, the ten kings are given over of God
to support with one consent the beast and purple harlot; whom, after
Antichrist is discovered, they shall hate and oppugn.

2 But let us come to the application. For even as from this place I proved
before that Antichrist is already come* so may I now from hence conclude that
the Pope is that Antichrist. That Antichrist is come, it is as certain as that
the provinces of the Empire are not ruled by deputyes of the Emperor, but by
sovereign princes, who have together with Antichrist divided the Empire among
them. And that the Pope is that Antichrist it is as certain. For he it is,
who, as well as the kings, has risen by the decay of the Empire in the west:
he it is, and no other, to whom these kings have with one consent given their
strength and power, submitting themselves unto him as his vassalls, swearing to
mainetaine and support him, fighting his battles and drawing their sword at
his beck. And being made drunk with the cup of his fornications they fought
against the lamb, and persecuted those servant of Christ whom Antichrist
condemns as heretics and schismatics: who notwithstanding are in truth the
called, chosen, and faithful; though few and despised in the world. When as
contrariwise the universality of people whereon the whore of Babylon sits,
and whereof the adulterous church of Rome consists, are but the branded
slaves of Antichrist. But howsoever these kings, whiles they were besotted and
given over of God in his just judgment that they should submit themselves to
the Antichrist of Rome, did seek by all means to support him: yet when Christ
had discovered him to be Antichrist, and by the preaching of his word as it
were the spirit of his mouth began to waste and consume him, and more and more
since the times of Luther to abate the opinion which men had conceived of him;
then these princes, not al, but some of them, began to revolt from Antichrist,
and to hate the Antichristian whore See chap. 2.. 11.
of Babylon the city and church of Rome, and as much as in them lies have left
her desolate and naked: and the rest in Gods good time shall accomplish his
will. For this prophecy concerning that which Antichrist was to suffer, is as
yet fulfilled but in part. And still there remains to be fulfilled the
final destruction of Rome the seat of Antichrist, before the end of the world,
soretold Apoc. 18. and the final overthrow of Antichrist at the glorious
appearing of Christ at his second coming, prophesied 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Apoc. 19.
20. Seeing therefore Antichrist the great enemy of Christ and his church is to
be overthrown by these three means, by the powerful ministry of the word,
by the puissaunt strength and power of Christian princes, by the glorious
coming of Christ to judgment; all faithful ministers are to be stirred up
seriously and earnestly to oppose themselves against Antichrist, that by their
ministry as it were the spirit of Christ's mouth, he may be more and more
wasted and consumed. All true Christian princes are to be excited not only to
hate the whore of Babylon, but also according to the prophecy of the holy
ghost to make her desolate and naked, to eat her flesh and burn her with
fire, and to do to her children as she has done to the servants of Christ. And
finally all sound Christians are to be exhorted, earnestly Apoc. 18. 6.
and continually to pray that the Lord Jesus would not only consume
Antichrist, giving success to the ministry of his servants: but also that he
would hasten his second coming and destroy him at his glorious appearing. Even
so Lord Jesus, come quickly. And thus have I showed that the prophecyes of Ap.
22. 17. 20.
the holy ghost in the scriptures concerning Antichrist Conclus.
do most fitly and properly agree to the Pope of Rome: whereupon I do
necessarily conclude, that therefore the Pope of Rome is the graund Antichrist
described in the scriptures.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK maintaining that the Pope is Antichrist.
The first Chapter, answering Bellarmine his first argument concerning the name
Antichrist.
Having in the former Book sufficiently proved by evident demonstration out
of the word of God, that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist: it remains that we
should maintain this our assertion against the arguments of the Papists. For
as the force and evidence of our proofs may persuade us to embrace this truth;
so the weakness and sophistry, which appears in the objections of our
adversaries may confirm us in this persuasion. And the rather if we consider
either the weight of this controversy it self, or their will and skill to
maintain their part; or lastly the advantage which they seem to have in this
controversy. For first the controversy it self is of such consequence, as
that if our assertion be true, then is all Popery overthrown, and all
controversies betwixt us and them easily decided: then are all Papists limbs
of Antichrist, and all their doctrines peculiar to them, errors of Antichrist.
And if you respect their will, you need not doubt, but that they, being wholly
devoted unto the Pope, have done their best endeavor to free their head and
Lord from all imputation of Antichristianisme. And for their skill, they being
men of great learning and much reading, you may be well assured that they have
scarcely omitted any thing, which may be said in so weighty a cause. And
questionless, they have no small advantage in this controversy being to
prove the negative part. For whereas we cannot prove the affirmative but by
the concurrence of those manifold properties and marks which the holy Ghost
has assigned unto Antichrist: they on the other side have liberty to
disprooue the same, and to prove the negative, if they can but show plainly
and evidently, that any one several and essential mark, ascribed unto
Antichrist in the Scriptures, does not agree to their Lord God the Pope. For
if the Scriptures foretell us as touching the place, that Antichrist shall have
his seat in Babylon, that is, Rome, which being situated on seven hills, had in
the Apostles time under the Emperor, and since under the Pope, dominion over
the Kings of the earth, and that in Rome, professing her self the Church of
God, because it is said, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God: as
concerning the time, that he should sit in Rome, after the remoouing and taking
away of the Emperors, whom he was to succeed in the government of Rome, as
has been showed out of these places, 2. These. 2. 7. 8. Apoc. 13. and 17. and
in respect of his conditions and qualities, that he should be for opposition an
adversary, although a disguised enemy; for pride and ambition, advancing
himself above all that is called God: for his other vices, a man of sin in
general, and more specially an horrible idolatour: in regard of his effects,
that he and his followers should be workers of signs and wonders, in the sight
of men, that he should compel all sorts of men to receive the mark or name of
the beast, or number of his name: and lastly, for that which he was to suster,
that Christ shall consume him with the breath of his mouth, that is, the
Ministry of the Gospel; and that thereupon the ten horns which first
assisted him, shall afterward assault him: It follows therefore, that unto
such as we affirm to be Antichrist, all these notes are to be applied, (as we
have applied them all to the Pope of Rome) whereas contrariwise the denial of
any one essential property, is an argument sufficient to prove the negative.
As for example, if any man will ^ake upon him to prove, that the Turk is
Antichrist, because some of the marks seem to fit him, he shall never be
able to prove it, because all the properties do not agree unto him. For
neither has he his seat in Rome, neither does he sit in the Church of God,
neither is he a covert and disguised, but an open and professed enemy: neither
may he be matched with the true Antichrist, either in advancing himself above
all that is called God, or in idolatry, or in lying signs and wonders, etc.
And from any of these we may reason thus. Antichrist was to have his seat in
Rome, which is mystical Babylon: the Turk has not his seat there: therefore
he is not Antichrist. Antichrist sits in the Church of God: the Turk does
no^, etc. wherefore much more easy it were to prove the negative, if it were
true, then the affirmative. If therefore the Papists having bent all their
forces, and employed the uttermost of their skill, to prove that which were
most easy to prove, if it were true, shall notwithstanding be found unable to
produce any one sound and sufficient argument, to clear their Pope from
Antichristianisme: have not we just cause to confirm our selves in that truth,
which before has been demonstrated, viz. that the Pope is Antichrist?

2. Let us therefore consider their arguments, and conceits whereupon their
arguments are grounded: not as they are propounded by the elder Papists, which
lived in the days of our forefathers (for their conceits concerning Antichrist
were mere dotages) but as they are delivered by the refiners of Popery the
Jesuits, and namely by Bellarmine, whose books are as it were a shot whereunto
many of them, as it seems, have contributed. Bellarmine therefore in his
third book De pontifice Romano, reduces all his arguments to nine heads. 1.
Concerning the name Antichrist. 2. Concerning his person, whether he be but one
man, or a state and succession of men. 3. Concerning the time of his coming,
and death. 4. Of his proper name. 5. Of his nation and followers. 6 Of his
seat. 7. Of his doctrine and manners. 8. Of his miracles. 9. Of his reign and
battles. From all which he hops (although in vain) to prove, that the Pope
is not Antichrist.

3. And first from the name he argues thus: Antichrist is hostis and aemulus
Christi, that is, such an enemy as is opposed unto Christ in emulation of like
honor: The Pope is not an enemy, nor opposed unto Christ in emulation of like
honor: therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. The proposition which we not
only grant, but also take to be the ground of some of our proofs, that he
labors to prove, and in that proof spends almost the whole first
chapter. But the assumption, wherein is all the controversy betwixt us and
them, that in a manner he See lib. 1. cap. 4.. 1.
takes for granted. In both playing the part of a right sophister. For which
of our writers ever denied, that (...) signifies hostem et aemulum Christi?
what though Musculus also says, that Antichrist Loc. Comm. cap. de potestate
Ministrorum.
is he, who being an enemy unto Christ, professes himself to be his vicar,
and says that the word may signify so much; yet he denies not the former
signification, but retains the same with this addition: That Antichrist is
such as one as challenges unto himself the office and authority of Christ
himself, and being indeed an enemy, and a counter-Christ, professes himself
to be the Vicar or Vicegerent of Christ upon earth. And this may be proved by
the signification of the name. For (...) in composition, commonly signifies
three things; opposition, equality, substitution. Opposition, as in the word
(...): equality, as (...): substitutio^, as (...), Preconsul, (...), Propraetor
or Legatus Praetoris; (...), the putting of one case for another: and in this
sense the sacraments of the new Testament, substituted and ordained instead of
the old, are called the (...) of them. And all these significations sometimes
1. Pet. 3. 21
are incident to one and the same word. As (...), signifies sometimes,
contrariae partis ducem, the chieftaine of the contrary part: sometime
propraetorem, that is, one who in the province has the same authority which
the Praetor has in the city: sometimes also him qui est vice praetoris, as the
Lieutenant or deputy. In like sort, all these significations may be applied to
the word (...), and it in them all most fitly agrees to the Pope. Who being
indeed an enemy unto Christ, and challenging unto himself the office and
authority of Christ, as if he were a counter-Christ, does also profess
himself to be the Vicar of Christ.

4. Yea, but says Bellarmine, Antichrist cannot by any means signify the
vicar of Christ: first because (...) properly signifies opposition. I answer,
Vllo modo.
that (...) simply signifies for; and in composition, as many times it
signifies against, so sometimes also equal or like, and sometimes for or in-
steed, as Greek writers and Lexicographers do teach, etc. Secondly, we must
(says he) understand the word as it is used in the Scriptures. But in the
Scriptures it is used to signify an enemy of Christ, which we do confess:
albeit his proves are ridiculous, all eadging, 2. These. 2. Mat. 24. where the
word (...) is not once used. Notwithstanding we accept his ground: that we are
so to understand the word Antichrist, as it is used in the Scriptures. Now it
is used in the epistles of John only, and there ascribed not to open and
professed enemies, but to such as being enemies, notwithstanding professed the
name of Christ, as the heretics of those times. Thirdly, al those authors
(says he) which have written of Antichrist, have under that name understood a
notable false Christ, who shall affirm himself to be Christ. If they mean
that Antichrist shall be such a false Christ, as shall plainly and directly
affirm himself to be Christ the only Messiah, that affirmation agrees not
with that Antichrist whom the Scriptures describe. If they hold that although
in words he profess himself a follower and servant of Christ, and yet indeed
obtrudeth himself upon the Church, as if he were Christ, taking upon him the
titles, attributes, offices and authority of Christ, which in effect is as
much as if he should say; I am Christ (Christ being a name of office) we also
confess so much, and withal profess, that the name Antichrist in this
signification, most fitly agrees unto the Pope. Fourthly, he alleges Henry
Stephen: but neither he nor any approved Author denies, but that Antichristus
may signify him, who being an enemy of Christ, professes himself to be his
vicar. And therefore all these four arguments are frivolous: for although
Antichrist do signify an enemy to Christ, yet that does not hinder but that it
may signify him which is the Vicar of Christ; because he which in profession
is the vicar of Christ, may indeed be the enemy of Christ. 2. Because the
compositio^ of the word imports so much. 3, Because the beast which figureth
Antichrist, is said to have two horns like the Lamb: for horn in the
Scripture signifies power, and the two horns his twofold sovereign power:
whosoever therefore challenges this twofold power, as the Vicegerent of Christ
he has two horns like the lamb: and the same person, as he is the Vicar of
Christ in profession, so is he also that Antichrist, which is resembled by the
two horned beast. The Scriptures therefore describe Antichrist, both as an
enemy of Christ, and as the Vicar of Christ: an enemy indeed, and Vicar in
profession.

5. And so much of his proposition, which we hold to be most true, that
Antichrist according to the signification of the word, is host is and aemulus
Christi, but withal we add, that the word may signify also such an adversary
as obtrudeth himself unto the Church, as a Prochristus, that is, as a vicar of
Christ. Let us therefore come to his assumption, and consider how he proves
that the Pope is not hostis and aemulus Christi, An enemy, and one that seeks
to match himself with Christ. Forsooth, because the Pope confesses himself
to be the servant of Christ, and subject unto him in all things: neither does
he by any means say, that he is Christ, nor make himself equal unto him. As
if he should say, he that professes himself to be the servant of Christ, is
not an enemy of Christ, and he that does not call himself Christ, nor make
himself equal unto him, he is not aemulus Christi. As touching the former, I
answer, that unless the Pope did confess himself to be the servant of
Christ, he could not be such an adversary as Antichrist is described to be in
the Scriptures, that is, a covert and disguised enemy, who under the name and
profession of Christ, oppugneth Christ and his truth. And what though he
profess himself to be the servant of Christ, does it therefore follow, that
he is not an enemy to Christ? Surely no more then it follows, he is Seruus
seruorum Dei indeed, because he calls himself so. Deceivers, such as
Antichrist is, pretend The servant of Gods scr^ts.
good names: false Prophets, such as Antichrist is, are Wolves in Sheep
skins: neither are any enemies so pernicious or dangerous, as those which
make semblance of friendship. And that the Pope is aemulus Christi, that is, an
adversary opposed unto Christ in emulation of like honor, we have proved
heretofore at large, showing how in many things he matcheth himself with
Christ, and in somethings aduanceth himself above him. So that the former part
of his speech does not prove his assumption, as being inconsequent, the
latter needs proof, as being untrue. And yet this is all that he brings to
prove, that the Pope is not hostis and aemulus Christi. But the untruth of
this assumption, we have heretofore demonstrated at large, when as we concluded
thus: He that is such an adversary as is described in the Scriptures, opposed
unto Christ in emulation of like honor, he is Antichrist as the Papists
confess: But the Pope is such an adversary as is described in the Scriptures,
opposed unto Christ in emulation of like honor, as we then proved at large:
therefore the Pope is Antichrist. Lib. 1. cap. 4. et. 5.


The second Chapter: maintaining that Antichrist is not one definite and
singular person.
1. THe second argument which Bellarmine uses, to prove, that the Pope is not
Antichrist, is drawn from the person of Antichrist, namely, that Antichrist
is one certain man, whereas the Popes have been many. His reason is thus
framed: Antichrist is but one singular person.

The Pope (meaning the order or succession of Popes) is not one singular person.

Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

To the proposition I answer, that as the Pope is one, so is Antichrist. The
Pope is one person not in number and nature, as one certain and singular man,
but one at once by law and institution, though successively so many as have
enjoyed the Papacy. For even as the Papists when they say, that the Pope has
been the head of the Church and Vicar of Christ these 1500. years, do not
mean See lib. 1. cap. 1. (...). 4.
any one Pope, but the order and succession: so we when we say, that the Pope
has been Antichrist almost these thousand years, we mean not any one Pope
only, but the whole row or rabble of them since the year 607. And thus
Antichrist, that is, the head of the Antichristian body, which was revealed
after the taking away of the Roman Empire, and is to continue after a sort,
until the end of the world, is one person: one I say at once ordinarily, but
continued in a succession of many. The proposition thus denied by us,
Bellarmine labors to confirm by authority of the Scriptures, and
testimonies of the Fathers. Out of the Scriptures he produces five
testimonies. The first out of the Gospel of John, chapter 5. verse 43. I am
John. 5. 43.
come in my Fathers name, and you receive me not: if another shall come in his
own name, him will you receiue^. In which words Bellarmine understands
Christ to speak of Antichrist, as of one singular person: And that he would
prove by testimonies of the Fathers, and four reasons. But Bellarmine and the
rest of the Papists, which make this collection out of this place, either
ignorantly mistake, or wilfully deprave this text. For first, whereas our
Savior Christ speaks indefinitely, of any false teacher which should come
unto them in his own name, that is, not sent of God, they expound him, as if
he had spoken definitely of one singular Antichrist. Secondly, whereas Christ
speaks not only indefinitely, but also conditionally, If another come, they
expound him, as if in a simple and proper axiom or proposition he had
prophesied of the coming of Antichrist: as if he had said, that other
counterfeit Messiah, that is to say, that singular Antichrist, sha'l come in
his own name, and him you will receive. And thirdly, whereas Christ speaks
of those Jews to whom he speaks, they understand him to speak of those
which shall be in the end of the world. But let us consider his proofs. The
Fathers, says he, do testify that these words are spoken, de vno
Antichristo, of one Antichrist. First I answer, that although diverse of the
Fathers expound these words of Antichrist, yet none of them has that word Vno,
one: and therefore the Jesuits collection is absurd. The Fathers understand
this place of Antichrist, therefore Antichrist is one singular person. For the
Fathers also understand that place Mat. 24. 24. of Antichrist, where our
Savior Christ speaks in the plural number, of false Christ's, and false
Prophets which should arise; and confer that place with this. And therefore
they may seem to understand this speech of our Savior, as if he had said: If
another come Mat. 24. 5. 24.
in his own name (as many indeed shall come) such will you receive. And sure
it is, that the Jews have received more then one of such as have come in their
own name. And secondly I answer, that the Fathers had no reason to restrain
these words unto Antichrist alone, as though Christ had prophesied of the Jews
receiving of Antichrist for their Messiah, seeing his speech is neither simple
nor definite, but conditional and indefinite. Whereby our Savior Christ would
show the untoward disposition of the Jews, who as they rejected him who was
sent of God, so they would be ready to receive any other that should come in
his own name, not sent of God. And so Nonnus in his Paraphrase upon this
place, expounds these words. Ei (...), etc. But if any other come, etc. And
lastly, if these answers will not suffice, let the adversary conclude his
argument drawn from the authority of the fathers in a Syllogism, and when he
has so done, let him prove the proposition, which must be this: whatsoever
those fathers write concerning Antichrist is true: and then the assumptio^,
which is to this effect, but this those fathers write that Christ speaks
those words, de vno Antichristo, of one singular Antichrist, and then (which
will never be) I will yield to the conclusion.

2. But omitting his testimonies, let us come to those arguments which he
draws out of the text, to prove that Christ in these words speaks of one
singular Antichrist. First says he, Christ opposes unto himself another man,
that is, person to person, as appears by these words, I, another, etc. His
reason is thus to be framed, where these two words, I, and another, are opposed
one to the other, we are to understand that as I signifies one singular
person, so also another: but in this place, I, and another are opposed:
therefore etc. I answer, where the other is taken definitely for that other, as
(...), is used John 18. 16. and 20. 2. 3. 4. there the proposition may be true.
But where it is used indefinitely, as (...), another, in this place, it is most
false: for in such speeches, to a certain and definite person, is opposed an
indefinite and uncertain. As for example Job. 31. 8. What I sow^, let another
reap, meaning any other. 1 Cor. 3. 10. I have laid the foundation and another
builds thereon, but let every one take heed how he builds thereon. Such
examples are ordinary. As if I shoud say, this argument I call a childish
reason, another would call it a dotage, and so I let it pass. His second
reason is this: Whom the Jews shall receive for their Messiah, he is but one
particular man: Antichrist shall be received of the Jews for their Messiah, as
Christ here says: therefore Antichrist is but one singular man. Answer. Christ
does not here foretell that Antichrist shall be received of the Jews for their
Mesias. For first, his speech is conditional, therefore not a prophecy.
Neither does he foretell what they were to do, but shows them what in respect
of their present disposition they were ready to do, if any false teacher
should obtrude himself unto them. Secondly, it is indefinite, and therefore not
to be restrained to a certain person. Thirdly, he does not say, that they
shall receive another for their Messiah coming in his own name, but only
that they shall receive him. Fourthly, those Jews to whom and of whom our
Savior speaks, were not to be alive at the coming of the great Antichrist,
according to the opinion of the Papists themselves, therefore our Savior
speaks not of the Jews receiving of Antichrist, and much less of Antichrist
as one particular person. Thirdly (says he) all false prophets come in the
name of another, not in their own name. But Christ here speaks of one that
should come in his own name, therefore he speaks not of false prophets. He
might as well have concluded against the Scriptures, that Antichrist is not a
false prophet. For false prophets, says Bellarmine, come not in their own
name, Antichrist comes in his own name: therefore if Bellarmines argument be
good, Antichrist is not a false Prophet. But I answer, that Antichrist and all
other false Prophets may be said to come both in their own name, and also in
the name of God. In their own name because they are not sent of God, in which
sense our Savior Christ here speaks, I am come, says he, in my fathers
name, sent from the bosom of my father who has sealed and sent me to this
work of mediation, and you receive me not: If another shall come in his own
name, not sent from God, or as Lyra expounds those words, in nomine suo, in
his own name, that is, not having the aforesaid testimonies from God, whereby
to warrant his calling from him, such will you receive. They are said also to
come in the name of God and of Christ, because they pretend (although falsely)
a calling and commission from God. Ierem. 14. 14. 15. Mat. 24. 5. For whereas
Bellarmine expounds these words thus, in his own name, that is, shall not
acknowledge any God, but advance himself above all that is called God, and
assigns such a coming to the expected Messiah of the Jews, it is absurd.
For the Jews expect a Messiah to be sent them from God. And therefore if any
shall take upon him to be their Messiah, and be received of them, he will
without doubt profess himself to be sent of God. And such a one may be said
to come in his own name, because he is not sent of God, and in Gods name,
because he pretends a calling and commission from him. Fourthly (says he) if
Christ had spoken of false Prophets, whereof many were to come, he would not
have said, if another come, but many come: but the second is false, therefore
the first. I answer, if Christ had spoken simply and definitely, one other
shall come, there had been some show of reason in the argumentation of the
adversary. But seeing he does not so speak as Bellarmine dreameth; but
conditionally and indefinitely, if another shall come, there is not so much as
any show of reason in this argument.

3. The second place which Bellarmine produces, is 2. These. 2. 3. 8. Where the
Apostle entreating of Antichrist, speaks of one certain and particular
person, as appears by the Greek article, (...), the man of sin, the son
of perdition, the outlaw. His reason is thus to be framed: Unto whatsoever the
Greek article is prefixed, it is signified to be one certain and singular
thing or person: unto the Antichrist that man of sin, the son of perdition,
the outlaw, the Greek article is profixed: therefore the Antichrist is but one
certain and singular person. The proposition he proves by the authority of
Epiphanius, who says that the Greek articles restrain the signification to
one certain thing, so Haeresi 9. q^ est S maritanrum.
that (...) signifies man in general, but (...) one singular man. And
therefore Bellarmine maruelleth greatly that none of us who would seem to have
skill in the tongues has observed so much. But it were more to be marvelled
that Bellarmine should in this weighty cause affirm that which he knows to
be false, but that he has Epiphanius upon whom to the father this untruth; and
yet Epiphanius does not say that the addition of the article does always
restrain the signification to one certain and singular thing, but that it
signifies (...), the discretion or difference of the name. Howbeit that is not
perpetual: For many times the article is added for ornament only and fullness
of speech, when as in respect of the sense (...), it is redundant or
superstuous. And here of there be more examples then there be leaves even in
the new testament. And therefore both in the same and like sentences the
article sometimes is used, sometimes omitted without any alteration of the
sense. As Lu. 4. 4. (...). But in Matthew 4. 4. where the same speech is
recorded, (...). And again where the article is used for difference sake, it
does not always point out one certain and singular thing, but only when it
is used (...), for a demonstratiue particle, as John 1. 29. (...), behold the
Lamb of God. John, 4. 29. (...); is not this that Christ? For more usually it
is used (...), that is, for difference, when as it serves not to signify one
special, but to distinguish the whole kind. In which sense (...), is all one,
as Philosophers say. As Mark 2. 27. the Sabbath was made (...), for the man,
not the man for the Sabbath. John. 2, 25. he needed not that any should bear
witness (...), of the man (meaning any man) for himself knew what was, (...),
in the man. So Number. 19. 11. (which is the law that Epiphanius misalledgeth)
(...): he that touches (that is, whosoever touches) the dead body (that is,
any dead body) of any man, he shall be unclean seven days. Whereas Epiphanius
therefore alleges it thus, (...): If any man touch the dead, he remains
unclean until the evening, and he shall be washed with water, and shall be
cleansed: and from the force of the article (which is not in the text as he
alleges it, if there be not a fault in the print) proves that by the dead
is to be meant not any dead man, but only Christ: it is evident that his
memory failed him. For the law which pronounces a man unclean until the
evening for touching a dead body, is understood of the dead bodies of beasts:
but that which speaks of the Leuit. 11.
dead body of a man, pronounces him unclean seven days, and is (as even now
you heard) understood of the dead body of any man whatsoever. And the reason of
this law is, first because a dead man is a spectacle both of our sin, and of
Gods curse for the same: and secondly, because the Lord would by the
detestation of the bodily death teach the Israelites to abhor the spiritual
death of the soul in sin. And there fore Epiphanius not unworthily
reprooueth the hypocrisy of the Samaritans, who under pretense of this law,
abhorred the dead bodies of men, when as themselves were dead in sin. So when
we say, the Pope, the Emperor, the king, the priest, the minister, the eye,
the hand, we mean not one particular, but the whole kind, as 1. Pet. 2. 17.
(...), honor the king, not this king only, but any whosoever is king. 1. Tim.
3. 2. (...), it behoou^th therefore the Bishop (not this or that Bishop, but
every one that has that calling) to be without reproof. Mat. 6. 22. (...).
The light of the body is the eye. See 1. Cor. 12. 15. 16. Mat. 12. 34. etc. So
when we say, the good man or the wicked man, we mean either generally al, or
indefinitely any that be such, Mat. 1^. 35. (...) etc. The good man out of the
good treasure of the heart, brings forth the goodthings; and the evil man,
etc.

4. Sometimes again the article is used (...), to signify that which is most
notable in that kind, and therefore most worthily (or as we say (...))
deserves that name. And of this use is Epiphanius his rule to be understood,
(...), Where the article is added unto some definite and notable thing, there
is always confirmation by the article, namely, that the word is not to be
understood indefinitly or indifferently of any: (...), but without the article
it is to be taken of any one indefinitely. Which latter part of the rule, if it
be true, proves that the speech of our Savior, John. 5. (...), if any other
come is indefinit. But neither does the article used (...), always point out a
certain and singular thing, though sometimes it do. As (...) in a Christians
mouth signifies the true God only, as Epiphanius says. So when we say, the
Apostle meaning Paul, the Poet meaning among the Greeks Homer, among the
Latins Virgil; the Orator, Demosthenes or Tullie; the wiseman, Solomon. But
when we say, (...) (which is another of Epiphanius his examples) and mean
thereby not indifferently any king but by an Emphasis that Prince to whom we are
subject, we do not always nor for the most part understand one certain king,
but all or any to whom the sovereignty of our conutrey does appertain, whether
he be king or Queen. As when we say, the king supreme governor of the church,
no time prescribes against the king, the kings highway, the Princes laws,
etc. In like manner when we say, (...) (which is Epiphanius his third example)
or as the Apostle more distinctly speaks, (...), the man of God: For although
by this Emphasis not any man is meant but the minister of 2. Tim. 3. 17.
God, yet it signifies not one certain minister, but any one of that function
called thereunto of God. And in this sense is the Pope called the Antichrist:
and the Antichrist in the same sense is called the man of sin, the son of
perdition, the outlaw. But this proves not, that therefore the Antichrist is
but one certain and singular man. For even as the devil, (...), the unclean
spirit, although there Luke 11. 24
be many wicked ones is called, (...), the evil, and yet there be many devils,
and as the Bishop of Rome since the ti me of Boniface the third, is called the
Pope (whereas before, the name Pope was attributed to other Bishops) and yet
there have been many Popes: so although al heretics deserve to be called
Antichrists; al profane men, men of sin; all reprobates, sons of perdition;
all sons of Belial, 1. Ioh. 2. 18
(...), or outlawes: yet not withstanding the Pope of Rome since the time of
Boniface the third, deserves to be called (...) the Antichrist, the man of
sin, the son of perdition, the outlaw. Which as it does not prove that the
Pope signifies but one singular person, so See Lib. 1. c. 6.
neither does it euince that the Antichrist signifies one certain man. For
look what they can say, of the Antichrist in this case; the same may be said
of the Pope.

5. The third place is like to the second, and therefore a short answer may
serve. 1. John 2. 18. (...), You have heard that the Antichrist comes, and
even now there are many Antichrists: where the article is prefixed before
Antichrist so properly called; but the name of Antichrist generally taken is
uttered without an article, which most plainly shows that Antichrist
properly taken is but one man, but generally taken it signifies all
heretics. As if he had said, (...), signifies but one certain man, because
the article is prefixed.

The Antichrist so properly called is (...), therefore the Antichrist so
properly called, is but one certain man.

The prosyllogisme or proof of the proposition I have already proved to be
most false, when as I showed that whereas there are four uses of the article
at the least, Bellarmines observation holds only in one, and that the least
usual: namely, when the article is used (...), that is, for a demonstratiue
particle. And that the article added to a word does not always signify one
certain and singular thing, I will show by some other examples, which will sit
nearer the Papists. In 2. These. 2. 7. (...), he that hinders, is expounded by
the fathers, and acknowledged by the Papists, to signify the Emperor 2. These.
2. 7
of Rome, not any one particular, but the state and succession of Emperors.
Again Mat. 16. 18. where there is not only the article, but also the
pronounce demonstratiue, (...), upon this rock, the Papists would have
understood by that rock, which P^ter confessed, which is Christ, or faith in
him; not only Peter himself, but also (although most falsely) the whole
succession of Popes. And therefore by their own doctrine, the article does not
always, no not when it is joined with a demonstratiue particle, signify one
certain and particular thing or person. Thirdly, in the place before alleged,
(...), the man of sin, the son of perdition, is understood by some to
signify not only the head of the Antichristian 2. These. 2. 3
body, but the whole multitude of those who join with Antichrist. Augustine
recites this opinion, and is so far from misliking it, that Bellarmine
alleges it as Augustines. Neither are we to think this interpretation to be
dissonant from the manner of speech used in the Scriptures: seeing (...), the
woman, Apoc. 12. 6. signifies the Church of Christ; and (...), the harlot, and
(...), the woman Apoc. 17. 1. 18. the city and Church of Antichrist. And that I
may come to the proposition it self, and omit other examples, (...), sometimes
signifies the Antichristian body or company of Antichristian heretics.

6. For better proof whereof let us consider the acceptance of the word:
(...), the Antichrist in the place alleged, and elsewhere 1. Ioh. 2. 18
in the Epistles of John, in which only it is used, and not elsewhere in the
scriptures. In the place which Bellarmine cites, the apostle seems to reason
thus. When the Antichrist is come, it is the last hour. Now Antichrists are
come; therefore now is the last hour. 1. Ioh. 2. 28
Where either the Antichrist and Antichrists signify the same, or else there
be four terms in the Apostles argument, which Bellarmine dares not avouch:
And afterward v. 22. he plainly shows, that every one that denies Jesus to
be the Christ (as many Antichrists 1. Ioh. 4. 3. 4
or heretics did, of which he spoke verse 18.) is (...), the Antichrist. In
the same Epistle Chapter. 4. he bids them try the spirits, that is, their
teachers, because many false prophets were come into the world, and gives them
this note whereby to try them: Every spirit (says he) which confesses Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit which does not
confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God. And this is the
spirit of the Antichrist, which you heard was to come, and even now 2. John. 7.
already is in the world. Likewise in the second Epistle: Many dec^iuers are
come into the world which d^ not confess that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, this is the deceiuer and the Antichrist. By which testimonies it is
evident, that (...), does not only signify the head of the Antichristian body
(which is not one singular man, but is continued in a succession of many) but
also sometimes any heretic that oppugneth the natures or offices of Christ:
and sometimes the whole body or company of heretics opposed unto Christ. For
John 1. Ioh. 2. 22.
plainly affirms that those many heretics and deceivers of his time, are
the Antichrist. And whereas Paul prophecieth of Antichrist that he should come
into the world, and should be destroyed at the second coming of Christ, John
affirms that Antichrist, of whom they had heard that he should come, was then
already come into the world. From which places I argue thus. If (...) the
Antichrist in the Epistles of John, and (...), the man of sin, (...), the
outlaw, in the Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians do signify one certain
and singular man, as the Papists affirm; then it will follow necessarily, that
one and the same man, who was come into the world in Saint John's time, shall be
in the world at the second coming of Christ: for John says, that the
Antichrist was come in his time, and Paul says that the outlaw shall be
consumed with the spirit of Christ's mouth, and destroyed at his glorious
appearing. But the latter is incredible, for since the time of Saint John there
are already 1500. years expired, and therefore the former (which is the
assertion of the Papists) is absurd. (...) therefore signifies sometimes the
whole body of Heretics from the ascension of Christ, until his second
coming: sometimes any heretics which are lims of that body: sometimes the
graund antichrist, who is the head of that body, and is called (...) the
Antichrist. Wherefore in respect of those heretics and lims of Antichrist in
the Apostles times; Antichrist is then said to have entered, and as it were, to
have set his foot into the world. And accordingly the Apostle Paul says, 2.
These. 2. 7
that even in his time the mystery of iniquity, that is, Antichristianisme was
working (namely by those which belonged to the body of Antichrist) although
covertly and underhand, until the head of that body was revealed as he was,
after the Empire in the West was dissolved, and the Emperor which hindered was
done out of the way; according to the prophecy of the Apostle, 2.
Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. And thus you see what a slender argument this is taken
from the article, although it be used as one of the principal demonstrations
generally of all the Papists, that write of this argument, but more especially
of Bellarmine, who thinking it too good to go for one argument, has divided
it into two.

7 His fourth testimony is taken out of Daniel, chap. 7. 11. and 12. Where
Antichrist is called a King, and not a Kingdom, who of the ten Kings which he
shall find in the world, shall take away three, and shall make the other
seven subject to himself. But I answer, that Daniel speaks not of
Antichrist at all, but of Antiochus Epiphanes, and therefore this allegation is
impertinent. For the learned of our times have made it evident, that the four
kingdoms whereof Daniel speaks, were ended before the incarnation of Christ:
and that the fourth kingdom which many have taken to be the monarchy of the
Romans, was the kingdom of the Seleucidae and Lagidae in Syria and Egypt, so
far forth as the people of Iewrie was subject thereunto, and is therefore
described as the most terrible of all the four, because it was most trouble
some to the Jews. And that the ten horns were ten Kings of Syria and Egypt,
which successively tyrannized over the people of the Jews; Antiochus Epiphanes
being the tenth and the last of those Kings which tyrannized over Iewrie. But
because in outrageous cruelty and cursed hostility, not only against the
people, but also against the religion of the Jews, he surpassed all that went
before him; of him therefore Daniel speaks so plainly and distinctly, that
he has seemed to some rather to write an History of him, then a Prophecy; as
shall hereafter more fully be showed, when as Chap. 16.
we shall also manifestly declare that this which Bellarmine adds concerning
Antichrists killing of three Kings, and subduing of the other seven, is but a
dream, which is indeed so far from all probability of truth, as that it
cannot be verified of that party whom Daniel describes. Daniel describes him
as the tenth: Bellarmine makes him the eleventh, as if it were a beast of
eleven horns. Daniel speaks of ten Kings, which successively ruled over the
Jews: Bellarmine makes him speak of ten, who together with the eleventh,
should be at one time in the world. Of those ten Daniel says, that three were
plucked up before the tenth, and as it may seem by his means, but of the other
six, either all or the most were dead before he was borne: Bellarmine makes
him to kill three and subdue the other seven, which indeed lived not in his
time, as shall be showed hereafter out of the eleventh of Daniel, where the
succession of these ten Kings, and the affairs of the tenth, who can be no
other but Antiochus Epiphanes, are particularly and fully described. This
argument drawn from the misconstruing of Daniel, Bellarmine although he knew
it to be nothing worth, yet he was content to make a flourish with it, because
he had some of the Fathers to father it upon. Afterward he comes nearer to
the purpose, and says, that Calvin, as some of the Fathers before him, to wit,
Cyprian and Jerome, affirms, and so does Bellarmine himself else where, that
Daniel speaks of Antiochus Epiphanes, who was a type of Antichrist. Therefore
leaving his former hold, he reasons thus: Such as is the type or figure, such
is the thing figured: Antiochus the type was but one singular person, therefore
Antichrist that is figured is but one. The proposition is to be understood of
the proportion and likeness only in those things, in respect whereof the type
is a figure, and not generally in all things. As for example, the High Priest
was a type or figure of Christ, but therefore it does not follow that there was
but one High Priest, because Christ is one. The Papists hold that Melchisedec,
who was but one, was a type of their Mass Priests, which are many. Iosuah,
Dakid and Solomon, were types of Christ, but therefore not like unto him in all
things. So Antiochur may not unfitly be said to have been a type of
Antichrist; because as Pharaoh was a type of other tyrants which oppressed the
Church of God: so he in falsehood deceit, pride, idolatry, cruelty, and
persecuting of the Church of God, resembled Antichrist the man of sin, which
is an enemy, and is listed up about all that is called God, or that is
worshipped. In which respects Antiochus was so fit a type of Antichrist, that
R. Leui Gerson alleged by Bellarmine in the end of the 12. chap. applies
whatsoever is spoken of him Dan. 7. and 11. to the Pope of Rome. If therefore
you understand the proposition generally, it is false: if particularly, the
whole argumentation is a fallacion.

8. His fifth testimony is Apoc. 13. and 17. For these places are to be
understood of Antichrist, as Irenaeus teaches, and as it is plain by the
likeness of the words in Daniel and John, etc. His reason is thus framed, If
Daniel spoke of one King, then also John: but the former is true, therefore the
later. The proposition, wherein there is indeed no coherence, he proves by the
similitude of their words: First, because both make mention of ten Kings, which
shall be in the earth when Antichrist shall come. It is true that both make
mention of ten horns, but with such difference as that otherwise there is no
likeness. Antiochus in Daniel, by whom Bellarmine would have us to understand
Antichrist, is the last of the ten, and not one besides the ten; otherwise the
fourth beast, were a beast of eleue^ horns: Antichrist is one besides the ten
horns in the Revelation, and of Bellarmine sometimes is called the eleventh.
Bellarmines Antichrist in Daniel is the little horn signifying indeed but one
man, but the true Antichrist in the Revelation is called not an horn, but the
beast, whereby not one man, but a state is signified. The ten horns in Daniel
are so many kings which succeed one another, in the kingdom usurped over the
Jews, before the coming of the Messiah: the ten horns in the Revelation are
so many rulers over diverse kingdoms, which receive their kingdom together,
not only after the incarnation of Christio^ but also after the dissolutio^ of
the Roman Empire: So that in truth nothing is here alike, save that in both
there is mention of ten horns. Secondly says Bellarmine, both of them foretell
that the kingdom of Antichrist shall continue three years and an half. But I
answer, that neither of both assign that time to Antichrist. For first Daniel
assigns a time, and times, and parcel of time, that is, three years and ten
days, to the persecution under Antiochus, whereby the public worship of God
was for that time interrupted, viz. from the 15. day of the month Casleu in the
145. year of the kingdom of the Seleucidae See. Chap. 16.
1. Mac. 1. 57. unto the 25. of the month Casleu in the year 148. 1. Mac. 4.
52. But of this more hereafter. Neither does John any where assign three years
and an half to the reign of Antichrist: but to the beast with seven heads and
ten horns, which signifies the Roman state either generally as it is opposed
unto Christ, or particularly as it was governed by the sixth head, that is, the
emperors, he assigns fortytwo Apoc. 11. 2. 7. and 13. 1 5.
months, which are not literally to be understood. Now Antichrist is not the
beast with seven heads, but one head of the seven, and is described under the
second beast as our adversaries also confess, which in plain terms is called
another beast. For how can he be that beast, if he be another? Apoc. 13. 11.
And of this also, I shall have better occasion to speak more fully hereafter.
Lastly, he flies to the authority of the fathers as his last refuge; but
neither do these fathers expressly say, that Antichrist shall be See. Chap. 8.
but one man: neither if they did, can any sound argument be drawn from their
testimonies, unless Bellarmine be able to prove, that whatsoever these
fathers have written concerning Antichrist, is true. And again diverse of the
Fathers, as Irenaeus, Origin, Chrysostom, Jerome, Ruffinus, Primasius,
Augustine, expounding that place Math 24. 24. which speaks of more then one,
as spoken of Antichrist, they could not understand Antichrist to be but one.
Yea but the Fathers say, that Antichrist shall be a most choice instrument of
the Devil, that in him shall dwell all the fullness of devilish malice
bodily, even as in the man Christ dwells the fullness of the divinity
corporally. But although this allegation were true (as I will not thereof
dispute,) yet is it impertinent: for the Pope (meaning the whole succession of
Antichristian Popes) may be a notable instrument of the devil, etc. and yet
hereof it follows not that there has been but one Pope: As touching the
other assertion of Antichrists reign three years and a Chap. 8.
half, we are hereafter to entreat.

9. Now that Antichrist is not one singular man, but a whole state and
succession of men, it may appear by these arguments. First by conference of 2.
These. 2. with the Epistles of John; for John plainly 1. Ioh. 4 3. 2. John. 7.
1. Ioh. 2. 18
says, that (...), the Antichrist, of whom they had hard that he should come,
was in his time. And of whom had they heard it, but of Paul in the 2. These 2.
where in like sort the Apostle says, that even in his time the mystery of
iniquity, that is, Antichristianisme was working: noting that Antichrist in
some of his members was already come, although he were not revealed, until
that which hindered was taken out of the way. Now as Paul and John do both
testify, that the Antichrist was in their time; so Paul also shows that
Antichrist shall remain unto the second coming of Christ, 2. These. 2. 8. for
although he should be wasted and consumed before by the spirit of Christ's mouth
(that is, the ministry of the word) yet he should not be utterly destroyed
until the second coming of Christ. From hence therefore we reason thus: If
Antichrist were in the Apostles time, and was to remain until the second
coming of Christ; then Antichrist is not one singular man, but a succession of
men; unless they will say, that one and the same man may live upon the earth
from the Apostles time until the coming of Christ, of which time there be
already above 1500. years expired. But Antichrist was in the Apostles times,
and is to continue until the second coming of Christ, as the two Apostles
Paul and John do plainly testify, therefore Antichrist is not one singular
man.

10. Of this syllogism Bellarmine cannot deny either the proposition, or the
assumption. Only he distinguishes of the former part of the assumption: viz.
That Antichrist in the Apostles time was come indeed, but not in his own
person, but only in his forerunners. And this he would prove; first, by a
similitude, which he might have known from Plato to be a most slippery
argument. As (...).
Christ came in the beginning of the world not in his own person, but in his
forerunners the Patriarchs and Prophets; so Antichrist came in the Apostles
time not in his own person, but in his forerunners, the heretics and
persecutors of the church. In which similitude there is no proportion, unless
that which is in question betaken for granted, namely that Antichrist is but
one particular person, as Christ is. For if Antichrist be a succession of
heretics, then might he be said to come in the first of the rank; although
the chief of that order, which principally is called Antichrist, was not yet
come. And secondly, the protasis or proposition of this similitude is untrue.
For although Christ might be said to be come from the beginning in respect both
of the truth of the promise, and also of the efficacy of his merits, which is
extended to all the faithful from the beginning: yet we never read, neither
can it truly be said that he came in the Patriarchs and Prophets: especially
seeing the holy Ghost makes a kind of opposition betwixt Heb. 1. 1. Mat. 21.
37 Gal. 4. 4.
Gods sending of them, and the coming of Christ, who was not sent before the
fullness of time came. Neither are the Prophets or Patriarchs any where called
the forerunners of Christ: For forerunners go a little before, as John Baptist
did, who therefore is worthily called (...), the forerunner. If any man object
that as Christ 1. Pet. 3. 19
spoke in the Prophets; so Antichrist in the heretics: I answer, that this
latter is true not of Antichrist, but of the devil, who is a lying spirit in
the mouths of all false Prophets. Thirdly, the reddition is contradictory to
that which the Apostle John delivers. For he says plainly that the
Antichrist with the article prefiexed, and that Antichrist whom they heard was
to come, was already entered into the world, 1. John. 4. 3. 2. John. 7. and
thence proves that therefore it is the last hour, because Antichrist was to
come in the last hour, 1. John. 2. 18. So that in this similitude nothing is
sound, no proportion in the whole, no truth in the parts.

11. Wherefore by a new supply of arguments, he labors to make good this
exposition. And as touching the place in Paul, he argues first from the
authority of the fathers and interpreters, whereof some understand by the
mystery of iniquity, the persecution under Nero: others the heretics of
those times which secretly seduced many. The former had no reason to call the
open persecution of Nero a mystery: who also although he were an enemy, yet
belonged not to the body of Antichrist, who is a disguised enemy and a
pretended Christian. The latter exposition we do embrace. For we hold
Antichrist to be the whole body of heretics in the last age of the world, who
under the name and profession of Christ advance themselves against Christ,
first secretly, as in the Apostles times; afterward more openly, when that
which hindered, was taken out of the way. Of this body as every member severally
and all jointly is Antichrist (and therefore John calls the heretics of his
time Antichrists, and of them all says that they are the Antichrist:) so
especially the head of this body, which we have proved to be the Papacy, is
(...) called Antichrist. Wherefore although Antichrist was after a sort come,
and the mystery of iniquity wrought in the Apostles time, yet Antichrist was
not revealed until the head of this body appeared, that is, until the Pope
became Antichrist, who since the year of the Lord 606. has showed himself in
his colors; first by usurping supreme authority over the universal Church,
and afterward by claiming sovereignty over kings and Emperors, as we have
heretofore showed Seeing therefore the heretics of whom the fathers speak,
did belong to the body of Antichrist, it cannot be denied but that Antichrist,
when they were in the world, was come in some of his members, and had as it
were set his foot into the Church.

12. Secondly from our own confession he would seem to drive us to great
absurdity. For (says he) if Antichrist were come in the Apostles times, and if
Antichrist has his seat in Rome, then it will follow that Peter and Paul were
the true Antichrists, and Nero or Simon Magus the true Christ. For there were
no other Bishops of Rome then, but Peter and Paul, with whom Nero and Simon
Magus contended. I answer, that it cannot be proved out of the Scripture, or
by any sound argument that Peter and Paul were Bishops of Rome: and although
they were, it would not follow upon our assertion, that therefore they were
Antichrists, and much less that Nero or Simon Magus was Christ. For when we
say that Antichrist was come in the Apostles time, we speak of the body of
Antichrist with S. John. Who^ we say that Antichrist has his seat in Rome, we
speak of the head of this body, who especially is called Antichrist: whom we
do with Paul acknowledge not to have been revealed, until that which hindered
was taken out of the way, that is, until the Roman Empire in the West was
dissolved: but afterward by degrees he was advanced in the Papacy, above all
that is called God; sitting in the temple of God, as if he were God, that is,
ruling and reigning in the Church, as if he were a God upon earth. And surely
if the head of the Antichristian body was to be revealed not long after the
dissolution of the Roman Empire in the West, and was about the same time with
the rulers of the Provinces, to attain unto his kingdom, as has bin showed;
and lastly, if he shall continue in the world after he is revealed, until the
second coming of Christ: then it follows necessarily that even this head of
the Antichristian body, cannot be any one singular man, but is continued by a
succession of many from the time of his revelation, until the end of the
world: of which time there is almost a thousand years expired. But both in
this argument, and in the former, Bellarmine sophistically beggeth the
question. For in his arguments there is no consequence, unless this be taken
for granted, that Antichrist is but one man. Antichrist came in the Heretics
in the Apostles time, therefore he came not in his own person. A good argument,
if Antichrist were but one man, which is the question. If Antichrist were in
the Apostles time, and if Antichrist must sit at Rome, then he that was then
Bishop of Rome, was Antichrist; a good argument if Antichrist were but one man,
which is the question.

13. Now whereas S. John says, that Antichrist in his time was come,
Bellarmine faineth him to speak of Antichrist, as he says, Our Savior spoke
of Elias Mat. 17. 11. Elias indeed shall come (namely in his own person) but I
say unto you, Elias is already come in suo simili, in his like, that is, John
Baptist. So S. John speaks of Antichrist, that he was indeed to come in his
own person, but now he was come in his type. You see to what silly shifts this
worthy cha^pion of the Pope is driven. For first he fathereth upon Christ that
Jewish fable, which with the Jews the Papists hold against Christ himself.
For whereas Malachie had prophesied of the coming of Elias before the day of
the Malac. 4. 5
Lord, meaning the first coming of Christ: our Savior Christ plainly
anoucheth Mat. 11. 14. that John Baptist was that Elias, who according to the
Prophecy of Malachie was to come. Now John Baptist was called Elias, because
he came in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers,
etc. as the Angel also applies that prophecy, Luke 1. 17. But suppose that
Christ had spoken of Elias Malac. 4. 6.
according to Bellarmines conceit; yet how does it follow that Luke. 1. 17.
therefore John speaks of Antichrist after the same manner? No more then it
follows, that David should long after his death be sent again to govern the
people of God: because it was prophesied by Ezechiel, that the Lord would raise
up a Pastor for his people, even David his servant, etc. But as by the name of
David in Ezechiel Eze. 34. 23 24. and 37. 35.
is meant not David himself, but Christ of whom David was a type: so by the
name of Elias in Malachie, is not meant Elias himself, Iere. 30. 9.
but John Baptist, who resembled Elias in spirit and power in reforming the
Church of God.

14. Our second argument is this: That which in the Prophecies of the
Scriptures, especially in the 7. and 11. of Daniel, and in Apoc. the 13. and
17. is described under the name and figure of a beast, is not one singular
thing or person, but a whole state or succession: Antichrist is described in
the Apocatypse 13. under the name and figure of a Beast, therefore Antichrist is
not one singular person, but a whole state and succession. The proposition is
proved by induction of particular examples. As in the 7. of Daniel, by the
Lion is figured the Kingdom of the Assyrians and Babylonians: by the Bear the
Medes and Persians: by the Leopard the Greeks and Macedonians: by the beast
with ten horns the Seleucidae and Lagidae, and so Chapt. 8. In the 13. of the
Apocalypse, there are two Beasts described, the former signifying the state of
the Roman Emperors: the second signifying the state of Antichrist. Bellarmine
answers, that Daniel as sometimes by the beasts he signifies whole
kingdoms; so sometimes also particular persons. As in the eight Chapter, by
the Ram ^he understands Darius the last King of the Persians: by the Goat,
Alexander the great. In which answer the upright dealing of Bellarmine with the
Scriptures appears. For in the 20. verse of the 8. Chapter, where that vision
is expounded, Dan. 8. 20.
the Angels words are these: The Ram which thou saw, having two horns are
(...) the Kings of the Medes and Persians. And the Goat is the King of Iauan
or Grecia (meaning as before the Kings or Kingly estate, as appears plainly
by the words that follow, and not as Bellarmine says, Alexander) and the great
horn between his eyes is the first King, namely Alexander, which being
broken, four other stand up in the steed thereof. As Daniel therefore by
several beasts Dan. 8. 22.
means not so many particular men, but whole states and orders of men; and as
John in the 13. of the Apocalypse, by the former beasts means not any one
Emperor, but the whole state and succession of Emperors at the least: so the
holy Ghost in the same Chapter by the second beast describing Antichrist,
means not any one particular Apo. 13. 11
person, but the whole state and succession of Antichristian Popes, to whom (as
heretofore has been showed) that description wholly agrees. And whereas
Bellarmine adds, that Paul when he entreats of Antichrist, speaks not of
any one of the four beasts in Daniel, but of the little horn mentioned in the
7. of Daniel, verse. 8 I answer, that the Apostle speaks neither of the one
nor of the other; and therefore the former part of Bellarmines speech is vain,
for no man says so; and the latter is false. For the little horn is not
Antichrist, but Antiochus Epiphanes, who lived above 200. years before the
incarnation of Christ: who although he were but one man, might not vnsitly be
called a type of Antichrist, who is a state or succession of men.

15. Our third argument is taken from that Apostasy, which the Apostle
foretells 2. These. 2. For where he speaks of a defection (whereof
Antichrist is the head) without addition, we understand a 2. These. 2. 3.
general defection of the visible Church, which as it began to work in the
Apostles time; so was it to increase until the revelation of Antichrist, and
to continue more or less until his destruction. This Apostasy because it
cannot be the work of one man, or of a few 2. These. 2. 7.
years, evidently proves that Antichrist is not one singular man, but rather
a state and succession of men. To this Bellarmine for want of one good answer,
makes many. First (says he) by that Apostasy we may very well (nay he says
rectissime) understand Antichrist himself, as diverse of the fathers teach; and
what will he infer thereupon? that therefore Antichrist is but one man? Nay
rather, the contrary is to be inferred. For if Apostasy be put by a metonymy
of the adiunct for the subject, or rather of the effect for the cause, that is,
for the parties which do revolt: then it follows, that Antichrist (who
according to this interpretation is signified by Apostasy) does not signify
one man, but the whole body and company of those that do revolt, that is, the
whole body and kingdom of Antichrist, which we have proved to be the
Apostaticall Church of Rome. And so Augustine whom Bellarmine alleges in the
very same place which he cites, reading in the concrete, nisi venerit refuga
primum, unless the Apostate first come, and expounding what is meant by De
ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. cap. 19.
the temple, not the temple at Jerusalem, but rather the Church of God, because
the Apostle would not call the temple of the devil, the temple of God,
propounds the opinion of some which he does not mislike, Vnde nonnulli non
ipsum principem, etc. Whereupon some understand in this place not the Prince
himself, but his whole body as it were, that is, the company of men pertaining
unto him together with their Prince, to be Antichrist: and they think that it
might more rightly be said in Latin as it is in the Greek, that he sits
(non in templo dei, sed in templum dei) not in the Temple of God, but as the
Temple of God, as though he were the Temple of God which is the Church. Which
as has been showed, notably sits the Pope and Church of Rome. And here we
are by the way to note, whereas Bellarmine says that Antichrist shall be such
a notable Apostate, as that he may be called the Apostasy it self, that
seeing none can be an Apostate which has not been a Christian: by this
assertion therefore of Bellarmine, Antichrist shall not be a Jew, but a
backslyding and revolted Christian.

16. Secondly (he says) by Apostasy we may understand a revolt from the
Roman Empire, as many of the Latin fathers do expound. To omit the dissension
of the fathers, which proves that their exposition can be no good rule of
interpreting the Scriptures, we do confess that before the manifest
revelation of Antichrist, there was to go, no^ only a defection from the
faith, but also a revolt from the Roman Empire. But as the reuolting from
earthly kingdoms is never in the Scriptures termed Apostasy: so is it not
here signified; but as the word elsewhere is used, and by the most and best
writers here is (...).
expounded, (...), signifies a falling away from God, a defection or departure
from the true faith, as heretofore I have showed. Augustme says, quem refugam
vocat, vtique a domino Deo, whom he calls a Lib. 20. cap. 19.. 2.
runnagate, namely, from the Lord God. Neither can it be denied but that this
Apostasy is that which afterward the Apostle calls the mystery of iniquity,
which was working in and by the heretics of those times, whom also Bellarmine
calls the forerunners of Antichrist, because they perverted the faith, and
therefore the defection caused by Antichrist is an Apostasy from the faith,
according to the prophesies of the Apostle, that in these latter times diverse
should make an Apostasy 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. Tim. 4. 4.
from the faith, and should turn away their hearing from the truth, and shall be
turned unto fables.

17. Thirdly, although we should grant (says he) that by Apostasy is to be
understood a defection or revolt from the true faith and religion of Christ,
yet it is not necessary that it should be an Apostasy of many years. For it
may be that the Apostle speaks of one great Apostasy which shall be only in
that most short time of Antichrists reign, that is, of three years and a
half. But this bare guess of Bellarmine ought not to be of so great weight
with us, as the plain speech of the Apostle compared with the event. And
therefore it is but vain to tell us what might be, seeing we have seen the
contrary to be, which the Apostle foretold should be. For as the Apostle told
us that there should be an Apostasy: so he says, that the mystery of
iniquity whereby many were seduced, did work already even in his time, and
insinuates that it should work until the full revelation of Antichrist. And
the event has showed how by degrees this Apostasy has bin wrought even from
the primitive Church, until it came to that height wherein it continued until
Antichrist began to be acknowledged. And surely as this general Apostasy
could not grow at once, but by degrees: so can it not be abolished at once, but
by degrees; and therefore was not like to be an Apostasy of three years and
an half only. Neither is it credible that by one man the greatest part, not
only of Christians, but also of the Jews should be seduced in three years
and an half: seeing Christ in the like space of time could not, as he was a
man and minister of the circumcision, convert many of the Jews;
notwithstanding that his doctrine was more effectual, and his miracles more
admirable then those of Antichrist can be; yea the Apostles and some other of
the disciples, who for so long time scarce went out of Iewry, were able to
prevail but with a few of the Jews in coparison of those which rejected their
doctrine: And shall we think that Antichrist, who (as the Papists hold) shall
be but one man, shall in three years and an half, seduce the remnant of the
Jews, and all the visible Church of God dispersed into so many parts of the
world? And whereas he alleges Augustine as a favorer of this guess, therein
he abuses the authority of that learned father, to seduce the ignorant, who
only delivers the Judgment of others concerning the mystery of iniquity,
and that to this effect. That the mystery of iniquity works in De ciuit. Dei.
lib. 20. cap. 19.
evil men in the Church and counterseit Christians, when as they revolt from
the truth, and that unto this mystery belongs the reuolting of those of whom
S. John speaks, They went out from us, but 1. Ioh. 2. 19
were not of us, etc. And that this mystery should still work, that is, that
unsound men in the Church should more and more revolt until they make a
sufficient number for Antichrist. But there is never a word of this defection
caused either by one man, or in so short a time, but rather the contrary, as
has been showed.

18. Fourthly he answers, that although it should be granted that this
Apostasy is of many ages (which he says cannot well be denied, seeing
the apostle says it began to work in his time) yet it is not necessary that it
should appertain to one body under one head, neither that it appertains to
the kingdom of Antichrist, but rather is a disposition thereunto, happening in
diverse dominions upon (undry occasions, etc. But this fourth answer is
overthrown by the first: wherein this Apostasy was made so proper to
Antichrist, as that by it Bellarmine thought we might most fitly understand
Antichrist himself, or rather as we showed the whole body and kingdom of
Antichrist. And further we have showed heretofore that the whole body of
Apostates and heretics professing the name of Christ, is Antichrist, and
after a more special manner the head of this body and Apostasy. And therefore
it follows, that all of this Apostasy professing the name of Christ, belong
to this body and kingdom of Antichrist. And whereas he says, that this
Apostasy is only a disposition so the kingdom of Antichrist, etc. I answer
that all the degrees of this Apostasy going before the revelation of
Antichrist, were a disposition not to the being, but to the revealing of
Antichrist. For in the Apostasy Antichrist was as John plainly shows,
neither could he be revealed unless first he were Whereupon Theodoret says,
Defectionem appellat Antichristi praesentiam, he calls Apostasy the presence
or coming of Antichrist. But is it not very likely think you that there has
been a disposition or preparation already of more then 1500. years in most
parts of the world, for the reign of one man three years and an half?

19. Fifthly and lastly, although we should grant (says he) that a general
Apostasy from the faith having now continued many years, is the kingdom of
Antichrist: yet it would not follow that therefore the Pope is Antichrist. For
it is not yet decided who have made this defection, they or we. And i^ were
more easy to proou^ that they have made this defection, for they have revolted
from that Church and religion whereof their forefathers were, which we have not
done, etc. In the four former answers Bellarmine turned back upon us, hoping
thereby to repel the force of our argument, but those being spent, in this he
turns his back upon us and betaketh himself to his feet: and leaving the
defense of the question in hand, runs to his chief hold. For whereas we
prove that Antichrist is not one man, contrary to their assertion, by this
argument among others, because that general Apostacy of the visible Church
continuing for many ages, whereof Antichrist is the head, cannot be the work
of one man or of a few years: Bellarmine answers thus in effect, that
although your argument be very good to prove that Antichrist is not one man;
yet notwithstanding here of it follows not, that the Pope is Antichrist. Why,
never any of us used this argument: Antichrist is not one man, therefore the
Pope is Antichrist. But in this assertion of ours, we answer your chief
demonstration whereby you would prove that the Pope is not Antichrist, and
where in especially you please your selves, reasoning as has been hard, after
this manner: Antichrist is but one man, therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.
And after you have proved this by many worshipful demonstrations, and stoutly
denied our contrary arguments: now in the end you make this cowardes brag:
Although this should be granted which you say to prove that Antichrist is not
one man, yet it does not follow that the Pope is Antichrist.

20. But let us pursue the Jesuit in his flight. Although this should be
granted, says he, etc. Yet it follows not that therefore the Pope is
Antichrist. For the question yet is, who has made this Apostasy, we or you.
Well then, let us join in this issue. If the Apostasy be on our side, let us
be thought to belong to Antichrist; if this Apostasy be in the Church of Rome,
whereof the Pope is head; then let it be acknowledged, that the Pope is the
head of this Apostasy, and consequently Antichrist. But you (says the
Jesuit) have reuoltd from the Church and religion of your forefathers, that
is, from the Church of Rome and Latin religion. And therefore when you read,
unless there come areuolt, etc. it is a wonder that you do not apply that
prophecy to your selves. The Apostasy whereof the Apostle speaks, is not a
separation from the Church of Rome that now is, nor a forsaking of Romish or
Popish religion: but a reuolting from God, a departure from the true faith and
religion of Christ, unto Antichristianisme and idolatry. We in forsaking the
Church of Rome, have come out of Babylon Apoc. 18. 4.
according to Gods commandment, and in reuolting from the Pope have returned
to God: and therefore this Apostasy touches not us. But you, say I to the
Papists, have revolted from the true faith and religion of Christ unto
Antichristianisme and Idolatry: as besides the infinite particulars wherein
your Apostasy does consist, may briefly appear by these notes. First, the
Apostle speaking of the same Apostasy in another place, has these words. The
spirit speaks plaincly, that in the latter times some shall make an Apostasy
from the faith, attending to erroneous spirits and doctrines of 1. Tim. 4. 1.
devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy and having their own conscience seared.
Now who these are that make this Apostasy, the Apostle further describes by
specifying two of those doctrines of devils, as certain notes whereby to know
them. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain^ from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving, etc. But as I have showed
heretofore these notes touch not us, and properly agree to the Papists,
therefore Lib. 1. Chap. 4. 3.
this Apostasy is among them. Secondly, this Apostasy is among those who are
fallen from the true religion and worship of God, into idolatry and
superstition. For the Apostaticall Church is the Idolatrous Church signified by
the whore of Babylon, the mother of fornications. But the Church of Room is
strangely addicted to idolatry and superstition, and for the same deserves to
be called the whore of Babylon; where as we through the mercy of God are free
from idolatry, and therefore the Apostasy is with them and not with us. For
the Apostasy is of them that are made drunk with the cup of the whore of
Babylous fornications, as the Papists are, and we are not, who have come out
of Babylon. Thirdly, the Apostasy is of those that receive the name and mark
of the beast as the Papists do, and not of those that refuse it as we do.
The fourth note or touchstone as it were, to try who have made this Apostasy,
i^ the word of God: For that is the true faith and the true religion which is
contained and prescribed in the written word of God. Now our desire is, that
the Scriptures may be acknowledged the only rule of faith and manners: unto
the Scriptures we appeal in all controversies, and desire to be judged by
them: unto the reading of the Scriptures we exhort our people, that they may be
further edified and confirmed in that truth which we do teach and prosesse.
The Papists contrariwise not daring to stand to the Scriptures, sly to their
unwritten verities, traditions, decretals, doctrines and authorities of men
both besides and against the Scriptures: and in a word, that the prophecy of
the Apostle foretelling this Apostasy, might be verified in them, they have
asserted their hearing from the 2. Tim. 4. 4.
truth, and are conuertd unto fables. They cannot abide to hear that the
Scripture should be the only rule of faith and manners: they cannot endure to
see any of their people to read the Scriptures, and therefore desire to keep
it from them in an unknown language. The foundation of their truth is the
authority of their Church, and in the Church, of their Pope, who, they say,
cannot err. But if the Pope teach doctrines of Devils, and speak lies in
hypocrise (as the Apostle has prophesied especially of them) then is there in
that Church little soundness of truth, that is built upon so unsound a
soundation. Thus therefore I reason. The head of the general Apostasy is
Antichrist: The Pope is the head of the general or catholic Apostasiei
therefore he is Antichrist.

21. To the three former arguments, a fourth may be added. The seven heads of
that beast which signifies the Roman state, are not so many persons, but so
many heads or states of government, whereby the common wealth of the Romans,
has been at diverse times governed: the sixth head was the state of emperors:
the seventh Antichrist, as the Papists confess: the eight (which also is one
of the seven) the state of Emperors renewed. Whereby it evidently appears,
Rhem. in Apoc. 17. Bellarmi.
not only that Antichrist is not one man, but also that the Pope (who is the
seventh head) is Antichrist.

CHAP. 3. Concerning the time of Antichrist his coming.
1. TO withdraw our minds from beholding Antichrist in the Sea of Rome, and to
make us look for the expected Messiah of the Jews that never shall come, the
Papists labor by might and maine to persuade us that Antichrist is not yet
come. For even as the learned of the Jews, when Christ was among them,
contrary to their one persuasion, for worldly respects refused the true
Messiah, and made the people expect another which never shall be: So the
learned among the Papists having Antichrist among them, for worldly respects
cannot endure that he should be acknowledged; but teach the people that he is
not yet come, and describe unto them such an Antichrist as themselves may well
know shall never come, as by the grace of God shall appear in the particulars.
Now as touching the time of Antichrists coming, Bellarmine first recites
diverse false and erroneous opinions as heo calls them: and afterward sets
down six solemn demonstrations to prove that he is not yet come. In the
former he spends a goodlong chapter, reckoning up diverse opinions both of the
fathers in former ages, and also of hetetiques as ^he calls them; in latter
times, mingling the truth with errors, that the credit of both might be
alike. As touching the fathers, because he takes it for granted, (which is the
question) that Antichrist is not to come before the end of the world, which we
deny according to the Scriptures: 1. Ioh. 2. 18 2. John. 7. 2. These. 2. 7
he would make their opinion concerning the approaching of Antichrist, which
they heid according to the Prophesies of the Scripture compared with the event,
of no better credit then their conceit of Christ's approaching unto judgment,
grounded not so much upon the Scriptures, as upon their own conjecture. For to
omit their conjectures concerning Christ's coming consuted by experience, what
can Bellarmine answer to the sound argument either of S. Jerome or Gregory,
concerning the coming of Antichrist, confirmed by experience, alleged by
Bellarmine himself. Jerome applying the Prophecy of Paul Epist. ad Geront. de
Monogamia.
2. These. 2. 6. 7. 8. that Antichrist should appear, when he that hinders
(meaning the Roman Emperor) was taken out of the way, to his time, wherein
not only the imperial seat had been removed from Rome (which was the first
degree of taking out of the way that which hindered) but also Rome it self in
distress, being taken of the Goths, and the Empire in decay: Quitenebat
(says he) de medio fit, and non intelligimus Anticbristum appropinquare? He
which did hold, is taken out of the way; and do we not understand that
Antichrist does approach? And likewise Gregory, Omnia quae praedicta sunt,
fiunt: Rex superbia prope est. All things which were foretold do come to
pass: the King Lib. 4. epi. 38.
of pride is at hand. Which arguments alleged also by us, Bellarmine because
he could not answer, he thought to discredit by reckoning them among erroneous
conceits.

2. But let us come to his heretics: Who although they all agree in this,
that Antichrist is come, and that it is the Pope: yet says Bellarmine, they
are divided into six opinions. The first opinion, viz. of the Samosatenians in
Hungary and Transyluania, is not worth the mentioning, being of such
heretics as deny the Trinity, and also the divinity of Christ, with whom
though we have as little to do as the Papists, saving that some of our men
have soundly confuted their heresies, whiles the Papists held their peace: yet
he numbreth our opinion with theirs, as Christ was numbered among the wicked;
that by this mixture of truth with falsehood, he might discredit the truth. As
for the rest, it is easy to show, that all Protestants almost that have
written in this argument, and namely those whom Bellarmine alleges, do agree
in the substance concerning the coming of Antichrist: And that there is no
such difference among them, as Bellarmine would bear us in hand. For
concerning this matter, this is the received opinion of our Churches. When with
John in his Epistles we speak of Antichrist, meaning the whole body of
Heretics and Antichrists, we hold with John that even in the Apostles times
Antichrist had as it were set his foot in the Church, and that from that time
the mystery of iniquity, that is, Antichristianisme, did more and more work,
until the head of this body the man of sin was revealed: Which with Paul we
hold to have been done, after that which hindered was removed out of the way.
But when we speak of the head of this body, who (...) is called the
Antichrist, figured by the second beast, Apoc. 13. of whom also the Apostle
entreats 2. These. 2. the constant opinion of the learned is this: that of the
revealing or manifest appearing of Antichrist, there were two principal
degrees. The first about the year 607. when Boniface the third obtained the
supremacy over the universal See lib. 1. cap. 3.
Church. The second after the year 1000. when he claimed and usurped both
swords, that is, a sovereign and universal authority, not only
ecclesiastical over the Clergy, but also temporal over Kings and Emperors.
Unto which second sovereignty they had long aspired, but never attained,
until the time of Gregory the seventh. We hold then, that Antichrist was
come and showed himself in Boniface the third: and that after this his birth
as it were, he grew by degrees, until he came to his (...), or full growth in
Gregory the seventh: in whose time and in all ages since, the Pope has been
by some acknowledged to be that Antichrist.

3. Now as touching his coming or birth, which is the chief matter in
question, all agree. Illyricus and the other writers 2.
of the Centuries, as Bellarmine confesses, hold, that about the year 606.
Antichrist was borne, when Phocas granted to the Bishop of Rome, that he should
be called the head of the whole Church. Of the same judgment is Chytraeus. For
although he 3.
confess, that the smoke of false doctrine, ascending out of the In Apoc. 9
bottomless pit, began sooner to obscure and darken the truth: yet he says,
that in the year 607, Boniface the third was by Phocas ordained the Angel of
the bottomless pit, meaning thereby Antichrist, when he received from him the
title of oecumenicall Bishop. Luther perceiving that the Papacy consists of
4.
the two swords, teaches that there is a twofold coming of De supput.
annorum Mundi.
Antichrist: the first with the spiritual sword after the year 600. when
Phocas gave him the Antichristian title: the latter, with the temporal sword,
after the year 1000. Bullinger does not say, as Bellarmine falsely charge
him, that Antichrist first 5.
appeared Anno 763. for he above all others most plainly and In Apoc. 13.
distinctlie has delivered that truth which we do hold. Pontisex Romanus
(says he) initium quidem dominij jecit sub Phoca: sub regibus Francorum
fundauit regnum: ampliauit autem sub. Henricis et Fridericis: confirmauit demum
sub sequentibus aliquot regibus: regnat nostro seculo ac praecedentibus
aliquot. The Pope of Rome laid the beginning of his dominion under Phocas:
under the French Kings he founded his kingdom: under the Henry's and
Fredericks he enlarged it: under some other Kings which followed he confirmed
it: bereigneth in our and some former ages. Musculus, whom he names in the
sixth place, does not say, that Antichrist 6.
came about the year 1200: but by the tyranny of the Popes, and usurped
dominion over the Church, by their shameless symony, by their excessive riote,
and devilish pride, by their abominable lusts and uncleanness, he concludes
that the Church of Rome is Babylon, and the seat of Antichtist: and adds that
Bernard was of the same mind. Who seems to have signified that Antichrist
was then come, and that only it remained that the man of sin should be
revealed (that is, acknowledged and detected, as Musculus understands him)
which discovery of Antichrist, says he, has followed in our age. And thus
you see a notable consent of all our writers whom he alleges in the maine
point, concerning the time of the coming of Antichrist.

4. Now let us see what he objecteth against this received truth. Concerning
the time of his coming with the spiritual sword, he objecteth that Phocas did
not give the title of universal to the Pope, but called him the head of the
Churches, as Justinian before him had done, and also the council of Chalcedon:
And therefore no reason, why the coming of Antichrist should be placed in the
time of Phocas. As touching the title, good authors affirm, that he received
from Phocas both the title of the head of the Church, and also of universal or
oecumenicall Bishop. And no doubt he sought for, and by suite obtained that
which John of Constantinople had before claimed. Neither is there any great
difference betwixt these two titles, as they are now given to the Pope, save
that to be the head of the universal Church, is the more Antichristian style.
And although titles of honor and pre-eminence were sometimes given to the
Church of Rome, as the chief or head of the Churches, the mystery of iniquity
working before the revelation thereof in the Papacy: yet before this grant of
Phocas, which was obtained with much ado and contention, the Church of Rome
had the pre-eminence and superiority over all other Churches excepting that of
Constantinople, not in respect of authority and jurisdiction (which after this
grant, it more and more practiced) but in respect of order and dignity: And
that for this cause especially, because Rome whereof he was Bishop, was the
chief city, as it is specified in the council of Chalcedon, (...): and in
the council of Constantinople, (...). And for the same cause was the Patriarch
of Constantinople sometimes Council. Chalced.
matched with him, sometimes Tempore Ma^itii.
preferred above him: because Constantinople (which they called new Rome) was
become the imperial seat. Yea and the Bishops of Rauenna, because their city
was the chief in the exarchate of Rauenna, whereunto Rome was for a time
subject, strove with the Bishop of Rome in the time of the exarches for
superiority. Seeing therefore that now the Pope of Rome had with great
contention and ambition obtained the supremacy and sovereignty over the
universal church; and now entitled himself the head of the universal Church
(a title peculiar unto Christ) the head I say, not only in respect of
excellency and dignity, as a chief member of the Church (as he had been in
former times by some acknowledged, because he was the Bishop of the chief
city; but also in respect of authority and Jurisdiction, as being the prince
and supreme governor of the Church universal: we do therefore worthily call
this sovereign dominion challenged over the universal Church, the first
revelation or open coming of Antichrist.

5. Concerning the coming of Antichrist with the temporal sword after the
year 1000. he obiecteth, that from the 700. year the Pope had received
te^porall dominion, and that about the year 715. he excommunicated the Greek
Emperor. etc. But Bellarmine knows well enough that we speak not so much of
the Popes temporal dominion over those parts which they call the patrimony of
Saint Peter; but of that which they call and challenge to themselves, Utriusque
potestatis temporalis and spiritualis Monarchiam, The Monarchy of both powers,
temporal and spiritual. I answer therefore, that the Pope indeed had a
temporal dominion before, but not general: and that he had long endeavored to
get the superiority over the Emperors, but never so fully attained unto it,
as in the times of Gregory the seventh, and afterward. For Gregory the
seventh, as Auentinus says, Primus imperium pontificium condidit, etc. First
founded the Papal Annal. B^cm. lib. 5.
Empire, which his successors (says he, reckoning unto his own times) for
these 450. years, in spite of the world, and maugre the Emperors, have so
held, that they have brought all in heaven and hell into subjection. From this
time forward the Emperor is nothing but a bare title, without substance, etc.
And thus have I answered whatsoever is in his third Chapter, pertinent to the
matter in hand, omitting (as my manner is) his other wranglings, as being either
altogether impertinent, or merely personal.

The 4. Chapter: maintaining against Bellarmine his first demonstration, that
Antichrist is come.
1. TO prove that Antichrist is not yet come, and consequently that the Pope
is not Antichrist, he brings six slender conjectures from six signs,
which, as shall be showed, are neither proper nor necessary. And these by a
strange kind of Logic, he calls forsooth six demonstrations. For so have
I read of some troubled with melancholy, who have thought every Straw or
small Reed in their hands, to have been so many Spears. We must know (says
he) that the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, has given us six certain signs
of the coming of Antichrist. Whereof two go before, viz. the preaching of the
Gospel throughout the whole world: and the desolation of the Roman Empire.
Two accompany Antichrist, to wit, the preaching of Enoch and Elias: and the
most grievous persecution of the church, insomuch that the public service of
God must wholly cease. Two come after, namely the ru^e of Antichrist after three
years and a half: and the end of the world. Of which signs, none (says he)
is yet fulfilled. We hold the contrary, namely, that all those signs, which
the holy Ghost has given concerning the coming of Antichrist, are fulfilled:
and that those which are not yet fulfilled, are none of those signs which the
holy Ghost has assigned. For I will not stand now to tell you how fitly he
makes the death of Antichrist, and the end of the world, which according to
Bellarmines conceit follows after his death, to be two signs of his coming.

2. The first sign which goes before the coming of Antichrist, is the
Preaching of the Gospel throughout the world. From whence he reasons thus:
If the Gospel has not as yet been preached throughout the world, then is not
Antichrist as yet come: But the Gospel has not as yet been preached
throughout the world, therefore Antichrist is not yet come. But in this
argument nothing is sound: no necessity of consequence in the proposition, nor
truth in the assumption. The proposition, notwithstanding he would prove,
because our Savior Christ makes this universal preaching of the Gospel a
forerunner of Antichrist, Mat. 24. 14. This Gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached in all the world, for atesti^onie to all nations. But our Savior
Christ does not say that the Gospel shall be preached throughout the world
before the coming of Antichrist, but before the end, as it follows in the
very same verse; and then the end shall come. Whereby we are to understand
either the destruction of Jerusalem, which is most like, or the end and
consummation of the world, as Bellarmine expounds it. And therefore unless
he take it for granted, that the coming of Antichrist shall not be before the
very end of the world, which we do constantly deny, as being the matter in
question betwixt us, there is not so much as any show of reason in this
allegation, being understood according to his own exposition, which also is
false. Neither is it the purpose of our Savior Christ to signify unto his
Disciples the time of Antichrists coming, but by way of answer to the question
propounded by his Disciples verse 3. to show them when Jerusalem should be
destroyed, as also to give them some signs of his coming, and of the end of
the world. But because the former part of this Chapter is diuershe abused by
the Papists in this matter concerning Antichrist, I think it needful by way
of a short analysis to give you the true meaning thereof; that by one labor
all their cauils may be refuted.

3. Whereas therefore our Savior Christ had foretold his Disciples the utter
desolation of Jerusalem, and destruction of the temple: they being persuaded
that the temple and city of Jerusalem should not have an end before the end of
the world, demand therefore of our Savior Christ when should be the end of
both. Tell us (say they verse. 3.) when these things shall be: that is, when the
temple shall be destroyed, and what shall be the sign of thy coming* and of the
end of the world. Which question having two parts, receives an answer to both.
To the former, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, from the 4. verse. to
the 23. To the latter, concerning the coming of Christ, and the end of the
world, from thence to the 42. As touching the former: our Savior prophecieth,
first of the calamities and troubles which should go before the destruction of
Jerusalem unto the 15. verse. And secondly of the destruction it self, and the
greeuousnesse thereof, unto the 23. The troubles and calamities which were the
forerunners of the destruction of Jerusalem, were either temporal or
spiritual. The temporal either public and common; or peculiar to the
disciples of Christ among the Jews. The public, wars, and rumors of
wars, famine, pestilence, earthquakes, which were but the beginning, (...),
of sorrows in the land of Iewry, being about to be delivered of her
inahbitants, verse. 6. 7. 8. The peculiar troubles to the Christians,
persecution and hatred for Christ's sake; and the effects thereof in the
unsound, falling away, and betraying and hating one another, verse 9. 10. The
spiritual, in the teachers spirits of error and heresy, verse 5. 11. In the
heaters, seduction by false Prophets and falling away, verse 11. 12. Now unto
this Prophecy are admixed both admonitions and consolations. Admonitions, that
they should take heed of false Prophets, verse 4. that they should not be
troubled or dismaide with rumors of wars, verse 6. Consolations grounded upon
a two-folde promise, first of salvation to those, who, notwithstanding these
temptations, shall persevere to the end, verse 13. Secondly, of the success of
their Ministry, that before the desolation of Jerusalem, the Gospel should be
preached throughout the world for a testimony to all nations, verse. 14. And
therefore that they should not fear, least together with Jerusalem his Church
should be overthrown. For before the destruction of Jerusalem he would by
their Preaching to all nations, both Jews and Gentiles, plant his Church in
many nations of the world. And for as much as the Temple and City of Jerusalem
were types and figures of the Church of Christ, which were to be abolished when
the church of Christ should be established: therefore he adds, that upon the
planting of his church by their ministry should the end and destruction of
Jerusalem come. And these were the calamities which went before the destruction
of Jerusalem. The destruction it self is described partly by the efficient,
foretold by Daniel chap. 9. 27. that is to say, the Roman armies besieging
Jerusalem Luke. 21. 20. which because they were Idolators are called Sic
Augustine. ad Hesychiu^ et Chrysostom. homil. 49. in Mat. oper. imperfect.
abominable, and because of the desolation which they were to bring upon
Jerusalem are called desolators, and by a metonymy, Mat. 24. 15. the
abomination of desolation, and by a Synecdeche Dan. 9. 27. abominable wings
(that is armies) bringing desolation: partly by the greeuousnesse of the
destruction verse 21. To this prophecy also he admixeth counsel and
consolation. Counsel, that they which shall be in Iewry provide for their selves
by flight, verse 16. 17. 18. in respect whereof he both pitieth the women and
such as give suck, and bids them pray that their flight be not in winter,
nor on the Sabbath day, verse. 19. 20. His consolation is, that for the elects
sake the time of the siege shall be shortened: for otherwise none of the Jews
could escape, as Chrysostom also expounds, verse. 22. This exposition is
plainly confirmed by conference of this Chapter of Matthew with Luke. 21. where
the same question being propounded, verse. 7. concerning the end of Jerusalem
alone, receives an answer peculiar to the destruction of Jerusalem, unto the
25. verse. And whereas Mat. 24. 15. Christ uses these words, when you shall
see the abomination of desolation which in Daniell is called the abominable
wings bringing desolation, standing in the holy place, this in Luke is thus
expounded, When you see Jerusalem Luke 21 20
besieged with armies (which Daniel foretold should bring desolation upon it)
then understand that the desolation thereof is near, and therefore he advises
them which shall be in Iewry to fly so soon as Jerusalem shall be besieged,
etc. Because there shall be great affliction in those days, namely in Iewry
(...).
and Jerusalem, as Luke restrains it. For there shall be great destresse Luke
21. 23 24.
in the land, and wrath in this people, and they shall fall on the edge of the
sword, and shall be carried away captive into all nations, Luke 22. 25
and Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles until the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled, and then shall be the end of the world, the signs whereof
be adds in the next words.

4. By this analysis of the text and conference with Luke, it evidently
appears that all these predictions from the 6. ver. to the 23. in Mat. and in
the 21. of Luke from the 7. verse. to the 29. concern the destruction of
Jerusalem, which happened within forty years after this prophecy was delivered.
Neither may we think that our savior Christ would intermingle the prophecies
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the world, thereby to
nourish the aforesaid error of his disciples, who imagined that the end of
Jerusalem should not be before the end of the world, as appears by their
question. For even afterward ver. 34. where seems the greatest mixture, our
Savior Christ speaks distinctly. For whereas our Savior had spoken first of
the end of Jerusalem, and then of the end of the world severally, and had given
signs of both, whereby they might know the approaching of either, as by the
budding of the fig tree they gather summer to be near, he defines the time of
the one, and the other he leaves indefinit: Verily I say unto you, this
generation shall not pass, until al those things (says he, pointing as it
seems toward Jerusalem as he sat in the mount Oliuet) be fulfilled. And as
touching the end of the world, he notes both the certainty thereof, and the
uncertainty of the time: of the former he says, Heaven and earth shall pass
away (and that with a noise, as Peter says) but my words shall not pass away,
howbeit of that day and hour (namely, wherein the son 2. Pet. 3. 10
of man shall come, and wherein the heavens shall pass away) none knows, no not
the Angels of heaven, but the father only. Whatsoever the Papists therefore
allege out of the former part of the Chapter, as favoring any of their
fancies concerning Antichrist, as namely the preaching of the Gospel before the
coming of Antichrist, the abomination of desolation, and the most grievous
tribulation in the time of Antichrist, etc. may easily be answered.

5 But if these prophecies be compared with the history and event, we shall
find this truth to be more evident, seeing all these predictions had their
complement at or before the destruction of Jerusalem. For (to omit the rest)
the Apostle testifies Colos. 1. 6. 23. Romans 1. 8. and. 10. 18. that the
Gospel was in his time preached in all the world; and therefore before the
desolation Eusebius. lib. 3
of Jerusalem, which happened about two year after his death. From whence also
evidently appears, how false Bellarmines assumption is, as being
contradictory both to the prophecy of Christ in this place, as also to the
testimony of the Apostle testifying the fulfilling thereof in his time,
according to the commission given to the Apostles, that they should go into
all the world and teach all nations, Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15. which was
accordingly performed, Mar. 16 20. And thus Homil. in Mat. 24.
Chrysostom also expounds this place, that before the end, that is, the
destruction of Jerusalem, the Gospel was to be preached throughout the world,
and proves by the same testimonies of Paul, that this prophecy was fulfilled
before the taking of Jerusalem. But if it seem incredible unto any that the
Gospel should be preached throughout the world in so short a time: he must
consider, first, that by the whole world is not to be understood every small
corner and unknown part of the world: but by a Synecdoche, the greatest part
of the world then known and inhabited, as Luke 2. 1. And by all nations, not
all and every nation, but all sorts, that is, both Jews and Gentiles. For both
here and elsewhere there seems to be an opposition made betwixt the whole
world and the land of Iewry: betwixt all nations and the Jews. For whereas
before the Church was contained in Iewry, and the word preached to the Jews,
our Savior shows that before the desolation of Jerusalem, the Gospel should
be preached commonly in all parts of the world, and not only in Iewry; and
indifferently to all other nations, and not peculiarly to the Jews. Secondly,
he is to consider, both the multitude of the preachers and dispersers of the
Gospel, and also the infinite power of Gods spirit, and miraculous efficacy of
his word preached in that it could in so short a time spread it self so far as
it did. Thirdly a distinction is to be made betwixt preaching the Gospel and
receiving it: For it was preached in all the world, but not received every
where. And that our Savior signifies where he says, it should be preached in
all the world for a testimony to all nations, to leave those which embrace it
not, without excuse. If then the preaching of the Gospel throughout the world
be not made by Christ our Savior a sign of Antichrists coming, and yet
notwithstanding it be most true, that according to the prophecy of Christ, the
Gospel was preached in all the world before the desolation of Jerusalem: what
show of reason is there in this demonstration? And this is all that I think
worth the answering in his fourth Chapter.

6. For to what purpose should I tell you of his argument, which
notwithstanding he says it was now no time to prove, to wit, that before the
coming of Antichrist the Gospel should be preached throughout the world,
because the cruel persecution of Antichrist should hinder al public exercises
of trus religion: and therefore was to be preached generally throughout the
world either before the time of Antichrist, or not at al: which we shall in
part find time to answer in his fourth demonstration. In the mean time we
answer first, that the grievous tribulation, before which our Savior says the
Gospel was to be preached in all the world, is not the persecution under
Antichrist, but the affliction of the Jews at and before the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans, as I have manifestly proved. And secondly, that if
the general preaching of the Gospel were made a sign of Antichrists coming,
as it is not, but of the end; yet is it not necessary that it should be
preached generally throughout the world at one time: for it might suffice that
in one age it were preached to one nation; and in another age, to another
people. And therefore although during the persecution of Antichrist the Gospel
were not preached generally and at once to all nations, yet in that time it
might be preached to some nations, where it had not formerly been preached,
and therefore might be preached to all nations before the destruction of
Antichrist, though it were not before his coming. Or to what end should I
spend any time in answering the testimonies of the fathers, who supposed that
the Gospel should be preached in all the world before the coming of
Antichrist, seeing according to the meaning of our Savior Christ, it was to be
preached in all the world, before the destruction of Jerusalem? Or what account
should we make of his objections, wherein he alleges that the Gospel has not
as yet been preached throughout the world, seeing our Savior who cannot he
has prophesied, and the Apostle by the same spirit of truth has testified,
that before the destruction of Jerusalem, the Gospel of the kingdom was
preached in all the world. And therefore the Papists in this point, whiles they
study to contradict us, are not afraid to give the lie to our Savior Christ.
Neither are his cauillations, whereby he indeuouteth to avoid and elude those
testimonies of Scripture, which do testify that the Gospel was in the
Apostles times preached in all the world, worth the mentioning. For whereas
Paul says, No doubt their sound went out through all the earth, and their
words into the ends Romans 10. 1^
of the world: Bellarmine cauilleth that the Apostle uses the time past,
instead of the future, as if he had said, no doubt their sound shall go through
all the earth. But (say I) the Apostle proves that the Jews had heard the
Gospel, because the sound of the Preachers thereof was gone through all the
earth: and therefore they from whom the Gospel proceeded to other nations,
could not be ignorant thereof. And again, whereas the same Apostle says, that
the Gospel in his time was in all the world, and adds that Col. 1. 6.
it did bring forth fruit even as it did among the Colossians: Bellarmine
answers that the Apostle would not say that it was actually, but virtually,
as they say, in all the world. But how could it bring forth fruit, unless it
were actually? and besides, the Apostle in the same Chapter says, the Gospel
had been preached (...), quod agit, est non solum actu primo, sed etiam actu
secundo. Col. 1. 23.
to every creature under heaven, which is a more large speech then this
prophecy of our Savior, Mat. 24. 14. To conclude, if by the end in that place
is to be understood the end of the world, as Bellarmine will needs have it
contrary to the text, yet the Gospel before the and might be preached
throughout the world, and yet not before the coming of Antichrist. If by the
end is to be understood the end of Jerusalem, as I have manifestly proved;
then according to our Saviors prophecy, the Gospel was preached in all the
world, in the Apostles times. But that the general preaching of the Gospel
should be a sign of Antichrists coming, the Scripture has never a word.

The 5. Chapter: maintaining against Bellarmine his second demonstration, that
Antichrist is already come.
1. THe second sign going before Antichrist is, as Bellarmine says, he utter
desolatio^ of the Roman Empire. From whence this demonstration is raised. If
the Roman Empire be not yet utterly destroyed, then is not yet Antichrist come
for: the utter desolation of the Roman Empire is a certain sign going
before his coming: But the Roman Empire is not yet utterly destroyed: therefore
Antichrist is not yet come. We confess that before antichrist could be
revealed by exercising a sovereign dominion in Rome, it was necessary that the
Emperor, so far forth as he hindered this revelation of Antichrist, should be
taken out of the way: But that there should be such an utter desolatio^ of the
Empire, as that there should not remain so much as the name of the Emperor or
king of the Romans, that we do utterly dony. He that hindered was taken out of
the way, partly when the imperial seat was removed from Rome to
Constantinople, and that to this end (as they have set down in the donation of
Constantine) that the City of Rome might be left to the Pope: but especially
when as after the division of the Empire into two parts, the Empire in the West
(which properly was the Empire of Rome) was dissolved, and lay void for many
years: All which was accomplished before Boniface 3. attained to the
Antichristian title. Neither does the reviving of the Western Empire in
Charlemaine, after it had bin void 325. years, hinder the revelation or
dominion of Antichrist; but rather proves that Antichrist was then come. For
this new Empire, erected by the Popes means, it is the image of the beast
(that is, of the old Empire) which Antichrist Apoc. 13.
the second beast causes to be made, and puts life therinto. It is the
beast whereon the whore of Babylon sits, and therefore is so far from hindering
Antichrist, that it supporteth him. This beast which was an imperial state,
but is not indeed, though in title it be, as being but an image of the old
Empire, is said to be the eight head of the beast, and yet one of the seven:
whereas Antichrist Apo. 17.
by the confession of papists is the seventh. Wherefore although the old Empire
in the West (which hindered) was done out of the way, and indeed dissolved
before the revelation of Antichrist; yet even with and under Antichrist, there
was to be an imperial state in name and title, which is the beast whereon the
whore of Babylon sits, as I have heretofore proved. Lib. 1. cap. 3.. 3.


2. But let us come to his arguments. The first whereof is this. If before
Antichrists coming the Roman Empire is to be divided into ten kings, whereof
none shall be called king of the Romans; then is not Antichrist yet come, for
yet there is a king of the Romans: but the first is true, therefore the last.
The proposition he takes for granted, although it cannot be denied but that
upon the desolation of the empire in the West, it was divided among ten kings
at the least; who although they had the provinces of the Empire, yet none of
them was called the king of the Romans. The proposition therefore is false,
and the reason may be returned upon our adversary. For seeing these ten kings
had not received their kingly power in the Apostles time, but were to receive
it either after the beast (which is Antichrist,) as some read; or with the
Apo. 17. 12. (...).
beast as others: it is evident therefore, that when the ten rulers of the
provinces had received authority as kings, then Antichrist was come. But many
hundred years since, the rulers of the provinces ceased to be deputies under
the Emperor, and obtained power as sovereign kings, dividing among them the
western Empire, therefore many hundred years since was Antichrist come. The
assumption he proves out of Daniel chap. 2. Where (says he) is described the
succession of the chief kingdoms unto the end of the world by a certain
image, the golden head whereof signifies the kingdom of the Assyrians; the
Breast of silver, the kingdom of the Persians; the Belly of Brass, the
kingdom of the Grecians; the Legs of Iron, the kingdom of the Romans divided
into two parts, etc. And in the 7. chap. the same kingdoms are signified: the
last which has ten horns being the kingdom of the Romans. Now (says he) as
the two Legs have ten toes Subtiliss.
which are not legs, and as the ten horns are not the beast: so the Roman
Empire shall be divided into ten kings, whereof none is the king of the
Romans. Answer. 1. This argumentation of Bellarmine implies a contradiction.
For if there be in Daniel described a succession of kingdoms which shall
continue to the end of the world, whereof the Roman is the last: then the
Roman Empire shall not utterly be destroyed before the coming of Antichtist,
which goes before the end of the world. But howsoever the common opinion has
bin, that the fourth kingdom mentioned in those chapters is the Roman Empire;
yet by the learned, especially of these latter times, it has been most
clearly proved, that by it is understood that kingdom of the Seleucida and
Lagidae, which tyrannized over the people of Iewry. For the Seleucida who were
Kings of Syria, and the Lagidae who were Kings of Egypt, were the two legs of
the image, and were also the fourth beast: the ten kings of these two
kingdoms, which successively Chap. 16.
usurped dominion over the Jews, were the ten horns of the beast; which being
most true as hereafter also shall be showed, it appears evidently, that this
whole argumentation is impertinent. But suppose that Daniel had spoken in those
places of the Roman Empire, yet would not that follow which Bellarmine would
infer thereof. For by the beast is signified the kingdom it self, and by
the horns the several kings, who although they be not the kingdom it self
signified by the beast, no more then the horns are the beast, yet are they so
many kings of that kingdom, which is signified by the beast. As for example:
Seleucus, Antiochus, and the rest of the ten kings signified by the ten horns,
and as Bellarmine speaks, by the ten toes, though they were not the kingdom
of Syria and Egypt it self; yet were they kings of that kingdom, and
therefore this argument of Bellarmine is very frivolous.

3. His second proof is out of Apocal. 17. Where John describes a beast with
seven heads and ten horns, upon which beast a certain woman sits, which
he expounds to be the great city sitting on seven hills, that is to say,
Rome. The seven heads as they signify seven hills, so also seven kings, by
which number (says he) all the Roman Emperors are understood: the ten horns
are ten kings, which shall reign together. And least we should think that
these shall be Roman kings, he adds, that these kings shall hate the harlot,
and make her desolate, because they shall so divide the Roman Empire among
them, that they shall utterly destroy it. Here Bellarmine, as you see,
confesses, that Rome is the whore of Babylon, and consequently the seat of
Antichrist, and not Rome under the old Emperors, but Rome after the
dissolution of the Empire. And that the ten horns are so many kings, among
whom the Roman Empire should be divided, and that these ten Kings were to
receive their kingdom together; and consequently that these are not the same
ten horns whereof Daniel speaks, which reigned successively, Dan. 11. And
whereas Bellarmine says, the 7. heads signify all the Emperors, it is untrue.
For the holy Ghost names seven, because they were seven indeed, and therefore
numbreth them. Five are fallen, the sixth is, and the seventh is not yet come.
But all this is besides the present purpose. How then does he prove, that
before Antichrist comes, the Roman Empire shall be so utterly destroyed, as
that not the name of a Roman Emperor or king of the Romans should remain?
because the Empire shall be divided among ten kings, which are not Roman
kings. But that proves not that the name shall not remain: for he that is
none of those ten kings, may have the name of the Emperor or king of the
Romans, as namely the beast which was, and is not, though it be, which is the
eight head, and is one of the seven, that is to say, the Emperor erected by
the Pope. And why may none of these be called the king of the Romans? First
forsooth, because they shall hate Rome, and make her desolate^ As though he
that has the title of the King of the Romans, may not hate Rome
notwithstanding that title, as indeed some of the Emperors have done.
Secondly, because they shall so divide among them the Roman Empire, as that
they shall utterly destroy it. Where you see by a circular disputation, the
question brought to prove his argument, and yet experience shows, that
although the Empire is dissolved, and also divided among the beast (that is
Antichrist) and ten kings, there does notwithstanding remain the name and
title of the Emperor or king of the Romans. And so much now shall suffice to
have spoken of that place, from whence I have heretofore proved, both that
antichrist is already come, and that the Pope is antichrist.

4. His third proof is out of 2. These. 2. And now what hinders you know,
that he may be revealed in due time, only he which holds must hold, until
he be done out of the way, and then that wicked man shall be revealed. That this
is to be understood of the Roman Empire, he not only affirms, but also
confirms by the testimonies of diverse of the Fathers, the which we are so
far from denying, that from hence, as one especial argument, we prove the
Pope to be Antichrist. But neither the Apostle nor any of the Fathers
(excepting Lactantius, whose Prophecy in this point the Papists themselves do
think to be erroneous) does say, that the Empire of Rome shall so utterly be
abolished, as that not so much as the name of the Emperor or King of the
Romans shall remain; which Bellarmine should have proved. For otherwise that
the Empire was indeed dissolved before the revelation of Antichrist, the holy
Ghost prophesied, the event has proved, and we do willingly confess: Qu^
tenebat, de med^ fit, Ad Gerontid de Monogamia.
(says Jerome in his time) and non intelligimus Antichristum appropinquare? He
which held, is taken away, and do we not understand that Antichrist is at
hand? Yea but (says Bellarmine) the Roman Empire is not yet utterly
destroyed, and therefore Antichrist is not yet come. Neither is it necessary:
it is sufficient, that he which hindered the revelation of Antichrist, wa^ done
out of the way, which was done first by remoouing the Imperial seat from
Rome, which was to be the seat of Antichrist, as has been proved: secondly,
by the dissolution of the Empire in the West. As for the Empire renewed by the
Pope, that hinders not Antichrist, but rather furthereth, as has been
showed; and therefore there is no necessity that it should be taken away.
Neither is there now an Emperor of the Romans indeed, but only in title,
without the thing it self, as enjoying neither the city of Rome it self, nor
yet the Provinces. And therefore either unskillfully or sophistically are these
Emperors, which have no imperial authority either in the city or the
provinces, compared with those ancient Emperors, who although they had the
Empire, wanted Rome it self.

5. And hereby appears the error of our adversaries, who think that
Antichrist comes not before the utter desolation of the Roman Empire:
whereas neither of the Apostles Paul or John do say so, but rather the
contrary, as has bin showed. For to omit the rest before alleged, John says,
Apoc. 13. That one head of the beast, meaning the state of the emperors, had
indeed ^ceiued deadly woun^, both in respect of Rome the head city, and of the
Emperors in the West, but was cured, therefore not utterly destroyed: and
cured by the Pope, both in respect of the city, and in regard of the Emperor.
And therefore the Pope is Antichrist, as some of our writers infer, because
this wound was to be cured by the second beast, which figureth Antichrist. And
Ambrose says upon 2. These. 2. That Antichrist shall restore liberty to the
Romans, but in his own name. Bellarmine answers, That he reads no where in
John, that the beast, which signifies the Roman Empire, was to be cured by
antichrist. Yea but this he might have read, that the second beast, which is
Antichrist, causes the image of the beast (that is, the new Empire) to be
made, and puts life unto it. For by this renewing of the Empire, Bellarmine
elsewhere De translat. imperij. lib. 1. c. 4.
prosesseth, that the Roman Empire was restored to the same estate, wherein it
was before Augustulus. But what has Bellarmine read in John? Forsooth, That
one of the heads of the beast should dye, and shortly after rise again by the
help of the devil; which the Ancient expound of Antichrist, who shall feign
himself to be dead, and by devilish art rise again, that so by resembling
the true death and resurrection of Christ, he might seduce many. First, it is
evident that the former beast figureth not Antichrist, but the Roman state,
and that under the Roman Emperors especially. Secondly, it is not said, that
one of the heads did feign it self dead, and by the help of the devil did
rise again (which needed not, if the death were cou^terfeit) but that one of
the heads had received a deadly wound, and was cured again. The head was the
state of the Emperors, to wit, the sixth head, which received a deadly wound in
Augustulus, after whom the Empire in the West lay void 325. years. But this
head was cured after a sort in Charlemaine and his successou^s, in whom there
was an image of the former Emperors erected by the Pope. And therefore this
state of Emperors renewed in Charlemaine and his successors, is said to be the
eight head of the beast, and yet is one of the seven. So that the sixth head
which before was wounded to death, was cured, and after a sort repaired in
the^. This in substance is confessed by Bellarmine himself in this chapt. where
understanding by the two legs of the image. quod (...)
in Daniel, the Western and Eastern Empire, he says, That the Western,
which was the one leg, failed, namely, in Augustulus, and was after erected in
Charlemaine, and that (as elsewhere he boasts) by the Pope. Now whereas
Bellarmine labors to prove, that this head which was wounded to death and
revived again, is not Charles the great, he shows himself rediculous in
fighting with his own shadow. For by the head is not meant any one man, but
the state and succession of Emperors, which was interrupted and cut off in
Augustulus, and renewed in Charles the great, and his successors. And that
which is added concerning the universality either of worship, or of rule, is
not spoken of the head which was revived, but of the beast, which was to Apoc.
13. 7. 8.
have one of his seven heads wounded to death and cuted again.

The sixth Chapter: answering his third demonstration, concerning Enoch and
Elias.
1. NOw we are to come to those signs, which in Bellarmines conceit are to
accompany Antichrist, the former whereof is the coming of Enoch and Elias in
the flesh, to oppose themselves against Antichrist, and to convert the Jews.
From whence Bellarmine reasons thus. If Enoch and Elias be not yet come
again in the flesh, then Antichrist is not yet come: But Enoch and Elias are
not yet come again in the flesh; and therefore Antichrist is not yet come. To
the proposition I answer; first, that if Enoch and Elias were to come in their
own persons before the second coming of Christ, as some of the Ancient have
thought, and that to oppose themselves against Antichrist, as the Papists
dream: yet it follows not that therefore Antichrist should not be come
before their coming. It is sufficient that they come before his overthrow,
and the second coming of Christ. And therefore if they were indeed to come,
their coming might yet be expected, notwithstanding the truth of our
assertion, that Antichrist is already come. But if Enoch and Elias be not to
come again in their own persons before the end of the world, to fight against
Antichrist, what force of argument is there in this worthy demonstration? This
therefore Bellarmine makes the question, which he goes about to prove.
First, by testimonies of Scripture. Secondly, by consent of the fathers.
Thirdly, by reason.

2. There be four Scriptures (says Bellarmine) to prove that Enoch and Elias
in their own persons shall come against Antichrist. Howbeit this is a manifest
untruth; for no place of Scripture speaks of Enoch his return. The first
Malach. 4. 5. Behold I will send unto you Elias the Prophet, before the great
and fearful day of the Lord come, and he shall turn the hearts of the
fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto their fathers.
This place makes no mention of Enoch, but only of Elias: and by Elias is
meant not Elias the Thesbite, but John the Baptist: who (as the Luke. 1. 17.
Angel applying to him this prophecy says) should go before the Lord Jesus in
the spirit and power of Elias, that he may turn the hearts of the fathers unto
the children, etc. And our savior Christ Mat. 11. 14
most plainly affirms, that John Baptist is that Elias who was to come, and
if you will receive (says he) that is, if you will give credit to my speech,
this is that Elias who was to come: And adds, he that has ears to hear,
let him hear. Which shows that the Papists neither have hearts to believe
Christ, nor ears to hear him: but have open both hearts to receive and ears
to hear the fables of the Jews: who as they yet look for their Messiah, so
they look also for Elias to be his forerunner. For as Jerome writes upon this
place of Malachy, the Jews and Iudaizing heretics think that before their
Messiah, Elias shall come, and restore all things. Hence it is, that unto Christ
this question is propounded in the Gospel: what is that which the Pharisees
say, that Elias shall come? to whom he answered: Elias indeed shall come: and if
you will believe, he is already come, by Elias meaning John. And therefore in
Ieromes judgment it is but the opinion of a Iudaizing heretic to expect the
coming again of Elias in his own person. Yea but (says Bellarmine) this
place cannot be understood of John Baptist, but of Elias only. For Malachy
speaks of the second coming of Christ which shall be unto judgment: For so he
says, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come; for his first
coming is not called great and terrible, but the acceptable time and day of
salvation. Whereupon it is also added, least when I come, I strike the earth
with a curse. But Christ in his first coming came not to judge, but to be
judged.

3. Answ. Bellarmine must give us leave to believe the Angel Luke. 1. 17 Mat.
11. 14 Math. 17.
of God, and our Savior Christ, rather then himself, who is not afraid, as
it seems, to give the lie to the spirit of God speaking in both. Neither can
he prove that Malachie speaks of the second coming of Christ: for therein
the Papists err worse then the Jews. For both the text it self, and also the
application thereof by the Angel and our Savior Christ, do prove, that Elias
was to come before the first coming of Christ, which is great to the godly,
and terrible to the wicked And therefore in the beginning of the third Chapter,
the Prophet speaking most plainly of the first coming of Christ, before which
the Lord promises to send his messenger, that is, John Baptist, to prepare the
way before Mat. 11. 10. Mark. 1. 2.
him, signifies, that this coming is great and fearful, verse 2. But who
may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure when he appears? for
he is like a purging fire, and like Pullers Soap, and he shall sit down to
try and fine the silver. Of the same coming he speaks in the beginning of
the fourth Chapter. Behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, etc.
showing how terrible it shall be to the wicked. But unto you that fear my name
(says the Lord, verse 2.) shall the sun of righteousness arise, and health
shall be under his wings, etc. And before this great day comes, he promises
them to send them Elias, that is, John Baptist, to whom our Savior applies
the Prophecy of Malachie, both Chapter 3. 1. and Chapter 4. 5. In like sort,
John Baptist himself describes the first coming of Christ as terrible in
respect of the wicked. Now (says he) is the Axe laid to the root of the
trees, etc. Math. 3. 10. and verse 11. and 12. He that comes after me is
mightier then I: he will Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, which
has his Fan in his hand, (using the like similitude that Malachie did) and
will purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner, but will burn up
the Chafe with unquenchable fire. Symeon also says of our Savior, that he
was appointed both for the fall of the wicked, and Luke. 2. 34.
rising of the godly. And elsewhere he is called a stumbling stone, and a Rock
of offense, upon which stone, whosoever falls, Romans 9. 33.
he shall be broken in pieces: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall all
Mat. 21. 44.
to grind him. If notwithstanding all this which has been alleged, any man
shall think the first coming of the Lord, not so fitly to be called terrible:
I further answer, that the Hebrew word Norah, signifies also reverend, to be
feared, or had in reverence, as Genesis 28. 17. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. and so is translated
by Tremelius and Iunius in this place of Malachie. And thus both that word, and
others of the same root are used in the signification Psalm. 130. 4
of reverence, or filial fear. And whereas it is added, that Elias should be
sent to convert the people, Least when I come (says the Lord) I should strike
the earth with a curse: the meaning is, that the Lord would send his messenger
to prepare the way before him, that some of the people at the least, might be
ready to receive our Savior Christ, least if all should reject him, he should
be provoked to strike the land: for at his second coming, he shall without
peradventure strike the earth. And in this exposition of Malachie besides
others, Arias Montanus the most learned writer among the Papists, does wholly
agree with In Malach.
us; expounding this Prophecy of John Baptist, whom he calls another Elias,
and of the first coming of Christ. Thus therefore I answer: First that
Malachie speaks not of Enoch, but of Elias only: and secondly, of Elias his
coming, not with Antichrist, but before Christ: thirdly, and that before the
first coming of Christ: fourthly and consequently, not of Elias literally, but
of John Baptist, who came in the spirit and power of Elias.

4. The second place is, Ecclesiastic. 48. 10. and 44. 16. In the former place
it is said of Elias, That he was appointed to reprove in due season, and to
pacify the anger of the Lords judgment proceeding to furis, and to turn the
hearts of the fathers unto the children, and to set up the Tribes of Jacob. In
the latter it is said of Enoch, as Bellarmine reads, That he pleased God, and
was translated into Paradise, that he might give pe^ance unto the Gentiles.
First I answer to both places, that although this book of the son of Sirach
be very commendable; yet it is not of Canonical authority, being but a humane
writing, as appears not only by the former place alleged, but also by that
erroneous conceit concerning Samuel, chapter 46. 23. Secondly, in neither place
is it said, that either of them should come to oppose themselves against
Antichrist; that from hence their return into the world, should be made a
sign of the coming of Antichrist. But as touching the former place, severally
I answer with I ansenius one of the best writers among the Papists (howsoever
Bellarmine wondereth at him* that he should consent with us in the truth,
being a Popish Bishop) that although the ancient writers have thought that
Elias was to come again, yet it cannot be euinced out of this place. For we
may say that Ecclesiasticus did write this according to the received opinion of
his time, grounded (as they thought) upon the words of Malachie, that Elias was
truly to come in his own person before the Messiah: when as that was not to
be fulfilled in his own person, but in him that was to come in the spirit and
power of Elias. True indeed it is, that not only the author of that book, as
it seems, but the Jews in general, understanding the words of Malachie
literally, did expect that Elias in his own person should return before the
coming of the Messiah. But our Savior Christ reformeth this error, applying
the Prophecy to John Baptist. And secondly I answer, that if Bellarmine will
argue out of Ecclesiasticus, according to his meaning, he must prove that
Elias was to come in his own person, before the first coming of the Messiah,
of which Malachie speaks, and before which this author as all the rest of
the Jews, do hold that Elias was to come: And therefore the Papists might
as well with the Jews, look for their Messiah, as for Elias. Now as touching
the other place, it is a wonder that Bellarmine would allege it for this
purpose. But that having nothing to say to the purpose, he is desirous to say
something to bleare the eyes of the simple. The original Text has these
words, (...) Eccl. (...). 16
(...), that is, Enoch pleased the Lord God, and was translated for an example
of repentance ^o the generations: that is, that the generations present and to
come, might be moved by his example, to turn unto the Lord and to walk
before him, knowing by his example that there is a reward laid up for those
that turn unto the Lord, and walk before him as Enoch did. But will
Bellarmine hence conclude, that therefore Enoch is to come again in the flesh,
to oppose himself to Antichrist?

5. The third place is, Math. 17. 11. Elias indeed shall come, and shall
restore all things. Which words, says Bellarmine, are plainly to be
understood, not of John, but of the true Elias. For John was already come, and
had finished his course, and yet the Lord says in the future, Elias shall
come. I answer, that by the Evangelist Mark, who speaks in the present
tence, Elias indeed coming first restores all things: the meaning of our
Savior Christ appears to have been this. Elias quidem venturus fuit primum,
and restituturus omnia; Elias indeed was to come first, and was to restore all
things, but I tell you that Elias is already come, and they have done unto him
what they listed, as it is written of him, meaning Mark. 9. 12 13.
John Baptist. As if he had said. The Prophecy indeed concerning Mat. 17. 13
Elias is true, but I tell you it is already fulfilled. For as he says in
another place; John Baptist is that Elias who was to come, then which, what
could be spoken more plainly? Bellarmine answers, That John Baptist was the
promised Mat. 11. 14
Elias, not literally, but allegor^eally. So we affirm also, and further add,
that Elias was not promised literally. For our Savior Christ plainly
affirms, that John Baptist is that Elias which was promised. And both he and
the Angel understand that Prophecy of Malachie chapter 4. 5. not literally of
Elias the Thesbi^e, but allegorically of John Baptist, who was, as it were,
another Elias. Yea but the Disciples, faith Bellarmine, who had seen the
transsiguration, when they asked Christ, what is that which the Scribes say,
that Elias must first come, speak of the same Elias, whom they had seen with
Christ in the Mount: and therefore Christ making answer to them, that Elias
indeed shall come, speaks of the same Elias. It follows not: for the
Disciples speak according to the erroneous opinion of the Scribes, who
understanding Malachie literallie, thought that Elias was to come in his own
person, and thereupon (as it is thought) inferred, that Christ was not the true
Messiah, because Elias came not before him. But Christ answers them according
to the true meaning of Malachie, applying his prophecy to John Baptist, who is
figuratively called Elias. Yea but it cannot truly be said that John Baptist
restored all things: for to restore all things, is to call all the Jews and
heretics, and perhaps some of the seduced Catholics to the true faith, as
Bellarmine obiecteth. This is indeed the Popish conceit, that Enoch and Elias
shall preach against Antichrist 1260. days, at the end whereof they shall be put
to death by Antichrist, and after three days and an half, shall rise again.
Within a month after their death, Antichrist shall be destroyed in mount Oliuet:
and 45. days after that, Christ shall come to judgment. In the mean time so
effectual shall be the preaching of Enoch and Elias, that they shall restore
all things, that is, they shall call all the Jews and heretics, and perhaps
the seduced Catholics. But how does this agree with the prophecies of our
Savior Christ, concerning the want of faith at his coming, and the
uncertainty of the time of his appearing? As touching the former he says, the
son of man when he comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? And as Luke
18. 8.
touching the other, he has foretold that the end of the world shall be
sudden and unlooked for, even as it was in the days of Noah and Lot. But if
this conceit of the Papists be Mat. 24. 39 Luke 17. 26 18.
true, there shall be more true believers at the end of the world, then ever
had been at one time before: and the day of Christ's coming, after the
revelation of Antichrist, but especially after his death, shall be precisely
known, and accordingly looked for. Now whereas he says, that John did not
restore all things, which (as Christ says) Elias should do: I answer, that
Christ speaks according to their understanding, and therefore that John
Baptist did restore all things in that sense that Elias was, according to their
conceit, to restore al things. But by restitution in this place, we are to
understand the reformation of the people and Church of the Jews (to whom the
messenger and forerunner is promised, and not to heretics and seduced
catholics) wherein John Baptist was another Elias. Neither is this
restitution ascribed to the Baptist, as though it had been perfected by him,
but because he began that, which Christ was to bring to perfection. So that
John Baptist may truly be said to have made this restitution Inchoatiue.

6. The fourth place is: Apoc. 11. 3. I will give to my two witnesses^ and they
shall prophecy 1260. days. Which words he affirms (but without all reason)
are to be understood of Enoch and Elias, who are not once mentioned in all that
chapter. Neither can those two witnesses signify Enoch and Elias: because they
are to be killed by the beast, and their bodies shall lie dead in the streets
of the great City three days and an half. For Enoch and Elias they were
taken up into heaven: where in soul at the least they enjoy the glorious
presence of God. For otherwise their estate were worse then of the rest of the
faithful departed: and so their translation should rather have bi^ a
punishment then a blessing or prerogative unto them: without question therefore
their souls at the least are in heaven. But whether they be there in soul
alone, or in soul and body, there may be some question: but if they be there
in body, it cannot be that their body is mortal (as the Papists would have it)
and subject to death. For how can corruption inherit incorruption? or how can
it be truly said, that Enoch was translated that he should not see death, if
notwithstanding his translation, 1. Cor. 15. 50.
he shall suffer death? If therefore their bodies be in heaven, undoubtedly they
were in the translation changed, and by that change became immortal, as the
bodies of them shall, who shall be alive upon the earth at the second coming of
Christ. If their 1. Cor. 15. 51. 53. 1. These. 4.
souls alone be in heaven* their bodies being dissolved and returned into
dust, then either they must come in their own bodies, or in others. If in
others, then must we hold the (...), or flitting of souls into diverse bodies:
if in their own, then shall they not only rise before the resurrection, but
also after their resurrection die again. All which absurdities plainly show,
that the Popish opinion concerning the coming of Enoch and Elias, is a mere
fable, whereby men are kept in security, that they should not with vigilancie
wait for the coming of Christ, because as yet forsooth, Enoch and Elias are
not returned. The two witnesses therefore cannot signify Elias and Enoch. But
if I should add, that Bellarmine cannot prove that this place entreats of
Antichrist, but rather of the beast with 7. heads arising out of the sea, that
is, the Roman state either generally, or especially under the Emperors, as may
be gathered by comparing verse 2. and 7. of the 11. chap. with the 1. and 5. of
the 13. I would then know to what purpose he alleges this text to prove,
that Enoch and Elias shall come against Antichrist, if neither the one nor the
other be here meant.

7. Unto these testimonies of Scripture, he adds the consent of the fathers,
who hold that Enoch and Elias shall in their own persons come in the time of
antichrist. And to this purpose he names many, but yet among all the ancient
which he cites, only Gregory is alleged to the purpose, who in his morals
expou^ding the words of Lib. 14. c. 12.
Bildad the Suhite as spoken of Antichrist, testifies, that in his time Enoch
and Elias shall come, which is as true, as that Bildad spoke of Antichrist. Of
the rest, some speak of the return of Elias only, and that to convert the
Jews (without mention of his resisting Antichrist) being deceived by the
corrupt translation of the 72. who in Malachy 4. v. 5. read Elias the Theibite,
and thereby gave occasion to the readers to expound those words of Elias
literally: whereas in the Hebrew, and also in other translations we read Elias
the Prophet, which may truly be applied to John, who was a Prophet; and by the
testimony of our savior. Christ, more then a Prophet. Mat. 11. 9.
Others, who besides Elias mention the coming of another, agree not among
themselves. Victorinus refuting the opinion of in Apoc. 11
some who thought the two witnesses to be Elias and Eliz^us, or Elias and
Moses, says, all our Ancestors by tradition have delivered that it is Elias
and Jeremy. Hilary refelling those which thought the two witnesses to be Elias
and Enoch, or Elias and Jeremy, contendeth that they must be Moses and Elias.
Hippolytus to Enoch and in Mat. con. 20.
Elias, adds John the Divine, who (as he says) shall come with the^ before
the coming of Christ. All which opinions of the fathers give us a sufficient
proof, into what uncertainties men are carried, when they will be wise above
that which is written. For seeing the holy Ghost has not named these two
witnesses, it is hard especially for them, who lived (as themselves thought)
before the fulfilling of this prophecy, to define whether by these two
witnesses is not meant a sufficient, though a small number of Gods witnesses,
whom ^he shall raise to testify his truth even in the hottest persecution of
the beast; or if they be two and no more, to determine particularly and by
name, who they are.

8. Unto these restimonies in the last place he adds a reason, to make up
this demonstration, which may thus be concluded. If Enoch and Elias were taken
up before their death, and yet ^iue in mortal bodies wherein once they shall
die; then shall they come in the time of Antichrist to set themselves against
him: But Enoch and Elias being taken up before death do yet live in mortal^
bodies, wherein they are once to die; therefore they shall come in the time of
Antichrist to set themselves against him. The proposition is unnecessary, and
the assumptio^ untrue. For though we should grant that they yet live in mortal
bodies, and that their death is yet deferred: yet how does this follow, that
they live to resist Antichrist and to be slain of him? Yea but says Bell
armine, there can n^ne other reason be given. Of their translation, there is
this reason, that there might be evident examples of reward and happiness laid
up both for the upright in Enoch, and for the zealous in Elias. Of their yet
living in mortal bodies, if they did so according to the opinion of some of
the fathers, that reason might be given, which they allege, to wit, to convert
the Jews. But the assumption also is false. For it is untrue that they live in
mortal bodies, or that they shall ever dye. For where I beseech you do they
live in mortal bodies, in the earthly Paradise, or in the heavenly? In the
earthly say the Papists; but that was defaced either at or before the flood: so
that although the place remain, yet no Paradise remains, as Bellarmine else
where confesses. And if they were Lib. 1. de Sanctor. beatitud. C. 3
living in the earthly Paradise, how is it said, they were taken up, as it is
plainly said of Elias, that he was taken up into heaven? Or what privilege or
reward have they above others, if all this 2. Kin. 2. 12
while they have wanted Gods glorious presence which others enjoy, and
hereafter are to be slain of Antichrist? Or how was Enoch translated that he
should not see death, if notwithstanding his translation, he must dye the
death? If in the celestial Paradise, that is the third heaven as Paul
speaks, it may first be 2. Cor. 12.
doubted, whether they be there in body: because it may be thought that Christ
was the first that in body ascended into heaven: or if their bodies ^o there,
we must hold that in the translation they were changed into immortal and
incorruptible bodies, as theirs shall, who shall be found living upon the earth
as the second coming of Christ, and shall be rapt up into the air. 1. Cor. 15.
51.
For this I say with Paul, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven, neither does corruption inherit incorruption. 1. These. 4. 17.


9. But will you see under one view, how far this slender 1. Cor. 15. 50.
conjecture taken from the coming of Enoch and Elias, is from being a
demonstratiue proof. First, he cannot prove necessarily that they are yet in
their bodies. Secondly, if they be in their bodies, he cannot prove that their
bodies are mortal. Thirdly, if their bodies be mortal, it is not necessary
that they should return into the world and die, because at the end of the
world they might be changed with the rest that then shall be living, as some also
have thought. Fourthly, if they should return into the Justin. q. 85 ad
orthodoxos.
world and dye, there is no necessity that they should come in the time of
Antichrist. Fifthly, if it should be granted that they are to come against
Antichrist, yet it would not follow that therefore Antichrist is not yet come:
but this only would follow, that Antichrist is not yet destroyed, which we do
not deny. And this was his third demonstration, whereby he proves that
Antichrist is not yet come, and consequently that the Pope is not Antichrist.
To conclude therefore, must not this needs be a good cause, that by so learned
a man is so stoutly proved?

The 7. Chapter: answering his fourth demonstration, concerning the most
grievous persecution under Antichrist.
1. THe second sign accompanying Antichrist, from whence Bellarmine draws
his fourth demonstration, is the most grievous and notorious persecution of the
Church, in so much that the public service of God shall wholly cease. His
demonstration is thus to be framed. When Antichrist is come there shall be the
most grievous and manifest persecution that ever was, insomuch that the
public service of God shall wholly cease: But as yet there has bin no such
persecution, neither has the public service of God wholly ceased, therefore
Antichrist is not yet come. Of his third argument, and consequently of the
proposition and assumprion, there are three parts, which severally are to be
considered, that the persecution under Antichrist is, 1. Most grievous. 2. Most
manifest. 3. Such as shall cause all Gods worship to cease. As touching the
first, he reasoueth thus: Under Antichrist shall be the most grievous
persecution; as yet this most grievous persecution has not bin, especially
under the Pope; therefore Antichrist is not yet come, neither is the Pope
Antichrist. The proposition, namely, that the most grievous persecution is
under Antichrist, he proves by two testimonies. The first, Mat. 24. 21. And
then shall be great tribulation, such as has not bin since the beginning of the
world, neither shall be. The other, Apoc. 20. 7. Then shall Satan be let loose,
namely, after the thousand years are expired. Answer. We doubt not but that
the persecution under Antichrist was to be very grievous, because the holy
Ghost testifies so much Apoc. 17. 6. Where the whore of Babylon is said to be
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus. But his proofs are not to the purpose. For the place in Matthew, as
heretofore has been showed, and as appears by the text it self, is to be
understood of the calamities, which at the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans, the Jews sustained. For when you see (says our Saulour Christ) the
abomination Mat. 24. 15
of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet standing in the holy place, that
is, as Luke expounds, when you see Ierusaelem Luke 21. 20
compassed about with armies (which Daniel calls the abominable Dan. 9. 27.
wings of desolation) then let those which are in Iewry fly unto the
mountains, etc. And his reason is, because then there Mat. 24. 2^
shall be great affliction, such as has not been from the beginning of the
world until now, neither shall be. Which Luke expresses thus, for there shall
be great distress in the Land, and wrath (...), in Luke 21. 23. 24.
this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be
carried captive into all nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden under f^ote of
the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

2. As touching the thousand years mentioned, Apoc. 20. After which Satan was
to be loosed: although the expiration of them fall in Antichrists reign, yet we
are not to begin his reign thereat, as appears plainly Apoc. 20. v. 4.
Neither is that letting loose of Satan to be understood of the persecution
only under Antichrist: for it is manifest by the text, that within those
thousand years, many martyrs were put to death by Antichrist for refusing to
receive his mark, and that the greatest part la* dead in Antichristian errors
and superstition, verse. 4. and 5. and by the 8. verse, that Satan was let
loose not only to stir up persecution against the faithful, but also and
that principally to stir up universal wars betwixt the nations of the world,
betwixt Gog and Magog, that is, as some expound, the Papists and Mahometans.
Now I would gladly know of Bellarmine when these thousand years began, and
when they expired: for hereof there be diverse opinions, but I will touch the
principal, 1. That these thousand years begin with the incarnation of Christ,
and determine accordingly, when as Siluester the second had obtained the
Papacy by the help of the devil: after whom followed in the Antichristian
seat a succession of notable sorcerers. 2. That the thousand years begin about
the 73. year of Christ: at which time the people of the Jews being destroyed,
and the Church of Christ of a particular became catholic and dispersed
throughout all nations, the devil as it is in the end of the 12. Chap. seeks
by all means to overthrow the seed borne of the Church Apoc. 12.
of the Jews, that is, the Churches of Christ begotten unto God by the
ministry of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ. Whereupon it is said Chap.
20. (where the former story, as some think is continued) the Angel! binds
Satan for a thousand years, which end in the year 1073. which being expired,
the devil is loosed, and Gregory 7. alias Hildebrand (a notable sorceres, and
murderer, in whom Antichrist came to his full growth) was installed in the
Papacy. Augustine begins this account much about De ciuit. Dei. Lib. 20
cap. 8.
this time. 3. That these 1000. years take their beginning from the time of
the revelation, which was about the year of our Lord, 96. and consequently
ended about the year 1096. in which year those universal wars were raised
for the recovery of Jerusalem and the holy land out of the hand of the Sara^s,
which the holy Ghost here seems to speak of betwixt the nations of the
earth. In this expedition there met at Jerusalem 600000. footmen, and 100000.
horsemen out of Christendom, besides eight or nine other expeditions
afterward, for the recovery forsooth of the holy land. 4. Others begin this
account at the beginning of Constantines reign, which happened not long after
the year 300. who being the first Christian Emperor, gave peace to the Church
of God, and according to this account the thousand years expired about the
year 1300. in which year the Turkish Empire began in Ottoman; and Pope
Boniface the eight most insolently and Antichristianlie challenged, especially
in that his year of Iubilee, an universal dominion over the world, both
spiritual and temporal. All which opinions being severally probable, it is
more then probable, that those 1000. years are already expired: and
consequently that Antichrist is already come. For as Bellarmine teaches, the
devil was to be loosed in the time of Antichrist, and the Text plainly
shows, that before the expiration of the thousand years, and loosing of the
devil, many were slain by Antichrist. So that the testimonies which he
alleges are against his purpose. For the great tribulation whereof Christ
speaks is already past, and the thousand years whereof John speaks,
already expired: and therefore if Bellarmines allegations be to the purpose,
then Antichrist is come.

3. But supposing his proposition to be thus far true, that the persecution
of the church under Antichrist, shall be very great and grievous (for that under
him shall be the greatest tribulation that ever was or shall be, I dare not avouch,
because our Savior has said, that the calamities of the Jews at the
destruction of Jerusalem, were the greatest that ever were or shall be to the end
of the world:) let us come to his assumption, and consider whether there has
not bin great and grievous persecution of the church, under the Pope.
Bellarmine confesses, that many of our religion have bin put to death by them:
but he makes it a matter of nothing. First, because this persecution if it
were so to be called, is not comparable with the persecutions under the
Heathenish Emperors, and especially under Dioclesian, by whose authority
17000. Christians were slain in (...) month. And secondly, because more of
them have been slain by Protestants in France and Flanders within 10. or 15.
years before Bellarmine read these controversies, which was Anno. 1577, then
had been^ burnt of our men by the Inquisitours in an hundred years: and
thirdly, if there has been any persecution in these latter times, the
Catholics have suffered it rather the^ the Protestants. To which I answer,
that I cannot tell whether the Papists in persecuting the faithful, have been
more cruel and barbarous, or he in cloaking their cruelty, shameless. For to
omit the spiritual calamities inflicted by the Pope, and fearful hauock of
men's souls, wherein he takes such liberty to himself, that if he carry whole
troops of souls into hell, no man may say unto him, sir, why do you so?
omitting, I say, these spiritual calamities which are most grievous, and in
respect whereof the tribulation of Christian people has bin more grievous
under the Pope, then under any Heathenish tyrants, and to speak only of
outward troubles: why are not the persecutions of the Protestants under the
Pope, comparable with those in the Primitive church? For durance, they have
been longer and more continual: for number, more flaine in France alone under
the name of Al^igenses, Waldenses, and Hugonotes, for refusing the mark of the
beast, then were s^aine in any one of the ten persecutions throughout the
world: besides infinite more, as Saunders confesses in other countries,
Demonstrat. 34.
on whom the Papists have practiced most savage cruelty. The Duke of Alba in
the Low Countries alone, caused within a very few years 36000. to be executed.
Yea but in Dioclesians time (says Bellarmine) there were in one month 17000.
Christians martyred. Yea but in France alone, say I, under Charles the ninth,
within one month were slaughtered in the Massacre at Paris and Lions, and some
other places, as some say, 40000 as others, above thirty thousand, that is to
say, twice as many as in Dioclesians month, without all order of law, but with
most perfidious treachery, and barbarous cruelty. And this bloody Massacre
applauded by the Pope and his Cardinals, was committed within five or six
years before Bellarmine read these controversies concerning the Pope, that is
to say, Anno. 1572. And yet this cruel Cardinal of the purpled harlot the
church of Rome, which is embrued, and as it were died red with the blood of
the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, is not ashamed to say, that within 10. or 15.
years there have bin slain more Catholics in France and Flanders, then had
bin burnt by the Inquisitours these 100* years. As touching the Inquisitours,
they can kill but all that they find of the religion, and that I am sure they
spare not to do. Vergerius, who could 1. Bal. de act. Pontific.
well tell, witnesses, that within the space of 30. years, there were put to
diverse fearful deaths by the bloody Inquisition, a hundred and fifty thousand
Christians. But we speak not only of those which have bin burnt, or by other
more exquisi^e torments martyred by their means (although the number of them
in all countries cannot be reckoned) but we speak also of those that have
been in great multitudes by outrageous Massacres most butcherly murdered.

4. But what Catholics, I beseech you, have bin put to death by protestants
for their religion? Bellarmine answers that many of them have died in the
civil wars in France and Flanders. It may be that the Protestants in these
civil wars undertaken for their own defense, that they might be free from
such outrages, have slain in lawful battle many of the Papists, as
contrariwise many of themselves have been slain. But what is this to the
purpose? Thus many in the armies of Antiochus Epiphanes, the most cruel
persecutor of the Church of the Jews, were slain in Iewrie in the time of the
Macchabees, as well as they had slain many of the Jews. But I say again,
what Catholics (as they call them) have been put to death for religion? As
for those few that have been executed among us, what one was put to death,
that was not found guilty either of treason or rebellion, or some such
capital crime? And yet the Papists report, and in Books do publish, that I
cannot tell how many of them are martyred here in England for their religion.
Neither are they ashamed to write, and in Rome to publish that some of them
have been put into Bears Ecclefi^ Anglic. Troph^. Printed at Rome An. 1584.
cum priuileg. Gregor. 13
skins and baited with Dogs, which also they have set out in tables. But
compare I beseech you with those many that were martyred in Queen Mary's five
years, those few that have been executed in Queen Elizabeth's forty five
years. Compare the causes, which make persecution in the agents and martyrdom
in the patients. What one put to death of those which were burnt in Q. Mary's
time for any crime, but only for religion, which they call heresy? what one of
the Catholics, as they call them, in Q. Elizabeth's time executed, who was not
found guilty of some capital crime? Compare the estate of Papists living
among Protestants at this day, as namely in England, with the estate of
Protestants living among Papists, as namely in Spain. Is any one suffered to
live among them, that is but once suspected to be of our religion? Is not every
such a one either privately murdered, or publicly brought to the stake? Among
us who is not suffered to live, although he be known to be of the Romish
religion? To live, did I say? Nay, God be merciful unto us that suffer them so
to live as they do, to the encouragement and infection of others. I speak not
only of ordinary Papists, and those that are at liberty, but of the
ringleaders also that be in custody: whose life has been more easy and
pleasant, and maintenance more plentiful, then of the Let the Cas^les of
UUisbich, and Fremingham be witness
most students or ministers among us. Yea but there is cause (will they say)
that we should deal worse with you, then you with us. Nothing less. They
object to us only heresy, and that as truly as the Jews did to Paul, which
we do truly object unto them, and in regard thereof, might, nay should do
to the children of Babylon, as they have done to us. But besides Apoc. 18. 6
many gross and capital heresies, which race the foundation, we truly object
unto them, that their religion brings with it, treason against the Prince,
and rebellion against God. Treason against the Prince, not only because of
their confederacy with the chief enemies of our state, the Pope and Spaniard,
in regard whereof those Jesuits and Priests, which come among us from
beyond-Seas, as also those which harbor them, are worthy of death: but also
because more generally they holding the Popes supremacy and authority to
depose Princes, and withal, believing that the Pope in his definitive sentence
cannot err: they cannot but approve the Bull of excommunication, wherein Pius
the fifth, (as much as was in him) deposed our Queen of famous memory, and
absolved her subjects from all allegiance to her. Rebellion against God,
because it persuades an Apostasy and falling away from God, into gross and
palpable idolatry. Of which fault whosoever are found guilty, that is, to
persuade others to idolatry, by the law of God they ought not be suffered to
live, because they have persuaded an Apostasy from God, Deuteronomy. 13. All this
notwithstanding, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 8. 9.
we deal too remissely with them, and they most barbarously with us. And yet
forfooth, if there be, or has been, any persecution in the Church in these
latter times, the Catholics are they which suffer it, and not the Protestants.
Alas poor Wolves, how cruelly they have been handled among the sheep of
Christ!

5. But to proceed: As the persecution under Antichrist, says Bellarmine,
shall be most grievous; so shall it be most manifest. For thus he reasons:
The persecution under Antichrist shall be most manifest: this under the Pope is
not manifest; therefore this is not the persecution of Antichrist. The
proposition is proved, because then all the wicked shall aperto mart, oppugn
the whole church: and not only those that be Infidels and open sinners, but
the hypocrites also and false brethren, shall then join themselves to
Antichrist, and discovering themselves, openly assault the Church. And is not
this well gessed think you, contrary to the word of truth, uttered by our
Savior Christ? For whereas our Savior has said, that the good and bad shall
grow together like Wheat and Tares, until the day of the great harvest:
Bellarmine tells us, that when Antichrist comes, there shall such a
separation be made, that there shall not an hypocrite be left in the Church:
but all the wicked without exception, shall be together Omnes prorsus impios
simul futuros in exercitu Antichristi.
in Antichrists host; and shall openly oppugn the whole Church of the Saints.
But such separation is not to be looked for, until Christ shall sever the
Lambs from the Goats. And therefore if we must not believe that Antichrist is
come, until such a separation be made: assuredly Christ will come upon us to
judgment, whiles we look for Antichrist. Yea but Augustine says, That now
there be many false brethren in the De ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. c. 11.
Church, At tunc erumpent omnes (inquit Augustinus) in apertam persecutionem ex
latebris odiorum, But then all shall burst forth, says Augustine, out of their
covert hatred, into open persecution. If Augustine had said so, we might well
have esteemed his speech to have been but a humane conjecture, rather then a
Prophecy divine. But Bellarmine without all shame falsifieth his words. For
Augustine in that place speaking of those words, Apoc. 20. 7. Soluetur Satanas
de custodia sua and exibit ad seducendas nationes, Satan shall be let loose out
of his ward, and shall go forth to seduce the nations: Exibit autem dictum
est (says he) in apertam persecutionem, de latebris erumpet odiorum: Now it is
said that he shall go forth, viz. into open persecution; he shall break forth
of the couerts of hatred, speaking of the devil alone, and not of all the
wicked. And thus was his proposition doughtily proved, being neuerlesse
according to his sense, repugnant to the Scriptures, which describe Antichrist,
not as an open enemy, but as a secret; and decipher antichristianisme, not as a
professed hostility, but as a mystery of iniquity, as has been showed.

6. Come we to his assumption, This manifest persecution has not bin, neither
is, as yet, and why? First, because there are now so many false brethren in the
church as never were more; speaking of the church of Rome, wherein it is hard
indeed to find a true christian. But shall not Antichrist come whiles there are
false brethren in the church? or rather shall we not think, that the Apostasy
of false brethren in the church of Rome and pretended Christians, whereof
Antichrist is the head, is a good argument of his coming? Secondly, because no
man can tell when this persecution began. That, if it were true, does not
disprooue the greatness of the persecution, but argue the length. Yea but
under Nero, Domitian, and the rest of the persecuting Emperors, it was well
known when the persecutions began, and when they ended. That happened because
there was some intermission of those persecutions: but these persecutions under
Antichrist they have no end, nor yet intermissio^, except it be when they have
none to persecute. But how does it appear that none know when these
persecutions of Antichrist began? For sooth, because some of us say, that
Antichrist came in the year 200. others in 606. others in 773, others in 1000,
others in 1200. The vanity of which objection, which now like a twice-bo^de
Colewurt he sets before us again, has bin showed before. For of these
opinions, only two belong to us, and those not different. For we hold, that as
the whole sovereignty and tyranny of the Pope consists in his two swords,
which he did not attain at once, but by degrees: so we make two degrees of
Antichrist his coming: first with the spiritual sword in the year 607.
secondly, with the temporal, after the year 1000. which was more fully
obtained then before, in Gregory the seventh: In whom, as has bin said,
Antichrist was come to his full growth. Since which time, he has been more and
more revealed, and by some acknowledged. Upon which acknowledgment there has
followed separation from him, according to the commandment of God, and
refusal of his mark: whereupon persecution has ensued, and never has ceased
where any such have been found, where the Pope has to do. Neither are we with
Bellarmine ignorantly to confound the time of his coming, with the beginning
of his persecution. For he began not to persecute, until men began to forsake
him: and men did not forsake him until he was discovered what he was, and
acknowledged: neither was he acknowledged, until he came to his full growth.

7. And thus the two first parts of this demonstration, concerning the
persecution of Antichrist, how great and manifest it should be, are already
answered, although in truth not worth the answering. The third part is
concerning the public service of God and ceremonies of the church, which (he
says) in the time of Antichrist by reason of that grievous persecution shall
wholly cease. His reason is thus framed. When Antichrist is come, the public
service of God, and daily sacrifice of Christians (meaning the sacrifice of the
Mass) shall cease: but as yet the public service of God, and daily sacrifice
of Christians, has not ceased; therefore as yet Antichrist is not come. To the
proposition I answer, that Antichrist being an hypocrite and pretended
Christian (as has bin proved) shall not abolish all worship of God, and much
less at his first coming. For Bellarmine makes this interruption of Gods
service, a fruit of his greatest persecution: his persecution (as I said) is a
consequent of men's for saking him; and that of his acknowledgement: and that,
of his showing himself in his colors, when he was come to his full growth,
whereunto he attained not at the first, but by degrees. But this proposition is
proved, says Bellarmine, out of Daniel. chap. 12. verse 11. From the time
when the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, are days 1290. Where (says he)
Daniel speaks of the time of Antichrist. For the exposition of this place, we
need not with Bellarmine run to the Fathers, seeing by conference thereof with
some other places in Daniel, whereunto it has reference, it may most plainly
be showed, who it is that takes away this daily sacrifice, and what that
sacrifice is. In the eight chapt. verse. 11. and chapt. 11. verse. 31. it is
affirmed, that by Antiochus Epiphanes, and his armies, the daily worship of God
should be taken away. When as therefore Daniel asked when there should be an end
of these things? the Holy Ghost answers, that from the time that the daily
sacrifice was taken away, and the abomination of desolation placed, whereof he
had spoken, chap. 11. 31. there should be 1290. days. For of the restitution
of Gods service, and delivery of the Jews from the tyranny of Antiochus,
there are foretold diverse degrees at diverse times, which agreeably to these
Prophecies of Daniel, are noted in the histories of Josephus, and of the
Maccabees: for from the interruption of Gods service, to the first restitution
thereof by Judas Macchabeus, were three years and ten days, namely from the
15. of the month Casteu, In memory hereof the Encaenia, that is, the feast of
the dedication, John 10. 22. was celebrated on the 25. of Casteu. 1. Macca. 4.
59.
in the 145. year of the Seleucida, 1. Maccab. 1. 57. unto the 25* of the
month Casteu, in the year 148 1. Maccab. 4. 52. which term Daniel calls,
chap. 7. 25. a time, and times, and parcel of time. Unto the victory obtained
by the Macchabees, whereby the forces of Antiochus were expelled out of Iewry,
and thereby the restitution before begun, established, were three years and a
half, as Josephus testifies; which Daniel, cha. 12. 7. calls a time and
times, and half a time, unto the time that Antiochus being stricken with the
hand of God, after his discomfiture and flight from Pers^polis, promised to
restore the religion of the Jews, and what else they desired, were 1290.
days; unto the time of his death 1335. And that these are Prophecies
concerning Antiochus, I will hereafter show more at large. In the mean time to
the present Chap. 16.
objection I answer, that by the daily worship or sacrifice here mentioned, we
are to understand, not the sacrifice of Christians to be taken away by
Antichrist, but the daily sacrifice of the Jews, which was interrupted and
taken away by Antiochus Epiphanes. It was the custom of the Jews (says
Chrysostom) to offer a sacrifice to God every morning and evening, which they
called (...), which sacrifice was taken away by Antiochus: and the same is
testified by Josephus and the author of the first book of the Macchabees.

8. To this place of Daniel although nothing at all to his purpose, Bellarmine
trusts so much, that upon it as it were his groudworke he builds three
conclusions, as you shall hear after we have also considered of his
assumption. The assumption he proves by experience; as though it did testify
that the public service of God had not been taken away under the Pope; (...)
the sacrifice of Christians ceased. But if by the public service of God he
means his true worship and service in spirit and truth: assuredly it has
been taken away in the Papacy, except will worship, superstition, and Idolatry
be the true worship of God. As touching Christian sacrifices; we acknowledge
the sacrifice of praise, the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, the Heb.
13. 15 Psalm. 51. 17 Romans 12. 1. Heb. 13. 16.
sacrifice of obedience wherein we offer our selves, the sacrifice of alms
whereby we offer our goods; these sacrifices, no Antichrist can wholly take away.
As for the sacrifice of the mass, we hold it to be a monstrous abomination,
wherein the holy sacrament of the Lords supper, is turned into an abominable
Idol. Seeing therefore there is no soundness of truth either in the
proposition or assumption, must we not needs think that the question in hand
is soundly concluded? And yet upon these grounds Bellarmine does not only infer
the question in hand, but two more also. From hence says he, three things may
be gathered. First, that Antichrist is not as yet come, because the daily
sacrifice yet continues. He might as well have concluded with the Jews that
Christ is not yet come: for he was to abolish the daily sacrifice, Dan. 9. 27.
partly by his own sacrifice, unto which the shadows of the Law were to give
place; and partly by the overthrow of the temple, in which and not elsewhere it
was to be offered. His second conclusion is, that the Pope of Rome is not
Antichrist, but rather an adversary unto him; seeing he does adore and
maintain this sacrifice, which Antichrist is to abolish. Nay rather by
ordaining this propitiatory sacrifice, and erecting a new priesthood to offer
the same, the Pope, shows himself to be Antichrist. For by this Priesthood
Christ is denied to be our only Priest: by this Sacrifice, his sacrifice on
the Cross is supposed not to be sufficient: in this sacrifice the humanity of
Christ (as has been showed) is overthrown, and a God of bread set up in his
room to be worshipped and adored. In this sacrifice Christ alter a sort is
made inferior to every masse-monger, who as they can make their creator by
breathing out a few words (hoc est corpus meum) so when they have made him in
their conceit, they offer him up to God, to be a sacrifice propitiatory both
for the quick and the dead. His third conclusion is; that the heretics of
this time above all others are forerunners of Antichrist, because they desire
nothing more, then the overthrow of this sacrifice of the mass. Nay rather as
appears by the former answer, they show themselves the limbs of Antichrist,
who overthrowing the sacrament of the Lords supper (which we have reduced to
the first institution) seek to uphold this mass and heap of all abominations
and sacrilegious Idolatry. And how are all these things proved? forsooth
because Daniel has prophesied that Antiochus was to take away for a time the
daily sacrifice of the Jews; therefore Antichrist is not yet come, therefore
the Pope is not Antichrist, therefore those that mislike the mass are
forerunners of Antichrist. And so with these three conclusions, as it were so
many roapes of sand, he knitteth up his fourth demonstration.

Chapter. 8. Answering his fifth demonstration concerning the term of
Antichrists reign, viz. 3. years and a half.
1. THere remain two demonstrations (as he calls them) proouing that
Antichrist is not yet come, taken from those signs which follow Antichrist, to
wit, the death of Antichrist after three years and an half, and the end of the
world. Where Bellarmine teaches us not to look for Antichrist, until he be
gone; not to expect his coming, until the world have an end. For if these be
signs that Antichrist is not yet come (as Bellarmine makes them) then may we
argue now, and so may argue even until the end of the world: Until Antichrist
be dead and the world have an end, Antichrist comes not; but at yet (may we
say now, and so may say until the end) Antichrist is not dead, neither as yet
has the world an end; therefore as yet Antichrist is not come. By this
argument therefore you see, how fitly these two signs are made the ground of
two demonstrations, that Antichrist is not yet come. Now as touching the
former, Bellarmine reasons thus. The fifth demonstration (viz. to prove that
Antichrist is not yet come) is taken from the continuance of Antichrist.
Antichrist shall not reign but three years and a half. But the Pope has
reigned spiritually in the Church above 1500. yeer^s, neither can any be
assigned that has been taken for Antichrist, who has reigned precisely three
years and a half: The Pope therefore is not Antichrist. Wherefore Antichrist is
not yet come. His reason is thus to be resolved. If neither the Pope be
Antichrist, nor any other, who hitherto has been taken for Antichrist; then
is not Antichrist as yet come: But neither the Pope is Antichrist, nor any that
hitherto has been taken for Antichrist; therefore as yet Antichrist is not
come. Where you see by a circular disputation, the Jesuit for want of better
arguments, brings the maine question (namely whether the Pope be Antichrist)
as an argument to prove, that Antichrist is not yet come, and consequently that
the Pope is not Antichrist. The Pope is not Antichrist; why? because Antichrist
is not yet come: and why is not Antichrist yet come? because the Pope is not
Antichrist. He may as well go on, for there is no end in a circle: and why is
not the Pope Antichrist? because Antichrist is not yet come: and why is not
Antichrist yet come? because the Pope is not Antichrist. And thus Bellarmine,
as you see, danceth in a round.

2. But to come to the purpose, how does he prove, that neither the Pope is
Antichrist, nor any other that has been taken for Antichrist? by this
syllogism: Antichrist shall reign but three years and a half precisely: but
neither the Pope, nor any other that has been taken for Antichrist, has
reigned three years and a half precisely: therefore neither the Pope is
Antichrist, nor any other that as yet has been taken for Antichrist. The
assumption, which he might have proved by a truth, he chooses to prove by a
falsehood. For whereas he might have said and that truly, that the Pope has
reigned spiritually in the church above 900. years, and therefore above three
years and a half; he says, he has reigned (meaning an universal reign over
the whole Church, or else he proves not his assumption) above 1500. which is
untrue. For he could not obtain this universal reign, before the year 607.
But all the controversy is concerning the proposition: For we do grant, that
the Popes have reigned and tyrannized in the Church, almost a thousand years;
and therefore above three years and a half. Let us therefore consider how he
proves, that Antichrist shall reign 3. years and a half precisely. He
proves it by diverse prophecies of the Scriptures, and ghesses of the fathers,
which were no prophecies. And first he alleges these places, Dan. 7. 25. and
12. 7. Apoc. 12. 14. Where we read (says he) that the reign of Antichrist shall
continus a time and times and half a time, that is, a year and two years and
half a year; and so he says, S. John expounds it, Apoc. 11. and 13. by 42.
months, and 1260 days, I answer, that none of these places defines the time,
or term of Antichrists reign. Daniel speaks not of the time of Antichrists
reign, but of that time wherein the Jews were to be afflicted, and the temple
and service of God in Jerusalem was to be profaned by Antiochus Epiphanes,
which time the Angel diversely reckons, Chap. 16.
as was in part showed in the last chapter, and shall hereafter be more fully
declared. For of their deliverance from the tyranny of Antiochus, there are
four degrees, obtained at 4. several times, all which seem to be noted by
Daniel. The first, is the restitution of Gods worship and renouation of the
temple by Judas Maccabeus. 1. Mac. 1. 57.
From the profanatio^ therefore, which was on the 15. of Casteu 1. Mac. 4. 52.
in the year 145. unto this restitutio^ made on the 25. of Casteu in the 148.
year, were 3. years and 10. days, which Daniel calls a* time and times and
parcel of time, Dan. 7. 25. and as some think Dan 12. 7. The second degree was
the victory of the Jews against De bello Iudaico lib. 1. Cap. 1.
the forces of Antiochus Epiphanes, whereby they were expelled out of Iewry and
the testitutio^ begun confirmed, which happened after 3. years and a half as
Josephus notes, who also affirms that for so (...). Joseph. de bell.
long Antiochus had caused the daily sacrifice to cease, his words are these:
(...). The term (as some think) Daniel Chapter. 12. verse 7. calls a time
and times (...) ^fe a time. The third degree, is the deadly sickness of
Antiochus after his flight from Pers^pons, at what time he promised all good
things to the people of the Jews. From the profanation to this Dan. 12. 11
time, Daniel reckons 1290. days: to his death which happened 45. days after,
to wit, in the beginning of the year ^49. he reckons 1335. days. Now
whereas Bellarmine says, that the term of antichrists reign shall be 3. years
and a half precisely, and says that this term is expressed in the Apocalypse
by 1260. days, and in Daniel by 1290. he seemed not to have been well
advised: for 1290. are not 1260. nor 3. years and a half precisely: And
therein he contradicts himself, and makes John in the same matter to be
repugnant to Daniel.

3. As touching the places in the Apocalypse, it is hard to prove that the
times mentioned in the 11. 12. and 13. chapters, be the same (which he must
prove, or else by conference of these places he proves nothing) and if they
be the same (as indeed they are not) it will be as hard to define where we are
to begin the account. But these two things may be affirmed. First, that all
these times are not to be understood literally: And secondly, that none of the^
defines the time of Antichrists reign. The 42. months in the 11. and 13.
chapters signify the time of the persecution under the Roman Emperors either
only or especially: for Chap. 11. v. 2. it is said that the Gentiles shall tread
upon the holy city 42. months. But antichrist (as the Papists hold) shall be the
Prince of the Jews and counterfeit Christians. And v. 7. it is said, that the
beast which arises out of the deep (which being the same with that which is
described chap. 13. 1. is the Roman state, especially as it was under the
persecuting emperors) that this beast (I say) shall persecute the two
witnesses of God, and their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great
Cities whereby in the Apocalypse is meant Rome or the R. empire. And hereby
also it appears that this term of 42. months mentioned in both places, is
not literally to be understood. For the persecution under the Roman Emperors
alone, endured so many Sabboths of years, as there are months mentioned in
those places, that is, 294. years, as Master Fox expounds it. Now if the
other terms mentioned, chap. 11. and 12. of time and times and half a time,
and of days 1260. be the same with the 42. months, as Bellarmine will needs
have it; then by them is not signified Anchrists reign, neither are they to be
understood literally, no more then the 42. months: but in the 11. chap. the
time of the two witnesses preaching, during the time of the before said
persecution, and chap 12. the woman's, that is, the Churches living in the
desert during the said time. Howbeit the speech of time and times and half a
time may rather be understood (according to Daniels phrase) of three years and
a half, wherein the Church of Vid. Iunium in Apo. 12.
Christ which was at Jerusalem, after it was admonished by a voice out of the
sanctuary to depart, and accordingly removed to Pella, was sustained there. For
in that place it is plain, that the holy Ghost speaks not of Antichrist nor
yet of the beast, but of the Serpent the devil, who seeks the overthrow of
the Church of Christ among the Jews, and afterward turns his anger toward
the rest of her seed, that is, the faithful among the Gentiles, and to that end
stands on the sea shore, from whence he raises the beast with seven heads,
etc.

4. And further I ad, that if these times mentioned in those places which
Bellarmine alleges, did signify the term of Antichrists 2
reign precisely, and were to be understood literally; the^ it would follow,
that after antichrist is once revealed, al me^ that be acquainted with the
Scriptures, may precisely define before hand, the very day of Christ's coming
unto judgment: which the Lord notwithstanding will not have known (Mar. 13.
32.) as Bellarmine himself Cap. 3. lib. 3.
must needs grant, seeing he uses this as the chief argument against those
which by 1260. days understand so many years. Again it is incredible, if not
impossible, that so many and so great 3.
things as they assign to Antichrist, should be effected and brought to pass
in so short a time; as Hentenius a learned Papist does confess, and as has
bin showed heretofore. For this is an error depending In praesat. translat.
Arcth^.
upon the former, concerning the person of Antichrist, and presupposing that
Antichrist is but one man. And therefore when 4
we proved that Antichrist is not any one man alone, but a whole state and
succession of men, we proved this by consequence, that his reign was not to
continue only three years and a half. And again Antichrist, according to the
conceit of the Papists, is to 5
reign before the preaching of the two witnesses, and as Bellarmine faith, is
to continue one month after their death. Seeing then the two witnesses preach
1260. days, which, as Bellarmine also says, make three years and a half
precisely, how can the term of Antichrists reign be three years and a half
precisely? Lastly 6
the Scriptures plainly testify, that the Antichrist which is to be destroyed
at the second coming of Christ, was come even in the Apostles time, although
he was not revealed by exercising openly a sovereign and universal dominion,
until that which hindered, that is, the Roman Empire was taken out of the way.
But after the Empire was once dissolved in the West, and the Emperor of the
East had lost his right in Italy and Rome, that is, when that which hindered was
taken out of the way, then according to the prophecy, 2. These. 2. 8. was
Antichrist revealed, succeeding the Emperor in the government of Rome, and
claiming an universal authority, first spiritual, over the whole Church in
the year 607. and after temporal, over the whole world, and advancing himself
above all that is called God: all which we have heretofore proved to have bin
done in the Papacy, above three years and a half ago, yea above so many
hundred years ago; so that we shall not need to expect another Antichrist, who
is to reign three years and a half. And thus you have heard not only
Bellarmines allegations answered, but also his assertion confuted.

5 Now let us see what Bellarmine can reply either against our assertion in
general, or against the expositio^s of some protestants in particular. For
whereas we generally affirm, notwithstanding his allegations aforesaid, that
Antichrist has already ruled in the Church almost a thousand years, Bellarmine
besides the slender conjectures of diverse of the fathers grounded on such
prophecies of Scriptures as they could not understand, which are his first
argument, he produces six other reasons, no less easy to be answered. His
second argument is, because the scriptures say that the time of the devils
loosing, and Antichrists reigning is breuissimum, very short, or most short:
But how can that be true if Antichrist shall reign a thousand years or more?
For that which he speaks of 1260. years, is the private opinion of some of
which shall be touched afterward. I answer, that the Scriptures no where say
that Antichrists reign, or that the time Apo. 17. 10 (...). Apo. 12. 12 (...).
Apo. 20 verse. 3. (...).
of the devil loosed is Breuissimum, that is, most short, but only that it is
short or small, which we do acknowledge. Let us then weigh his argument, which
may be resolved into two syllogismes: the former, A thousand years or more is
not a short time: Antichrists reign is a short time: therefore Antichrists
reign is not a thousand years or more. First to the proposition I answer, that
a thousand years unto the Lord (who speaks in the Scriptures) is a short
time. The Apostle Peter expressly says, that a thousand years with the Lord 2.
Pet. 3. 8.
are but as one day. Yea, and the whole time from the ascension of Christ until
his coming to judgment, is often noted in the Scriptures to be a short time,
and in one place it is called the last hour. And likewise above 1500. years
ago, it was promised, 1. Ioh. 2. 18
that the prophecies concerning the destruction of Antichrist, the second
coming of Christ, and end of the world, should within a short time be
fulfilled. To the assumptio^ I answer, that although the time of Antichrists
tyranny seem to belong to them that Apoc. 1. 1. (...) v. 3. (...). Ap. 22. 10.
12. 20. Heb. 10. 37
are exercised thereby; yet it is but short in comparion of that time which
they shall reign with Christ, and is so called; Apoc. 17. 10. But yet nothing
so short as Bellarmine imagines. This therefore he proves in the second
Syllogism: The time of Satan loosed is very short: the term of Antichrists
reign is the time of Satan loosed: therefore the term of Antichrists reign
is very short. The proposition he proves by two places in the Apocalypse,
which affirm his time to be short, but yet nothing so short as the Papists
imagine: for in the former place, Chap. 12. 12. he is said to have but a short
time, before he persecuted the Church of Christ among the Jews, which was
above 1500. years ago. And in the latter place, Chap. 20. 3. it is said that
he should be let loose for a small time: but this small time begins at the
expiration of the thousand years wherein he had been bound, and continues
until the time that he shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, in the
end of the world. Now the thousand years were expired many hundred years
ago, as has been showed. But although the time of Antichrists reign be
called short, yet is it not so short as the time of Satan loosed: and
therefore the assumption is false: For howsoever the thousand years expire in
the time of Antichrists reign, yet we are not to begin the reign of
Antichrist with the loosing of Satan. For within the thousand years of
Satan's imprisonment, Antichrist not only Apoc. 20. 4.
was, but also persecuted those that refused his mark: and yet we are not to
confound the time of his persecution, much less of his hotest persecution,
with the time of his continuance. Now the time of the devil loosed, as the
Papists teach, is the time of Antichrists most grievous persecution, which was
a co^sequent of men's refusing his mark, and that a fruit of his discovery
and acknowledgement: but he was not acknowledged until he came to his full
grouth, whereunto he attained not at the first. And it is to be thought that
the heat of his persecution will be slaked before his end, himself being
consumed and wasted by the spirit of Christ's 2. These. 2. 8.
mouth, and his See impouerished, if not overthrown by the kings of the earth,
which before the end of the world, shall not only hate the whore of Babylon
(the Popes co^cubine) but also shall make her Apo. 17. 1^.
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and her they shall burn with fire.

6. Thirdly, he argues from Math. 24. 21. mistaken by some of the fathers,
that unless those days (meaning of Antichrists persecution) should be
shortened, and consequently the persecution very short, no flesh could be saved:
but how can it be very short if it shall continue a thousand years? I answer,
first, that the tribulation there spoken of, is to be understood of the
calamities of the Jews in the siege of Jerusalem, as I have manifestly proved:
And secondly, that we are to distinguish betwixt the time of Antichrists
continuance, and the time of his hotest persecution, which Bellarmine
confounds; the latter notwithstanding being much shorter then the former.
Fourthly (says he) Christ preached only three years and a half, therefore
decet etiam, it is also fit, that Antichrist be suffered to preach no longer.
Answer, 1. In this argument Bellarmine presupposes that Antichrist is but one
man, as Christ is, which we have proved to be most false. 2. he takes upon him
to be the Lords counsailour, auouching that it is not fit that Antichrist
should preachlonger then Christ did: he might have added that it was not fit,
or to speak more fitly, not like that Antichrist in the same time should be
able to prevail with more then Christ did, and much less to pervert almost
the whole world in three years and a half; whereas Christ as he was man,
could convert but a few of the Jews, etc. 3. Although Christ in his own
person preached but a few years; yet he being the eternal word and wisdom of
his father, has ever since the beginning spoken by the mouth of his Prophets
and ministers, by whose ministry also as it were the breath of his mouth, he
shall waste and consume Antichrist. 4. Neither can it be proved by any show of
reason, that Antichrist is to preach just so many years, as Christ our Savior
did: Or that he shall in three years and an half subdue by force, I know not
how many kingdoms, and convert by preaching, and gather to himself the
remna^t of the Jews, and all counterfeit Christians, dispersed through so many
nations, as a man cannot travel through in three years and a half: not to
speak of his repairing Jerusalem, and erecting the temple, and many good
morrowes, which by many poetical fictions the Papists assign to their devised
Antichrist. His fifth and sixth reasons are not worth the mentioning. For the
time and times, and half a time, as has bin showed, belong not to Antchrists
reign, and thereby we understand 3, years and a half, as also by the 7.
times, Dan. 4. 19.
in the 4. of Daniel, 7. years, according to the interpretation of the holy
Ghost (expou^ding, as it seems) times by years. Dan. 11. 13.

7. In the last place he labors to take away the exceptions which some
particular man, as namely, Chytraeus, Bullinger, and the authors of the
Centuries, make against his former allegatio^s out of Daniel and the
Apocalypse, but scarsly touches any one of the 6 exceptions before mentioned.
For whereas Chytraus answers,. 3. and 4.
that the 42. months in the 11. and 13. of the Apoc. may not be understood
literally for three years and a half, because it is contrary to experience:
and besides the Apostle affirms that Antichrist shall continue until Christ's
coming. Bellarmine replieth, that he beggeth the question. But I answer again
as before, that experience shows that the persecutions under the beast with 7
heads, continued longer then three years and a half: and when as John
affirms that the Antichrist was come in his time, and Paul foretells, that
he should after a sort continue (though at the last in a kind of consumption)
unto the second coming of Christ, surely their meaning was, that he should
continue above three years and a half. 2. He finds fault with him and
Bullinger, who thought that the holy ghost mentioning 42. months and 1260.
days, by a certain time, meant an uncertain; replying that the number which
is meant, is certain, when it consists of great and small numbers mixed. But
they speak of the time, and he of the number, and therefore his reprehension is
unjust. For although the holy ghost do mean no other number then 42, and 1260,
yet by the certain time mentioned, that is, months and days, he means an
uncertain, which may be as some think 42. sabbothes of years, and 1260
years. And thirdly, whereas Illyricus, and the other authors of the Centuries
by 1260. days, understand so many years; Bellarmine denies that days are
put for years any where in the scripture, and yet cannot deny, but that by
390. days in Ezechiel, is Ezec. 4. 5. 6
meant 390. years, and by 40. days so many years, a day for a year, as the
holy ghost speaks. And likewise Apoc. 2. 10. by ten Vid. Iun. in Apoc. 2.
days is meant 10. years, as some of the learned think. Indeed if any shall
by 1260 days, understand (as Bellarmine does) the just time of Antichrists
reign, and withal expound them either by 1260. years, as Bellarmine charge
some, or by three years and Cap. 3.
a half, as the Papists do; they may be refuted by the reason before alleged,
because after the revelation of Antichrist the special time of Christ's coming
may according to this exposition be foretold, which notwithstanding shall not
come by observation, but suddenly, neither shall precisely be foreknowne, as
being known only to the Lord.

The 9. Chapter: answering his sixth demonstration concerning the end of the
world.
1. THe sixth and last demonstration, to prove that Antichrist is not yet come,
is taken from the end of the world. But because Bellarmine saw that this could
not be made a sign of Antichrists coming without absurdity (for it is absurd
thus to reason, the world has not yet an end, therefore Antichrist is not yet
come) therefore he changes the question. For whereas he propounded this
question to be concluded, that Antichrist is not yet come, he concludes that
he came not long since. So that for all this demonstration Antichrist may
already be come, although perhaps not so long since, as some do imagine: But
let us see how he proves that he was not come long since. If Antichrist were
come long since, then also the world long since should have had an end: but the
world has not yet an end, therefore Antichrist was not come long since. The
proposition he proves, because Antichrist comes a very little while before
the end of the world, and as it were immediately before the second coming of
Christ. But this whole demonstration may easily be refuted by this one
distinction: for we must distinguish betwixt the coming of Antichrist and his
death, betwixt his beginning and his end. Antichrist indeed is not utterly to
be destroyed before the second coming of Christ: but this does not prove that
therefore he was not come long since. The Apostle Paul does tell us that
Antichrist is to be destroyed at the second coming of Christ: notwithstanding
both he does insinuate and John plainly professes that the Antichrist which
they had heard was to come in the last hour, was already come in his time:
and thereupon infers that even then was the last hour or age of the world,
which the holy ghost calls an hour, that we should not think it long.

2. Now all the testimonies which Bellarmine alleges, if they were to be
understood of Antichrist (as indeed few of them are) do serve to prove, that
the destruction of Antichrist shall be in the end of the world, which we do
freely confess. But of these places, as some make not for him so the rest are
against him. The 7. of Daniel verse. 8. 9. 26. Apoc. 20 4. Mat. 24. 14. are
altogether impertinent. For Daniel speaks not of Antichrist or the last
judgment, but of Antiochus and Gods judgments on the Seleucidae: John
speaks not of the coming of Antichrist o^ last judgment, but of the binding
and loosing of Satan, and seats of judgment erected for the faithful, as
Augustine also expounds: Christ in that place of Mat. speaks not a word of
De ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. cap. (...)
Antichrists coming or of the end of the world, but of the preaching of the
gospel before the destruction of Jerusalem. The rest of the places make against
him, and as he alleges them, against the truth. For first Daniel 12. 12.
Where Daniel (says Bellarmine) after he had said that the kingdom of
Antichrist should continue 1290. days, adds, Blessed is he that expects
and comes to 1335. days. From whence the Papists would infer, that
Antichrist having reigned three years and a half, should be destroyed forty
five days before the day of judgment. This place as I have proved, is to be
understood of Antiochus. But suppose it spoke of Antichrists reign, and end of
the world, see what would follow thereof. First, that the reign of Antichrist
is not three years and a half precisely, or 1260. days; but 1290. days.
Secondly, that Antichrist shall be destroyed before the end of the world, whereas
Paid tells us, that Christ shall destroy him at his appearing, 2. These. 2.
(...)
and not 45. days before. Thirdly, then so soon as Antichrist is revealed,
men shall be able certainly and distinctly to foretell the very day of judgment,
to wit, the 1335. after Antichrists coming, and 45. after his death: which
Christ denies Math. 24* 36. And lastly, if this were true, then after the
coming, or at least after the death of Antichrist, all men would be in
expectation of Christ's second coming. And therefore those days will not be
(as Christ says) like the days of Noah: neither will his Man. 24. 37 38. 39.
coming be sudden and unlooked for, as himself says Mat. 24 if the very
day of his coming be known before hand, and accordingly Mat 24. 44 1. These.
5. 2. 3.
looked for. But let Christ be true, and all Papists liars.

3. 2. Mat. 24. 29 Shortly after the tribulation of those days, the sun
shall be darkened, etc. In this chapter of Matthew our Savior speaks not at
all of Antichrist until the 23. and 24. verse, which diverse of the Fathers,
yea and the Papists themselves understand as spoken of Antichrist. There shall
arise false Christ's, and false Pr^phets, and they shall work great signs and
wonders, etc. From whence it appears, that Antichrist is not one only man,
as Bellarmine says, and that the signs of Christ's coming are to follow the
tribulations under Antichrist, which we do confess. 3. 2. These. 2. 8. And then
shall that outlaw be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, etc. Whence Bellarmine would prove that the second
coming of Christ shall follow very shortly after the coming of Antichrist.
But we must distinguish betwixt the first coming of Antichrist, and his
revelation and acknowledgement. And it cannot be denied, but (...) there is a
great distance betwixt his revelation, and destruction. For he w^ to be
revealed as the Apostle says, when that which hindered was taken out of the
way, which we have proved to have been done many hundred years since: and
consequently that Antichrist appeared long since, howsoever he shall not
utterly be destroyed until the second coming of Christ. And lastly, we are to
distinguish betwixt Christ's consuming him with the spirit of his mouth, and his
utter destroying him at his glorious appearance. There are therefore these
degrees to be noted betwixt the first coming of Antichrist and his
destruction. For after he is come, he shows himself in his colors, and that
by degrees, more and more advancing himself, until he come to his full pitch
and height of his Antichristian pride. After he is come to his height, he is
acknowledged, and that by degrees: after he is acknowledged, Christ consumes
him by the spirit of his mouth, that is, by the preaching of the everlasting
gospel, Apo. 14. 6. 7. After which follows the destruction of Babylon, that
is, Rome, Apoc. 14. 8. effected and brought to pass by the Kings of the earth,
who assisted the beast until Christ laid him open and consumed him with the
breath of his mouth: and after that in the last place follows the utter
destruction of Antichrist at the second coming of Christ. 4. Lastly, 1. Ioh.
2. 18. Children, this is the last hour, and as you have heard that Antichrist
comes, etc. Where Bellarmine makes the Apostle reason thus, We know
Antichrist shall come in the end of the world, and now we see many petite
Antichrists, as it were his forerunners: therefore we know that this is the
last hour and age of the world. But if this reason of Bellarmines framing were
good, we might upon his former grounds conclude thus. At the fullness of time,
Christ was to come: But ever since the beginning there have bin Patriarchs and
Prophets, which Bellarmine calls the forerunners of Christ; therefore the
fullness of time has bin ever since the beginning. But whether shall we say
that Bellarmine is so ignorant that he knows not how to make a syllogism, or
so shameless as to make the Apostle argue sophistically. The Apostles reason
is this, When the Antichrist comes it is the last hour: Now (says he)
Antichrists are come, (meaning by Antichrists the same with the (...). John. 4.
3. (...). (...). 7.
antichrist, which else where he affirms was the^ entered into the world, or
else there are 4. termini four terms in The Apostles argument) therefore now is
the last hour. And if then were the hour of Antichrist his coming, what
reason have the Papists to restrain his coming, until three years and a
half before the end of the world? And thus, as you see, Bellarmines
allegations are either altogether impertinent, or else against himself.

4. But as I said before, suppose they all spoke of the day of judgment, and
end of the world following upon Antichrist: yet none of them joineth the end of
the world with his coming and birth, but with his death and destruction. And
the like may be said of his allegation from the common consent of the fathers
and confession of his adversaries, For our adversaries (says he) confess,
that Antichrist shall reign (we say he shall continue) unto the end of the
world: and therefore sh^rtly after his death shall be the end of the world. Yea we
further confess, that his destruction shall concur with the consummation of
the world: for Christ at his coming shall destroy him* But this proves not
that his coming shall be within three years and a half before the end of the
world. For John says, He was come in his time, and Paul says, he should be
revealed, when that which hindered was done out of the way, which was done many
hundred years ago. Therefore though his end concur with the end of the world,
yet there shall be a greater distance then Bellarmine imagines, betwixt his
coming and the end of the world. This Bellarmine foreseeing, perceived very
well, that i^ this demonstration by it self alone, there is no force at all.
And therefore he joyneth it with the fifth, of both which together he says, an
unanswerable demonstration may be made, to prove that Antichrist is not yet
come, and that the Pope is not Antichrist. For, says he, if presently after
the death of Antichrist the world shall have an end, and Antichrist shall dye,
after he has reigned but three years and a half; then it follows, that
Antichrist shall not appear nor begin ^o reign til within 3. years and a
half before the end of the world. But the Pope has reigned longer then 3.
years and an half, and yet the world continues, therefore the Pope is not
antichrist. The vanity of the former demonstration which is made the ground of
the last, I have sufficiently showed before: and therefore that which is said of
two ciphers in ciphering, the same may be said of these two demonstrations
joined together, that naught to naught makes naught. For now I will not stand
to tell you, how the three years and a half which in the former demonstration
were 1260. days precisely, are now grown to 1335. days. For Antichrist shall
not begin to reign, says Bellarmine, until within three years and a half
before the end, and yet from the beginning of his reign, until the end of the
world, shall be 1335. days; so that in Bellermines precise account of half a
year, 75. days, that is 10. weeks, and 5. days are nothing.

Thus have we answered these six demonstrations, which we have showed to have
been far from proouing demonstratiuely, either that Antichrist is not yet
come, or that the Pope is not Antichrist. Wherefore to conclude, if the Papists
demonstrations in so weighty a cause, whereupon all Popery depends, be such
trifling trumperie, as is scarce worth the answering, what shall we think be
their ordinary arguments in other causes of less importance. And this was his
third principal argument, wherein he has spent seven whole chapters.

The 10. Chapter: Concerning the name of Antichrist.
1. NOw follows his fourth disputation concerning the name and mark of
Antichrist. From the name he fetches this unanswerable argument, as he calls
it. If the Insolubile argumentum.
name of Antichrist spoken of Apoc. 13. be yet unknown, then is not Antichrist
as yet come; and consequently the Pope is not Antichrist: But Antichrists name
spoken of Apoc. 13. is yet unknown: therefore Antichrist is not yet come, etc.
Of this unanswerable argument, there is no part sound, as shall appear. The
proposition he proves, because when Antichrist is once come, his name shall be
c^only known. Which he proves first by a similitude: As Notissimu^.
Christ's name before his coming was unknown, although the Prophets had
foretold many things concerning Christ, and Sibylla had prophesied that his
name should contain 888. but after he was once come, all men know that his
name is Jesus: so although before Antichrists coming his name be unknown, yet
after he is once come there will be no more question what his name is, then of
the name of Christ, which all even Turks and Jews and Pagans know to be Jesus.
Secondly, from a common adiunct of all prophecies, to be doubtful and obscure,
until they be fulfilled, as Irenaeus teaches and proves, Lib. 4 Chap. 43.
For answer, first I deny the proposition, and the Hypothesis whereupon it is
grounded, and contrariwise affirm that the name of Antichrist, meaning the
name which Antichrist shall impose upon men, spoken of Apoc. 13. might be
unknown for a time, yea was to be unknown for a long time after his coming.
For the name of Antichrist cannot be known as the name of Antichrist, until
Antichrist himself be known and acknowleged. But Antichrist himself was not
commonly to be known and acknowleged at his first coming: For then he could
not be able to seduce many, few or none being so desperately mad as to follow
him whom they know to be Antichrist. First therefore the mystery of iniquity
was to work secretly to the seducing of many: afterward, Antichrist was to be
revealed, first, by his manifest appearing and showing himself more plainly
and openly; after by his acknowledgement: whereof also there are degrees; first
by some particularly; secondly, by whole Churches generally; and yet never in
this world to be acknowleged of those, that receive and retain his mark.
Again, the name of Antichrist is a mystery, and Antichristianisme is a
mystery of iniquity, In the whore of Babylons forehead In Apoc. 17 5.
is written a mystery. And so far is it from the understanding of all to tell
the name of the beast, that the holy Ghost speaking of this name, says, Here
is wisdom, he that has understanding, let him reckon the number of the beast,
meaning the number of his name. Apoc. 13. 18.


2. In the similitude taken from Christ, there is no likene: howbeit Be^armine
takes great felicity in co^paring Christ with Antichrist. Christ as he was one
particular man, so at the time of his circumcision a proper name was given unto
him: Antichrist as he Luke. 2. 21.
is not one particular person (as has bin proved) but a state, could not have
a proper name given unto him. And accordingly it is said to be the name of the
beast, which beast as has bin showed, signifies not one particular man, but a
whole state. Again, Christ coming to save, his name Jesus the name of the
Savior was t^ be made known, that he might the rather be embraced: Antichrist
coming to deceive and to destroy, was (according to his devilish policy) to
conceal that name whereby he should be known to be Antichrist, least being
known he should be forsaken of all. And as touching S^bylla, she did not only
foretell that the name of Christ should co^taine the number 888. as indeed the
name (...), Jesus does: but also sets down certain Acrostiches, that is,
verses, the first letters whereof contain this sentence, (...) Lib. 8.
(...), Jesus Christ the son of God the Savior, which are also cited by
Augustine. But of antichrist she speaks nothing De ciuit. dei. lib. 18. Chap.
23.
so plainly. Howbeit she plainly calls Rome Babylon, as John does and in the
8. book describing antichrist, as some think, she says,

(...). etc. that is: There shall be a Prince with many heads (which is to be
understood either by a metonymy for his triple crown, or by a Synecdoche for
the succession of Popes) having a name near to Po^ti, that is, Po^tifex the
Pope. But to return to my purpose. By this which has bin said, you plainly
see that there is no similitude betwixt Christ and antichrist in this behalf,
Christ having a proper name; but Antichrist having none, and withal you have
heard reasons why Christ's name should be well known, whereas Antichrists was to be
obscure and for a long time unknown, or at the least not acknowledged.

3 His other proof touching the obscurity of prophecies before they are
fulfilled, proves nothing for him, unless he ad, that as before their
fulfilling they are very obscure, so also after their fulfilling they are very
plain: which after indeed he adds in the end of the chapter, Siquidem omnia
vaticin^a (says he) cum implet^ sunt, clarissima officiuntur, for all
prophecies when they are fulfilled become most clear. I answer, that although
they become more clear after then before, yet many times they remain dark
and obscure to very many. As appears in the prophecies of the scripture
fulfilled in Christ, but not yet understood of the Jews, nor acknowledged to
have bin verified in Christ. And even as the prophecies concerning Christ are
by true Christians easily understood; howbeit to Jews and infidels they
remain dark and obscure, because the God of this world has blinded their
eyes, that they should not see the shining light of the Gospel: so also the
prophecies concerning Antichrist, which already are fulfilled in the Papacy,
howsoever many of them are plainly understood of the true professors; yet to
the followers of Antichrist, who^ God has given over to strong illusions, that
they may believe lies, they seem to be dark and obscure, and not as yet
fulfilled. Notwithstanding the former part of his assertion we do embrace: that
prophecies until they be fulfilled are (for the most part) dark and
ambiguous, and herein with Bellarmine we approve Irenaeus his judgment. But
hereupon we infer, that therefore the writings of the fathers, who living before
the revelation of Antichrist, and expounding the prophecies concerning
Antichrist, were most uncertain ghesses (as Sed nec isti patres voluerunt
sententias illas suas, alio loco haberi, quam suspicionum and coniecturarum.
Bellarmine. Lib. 5.
Bellarmine even in this chapter confesses) the prophecies being to them dark
and ambiguous, which now since the fulfilling thereof have bin more plain and
perspicuous: and therefore that it is no arrogance in us which see the event
agreeing with the prophecy, to take upon us to expound diverse prophecies
concerning Antichrist, the true understanding whereof was hid from the fathers.
For if God would have had them plainly known before their fulfilling, surely he
would have made the^ known by those his servants the apostles by who^ they were
delivered. And so Irenaeus says, that he would not take upon him certainly to
define what this name should be, Scientes (says he) quoniam si operteret
manifest praesenti tempore praeconari nomen eius, per ipsum vtique editu^
fuisset, quiet Apocalypsin viderat, Knowing that if this name ought in these
times to be published, it should no doubt have bin declared by him, to who^ the
revelation was given. Likewise Andreas the Bishop of Caesarea, The exact
account (says he) and computation of the number, and likewise Apud. Aretham in
Apocalpys.
all other things which are written of Antichrist, opportunity of time and
experience shall make manifest to them that are vigilant. For as some of the
doctors say, if it were necessary that this name should manifestly be known
before hand, it should have been revealed by John himself.

4. Now let us come to his assumption, where he affirms that Antichrists name
is yet unknown. We confess that in the Church of Rome this name is either not
known as of the ignorant, or not acknowledged as of the obstinat: But in the
true Church of God, as Antichrist himself is known, so is this name
acknowledged. But let us hear Bellarmines disputation proving this assumption.
Fatentur omnes (says he in the beginning of the chapter) pertinere omnino ad
Antichristum verba illa Ioannis, Apoc. 13. All men do confess that those
words of John Apoc. 13. do wholly belong to Antichrist. And he shall make all
both small and great, rich and Apoc. 13. 16. 17. 18.
poor, free and bond, to receive from him a mark in their right hand or in
their forehead; and that none should buy or sell, unless he have the mark or
name of the beast or number of his name. Here is wisdom: he that has
understanding let him reckon the number of the beast, for it is the number of a
man, and his number is 666. Now* concerning this number says he, there are
many opinions. The first of those who think that by this number is signified
the time of Antichrists coming, etc. But this opinion we do with Bellarmine
reject, because it is called the number of his name, and not of the time; and
also because Antichrist shall compel all sorts of men to take his name, and
the number of his name; which cannot be understood of the time. Thirdly,
because Irenaeus reports from those who had seen John face to face, that the
name of the beast shall according to the computation of the Greeks by letters
which are in it, contain 666. The second opinion is of those who think
Antichrists name to be (...) or (...), of which we will speak anon in his due
place. The third opinion is of many Papists who think that his name shall be
(...), thereby understanding an adversary, but that is not a name that he shall
assume to himself, or impose upon others, but a name rather given him of his
adversaries. Neither is it the name of the beast here spoken of. The fourth of
Rupertus, who imagined that by this threefold number 666. is signified, the
threefold preuarication of Satan: first in himself; secondly, in our first
parents; thirdly in Antichrist. The fifth of Beda, who supposes that it is a
number of perfection, which Antichrist shall challenge unto himself. But these
three opinions Bellarmine re^ecteth, and that worthily. For first, the holy
Ghost says it is the number of the name of the beast: and secondly, this name
and number of it, Antichrist causes men to take upon them. The sixth opinion,
wherein he rests as the most true, is theirs which confess their ignorance,
and profess that this name is not yet known.

5. To these opinions many more might be added, but to make short work: the
last of these opinions is Bellarmines: the second is ours: therefore let us
consider how he proves his own opinion, and disprooueth ours. That this name
is unknown, Bellarmine would prove by the authority of Irenaeus, as if he
should have said, This name was not certainly known in Irenaeus his time;
therefore not in our time. I deny the consequence, Irenaeus lived before the
fulfilling of this prophecy, as himself professes and as the truth is: for
he lived above 1400. Non ante mul'um temporis, pene sub nostro saeculo. Iren.
Lib. 5.
years ago: and as himself says, the revelation was given to John but a
little before his age. For it was given in the end of the first Century, and he
lived in the second, and therefore it is more safe (says he) to wait for the
fulfilling of this prophecy, then before hand to determine any thing. For if
the Lord would have had this name known in Irenaeus his time, he would have
made it known by John himself, to whom the revelation was given. But as
before the fulfilling of this prophecy, he says, this name was very obscure;
so he signifies, that after the fulfilling it should be more plain. And
therefore that which he could but guess at in his time, we may now define,
time having revealed that truth, which until the prophecy was cleared by the
event lay hid: otherwise it shall be lawful for men to reason from the
authority of Irenaeus, as Bellarmine does, even unto the end of the world. But
may we then reason thus: this name was not known in Irenaeus his time,
therefore it shall never be known? to what end was this prophecy given, if it
shall never be understood? Whereas therefore he uses the arguments whereby
Irenaeus proves, that this name could not be known in his time, to prove
that it cannot be known in our time, he is ridiculous. There are many names,
says Irenaeus, that have this number, therefore it is heard before hand to
tell which is this name. Again, if in Irenaeus his time God would have this
known, he would have revealed it by John. 3. It is dangerous to define before
hand his name, for missing of his name we shall not know him when he comes,
and therefore shall be in the more danger to be decoiued by him. All this we
grant. But will Bellarmine needs be so ridiculous, as to conclude: In Irenaeus
his time men were not able to tell which of those names that contain the
number 666 is the name of the beast, therefore 1400. years after none shall be
able to tell. God would not have it known in Irenaeus his time, therefore he
will not have it known now. It was dangerous then before the fulfilling of the
prephecie, to define what this name should be: therefore it is dangerous now,
when the prophecy is expounded by the event, to apply the one to the other?
And what does he infer hereuppon? Therefore no doubt the Protestants, who
think the Pope to be Antichrist, shall be deceived of the true Antichrist, when
he comes. But blessed be God that has already revealed unto us the true
Antichrist, that knowing him we might avoid him: whereas upon the Papists he
has sent strong illusions, that they may believe lies, because they loved not
the truth that they might be saved, 2. These. 2. 11.

6. Again he proves this name not to be known, because there is great
controversy about it, what it should be. But by the same reason he may
conclude that few points of religion are yet known, because there be few
concerning which there is no controversy. Notwithstanding as in other
controversies, the truth is known of those which are Orthodoxall, howsoever
others will not acknowledge it: so I doubt not, but that the truth in this
matter is known, although some cannot, and others will not, as yet see it. For
seeing the hardest matter in this mystery is known, it is not to be thought
that the easier is hid or unknown, especially seeing the knowledge of the one
makes the other evident. The chief thing here to be considered is, what this
beast is. For if the beast be known, it will not be hard to tell what his name
is, especially if the number of the name be 666. The beast, as appears by the
whole context, is, as I have showed, the former beast, which without doubt
figureth the Roman or Latin state. The name of this beast is Roman or
Latin. If therefore this name in the learned tongues contain the number 666.
and be such a name, as he to whom all other notes of Antichrist do agree,
shall enforce men to take upon them; then without doubt this is the name where
of the holy Ghost speaks: but these properties agree to the name Latin or
Roman. For (...), in Hebrew (signifying Roman) (...) in Greek, signifying
Latin, and Romanus in Hebrew Characters, do contain the just number 666. and
are besides such names as Antichrist compels all men to take upon them, as
has been showed heretofore. See. Lib. 1. Chap. 8.


7. But let us see what Bellarmine obiecteth, against this truth. Of those many
reasons which we do use, Bellarmine makes choice of two, as being the easiest
to answer, as his manner is; and against them he argues, namely, the conjecture
of Irenaeus, and the agreement of the number. But besides these, we produce
three other arguments, as you have heard, which together with Lib. 1. c. (...).
these make the matter evident. It is true indeed that Irenaeus besides
Latinus, produces two other names, (...), and (...), and seems to prefer the
latter of these before (...). But we build not upon Irenaeus his authority, but
upon those reasons, whereon his conjecture is grounded, which are two: the one,
because it is the name of that kingdom which is figured under the former beast
Apoc. 13. 7. whose authority Antichrist was to usurp: the other, because it
contains 666: his words be these. But the name Lateinos also comprehends
the number 666. et valde verisimile est, and it is very likely. For it is the
name of that which most truly is called the kingdom. For they are the Latins
that now reign. Which in effect is as much as if he had said, this name is
very likely, because it is a name containing 666. and is the name of the former
beast, spoken of Apoc. 13. 1. which figureth verissimum regnum, that kingdom
which most truly is called a kingdom, that is the Latin or Roman state. Yea
but this conjecture says Bellarmine, which in Irenaeus his time was of some
force, now it is nothing worth: for then the Latins bare the sway, now they
do not. For Antichrist as he shall be Potentissimus Rex, (...) most mighty
king; so without doubt he shall seize upon the most mighty kingdoms. Whereas
therefore the kingdom of the Latins was in those times most mighty, but now
otherwise; there was some likelihood then, that he might by subduing them be
called Latinus, but now there is no such probability. I answer, the name
whereof John speaks is not the name of Antichrist properly the second beast,
but the name of the former beast; which name of the former beast, Antichrist
the second beast causes men to take upon them. And so Latinus, is not the name
of Antichrist properly, but of the beast, that is, the Latin or Roman state.
Neither was it Irenaeus his meaning, that the name of the beast is (...),
because Antichrist was to subdue the Latins, but because the Latins then had
Verissimum regnum, the most true and sovereign kingdom: and therefore most
truly were the beast described Apoc. 13. 7. If therefore the Latins then had
the greatest kingdom, and were the beast whose authority the second beast,
that is, Antichrist was to take upon him, Apoc. 13. 12. this conjecture that
the name of the bea^ (...), which was probable before the prophecy was
fulfilled, Apo. 13. 12
is now more then probable, the prophecy being verified in the event. And the
decay or rather dissolution of the Latin or Roman Empire, before which
Antichrist was not to be revealed, is so far from making this conjecture
less probable, that it rather confirms it. Neither do we read in the
Scriptures that Antichrist should be a most mighty King, or should sease upon
the most mighty kingdoms: only this we read, that he should exercise the power
of the former beast, which most fitly agrees to the Pope.

2 As touching the agreement of the number 666. Bellarmine obiecteth, first,
that the number agrees not with the names propounded: and secondly, although
it did, yet it follows not, that any of these is the name of the beast. That
the number agrees not he shows, because (...), if it be written with a
simple Iota as it ought to be, it wants five of that number. I answer, that
the ancient Latins used to write and pronounce i long by ei diphthong; and the
Graecians usually express i long by ei. And it is to be observed, that
Irenaeus setting down these two names (...) and (...) as containing the number
666, takes it for granted, that (...) may so be written: whereas of (...) he
says, that it makes that number, if it be written writh (...) diphthong.
Against the name (...), that is, Roman, he objecteth, that it is not
masculine, unless the last letter signifiyng 400. be taken away. I answer
that collectiue names in Hebrew are indifferently expressed in either gender.
And suppose the name were feminine, yet that hinders not, but that it may be
the name here spoken of. For the Holy Ghost speaks of the name of the beast,
that is, the Roman state, which elsewhere is called the whore of Babylon, and
foemina, a woman: And therefore well may the name be feminine. But although the
number agreed (says Bellarmine) yet i^ follows not, that either Roman or
Latin should be the name. First, because neither of them is his proper name,
but commune. Neither ought it, seeing it is the name of the beast, which
signifies a whole state. Secondly, because many other ^es make this number:
And therefore it follows not that any of these is the name here spoken of,
because they contain the number 666. For diverse Authors have noted diverse
other names, as Hippolytus (...) (which indeed makes not that number, but
rather proves the author (alleging (...)) to be counterfeit; neither is it
a Nowne, and much less a name) Aretas, seven others, (...) (which makes not
that number,) but (...), (which is (...) barbarous) (...): Primasius (...),
Rupertus and Haymo (...) and Pic^x. Unto these he adds out of lying Lindanus,
Martin Lauer (for Luther) in Latin letters, taken (as they never were) for
numbers, after the manner of the Greek: out of G^ebrard Lithers name in Hebrew,
viz Lultor: to which Bellarmine in his wisdom adds, Dabid Chitreiu, for
David Chytreus, and (...) a Saxon, to signify Luther: Which latter names show
the Papists to be fraught with malice and void of judgment, forcing these
men's names, as they might their own, to this purpose. But we answer, that
although there are many names which contain 666. yet notwithstanding, none can
be the name here spoken of, unless also it be the name of the beast, that is,
the Latin or Roman state, and unless it be such a name, as he to whom all
other notes of Antichrist do agree, causes men to take upon them. Consider
therefore with what conscience Bellarmine would persuade us, that any of these
may be the name here spoken of, as well as Latin or Roman: Seeing first,
either of these is the name of the beast, whereas none of those is or can be.
Secondly, seeing those are such names as Antichrist will not cause men to take
upon them; whereas the Pope (whom we have proved to be Antichrist) inforceth
either of these names upon men, suffering none to buy or sell, or to live among
them, unless he profess himself to be a Roman or Latin in respect of his
religion. And thirdly, whereas these names agree fitly to him, to whom all
other marks of Antichrist agree, many of those do not; and those which do,
as (...), an evil guide, which (...) agrees to the Pope, (...), etc. yet
cannot be this name, for the reasons before alleged. And thus I hope this
Gordian knot is untied, and this unanswerable argument answered by this (...).
The name of the beast is not yet known, therefore (says he) Antichrist is not
yet come. I answer, although the name were unknown, yet might Antichrist
become. But now the name of the beast is known: how far then is Billarmine
from proouing by this argument, that Antichrist is not yet come?

The 11. Chapter: Concerning the mark, which Antichrist shall impose upon men.
1. COncerning the mark of Antichrist, Bellarmnine recites three opinions,
unto which he adds a fourth of his own coining. The first of the
Protestants, who teach that the mark of Antichrist is some ^ne of obedience
and conjunction with the Pope. The second opinion is of some Catholic
Papists, who think this mark to be the letters of Antichrists name. The third
of Hippolytus, and some others, who imagine that this mark of the beast is,
not to use the sign of the cross, but rather to detest and (...) it. The
first opinion viz of the Protestants, he detesteth as r^sh and ^irde: The
second of the Catholics, he rejects as false, which he signifies when he
says, they were deceived. The third he would willingly embrace, because it
seems to make against us; but the author is counterfeit, and his testimony
falsified by Bellarmine. And although indeed he do reject it, as he might well,
because it is absurd^ to feign a privative mark, as if the not using of some
mark, were the mark whereof the Holy Ghost speaks: yet he affirms, (such
is his blind malice) that herein we are notable forerunners of Antichrist. In
the fourth place he adds his own conceit, that Antichrist shall invent a
positive or real mark, which as yet is not known: whereby as he would
overthrow all the former opinions, so especially he confuteth the last. From
whence notwithstanding, as if it were true, he would feign infer that we are
the forerunners of Antichrist. And this opinion he does confute by two
reasons. First, because the mark must be positive; and secondly, because it is
as yet unknown. And this is the sum and effect of his whole eleventh
Chapter. But what of all this? or whereunto does all this discourse tend? You
will say, to prove that the Pope is not Antichrist. He had indeed propounded
that question to prove, but in this Chapter he concludes nothing for the
Pope. Only he tells us, that there be three opinions concerning the mark,
and to them he adds a fourth of his own, and there an end. Other Papists
when they handle this argument, reason thus: Antichrist shall compel men to
take the mark of the beast; the Pope does not compel men to take the mark of
the beast. Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. Which argument if he had used,
and had also made good the assumption, he should have said something to the
purpose. But Bellarmine concludes no such matter, Nec enim a^sus est, nec
potuit. For well does he know, that from this mark of the beast we conclude
the affirmative, namely, that the Pope is Antichrist.

2. How then does he argue? surely it is not easy to tell. For after the
sophisters guise, he hides his conclusion, that he may the more easily
deceive. (...), as the Philosopher says. But so far as I can gesle, either by
resolving the discourse it self, or by conferring the same with the former
chapter, whereunto he seems to refer us, he would seem to reason thus: If
Antichrists mark be not yet known, then is not Antichrist yet come: But
Antichrists mark is not yet known; therefore Antichrist is not yet come: and
consequently the Pope is not Antichrist. The proposition he omitteth, and so
takes it for granted: although in truth there is no necessity of the
consequence. For as we said before of his name, so now we say of his mark:
that after Antichrist is come, his mark might be unknown, yea was for a time
to be unknown. Otherwise he should not be able to enforce his mark upon
many, few or none being so desperately wicked, as knowing his mark, to suffer
themselves by the same to be branded to destruction; as all they are, who do
receive and retain it. Apoc. 14. 9, 10. And further I add, that although this
mark be known to very many of those who have the Mark of God: Apoc. 9. 4.
yet to them that are branded with this mark of the beast, and do retain the
same, that is, who live and die Papists, it neither is, or shall be known, or
at least not acknowledged of them during this life. And therefore no marvel
though Bellarmine confess his ignorance in this behalf.

3. But let us see also how he proves the assumption, viz. that the mark of
the beast is not yet known. Forsooth by this reason: If neither that be the
mark of the beast which the Protestants teach, nor yet that which the
Catholics imagine (so many of them as take upon them to know what this mark
is) the assuredly this mark is not yet known: But neither is that the mark
which the Protestants speak of, nor yet that which the Catholics have
supposed: Therefore this mark is not yet known. As for the Papists, we
confess that either they know not, or at the least acknowledge not this mark,
for if they did, the most of them would refuse to take it. Wherefore leaving
them to Bellarmines discretion, whether to be confuted or allowed; let us
consider whether that be the mark, which the Protestants have supposed, or
not. The heretics of this time (says Bellarmine) teach that the character of
Antichrist is some sign of obedience and conjunction with the Pope of Rome.
But what this sign is, they do not express after the same manner. Bullinger
understands by the mark the Chrisme, wherewith young ones are anointed in
(...). 61. in Apoc. Chron. ta^. 10.
their confirmation. Bibliander says, it is the profession of the Romish or
Popish faith. Chytraeus to these adds the oath of fidelity, which many are
compelled to swear to the Pope: as also the priestly unction which is received
in the head and the hand, impressing (as the Papists speak) Characterem
indelebilem: Finally to fall down before Images, and the host, and to be
present at Masses for the dead. Sed facile est (says he) has nugas refutare.
But it is easy to refute these toys. But before I come to answer his trifling
cauillations, I think it needful first to refer the reader to the former
book, See lib. 1. Chap. 8.. 4. and. 5.
where I showed what this mark is, and that this mark which is but one in
substance, is diversely expressed and testified; and therefore that there is no
opposition in the opinions of the Protestants, concerning this matter, all
these notes, which they mention, belonging to the mark of the beast. And
secondly, to deliver briefly the Popish conceit concerning this mark. For the
Papists imagine that the character is a visible mark of Antichrists name,
which the followers of Antichrist shall have imprinted in their foreheads, and
carry as a sign in their hands, that it may be as it were their warrant to
buy or sell: And so Bellarmine (to omit others) writes also of the name and
the number. The proper name of Antichrist (says he) must be showed for a token
of Chap. 10. lib. 3. de. pontif. Romans
all that buy or sell. To which purpose he approves the judgment of Rupertus,
who says, that Antichrists name is such a one as he shall glory in, Adeo vt
jubeat inscribi in frontibus hominum, Insomuch that he shall cause it to be
written in the foreheads of men. And again, the beast (whose number this is)
shall command all merchants that they use this number for a sign or token in
their contracts. But who could be so gross as to imagine that Princes and
Magistrates, and men of all sorts, would ever suffer themselves to be branded
as it were with Antichrists visible mark? or if that were Antichrists
practice, who should not be able to discern him? Why, their ordinary gloss
could tell them, that the mark is received in the forehead by confession, and
in the right hand by operation, as we also hold. Antoninus also and Lyra teach
that Character est determinatus modus viuendi secundum legem alicujus, quo a
caeteris distinguuntur; A Character or mark is a certain manner of siuing
according to the law of any, whereby men are distinguished from others: which
also agrees with our judgment. Again, the Scriptures often times make
mention of marks and seals, which cannot Ezec. 9. Apoc. 9. 4. ^t 7. 2. et. 2
17. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
without absurdity be understood of visible marks.

4 Now let us see how easily this trifler is able according to his vain brag,
to refute those toys of ours. His reasons are two: the former, because that
which we deliver concerning the mark, agrees not with the words of the text:
which he shows by four instances. First, because the text speaks but of
one character, we speak of many. We answer, that as of the Lamb, so of the
beast also there is but one character in substance, although the same by diverse
means may be diversely expressed and testified; that is, subjection to the Pope
as their head, and the acknowledgment of the Sea of Rome, and of the Popes
supremacy, etc. And this mark (to answer his second instance also,) is common
to all, as being enforced upon all sorts of men without exception. Hear the
words of their law; Subesse Romano pontifici, omni Extr. de mayor. et obed. C.
v^a sancta.
humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronuntiamus omnino esse
de necessitate salutis: For every humane creature to be subject to the Pope of
Rome, we declare, affirm, determine, and proneunce, that it is altogether of
the necessity of salvation. See more lib. 1. cap. 8. 6. and 7. Thirdly, says
he, The scripture shows this character to be such a one, as may indifferently
be carried either in the right hand or in the forehead. But none of these marks
which the Protestants mention are such. The Chrisme is received in the
forehead, and not in the hand, etc. The scripture says thus, Apoc. 13. 16. And
he causes all, both small and great, etc. That he may give them a mark on
their right hand, or else upon their foreheads. That is, by his usurped
dominion and tyranny, he shall make all sorts of men subject unto him: and in
testimony of their subjection, to receive his mark on the forehead by
profession, or in the right hand by practice and operation. Of the carrying of
this mark, and the carrying of it indifferently either on the forehead, or in
the hand, the scripture speaks not. The mark is subjection unto him, which
(as has been said) is diversely expressed and testified. Fourthly, the
Scripture says, that none in the kingdom of Antichrist, shall be suffered to
buy or sell, unless he have this mark: but how many (says he) are there
within the dominion of the Pope, who having none of these marks, do buy and
sell, as namely the Jews? I answer, that Antichrist was to sit in the Church
of God, and to tyrannize over Christians. Now of all those that profess the
name of Christ, the Pope suffers none where he has to do, either to buy or
sell, except he have his mark. See the Bull of Martin the fifth, annexed to the
council of Constance, where express and straight charge is given, that
whosoever does not live in subjection to the Pope, and communion with the
Church of Rome (meaning such as Wicliffe and Husse) shall not be suffered See
lib. 1. cap. 8.. 7.
to buy or sell, or to enjoy the comforts of humane society. Whereas therefore
the Pope permits that to the Jews, which he will not permit to the
professors of the Gospel of Christ: that, as it shows his greater
opposition ot the servants of Christ, then to the enemies of Christ the Jews;
so it bewrays him to be Antichrist.

5. His second reason is thus concluded. If all these things, which the
Protestants mention, were used in the Catholic Church before the coming of
Antichrist, then none of them belong to the mark of Antichrist, (for otherwise
Antichrist should have learned them of the Church:) But all these things as
namely Chrisme and the rest, which the Protestants mention, were used in the
Catholic Church before the year 607. that is, before the coming of
Antichrist, according to the opinion of the Protestants: therefore none of
these belong to the mark of the beast. First I answer to the proposition, that
although these things had been used in the Catholic Church before the
revelation of Antichrist, yet that hinders not, but that now they may
appertain to the mark of the beast. For we doubt not to affirm that before
the revelation of Antichrist there were many corruptions crept into the Church,
both in Doctrine and in the worship of God (the mystery of iniquity more and
more working, even from the Apostles times, unto the revelation of Antichrist)
which corruptions Antichrist was to retain with increase. If therefore the
seeds of Antichristianisme, which were sown before Antichrists appearing, were
signs of his approaching; the same being as it were grown up, confirmed and
increased, may without absurdity be said to belong to the mark of Antichrist
already come. Especially if we consider the diversity in using of them since
the revelation of Antichrist and before. For there was not in the Catholic
church an universal subjection to the Pope as the head, until he by much
ambition and contention obtained the supremacy, and was called the universal
Bishop, and head of the universal Church, which he could never obtain until
the year 607. Seeing then there was not an universal subjection to the Pope
before that time, these things if they had been used at all, could not be used
as signs thereof; as since they have: Neither were they imposed before and
enjoined upon all by the laws of the Pope, as since they have: so that the
cause of using them now, is not the example of the ancient Church, but the
authority of the Popes law, injoyning and commanding them. Therefore
although these things had been used in the Church before the year 607, yet
now they may appertain to the mark of the beast: And therefore the connection
of the proposition, is first to be denied. But now if these things were not
used in the first 600. years, will not he then in confuting those toys, show
himself a mere trifler?

6. But let us consider of the particulars. And first, that Chrisme was used
before the year 606. he proves by the testimonies of Tertullian, Cyprian and
Augustine. I answer, that these Fathers speak of the anointing with Oil used
in the Sacrament of 1. Chrisme.
Baptism, which also without warrant of the Scriptures is retained among the
Papists. But of the chrisme of salvation, which the Papists make the element of
their counterfeit sacrament of confirmation, whereof there is no institution in
the Scriptures, no word, no element, these Fathers speak not. The ceremony
of imposition of hands, with prayer for the confirmation and strengthening of
those, which before had been baptized, was indeed used in the primitive
church: neither is it altogether misliked of us, although not much used among
us, because it was so much abused by them. But this ceremony was done without
unction or chrisme: for further proof whereof see D. Fulke his answer to the
Rhemists, Acts. 8. 17. And therefore notwithstanding that ancient practice of
the Church, this Chrisme used in confirmation, may belong to the mark of the
beast. And the rather because the Papists make their confirmation with Chrisme,
not only a sacrament, but also a most necessary and Principal sacrament. So
necessary as that they have set it down as a law, that no man is to be
esteemed a Christian without it. Nunquam De consecrat. did. 5. C. vt iciuni.
erit Christianus nisi confirmatione episcopals fuerit Chrismatus. He shall
never be a Christian, who is not confirmed with Chrisme by a Bishop. So
principal, as that they prefer it before Baptism, affirming that it is
maiore veneratione venerandum, with greater veneration to be reverenced. Now if
it be a privilege De consecrat. did. 5. C. de. his vero.
peculiar unto Christ the author and bestower of grace, to ordain Sacraments
of grace; then must it needs be accounted a practice Antichristian, if any man
shall take upon him to ordain a Sacrament, and not only to obtrude the same
upon all as necessary to salvation, but also to prefer it before that
excellent Sacrament of Baptism ordained by Christ himself. Therefore as the
ordayning and enforcing of this Sacrament upon men is a note of Antichrist, so
those which do not only receive it when they are young, but also retain it
when they are old, remaining in the communion of the Church of Rome, may be
said to have the mark of the beast.

7. Secondly, that to adhere to the Roman Church was a mark of a true
Catholic before the year 606. he proves by 2. Romanae ecclesie adhaercre.
the authority of Augustine, Ambrose and Victor Vticensis. But we speak of the
Church of Rome that now is, that is, the apostaticall Church of Rome: he
argues of the ancient Church which was apostolical. Indeed whiles the Church
of Rome did cleave unto Christ, so long might it be a note of a good Christian
to cleave unto it, although these testimonies do scarce prove it: but after
that Church became apostaticall and adulterous, as appears by their
fundamental heresies, and horrible Idolatries, and consequently of a faithful
Church became an harlot, and of the Church of Christ the synagogue of
Antichrist: it has been the mark of an Antichristian to live in the
communion of that Church. Besides this great difference betwixt the present and
the ancient state of the Church of Rome, there is also great odds in the
manner of adhering or cleaving thereto. Then, as other Churches did cleave to
the Church of Rome, so did the Church of Rome cleave to them: now it
acknowledges no Church besides it self. Then the Church of Rome was accounted
but a part of the Catholic Church, and so a man might be a good Christian
although he were not of the Church of Rome: now the Church of Rome alone must
be accounted the Catholic Church; and consequently he that is not a member of
that Church, must not be taken for a Catholic or true Christian. For when the
Pope got the title of universal Bishop, or head of the universal Church, then
the church whereof he was head, was accounted the only Catholic and
universal Church. Hereunto agrees that Gloss, Constat ecclesiam ideo esse
vnam, quia in universally ecclesia est vnum caput suprem^, Clementin. Lib. 5. ad
nostrum in gloss.
cui omnes de ecclesia obedire tenentur seil. Papae. It is evident that the
Church is therefore one, because in the universal Church there is one supreme
head, whom all that are of the Church are bound to obey. And agreeably thereunto
says a late writer, whose books were published at Venice in the year 1588.
Non potest quis se Christianum fateri, qui curae Papae dicit se non subesse. No
man may Rod. Cupers 127. number. 29.
profess himself to be a Christian, who does not confess himself to be
subject to the Popes cure or charge. And therefore in the conclusion of his
book he professes himself to be Mancipium S. R. E. The bond servant of the
holy church of Rome, Non ignorans (he says) haud possehaberese deum patrem, si
sanctam vniuersalem Romanam ecclesiam non habuerit matrem, knowing that a man
cannot have God to be his father, unless he have the holy universal Church of
Rome to be his mother. Seeing therefore the Church of Rome is become the whore
of Babylon, as has been proved, and the synagogue of Antichrist; and seeing
the Pope compels all men to cleave to the church of Rome, suffering none to
buy or sell, or to enjoy any benefits of humane society, which profess not
themselves to be members of the Church of Rome: it follows that this cleaving
to the Apostaticall Church of Rome, or living in the communion thereof,
belongs to the mark of the beast.

8. Thirdly, as touching the oath of obedience and fealty 3. Iura^ium
obedientiae.
made to the Pope of Rome, Bellarmine proves that it was used in the time of
Gregory the great, and therefore before the year 606. as appears in the
Epistles of Gregory. I answer, that although Lib. 10. Epist. 31.
before the year 606. the Bishops of Rome took more upon them, then became
the ministers of Christ: yet Bellarmine is not able out of all antiquity to
allege one example of such an oath of fealty and allegiance imposed by the
Pope upon foreign Bishops, and much less upon Kings and Princes, as all
Catholic Bishops, as they call them, Priests, graduates, Princes and
potentates are compelled to swear unto the Pope of Rome. That one example,
which, as it seems, is all that he can allege, of an oath taken not long
before the year 606. is little to the purpose. For it is not an oath of
obedience and allegiance to the Pope, but of faith and religion toward God,
conformable to the faith and religion then professed by the Bishop, and Church
of Rome. For it is the oath of a certain Bishop who swears to renounce his
former heresies, and to profess and maintain that faith and religion, which
then the Bishop and Church of Rome did profess: which oath in effect is no
otherwise to be vndestood, then if a minister among us, being reclaimed from
Popery or some other heresy, should take an oath before a Bishop, that whiles
he lives, he will profess and maintain that religion which is now professed
and established in the Church of England, and other reformed Churches; which is
not to swear allegiance to them, but the like allegiance with them unto Christ.

9. Fourthly, the anointing of Priests, we confess to be as ancient as the
Priesthood of Aaron, from whence they profess 4. Vnctio sacerdotalis.
they have received this Jewish ceremony; which together with the sacrifices,
Priesthood and ceremonies of the law, are abrogated by the sacrifice and death
of our Savior Christ. And why then do they not as well retain circumcision,
the sacrifices of Bulls and Goats, and other ceremonies of the Leuiticall
Priesthood, that they might more plainly show themselves, whiles they seek to
be the Apes of the Jews, to be as indeed they are, according to the censure
of Paul in the Epistle to the Galathians, Apostates from Christ. But as their
priesthood it self is Antichristian, whereby the Leuitical priesthood and many
Jewish ceremonies are retained, as though Christ had not put an end to them:
whereby Christ is denied to be our only Priest: whereby Christ himself (as
they say) is daily offered, to the disgrace of his own sacrifice, as though
that once performed had not been sufficient: to the overthrow of his human
nature, which they hold to be in many places at once invisible and
incircumscriptible, without quantity and dimension, and consequently no body;
to the disparagement of his divine excellency, whiles every shaueling Priest
takes upon him by breathing out a few words after a magical manner to create
his maker, and when he has done to offer him as a sacrifice to the father,
every sacrifice being inferior to the sacrificer: to the deifying of a piece
of bread consecrated to most sacrilegious Idolatry: as I say, their priesthood
it self is Antichristian, so their unction, whetherof Bishops on the head, or
of Priests on the hand, undoubtedly belongs to the mark of Antichrist. And
although they were able to show some practice hereof in the Church before the
year 606. yet this hinders not, but that this Priestly Unction may belong to
the mark, because as I said, some corruptions were before the revelation of
Antichrist crept into the Church, which by him were to be retained with
increase and maintained, as also because this ceremony is used not by authority
of their example, but as received from Moses by the authority of the
ceremonial law, as though it were not abrogated by Christ, and as imposed upon
the Church by the law of the Pope: And lastly because it is a ceremony
belonging to such a sacrificing Priesthood, as was not known in the primitive
Church. But as I suppose they are not able to produce any sufficient testimony
or authenticke proof to declare the use of this ceremony in the primitive
Church, which some of them impute to the rudenes, and unsettled estate of that
time. For whereas he alleges two testimonies of Nazianzene, both places are
to be understood ^ighius.
figuratively, of consecration to the ministry. For as appears De sacra
unction C. cum venisset.
by the testimony of Innocentius 3. this ceremony of anointing was not used in
the Greek Church, whereof Nazianzene was, but rejected as Jewish, until he
imposed the same upon them, about the year 1200.

10. As touching the fifth: Sacrifices of praise we offered for 5. Missa pro
defunelis.
those that dyed in the Lord; but no propitiatory sacrifices, such as their
masses be, were offered for them. The oblations for the dead, whereof Augustine
speaks, prove not that mass, Lib. de hares. C. 53. See D. Fu^ke. in Apoc.
14. 13. s. 5. contra. Rhem.
were used as propitiatory sacrifices for the quick and the dead. Unless
therefore he can prove that they had before the year 607. masses as
superstitious and Idolatrous as since: the frequenting of Masses may now belong
to the mark of the beast, which before did not.

11. Adoration of images and of the Eucharist, may most fitly be said to belong
to the mark of the beast. For those 6. Adoratio imaginum et Eucharistiae.
that are made drunk with the cup of the whore of Babylons fornications, that
is, which are besotted with the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, are the same
with those that receive the mark of the beast: But the adoration of Images and
of the Eucharist, is notorious Idolatry or spiritual fornication; and
therefore those that are besotted with these Idolatries have received the mark
of the beast. And as touching the worshipping of Images, it is most plainly
forbidden and condemned in the Scriptures, and Councels, and writings of the
fathers, who lived in the first 600. years. The Wine of this fornication,
wherewith all sorts have been made drunk, was first set abroach to the world
in the second Council of Nice, about the year 789. For further proof whereof
read B. Jewel in his 14. article against M. Harding. And the like may be said
of the adoration of the Eucharist, which is a consequent of the elevation of
the sacrament and transubstantiation, neither of which were used or heard of in
the first 600. years, as the same Jewel proves Artic. 75. 10. And Artic. 8.
he shows that the adoration of the sacrament cannot be warranted by any
commandment of Christ, nor by any word or example of the apostles or ancient
fathers, but that it is a thing lately devised by Pope Honorius about the year
1226. But let us weigh his proofs. That Images were worshipped he proves by
the testimony of Jerome, who in the life of Paula, speaking of her zeal and
devotion in visiting those places, where our Lord Jesus had been conversant;
he shows how at length she comes to the sepulcher and kisseth the stone,
which the Angel had rouled away from the mouth of the sepulcher, and licked
the place where Christ's body lay: and seeing that very Cross (as was supposed)
whereon Christ was crucified, Prostrata ante crucem quasi pendentem Dominum
cerneret adorabat, Falling down before the cross she worshipped the Lord, as
if she had now seen him hanging on the Cross. I answer that this practice
was not common, but peculiar to her; and to her not usual, but only at that
time, and in that place: neither did she worship the Cross (as the Papists do
the images of that Cross, cult^ latriae with divine worship) but seeing the
Cross whereon Christ was crucified, and being ravished with the memory of his
death, she falling before that Cross, worshipped Christ. Now that the
adoration of the Eucharist was also in use before the year 606. he proves by
the testimonies of Ambrose and Augustine. Ambrose his words are these, Itaque
per scabellam terra intelligatur, per terram caro Lib. 3. de spiritu S. chap.
12.
Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysterijs adoramus, et quam Apostoli in Domino
Jesus, vt supra diximus, adorarunt. Therefore by the footestoole let us
understand the earth, and by the earth the flesh of Christ, which at this day
also we adore in the mysteries, and which the Apostles adored in the Lord
Jesus, as we said before. But it is one thing to adore and honor Christ in his
sacraments, as the ancient Christians and we do: and another thing to adore
the sacrament, as if it were Christ himself, as the Papists do, deifiyng a
piece of bread, and adoring it with such a worship as indeed belongs not (I
say not to the man Christ, but) to the humanity of Christ, whereof alone and
not of the deity the bread is a sacrament: For the bread is a sacrament of the
body of Christ crucified, and the wine of his blould-shed. But if Bellarmine
would have read but five or six lines further, he should have sound a better
testimony against their adoration of Saints and images, then this was for the
adoration of the sacrament. For Ambrose proouing that the holy Ghost was to be
adored, because he is adored that according to the flesh was borne of the holy
Ghost: Ac ne quis h^c deriuet (says he) ad Mariam virginem: Maria erat templum
dei, non deus templi, et ideo solus ille adorandus qui operabatur in templo:
And least any should derive this to the virgin Mary: Mary was the Temple of
God, not God of the Temple; and therefore he alone is to be adored who did
work in the Temple. Augustine understanding In Psalm. 98.
by the footestoole mentioned Psalm. 99. 5. the flesh of Christ says, Ipsam
carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit. Nemo autem ^arnem illam manducat
nisi p^us adorauerit: He gave his flesh it self to be eaten of us to
salvation, but no man eats that flesh unless he first have adored it. Where
Augustine speaks no more of the sacrament or of the bodily eating of the
flesh, then Christ himself does John 6. and therefore this allegation is
impertinent; or if it were not, yet is it one thing to adore the flesh of
Christ, and another thing to adore a piece of bread, which by the testimony of
Christ John 6. and of Augustine, is proved not to be turned into the body of
Christ, because both do signify, that the wicked do not eat the body of
Christ. To conclude therefore, whereas Bellarmine argues thus, These things
were used before the year 606. therefore they belong not to the mark of the
beast: the sum of my answer is this, that they were not used in the first
600. years: and again, if they had been used then, yet they may belong to the
mark of the beast now, for the reasons before alleged.

The 12. Chapter. Of the generation and nation of Antichrist.
1. THe Jesuits fifth disputation is concerning the generation and nation of
Antichrist, whereof he shall come, and of which he shall especially be received.
From whence as he vainly supposes, is gathered a most evident demonstration,
that the Pope is not Antichrist. For Antichrist shall be received of the Jews
for their Messiah, and consequently he is to be a Jew both by nation and
religion: But none of the Popes since the year 607. has boene received of the
Jews as their Messiah; neither has any one been a Jew either in nation or
religion: therefore the Pope is not Antichrist: or rather as he ought to
conclude from the premises, therefore not any one of the Popes is Antichrist.
For in all this disputation Bellarmine presupposes that to be true, which we
have proved to be most false, that Antichrist is but one singular person, and
accordingly reasons, as if we held that this or that Pope were the
Antichrist. We holdeindeed that every Pope for his time, as he is the head of
the catholic Apostasy, so is an Antichrist: but the Antichrist is the whole
row and order of them from Boniface the third downward. If therefore
Bellarmine argues upon a false supposition, we are like to have but a simple
demonstration of it. But let us examine his disputation. Before he proposes
his proposition, as the basis or ground of his demonstration, he deals with
us as cunning tradesmen, who being desirous to utter their bad wares at a good
price, first, show those that are worse, that the naughtiness of the worse may
commend and set forth those that be not so bad. So he brings forth diverse
opinions concerning the generation of Antichrist, and first those that are
false and absuide, as namely, that Antichrist should be borne of a virgin by
the operation of the devil, as Christ was borne of a virgin, by the operation
of the holy Ghost. Which opinion is propounded by the author of the treatise
concerning Antichrist, falsely ascribed to Augustine. Secondly, that the devil
himself is Antichrist, who shall feign himsefe to have taken flesh of a
virgin, at Christ truly did; which is the conceit of Hippolytus: upon whose
counterfeit authority the Papists in other points concerning this controversy,
do so much rely. Thirdly, that Antichrist shall be a true man, but withal
a Devil, by the incarnation of the Devil; even as Christ, who is God, by
incarnation became man: which opinion (says Bellarmine) Origin thought to be
possible. These opinions show into what absurdities men do fall, when as they
will needs be comparing Christ with Antichrist, as the Papists in many things
do. Fourthly, that Nero who died above 1500. years ago should come again in
his own person to be Antichrist.

2 But these wares are all so corrupt, that Bellarmine will not for his credit
sake commend them unto us. And therefore he makes a second show of such
opinions as are more probable, viz. That Antichrist shall be borne in
fornication and not in marriage, which is the opinion of Damascen and some
others. And secondly, That be shall be borne of the Tribe of Dan, which is the
judgment of twelve of the Fathers, and other approved Authors among the
Papists; and generally of all Papists almost besides Bellarmine himself. But
although these opinions be, as he says, very probable, and the latter
commended by a whole Jury of ancient writers, yet because they cannot be
proved out of the scriptures, he will not put the^ into our hands, as though he
meant to warrant the^. So that now we must needs think that we shall be well
dealt withal, and that no corrupt or counterfeit stusse shall be commended
unto us, but that which is current and warrantable by the word of God. But what
say you Bellarmine, cannot this opinion that Antichrist shall be of the Tribe
of Dan, be proved out of the scripture? what say you then to those three places
of scripture, which are to this purpose usually alleged in the Church of Rome?
the first Genesis 49. 17. Dan shall be a serpent in the way, etc. The second, Ier.
8. 16. The neying of his horses was heard from Dan. The third, Apoc. 7. where
12000. of every Tribe being sealed to salvation, the Tribe of Dan is leftout,
because Antichrist was to come of that Tribe. To the first of these places
Bellarmine answers with us, that the prophetical blessing of Jacob, was
verisied in Sampson, who was of the Tribe of Dan: and that Jacob meaning in
these words to bless Dan, his meaning cannot without absurdity be perverted
to the signification of a curse. And I add, that they might with as good
reason allege that Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of Benjamin, of whom it is
said, verse 27. that he shall rauin as a Wolf. Jeremy undoubtedly speaks not
of Antichrist, nor yet as Bellarmine says, of the Tribe of Dan, but of
Nabuchadonosor, who was to come by the coast or country called Dan, to destroy
Jerusalem, as Jerome rightly expounds. Why Dan is omitted in Apoc. 7. it is
not well known says Bellarmine, especially seeing Ephraim also which was one
of the greatest Tribes is left out. But here Bellarmine does praeuaricari, and
by trifling betray the truth. For it is not true that Ephraim is left out: for
seeing Manasses is mentioned Verse 6. we must needs by the Tribe of Joseph
mentioned Verse 8. understand the Tribe of Ephraim Never thelesse, this may
truly be said, that there are other causes of this omission, then that which is
alleged concerning Antichrist. For else we may say as well, that Antichrist
should come of the Tribe of Simeon, because he is not mentioned in the blessing
of Moses. Deuteronomy. 33. The truth is, that where the holy Ghost numbreth the 12.
Tribes, and mentions Leui, which for the most part is not As Apoc. 17.
reckned among the 12. Tribes, because it was scattered among them all; some
one of the other Tribes is left out, otherwise, where 12. are named, 13. should
be reckned. The mentioning therefore of Leui, is the cause why some one of the
rest is not expressed, but either comprehended under an other that is
mentioned, as Simeon under Judah Deuteronomy. 33. Ephraim and Manasses being two
several and great Tribes, under Joseph. Deuteronomy. 27. 12. Ezec: 48. 32. are
altogether omitted, as Dan. Apo. 7. Now Dan seems to be omitted, rather then
any other, because that was the first Tribe which fell from God unto Idolatry:
and for the same cause (as some think) the genealogy of that Tribe is omitted
in the first book of the Chronicles.

3 These opinions therefore though countenanced with the authority of the
Fathers, Bellarmine dares not deliver as matters of truth, because they cannot
be proved out of the scriptures. The which in truth is the cause why we reject
all the fancies of the Papists concerning Antichrist, wherein they differ from
us, because that although many of the^ were also the opinions of the ancient
writers (who could but guess at the meaning of prophecies not then fulfilled)
yet they cannot be proved out of the word of God, wherein Antichrist is
sufficiently described. This liberty therefore which Bellarmine lawfully
takes unto himself in rejecting the testimonies of the Fathers in this point
not warranted by the scriptures, must in equity also be granted unto us. For
upon the same principle or ground which Bellarmine here sets down, we
reason against the Popish conceits after this manner: Those opinions concerning
Antichrist which cannot be proved out of the scriptures, are not to be held as
certain truths, or believed as matters of faith, although they have the
testimony of the Fathers: But all the Popish co^ceits concerning Antichrist,
are such as cannot be proved out of the scriptures: therefore none of the
Popish conceits concerning Antichrist, are to be received for certain truths,
though diverse of them have the testimony of the Fathers.

4 Now let us hear in the third place what those things are which Bellarmine
would have us to take upon his word for certain and sound in this point. There
be two things says he, most certain: one that Antichrist shall come for the
Jews especially, and shall be received of them for their Messiah. The other,
that he shall be borne of the Nation of the Jews, and shall be circumcised,
and shall at the least for a time observe the Sabbath. On which two points the
proposition of the syllogism before rehearsed does consist, the which
Bellarmine thought to set out as true, by setting by. 1
it other opinions more absurd then it is. But although there be degrees of
falsehood in all these opinions, yet all of them are false, as being grounded
upon this false supposition, that Antichrist 1
is but one singular man. And secondly, by the same reason that moved
Bellarmine to reject the former opinions, may 2
these also be rejected, namely, because they cannot be proved out of the
scriptures; but contrariwise may be disproued thereby. For Antichrist shall sit
in the Temple of God, that is, shall reign in the church of Christ, and shall
be an Apostate, 3
and the head of the Apostasy, as Bellarmine confesses, and therefore not the
head of the Jews (who cannot be said to make an Apostasy before they be
called) but of backsliding Christians. Again, Antichrist is one of the seven
heads of the beast mentioned Apoc. 17. that is, of the Roman state, having
his 4
seat in Babylon, that is, in Rome, in the government whereof he succeeds
the Emperor: who, whiles he ruled in Rome, hindered the revelation of
Antichrist, as it has been showed heretofore out of Apoc. 17. 13. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. All which do sufficiently prove, that Antichrist was not to be a Jew,
either by nation or religion, but a Latin or Roman, which name with the
mark thereof, he causes all sorts of men to take upon the^. And lastly, for as
much as the Papists themselves hold the calling of the Jews: it would be
known whether they shall revolt, after their calling from Christ to
Antichrist, or whether they shall be called after the destruction of
Antichrist, or during the time of Antichrists reign, which shall be as they say,
the term of three years and a half precisely, or 1260. days. But themselves
deny that the Jews shall revolt after their calling, or that they shall be
called in the time of Antichrists reign: and that they shall be called after the
destruction of Antichrist, which shall not be before the end of the world, it
is absurd.

5 But let us see how he proves these things which he says are most certain
and sure, and from whence he draws his most evident demonstration. First that
Antichrist shall be received of the Jews for their Messiah, he proves by
testimonies of scripture, by authority of Fathers, and by reason. Out of the
scripture he produces two testimonies, the former Ioh. 5. 43. which place I
have heretofore freed from the corruptions of the papists, showing that our
Savior Christ does not speak absolutely, Another shall come, but
co^ditionally, If an other shall com, and therefore does not foretell what they
were afterward to do, but tells them what in respect of their present
disposition they were ready to do, if an other should come in his own name
unto them, not sent of God. 2. Neither does he speak definitely of Antichrist,
but indefinitly of any false teacher. 3. he speaks of those Jews, to who^ he
speaks, who could not be the receivers of Antichrist, unless he were come
above 1500. years ago.

6 His second testimony is 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10 11. Because they received not the
love of the truth that they might be saved: therefore God shall send them the
efficacy of error that they may believe lies, etc. Which words he
understands of the Jews, who because they received not Christ shall therefore
be seduced by Antichrist. But the place is plain enough to them that will
understand. The Apostle immediately before these words says, that Antichrist
shall prevail with the^ that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved: And immediately after these words, (Therefore
God shall send them the efficacy of error, that they may believe lies) he
adds, that all might be judged or condemned that have not believed the truth,
but have taken pleasure in unrighteousness. In which words the Apostle does
not go about to define of what Nation or people Antichrist shall be received:
but having described Antichrist as by other arguments, so in the last place by
this effect of seducing, now he describes the followers of Antichrist, who
shall be seduced of him not by their nation, but by their condition before God.
And withal clears the justice of God in giving them over to be seduced to
their destruction. The followers of Antichrist are described by their condition
before God, that they are reprobates, or such as perish, according to that,
Math. 24. 24. that it is impossible that the elect should finally be seduced by
him: which is set down, not so much to be a note whereby to discern Antichrist:
as to signify the estate of those that follow him, whom before he had
described, that they are such as perish, and that worthily. For as I said, in
the next words he clears the justice of God, after this manner: On such as
have not received the love of the truth that they might be saved, nor believed
the same, but have delighted in unrighteousness, the Lord sends justly the
efficacy of error, that they may believe lies, that they may all be
condemned: But the followers of Antichrist are such as have not received the
love of the truth, that they might be saved, nor believed the same, but have
delighted in unrighteousness: therefore the Lord justly sends upon them strong
illusions, that they may believe lies, that all such as believe not the truth,
but delight in unrighteousness, may be condemned.

This is the discourse of the Apostle, concerning the followers of Antichrist,
which cannot with any show of reason be restrained to the Jews, unless it
may be said that they alone are such as perish; that they alone have not
received the love of the truth that they might be saved; that they alone have
not believed the truth, etc. for he says, that all might be condemned, etc.
For it is certain, that as Antichrist, which in this chapter is described, is
not the head of the Jews, but of counterfeit Christians: so the Jews (as they
are Jews) are not the followers of Antichrist here described. Antichrist is
the head of the apostasy or revolt from Christ, and consequently the head of
Apostate Christians. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God,
that is, shall rule and reign over the Church of Christ. Antichrist was to sit
in Babylon, that is, Rome, and therein was to succeed the Emperors: who whiles
they ruled in Rome, hindered the revelation and dominion of Antichrist. All
which points as they do fit the Pope, so they do prove that the Papists be the
followers of Antichrist, and have received the name and mark of the beast. And
hereof there can be no doubt, if this description also agree unto them, as most
evidently it does. For seeing they are the Apostate Christians described, 1.
Tim. 4 1. 3. certain it is, that they have not received the love of the truth,
that they may be saved. That strong illusion is sent upon them that they might
believe lies, etc. it appears plainly in their written vanities, which they
call unwritten verities, in their legends, portuises, and festiuals fraught
full of incredible lies, in their ridiculous dotages and devout superstitions,
wherein they plainly show themselves to be besotted and made drunk with the
whore of Babilons cup of fornications, and to be given over to believe
untruths. That they will not believe the truth, appears by their manifold
gross errors, from which they will not be reclaimed And that they delight in
iniquity appears by their doting upon the doctrine and religion of
Antichrist, which as there it is opposed to the truth, so before is called the
mystery of iniquity. This description therefore of the followers of Antichrist,
ought to be an admonition for all Ver. 12. Ver. 7.
Papists to renounce that religion of Rome, if they would not be in the number
of the^ that perish: and a caveat for all Christians, who professing y^ true
religion, have no true love thereof, but are ready to accept and embrace the
religion of Rome, least this heavy judgment of the Lord fall upon the^, that
because they have not received the love of ye truth to their salvation, the
Lord send upon the^ strong illusio^, that they believe lies unto their
destruction.

7. Yea, but (says he) this place cannot be understood of Christians, but of
the Jews: for he says, that Antichrist shall be sent to them who would not
receive Christ, which is true of the Jews, but untrue of Christians. The
Apostle speaks of those that receive not the love of the truth that they
might be saved, which may be verified of unsound Christians (as the Rhemists
themselves on this place do grant) that is, of all those who content
themselves with a bare profession of the faith, having neither a true faith,
nor yet a sound love of the truth. A sound Christian does not only profess the
name of Christ, but also has some good understanding and knowledge of the
truth, and withal an assent thereto, in which two, namely knowledge and
assent, consists the historical, or dogmatical faith: and not only a
knowledge and assent (for so much the devils have) but also a love and liking
of the truth; and not only that (for even hypocrites and temporary believers
may attain to a love and liking of the truth for some temporary respects) but
also a special application of the promises of the Gospel unto himself, and
particular apprehension of Christ his merits, whereby he is received of the
believer to justification and salvation. Now the Papists are such as profess
Christ, but indeed receive him not, nor yet the love of his truth that they
might be saved. And therefore this place is verified of them. For does any man I
beseech you, receive Christ or believe in him, who does not believe that Christ
is his Redeemer and Savior? But if thou be a Papist, thou must not believe
that Christ is thy Redeemer and Savior; thou must sing Magnificat, but thou
may not say with Mary, that thy soul rejoices in God thy Savior: nor with
Paul, that Christ has loved thee, or given himself for thee. Gal. 2. 20. Must
thou believe that Christ is thy Savior and redeemer? the^ must thou believe
that thou art redeemed by Christ, and shall be saved by him. Must thou believe
that thou have redemption by Christ? then must thou also believe that by him
thou have remission of sins. Ephe. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. But this to believe
without special and extraordinary revelation, is damnable presumption says
the Papist. Therefore they profess Christ, but they receive him not. Nay, they
are so far from receiving Christ by a lustifying faith, that they might be
saved, that they have not so much as the historical faith, which consists in
knowledge of the truth and assent thereto. For the most of them have no
knowledge, pleasing themselves in their implicit faith: under which name
gross and palpable ignorace is commended in the laity of the church of Rome.
And the rest assent not to the truth, but set themselves against it. So that
whereas all the faith which they profess themselves to have, is but that faith
which is also in the devils, yet they have not even that little which they do
profess. But the Apostle (says Bellarmine) speaks in the pretertence, which
have not received the love of the truth, etc. not in the future: therefore this
speech cannot be understood of any other but those who before the Apostle wrote
this, had refused to believe the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, that is
to say, the Jews. Answ. The Apostle speaking both of the sin of the
Antichristians, and of their punishment, which presupposes their sin going
before, he expresses their sin in the pretertence, which is to be referred not
to the time of the Apostles writing, but to the time of their punishment.
Antichrist shall be received of those that perish. But why shall they perish?
because they have not received the love of the truth, etc. But this appears
more plainly, ver. 12. God shall send the^ strong illusio^s to believe lies,
that al may be condemned, (...) that have not believed, that is, that shall not
have believed the truth, Qui non crediderint veritati, but have delighted, that
is, but shall have delighted in iniquity, Sed acquieuerint in iniustitia.
Confer with this place Mar. 16. 16. Go preach the Gospel says our Savior
Christ, to every creature, baptising them (as it is in Matthew 28. 19.) (...),
H^ that has Qui crediderit and bap tizatus sue^it etc.
believed and has been baptized shall be saved; that is, shall have believed,
and shall have been baptized, but he that has not believed, that is, shall not
have believed, shall be condemned. Otherwise, if Bellarmine will needs urge
the pretertense, as though the Apostle meant that Antichrist should be
received only of those who before that time had rejected the truth, he must
with all hold, that Antichrist shall be received in the end of the world of
those who died above 1500. years since.

8 To these testimonies of scripture he adds the authority of diverse
Fathers, who supposed that Antichrist was to be received of the Jews, and
accordingly expound the place alleged out of 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11.

Ans. So they held that Antichrist should come of the Tribe of Dan, and
accordingly expounded some places of scripture, which no man now unless he
will be too ridiculous, can understand of Antichrist. Therefore as Bellarmine
in that point answered a whole dozen of Fathers, so may I answer here with as
good reason, that although this opinion might seem probable to the Fathers in
their time, living before the revelation of Antichrist, yet now there is no
probability in it, seeing it cannot only not be proved out of the scripture,
but as you heard, is confuted both by the scripture and the event.

9 Let us therefore in the third place consider his reason: Antichrist shall
without doubt join himself first and chiefly to those who are ready to
receive him: But the Jews are ready to receive him, not the Christians nor
the Gentiles, therefore Antichrist first and principally shall join himself
to the Jews. First to the proposition I answer, that Antichrist shall join
himself not to any whatsoever, but to those in the Church that are ready to
receive him. For as Cyprian truly notes, They be the servants of Epist. 1.
lib. 1.
God whom the devil troubles, and they are Christians whom Antichrist
impugneth, Neque enim quaerit illos, quos iam subegit, aut gestit euertere quos
iam suos fecit. For he seeks not those whom he has already subdued, or
desires to overthrow those whom he has already made his own, the enemy
and adversary of the church: whom he has estraunged and kept forth of the
Church, them he neglects and passes by as captives and overcome: those he
assaulteth, in whom he perceives Christ to dwell. If therefore Antichrist be
led by the spirit of Satan, then no doubt he shall pass by both Jews and
Insidels, and set himself (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
that is, both in the Church of God, and against it, that the unsound he may
seduce, and the sound he may persecute. The assumption stands on two parts.
1. affirmative, that the Jews are ready to receive Antichrist. 2. negative,
that the Christians and Gentiles are not ready to receive him. The former he
proves, because the Jews do yet look for their Messiah, who shall be a
temporal King, such a one as Antichrist shall be. But this reason is built on
false suppositions. First, that Antichrist shall be one particular man, which
we have proved to be false. Secondly, that Antichrist shall profess himself
to be the Messiah of the Jews, which as it has been disproued out of the
scriptures, so can it not with any color of reason be proved out of the same.
For as has been showed, Antichrist is the head of the Catholic Apostasy or
Apostate Christians, sitting in Babylon, that is, Rome, professing her self
the church of God, being one of the seven heads of the Roman state, succeeding
the ^mperours in the government of Rome, etc. Thirdly, as Antichrist shall not
be such a one as the expected Messiah of the Jews: so there is no necessity
that there should such a one come to the Jews, as they expect. The second part
also of his assumption is false. For although sound and constant Christians be
not ready to receive Antichrist, but always have been ready to resist him
even unto the death: yet unsound and backsliding Christians, who embrace not
the love of the truth that they might be saved, either are as ready to receive
Antichrist, as they are apt and prone to decline from the truth (a searefull
caveat to those which wax weary of the Gospel) or already have revolted
from Christ to Antichrist, and have received the mark of the beast. Yea, but
Christians says he, do not expect Antichrist, as the Jews do. The Jews
look for him with joy, as for their Messiah, but the Christians with fear. I
answer, as true Christians look not at all for the expected Messiah of the
Jews to be Antichrist, but acknowledge him that is come: so Papists, but that
they cannot see the wood for trees, might in stead of looking for Antichrist,
look upon him.

10 The second thing which Bellarmine delivers concerning Antichrist for a
certain truth, is, That Antichrist shall be a Jew both by Nation and Religion;
that is, he shall be a Jew borne, he shall be circumcised, he shall be an
obseruer of the Jews Sabbath, and other Jewish ceremonies. But how is this
certain truth proved? forsooth from the premises. For the Jews will not
receive one for their Messiah, that is not a Jew borne, nor circumcised. Nay,
it is not to be doubted, but that as the Jews look for their Messiah out of
the family of David; so he will faigne himself to be of the Tribe of David,
although indeed he be of the Tribe of Dan. But this Popish conceit, built upon
their own vain imaginations, needs no answer. For seeing I have
overthrown their former assertion, whereupon this is grounded; therefore this
building of it self falls to the ground, Whosoever (says he) shall be
received of the Jews for their Messiah, he shall be a Jew borne, and
circumcised, but Antichrist shall be received of the Jews for their Messiah:
as has been proved, therefore Antichrist shall be a Jew borne, etc. The
proposition is not altogether true, for the Herodians received Herod for
Epiphan. lib. 1. de haeresi Iudaeor. 7.
their Messiah, and thence had their name. But I will not stand upon that.

The assumption I have already disproued, showing that Antichrist was not to
be received of the Jews for their Messiah, and therefore there is no validity
in this argument. In the next place therefore for want either of reason, or
authority of scripture, he vnderproppeth this tottering wall with testimonies
of Fathers; but such as either himself before has rejected, or else in this
question may by the same reason be little regarded. The twelve Fathers (says
he) which affirmed that Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of Dan, do therefore
hold that he should be a Jew borne. But himself has told us, that we are
not to believe them, because their opinion cannot be proved out of the
scriptures: and therefore by the same reason, neither they, nor the rest are to
be believed in this point, which has no ground in the word of God.

And thus his most evident demonstration is come to nothing. For although the
Jews receive not the Pope for their Messiah, but rather esteem of him as of
an other Pharao, and withal apply unto him all that is spoken either of
Antichrist, as the Papists say, or of the type of Antichrist R. Ieu^ Gerson.
Antiochus, as we say, Dan. 7. and 11. this hinders not, but that the Pope
may be Antichrist. Yea, this may be some inducement to persuade us, that if
those things which be spoken of Antichrist, or his type, may in the judgment
of the Jews, who are no parties, be applied properly to the Pope: that then
the Pope is that Antichrist, that in Daniel is figured, and in other places of
scripture not unlike to that figure described.

Chap. 13. Of the seat or See of Antichrist.
1 Our adversaries sixth disputation is, concerning the seat or See of
Antichrist, concluded in this syllogysme. Antichrist shall sit at Jerusalem,
and not at Rome: the Pope sits at Rome, and not at Jerusalem: therefore the
Pope is not Antichrist. The proposition, concerning which all the controversy
is, is first proved by testimonies of scriptures, and afterward defended
against our obiectio^s. His (...) or proof stands on three testimonies of
scripture. The first Apoc. 11. 8. where John says, that Enoch and Elias shall be
slain of Antichrist in Jerusalem. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of
the great City, which is called spiritual Sodom or Egypt, where our Lord
also was crucified. But what if John speaks neither of Antichrist, nor of
Enoch and Elias, nor of Jerusalem? that he speaks not of Antichrist, it may
be doubted. For verse 7. he says, that the beast which ascends out of the
deep (which seems to be the former beast described in the beginning of
Chap. 13.) shall kill the two witnesses. And verse 2. it is said that the court
of the Temple should be given to the Gentiles, and that they should tread upon
the holy City 42. months, which is the time allotted to the persecution of
the beast with seven heads, Apoc. 13. 5. Besides, the Papists teach, that
Antichrist shall be the Prince of the Jews and counterfeit Christians:
therefore by their own doctrine, this persecution of the Church by the
Gentiles, should not be the persecution under Antichrist. And that Enoch and
Elias be not here spoken of, it has been showed before: and thirdly, that the
holy Ghost does not mean Jerusalem, I have heretofore proved. But suppose that
S. John did speak both of Antichrist, as it Chap. 6. Lib. 1. ca^ 2. 17.
seems he does not, and also of Jerusalem, which I am sure he does not: yet
notwithstanding, this follows not, that wheresoever the witnesses of Christ
are put to death by him, or by his authority, that there should be his
principal seat. Whereas therefore Bellarmine argues thus, Where the two
witnesses are put to death, there is the seat of Antichrist, at Jerusalem the
two witnesses are put to death, therefore at Jerusalem is the seat of
Antichrist: I answer first to the proposition, that it being generally
understood, is false: if particularly, then Bellarmines argumentation is not a
syllogism, but a paralogisme. And to the assumption I answer negatiuely, and
that answer I have heretofore made good, proving that not Jerusalem is here
meant, but ciuitas Romana (the City and Empire of Rome) which every where in
the Apocalypse, is called the great City, wherein, and by authority whereof,
our Lord was crucified. See the first book, chap. 2. 16. 17.

2 His second testimony is, Apoc. 7. 16. whereunto I have answered before in
the second chapter of the first book,. 18. But as from that place he would
prove that Rome is not the seat of Antichrist, so by another argument which he
adds, he proves that it is Jerusalem. For says he, If Antichrist be a Jew,
and profess himself to be the Messiah and King of the Jews, then no doubt he
will sit in Jerusalem: but the former of these I have disproued in the former
chapter, and therefore further answer needs not. Yea, but four of the
Fathers avouch that Antichrist shall sit at Jerusalem. Although they did, yet
Bellarmine has taught us that we are not bound to believe them, unless their
assertion can be proved out of the scriptures. And yet of these four Fathers
which he alleges, Lactantius speaks not of Antichrist. Hierome and
Theodoret, where they deliver Hierony^. ad Algas. 9. 11. Theodoret. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Epitom. 1. Anselm.
their own judgment, do not affirm that he shall sit in the Temple at
Jerusalem, but in the Churches of Christ.

3 His third testimony is 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. In so much that he sits in the
Temple of God. Of which words there be many expositions says Bellarmine: some
by the Temple of God understand the minds of the faithful, in which
Antichrist shall sit after he has seduced them: which interpretation agrees
fitly to the Pope, who only sits as it were a God in the minds of men,
prescribing laws to bind the conscience, and that with guilt of mortal
sin, as they speak. Others expound these words of 2
Antichrist and his whole people, who is therefore said to sit in templum
August. de ciuit.
Dei, because Antichrist shall profess himself with his people, to be the
true church of God: which also most fitly agrees to Dei lib. 20. cap. 19.
the Pope and church of Rome, which vaunt that they alone are the catholic
church; and that all others professing the name of Christ which are not subject
to the Pope, or acknowledge not themselves members of the church of Rome, are
heretics or schismatikes. Others by the temple, understand the churches 3
of the Christians, which Antichrist shall make subject to himself. Chrysostom.
etc.
The which as we proved it to be the most true exposition, so does it properly
agree to the Pope of Rome. Others by the temple 4
of God, understand the temple of God at Jerusalem, wherein Antichrist shall
sit, and this (says Bellarmine) is the more common, more probabte, and more
literal opinion. I doubt not but that it is an opinion more plausible to the
Papists, who care not what they hold concerning Antichrist, so that it agree
not to the Pope.

But of these three things which Bellarmine avoucheth in commendation of this
conceit, two are false, and the third is to no purpose. For neither is this
exposition more common among the ancient Fathers, then that other, which by
the temple understands the churches of the Christians: which heretofore we
have showed to have been the judgment of Theodoret, Li. 1. ca. 4 15.
Jerome, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, etc. And although it were the
more common exposition, yet that would not prove it to be more true, for truth
goes not by voices, neither is to be weighed by multitude of suffrages, but by
weight of reason. Neither is it more probable: for if the temple shall never be
reedified, as has been showed, then is there no probability that Antichrist
should sit in it. Neither were that material, though it were more literal,
unless the literal were usual. For in all the Epistles by the temple of God
is meant the Church: and there is an usual metonymie betwixt the words which
signify either the assembly, or the place of the assembly. So (...), which
signifies the place, is often used for 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17. 2. Cor. 6. 16 Ephe.
2. 21. Apoc. 3. 12.
the assembly or church: and Ecclesia that is church, is often used for the
place. Neither can the temple erected by Antichrist be truly called the temple
of God. Yea but (says Bellarmine) in the scripture of the new testament, by
the temple of God are never understood the churches, that is to say, the
temples of Christians. The more absurd is he to understand this place of a
material temple, contrary to the usual acceptance of the word in the
writings of the Apostles. The Apostle therefore by temple, means not a
material temple of wood and stone, but a spiritual temple compact of living
stones: and by sitting in the temple, not a corporal gesture, for Antichrist
is to sit there as God, that is, he is to rule and reign in the church of God,
as if he were a god upon earth. But of this whole matter, see more in the first
book, chapt. 2. 13. and 14. and 15.

4 Now let us come to his (...) or disproofe of our assertion, who hold that
Antichrist shall sit not at Jerusalem but at Rome, and in Rome professing her
self the church of God. First by a fond cauillation, wherein he greatly
pleases himself, he seeks to drive us to an absurdity. For (says he) if
Antichrist shall sit in the Church of God, and if the Pope be Antichrist, then
the church wherein the Pope sits is the true church: and consequently the
Protestants and all others that be not of that church, are out of the church,
etc. This cavil is to be resolved into three syllogismes. 1. Antichrist
sits in the Church of Christ, The Pope of Rome is Antichrist, therefore says
Bellarmine, the Pope sits in the true church of Christ.

But he might as well conclude thus: He that professes the name of Christ is
a Christian: the Papist, the Anabaptist, the Familist, etc. professes the name
of Christ, therefore the Papist, the Anabaptist, the Familist is a true
Christian. But has not Bellarmine learned so much Logic as not to foist into
the conclusion, that which is not contained in the premises? the word true is
not contained in the premises, and therefore sophistically thrust into the
conclusion. For Antichrist may sit in the church, although not in the true
Church. Generally the Church of Christ signifies the company of Christians,
that is, of those that profess the name of Christ. But as of Christians, some
are only in title and profession, some indeed and in truth: so of Churches,
some are only in title and profession Churches of Christ, others are his true
Churches. Now Antichrist he was to be an Apostata, and the head of the
Catholic apostasy: therefore the church whereof Antichrist is the head,
although it be in title and profession a church of Christ, as being a company
of them that are christened, and profess the name of Christ: yet it is but an
apostaticall church; a church which of a faithful City is become an harlot;
and of the true Church of God, the whore of Babylon. But may not this
absurdity rather be returned upon the Papists, who by the templeof God 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. understand that temple which Antichrist shall build at Jerusalem?
Antichrist shall sit in the temple of God, says the Apostle, Antichrist shall
sit in that temple which himself shall build at Jerusalem says the Papist,
therefore that temple which he shall build at Jerusalem shall be indeed the
temple of God. Whereas in truth according to their own conceits, it were
rather to be called the temple of the devil. If any man object that it might
after a sort be called the temple of God, because the temple of God did stand
there, and because Antichrist will pretend to make it to the honor of God,
whereunto the former temple was erected: I answer by the like reason the
church of Rome may be called the church of God, because once it was a true
church, and still is in title and profession the church ofChrist: although in
truth it be but little more the church of Christ, then Antichrists imaginary
temple at Jerusalem would be the temple of God.

5 His second syllogism which is inferred upon the former is this. If the Pope
sit in the true Church of God then the church of Rome is the only true Church
(for the Church of Christ is one as Christ is one): but the Pope sits in the
true church of God, as was proved in the former syllogism, therefore the
church of Rome is the only true church of Christ. First, I answer to the
proof of his proposition. The Catholic and invisible Church of Christ is one
sheepfolde under one shepherd Christ: but particular and visible churches are
more then one, as the church of Corinth, the church of Rome, the seven churches
in the Apocalypse, and all the Churches of the Gentiles mentioned Romans 16. 4.
and therefore the church of Rome, although it were a true visible church, yet
were it but a particular church, and therefore not the only true church. But
now the church of Rome is not a true visible church of Christ, but the whore of
Babylon, an adulterous, and Idolatrous, and Apostaticall church, which once was
Rome, as Petrarch says, now Babylon; once Bethel, now Bethauen: once the
Church of Christ, now the synagogue of Antichrist, as has been proved. And
therefore there being no truth either in the proposition, or the assumption, I
answer the proposition by this (...), although the Pope did sit in the true
church, yet it follows not that therefore the church of Rome is the only
true Church: and the assumption by this (...), but the Pope does not sit in the
true church, and therefore there is no show of reason in this cavil.

6 His third syllogism is inferred upon the second: If the Church of Rome be
the only true Church, then those which are not members of this Church, whereof
the Pope is head, as namely the Protestants, are out of the Church. But now
(say I) the church of Rome is so far from being the only true church, as
that it is that Babylon, Apoc. 18. 4. from which we are commanded to separate,
if we will be saved: there being no salvation in that Church for those that
receive and retain the mark of the beast, Apoc. 14. 9. therefore this also is
a fond and sophistical cavil. Notwithstanding, as the adulterous and
apostaticall state of Israel under Jeroboam and Achab, so the Church of Rome
under the Pope, may be called the church of God: in respect both of some notes
and signs of a visible Church, as the administration of some sacraments and
profession of the name of the Lord, and also of some relics and remainder, as
it were the gleanings of the invisible Church. In Israel, although an
Apostaticall and Idolatrous state, the sacrament of circumcision was retained:
so in the church of Rome, the sacrament of baptism. The church of Israel
professed Jehovah to be their God, although they worshipped him Idolatrously:
so the church of Rome professes the name of Christ, but exceeds Israel in
Idolatry. In Israel even under Achab the Lord had reserved 7000. who never
bowed their knee to Baal: and so we doubt not, but that in the corruptest times
of Popery, the Lord has reserved some who have not received the mark of the
beast. And as the church of Sardis was still called the church of Christ,
although grievously fallen from Christ, because they still professed the name
of Christ, and retained no doubt the Sacrament of Baptism, and had among them
some few names that had not defiled themselves: so I confess with Calvin,
that the church of Rome may be called a church of Christ, both in respect of
some vestigia and outward notes of a visible church, as administration of
Baptism, and profession of the name of Christ, and some secret relics of the
invisible church, which have not bowed their knees to Apo. 20. 4
Baal. But that which is said to the church of Sardis, may most justly be
avowed to the church of Rome. Thou have a name that thou live, but indeed art
dead: thou professest Apoc. 3. 1.
thy self to be the church of Christ, but art the synagogue of Antichrist:
thou art called the church of Rome, which once was famous for her says, but
art the whore of Babylon, the Apo. 3. 4.
mother of all the fornications, and abominations in the christian world.

7 Here Bellarmine obiecteth two things: If there remain in the church of
Rome but ruins and relics of a true church, then the church may be ruinated,
and the truth has lied, who says, that the gates of hell shall never prevail
against it.

Ans. The Catholic and invisible church of Christ, which is the whole company
of the elect, can never fail: But visible and particular churches which
consist of hypocrites many times and unsound christians (which are in the
visible church, but are not of the invisible) as the greater part, may fail
and fall away, although not one sound christian that 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
is of the invisible church does fall away. As the lamentable experience of the
church of Israel severed from Judah, the examples of Corinth, Ephesus, and many
other famous Churches, which were planted by the Apostles. Again says
Bellarmine: If the Church be ruinated, and the ruins remain in Popery, then
the Papists have the Church, although decayed and ruinated, but the Protestants
have no Church; not entyre, for the entyre Church is ruinated: not ruinated or
decayed, for the ruins are among the Papists. What have they then? a new
building, which because it is new, is none of Christ's, and therefore who sees
not, that it is safer to live in the church decayed, then in no church at all?
But in this cavil there is not so much as any show of reason, unless he take
that for granted, (which we do most confidently deny, and they are never able
to prove) that the church of Rome not only is the true church of Christ, but
also the only true church. For otherwise the church of Rome may fall, and yet
the Catholic church of Christ may stand, yea, shall stand, maugre the force of
Antichrist, and malice of Satan himself. And as for the church of the
Protestants, it is no new building, as Antichrist vaunteth, but is a part of
the Catholic church of Christ, reformed and renewed according to the word of
God, and the example of the primitive church: even as the Church of Judah under
Josias, was no new building, but the old frame, as it was under David, renewed
and reformed according to the law of God.

8 The exceptions which he takes against our arguments, concluding that Rome
is the seat of Antichrist, I have for the Lib. 1. cap. 2.
most part taken away before. It shall suffice therefore now, to answer those
which before were not touched. That Rome is the seat of Antichrist we prove,
because it is mystical Babylon, situated on seven hills, and having dominion
over the Kings of the earth, etc. Bellarmine among other answers before
refuted, says, that by mystical Babylon we are to understand Rome Heathenish,
not Rome christened, because S. John speaks of that Rome which had dominion
over the kings of the earth, and which is said to be drunk with the blood of
the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. I answer, that although these notes agreed
not to Popish Rome, yet we might understand the Apostle thus, that that city
which then had dominion over the Kings of the earth, and then persecuted the
Saints, is called Babylon: because it was to be the seat or See of Antichrist.
But now these notes agree also to Popish Rome, both in respect of dominion
usurped more insolently over the Kings of the earth by the Pope, then by any
Emperor: and in regard of most cruel persecution of the Saints of Christ,
as before has been showed.

9 Again, whereas we prove that Antichrist shall sit in the church of God
because the Apostle says, he shall sit in the Temple of God, and withal
affirm that this cannot be understood of the Temple of Jerusalem, which now is
utterly destroyed, and is no more to be reedified, as Daniel testifies chap.
9. verse 27. he answers that Daniel would say something that he does not
say: either that the Temple should not be reedified until a little before the
end of the world. But Daniel does not say until a little before the end: but
as their own translation reads, Vsque ad consummationem and finem
perseuerabit desolatio, the desolation shall continue until the consummation
and end: or as Jerome says, Vsque ad finem mundi, unto the end of the world:
or as other, Vsque ad consummationem eamque praecisam. As it is said of Michel,
2. Sam. 6. 23. that she had no child until the day of her death. And of
Joseph, that he knew not Mary until she had brought forth her first begotten
son, Math. l. 24. and of Christ, that he will be with the faithful until
the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. Not that Michel at her death, or a little
before had children: not that Joseph ever knew Mary: nor that Christ will ever
forsake the faithful: So that this word until in the scriptures signifies
rather perpetuity then cessation before the time, which seems thereby to be
limited. Whereas therefore Daniel says that the temple should lie desolate
until the end and consummatio^ of the world, it is as much as if he had said,
that it should never be reedified. Or if that were not Daniels meaning, the^ he
must say, that although the temple should be built again, yet as it was
desolate before it be built, so afterward the abhominatio^ of desolation, that
is, Antichrist or his Image, should remain in it to the end. Yea but the
Primitive Church believed that the temple should never be built again, and
held this assertion of the Papists as a Jewish fable. And as touching the
abomination of desolation, it has been showed that our Savior Christ by a
metonymie understands Luke 21. 20. and Mat. 24. 15.
thereby the armies of the Romans, who in respect of their paganism were
abominable, and in regard of their effect desolations, such as brought upon
Jerusalem the final destruction and desolation. Daniel says per alam
detestationum desolantem by a synecdoche for per legiones etc. as Esaias 8. 8. Or
lastly, this must be Daniels meaning, that the temple shall never perfectly be
reedified, but that the reedifying is to be begun, and that in the temple so
begun Antichrist shall sit. Thus shamefully the wilful patrones of error,
stick not to draw the scripture to their fancies, not caring to conform
their judgment to the scripture. Daniel in that place speaks not a word of
Antichrist, nor yet of Antiochus his type, but of the utter desolation and
final destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans: and of this desolation,
according to their own translation, he says, that it should continue to the
end and consummation: that is, (says Bellarmine) the temple shall never
perfectly be built again, but yet it shall be built again, and in it being so
built, Antichrist shall sit. How built? is it like that Antichrist, who shall
according to their conceit be the most mighty Prince and Monarch in the world,
that he I say, will suffer that temple which he chooses for his chief seat,
to be unbuilt: or that so great and so proud a monarch will sit in a temple
without a roose or vnsinished, professing the same also to be his principal
seat? Why but Christ says, the destruction of the temple should be such as
that one stone should not be left upon another; and Daniel says according to
their own translation, that this desolation of the temple should continue to
the end. How then can his meaning be, that it should be reedisied either in
whole or in part? The stories also of the church do testify, that as Daniel
Socrat. li. 3 c. 20.
and our Savior Christ had foretold the final destruction and desolation of
Jerusalem: so when Julian the Apostate, desiring Theodoret li. 3. ca. 20.
Sozom. li. 5 cap. vlt.
to convince the preaching of our Savior of untruth, endeavored by the Jews to
reedifie the temple: the Lord to verify his word, would not suffer it to be
built either in whole, or in part: but by a fearful earthquake overthrew the
foundations, by fire from heaven burnt the tools of the worke-men, by wind
and tempest scattered the lime and mortar, and by fire proceeding out of the
earth burnt the workmen as they dug. Jerusalem and the temple were types of
the church of Christ. Therefore when as by the preaching of the Gospel to all
nations the church of Christ was planted among the Gentiles, the city and
temple were to have an end as our Savior has prophesied, Math. 24. 14. then
shall be the end, to wit, of the city and temple of Jerusalem: which being
once overthrown by the legions of the Romans, should according to Daniels
prophecy remain desolate until the end of the world: or as our Savior
foretold in other words, that Jerusalem should be trodden Luke 21. 24.
under foot of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

10 Lastly, whereas Theodorus Bibliander proves by the testimony of Gregory
the great, that Antichrist was to sit in the church, and to exercise an
universal dominion over the same, because Gregory says that John of
Co^sta^tinople challenging the title Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
of universal Bishop, therein was the forerunner of Antichrist: and secondly,
because he says that an army of Priests were prepared for Antichrist, thereby
signifying that he should be a prince of Priests: Bellarmine answers, that
the contrary is to be inferred upon Gregory his words. For the forerunner must
not be equal to him, whose forerunner he is, but less and inferior. If
therefore John of Constantinople, who was the forerunner of Antichrist,
challenged the title of universal Bishop, Antichrist himself shall challenge
greater matters, and shall advance himself above all that is called God. But I
reply, that although the pride and ambition of John of Constantinople was very
great and Antichristian: yet it was not to be compared with the incredible
insolency and pride of the Antichrist of Rome. John of Constantinople sought a
superiority over all other Bishops, but challenged not that height of
authority and foueraigntie which the Popes since have usurped, not only over
Bishops and Ecclesiastical persons, but also over the Kings and Monarchies
of the earth. Neither has the Antichristian pride of the Pope rested here,
but as I have showed heretofore, in some things he matcheth himself Li. 1.
cap. 5.
with Christ, in some things he aduanceth himself above him, and above all
that is called God. To the second Bellarmine answers, that it was not
Gregory's meaning, that Priests as they are Priests, belong to the army of
Antichrist, but as they are proud. But hence it follows not says he,
Antichristum fore principem sacerdotum, sed fore principem superborum, that
Antichrist shall be the prince of Priests, but that he shall be the prince of
proud men: shameless, and yet ridiculous. Does it not follow, that if he be
the prince of Priests as they are proud, that he is the prince of proud
Priests, such as the whole hierarchy of Rome consists of? It follows
therefore upon our arguments, notwithstanding all his cauils, that Antichrist
was to have his chief seat in Rome, and in Rome professing her self the
church of God, but being indeed the whore of Babylon.

Chap. 14. Concerning the doctrine of Antichrist.
Our adversaries seventh disputation is concerning 1
the doctrine of Antichrist. For whereas it is certain, says Bellarmine, that
there are four principal doctrines of Antichrist, none whereof is taught by
the Pope; therefore it follows necessarily, that the Pope is not Antichrist.
I answer, that there are more doctrins of Antichrist that false prophet then
four, among which those two doctrines of devils which are mentioned by the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. as notes of that Catholic Apostasy, whereof Antichrist is
the head, are to be numbered, forbidding marriage, and commanding abstinence
from meats. But yet not all these four are the doctrines of Antichrist, and
those which be, do not unfitly agree to the Pope: as shall appear in the
particulars, which we are to examine in order. For from these four doctrines
Bellarmine fetches four arguments. The first, Antichrist shall deny Jesus to
be Christ, and consequently shall oppugn all the ordinances of our Sautour, as
Baptism, confirmation, etc. and shall teach that circumcision, the Sabbath,
and other ceremonies of the old law are not yet ceased: But the Pope does not
deny Jesus to be Christ, nor bring in circumcision instead of Baptism, nor the
Saboth in stead of the Lords day, etc: therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.
The proposition, and so also (...) assumption ^ath two parts, the former
concerning the denial of Christ it self, the second concerning the
consequents thereof. Of the former, I have sufficiently spoken heretofore:
proving (...) ^ntly (...) that as Antichrist was to deny Christ, so Li. 1. ca
4. 6 7. 8.
the Pope do^ no^ in deed only, but in word also and doctrine, although not
openly directly and expressly (for Antichrist was not to be an open and
professed enemy), yet covertly, indirectly, and by consequent. And of such
denying of Christ, Bellarmine himself in this chapter understands John to
speak in the place by him alleged for the proof of his proposition. 1. Ioh.
2. 22.


2. But ^iuing that this exp^ion will not clear me Pope (...) Antichristn ^me
he (...) ^th that. Ancichrist is to (...) Christ (...) (...) openly, and (...)
all means. Which bold assur^ion I have her^of (...) ^fficiently disproued,
when I proved that AntiChristianisme is as the Apos^ ^eth it, a mystery of
iniquities; an^ that Antichrist is (...) ^and disguised em^; who under the name
and profession of ^tianitie denies, yea oppugneth Christ and his truth. Bu^
(...) ^s weigh his reasons. The first whereof has all his w^ (...) such
assertions as we have before proved to (...) then vanity it self: and it is
thus concluded. He that (...) be in nation and religion a Jew, and shall be
received of the Jews f^ their Me^ shall ^ugne Christ, and teach that our
Christ is not the Me^ But Antichrist shall be in nation and re^ (...) and shall
be re^iued of the Jews for their Messiah (...) before ^th been showed;
therefore he shall oppugn Christ openly, etc. I (...) ^ere first to the
proposition and assumption jointly, that the^e is no necessity nor yet
likelihood that there should come to the Jews such a one as they expect; and
yet Bellarmine every where takes this for granted. But the assumption I have
proved heretofore to be a new fable, and therefore further answer is
superfluous. Chap. 12.


3 The second argument is gathered out of 1. John. 2. 22. Who is a liar, but he
that denies Jesus to be Christ, and this is Antichrist. For all heretics
(says he) are called Antichrists, which any way deny Jesus to be Christ.
Therefore the true antichrist himself shall simply and by all means deny Jesus
to be Christ. And this is proved, because by the heretics the devil is said
to work the mystery of iniquity, because they deny Christ covertly, but the
coming of Antichrist is called a revelation, because he shall openly deny
Christ. I answer first, that John in that place speaks neither of the body
of Antichrist in general (as elsewhere in his Epistles the word (...) is used)
nor of the head of that body in particular, who is most worthily called (...)
the Antichrist; but of some other members of that body, that is to say, of
those Antichrists or heretics of that time, as Cerinthus and others, which
denied the divinity of Christ; and denying the son, did consequently also
deny the Father, for he is the Father of the Son, as appears plainly by
that which follows in the text (...), This is that Antichrist that denies
the Father and the Son. Secondly, the difference betwixt the petite
Antichrists and the graund Antichrist, is not in respect of the covert and open
denial of Christ; or if there be a difference to be made in this behalf, it
is in this, that diverse heretics and petite Antichrists, such as Simon Magus
and some others, have denied Jesus to be Christ more plain^y and directly,
which the graund Antichrist according to his greater cunning and efficacy of
deceit (coming as the Apostle says, (...) in all deceiueablenesse of
iniquity 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
) was to deny more cunningly and covertly. But the difference is both in
respect of the Apostasy and oppositio^ against Christ, and also in regard of
the ambition and advancing of themselves. The Apostasy and opposition may be
considered either in respect of the parts and points wherein it consists, or
in respect of the parties which make it. In both respects the Apostasy and
opposition of the petite Antichrists is but particular, that is, of few men in
few things: but the Apostasy and opposition of the graund Antichrist is more
eatholike and general, that is, in the most parts of Christianity, and of the
greatest part of Christendom. Likewise, the ambition of petite Antichrists is
to seek pre-eminence with Diotrephes in particular 3. John. 9. (...).
churches, and over some other men: But the graund Antichrist claims an
universal sovereignty over all men, and a double Monarchy over all the world:
and not contented to advance himself above all other men, even Kings and
Emperors, and that by many degrees; but in many things also matcheth himself
with Christ the King of Kings, and in some things aduanceth himself above him.
Yea, but this difference betwixt the small Antichrists and the great Antichrist
is proved, because by the small Antichrists or heretics, Satan is said to
work the mystery of iniquity, whereas the coming of Antichrist is called a
revelation. The mystery of iniquity 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. is Antichristianisme, or
that Antichristian Apostasy from Christ mentioned Ver. 3. which is therefore
called a mystery of iniquity, because it being a devilish oppositio^ unto
Christ, is cunningly cloaked under the profession of Christ. This mystery as it
was a working in the Apostles time in the heretics and petite Antichrists by
degrees: so was it more fully wrought and accomplished in Antichrist himself,
the head of the catholic Apostasy: under who^ it deserves so much the more
to be called the mystery of iniquity, as it masketh under more glorious
shows and visards of outward profession, and shrowdeth it self under the name
and title of the catholic and only true visible church. The mystery
therefore of iniquity, which in the former part of this Antithesis is
appropriated unto heretics, does indeed most truly belong to Antichrist
himself; and therefore if it be called a mystery because it is a covert and
cunning denial of Christ, then under the graund Antichrist Christ shall be
most cunningly denied, when he is most gloriously professed. Now Antichrist is
said to be revealed, when the head of the Antichristian body is manifested, and
of this revelation there be degrees; the first his showing of himself in his
colors, by challenging and usurping an universal supremacy and sovereignty
over all the world; and secondly his acknowledgeme^t after he was come to his
full growth, of which we have heretofore spoken. It appears therefore that
Antichrist was not to deny Christ plainly and openly; and consequently, that
the first part of his proposition (whereupon the latter is inferred) is false.

4 The latter part of his proposition is, that Antichrist shall abolish all the
ordinances of Christ, and in stead of them, bring in the ceremonies of the
Jews, as circumcision in stead of baptism, and the Jewish Sabbath in stead of
the Lords day. But how is this proved? because he shall openly deny Christ, and
shall in nation and religion be a Jew. But as both these assertions have been
proved false: so are we to think of this which is inferred upon them. For
seeing he was to be a disguising hypocrite, and his religion a mystery of
iniquity: it cannot be thought that he sitting in the Temple of God; and
professing the name of Christ, should abolish all his ordinances; but rather
that he would deprive and corrupt them, and take away the right use thereof, by
devilish doctrines, by superstitious Idolatries, by mixture of Jewish and
Heathenish ceremonies. But both the parts of his proposition he seeks further
to prove by testimonies of Fathers, and by reason. The testimonies of the
Fathers in this question deserve no further credit, the^ as they conspire with
the prophesies of scripture, and agree with the event. But let us examine them
severally. First Hillary is alleged as though he testified, that whereas the
Arrians affirmed that Christ is not the son of God by nature, but only by
adoption: the Antichrist shall teach that he is not so much as the adoptiue
son of God. But if you read the place, Lib. 6 de trinit. fol. 102.
you shall find that Hillary applies the speech of John, 1, Epist. 2. 22. to
those heretics who professing Christ to be their Savior, but denying him to
be the natural son of God, and consequently denying him to be Christ, affirmed
that he is the adoptiue son of God: and therefore infers out of that place of
John, that they cannot avoid, but that they are Antichrist. Wherefore the
Antichrist, of who^ Hillary speaks; confesses the name of Christ; De
co^summat. mund^.
neither does he deny him openly and directly, but indirectly and by
consequent. The next authority of Hippolytus is counterfeit, and the testimony
here alleged as current, (that the mark of Antichrist shall be nego
baptismum, nego signum crucis, I deny baptism, I deny the sign of the Cross)
heretofore has been rejected by Bellarmine himself, and refuted as false.
Chap. 11. Where he has taught that there is but one mark of the beast, and
that not a privative (as this is) but a positive mark, which is not yet
known. Thirdly, he alleges Augustine, as though he affirmed De ciuit. Dei
lib. 20 c. 8.
that Antichrist should suffer none to be baptized. Yet Augustine speaks not
of Antichrist, but of the devil, and affirms, that even then when the devil
shall be loosed, many shall be added to the church: and that the devil
himself being loosed, shall not be able to hinder Baptism, but surely so
valiant shall be both the parents for the baptising of their children, and also
those which shall then first believe, that they shall over come that strong one
being unbound. The speech of Jerome on the 11. of Daniel, if it deserve credit,
it must be taken either as a prophecy it self, or else a true exposition of
Daniels prophecy. Verse. 21. 22. But Jerome was no Prophet. And Daniels speech
undoubtedly is to be understood of Antiochus Epiphanes, to whom this
exposition (if it were good) should literally agree. But Antiochus did not rise
of the Jews, neither did he faigne himself to be the Prince of the covenant.
And for further answer, and better understanding of the place, read Polan. on
Polan. in Daniel. cap. 11. ver. 21. 22. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Daniel 11. If Sedulius affirm as Bellarmine cites him, that Antichrist shall
restore all the ceremonies of the Jews, his speech is incredible, for many of
them cannot be observed but in the Temple, which shall never be reedified. If
he speak of many, it may be verified of the Pope, and of some other
heretics, who notwithstanding have not openly denied Christ. Gregory in the
same place which Bellarmine alleges, does affirm Lib. 11. Epist. 3.
that Antichrist shall have in reverence not only the Sabbath day, but also
the Lords day; which cannot stand with such an open denial of Christ as
Bellarmine imagines. His words be these. Qui veniens diem Sabbati atq
dominicum ab omni faciet opere custoderi, Who when he comes (speaking of
Antichrist) shall cause the Sabbath day, and the Lords day, to be kept from all
work. And of this there may better reason be given, then of the other, because
(as has been proved) Antichrist was to be a pretended Christian.

5 These were his authorities: now let us weigh his reason, which is thus
concluded. In whose time the public service of God, and divine sacrifices shall
cease by reason of the vehement persecution, he shall openly deny Christ, and
shall abolish all his ordinances, and in stead of them, bring in Jewish
ceremonies: But in Antichrists time, by reason of the vehement persecution, the
public service of God, and divine sacrifices shall cease; therefore, etc. I
answer by distinction: If by the service of God he mean the true worship of
God, the proposition is untrue. For in the Papacy the true public worship of
God, by reason of the vehemency of persecution has ceased, and yet the Pope
does not openly deny Christ and abolish his ordinances, although he do vilely
deprive them, and mingle them not only with Jewish, but also Heathenish
ceremonies. If by the public service, and divine sacrifices he means
generally any service of God, although superstitious, any sacrifices although
idolatrous (such as is the sacrifice, of the Mass) then the assumption is
false: for such superstitions and will-worshippes do best beseem Antichrist.
But of this argument concerning the persecution of Antichrist, we have spoken
before, chap. 7.

6 This may suffice for answer to his proposition and the proofs thereof.
Whereas therefore he assumeth, that the Pope does not deny Christ, etc. I
answer: if he means a direct denial in open profession, that the Pope may
be Antichrist, although he do not so deny Christ: If he means a denial of
Christ in deed and in truth, although covertly, indirectly, and by consequent,
I have heretofore proved that he does so deny Christ, not only in word and
doctrine, as he is a false Prophet, but also in deed and fact, as he is a man
of sin, denying him in his life, and as he is an adversary, not only
denying, but also oppugning Christ and his truth. See the first Book. chap.
4.. 6. 7. 8.

7 The second doctrine of Antichrist says Bellarmine, is to affirm himself
to be the true Christ. From whence he gathers his second argument. Antichrist
shall affirm himself to be Christ. The Pope does not affirm himself to be
Christ, therefore the Pope i^ not Antichrist. That Antichrist being hostis and
amulus Christi, (that is, an enemy of Christ opposed unto him, in emulation of
like honor) shall indeed challenge unto himself those offices, prerogatives
and authority which properly belong to Christ (which in effect is as much as
if he should say, I am Christ) we deny not: and withal avouch that the Pope
of Rome does so affirm himself to be Christ. But that Antichrist shall openly
and in so many words expressly affirm that he is the Christ or Messiah of the
world, that we deny to be agreeable to that Antichrist, who is described in the
word of God. For Antichrist was to be a dissembling hypocrite, as has been
proved, and his religion is a mystery of iniquity cloaked under the
profession of Christianity. Neither could he seduce so many Christians, if he
should plainly and openly profess himself to be the true Christ. But let us
see how Bellarmine proves that Antichrist shall openly and expressly name
himself Christ. Forsooth out of Ioh 5. 43. If an other come in his own name,
him will you receive: Where says he, our Lord seems of purpose to have added
these words (in his own name) foreseeing that the Lutherans and Caluinists
would say, that Antichrist shall not come in his own name, but in the name of
Christ as being his Vicar. But I have heretofore proved, that Christ in this
place does not speak absolutely an other shall come, but conditionally, if an
other shall come, nor definitely of Antichrist, but indefinitely of any false
Prophet that should come in his own name, not sent of God. Neither does it
follow, that if Antichrist shall come in his own name, that therefore he will
profess himself to be Christ. For all false Prophets come in their own name,
because they are not sent of God, and yet the most of them have not professed
themselves to be Christ. And it is plain that our Savior Christ in this place
makes an opposition betwixt himself and every false Prophet in this respect,
that he came unto them in the name of his Father, that is, not taking upon
himself this honor to be our Prophet and Priest, without authority and
commission from God, but sent from the bosom of his Father, and yet was not
received of the Jews: but if an other, meaning any other false Prophet, should
come unto them not in the name of the Father, but in his own name, that is,
having no commission or authority from God, such a one should be embraced of
them. And further we are to consider, that Christ professing himself to be the
Messiah, seems to deny that he came in his own name, (for he signifies
that false Prophets come in their own name, but he came in the name of the
Father) therefore to come in his own name, signifies to come of himself,
without any calling or commission from God: And therefore our adversaries cannot
with any show of reason conclude out of this place, that Antichrist shall
profess himself to be Christ. And yet this is all the proof which he can
bring out of the scriptures. Yea, but though the scriptures teach no such
matter, Yet some of the Fathers affirm, that Antichrist shall profess
himself to be Christ: yea, but Bellarmine has told us, that we are not to
give credit to such conjectures of theirs as have no ground in the word of God.
For how could they, being no Prophets, certainly foretell such things of
Antichrist without book, that is to say, without warrant of the scriptures.
And whereas he adds, that these Fathers affirm, that he shall be received of
the Jews for their Messiah, and therefore shall profess himself to be the
Messiah, I answer, that in like sort a dozen of them affirmed that Antichrist
should come of the Tribe of Dan, whereof notwithstanding there is no
probability.

8 To the proposition therefore I answer, that Antichrist was not plainly and
openly to profess himself to be Christ, but to challenge the office and
authority of Christ, which is in effect although indirectly and by consequent,
as much as if he said I am Christ. To the assumption I answer, that although
the Pope does not plainly and directly say, I am Christ, but forbeareth the
name of Christ, as Caesar did the name of a King: yet notwithstanding, in that
he challenges the office and authority of Christ, it is as much in deed and
in truth, although indirectly and by consequent, as if he made himself Christ,
Christ being a name of office. For certainly whosoever professes himself to
be ye foundation, the head, the husband, and Lord, etc. of ye universal church,
he makes himself Christ, although he do abstain from the name. For who is the
head and Lord, etc. of the universal church, but Christ? who has authority
to ordain sacraments, to prescribe laws to the conscience, to deliver
doctrines and articles of faith as necessary to salvation, to forgive the
sins of the quick and the dead? who is the Prince of Priests, the great
Priest after the order of Melchizedec, the Pastor of Pastors, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whom Kings and Emperors do reign, who has
authority to command the Angels, to bestow the kingdom of heaven on whom he
pleases. Finally, unto whom is all power given in heaven and in earth, but
only to Christ? But the Pope does challenge all this to himself, and much
more, as has been showed. He forsooth is the foundation, the head, husband and
Lord of the universal Lib. 1. cap. 5.
Church, etc. And to conclude, if you respect his nature, Atque ac Christus
Deus est ens secundae intentionis, compositum ex Deo and homine, As well as
Christ he is God, an essence of the second intention, compounded of God and
man: if his office, unction Christus est, he is by annointment Christ, having
the very same office which Christ had when he was upon the earth. And therefore
Bellarm. de pontif. Romans lib. 5. cap. 4.
if this be a property of Antichrist to leave unto our Savior the name and
title of Christ, and to take to himself the dignity, office, and authority
of Christ: it cannot be avoided but that the Pope is Antichrist.

9 The third doctrine of Antichrist (says Bellarmine) is this: He shall
affirm himself to be God, and will require that he may be worshipped as God.
From whence he reasons thus: Antichrist will affirm that he is God, and will
be worshipped for God: The Pope of Rome does not affirm himself to be God,
neither would be worshipped as God, therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. The
proposition is proved out of 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. So that he sits in the temple
of God, showing himself as though he were God. Answ. The meaning of the
Apostles words is thus much, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, as
God, that is, he shall rule and reign in the church of God, as if he were a
God upon earth, showing himself not so much by words as by deeds, that he is
a God. Or as the vulgar Latin edition and English translation of the Rhemists
do read, tanquam sit Deus; as though he were God. And thus Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and Oecumenius, expound this place, (...), (says Chrysostom)
(...), he says showing himself, he said not, saying, but endeavoring to show,
for he shall work great works, and shall show forth wonderful signs: and
the word (...) showing, as Beza observes, is answerable to the Hebrew Moreh,
faciens se apparere, prae se ferens, or as we say, taking upon him as if he
were a God.

It is not therefore necessary that Antichrist should in word plainly and
openly profess himself to be God: it is sufficient, if in deed and behavior
he takes upon him as if he were (...) God. As for example, if he shall be
content to be acknowledged, saluted and called God. If he shall cause, nay if
he shall but willingly suffer himself to be worshipped as God, if he shall
challenge unto himself those titles, attributes, and works which are proper
and peculiar to the Lord. But Bellarmine perceiving that this place in this
sense may fitly be applied to the pope: therefore he contendeth that it is not
sufficient that Antichrist should indeed show himself to be God (as the Pope
does) but that he shall openly name himself God: and that he shall usurp, not
only some authority of God (as the Pope does) but also the very name of God.
And that he says is proved out of these words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. in
so much that he sits in the temple of God, showing himself tanqua^ sit
Deus, as though he were God. Where says he Paul does not only affirm that
Antichrist shall sit in the temple, (for we also sit in temples, and yet are no
Antichrists) but also expounds his manner of sitting, namely that he shall sit
as God: to who^ alone a temple is properly erected. And this hesaith is more
clearly set down in the Greek text: for it is not said (...) as God, but (...)
that he is God. But in this cavil are contained diverse errors: 1. by temple,
which as we have proved, signifies the church of God, he understands a
material temple, which should be built at Jerusalem. 2. by sitting in the
temple, which signifies his reigning in the church, he understands the
corporal gesture of sitting in that material temple. 3. by his sitting in the
temple of God as God, which signifies his ruling over the church as if he were
God, he understands thus much, that the material temple should be erected
and consecrated to his honor, as if he were God. As though that temple which
should be erected to his honor, as if he and no other were the true God, were
called of the Apostle the temple of God: or as though he pretending himself to
be the Messiah of the Jews sent from God, would not also pretend the building
of that temple to the honor of God. 4. Whereas he says that the Greek text
has not (...) but (...), it is plain that the text has both. In so much that
he sits in the temple of God (...) as God, showing himself (...), that he
is God. Now Antichrist may sit in the temple of God as God, and by his deeds
and demeanor bear the world in hand that he is a God upon earth, and yet not
profess himself openly and plainly to be God.

10 And in this sense (to come to his assumption) does this place properly
agree to the Pope of Rome, who sits in the temple of God as God, that is,
rules in the church of God as if he were a God upon earth: and in his
behavior and course of life, takes upon him as if he were a God and so would
be reputed of others. For first in their own law the Pope is not Did. 96. c.
satis euidenter.
obscurely called God. The Canonists call him Dominu^ Deum nostrum Papam, Our
Lord God the Pope. But for further proof of this point, I refer you to the
former book, chap. 5. 6. etc. where I entreated of the Antichristian pride of
the Pope. To which former testimonies I will add one practice of the Pope in
his great year of Iubile, when as in solemn procession he is carried in a
seat of gold upon noble men's shoulders (his god of bread being carried before
him upon an backeney as his attendant) and at length comes to the gates of
Paradise which he beats open with a golden hammer, at which time he is
worshipped of all sorts present as a God, from who^ they expect indulgence,
remission of sins and eternal life, according to his large promises made to
all those which shall come to Rome to celebrate the Iubiley. In a word, he is
numen quoddam visibilem quendam Deum pre^se ferens, a certain divine majesty
showing himself to be a certain visible God. The premises therefore
considered, together with my allegations in the place before named, this
argument may be returned upon our adversary after this manner: whosoever
sits Lib. 1. ca. 5. 6. 7.
in the temple of God as God, that is, rules and reigns over the church as
if he were a God upon earth, and declares himself either by word or deed that
he is God: for example, if he shall challenge unto himself those titles,
attributes and works which are proper unto God, and shall be willing to be
saluted, acknowledged and adored as God, he undoubtedly is Antichrist. But the
Pope of Rome rules over the church as if he were a God upon earth, and
declares himself both by word and deed that he is God, challenging unto
himself those titles, attributes and works which are peculiar unto the Lord,
etc. as has been proved, therefore the Pope is Antichrist: yea but the Pope
says Bellarmine, does not declare himself to be God, for he acknowledges
himself to be the servant of the Lord. He might as well conclude that the
Pope never calls himself regem regu^terrae, ac Dominu^ Dominorum, the king
of the kings of the earth, and Lord of Lords, because he acknowledges himself
seruu^ seruoru^ Dei, the servant of gods servants. Neither does his verbal
profession ouersway his real practice. But he should have remembered that the
second beast which is Antichrist, Apoc. 13. 11. as he speaks like the dragon
belching out blasphemies against God: so he has two horns like the lamb,
and as a dissembling hypocrite imitateth in some things the humility of
Christ. And therefore that the Pope could not be such an Antichrist as is
described in the scriptures, unless he were an hypocrite, who does by open
profession pretend himself to be the servant of God, when as in truth he
aduanceth himself against him. And yet this is all that our adversary
alleges to prove his assumption, that the Pope does not show himself to be
God.

11 The fourth and last doctrine says the Jesuit is this, he shall not only
affirm that he is God, but that he only is God, and shall oppugn all other
Gods both true and false, and shall suffer no Idols. But this absurd conceit of
the papists, is not only repugnant unto the truth, but also contradictory to
their own doctrines concerning Antichrist. For is it credible either that a
mortal man shall affirm himself alone to be the true God, and none but he:
or if he shall so affirm of himself that Christians and Jews and all the
world almost will acknowledge and worship him as the only true God? Again,
the Antichristian seat is figured by the whore of Babylon, which because of
her own idolatry is called a whore, and because she infecteth all nations
that adhere unto her with her idolatries Apoc. 17. 2. 5.
and superstitions, she is said to make them drunk with the cup of her
fornications, and also to be the mother of all the fornications, that is,
idolatries of the earth. Yea, and the Papists themselves expound Deuteronomy. 11. 38.
where Antiochus Epiphanes is described as an Idolater, as properly spoken of
Antichrist. And do not themselves teach that Antichrist shall profess himself
to be the Messiah of the Jews, and consequently that he is sent and anointed
of God? Now if he shall profess himself sent from God, shall we think that
he will say there is no God besides himself? Or if he being but a mortal man,
shall say there is no God besides himself, may we not well think that either
they will hiss at him as a fool, or stone him to death as a blasphemer? Nay,
do not themselves teach that he shall be in religion a Jew, an obseruer of the
Sabbath, and other Jewish ceremonies? And do they not allege Jerome to prove,
that Antichrist shall faigne himself to be the chief of the covenant, and a
In Dan. 11
chief maintainer of the law and testament of God? And are not his two horns
like the Lamb expounded by some approved In Apo. 13
Authors among them, of the two testaments which he shall seem to profess?

12 But let us see how this wise conceit is proved: Forsooth by testimonies of
the scriptures and the Fathers. Out of the scripture he alleges two places,
the former 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Who is extolled above all that is called God, or
worshipped. As if he should say, Antichrist shall be advanced above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped, therefore he shall avouch that he alone
is God, and will suffer no other God either true or false to be worshipped
besides himself. I deny the consequence. For first Antichrist may advance
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, and yet suffer,
yea require them to be worshipped. Jupiter was supposed among the Heathen to
advance himself above all other Gods, and yet suffered them to be worshipped as
Gods. Antichrist the second beast, aduanceth himself above the Image of the
Apoc. 13.
former beast, which is the Empire renewed, whereon he sits as the rider
death upon a beast, and yet requires the same to be worshipped. The Pope
aduanceth himself above Angels, Apoc. 17.
Kings, and Princes, who are called Gods; above the Saints, the Host, the
Cross, and whatsoever (...) is in the church of Rome, and yet requires them
all to be worshipped. Secondly, Antichrist may advance himself above or against
all that is called God, or is worshipped, and yet not profess himself to be
the only God. For so Antiochus Epiphanes advanced himself against every God,
yea, against the God of Gods, Dan. 11. 36. and yet he was never so mad as to
profess himself the only God. Thirdly, seeing Antichristianisme is not open
Atheism, but a mystery of iniquity; and Antichrist is described in the
scriptures as an hypocrite and pretended Christian: we may be assured that
although in deed and in truth he shall advance himself against God, and
against Christ our Savior, and list up himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped; yet he shall profess himself to be the servant of
Christ, and a worshipper of God. Fourthly, the words of the text do not ascribe
to Antichrist so great an extolling of himself as the Jesuit imagines. For
first he is called a man of sin, and son of perdition, and therefore we are
to conceive of such an advancement of himself, as is incident to a mortal and
wretched man. Secondly, he is said to extol himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped. By all that is called God, we are to understand all
to whom the name of God is communicated, as to Angels in heaven, to kings and
Princes on earth. And of this advancing above Kings, we are the rather to
understand this place, because afterward it is said, that the Roman Empire
hindered Antichrists advancing or revealing himself. And by (...) we are to
understand any thing which is worshipped as God, or wherein God is worshipped:
Such in the Church of Rome are the Host, the Cross, the Saints, and their
Images and relics. Above al which a man may advance himself (as the Pope
does) and yet may acknowledge some other God besides himself. Thirdly, the
greatest height of pride that is incident to any creature whatsoever, is not to
seek to be above God, for that cannot be imagined, but to be as God. And
indeed the height of Antichrist his pride and advancing of himself, is noted
in the words following, (...) in so much that he shall sit in the temple of God
as God. Whosoever therefore being but a mortal man, shall advance himself
above all that is called God and worshipped, insomuch that he shall sit in the
temple of God as God, that is, rules in the church of Christ as if he were a
God upon earth, he is to be deemed Antichrist (that is aemulus Christi, one
that would feign be equal to Christ) although he neither profess himself to
be the only God, who only is to be worshipped, neither yet abolish all other
worship of God both true and false. And if in this sense this place do properly
agree to the Pope, as indeed it does, then can it not be avoided but that he is
Antichrist.

13 The second testimony which he alleges to prove this fond conceit is Dan.
11. 37. neither shall he care for any of the Gods, but shall rise against all.
I answer, Daniel in this place speaks not of Antichrist, and he of whom he
speaks was an Idolater, and therefore this allegation is altogether
impertinent. As touching the first, it is evident that Daniel from the 21.
verse of that chapter to the end, does most plainly and properly describe
Antiochus Epiphanes. For howsoever in this place Bellarmine would prove by the
authority of Jerome, that these words are to be understood of Antichrist, and
not of Antiochus: yet in another place when part of this verse is objected Li.
3. ca. 21
by some protestants as sitting the Pope, he tells us plainly that Daniel
speaks ad literam^, literally of Antiochus, who was a figure of Antichrist.
Secondly, he of whom Daniel speaks was an Idolater, and establisher of
Idolatry. So far was he from professing himself to be the only true God,
or suffering none to be worshipped besides himself. For if he speak of
Antiochus Epiphanes, (as most certainly he does) it may easily be proved both
by History of the Machabees, and by other stories, that he was both an
Idolater himself, and an inforcer of Idolatry upon others. See I. Maccab. 1.
50. 2. Mac. cab. 6. 2. etc. Polybius also testifies that in sacrifices and
honoring the Grecian Gods, he surpassed other Kings which went before him,
Apud Athenaeum.
as might appear by the Olympiaeum at Athens, and the Images about the altar
at Delos. This Jerome also avouches, and Bellarmine confesses. But of
whomsoever Daniel speaks, he does plainly describe him in the next verse to
be an Idolater. Ver. 38.
And it is a world to see what silly shifts the Jesuit makes to avoid this
truth. For first he reads the words thus: And he shall honor the God Maozim
in his place: Secondly, he omitteth the words following (the God which his
fathers knew not, he shall honor with gold, etc. which most plainly specify
his Idolatry who is here described) and busieth himself wholly in giving a
false interpretation to the god Maozim. The God Maozim says he, signifies
either Antichrist himself, and then the meaning is he shall honor himself,
that is, cause himself to be worshipped: or else it signifies the devil whom
Antichrist being a sorcerer shall worship in secret, which interpretation he
prefers before the other. And therefore this place does not prove that he
which is here described shall be an Idolater.

14 I answer first, that although either of his interpretations of the God
Maozim were true (as neither is) yet the one hinders not, and the other
proves that he which is here described is an Idolater. For let the word
Maozim signify what it may, yet the words following plainly convince the
party here described of Idolatry, the God which his fathers knew not he shall
worship with gold. And if the God Maozim signify any but the true God, and if
also the words are so to be read as Bellarmine reads them: And he shall honor
the God Maozim, and the God who^ his fathers knew not, he shall worship with
gold and silver, etc. then by these words the Idolatry is increased. For first
it is said, that he shall worship the God Maozim according to Bellarmines
reading, whereby is not meant as he says the true God, nay he says to make
Christ the God Maozim, Li. 3. ca. 21
it is intolerable blasphemy, O therefore first in these words is signified an
Idolater: and secondly it is added, that the God also which his fathers knew
not he shall worship, where again his Idolatry is most plainly noted.

2. But indeed Bellarmines interpretation is merely false, and that which he
infers thereupon, altogether absurd. The God Mahuzzim signifies the God of
fortitudes, that is, the most mighty or almighty God, which title as it is
proper to the Lord, as Jeremy calls him (...) Jehovah, my Iere. 16. 19
strength and fortitude: And likewise David, Psalm. 31. 5. so may it not be
ascribed to any other. And therefore it is a senseless imagination, that
Daniel by the God of fortitudes would signify either Antichrist himself, a
wicked and wretched man, or the father of Antichrist the Devil. And further,
as touching the former interpretation, it seems to be absurd, that when
Daniel according to his reading says, he shall worship the God Maozim, his
meaning should be, that Antichrist should worship himself, as though he that
worshippeth, and he that is worshipped were one and the same. And the^ in like
sort in the latter clause, by the God which he shall worship, which his fathers
knew not, we must absurdly understand himself. For whereas he cauilleth at the
word worship, and says, we must read glofie, as though Daniels meaning were,
that Antichrist should glorify himself, and cause himself to be worshipped:
it is certain that the vulgar Latin (which he prefers before the Hebrew,
and which by the Council of Trent he is bound to stand to) has venerabitur,
shall worship. and himself both in the second clause of the verse, he reads
according to the vulgar colet, shall worship: and in his second interpretation,
which he says is the better, he does so read and understand the word. His
first interpretation therefore, that the God Maozim should signify Antichrist
himself, is sottish and absurd.

15 Let us therefore consider whether the second which he prefers before the
other, be any better. In the second place says he, it may be said, which
pleases me better, that Antichrist shall be a Magician or sorcerer, (such as
very many Popes of Rome have been) and that according to the manner of other
Magicians, he shall in secret worship the Devil, (as diverse of the Popes have
done homage unto him) by whose help he shall work wonders, and that he is
called the God Maozim. Answ. Whereas Bellarmine prefers this exposition
before others, it seems he has forgotten the question which he took upon
him to defend, namely, that Antichrist shall not be an Idolater. For if he
shall be a worshipper of the devil, and also of a God whom his fathers knew
not, I hope by this exposition he shall be proved an Idolater. But let us see
what he further alleges to prove this exposition, which although it be false
(for Daniel here neither speaks of Antichrist, nor yet of the Devil) yet it
makes against himself. Forsooth Maozim as he supposes is not the name of
God, but of a certain strong and secret place, in which shall be the chief
treasures of Antichrist, and wherein he shall worship the devil. For it
follows in Daniel, that he shall fortify Maozim with a strange God whom he
knew, and surely (...) Mahoz signifies as well fortitude as a tower or place
of munition. His meaning then is, that the devil is here called the God
Maozim, because Antichrist shall worship him in a certain tower, which if it
were true, he should rather be called the God Maoz, but Daniel speaks in
the plural number, the God of fortitudes or munitions, signifying according to
the Hebrew phrase, the most mighty and strong God, Deum summiroboris, as
Tremellius reads.

And whereas he says it follows, that he shall fortify Maozim with a
strange God, whom he has known, I answer, that there is no such matter in
the original text, which word for word is thus: And he shall do to the
munitions of Mahuzzim with a strange God, that is, he shall commit the
munitions of Mahuzzim, that is, Jerusalem and the cities of Iewry to a
strange God. Yea, but faith Bellarmine, one of these interpretations (either
that Antichrist is the God Maozim, or if he be any other (for he dare not now
say it is the devil) he shall not be worshipped of Antichrist, but secretly
and in a most hidden place) one says he, of these interpretations must be
good, or else there will be a repugnancie in Daniels words. For if he care for
no God, how shall he publicly worship Idols? yea, rather if he care for no
God, how shall he worship any privately? For it is more like that he which is
an Atheist, and cares for no God indeed, will in Machiuilian policy worship
some God publicly, although privately he cares for none. And it more fitteth
the disposition of Antichrist to be secretly an Atheist, and openly an
Idolater, then contrariwise although Bellarmine here does hold the contrary.

16 But now perhaps you expect, that having freed this place of Daniel from
Bellarmines corruptions and deprauations, I should open unto you the true
meaning thereof, and show how this prophecy was fulfilled in Antiochus, who
in many things was a type of Antichrist. And the King says the Angel, Verse.
36. (or this King Hamelec, that is, Antiochus Epiphanes, of whom I have all
this while entreated, namely, from the 21. Verse) he shall do what he will,
his will shall be to him for a law; wherein he might seem to be a lively
figure of the Pope, of whom it is said, Sic volo, sic iubeo, slat pro ratione
voluntas: And again, Iudiciumque est pro lege suum. And this was the ground of
all his actions, wilfully following in all things his own will. Then more
particularly the Angel describes his actions, both in respect of religion and
policy.

His actions tending to irreligion (of which only we are now to speak) are
first summarily comprised, Verse. 36. and afterward more fully expressed. The
sum is this, that he should alter and abrogate all the religions of the
Syrians, as well the false religions of the Idolaters, as the true religion of
the Jews. The abrogation of all the religions of the Syrians, is here called
the magnifying himself, (...) above or against every god, whose worships he
did put down. The profanation of the Jewish religion ordained by the true
God, the God of Gods, is here signified by speaking (...) great and swelling 1.
Mac. 1. 43. 46. 2. Mac. 6. 2.
words against him, which we are to understand of his blasphemous edicts to
abolish the whole religion of God: both which we see performed by Antiochus
Epiphanes. 1. Macab. 1. 43. 46. etc. The same things are again repeated,
Verse. 37. and 38. First, as touching the gods and religions of the Syrians
in general, whether true or false, he says Verse 37. that unto the Gods of
his fathers he shall not attend, neither will he listen to the desires of
women: that is, as some expound, his wives, who entreated the continuance of
those religions whereunto themselves were addicted: so that neither the
reverence of his fathers, nor the love of his wives could stay him from
following his own will in abrogating their religions, neither will be regard
any of the Gods, viz. of the Syrians, because he will magnify himself
against all, in abrogating the religions of them all, whether true or false.
And more particularly concerning the true religion of the true God, he says
Ver. 38. (...). And as touching the God Mahuzzim, that is, the God almighty,
and there he pauseth, in his place he will honor, even a God whom his fathers
knew not, will he honor with gold and with silver, with precious stones and
with Jewels; and (verse. 39.) he shall commit the munitions of Mahuzzim, that
is, of the Almighty unto a strange God, that is, he shall deal so
despightfully with the God of Israel, the Lord of Hosts, that having abrogated
his worship and religion, he shall set up in the temple of God the Idol of
Jupiter Olympius to be worshipped (as it is recorded 2. Mac. 6.) who was a God
whom his fathers knew not, that is, acknowledged Strabo geograph. lib. 16.
not, nor worshipped. For the Syrians worshipped Apollo and Diana. And the
munitions of Mahuzzim, that is, Jerusalem and other cities of Iewry, which had
been as it were the munitions and cities of God, he committed them to the
tuition of a strange God, namely, Jupiter Olympius. The same prophecy in
effect was before delivered, Dan. 7. 25. See Tremell. in Dan. 7. and 8.
and 8. 11. by conference of which places with this in hand, it is manifest,
that by the God Mahuzzim, is meant the true God.

17 This prophecy therefore being meant of Antiochus Epiphanes, and fulfilled
in him, cannot properly belong to Antichrist or any other. Notwithstanding as
in some other things, so in the premises Antiochus may not vnsitly be thought
to have been a type or figure of Antichrist. In so much that both the ancient
Fathers have understood these prophesies of Antichrist, and many also of the
late writers (besides the Jews) have applied the same particularly to the
Pope. For besides that it is most true of the Pope, that he does what he will,
seeing Legi non subiac^t vlli.
he is subject to no law, and no man may say to him, Sir why do you so? The
rest also after a sort may be verified of him, that both he sets himself
against the Idols of the Gentiles, and also has abrogated the true worship of
God. And that in stead of Christ the Almighty God, he has set up in his
churches, besides many other Idols, the abominable Idol of the Mass, a God
which his fathers the first Bishops of Rome knew not, which notwithstanding he
honoreth with gold and silver, and precious stones, and has committed the
churches, cities, and countries of Christendom, to the tuition and patronage
of diverse Saints, who as they are indeed, so are they called by Paulus Ionius a
Popish Bishop, the tutelar Gods of the Papists. Hist. lib. 24. in fine.


18 And these were his testimonies of scripture. In the next place, for want of
better proofs, he slyeth to the authority of the Fathers as his last refuge,
as though they testified that Antichrist shall not be an Idolater, nor one that
will suffer Idols. But I answer, that the Fathers do either speak of the Idols
and Idolatry of the Gentiles only, and in that sense their speeches are
verified in this behalf of the Pope, who neither honoreth nor suffers the
Idols of the Gentiles: or else if they speak of all Idols and Idolatry in
general, when they say Idola seponet as Ireneus, or adidololatriam non
admittet as Hippolitus, or idola odio habebit, as Cyrill, or adidololatria^ non
adducet ille, as Chrysostom, they deserve such an Antichrist as in this
behalf is better then the Pope. But indeed as the Pope is, so Antichrist in
the scriptures is described to be an Idolater, as has been showed.

19 Having thus doughtily proved this Popish conceit, the Jesuit proceeds to
the disproofe of our assertio^s and expositions of some places of scripture,
and especially that of 2 Thessalonians, 2. Our assertion concerning the doctrine of
Antichrist, he says is only built upon the scriptures falsely expounded by
new glosses. In token whereof says he, they allege not one Interpreter or
Doctor for them. But this is a malicious slander, witness this place which he
mentions 2 Thessalonians. 2. where we prove by the consent of many of the Fathers,
that by the Temple is meant the church of God; and that in the church of God
Antichrist was to be revealed, after the Roman Empire, which hindered, was
taken out of the way, etc. Our assertions concerning Antichrist, are grounded
on the prophesies of scriptures expounded by the event, which is the best
expounder of prophesies. And with our assertions the opinions of the Fathers
agree, where they are consonant to the scripture and the event. Contrariwise,
the assertions of the Papists concerning Antichrist, as they are repugnant to
the scriptures and the truth of the event: so are they wholly grounded either
upon the uncertain (and many times misalledged) conjectures of the Fathers,
who were no Prophets, and therefore being not able to foresee the event, did
not many times understand the Prophesies: or else on the blind conceits of
Popish writers, who being deceived with the efficacy of illusion, and made
drunk with the whore Babylons cup of fornications, were given over to
believe lies. And whereas our writers expounding those words of the Apostle,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. (who is lifted up above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped) do apply the same unto the Pope upon very good and sufficient
proofs, and from thence do plainly conclude the Pope to be Antichrist, (for
evidence whereof, I refer the Reader to the 5. chapter of my former book.)
He culleth out some straggling sentences out of some one of the vnsoundest
writers of our side, (as their manner is) which he may best hope to answer. As
though we had no more, nor no better arguments to prove, that the Pope
aduanceth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, then
these two: First, because he professes himself to be the Vicar of Christ:
And secondly, whereas Christ subjected himself willingly unto the scriptures,
the Pope challenges authority to dispense with the scripture. Howbeit the
former of these two reasons he depraueth, and the latter he is not able to
satisfy. For Illyricus his reason to prove that the Pope aduanceth himself
above all that is called God, is not because he makes himself the Vicar of
Christ, but this, because he vaunting himself to be the Vicar of Christ, does
notwithstanding usurp greater authority, then the son of God claimed unto
himself, of which, that which Bellarmine Catalog. test. page 3.
alleges as a second reason, is by Illyricus added as a proof: Whereunto
Bellarmine is no otherwise able to answer, then by impudent and shameless
denial, either that Christ subjected Contrary to Galat. 4. 4. Luke. 2. 51
himself to the law and word of God, or that the Pope takes upon him to
dispense with the scriptures, or that any Catholic (meaning Popish) writer
has said, that he may dispense with divine precepts; both which
notwithstanding I have heretofore proved by many instances and most evident
allegations. See the first book. chap. 5.. 10. 11. 12. For that which he
adds of Christ's subiecting himself to the prophesies, and not to the
precepts, as though Illyricus had spoken of the one in his proposition, and of
the other in the assumption, it is partly false and partly ridiculous, and
indeed not worth the answering.

Chap. 15. Of the miracles of Antichrist.
1 We are now come to the eight maine argument, which Bellarmine uses to
prove that the Pope of Rome is not Antichrist; because forsooth those things
which the holy Ghost in the scriptures has foretold concerning the miracles of
Antichrist, do not agree to the Pope and church of Rome. For concerning the
miracles of Antichrist, the scriptures (says he) mention three things. 1. that
Antichrist shall work many miracles. 2. what manner of miracles they shall be.
3. there are recorded examples. Of al which points I have entreated heretofore,
proving from Bellarmine his own grounds, that the Pope is Antichrist. And
first that many signs and wonders should be wrought by Antichrist and his
adherents, which Lib. 1. cap. 7.
they call miracles, the scriptures testify, the event has proved, and we do
confess. And secondly, that all these signs and wonders, howsoever he and his
followers do boast of them, and in respect thereof contemn the true
professors: yet are as the Apostle says, lying signs and wonders, both in
respect of the end, which is to seduce and to confirm lies, and in respect of
the substance, which is counterfeit. For whereas Bellarmine adds that they are
also called lying signs in respect of the efficient and author of them, which
is the father of lies, according to whose power Antichrist was to come, who as
some of the Fathers affirm, was to be a notable Magician or sorcerer. This
seems to be somewhat far fetched, unless we will take the word (...) to be
masculine (as none does). Notwithstanding, because the Apostle ascribes the
working of these miracles to the power of Satan, we will trace him in his own
steps, not doubting to apply this note also to the Pope and church of Rome:
seeing it cannot be doubted, but that as very many not only of their Clergy,
but even of their Popes, have been notable Magicians and sorcerers: so also
very many of the miracles in the church of Rome, have bin the operatio^s or
illusio^s of the devil. As for their Clergy, who knows not, but that there
have bin few learned men among the^, who have not been known, or at the least
suspected, to be coniurers, and skillful (as some call it) of the black Art.
But as touching the Popes, because it may seem incredible, that any known
Magician or sorcerer should be advanced to the Apostolic See, as they call it:
therefore it may be thought, that the sorcery and witchcraft of the most of
the^, who indeed were sorcerers, was hidden and unknown. Notwithstanding eue^
in their own writers there are recorded as known Magicians and sorcerers
above 20. Popes, diverse wherofgaue themselves wholly to the devil, that in the^
the prophecy of the Apostle might be fulfilled, viz. that they might come to
the Papacy by the help of the devil, or as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 9. that their coming might be according to the efficacy of Satan: And as
this happened often, so especially about those times wherein Antichrist in the
Papacy was in a manner come to his full growth, that is to say, in Syluestex 2.
and Gregory 7. and all the Popes betwixt them, who were a sort of infamous
sorcerers. And therefore if any miracles have bin wrought by such Popes, (as
Saunders braggeth of many signs and wonders wrought by Gregory 7.) we need not
doubt, but that as themselves were Magicians Demonsir. 20.
and sorcerers, so their signs and wonders were wrought by the power of the
devil.

2 And thus Bellarmine through all the causes shows the miracles of
Antichrist, to be lying signs and wonders. But to what end I beseech you
serves all this discourse? Will Bellarmine conclude from hence that the Pope
is not Antichrist, either because there are no miracles in the church of Rome,
which was the first point, or because those miracles which they have, be not
lying signs and wonders, which was the second? If this were his end, why then
does he not from this proposition as it were his groundworke, assume and
conclude after this manner. By Antichrist and his adherents many signs and
wonders shall be wrought (which they call miracles) as the scripture
testifies: By the Pope and his adherents many signs and wonders have not bin
wrought which they call miracles, therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. But
Bellarmine durst not reason thus, seeing the Papists brag of nothing more
then of their signs and wonders, which they call miracles. And therefore from
this ground I have heretofore inferred the contrary. For if it be a peculiar
note of Antichrist and his adherents in these latter times to work many signs
and wonders, which they call miracles: then can it not be avoided, but that the
Pope of Rome is Antichrist, and the church of Rome the Synagogue of Antichrist,
seeing they alone do brag of miracles. See the first book. chap. 7.. 1. and
2. Secondly, why does he not reason thus? By Antichrist and his followers,
lying signs and wonders shall be wrought: But by the Pope and church of Rome,
there have been no lying signs and wonders wrought, therefore the Pope is not
Antichrist. Indeed this would Bellarmine have the simple reader gather from his
words, and that is the drift of all that discourse. But this he could not
assume and conclude, because his own conscience does tell him that, which all
the world knows, that their church is full of lying signs and wonders, which
they call miracles. Therefore from Bellarmines own ground I reason thus: If it
be a peculiar note of Antichrist and his Synagogue in these latter times to
work many lying signs and wonders, then it must be confessed, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and the church of Rome the Synagogue of Antichrist, because among
them are many lying signs and wonders: but the first is testified in the
scriptures, and therefore the latter cannot be denied, seeing I have proved that
the church of Rome is full of lying signs and wonders, which notwithstanding
they call miracles. See the first Book. Chap. 7.. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

3 It is plain therefore, that of those three things which Bellarmine
observes out of the scriptures concerning the miracles of Antichrist, the two
first do fitly serve to prove the Pope Antichrist. Neither will the three
examples of Antichrist his miracles which Bellarmine sets down in the third
place, disprove the same. For of these three examples, to wit, First that
Antichrist, or at least his Ministers, shall make fire to come down from
heaven in the sight of men. Secondly, that he shall put life into the Image of
the beast, and cause it to speak. Thirdly, that he shall faigne himself to
die, and to rise again. The two first (which indeed belong to Antichrist) do
fitly agree to the Pope (as has been showed in the first book, chap. 7. from
the 8.. to the end of the chapter.) The third belongs not to Antichrist.
From whence notwithstanding, Bellarmine argues thus. The third miracle of
Antichrist (says he) is, that he shall faigne himself to die and to rise
again, for which miracle especially the whole world almost shall admire him.
But never did any Pope faigne himself to die and rise again, therefore the
Pope is not Antichrist. I answer to the proposition, that no such miracle in
the scripture is assigned unto Antichrist, but that it is a sond imagination of
the Papists, which by some of them, and namely by Lib. 3. de pontif. Romans cap. 5
Bellarmine himself is propounded more fondly, to wit, that Antichrist shall
faigne himself to die, and by the help of the devil shall rise again. For
if his death be but counterfeit, he shall not need the devils help to raise
him. Notwithstanding, they would ground this miracle upon those words, Apoc.
13. 3. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, but his deadly
wound was healed, and all the world wondered after the beast. I answer, that in
these words the holy Ghost speaks not of Antichrist, and that he of whom he
speaks, does not saigne himself to die, and rise again. As touching the
first of those two beasts described in this chapter, the former is not
Antichrist, but the latter. The former which is described unto the 11. Verse,
is the Roman Empire, especially under the persecuting Emperors, as has been
showed, every part of that description fitting the same. And that the latter
beast signifies Antichrist, it is in a manner confessed of all. Hear what
Bellarmine says in the beginning of his tenth chapter, speaking of the Lib. 3.
de Pontif. To. ca. 10.
16. 17. and 18. Verses of this 13. chapter of the Apocalypse, which are spoken
concerning the second beast, Fatentur omneo (says he) pertinere omnino ad
Antichristum verba illa Ioannis Apoc. 13. and fuciet omnes pusillos cum magnis,
etc. All men confess, that those words of John, Apoc. 13. And he shall make
all both small and great, etc. do wholly appertain to Antichrist. And in this
very chapter how does Bellarmine prove, 1. that Antichrist shall work great
signs, because it is said, verse 13. and fecit signa magna, and he wrought
great signs. 2. that many of the signs of Antichrist shall be fantastical,
and only in appearance, because it is said in the same verse, that he does
cause fire to descend in the sight of men. 3. that Antichrist shall cause fire
to come down from heaven, and make the Image of the beast to speak, because
it is so prophesied of Antichrist, verse 13. and 15. Now if this be confessed,
that the latter beast is Antichrist, then can it not be truly affirmed, that
the former beast is Antichrist, unless we may say, that the former and the
latter are one and the same. But that cannot be truly said. For of the latter
John says, And I saw (...) an other beast. verse. 11. If it be an other, then
is it not the same, and the great difference in the descriptions of both, does
show that they are diverse beasts, The one arising out of the Sea, has ten
horns, the other arising out of the earth, has two horns like the Lamb. The
latter exercises the power of the former, and that in his sight, causes men
to worship the former beast, whose deadly wound was healed, makes an Image to
the former beast which had a deadly wound, and lived. verse 14. Therefore the
second Verse. 12.
beast which signifies Antichrist, is not that beast which had the deadly
wound and was cured thereof, nor yet the head which was so wounded.

4 Again (to come to that objection which Bellarmine makes unto himself, and
does not satisfy) this miracle and the two first do not belong to one and the
same subject: if therefore the two first concerning fire and the Image, belong
to Antichrist, then this does not; or if this do, then the other two do not:
but all confess, that those two do belong to Antichrist, therefore this does
not.

Hereunto Bellarmine would seem to answer, that the former beast signifies
either the Roman Empire, or the multitude of the wicked, and that one (that is
to say the chief head thereof) which seemed to dye and rise again, is
Antichrist. For says he, Antichrist shall be the chief and the last head of
the wicked, as also of the Romans. The second beast signifies either
Antichrist himself, according to Rupertus, or the Ministers and Preachers of
Antichrist, according to Richardus and Anselmus. And therefore these three
miracles belong either to Antichrist alone, or to him and his Ministers. In
which answer of Bellarmine, we see that prouerbiall speech verified, that
Great it the truth, and it shall preuale. Seeing the force and evidence Esdr.
341.
of truth has expressed from him in this place a confession that overthrows
the popish concerning Antichrist, and manifestly proves the Pope to be
Antichrist. Namely, when he confesses according to the true interpretation of
the ancient Interpreters and Fathers of the Church, that the beast with seven
heads is the Roman Empire, and that Antichrist is one of those seven heads: as
also elsewhere he has confessed that the whore of Babylon is the city of
Rome. From hence therefore it follows, that Antichrist shall be the head,
Cap. 13.
not of the Jews, but of the Romans, that his chief seat or See shall be,
not Jerusalem, but Rome, that the name of the beast is Roman or Latin, that
Antichrist is not one particular man, no more then the other six heads of the
Roman Empire, but a state of government, as the Kings were one head, and the
Consuls an other, and the Emperors but one head, and the Popes and Papacy but
one head, and lastly, that the head of the beast or Roman Empire, which is
Antichrist, can be no other but the Pope of Rome. For of these seven heads S.
John says, that in his time five of the^ were fallen, one was, and an other
was not yet come. These five which were fallen, were the five first, viz.
kings, consuls, Dece^uiri, tribunes, and dictators. The head that then was, out
of question was the Emperors, who were the sixth head, the seventh (which is of
the Popes) was not yet come: Which then of these seven heads does signify
Antichrist? surely none of the five first, for they were past before S. John's
time: nor the sixth, which is the state of Emperors, for that then was, and
Antichrist was not yet come; and as the Papists confess, that was it which
hindered the revelation In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
of Antichrist, and therefore was to be done out of the way before Antichrist
could be revealed. It remains therefore that the seventh head (which is of
the Popes) is Antichrist. For as touching the Imperial state renewed in the
West, the holy Ghost plainly says, that the beast which was, and is not,
though it be, as being but the Image of the old Empire, is the eight, and is
one of the seven: that is, in name and title it is the same with the sixth, as
Images bear the names of those things which they do represent. If therefore
Antichrist be one of the seven heads of the Roman state (as undoubtedly he
is, and as our adversary here confesses) then can it not be denied, but that
the Pope, who is the seventh head, is Antichrist.

5 The other interpretation, that the beast with seven heads does signify the
whole multitude of the wicked, is senseless and absurd. For if the beast be
the universal company of the wicked, what is the world, which verse. 3. is
said to wonder after the beast? what are all the kinreds, tongues, nations
which are made subject to the beast, verse. 7.? who are all those inhabitants
of the earth that do worship him? does not the holy Ghost plainly say, verse.
8. that they are those whose names are not written in the book of the Lamb;
that is to say, the company of the wicked and reprobates? When as Bellarmine
therefore says, that this beast signifies either the Roman Empire, or the
whole company of the wicked, we may add, but it signifies not the whole
company of the wicked. It remains therefore that it signifies the Roman
state, whereof Antichrist is a head. But although Antichrist be one head of
the seven, yet it follows not, that the head which was as it were wounded to
death, is Antichrist, but rather the estate of Emperors which then was. For
albeit the b^ast with seven heads does signify the Roman state in general,
yet in that place it seems to be described as it was subject to the sixth
head. In the 17. chapter as it is renewed and subjected to the Antichristian
state. For the beast (which he there speaks of) which was, and is not though
it be, was after to arise (...), and being the eight in order, was in name one
of the seven: on which beast as also upon those waters, that is, nations whereof
the old Empire did arise, the whore of Babylon (whereby is meant the
Antichristian state) sits, that is, rules and reigns as a Queen.

6 And that it may appear that there is no necessity that we should
understand this wound of Antichrist, let us consider what wounds the Roman
state had received, and was cured thereof. First therefore by the death of
Julius Caesar, and the civil wars thereupon ensuing, the Roman Empire
received as it were a deadly wound, and yet recovered it so again, as that in
Augustus and some of his successors, it flourished more then ever before. And
this some think to be the wound of the beast which was cured, whereof the holy
Ghost here speaks, describing the beast by that which was known to have been
done in the Roman state. The second wound which the Roman Empire received,
was at the death of Nero, in whom the stock of the Caesar's ended: which being
cut off, the succession of the Imperial Crown was uncertain, and by the
uncertainty of succession the like desolation threatened to that Empire, which
happened to the Grecian Monarchy after the death of Alexander the great; the
Empire being left as a prey for the mightiest. Neither was this wound cured
until Uespasian obtained the Empire. For after Nero, Sergius Galba seized upon
the Empire, and enjoyed the same but seven months and seven days. And albeit
to establish the succession, he had adopted Piso, yet was he murdered by
Syluius Otho, who succeeded him, and Otho after three months and five days
was slain by Uitellius, who also after eight months was deposed and put to an
ignominious death by Uespasian: In whom the Empire which since the death of
Nero had been incertum and vagum, as Suetonius says, was established, and as
it were cured of the former wound, which diverse learned men think to be
understood in this place. Others rather expound this deadly wound of the
dissolution of the Empire in the West, Augustulu; being overcome by the Goths,
and the Empire in the West lying void until Charles the great, in whom this
wound was after a sort cured. Therefore although Antichrist be one of the heads
of this beast, yet seeing he is but one of the seven, and the holy Ghost
speaks of this Empire especially, as it was ruled by the sixth head, that is
to say, the Emperors; there is no necessity, nay, no probability that by the
head which was wounded we should understand Antichrist, especially seeing
Antichrist is afterward described at large, and that by these notes among
others, that he causes men to worship the former beast, whose mortal wound
was healed, verse. 13. and caused an Image to be made to the beast which had
the deadly wound, verse. 14. which as appears also by the Image, was the
Roman state under the Emperors; for thereof the Empire renewed is an Image.

7 But now suppose that Antichrist were this head which was wounded and cured
as he is not, yet how does it follow that therefore Antichrist shall faigne
himself to die and rise again, seeing he speaks not of a particular man's
death and resurrection, as the Papists imagine, but of the wounding and curing
of a state signified by the head. Neither speaks he of death and
resurrection, but of wounding and curing: neither is the wound and the cure
counterfeit and feigned, but the wound is truly inflicted and truly cured;
such, as was both the wound of the Roman Empire, either at the murder of
Julius Caesar, or death of Nero, or vanquishing of Augustulus; and also the
cure in Augustus, in Vespasian, and as Bellarminee elsewhere De translat.
imperi^ lib. 1. cap. 4.
says, in Carolus Magnus. If therefore neither Antichrist be spoken of in this
place, nor yet he who is spoken of, does faigne himself to die and rise
again; how is it proved from these words, that Antichrist shall faigne
himself to die and rise again?

Chap. 16. Of the kingdom and battles of Antichrist.
COncerning the kingdom and battles of Antichrist, we read four things in
the scriptures 1
says Bellarmine. 1. that Antichrist arising from a most base estate, shall by
fraud and deceit obtain the kingdom of the Jews. 2. that he shall fight
with three kings, to wit, of Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia, and having overcome
them, shall possess their kingdoms. 3. that he shall subdue seven other
kings, and by that means shall become the Monarch of the whole world. 4. that
with an innumerable army he shall persecute the Christians in the whole world:
and that this is the battle of Gog and Magog. Of all which seeing none
agrees to the Pope, it follows manifestly that he can by no means be called
Antichrist.

To these four points I will answer, first jointly to them all, and then
severally to every one. For whereas Bellarmine says, that these four things
are read in the scriptures concerning the kingdom and battles of Antichrist,
I answer, that not any one of these four is to be found in the scriptures,
and therefore that this argument as it is the last, so of least force, and that
his disputation standing now as it were on the tilt, he seems to draw of the
lees. Notwithstanding the three first he would feign father upon Daniel, as
though he in the 7. and 11. Chapters had prophesied such things concerning
Antichrist. But I answer, that these prophesies had, and according to Daniel
were to have their complement before the coming of the Messiah, and therefore
that the Papists may as well with the Jews expect the coming of their Messiah,
as still to expect the fulfilling of these things in their imaginary
Antichrist, the counterfeit Messiah of the Jews. Seeing as I said, these
prophesies were to be fulfilled before the coming of Christ: and seeing the
Jews do still wait for their Messiah, because with the Papists they will not
acknowledge these prophesies (which were to have their complement before the
coming of the Messiah) to have been fulfilled before the incarnation of
Christ. The occasion of which error of the Papists (whereat the Jews also do
stumble) has been an erroneous interpretation of some of the Fathers, who
understand whatsoever is spoken of the kingdom of the Seleucidae and Lagedae,
that is, the kingdom of Syria and Egypt (so far forth as it tyrannized over
the people of God the Jews) figured by the two legs of the Image, chap. 2.
and the fourth beast with ten horns, chap. 7. they understand (I say) as
spoken of the Roman Monarchy. And consequently whatsoever is spoken of the
little horn, chap. 7. 8. 11. whereby Antiochus Epiphanes is most plainly
described, they expound it of Antichrist.

2 But the learned of our times have made it clear, although the Papists shut
their eyes against the truth, that by the two legs of the Image, and by the
fourth beast, is not to be understood the Roman Empire, and by the little
horn not Antichrist properly, but Antiochus Epiphanes. For these things which
are recorded of the two legs, chap. 2. and of the fourth beast, chap. 7. do
not only sitly, but also properly and only agree to the kingdom of the
Seleucidae and Lagedae. And those things which are written of the little horn,
do wholly and properly belong to Antiochus Epiphanes, as the Papists themselves
cannot deny. Porphyry that learned, though malicious enemy of Christianity,
perceived Daniels prophesies in the 7. 8. 11. and 12. chapters, which the
Papists understand of Antichrist, so fully and perfectly to agree to Antiochus
Epiphanes, that he cauelled against the prophesies of Daniel; affirming that
they were written not before hand of Daniel, but after the fulfilling of them
by some one that lived in the times of Antiochus Epiphanes. For so Jerome
writes of him: Contre prophetam Danielem doudetimum librum scribit Porphyrius,
notans eum ab ipso cuius Praefatione in Daniel.
inscriptus est nomine esse compositum, sed a quodam qui temporibus Antiochi,
qui appellatus est Epiphanes, fuerit in Iudaea, and non tam Danielem ventura
dixisse, quam illum narrasse praeterita. And after, tanta enim dictorum fides
fuit, vt propheta incredulis hominibus non videatur futura dixisse, sed
narrasse praterita. So fully and plainly is Antiochus deciphred in the
prophecy of Daniel, that the author of that book seemed to Porphyrie, to
have written a story of Antiochus Epiphanes, rather then a prophecy.

3 As for Antichrist, he is not once mentioned or meant in all the prophecy of
Daniel the which I deliver, not as though I thought, that those things which
the papists expound concerning Antichrist, could not for the most part be fitly
applied to the Pope: for not only diverse protestants arguing from the papists
own grounds, have out of Daniel proved the Pope to be Antichrist: but also
the Jews, and namely R. Leui Gerson, whom Bellarmine cites, chap. 12.
expounds all those things in Daniel, chap. 7. and 11. which the papists
understand of Antichrist, as spoken of the Pope of Rome, whom he calls
another Pharao. And most true it is, that excepting Antiochus Epiphanes, these
prophecies do best fit the Pope of Rome. And therefore I willingly grant
that, which both old and new writers have a^med, that Antiochus Epiphanes may
be said to have been a type of Antichrist. A type I say, not in all and every
particular* (as though whatsoever can be said of Antiochus, the like may be
said of Antichrist) but in some principal matters, in respect whereof he is a
type. Solomon the King of peace, David the kingly Prophet, the high priests,
which by offering sacrifices made atonement for their brethren, Iosuae the
deliverer of the people, were types of Christ. And yet it were a ridiculous, if
not a blasphemous course, to apply to Christ whatsoever is recorded of Solomon,
David, the high Priests, or Iosuah. Neither is this without cause set down by
the Schoolmen as a rule of Divinity, that theologia symbolica non est
argumentutina. For those things which properly are spoken of Antiochus, cannot
properly be understood of Antichrist, (if at all) but only allegorically, and
allegories prove not: and that force which they seem to have in proving, is
not to prove the same particular, but the like: for allegories are similitudes
without notes of likeness. If therefore it were scarce a good argument in
divinity, from a type or allegory to prove the like, because similia
claudicant: then must it needs be a senseless argumentation from a similitude,
to conclude not the like, but the same particular, seeing nullum fimile, est
idem, no like is the selfsame. The principal matters which are recorded of
Antiochus are these: that he was (...) an enemy to God, and a persecuter of his
church, an aduancer of himself above or against every God; or as the Apostle
speaks, (...), one that was (...) ruled by no law, but his own will, having
a mouth speaking Dan. 7. 8.
presumptuous things, and such like: which as they are recorded of Antiochus,
so are they by the Apostles applied to Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and do most fitly and properly agree to the Pope. But if we shall apply to
Antichrist those things* which were proper to the person of Antiochus, and in
respect whereof he was not a type of Antichrist, and from thence shall infer
not the like, which were too much, for like things are not like in all things,
but the same particular which was proper to his person, we shall be
ridiculously absurd. As for example, if we shall say that Antichrist shall by
craft attain, not to his kingdom, but to the same kingdom of Syria, because
Antiochus did so: that Antichrist shall fight with the kings of Egypt, Libya and
Aethiopia, because in Bellarmines conceit Antiochus did so, and such like
particulars; then may we by as good right affirm, that Antichrist shall
immediately succeed in the kingdom of Syria his brother Seleucus Philopater,
for that is expressly noted Dan: 11. 21. and in his place, etc. and
consequently, that he shall be the son of Antiochus Magnus, that he shall be
an hostage at Rome before he be king, as Epiphanes was: that he shall make
three expeditions into Egypt, and in his return homeward every time shall he
afflict the land of Jury; especially in the second expedition, when being
hindered by the ships of Chittim, Joseph. antiq lib. 12. cap. 6.
that is the Romans, he wreaked his malice upon the Jews, chap. 11. 30. and
all the rest of the particulars, which properly belong to the person of
Antiochus, all which Daniel does so fully and particularly describe, that he
has seemed to some which knew not with what spirit he did write, to have
written a story rather then a prophecy of him. Chap. 7. 8. 11. 12.

4 But now let us examine severally the particular instances from whence
Bellarmine would prove that the Pope is not Antichrist. From the first he
argues thus: Antichrist arising from most base estate (ex humilimo loco) shall
by fraud and deceit obtain the kingdom of the Jews. The Pope of Rome arises
not from base estate, neither obtains the kingdom by fraud and deceit,
therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. The proposition is after his manner proved
out of Dan. 11. 21. And in his place shall stand a vile person, and they shall
not give unto him the honor of a king, but he shall come secretly, and obtain
the kingdom by fraud. I answer first, that Daniel speaks not of
Antichrist: and secondly, that this, proposition is not true of him of whom
Daniel speaks, and therefore that this allegatio^ is both impertinent and
untrue. That Daniel speaks not of Antichrist, it shall appear out of Daniel
himself. For Daniel speaks of him that immediately in the kingdom of Syria
succeeded Seleucus Philopater. For so he says, in his place, who was
described, verse. 20 shall stand up a vile person, meaning thereby Antiochus,
who, (...) is called (...), but properly as Polybius calls him (...), unto
whom that which is cited out of the 21. verse, and all the rest of the chapter
unto the end, does wholly and properly agree.

5 For the better understanding of this place and the rest of Daniel, we are to
know, that excepting one prophetical comfort of the resurrection, cha. 12. his
whole prophecy is of those things which happened within less then 700.
years, that is to say, from the taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, unto the
final destruction thereof by the Romans: and his prophecy concerns those
kingdoms which should in the mean time be in the world. And those are either
such terrestrial kingdoms unto whose tyranny the Jews were subject before
the coming of the Messiah: or else the spiritual kingdom of Christ, (the
Messiah and king of the Jews) before which all the former kingdoms were to
have an end. Da. 2. 4. (...). and 7. 11. and. 26 27. The time whereof, as also
of the desolatio^ of Jerusalem, is foretold, cap. 9. 25. 26. 27. according to
which time this Messiah and king, is by the wise men acknowledged to be born
Mat. 2* and his kingdom by John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, was said to
be at hand. Mat. 3. 2. and in like sort preached our Savior Christ, Mat. 1.
15. and his apostles, Ma. 10. 7. Christ also a little before his death confessed
that he was a king, and in his death his title was the king of the Jews. After
his death and resurrection he professes that all power was given him in heaven
and in earth, and thereupon ascends into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of God: which is noted in Daniel, chap. 7. 13. that after Christ the son
of man was come into the world, he went unto the ancient of days, and to him
was given power, glory, and kingdom, that all people, nations and tongues
should serve him. Of both these sorts of kingdoms Daniel entreats, chap. 2.
and 7. And as touching the terrestrial kingdoms which tyrannized over the
Jews before the coming of Christ in the flesh, they are noted to be four:
the first of the Babylonians, the second of the Medes and Persians, the third
of the Macedonians, the fourth of the Seleucidae and Lagidae. And of these
four Daniel prophecieth, either jointly of all together, or severally of some
of them. In the second and seventh chapters, of them all together, resembling
them in the second chapter by an Image, the golden head whereof figureth the
Babylonians, the breast and arms of silver the Medes and Persians, the belly
and sides of brass, represent the Macedonians, his legs of iron, and his
feet, part of iron, and part of clay, resemble the Seleucidae and Lagidae: and
in the seventh chapter, the same four kingdoms are figured by 4. beasts, the
Babylonians by a Lion, the Medes and Persians by a Bear, the Macedonians by a
Leoparde, the Seleucidae and Lagidae, by the beast with ten horns.

6 Severally he prophecieth, either of the Babylonian Monarchy, or of the rest.
His prophecies concerning the Babylonian Monarchy, which also were fulfilled in
his time, are set down chap. 4. and 5. Of the three other, and especially of
the last (because that especially was to afflict the people of the Jews) he
prophecieth again in the 8. and 11. chapters. In the 11. chapter, to omit the
rest, the Angel promises, verse. 2. Dan. 11. 2.
to declare the truth; that is, the true and proper sense and meaning of the
aforesaid visions concerning the three kingdoms which yet remained, recorded
chap. 2. 7. 8. And first as touching the kingdom of the Medes and Persians, he
mentions but four Kings, because the rest did nothing memorable against
Judah, verse. 2. In the third verse he prophecieth of Alexander Verse. 3.
the great, the mighty Monarch of the Graecians, and of the division of that
Empire into sour principal parts, verse. 4. Verse. 4.
which before was foretold, chap. 8. 22. Of which division Jerome writes thus;
Quo (sc. Alexandro) tricesimo secundo aetatis In Dan. 8.
suae anno mortuo in Babylone, surrexerunt pro eo quatuor duces eius, qui sibi
imperium diuiserunt. Aegyptum enim Ptolemeus Lagi filius tenuit, etc. Alexander
being dead in Babylon, in the 32. year of his age, there arose in his stead
four of his captains, who divided the Empire among them. For Ptolemy Lagides
held Egypt. Philip who also is called Arideus, the brother of Alexander held
Macedonia. Seleucus Nicanor, held Syria and Babylon, and all the kingdoms of
the East. Antigonus ruled over Asia minor. These four kingdoms were by
mutual conflicts reduced to two under Seleucus Nicanor, and Ptolemy Lagides,
from whom did spring the kingdom of the Lagidae and kings of Egypt on the
South: and of the Seleucidae or kings of Syria and Babylon in the North. These
two used to contend for Iudaea, which lying in the midst betwixt them, became a
prey to the conquerers, and was grievously afflicted by them. These two are the
two legs and feet of the Image, chap. 2. and also the fourth beast with
ten horns, chap. 7. for of these two kingdoms there are ten kings
reckened, which tyrannized over the people of the Jews, especially the tenth
horn; that is, Antiochus Epiphanes, who arose in the end of the kingdom of
this beast, namely, over the Jews, chap. 8. 23. For in his time the people of
God were freed from the tyranny of the Seleucidae, by Judas Macchabaeus.

7 These ten horns which successively tyrannized over Iewry, are mentioned
in order in this 11. chapter. First Ptolemy Lagides (the first horn) who is
called verse. 5. the king of Verse. 5. Joseph. antiq. lib. 12. cap. 1.
the South, that is of Egypt, who shortly after he had gotten Egypt, invaded
Judea, and surprised the city of Jerusalem on a Sabbath. Secondly, Seleucus
Nicanor (the second horn) the mightiest of the Princes of Alexander, as he is
described in the same fifth verse. For although Ptolemy for a time held Iudaea,
yet after it was agreed upon that Seleucus should have Syria and therein
Iudaea. Him succeeded Antiochus Soter (the third horn) so called, because he
expelled the Frenchmen out of Asia: whose son Antiochus Theos (the fourth
horn) to confirm a league betwixt him and Ptolemy Philadelphus King of Egypt,
took in marriage Bernice, the daughter of Ptolemy Verse 6.
Philadelphus, according to that prophecy of the two legs, consisting of
iron and claie mingled together, that they should mingle themselves together in
the seed of man, but they should not cleave together, even as iron cannot be
mixed with claie, chap. 2. 43. for even so it follows verse. 6. For howsoever
they had combined themselves together by marriage, yet this conjunction held
not, and they which had any hand in it shortly after died. For Antiochus Theos
had a former wife yet living named Laodice, by whom he had Seleucus Callinicus,
and Antiochus Hierax. This Laodice to revenge this despite, poisoned her
husband Antiochus Theos: her son Seleucus Callinicus (the fifth horn) slew
Bernice, her child, and her train: and Ptolemy Philadelphus shortly after
this marriage ended his life. But in his place, verse. 7. did arise his son
Ptolemy Euergetes (the sixth Verse. 7.
horn) proceeding from the same roots with Bernice (that is, her brother) who
to avenge the death of his sister, made war with Seleucus Callinicus, and
overcame him, and having caused himself to be crowned king of Syria, returned
with much spoil, and many captives into Egypt; and Ver. 8. and 9 Polyb. li. 5.
Appian. in Syria. Joseph. l. contr. Appian. Verse. 10.
being stronger then Seleucus Callinicus, he held the dominion of Syria for
many years. But the sons of Seleucus Callinicus, to wit Seleucus Ceraunus,
and Antiochus Magnus, raised war, verse. 5. 10. First Seleucus Ceraunus
against Ptolemy Euergetes, and they both being dead about the same time,
Antiochus Magnus against Ptolemy Philopater, the son of Euergetes. Of him (I
mean Antiochus Magnus) the Angel prophecieth unto the 20. verse: to wit, of
his battles first with Ptolemy Philopator, and those sometimes prosperous,
whereby he recovered Syria, verse. 10. sometime adverse, whereby he lost the
same again, verse. 11. 12. Whereupon Ptolemy being list up becomes the 7.
horn, and kills many of the Jews, for which he shall not prosper, verse
12. After, of his battles and victories against Ptolemy Epiphanes son of
Philopater, verse. 13. 14. 15. Of Verse. 13. 14. 15. Verse. 16.
his afflicting the land thereby that is Iewry, verse. 16. as being the eight
hour: of his giving his daughter Cleopatra to Ptolemy Epiphanes to mingle the
iron and the clay (according to the prophecy, chapter 2.) therein pretending
peace and friendship, but intending by her his destruction, although in vain,
she joining with her husband against her father, verse Verse. 17.
17. Of his expeditions into the Islands of Greece, and conquering them. Of his
wars with the Romans, which brought shame upon him, they making him to sit
down with dishonorable conditions, verse. 18. Of his ignominious Verse. 18.
Verse. 19.
end, namely in a Barbarian tumult for sacrilege, verse 19. In his place
succeeds his son Seleucus Philopater (the ninth horn) one who did pill and
poll his subjects by great tributes and exactions, and sent to empty and
exhaust the treasury and temple of Jerusalem: and having set free his brother
Antiochus Epiphanes, who was an hostage at Rome, and in stead of him sent his
own son Demetrius, is shortly after poisoned by Heliodorus, suborned by
Antiochus Epiphanes, verse. 20. Verse. 20. Ver. 21.


8 Now in his place (says the Angel, verse. 21.) shall stand a vile person,
etc. that is, in the kingdom of Syria, a vile person shall succeed Seleucus
Philopator as the tenth horn, which cannot be understood properly of any other
but of Antiochus Epiphanes, who in the rest of the chapt. to the end, is most
fully and plainly described. For first he entreats of his coming unto the
kingdom: secondly of his affairs afterward: and lastly of his end. Of his
coming unto the kingdom he says, that having no right of succession (for
Demetrius was the heir) nor lawful election, by flattery and fraud attained
to the kingdom, pretending himself (as Richard the third did) to be the tutor
and protector of the young Prince Demetrius, and Administrator of the kingdom
during the minority and absence of Demetrius, who had been sent in his stead
as an hostage to Rome. Wherefore Daniel in this place speaks not of
Antichrist, unless we may say, that Antichrist was to be the immediate
successor of Seleucus Philopater, which is ridiculous; yea, and Bellarmine
himself confesses elsewhere, that in this latter part of the chapter, Daniel
speaks of Antiochus literally, who was a figure of Antichrist. This place
therefore does not prove Lib. 3. cap. 21.
Bellarmines proposition, namely, that Antichrist arising from most base
estate* should by fraud obtain the kingdom of the Jews. Neither does this
proposition sit Antiochus, who is here described; neither is it agreeable to
the description itself. For neither did Antiochus arise from most base estate,
for he was son to Antiochus the great, and brother to Seleucus Philopater:
Neither does Daniel say so, but only that (...) a vile or despised person
should succeed Seleucus Philopator; which is to be understood not in respect
of his base estate and condition, but of his base manners and vile conditions,
in regard whereof the holy Ghost calls him, although a great Kings son,
vile and contemptible. And so is every wicked man, though mighty in the world,
a vile and despised person in the eyes of the godly, Psalm. 15. 4. The wicked
man is vile in his eyes. And as Solomon says: The wicked man is an
abomination unto the righteous. Such an one was Haman in the eyes of Mardoche,
and Iehoram Pro. 21. 27. Hest. 3. 2. King. 3. 13. 14.
the wicked king of Israel, in the eyes of Elizeus. So that it was not the base
condition, but the vices and base conditions of Antiochus that made him vile,
in respect where of Polybius calls him (...). So is Seleucus Philopater,
verse. 20. in the vulgar translation called Uilissimus, because of his base
polling of his people, and not because he did arise from base estate.
Wherefore it is evident, that Daniel speaks not of Antichrist in this place,
and that he of whom he speaks, did not arise from most base estate, as
Bellarmine would bear us in hand; unless it be a most base estate to be the
son of a mighty King, who for his greatness was called Antiochus the great.

9 But will you see with one view the absurdity of this Popish argument. He
proves from this place, that Antichrist shall arise from most base estate, and
shall by deceit obtain the kingdom of the Jews. But (say I) Daniel speaks
not of Antichrist, but of Antiochus Epiphanes. Yea but Antiochus was a type of
Antichrist. Be it that he was a type not only in some other things, but also
in this particular: yet from hence we must infer not the self same
particular which is proper to the person of Antiochus, but the like, and that
by way of allegory only, which were but a slight argument to prove so
weighty a controversy in divinity. Whereas therefore he infers from hence
not the like (viz. as Antiochus obtained his kingdom by fraud: so shall
Antichrist obtain his) but the very same particular, (viz. as Antiochus
obtained the kingdom of the Jews, so shall Antichrist obtain the same
kingdom of the Jews) his argument is ridiculous: and yet this is not all the
absurdity of this argument: for when as from the likeness of Antichrist to
his type, he would prove that Antichrist shall arise from base estate, this
assertion is not true, of the type it self. Yea but Jerome says, that this
place may better be understood of Antichrist, Qui consurgere habet de mo^ica
gente id est de populo Iudaeorum, etc. Who is to arise of a small nation, that
is, the people of the Jews, etc. and Daniel compares Antichrist because of
his base beginning to the little horn, chap. 7. I do not deny but that
Antichrists beginning might be base; but yet neither can the testimony of
Jerome, neither does that allegation out of Daniel, prove it. For Ieromes
testimony in this case, if it ought to be of weight with us, it must be taken
either as a prophecy, or else as a sit exposition of Daniels prophecy, as I
have said heretofore. But Jerome was no Prophet: neither does he sitly expound
Daniel, who speaks plainly, not of Antichrist, but of the successor of
Seleucus Philopator. And it is a wonder that Jerome one of the most learned of
the Fathers, should in so easy a matter be ouerseene. For seeing he
confesses that the former part of the chapter is to be expounded of the
Seleucidae, and that in the 20. verse is described Seleucus Philopator, for so
he says on those words (Et stabit in loco eius vilissimus) Seleucum dicit
cognomento Philopatorem, filium magni Antiochi, he speaks of Seleucus,
surnamed Philopator, the son of Antiochus the great.

It is therefore most plain, that when Daniel says, and in his place shall
stand a vile person; he speaks of the next successor of Seleucus Philopator,
meaning Antiochus; even as in the 20. verse after he had spoken of Antiochus
Magnus, he says, and in his place shall stand up a sender forth of an
extortioner, meaning Seleucus. Neither does Daniel say any where, that
Anchrist, or he of whom he speaks, shall arise of a small nation, meaning
thereby the Jews: that which he speaks de modico populo, verse. 23. is to be
understood properly as Jerome himself expounds it, according to the literal,
that is, the proper sense, of the small company wherewith Antiochus surprised
Egypt: neither can there be any such allegorical sense, as he seems to frame.
Neither does Daniel by the little horn mean any other but Antiochus Epiphanes,
who may not unfitly in diverse things be said to have been a type of Antichrist.
For the terrible beast with ten horns, does not signify the Roman state as
the Papists would have it, but the kingdom of the Seleucidae and Lagidae: and
by the ten horns, not the ten Kings whereof John speaks, Apoc. 17. among
whom the Roman Empire was to be divided; but ten of these Kings, viz. three
Lagidae, and seven Seleucidae, which tyrannized or ruled over the people of
God. The tenth, that is to say, the last of them that had dominion over Iudaea
was, not Antichrist, but Antiochus Epiphanes, who in cruelty toward the
people of God surpassed all that went before him.

10 Which I speak not as though this exposition did much hinder our assertion;
for others which have held the same, have applied those things which are spoken
of the little horn, unto the Pope. And surely if this fourth beast were the
Roman state, and the horns the rulers thereof, and the tenth or last horn
Antichrist: then is it hereby very likely that the Pope is Antichrist, seeing
hitherto he is the last that has ruled in Rome, and shall according to the
Papists own conceit continue to the end. But the truth is, that the
description of the fourth beast does not agree to the Romans, but to the
kingdom of the Seleucidae. For this fourth beast was a kingdom which was to
have an end before the coming of the Messiah and his kingdom, chap. 7. verse.
11. 26. 27. So had the kingdom of the Seleucidae, so had not the Romans. 2.
This fourth beast warred with the Jews, tyrannized over them, and hindered
their religion and worship of God at Jerusalem, not only before the coming of
Christ, but also before the purging of the temple, and restitution of religion
by Judas Macchabaeus, cha. 7. ver. 25. 26. 27. So did the Seleucidae, so did
not the Romans. 3 Of the fourth beast there were but ten horns, that is
Princes that ruled over Iudaea, which is most true of the Seleucidae and
Lagidae; but of the Romans, after they had once obtained the dominion of Jury,
there were many more then ten that ruled over the holy land. If any say the
Roman Empire is figured Apoc. 17. by a beast with ten horns, I answer, that
the ten horns whereof John speaks, Apo. 17. 12. are ten kings, among whom the
Roman Empire was to be divided, who succeeded not one another in the same
kingdom, but were rulers of so many several provinces or kingdoms at the same
time: but these ten horns tyrannized over the same kingdom of the Jews
successively, as they are particularly described, chap. 11. And further, he
that in Daniel is supposed by the Papists to be Antichrist, is one of the ten
horns, but in John not. 4. that which is spoken in Daniel of the tenth horn,
does fitly and wholly agree to Antiochus Epiphanes, who was the tenth and last
king of that kingdom, that ruled over Iudaea, but the same things cannot in
like sort be applied to the tenth Prince of the Romans. 5. By conference of
that which is written of the little horn, chap. 7. with those things which
are more plainly recorded of Antiochus, chap. 8. 23. etc. and chap. 11. 21.
etc. to the end of the chapter, it appears evidently, that he and no other is
that little horn. For whereas Daniel in the 7. chap had described 3. kingdoms
besides the Babylonian, which should tyrannize over the Jews by three beasts:
in the 8. chap. he figureth the same 3. kingdoms by 2. beasts. For the
kingdom of the Medes and Persians which before was resembled by a Bear, is
here signified by the Ram with 2. horns: the kingdom of the Macedonians and
Seleucidae, which before were represented by two several beasts, are here
figured by the Goat Bucke, containing them both; for both the Macedonians and
Seleucid^ were Iauan, that is, the Greeks, Daniel. 8. 21. And as in the 7.
chapter, the kingdom of the Macedonians was signified by a Leopard which had
four heads: so here it is said, that after the great horn signifying
Alexander the great was broken off, there grew four horns in stead thereof,
meaning the four Princes among whom the Macedonian Monarchy was divided. The
fourth kingdom figured chap. 7. by the beast with 10. horns, is here signified
to be that kingdom which was chiefly erected by one of those four horns,
namely Seleucus, that is, the kingdom of the Seleucidae: and from him, namely
in the end of their kingdom over the Jews, came forth a little horn, that
is, the king with the impudent face, chap. 8. verse. 9. 23. which is Antiochus
Epiphanes, who was the tenth horn of the fourth beast. And in the eleventh
chapter without figures of beasts the same three kingdoms are described, the
same ten horns reckned up, the same tenth horn more particularly deciphred.
6. The people pusht at and oppressed by these horns, is Daniels people, the
people of the Jews yet remaining and inhabiting in Tzeby, that is in Jury and
Jerusalem, not only before the desolation of Jerusalem, but also before the
reformation under Judas Macchabaeus. But Antichrist, if we will believe the
Papists, shall be the counterfeit Messiah of the Jews, neither shall he
afflict the Jews, but by them the Christians, and that in the end of the
world, etc. 7. The times of afflicting the people of God assigned to the
little horn, do precisely agree to the persecution under Antiochus. But these
times are diversely to be reckened in respect either of the beginning, or the
end of the account. For as touching the beginning, we reckon either from the
defection and revolt of the people wrought by Menelaus the priest, in the year
142. the sixth month, and sixth day, unto the restitution of Religion, in the
year 148. and 25. day of the ninth month, and this space is 2300. days,
(that is 6. months, 3. years, 18. days) foretold Dan. 8. 14. or else we
reckon from the pollutio^ of the temple, and erection of the new altar, and
abolishing of the daily sacrifice, to wit, in the 145. year of the Seleucidae,
on the 15. of Casleu, diversely in respect of the end, viz. either to the
restitution begun by Judas Machabaeus, Joseph. antiq lib. 12. cap 6.
in the 25. of the same month Casleu, in the year 148. which space is called a
time and times, and parcel of time, that is, three years and ten days: or
if we read a time and times 1. Mac. 1. 57.
and half a time, we may reckon unto the time of that victory which
Macchabaeus and the Jews had against the Armies 1. Mac. 14: 52.
of Antiochus, whereby his instauration of Religion was secured and confirmed,
and Antiochus his Armies were expelled Dan 7. 25. Dan. 127. De bello Iud. lib.
1. cap. 1.
out of Jury, which as Josephus notes, was done after three years and six
months: or if we reckon to the time that Antiochus having heard of these and
some other overthrows of his Armies after his own discomsiture and slight
from Persepolis, was stricken by the hand of God, and promised all good things
to the Jews, it is 1290. days; if Dan. 12. 11. 12.
to his death, 1335. By all which considerations, it appears that Daniel by
the fourth beast understands not the Roman Monarchy, but the kingdom of the
Seleucidae, and Lagidae: nor by the tenth horn Antichrist properly, but
Antiochus Epiphanes.

11 Thus much therefore may suffice to have spoken of his proposition: now let
us briefly consider of the assumption. The Pope (says he) arises not from
base estate, neither by deceit obtains his kingdom. As touching the former I
answer, that although it were false of Antiochus, yet is it true of the Pope,
whether you consider the mean estate of the first Bishops of Rome, or the base
birth and obscure parentage of diverse Popes. For that which Bellarmine
alleges in commendation of the Primitive religion, and ancient church of
Rome, is but a vain flourish, nothing appertaining to this purpose. 2. That
the Pope has not attained to his kingdom by fraud and deceit, Bellarmine had
rather it should be taken for granted, then once called in question: and
therefore cunningly passes it over with silence. But if this were set down in
the scriptures as a badge of Antichrist, to attain to his greatness by fraud
and deceit, I would make it manifest, that never in any estate more deep
policy, and devilish deceit has been used then in the Sea of Rome, whereby
they have obtained their supremacy, and maintained their sovereignty over the
Christian world. Yea their whole religion of Popery and mystery of iniquity,
seems to be naught else but a pack of policy devised by worldly men to
deisie the Pope, and to enrich the popish clergy. For whereunto else I beseech
you tended their Indulgences and Pardons, their Iubelies, their doctrines of
merits and supererogation, their purgatory, their trentalls of Masses, and
prayer for the dead, their pilgrimages and adoration of Saints, Images, and
relics, their licenses and dispensations, their thunderboults of
excommunication, their oathe of allegiance and fealty imposed on Princes and
potentates, subjection to the Pope enforced upon all sorts, as absolutely
necessary to salvation, their wilful deprauations of scriptures, forgeries of
Canons, counterfeit donations of Constantine and others, to prove the double
supremacy of the Pope? Whereunto tended his often maintaining of quarelles among
Christian Princes, his wars enjoined them for the recovery of the holy land,
but that they being by these means weakened, might be the more easily subdued
unto himself: his Croisades and promises of heaven, to all those that sight
such battles as like him? Have not their clergy come to their riches, and
the Pope to his greatness by these and such like means? But because the coming
to his greatness by fraud and deceit, is not set down in the scriptures as a
note of Antichrist, unless it be by way of type and allegory in Antiochus, I
will therefore let it pass: only let me put you in mind that the prophecy
of Peter in the former respects is performed in the Pope and clergy of Rome,
who by fained words make merchandise of men's souls through covetousness. And
this was Bellarmine his first instance.

12 His second argument is thus to be framed. Antichrist shall war with
three Kings, to wit of Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia; and having overcome them,
shall possess their kingdoms. But the Pope of Rome has not warred at any
time (he should say, shall not war, and that is more then he is able to
prove) with the Kings of Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia, neither having vanquished
them, has possessed their kingdoms, therefore the Pope of Rome is not
Antichrist. And in this argument Belarmine does so greatly please himself,
that after an insulting manner he breaks forth into these bragges: Hoc
autem maxim refellit insaniam haereticorum, etc. This especially refuteth the
madness of heretics, who make the Pope Antichrist. For let them say if they
can, when the Pope has killed the Kings of Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia, etc.
What would this Thraso do think you, if he had any good argument against us,
that thus insulteth upon a mere dotage? For where does the scripture say, that
Antichrist shall sight with the Kings of Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia, and that
having vanquished them, he shall possess their kingdoms? Forsooth in the 7.
and 11. of Daniel. In the 7. chapter Daniel speaking of the ten horns of the
fourth beast, he says, verse. 8. I considered the horns, and lo the last
horn came up, a little one among them, and three of the former horns were
plucked up before it. And after, verse. 24. expounding the same words, he
says: And the ten horns are ten Kings of that kingdom, after whom shall
arise the last (namely of the ten) diverse from the rest, and he shall abase
three Kings.

But this allegation is impertinent. For I have showed that this fourth beast
is the kingdom of the Seleucidae and Lagidae; that the ten horns are those
ten Kings of that kingdom which tyrannized or ruled over Iewry; that the
tenth or last of them that tyrannized over the Jews, was Antiochus Epiphanes,
who is therefore called little before his coming to the crown, because of his
unlikeness to be King. First because he was the third and youngest son of
Antiochus Magnus, his elder brother Seleucus having also a son called
Demetrius. Secondly, because he was to be a perpetual hostage at Rome. For
when as other hostages, which Antiochus the great gave to the Romans, were to
be changed every third year, he was to be a perpetual hostage. And thirdly,
because of his vile and base conditions. Now whereas it is said that three
horns were to be plucked up before him, we are by those three horns to
understand three kings, not of others, and those also diverse kingdoms, as of
Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia; but three kings that successively had ruled before
him in the same kingdom usurped over the Jews, as being expressly called three
former horns, viz. of the ten, verse 8. Yea but Antiochus was a type of
Antichrist. It cannot be proved that he was a type in this point, or if he were
a type in this, we may not infer the same particular as Bellarmine does, for
then those three kings mentioned in Daniel, must be revived again, that
Antichrist may make them away: but the like might be inferred, viz. that as
Antiochus Epiphanes to make himself a way to the kingdom, did make away his
brother and two others that went before him: so it is not unlike, but that this
should be an Antichristian practice. It is well known that Gregory the
seventh, who resembled Antiochus in many things, to make himself a way to the
Papacy, made away six of his predecessors by poison. And it is an ordinary
practice among the Cardinals of Rome that aspire to the Papacy, now and then
to minister an Italian Fig to their Popes: that you may not marvel that
there have been nine Popes in the time of Queen Elizabeth's reign, of whom the
three next predecessors of the present Pope Clement 8. were so suddenly plucked
up before him, namely Urbanus 7. Gregory 14. and Innocent 9. that I suppose
their names have been heard of few among us.

13 But the 11. of Daniel, perhaps will prove Bellarmines assertion. That
allegation will prove nothing but Bellarmines wilful blindness. He says
that in the 11. chapter verse. 43. Daniel explaneth who those three Kings are.
He shall stretch out his hand over countries, and the land of Egypt shall not
escape, and he shall pass through Libya and Aethiopia, as Bellarmine reads,
but according to the Hebrew, the Lubim and Cushim, that is, the Libyans and
Aethiopians shall be in his passages or voyages. Whence Bellarmine infers,
that Antichrist shall kill three kings, viz. of Egypt, Libya, and Aethiopia.

Answer. 1. Daniel speaks not of Antichrist but of Antiochus, as I have
manifestly proved. 2. although Antiochus were granted to have been a type of
Antichrist herein, yet the same particular which is proper to the person of
Antiochus, may not be applied to Antichrist. For then we must dream that the
world and the kingdoms thereof, must be brought again just to the same pass
wherein they were when Antiochus reigned, and the same kings to be revived; but
something like might be applied, that as Antiochus, in Bellarmines conceit,
suppressed three kings, so Antichrist should be a suppressor of kings, which is
true of the Pope: who besides diverse kings deposed by his means, has also
depressed four Emperors at the least, as Bellarmine himself confesses. 3.
Daniel in this place is so far from mentioning three kings slain by
Antichrist according to Bellarmines conceit, that he neither speaks of
Antichrist, nor of three kings, nor of the killing of any one king, but only
of Antiochus his spoiling of Egypt, having in his company the Libyans and
Aethiopians. Whether therefore this argument of Bellarmine does reprove our
madness, or rather prove his folly, let any indifferent arbiter be Judge. Now
if Jerome or any other of the Fathers have let fall any such thing, we are to
esteem it as an excrement of theirs, which we are to pass by, rather then
with the Cacouorae the Papists, to gather it up as Cacouora, auis quaedam est
apud Indos, quae alterius auis asse^ cla est: cuius vescatur excreme^tis.
Scalig. de subtle.
fit food for their souls.

14 And the like answer we frame unto his third argument, which is not
grounded upon the scriptures; but upon the bare conjectures of some of the
Fathers. For where is there in all the scriptures any word of this which
Bellarmine says he reads in the scriptures, that Antichrist shall subdue
seven other kings, and by that means shall become the Monarch of the whole
world? Forsooth Lactantius and Ireneus say so. But I never took their
writings before to be the scriptures. Why then Jerome says so upon Daniel 11.
24. where Daniel speaks of Antiochus his dealings in Egypt, that he did that
which his forefathers never did; Nullus Iudaeorum absque Antichristo in tot^
vnquam or be regnauit. These be Bellarmines scriptures. But where do the
scriptures indeed say that Antichrist shall subdue seven of the ten Kings?
Nay, the contrary may rather be gathered out of the scriptures. The ten
horns whereof Daniel speaks, were ten Kings which successively reigned
over Iudaea, as has been showed. And although Antiochus Epiphanes might help
away three of his next predecessors, yet he could not hurt the other six (for
there were but nine besides himself) which were all dead and gone before he
came to years. Yea, but this opinion of the Fathers is plainly enough deduced
out of Apoc. 17. 12. where we read, and the ten horns which thou saw,
are ten Kings; these have one mind, and they shall give their power and
authority to the beast.

No marvel though some of the Papists call the scripture a nose of wax,
seeing they can frame and fashion it at their pleasure, and give unto it what
sense they list. Does John speak of Antichrist his either killing three, or
subduing seven? Or does John speak of the same ten horns whereof Daniel
does? Daniel speaks of ten Kings which were to be dead and gone before the
coming of the Messiah: John speaks of such as in his time had not yet
attained to their kingdom. verse 12. Daniel speaks of ten Kings of the
Seleucidae and Lagidae which succeeded one an other. John, of ten Kings among
whom the Roman Empire was to be divided, who also were to have their kingdom
together with the beast. Daniel tells us what the little horn which was one
of the ten, should do to three of the other nine, without mention of the
rest, John shows what all the ten horns should do to Antichrist, which is
none of the ten horns, but one of the heads of the beast. If therefore
Bellarmine can prove from hence that these are the same ten horns spoken of
in Daniel, and that Antichrist shall kill three of them, and subdue the other
seven, he may hope to prove any thing,

But what other scriptures has he? forsooth Chrysostom and Cyrill. For
Chrysostom on 2 Thessalonians. 2. says, that Antichrist shall be a Monarch, and
shall succeed the Romans in the Monarchy, as the Romans succeeded the
Greeks; the Greeks succeeded the Persians, and they the Assyrians. And Cyrill
says, that Antichrist shall obtain the Monarchy Catech. 15
which was the Romans. I answer, that for substance these Fathers held the
truth. For what Monarch has there been in the West these five or six hundred
years, besides the Pope, who calls himself King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth, who has as they say,
the double Monarchy both of spiritual and temporal power; who forsooth is Lord
of the whole earth, in so much that he takes upon him authority to dispose of
the new found world. And that he succedeth the Emperors in the Alexand. 6.
government of Rome, as it becomes Antichrist, who is the second beast, Apoc.
13. and the 7. head of the beast, Apoc. 17. whereof the Emperor was the sixth,
I shall not need to prove.

15 There remains the fourth argument. Antichrist shall persecute with an
innumerable army the Christians throughout the world, and this is the battle
of God and Magog: but this agrees not to the Pope, therefore the Pope is not
Antichrist. I answer to the proposition, that no such thing can be proved out
of the scripture. He alleges Ezech. 38. and 39. and Apoc. 20. 7. 8. 9. 10.
But Ezechiel speaks not of Antichrist, nor of the persecution of the
Christian Church by him. But having foretold chapter 37. the restitution of the
Jews from the Babylonian captivity, and also prophesied of the coming of
Christ; in those chapters he foretells of the afflictions and troubles which
the people of the Jews should sustain in the mean time, to wit, after their
return out of captivity, before the coming of the Messiah, and withal,
denounces the judgments of God against the Seleucidae, who were the kings of
Syria and Asia minor, and their adherents, who should be the chief enemies of
the church, and people of the Jews after their return. For Gog signifies
Asia minor, having that name from Gyges the King thereof. Magog is Hierapolis
the chief seat of Idolatry in Syria, built by the Scythians, and from them
has that name. So that by the land of Magog, we are to understand Syria, and
by Gog, Asia minor. And the rest of the peoples that Plin. lib. 5. cap. 23.
are named in Ezechiel, were such as assisted the Seleucidae (who were the
kings of Syria, and Asia minor) in their wars, either as their subjects, or
as their friends, or as their mercenary soldiers. And for as much as the
princes and people of Syria and Asia minor, were the most grievous enemies of
the Jews, by Ad Tremell. and Iun. in Ezech. 38. and 39.
whom they sustained the chiefest calamities after their return before the
coming of Christ: therefore by an usual speech in the Jewish language, the
mortal and deadly enemies of the church, are called Gog and Magog. And in this
sense John the Divine uses these names, Gog and Magog, to signify the enemies
of the church, meaning not the same enemies whereof Ezechiel speaks, but the
like enemies of the Church, which should afflict the true Christians, as Gog
and Magog afflicted the Jews. Neither does John in this place speak of the
persecution of Antichrist properly, but of Satan (after he was loosed) his
inciting the enemies of the Church to battle, and of Gods judgments against
them, signified by fire. And so much shall suffice to have answered to this
argument. For after so long a Treatise I will not trouble the Reader with the
ten several opinions which Bellarmine recites concerning Gog and Magog,
neither yet with any further answer to his cauillations and exceptions against
some of the arguments of diverse Protestants, which he thought were more easy
to answer: seeing in the former book I have sufficiently cleared those
arguments whereby the Pope is more evidently proved to be Antichrist: neither
is the controversy betwixt us, whether every argument that has been produced
by every one, does necessarily conclude the Pope to be Antichrist. That
discourse therefore being rather personal then real, I let it pass.

Chap. 17. Being the conclusion of the whole Treatise.
Having therefore both by sufficient arguments manifestly proved that the Pope
is 1.
Antichrist, and by evidence of truth maintained the same assertion against the
arguments of the Papists: let us now consider in the last place, what
conclusions may upon this doctrine be necessarily inferred for our further use.
For first, if this be true, that the Pope is Antichrist, as I have proved; and
the church of Rome that now is, Babylon the Synagogue of Antichrist: then all
other controversies betwixt us and them, may be easily decided: their chief
ground being the authority of their church, and of the Sea Apostolic. For
then it is to be presumed, that those doctrines which are peculiar to the Pope
and Church of Rome, are the errors of Antichrist; yea, and as the Apostle
calls 1. Tim. 4. 2.
them, doctrines of devils.

2 If the Romish church be Antichristian, then our separation from it is
warranted, yea, commanded by the word of God, and all returning to it
forbidden. Apoc. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, least pertaking with her in
her sins, you partake also in her punishment.

3 If the Pope be Antichrist, then those that embrace that religion, and join
themselves to that church, acknowledging the Pope to be their head, receive the
mark of the beast. And those that do receive the beasts mark (especially
after he is revealed) shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and shall be
punished with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.
Apoc 14. 9. This therefore must serve as a serious admonition, and necessary
caveat both to reclaim all tractable Papists, and to confirm all wavering and
unstayed Protestants. The former, as they tender their salvation, so to come
out of Babylon: The latter, as they will avoid their endless confusion, to keep
out of Babylon. For not only to retain the mark of the beast wilfully after
he is discovered, but to revolt from the profession of the truth unto
Antichristian religion: it also is a fearful sign of reprobation. For it is
impossible that the elect should finally be seduced by Antichrist. Math. 24.
24. And the Apostle Paul observes, that Antichrist shall effectually deceive
them that perish with all deceitfulnes of iniquity, because they have not
received the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies, that al they
might be damned which believed not the truth, but delighted in
unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. 12. Whereupon Chrysostom also writing,
has these words, (...), Antichrist prevails with Castawayes or such as
perish. And Jerome likewise, Ad Algasia^ quest. 11.
They shall be seduced (says he) by the lies of Antichrist, who are prepared
unto perdition. But on the other side, those which renounce the Pope and church
of Rome, and rise sro^ the grave of Antichristianisme and Popery, and follow
our Savior Christ in the sincere profession of the truth, Blessed and holy are
they for they having part in the first resurrection, shall be freed from the
second Apoc. 20. 6
death: And howsoever they are esteemed of the followers of Antichrist, as
heretics and schismatickes, which are to be persecuted with fire and faggot,
yet are they happy in their life whiles they join with Christ against
Antichrist, for such are called, elect and faithful, and redeemed out of the
world; and they are also blessed in their death, dying in the quarrel of
Christ Apoc. 17. 14.
against Antichrist: for of those specially does the holy Ghost speak, Apoc.
14. 13. Blessed are those that dye in the Apoc. 14. 4.
Lord, etc.

4 If the Pope be Antichrist, then those that are found to be resolute
Antichristians, that is recusant Papists; but especially Jesuits and Seminary
Priests, which are sent to reconcile men unto the Pope and Church of Rome, that
is, (as has been proved) to set on them the mark of the beast, and
consequently to brand them to destruction, and all such as seek to pervert and
seduce others, ought not to be favored or spared in a Christian common wealth.
First, because they are limbs of Antichrist, and therefore by the commandment
of God, we should do to them as they have done to us. Apoc. 18. 6. Secondly,
because they are enemies to God, and traitors to Christian Princes. They are
enemies to God, not only because themselves are Idolaters, and consequently
such as hate God, Exodus 20. 5. but also because they labor to withdraw others
from the true worship of God, unto superstition and idolatry, and therefore in
no case ought to be spared, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 8. They are traitors also to Christian
Princes, being sworn vassals to the Pope their capital enemy. For he
esteems all Christian Princes that do not acknowledge him to be their head,
as schismatikes or heretics. And as he uses (so often as he dares) to proceed
Antonin. sum. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 11.
against such four ways, viz. by excommunication, deposition, depriving them
of their temporal goods and possessions, and raising war against them, so
all Papists acknowledging the Popes supremacy, do hold both that he has
authority so to proceed against Christian Princes, and also that in his
definitive sentence he Antonin. sum. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 10
cannot err. And therefore if they put not in execution the sentence of their
holy Father, it is not for want of treasonable will, and rebellious affection
toward their Prince, but for lack of means and opportunity. As for example,
when Pius 5. had sent his Bull of excommunication against our late Sovereign
Cupers. page 182. number. 8.
Queen of happy memory, therein deposing her from her crown, and absoluing
her subjects from their allegiance toward her, it is most certain, that
whatsoever many hollow hearted Papists pretended, yet few of them did
acknowledge her for their lawful Queen; and many of them thought it a
meritorious work to take away her life. And surely if not their persons, then
much less ought their Antichristian religion, the mystery of iniquity, be
tolerated in the Church of Christ. For what fellowship can there be betwixt
light and darkness? or what agreement can the Temple of God have 2. Cor. 6.
with Idols?

5 If the Pope be Antichrist, and his Church Antichristian, then can there be
no reconciliatio^ betwixt us and the church of Rome, we being, as often has
been proved, the true church of God. For what agreement can there be betwixt
Christ and Antichrist? Such neuters therefore show themselves to be
n^llifidians and politic Atheists, who would persuade men that both we and
they are the true church of Christ, and that the difference betwixt us being in
words rather then in substance, may easily be composed: but they might as well
say that there is but a verbal difference betwixt the Gospel of Christ, and
the doctrine of Antichrist.

6 Lastly, if the church of Rome, which because of her largeness, calls her
self the Catholic, that is to say, the universal church, be notwithstanding
the Synagogue of Antichrist: What infinite thanks do we owe to our good and
gracious God, who has not suffered us to be carried away with that Catholic
Apostasy, as it were an universal deluge, but has gathered us into the arc
of his true church, making us with the rest of his true professors his peculiar
people. It remains therefore, that seeing God has been so gracious to us,
we should not be unthankful to him, but rather should walk worthy our
calling, as it becomes the children of the light, adorning the profession of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, by a godly conversation; to the end that by the
plentiful fruits of righteousness and true holiness, we may glorify God
our heavenly Father, stop the mouths of our adversaries, and gather
assurance unto our own souls, of our justification and salvation by Jesus
Christ our bessed Lord and Savior; To whom with the Father and the holy
spirit, be all praise and thanksgiving, both now and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

