The Plea of the Poor.

OR A TREATISE OF BENEFICENCE AND ALMSDEEDS: teaching how these Christian
duties are rightly to be performed, and persuading to the frequent doing of
them.

NECESSARY FOR these times, wherein the works of mercy are so much neglected,
or so indiscreetly practiced.

Published by JOHN DOWNAME Bachelour in Divinity.

HEBR. 13. 16. To do good and communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices
GOD is well pleased.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for RALPH MABBE, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1616.

THE ANALYSIS of the Psalm.
He has dispersed, he has given to the poor. his righteousness endures for
ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.
CHAP. 1. The resolution of the whole Psalm, the parts of the text, and the
general doctrines which arise out of it.
Sect. 1. Analysis of the whole Psalm.
THis Psalm is doctrinall; teaching us, that the godly and just man is
blessed, and that whether we consider him simply in himself, which is handled
from verse 1. to the tenth, or compare him with the wicked verse 10. In
himself he is blessed: first, in respect of his inward graces exercised in
outward duties, and secondly, in regard of many singular privileges, wherewith
his graces and virtuous actions are richly rewarded, and these are intermingled
throughout the whole Psalm. His inward graces here specified are diverse.
First, the fear of God. Secondly, delight in his commandments, verse 1.
Thirdly, graciousnesse. Fourthly, mercy and compassion. Fifthly, justice, verse
3. Sixthly, faith and affiance in God, verse. 7.

The outward actions, in which they are exercised, are showing favor, giving
and lending to those that stand in need, moderation of his affairs with
discretion, verse 5. and liberal employing of his riches to all good uses,
especially to the relief of the poor, verse 9. The privileges wherewith God
blesses him, are also many; as first the prosperous condition of his
posterity, verse 2. Secondly, the establishment of his outward estate, verse 3
and 9. Thirdly, ability and readiness to relieve others in the time of
adversity, verse 4. Fourthly, permanencie of prosperity, and perpetuity of
fame, verse 6 and 9. Fifthly, security and safety in time of danger, verse 7
and 8. Secondly, the godly man is blessed, being compared with the wicked,
seeing he is not only miserable in himself, but also in the fight of the
righteous man's happiness, verse 10.

Sect 2. The manner of penning this Psalm.
And this is the resolution of this Psalm. The manner of penning of it is also
to be considered, which is very exact and accurate. For every hemisticke or
half verse, begins in order with a letter of the Hebrew Alphabet; only the
two last verses have three letters, after every pause or comma one, that so the
whole Alphabet might be expressed. The which was done to these ends; first to
help the memory, when as they referred every sentence to a letter of the
alphabet, with which they were familiarly acquainted. Secondly, to note the
excellency of the argument here handled, when as he was so curious and exact
in the penning of it. Thirdly to teach us, that there is a laudable use of art
and accurate labor in the service of God, if it be in an holy manner, grave,
sober and tending to the use of edifying; especially if the occasion be more
then ordinary, as was the composing of this Psalm; which (as the learned
think) with some others were penned by David, that they might be sung at their
public and solemn feasts, when as all the people were assembled together.

Sect. 3. The sum of the Psalm.
The sum of it is the blessedness of the godly man, because he is inwardly
endowed with the riches of spiritual graces, and outwardly advanced in many
excellent privileges, both presently in this life, and for ever in the life to
come. So that those words of the Apostle are an abridgement of it. 1. Tim. 4.
8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promises of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come.

The maine scope at which the Psalmist aims, The scope
is to persuade all unto godliness, seeing it is the only way to attain unto
blessedness.

Sect. 4. The parts of the text.
And so I come to the words themselves, which contain two things; first
certain duties or properties of the godly and blessed man, springing from the
inward graces of his goodness and mercifulness. Secondly, the privileges
wherewith God rewards them. The duties are two; the first general, which is
beneficence, bounty and openhandednes to al, in all good actions and works of
mercy, signified by those words, He has dispersed. The second more special,
namely his liberality toward the poor, in the next words, he has given to
the poor. The privileges are two; the first is the lasting benefit of his
good works; his righteousness endures for ever. Secondly the establishment
of his estate with honor, in the last words, his horn shall be exalted with
honor.

Sect. 5. 1 General doctrine That blessedness consists as much in graces and
virtuous actions, as in privileges and rewards.
But before we come to entreat of these parts particularly, we may generally
observe that the holy Ghost showing the blessedness of a godly man, does make
it to consist as much in his graces and virtuous actions, as in his privileges
and rewards. From whence we learn, that we are as happy in our graces and good
works, as in the prerogatives and rewards which do accompany them. The which
is manifest both by plain testimonies of Scriptures, and by evident reasons,
grounded upon them. For the first, he is pronounced blessed in this Psalm, who
fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments, verse. 1. and
Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the
Lord. 2. Blessed are they that keape his testimonies, and that seek him with
the whole heart. So our Savior pronounces Psalm. 119. 1. 2.
them blessed, who hear the word of God and keep it. Luke 11. 28. and says
unto his Disciples, if ye know Pro. 29. 18.
these things, happy are ye if you do them. Yea this virtue and obedience unto
Gods law make us blessed, not only in the time when they are rewarded with
prosperity and worldly benefits, Luke 11. 28.
but even in our greatest afflictions and persecutions, according to that,
Psame. 94. 12. Blessed is the Ioh. 13. 17. Pro. 29. 18.
man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy law.

Sect 6. The reasons which prove the former point
The reasons also to prove this are clear and manifest. For first, virtue and
goodness are so Psalm. 94 12.
excellent in their own nature, that they bring always their reward with
them. This appears in many places of this book of the Psalms, where the
Prophet prefers Gods commandments and the keeping of them before gold and
all manner of riches, as being much more profitable, and before the honey and
the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10 and 119. 72. 103. 127
as being much more sweet and pleasant. So the wise man commends wisdom,
that is, the knowledge and practice of true godliness, before silver, gold,
and precious stones. And Job tells us that it cannot be valued with the gold
of Ophir, with Pro. 3. 14 and 8. 19
the precious Onix, or the Sapphire; the gold and the crystal cannot equal
it, and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold. And this even
the heathen man discerned by the light of nature; O Job. 28. 16. 17
virtue (says he) if we could behold thee with bodily eyes, with what
admirable love would thou inflame us. And another affirms, that in In quo
virtus sit, ^^ nihil de esse ad beat viuendum puto. Cicero.
whom soever virtue is, there is nothing wanting unto his happiness.

Secondly, we are as happy in our graces and virtues, as in the benefits which
accrue unto us by them, because they are the means through Gods mercy and free
promises of all rewards and privileges: in which respect the Apostle says,
that godliness is profitable for all things, as having the promises of this
life, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8. 1. Tim. 4. 8.


Thirdly, because they make us more to resemble God the chief blessedness,
whose excellency consists in being, and doing good, and not in receiving any
other benefit by it.

Lastly, grace and glory are inseparably joined together, whereof it is that
the Apostle compriseth our sanctification under the name of our glorification,
because it is the first part of it which assures us of all the rest. Romans 8.
30. Romans 8. 30.


Sect. 7. The use of the former doctrine.
The consideration of which point serves to show and condemn their folly and
madness, who will embrace no virtue, nor do any good work gratis and without
reward, Gratis paenitet esse probum.
but only when they are hired with benefits; no not justice it self without a
bribe.

Secondly, it serves for the comfort of all those who are endued with Gods
sanctifying graces and continually exercised in virtuous actions, seeing they
are blessed whatsoever their estate in the world be, whether they abound in
earthly benefits, and flourish in prosperity, or whether they want these, and
contrariwise be in misery and affliction.

Finally hereby we may try and examine, whether we are happy, or miserable;
for if we be rich in grace and good works, then are we truly blessed though we
be sick and weak in our bodies, distressed and penurious in our estates, and
disgraced, and infamed in our name and reputation; but if in all these we have
our hearts desire, and be destitute of the other, our estate is wretched; for
where there is no grace, there neither is there any blessedness.

Sect. 8. 2. Doctrine. That it is a property of a godly man to be beneficent.
The second general point to be observed is; that it is a property of a
godly and blessed man, to be beneficent, ready to all good works, and liberal
toward the poor. For so far forth are we godly, as we are imitators of the
godly nature; but in nothing do we more resemble God, then when we imitate
the goodness of his nature, and be bountiful and beneficial to all that
need our help, which who so do, are blessed, and none but they. So Pro. 14.
21. He that Pro. 14. 21.
has mercy on the poor, happy is he. And thus they are blessed in the work
it self, according to that Act. 20. 35. It is a more blessed thing to give,
then to receive: and blessed also in their reward, as our Act. 20. 35.
savior tells us. Math. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, Mat. 5. 7.
for they shall obtain mercy, and be also received into the place of
blessedness, according to that Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the Math. 25 34.
world; whereas contrariwise the merciless are accursed; for they shall have
judgment without mercy, that have showed no mercy, as it is Iam. 2. 13. As we
may also see it in the last sentence, in which the Iam. 2. 13.
judge shall say unto those who have neglected these works of mercy; Depart
from me ye cursed into the fire prepared for the devil and his Angels; Math.
25. 41.
for I was hungry, and ye fed me not, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink, etc. Mat. 25. 41.

Sect. 9. Niggards are rightly called misers.
Fom whence we may gather a special and forcible argument to make us loath
griple covetousness, and to love liberality toward the poor and
openhandednesse. For even in the confluence of worldly wealth, niggards and
sordidous men deserve the name of wretched misers, seeing none in truth are
more desperately miserable: for they are not the masters, but the slaves of
their goods which they possess, and have no power to enjoy them for their own
comfort: Et quid est miserius misero non miserante se ipsum? What is more
miserable then a miser that pittieth August.
not himself? neither do they use them for the benefit of others. Nam qui
sibi nequam, cui bonus? how can he be good to another, that is so evil to
himself? yea as they are hurtful unto others Eccle. 14. 5.
in defrauding them of their right, or in spoiling them of that which they
have, by wrong and oppression; so they are most pernicious to themselves; for
they hourd up their riches to be a wttnesse against them at the latter day,
when as the rust of their silver and gold shall eat their flesh like fire; as
it is Iam. 5. 3. They deprive themselves of Iam. 5. 3.
their present benefits, and are deprived by God of their future blessedness;
they are in this life accursed of the poor, and in the life to come accursed
of God. So also this may be an effectual 1 Cor. 13. 3. Iam. 2. 14. 15.
teaches us. 1. Cor. 13. 3. Iam. 2. 14. 15.

CHAP. 2. Of Benificence, the subject, object and properties of it.
Sect. 1. Exposition of the words.
ANd so I come from the general observations, to the particular duties. The
first whereof is beneficence, or readiness to all good works unto all; in
these words, He has dispersed. For so I expound them, because he speaks of
almesdeedes, in the next words, and it is not like that in these diverse phrases
he intends the same thing.

Secondly, because the metaphor taken from them whosow their seed will well
bear it, who scatter it all abroad in the field, and not in the lowest
places only.

Thirdly, because the general doctrine of beneficence, and the particular of
almesdeedes are in other places joined together, as 1 Timothy 6. 18. 1. Tim. 6. 18.
That they do good and be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, and Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and communicate, forget not etc. Heb.
13. 16.


Sect 2. Beneficence what it is.
Now in speaking of this beneficence, I will first consider the duty it self,
and secondly the properties of it, and how it is to be exercised. The duty of
beneficence it self is with a bountiful heart and hand, to do good unto all,
who in any kind whatsoever need our help, by our riches, labor, care,
counsel, providence or howsoever. So that this grace extends it self to
all good works, as building Schools and Colleges, and maintaining the
ministry and means of Gods worship, erecting of Hospitals, and allowing
yearly Pensions to Parishes, and corporations for the relief of their poor:
or if we want ability for these things, comforting the distressed,
counsailing those that Act. 9. 39.
need counsel, helping the blind and lame, by being eyes and feet unto
them. Job 31.


Sect. 3. Beneficence commended unto all.
And these duties of beneficence are commanded unto all. Heb. 13. 16. and are
numbered by Heb. 13. 16. Gal. 5. 22. 3. Tim. 6 17. 18
the Apostle among the fruits of the spirit. Gal. 5. 12. and there joined with
love and faith, to show that there is no true faith or love where beneficence
and goodness is wanting: but especially they are charged upon rich men,
because they have the privilege of ability above others, and better means to
express their inward bounty in the outward act. And howsoever the poorer sort
may have as large and liberal hearts as they, and consequently may be as
acceptable in the sight of God, because he looks principally, not to the
gift, but to the mind of the giver; yet wanting riches they cannot show unto
men the visible testimony of their bountiful hearts, nor produce their
liberality into act, seeing they want the chief instrument of well doing,
which are hence called goods, because by them we are enabled to do good. And
indeed this is the right use of these rich talents which God has lent unto
us, that shall be so highly rewarded at the day of our great account; and the
neglect hereof the hiding of those talents, which shall be at that day so
severely punished.

Sect. 4. The object of our beneficence.
Now the object of this our beneficence is very large; for it must extend unto
all men, according 1. These. 5. 15.
to that 1 These. 5. 15. But ever follow that which is good, both among your
selves, and to all men. Yea even to our enemies, as the wise man teaches us,
Pro. 25. 21. If thine enemy be hungry, give Pro. 25. 21.
him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink. And this
our Savior requires. Mat. Math. 5. 44. 45.
5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, etc. the which is enforced with a strong reason, because herein we
shall be like our heavenly father, verse. 45. which if we neglect, and limit our
beneficence to our Luke 6. 32. 33.
friends, we shall be no better then publicans and sinners. Luke 6. 32. 33.

Sect 5. That our beneficence must chiefly extend to the faithful.
But though our beneficence must extend to Gal 6. 10.
all, yet chiefly to those who are of the household of faith. Gal. 6. 10. And
though we be liberal in scattering the seed of our good works in all
grounds which are ready to receive it; yet principally we must cast it into
those, which being fertile and fruitful, will yield unto us the best
increase. Now such are the faithful, who being the true members of Christ, he
will acknowledge what is done unto them as done unto himself. Mat. 25. 33.
which consideration moved David Mat. 25. 33.
to extend his goodness and bounty to the Saints that are upon the earth, and
to the excellent, as appears, Psalm. 16. 3. And the Apostle Paul to commend
Psalm. 16. 3.
the faith of the Ephesians, in the Lord Jesus, when as he saw it approved by
their love toward all the Saints. Ephesians. 1. 15. Ephesians. 1. 15.


Sect. 6. The properties of beneficence. First, that it be liberal and
bountiful.
The properties of this beneficence are diverse, and they are all implied in
this metaphor of dispersing or scattering seed. As first in respect of the
quantity, it must be liberal and bountiful, and we must dare multum multis,
do much good unto many. For though a man be never so sparing in other things,
yet he will not be niggardly in sowing his seed, but will scatter and cast it
from him in full handfuls, as much as is sufficient, and the ground will well
bear; because he knows that the fruitful harvest will return all again
with large increase: and so the godly and blessed man though he be hard in idle
expenses and superfluities, as in rioting, gaming, adorning the back and
pampering the belly, yet he is bountiful in doing good, and scatters the
seeds of his beneficence with a liberal hand, because he knows that after
the seedetime the harvest will follow, and then all will be returned with great
advantage, which argument the Apostle uses to stir up the Corinthians to
this liberal beneficence, because he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully, and he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. 2 Cor. 9. 6.
And this the wise man observed. Pro. 11. 24. There is (says 2. Cor. 9. 6. Pro.
11. 24. 25.
he) that scatters, and yet increases, and there is that withholdeth more
then is meet, and comes to poverty. 25. The liberal soul shall be made
fat, and he that waters shall be watered again. In which regard one says
well, Non qui habet and seruat, sed qui Clemens Alexand. pe^^g. lib. 3.
impertit est dives, and impertitio, non autem possessio diuites facit. Not he
that has wealth and keeps it, but he that bestows it is rich, neither is
it the possession, but the laying out of riches, that makes men rich. For he
that sows and gathers more, is he who gives earthly things, and gathers
heavenly and eternal: but he who gathers on earth, and bestows it not, he
puts his treasure into a broken bag. Hag. 1. 6. Hag 1. 6.


Sect. 7. Bounty in our beneficence is required,
And this bounty in our beneficence God requires. Deuteronomy. 15. 11. Thou shall
open thine hand Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
wide unto thy brother, to thy poor and needy in thy land: especially of rich
men, who must not only give a portion of their wealth to good uses; but also
in some fit proportion to their means, Job 31. 16* 1^.
for the Apostle would have rich men charged to be rich in good works, even
as God has given them all things richly to enjoy. 1. Tim. 6. 17. 18. 1 Timothy 6.
17. 18
which who so neglects, is not only a miser, but a fool, seeing he
depriueth himself of the fruits of harvest, because he cannot find in his
heart to sow his seed; yea loses not only an earthly croppe, but the rich
harvest of heavenly happiness, because he will not forgo for the present
momentany trifles and earthly vanities.

Sect 8. No bounty in worldlings to charitable uses.
And thus it appears that the beneficence of the godly man is bountiful. The
contrary we may observe in wicked worldlings: for either they are misers and
not liberal at all, or quite contrary in their bounty to the blessed man.
For where God commands them to spend, namely in beneficence and works of
mercy, there they spare, and their hands like Ieroboams are so dried and
shrunk up in the sinnewes, that they cannot stretch them out to do good. Or
if they do, it is to give some penny alms out of many thousands, upon some
qualme of present pity, or to keep their conscience sleeping, that they may
not accuse and torment them for their unmercifulness. But where God bids
spare, there they spend like prodigals, as on dogs and harlots, in feasting
and banqueting, in building and bravery, in gaming and reuelling, and all
other excess and riot. And whereas the godly man spares from his
superfluities, yea sometimes necessaries, that he may have the more to spend in
bounty and beneficence; he only spares in the works of mercy, that he may
have the more to spend upon his sinful vanities. But as the niggard that
sows not, shall not reap, so the prodigal worldling that sows only to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, as it is, Gal. 6. 8. Gal. 6. 8.


Sect. 9. The second property is alacrity.
The second property is alacrity and cheerfulness; the which is also
implied by the metaphor. For the husbandman casts his seed into the ground,
not only willingly, but also cheerfully and joyfully; not in respect of his
present parting with his seed, but because he expects a fruitful harvest.
And this the Lord requires in all good works, according to that Eccles. 9.
10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do Eccles. 9. 10.
it with thy might; and that of the Apostle. Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to
be ready to every good work. Tit. 3 1.
And especially in our beneficence and works of mercy; because it is not so
much the outward act of the hand, as the inward service of the heart wherein he
delights. So 2. Cor. 9. 7. Every man 2. Cor 9. 7.
according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or
of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver, and Romans 12. 8. the Apostle
requires, Romans 12. 8.
that he who shows mercy, do it with cheerfulness. And this the Lord
chiefly respects and rewards; for so it is said, Pro. 11. 25. The liberal
soul shall be made fat; not the hand, Pro. 11. 25.
but the soul and heart. An example whereof we have in David, who was accepted
for his readiness to build the temple, though he never performed 2. Sam 7.
it in act, but only had a desire to build it. 2 Samuel 7. And in the
particular case of giving alms, that if there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.
2. Cor. 8. 12. 2. Cor. 8 12.


Yea this even the heathen man discerned, and Seneca.
therefore defined a benefit, to be a loving and voluntary action, tribuens
gaudium, capiensque tribuendo, yielding joy, and receiving in yielding it: and
affirms that a benefit cannot be touched with the hand, but is seen with the
mind: for there is great difference between the matter of a benefit, and the
benefit it self: and therefore gold and silver is not the benefit, but the
good will of the giver, for they may be lost, but the benefit still remains.

Sect 10. Cheerfulness in the countenance.
Now this cheerfulness shows it self in our countenance, words and
actions.

For the first, benefits are to be done with a cheerful look and smiling
countenance, which adds much to the grace of a good deed, when the eye of
the giver tells the receiver that the benefit bestowed is a token sent unto
him from a loving heart: whereas contrariwise a sour look much blemisheth it,
as though the hand had stolen it from the heart at unawares, and the eye were
displeased when it discovers the theft.

Sect. 11. Cheerfulness in words.
Secondly, the cheerfulness of the heart appears in our words, when as we
speak comfortably to the party unto whom we do good. And surely then are
these well suited together, Quando adijcimus bona verba, bonis rebus: when we
join good words, with good deeds, which is to speak to his heart who
receives the gift, and doubleth the sweetness of any benefit. Contrary
whereunto are proud speeches, insolent and bitter expostulations, which turn a
benefit into an injury, and sometime cause a man by a gift to purchase an
enemy, Nam iniuri^ altius quam merita Seneca.
descendunt, wrongs pearce deeper then gifts, and the memory takes fast hold
of them, when as it easily suffers these to slip out. To this point the son
of Syrach speaks notably. cap. 18. verse Eccle. 18. 15.
15. My son blemish not thy good deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when
thou give any thing. 16. Shall not the deaw assuage the heat? so is a word
better then a gift. 17. is not a word better then a gift? but both are with a
gracious man. 18. A fool will vpbrayde aid churlishly, and a gift of the
envious consumes the eyes.

Sect 12. Cheerfulness in the action. First, when a man gives speedily.
Thirdly, it appears in the action, when a man does good speedily and
readily. For as one says, De benef. li. 2. c. 5
Beneficentia est virtus quae moram not patitur. Beneficence is a virtue which
disliketh all delays; and as Seneca tells us, Omnis benignitas properat, all
goodness is quick of hand and swift of foot, and hates as well the
paraliticall shaking and staggering of those, who doubt whether to give or no,
as the goutie lamenesse of such as after they are resolved to give, make but
slow have. For these delays show unwillingness. Et qui moratur, neganti
proximus est, he that delayeth a benefit is the next door to him that denies:
even as on the otherside, a quick hand is an evident sign of a free heart,
for proprium est libenter facientis, cito facere, Seneca ibid.
it is the property of him that gives willingly, to give it speedily. And as
this graceth the gift in respect of the giver, so it doubleth the benefit to
him that receives it. Nam bis dat qui cito dat, he gives twice that gives
quickly, and the swifter that a benefit comes the sweeter it tastes. (...).
There must then be no stay in these actions of beneficence, but only that
which is caused through the receivers shamefastnes, for a benefit loses his
grace, when it sticks to his fingers who is about to bestow it, as though it
were not given but plucked from him. And so the receiver praises not his
benefactours bounty, but his own importunity, because he does not seem to
have given, but to have held too weakly against his violence.

Sect 13. That we should prevent men's suites with our readiness.
It must then be the benefactours care to prevent with his readiness their
suites who need his Sero beneficium dedit qui roganti dedit. Seneca. Esa. 21.
14.
help; and like the Astrologer, he must divine at the wants of the poor
before they lay them open, imitating the sun which gives light, heat and
vital influence without entreaty. He must be like the inhabitants of the land
of Tema, who brought water to him who was thirsty, and prevented with their
bread him that fled; yea he must labor to be like our heavenly father, who as
the Psalmist speaks, not only gives us our hearts desire, and withhouldeth
not the request of our lips, but also preuenteth us with his blessings of
goodness, and often gives before we ask. Psalm. 21. 2. 3. And Psalm 21. 2. 3.
this also is of singular use in the bestowing of benefits, and makes the gift
much more acceptable. Nam illud beneficium iucundum, victurumque in Seneca de
Ben. lib. 2. cap. 1.
animo scias, quod obuiam venit: that benefit is most delightful, and will
longest live in the mind of the receiver, which stays not till he come to
seek it, but comes out to meet him in the midde way. For it is a torment
and heavy burden to an ingenuous mind to crave, the which so presses the
heart, that oftentimes it makes the blood to come into the face, which who so
with his readiness preuenteth doubleth the benefit. And if this be omitted,
the gift loses some part of his grace, because it is purchased with pain,
and comes not freely and without cost, Nam non tulit gratis qui cum rogasset
accepit, there is nothing dearer then that which is bought with the price of
many prayers: and the benefactour also loses some part of his thanks; for a
benefit pearceth the heart like a dart; diversely in respect of the diverse
manner of casting it, slighty if it be cast faintly, and deeply when as it
comes forcibly, and with a good will.

Sect. 14. We must at least willingly entertain the first motion.
But if this has been omitted to prevent suits with our readiness, yet at
least the cheerfulness of the heart must show it self in willing
entertaining the first motion: and if our benefit have not sought him out
before he sued, yet at least let him find it when he sueth. Atque etiam dum
rogat erogemus, and let us give even whilst he asks; or if necessary
occasion causes any stay, yet let us by all means not seem to doubt and
deliberate whether we shall give or no; for, proximus Seneca.
est neganti qui dubitauit, nullamque meretur gratiam: he that doubts
deserves small thanks, because he is next neighbor to him that denies; nam
qui tarde dedit, diu noluit, he that was slow in giving, was long unwilling.
And this ready intertaining the first motion the wise man requires. Pro. 3.
27. Withhold not good from thy neighbor Pro. 3. 27.
when it is in thy power to do it; say not to him go and come again, and to
morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by thee. For nothing is more tedious
then to hang long in suspense, and we endure with more patience to have our
hopes behedded and quickly killed, then to be racked and tortured with long
delays, according to that, Pro. 13. 12. Pro. 13. 12.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire comes, it is a
tree of life.

But especially we must avoid delays in giving after we have granted; for
there is nothing more bitter then to be forced to make a new suite for that
which has already been obtained, and to find more difficulty in the
delivery, then in the grant.

Sect. 15. The third property is constancy in doing good.
The third property of beneficence is constancy, and assiduitie in doing
good; the which is also implied by the metaphor; for the husbandman contenteth
not himself to have sowed his seed in former years, but he continues to sow
it still to the end of his life: and though the croppe be sometime so small,
that the seed it self is scarce returned: yet he will not be discouraged,
but will again cast it into the ground, in hope of better success. And thus
must we also do in sowing the seeds of our beneficence, casting them daily
into the grounds which we find fitted and prepared, and not thinking it enough
to adorn our selves with them, as with our best apparel, which we only put
on on high and festival days, we must make it to be our daily exercise;
benefacta benefactis pertegentes (as one says) making one Plau^us in tri^m^^r.
good deed an inrroduction unto another, and never leaving to do good, so
long as there is any power in our hands to do it. And unto this the Apostle
exhorts. 2. These. 3. 13. Brethren be not weary of well-doing, and 1. These.
5. 15. Ever follow 2. These. 3. 13. 1. These. 5. 15. Gal. 6 9.
that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men: wherein we shall
imitate our heavenly father, and approve our selves to be his children, who
renews his mercies unto us every morning, and multiplieth his blessings upon
us every day with a new supply, and so we shall be sure to receive a rich
reward, for if we be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in these works
of the Lord, we may be assured that our labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord, as it is promised. 1. Cor. 1. Cor. 15. 58.
15. 58.

Sect. 16 We must increase in doing good.
Yea our care must be, as to grow in grace, so to bring forth new fruits of
good works, imitating Apoc. 2. 19.
herein the Church of Thiatira, whose last works excelled the first, Apoc. 2.
19. Seeing we cannot otherwise be sure to be constant in them; for they who go
not forward but stand at a stay, will not long stay in their standing. And in
this the beneficence of a godly man differs from that which is in worldlings,
who do some good works of mercy by fits, but are not constant in well doing;
and also from that which is in hypocrites who do some good deeds for praise
or profit, but yet desist when their turn is served; the flame of their
charity lasting no longer then the fuel does wherewith it is nourished. But
these have only a green blade of an outward profession, and never come to the
bearing of ripe fruits; they run well for a time, but get not the garland,
because they do not hold out to the end of the race. They are not true
Christians, but only dead images of them, like unto that which Nebuchadnezer
saw in a dream, which had an Dan. 4. 31.
head of gold, the middle parts of silver, his thighs of brass, his legs of
iron and his feet part of iron and part of clay; for so the head and first
beginnings of their works are golden and glorious, but the last and latter
ends base and of no worth.

Sect. 17. The fourth property which is equality.
Now that we may thus constantly hold out in well doing unto the end, there is
required in the last place, that equality and proportion be observed in
discreet fitting of our works of mercy and beneficence unto our state and
ability, that they may match, but not exceed it. For we have not a sea of
sufficiency which cannot be drawn dry, no nor yet is our estate in it self
a springing fountain, which is no sooner empty, but presently it fills
again: but it is like a poole or standing water, or (as it were) a small
stream which is fed and supplied by the spring of Gods bounty; and therefore
we must not let it flow out faster then it comes in, but still preserve the
maine stock (unless it be in cases of great necessity) and keep the pond in
a convenient fullness, letting the overplus continually run over to good
uses, for otherwise there will be an intermission in the stream of our
bounty, till the emptiness be replenished, and too much at one time will
cause necessarily too little at another.

Sect. 18. Good husbandry required that we may do good deeds.
But yet because the Scriptures require, that we should be bountiful and
plentiful in good works, this should increase our care and diligence in
preserving and increasing of our estates, by all lawful means, in acquisition
and getting by our honest and painful labors in our callings, and by our
frugall husbanding and thriftie spending of our goods, that so having greater
plenty we may be the richer in good works. According to that Ephesians. 4. 28.
Otherwise though we cannot justly be Ephesians. 4. 28.
condemned of niggardliness and uncharitableness, because we do but little
good, seeing we cannot go beyong our tether, nor extend our good works beyond
the reach of our ability; yet may we be condemned of sloth and negligence, or
wasting and ill husbandry, whereof it is that we have no better ability.

CHAP. 3. Of Almesdeedes, and first of the action of giving, and the properties
of it.
Sect. 1. Of almesdeeds and first of the action of giving.
ANd so I come from the general duty of beneficence, to the more special
duty of alms deeds, expressed in these words, he has given to the poor.
In which consider two things; the action, and the object. Of which I will
entreat, first severally, then jointly. The action is giving, which is a free
and liberal contract, whereby the property and use of some good thing, is
alienated from one and conferred upon another, out of the good will and bounty
of the benefactour. And it has two extremes, the one, in excess, lavish
prodigality; and the other in defect, base niggardliness. Between which
extremes this virtuous action holds the mean, being guided with true
wisdom, judgment and discretion (as all other virtues are, according to that,
Psalm. 112. 5. A good man Psalm. 112. 5.
shows favor and lends; he will guide his affairs with discretion.) And
in respect of the quantity of the gift, it keeps a good proportion, both in
respect of his ability, who gives, and his necessity, who receives. And
hereof it is that these almesdeedes are called righteousness in the Scriptures
(as hereafter we shall see) to teach us, that they are to be done justly,
according to the rule of equity; due respect being had both to our own state
and means, and the necessities and wants of our poor brethren.

Sect. 2. Moderation in giving according to our ability.
In respect of the former, it is said that the godly and blessed man gives to
the poor, Dat non profundit, he gives but not wastes, he so gives as that
he may still give, and because it is a more blessed thing to give, then to
receive and crave, he preserves the stock and store house of his bounty,
that by continual giving he may continue his greater blessedness. So the
Apostle appointing a collection for the Saints, inioyneth every one to lay up
in store as God has prospered him. Every one 1 Cor. 16. 1.
therefore in his almesdeedes, is to respect his own ability, and to give
neither above nor under his means. The which a man observes, when as he so
gives, as that he may be able to hold on in the same proportion, and that
rather with increase then abatement. So the heathen man could say, Dabo egenti,
sed vt ipse non egeam; succurro Seneca.
perituro, sed vt ipse non peream. I will so give to the needy, as that I do
not need my self; I will relieve those who are ready to perish, but yet so,
as that I my self may not perish. How be it this rule houldeth only in
ordinary, for the extreme necessity of the poor (as we shall see Chap. 4. 5.
hereafter) and the general necessity of the Church, bring a non obstante,
and dispense with it; as we may see in the Acts of the Apostles, where the
Saints that had houses and lands, fould them, that they might thereby supply
the great wants of the faithful living under grievous persecution, the
necessity of the times urging and requiring it. The which was not proper to
those times, but should now also be put in practice, upon the like occasion.

Sect. 3. We must give according to our neighbors need.
Secondly, we are to order with wisdom the act of giving, in respect of the
parties estate who is to receive our alms, bestowing more or less, as his
wants require. For he that gives more then sufficient, non dat sed di^at, he
does not properly out of charity give an alms, but out of bounty inricheth
with benefits. And he that gives less then their necessity requires. Non
pauperem sustentat, sed paupertatem, he cures not the disease of poverty,
but only gives some present ease; and if he apply not fresh remedies, he has
but prolonged their pains, by making it more tolerable, which extremity would
soon have ended and quite taken away.

And therefore as the godly and blessedman does in his giving alms avoid that
extreme of excess, so much more the contrary extreme of defect; and chooses
rather to offend on the saufer side; because it is better the poor man should
take a slight surfeit, through too much fullness, then to be pinched and
famished for want of necessaries; and that the merciful man's alms should
aspire to the title of bounty and beneficence, then to be abased with the
name of neerenesse and niggardly hardness.

Sect. 4. We must so give to one as that we do not neglect many.
Yet because great benefits can reach but to few, and almesdeedes must extend
to many, wisdom as much as may be auoideth both extrems, and so gives to one,
as that many others may not be neglected. And therefore the godly man makes
wisdom to deal the dole, because nothing is well done which is done without
it. For as the hathen man says, non est beneficiu^ nisi quod ratione datur,
quoniam ratio omnis honesti comes est. Seneca.
It is not a benefit which is not given with reason, because reason is the
guide and companion of all honest and virtuous actions. And in this regard
almesdeedes are fitly likened unto sowing of (...). Adag.
seed, wherein the rule is, manuserendum non thylaco, the seed is to be cast
out of the hand, and not out of the whole sack, and strained through the
fingers, that it may be scattered abroad and so go far, and not powered on
heaps, which were non serere but congerere, not to sow but to surcharge the
ground with superfluity in one place, and to cast nothing in another. And thus
in giving alms, we must cast the seed of our beneficence with an even and
indifferent hand, not upon one or two alone, but upon many, for it is the
nature of goodness, as the schoolmen speak to be diffusiua sui, extending it
self to the benefit of many. The which is also signified by that phrase of
casting our bread upon Eccle. 11. 1.
the face of the waters, where he uses the plural number to intimate unto
us, that the object of our bounty should be many, and not one or some few; and
by the phrase of communicating, which the Apostle uses. 1. Tim. 6. 18. which
implies 1. Tim. 6. 18.
thus much that our almesdeedes must be common unto many. And it is plainly
expressed by the wise man. Eccles. 11. 2. Give a portion to seven, Eccles. 11.
2.
and also unto eight, where by a certain number an uncertain is signified, but
yet thus much is required of us, that we confine not our liberality unto a few,
but extend our goodness to a numerous company.

Sect 5. We must give alms cheerfully.
Again whereas almesdeedes have here the title of giving given unto them, and
a gift is a free and liberal action: we hence gather, that they are to be done
willingly and cheerfully, and not grudgingly and repiningly. The which the
Lord forbidderh and condemns. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Thou shall surely give unto thy
poor brother, and thine heart Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
shall not be grieved when thou give unto him; because that for this thing
the Lord thy God shall bless thee in 1. Pet. 4 9.
all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto. For as in all
other duties, so in this, the Lord more requires the inward service of the
heart then the outward service of the hand, according to that, 2. Cor. 9. 7.
Every man as he purposes in his 2. Cor. 9. 7.
heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver. An example of which cheerfulness we have in the faithful
of the Church of Corinth, who were so forward in ministering to the poor
Saints, that the Apostle professes it needelesse to remember them of it. 2.
Cor. 9. 1. Yea an almesdeede is a gift not only 2. Cor. 9. 1.
unto men, but even to God himself (as he esteems it) from whom we have
received what we give and all good things besides; and hereof it is called a
sacrifice; yea such a sacrifice wherein he chiefly delights, Heb. 13. 16.
Now all Christian sacrifices are freewill oblations, which Heb. 13. 16.
are to be offered with joy and cheerfulness; and if they be soured with the
leaven of grudging and murmuring, they are made odious unto God.

Sect. 6. Cheerfulness in countenance.
Now this alacrity of heart, discovers it self in the countenance, words,
and actions. For first a willing mind causes a cheereful countenance; the
which is necessary in these actions of liberality, wherein it is not fit to
have manum apertam and vultum clausum, an open hand and a close and cloudie
look, which though it should not proceed from any auersenesse and
unwillingness in the heart, yet it serves for no good use, but like a scarecrow
affrigheth the poor, so as they cannot with any boldness or confidence come
to ask relief, nor feed securely upon those seeds of beneficence which are
cast unto them. And this the son of Syrach requires in these actions of
liberality. Cap. 35. 9. In all thy gifts (says Eccle. 35 9.
he) show a cheerful countenance, which that we may do, let us remember
that the liberal look has the promise of blessedness, as well as the
liberal action, according to that, Pro. 22. 9. He that has a bountiful eye
shall be blessed, for he gives Pro. 22. 9.
of his bread to the poor. But this hope of blessedness many rich worldlings
make void unto themselves, who either like evil nurses are so hard of milk,
that it cannot be drawn from them without pain and irkesomenesse, the which
they express by their sower looks and wrethed and wrinkled foreheads; or else
cover the poores nakedness and relieve their wants, as Noah's sons (with a
better mind) did cover the nakedness of their father, with their faces turned
another way. For as some, browbeate the poor with proud, sour, and severe
looks; so there are others as bad as they, who turn away their eyes and faces
from them, as though they were such an eyesore as might not be endured, nor be
looked upon without grief and vexation. And this they do, because they fear
to be infected with the contagion of the poor mansmisery, so much as in a
sympathy and fellowfeeling of his calamity; and therefore as men that come
near unto them who are infected with the plague or leprosy, so do they
shun them; or (if they stand in their way) turn their faces from them; and
out of a desperate resolution to give them nothing, they will not so much as
look upon their miseries, least their conscious eyes should check their
churlish hearts, and put them in mind of their barbarous inhumanitie. But let
such be assured that as they turn away their eyes from the poor in the day of
their misery, so the Lord will turn away his face from them in the day of
their calamity; and as they have stopped their ears at the cry of the poor,
so they themselves shall cry, and God will not hear them, as it is. Pro. 21.
13. Pro. 21. 13.


Sect. 7. Cheerfulness in our words and speeches.
Secondly, the alacrity in the heart appears in the mildness and
sweetness of our speeches, which the Apostle would have ever conjoined with
our almesdeedes; whereof it is that he calls them eloga. 2. Cor. 9. 5. to
note unto us, that 2. Cor. 9 5.
as these good works and good words are comprehended under the same name, so
in the action they should never be severed. And surely these cheerful and
kind words are very necessary to be joined with those works of mercy; for
poverty and want deiecteth the mind, and the discovery of it affects the
heart of those that sue and crave, not only with shame, but also with fear
and jealousy, least they be thought of their benefactors to be too bold and
troublesome; in which respects there is great need, that they should not only
speak to their suites, but to their hearts, and by kind and loving language
apply unto them such cordials of comfort, as may preserve them from fainting in
their fears. And this the son of Syrach requires, chap. 4. v. 8. Let
Eccles. 4. 8.
it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a
friendly answer with meekness. Contrary whereunto is the practice of those,
who join with their alms proud expostulations, harsh words, and vpbraiding
speeches: feeding the poor, as they feed their untaught dogs which they
would have at command, for when they offer them meat, they do withal so
sneape and rebuke them, that they dare scarcely take it, but are ready to let
it fall out of their hands and mouths, for fear of beating. Of which kind of
men one speaks fitly. There are Gregory.
some (says he) that when their poor brethren crave necessaries of them,
before they will give any thing, do cast out against them, contumelious words:
and performing these offices of piety at length indeed, do first spoil the
grace of their bounty with opprobrious terms; wherein they seem not freely
to do a work of mercy, but to make satisfaction for the injuries which they
have offered, when they give an alms after such contumelies. Others there are
that chide the poor for coming so often, and craving again after they have
once or twice relieved them. But of these I may (with Chrysostom) demand.
Chrysostom. in 10. Math. Homil. 36 Tom. 2. Col. 328.
Do they not therefore want meat, because thou have before times relieved
them? why then do thou not bind thine own belly to the same conditions?
why do thou not say to thy stomach when it craves meat, thou wast filled
yesterday and the day before, and why do thou now again desire more? Yea
contrariwise thou almost burstest thine own belly in filling it beyond
measure, but turnest away thy face from the poor craving a little to satisfy
his hunger, because he asks again of thee; on whom thou ought the rather
for this cause take pity, because he is pinched with no small necessity,
which forces him so often to come unto thee. And secondly we might demand of
them, why by the same reason they sue often unto God for new benefits, seeing
they have already received many from him, saving that it is to be feared they
trouble him not much with many suites and prayers, and that what they have,
they receive it rather out of his mere bounty, then their own earnest suite
and importunity; for otherwise the experience of their own wants, and Gods
infinite mercy in relieuing and supplying them, would move them to think of
the necessity of the poor, and make them more compassionate in helping and
succouring them. Let us not therefore stain our good actions with evil words,
neither after we have given let us vpbraide, Eccle. 41. 22.
wherein we shall but discover our folly; for a fool (as the son of Syrach
tells us) when and 18. 18.
he gives a gift will vpbraid churlishly, and the gift of the envious
consumes the eyes.

Sect. 8. Cheerfulness appears by ready giving.
Thirdly, this cheerfulness shows it self in the manner of the action;
when it is performed readily and speedily. For a gift or almsedeede should not
be drawn from the giver by the importunity of the receiver, but rather the
importunity should be on his part that gives, in pressing the benevolence
upon him with undeniable earnestness, when as he discerns in him any modest
bashfulnesse or backwardness in receiving of it. An example whereof we have in
the Church of Corinth, of whom the Apostle testifies, that in communicating to
the necessity of the Saints, They were to their power, and beyond 2. Cor. 8. 4.
their power willing of themselves, praying them with much entreaty that they
would receive their gifts.

Sect. 9. 2. In giving speedily.
And with this readiness must be joined speediness in giving; and taking our
intelligence of our neighbors wants from the report of others, or else reading
them in their pale visage, heavy countenance or poor habit, we must let our
alms prevent their suite, and give them relief before they crave it. For (as
one says) Haec est August. Homil. 39. T^m. 10.
perfecta misericordia, etc. this is the perfection of mercy, that we prevent
the suites of the needy, and relieve the hungry before they ask; and that
mercy is imperfect (and it self needs mercy) which is extorted with
importunate prayers. And as it is maimed in it self, so not so acceptable to
the poor, for ingratum est beneficium quod diu inter manus dantis Seneca.
haesit. That benefit is unwelcome and scarce worthy thanks which has long
stuck to the hands of the giver. And therefore herein let us labor to be
perfect as our heavenly father is perfect, who oftentimes supplieth our wants
before we crave, and conferreth upon us many benefits, which in particular we
never desired.

Sect 10. Reasons which may move us to give speedily.
And this speediness in relieuing the poor is employed by that name diakona
which the Apostle 2. Cor. 8. 4. and 9. 1
gives unto almesdeedes, signifying such a ministration, as is performed with
speed and diligence, being derived from a word which signifies to hasten and
make speed, and is expressly required by the Wiseman in the doing of these
works of mercy. Pro. 3. 27. Say not to thy neighbor Pro. 3. 27.
go and come again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by
thee. Unto which speedy and present dispatch in giving alms we may be moved by
these reasons. First, because in respect of our neighbor, an alms is most
seasonable in the time of want, and the gift doubled by his desire that
receives it. Again, what know thou if to morrow he will need thy gift,
the Lord otherwise providing for him? and so thou shall loose a fit
opportunity of doing good, because thou did refuse it when it was offered;
which will turn thee to more damage and hurt, then to neglect the sowing of
thy seed in time most seasonable. Furthermore it may be that through these
delays thy alms will come too late, like a good gale of wind after
shipwreck, when his health is lost for want of relief, or state ruined for
want of seasonable help, and so thy late and untimely alms will do him
little good. For it fares with men in their strength and state, as with a
leake in a ship, or a breach of waters, which may be easily stopped and
stayed at the first appearing, but if be let alone, will within a while grow
remediless. Finally, how can thou tell whether the next time he comes,
thou shall be able to relieve his wants, seeing for thine unthankfulness and
mis-imployment of Gods talents he may take thy goods and means of doing good
from thee, and make thee to need the help of others, or thee from thy goods,
and so thou shall have no power to dispose them? And this reason the wise man
gives to move us unto speedy and present giving. Pro. 3. 27. Withhold Pro. 3.
27.
not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to
do it: and the Apostle inioyneth us, when we have opportunity, to do good
unto all men, especially to them who are of the household of faith. Gal. 6. 10.
Gal. 6. 10.


CHAP. 4. That the poor should be the object of our bounty.
Sect. 1. That the poor should be the object of our liberality.
ANd thus much of the action: the object of our liberality is the poor:
whence we learn that though there are many ways, whereby men express much
bounty and liberality in spending their riches, yet this only does approve a
man to be godly and blessed, when as he gives freely to the poor and needy.
And this our Savior shows. Luke 14. 12. When thou make Luke 14. 12.
a dinner or supper, call not thy friends nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen
and rich neighbors; least they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made
thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind; and thou shall be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee, for thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. So that if we would be
blessed in our bounty, the poor must be the object of it. For they are the
ground in which the seed of beneficence must be sown if ever we mean to
reap an harvest of happiness. They are the bankers to whom we must deliver Gods
talents, if we would have them increase in our masters aestimate, and so
receive the gracious reward of our faithful service. Finally, these are Gods
factours, unto whom if we deliver our goods, the Lord himself will acknowledge
the debt, and will surely pay us with great advantage.

Sect. 2. That the liberality of the worldlings will not profit the^.
And therefore they, the streams of whose bounty do run another way, may
well impair by their expenses their present means, but they cannot thereby
increase their future hopes, they may perhaps among men have the praise of
their munificence and liberality, but they shall not by God be approved for
their cost, nor when they give up their account be blessed in their bounty.
For example, many are profusely liberal in feasting and banqueting, who
because the poor are not their guests, but their kindred and rich friends,
they have their reward in this world, when they feast them again, and their
reckoning to make in the life to come, for defrauding their poor fellow
servants, and wasting their masters wealth in excess and riot. Many are
liberal in sending to their betters and equals rich presents; but how far
off shall they find themselves from being blessed in their liberality, when
in the day of their account it shall be laid to their charge, that they have
given more in one new-yeares-gift, to get the favor of some flattering
courtiar or false friend, then in their whole lives they have given to the
poor, that thereby they might be assured of the favor of God? Many are
bountiful in giving large bribes, either to pervert justice and judgment, or
to advance their unworthy selves to some worldly preferments; but as the end of
their giving is to corrupt, so their gift shall be corruption in the end, even
a canker in their flesh, and rottenness in their bones; and as these give not,
but rather put out their moneys unto usury, making it serve as a small bait
to catch a greater pray, so the end of their preferment shall be their ruin,
and their false glory in this world, shall bring them true shame and a
fearful downfall in the world to come. Finally, there are many who spend
largely on stately buildings, sumptuous furniture, and gorgious garments,
giving more for one suite of apparel, for a jewel made precious only by such
wantons aestimate, for one piece of rich hangings, or a picture to adorn their
walls, then ever they have bestowed in their whole lives in relieuing the poor
members of Jesus Christ. But there is no blessedness in this bounty, because
it is spent on the world, which is most ungrateful and will never requite it.
Yea how accursed shall they find it at the day of judgment, when they shall
hear that fearful sentence of death and condemnation, because they have
prodigally wasted Gods talents in such excess and riot, and have neglected to
Math 25. 41.
releive Christ in his poor and distressed members?

Sect. 3. That common vagrants and idle persons are not those poor who should
be relieved.
So that it is not enough to be bountiful, unless we chouse the poor as the
object of our beneficence; and not all that are poor, neither is every leaude
lozell of the canting commonwealth, a fit altar whereon we may offer the
sacrifice of our almesdeedes, but such as are so through necessity and not of
choice. For there are many sturdie beggars, and vagrant rogues, the blemish of
our government, and a burden to the common wealth, who have nothing in
propriety, but their licencious life and lawless condition; no known father
or mother, wife or children, but a promiscuous generation, who are all of
kin, and yet know no kindred, no house or home, no law but their sensual
lust, or some wicked orders of their own making, fit to maintain them in
their in ordinate courses; men without religion, Church, baptism, faith or God
in the world, who like idle drones, feed upon the common spoil, and live by
the sweat of other men's brows: which kind of poor are not to be maintained
in their wicked courses, for according to the Apostles rule, they that will not
labor, 1. These. 3. 10. 12
must not eat; but rather the law is duly and with severity to be executed,
which though it seem sharp, yet for the present it is full of mercy to the
honest poor, who might be more liberally relieved, if these idle deuourers did
not eat up their portion; and would above all be merciful to those
miscreants, if by wholesome severity they might be reclaimed from their wicked
lives, seeing hereby they should be pulled out of the jaws of the devil, and
preserved from falling into fearful condemnation. To which purpose Austine
says; It is better to love with severity, then to August. ad vincent.
Donatista.
deceive under show of lenity; and to withhold bread from the hungry, if
being sure of his victuals, he neglect justice, then by giving unto him, to
make him rest securely in his unrighteousness.

Sect. 4. What poor are chiefly o be relieved.
Or if through their inordinate living, and the just hand of God lying upon
them, they are brought into extremity and misery, so that something is to be
done, if not homini yet humanitati, to the common nature of mankind, and not
to the particular person; it must not be in bountiful fullness to encourage
him in his unchristian courses, but only to relieve his present necessity.
But the poor upon whom the godly and blessed man does exercise his
beneficence, is the honest laborer and the poor houshoulder, who either
through the greatness of their charge, or badnesse of their trade, crosses,
losses, sickness, suretiship, or other casualties being brought behind hand,
are not able in the sweat of their face to earne their bread; or the blind
and maimed, the aged and decrepit, the weak widows or young orphans, which
are either past their labor, or not come unto it. The which is signified, by
that phrase of speech which the holy Ghost uses. Leuit. 25. 35. If thy brother
be waxen poor, and his Leuit. 25. 35.
hand fails, or trembles and shakes, then thou shall relieve him: by which
is meant the weak, sick and impotent, who are unable to get their own living.
And amongst these (if our bounty cannot extend to all) we must choose out those
who are in greatest necessity; and especially such as are most honest and
religious; for as we must do good Gal. 6. 10.
unto all: so principally unto those who are of the household of faith.

Sect. 5. That we must avoid negligence in giving
By all which it plainly appears, that it is not enough, that we be liberal
and open handed; but it is further required that we make choice of such as God
in his word has commended unto us; relieuing those poor who have his gracious
pasport to show, and esteeming them as vagrants that come without it. In which
our choice two extremes are to be avoided. The one is negligence and
carelessness, whereby men give they care not to whom; showing therein their
prodigality and contempt of their money, rather then their charity toward
the poor, or their love unto God. But this we must carefully avoid, Psalm.
41. 1.
and no less study the husbanding of the poores stock (that those being
passed by, who have no need, there may be sufficient for the^ who are truly
poor, as the Apostle speaks. 1. Tim. 1. Tim. 5. 16.
5. 16.) then the well managing of our own estate; for (as one says) pars
sacrilegij est, res pauperum dare non pauperibus, it is a kind of sacrilege,
to give the poores portion, to those who are not poor. And even the heathen
man could tell us, that a wise and virtuous man will not give, but Habebit
sinum facilem non perfora^um. etc. Senec. de beata vita. cap 23.
when he is moved by a right and probable reason, because a gift ill given is
to be reckoned among our least honest losses. And therefore he will have his
bosom easy, but not open; out of which many things go out by direction of
wisdom, but nothing falls to the ground at unawares. For what husbandman is
so free in sowing his seed, who casts it indifferently into all grounds,
fallow and manured; yea upon the high way and hard rocks, where it is sure to
be lost and come to naught? and why then should we show less care, about this
seed which is more precious, and consequently the loss greater, and the
inconsiderate loosing more faulty Seneca.
and blame worthy? For Turpissimum genus perdendi est inconsulta donatio, un
advised giving is the worst kind of loosing, and much worse to him who
bestows a gift ill, then it were to the other not to receive it; for it is
another fault if we do not receive, but it is ours if we make not good choice
of those unto whom we give.

Sect. 6. That we must not be over scrupulous in making choice.
The other extreme is too much care and scrupulosity, when men of almesgiuers
will be judges, or 2. These. 3. 13.
justices of peace, and are so busy in examining the poor about their estate
and desert, that they can find no leisure to open their purse or relieve their
wants. With which practice the Apostle meets. 2. These. 3. 13. for having
given charge that the idle should not be relieved, he adds in the next
words, but ye brethren be not weary of well doing. As though he should say;
let not the disorder and inordinate courses of some, make you desist from doing
the works of mercy, and to pick a quarrel against almesdeedes, because of
the unworthiness of those who are to receive them. And therefore let us take
heed, that we do not use this practice as a veil to hide our niggardliness
and hardheartednesse, because we can meet with none worthy to have the^. And
to this end let us remember that we do not out of justice and equity, give
rewards to them that have deserved them, but an alms and free gift out of
mercy and pity, to relieve the poor whom we see in necessity; and that if
we take convenient care, though the alms be lost in respect of the party who
has received them; yet not unto us in respect of the fruit of our
beneficence. For we have given it in love unto God and in obedience to his
commandment, and he will be our paimaister in rewarding our charity,
according to that gracious promise of our Savior. Math. 10. 41.
Math. 10. 41. He that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous
man, shall receive a righteous man's reward; who also professes, that what is
done to the poor for his sake, is done unto himself. Math. 25. 40.
There is no husbandman that will wholely refrain his sowing of seed, because
there are many grounds unfit to receive it, but this makes him more careful
to choose such as are fruitful and fertile; and more painful in tilling,
dunging, and manuring those that are barren, that they may be made fruitful;
and much less must we take such discouragements in sowing the seeds of our
beneficence, but hold the same course in making them better by our benefits;
and that the rather because we are assured that though the ground where we
sow our almesdeedes do prove barren, yet God himself will return unto us a
fruitful harvest.

Sect. 7. That we must give alms constantly.
And thus much for the object of our alms: the time of performing this duty
is daily, continually, and constantly, as our ability will bear, and the
necessity of the poor shall require, according Eccles 11* 6
to that. Eccles. 11. 6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening hold
not thine hand. And this assiduitie in the action is employed in the object. For
whereas he says, that the godly man gives to the poor, he implies thus
much, that he continues giving, so long as they continue in their poverty;
and that there is no end of his bounty, till he sees an end of their wants.
Neither does he vpbraide the poor man with remembrance of former benefits
when he renueth his suites, as though it were too great boldness in him to
crave often, and superfluous for himself to give often to the same person: but
remembering that his heavenly father renueth his mercies unto him every morning,
and harkneth graciously to his suites so often as he wants and craves; he
imitateth his unwearied goodness, and gives often to the same poor man,
according to his own ability and the others necessity, if he see that his
wants are not caused through his idleness and negligence, but through the hand
of God lying heavy upon him. Or if God has provided otherwise, for those whom
we have formerly relieved, this must not put an end to our charity and
almesdeedes, seeing the godly man gives to the poor, that is, so long as
there are any poor, so long he gives, his liberality not being appropriated
unto any persons, but extending it self to the same estate and condition of
poverty, when as he finds it in new subjects. And therefore as the fountain
sending forth it streams, first fills one empty hole as it runs, and
then goes into another, and never cease till it has filled all: so the
fountain of the righteous man's bounty never cease to communicate the
streams of his beneficence, but after he has supplied the wants of one and
many, he still seeks after more, and never thinks himself so rich in good
works and almesdeedes, that now he may give over and spend upon the stock,
blessing himself in his former bounty; but still he continues his spiritual
trade and never faints, until the great paimaister have given him an
everlasting reward. And because God has so ordained that there shall always be
poor (according to the saying of our Savior, the poor you shall always have
Math. 26. 11.
with you) for the exercise of their faith and patience, and of rich men's
bounty and obedience, that so both being approved, both may also be richly
rewarded; therefore he resolves to be constant in his beneficence, and that in
obedience to God who has commanded it, according to that Deuteronomy. 15. 11. The
poor shall never cease out of the land, therefore I command thee saying, thou
shall open Deuteronomy. ^5. 11.
thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and thy needy in the land.
The which perseverance in well doing, has the promise of reward appropriated
unto it. Gal. 6. 9. Let us not (says the Apostle) Gal. 6 9.
be weary of well doing, for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. And
therefore as we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to
them that are of the household of faith.

CHAP. 5. What almesdeedes are, and of the true causes from which they arise.
Sect. 1. That men are grown cold in these works of mercy.
WE have entreated according to our order propounded, of the action and object
of almesdeedes severally; and now it follows that we join them together, he
has given to the poor. In which words he shows, that it is a virtue or
property of a godly and righteous man to be liberal in almesdeedes, and in
those special works of mercy and beneficence whereby the poor and needy are
comforted and relieved. The which duty in this frozen age of the world is much
neglected, by reason that self love and covetousness do so abound, and men
are grown so cold and careless in the performance of these charitable
actions, that their hearts seem frozen, unto such an icie, if not flinty
hardness, that the deep sighs and scalding tears of the distressed poor
cannot thawe or supple them; and their hands stiff and benumbed, being
forsaken of the kindly heat of charity and devotion, that they cannot
stretch them out to perform these Christian duties: yea this utter neglect or
slack performance of the works of mercy, is to be observed (and even with
tears of blood to be lamented) not only among carnal worldlings, who in
respect of other things have no show or semblance of any goodness in them, but
even among professors of religion (by reason that covetousness, pride and
self-love do so reign and rule in the hearts of the most) that rhis
Christian duty which is so often commended unto us in the Scriptures, and
magnified so much in the writings of antiquity, is grown almost so out of use,
that now if ever it needs urging.

Sect. 2. What almesdeeds are.
In which regard I will the more largely insist upon it. And first I will
speak of the duty it self, and then of the reasons which may enforce it. The
duty it self is almesdeedes, or giving to the poor; which is a good work,
or work of mercy, whereby a Christian out of faith, obedience, charity and
compassion, communicates and gives something necessary for the sustentation
of life unto the poor for their relief, and the supplying of their wants, to
Gods glory and their mutual good. By which description it appears, that
howsoever any man may give gifts, yet only the Christian and godly man can
rightly perform this duty of almesdeedes. For it is a good work, and there
is none do good, but those that are good, neither is it possible, that Math.
^. 18 and 12. 33.
there should be good fruit, unless it spring from a good tree. It is a
sacrifice unto God, which none can offer but those that serve him, yea a
Christian sacrifice, which not any can offer in an acceptable manner, unless
they themselves in Christ be first accepted.

Sect. 3. The true causes of almesdeedes from which they arise. 1. Faith.
But this will more plainly appear by that which follows in the
description, which shows the true fountain out of which almesdeedes flow, as
faith, obedience, charity, mercy; all which being proper to the godly
Christian, it follows that these works of mercy be also peculiar unto him.
First then our alms are to arise from a lively faith, which formalizeth all
the Christians actions, and puts the maine difference between their works
and the same works done by worldlings. For first we are assured that God is
good unto us, before we can show any goodness toward our brethren; that he
has given us all we have, before we will part with any thing for his sake;
that he will give us all things which will make us happy and glorious, before
we will part with those things wherein men place their worldly happiness. So
that those gifts which are given to the poor by infidels, carnal worldlings,
and men professing christianity, but yet continuing grosely ignorant of the
maine principles of religion, and in the state of infidelity, are not such
Christian alms as are acceptable unto God, or as will assure us that we are
godly and blessed: for to do a work in faith and approved in the sight of
God, is not only to be truly persuaded and assured, that the thing we do is
warranted by Gods word and allowed by him; but that we also in Christ are
accepted of him, which faith being wanting it is impossible that our best
actions should please God, because they are but sin, as the Apostle tells
Heb. 11 6. Romans 14. 23.
us. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 23.

Sect. 4. The second cause is obedience unto God.
Secondly, the godly man's alms is given in obedience to God, because he has
commanded it. In which regard he puts no difference between friend or
enemy, nor respects his own praise or profit, to be thereby swaied in doing
these works of mercy; but always has God before his eyes, and chiefly
intends in his alms to do him service. And therefore such alms as are
given, without any respect to Gods commandment, out of mere humanity, and
natural pity, or for worldly ends, as profit and vaineglory, are no badges
of christianity, nor any infallible properties of a blessed man. Math. 6. 2.


Sect. 5. The third cause is charity. Fitst, the love of God*
Thirdly, the christians alms arise from true charity and unfeigned love; and
are therefore called 2. Cor. 8. 4.
by the Apostle chri, that is a gift given out of mere good will. The which is
so necessary to the doing of alms, that they are of no worth, if they be done
without it. For so the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13. 3. Though I feed the poor
with all my goods, and have no charity, it profits me nothing. 1. Cor. 13 3.
Now this charity from whence almesdeedes spring is twofold. The first is the
love of God, for when we are persuaded, that God dearly loves us, and as a
pledge hereof has given unto us his dear Son to the death for our
redemption, and with him all good things, respecting this life or the life to
come; then from the fire of this divine love toward us, flameth or rather
sparkleth our love toward him again, the which we manifest by loving our
neighbors for his sake, and approve both our love and thankfulness to be
hearty and sincere, by giving unto them somewhat out of that store wherewith
God has enriched us, in obedience to his commandment; and that we may
glorify his name by having the light of our godly conversation shining before
men. Which duties of love and Christian charity who so neglect, they show that
they are destitute of the true love of God, as the Apostle affirms, 1. Ioh.
3. 17. Who so has this worlds good, and 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
sees his brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him? Even as on the otherside, they are
barren of almesdeedes though they give never so much to the poor, whose
liberality springs not from the fountain of Gods love.

Sect. 6. How our alms arise from the love of God in respect of the order.
Now the order to be observed in this Christian beneficence is, upon
consideration of this infinite love of God toward us in giving us his dear
son, to have our hearts so inflamed with love and enlarged with thankfulness,
that we be ready to give our selves unto God, and to dedicate and consecrate
our souls, bodies, goods, all that we have to his service for the advancement
of his glory; and consequently to give liberally to the relief of the poor,
because we know that it is acceptable unto him. And this the Apostle observed
in the Macedonians, who being to extend their Christian bounty to the
relieuing of the poor Saints, first gave themselves unto the Lord, and then
their alms to the afflicted Saints. 2. Cor. 8. 5. 2. Cor. 8. 5.


Sect. 7. 2. From our love to our brethren.
And as our alms must principally arise from our love toward God; so also in
the next place 2. Cor. 7. 5.
from our love toward our neighbors, in which regard they are rightly called
a benevolence, because they proceed from mere love and free good will. The
which our love must not only spring from hence, that they are of the same
flesh, but also because they are brethren of the same father, and members of
the same body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head. Not so much because they are
of the same country, as because they are of the same Church and communion of
Saints, and of the same religion, faith and baptism.

Sect. 8. The fourth cause is mercy and compassion.
Lastly, the blessed man's bounty in the outward action of the hand, must spring
from the inward mercy and compassion of his heart; so that it is not enough to
relieve the necessities of the poor, but like a member of the same body, he
must do it with a sense and feeling of their misery and penury, as though he
suffered together with them. And this duty is employed by those phrases, which
the Scriptures use in exhorting to these works of mercy. As Esa. 58. 10. If
thou draw out thy soul to the hungry and satisfy the afflict^^ ^sa 58 (...)
soul. So that it is not enough to draw out our purse and relieve them,
unless we draw out our souls also by pitying them. And 1. Ioh. 3. 17. Who 1.
Ioh. 3. 17.
so has these worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up
his bowels of compassion from him, etc. So that it is not sufficient to have an
open liberal hand, unless also we have an open and compassionate heart. And
in other places this is expressly required, as Hos. 6. 6. I will have mercy Hos.
6 6.
and not sacrifice. And therefore if the sacrifice of our almesdeedes be not
mingled with the oil and incense of mercy and compassion, it will not be
acceptable unto God. Thus the Apostle also requires us to remember them that
are in bonds as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity, as being our
selves also of the same body. Heb. 13. 3. An Heb. 13. 3.
example whereof we have in Job, who was not only bountiful in relieuing the
poor, but was also in his soul grieved for them, and wept for him that was
troubled. Job 30. 15. Job 30. 15.


Sect 9. The Hebrew name implies that mercy and almesdeedes must go together.
Chesedh.
And this is signified by the names which in the Scriptures are given to
almesdeedes. For whereas the Hebrews have two names to express them by; the
one is which signifies also mercy, or those tender affections in parents,
which the Graecians call ^orga. Implying thus much; that the inward infection
of the heart is to be joined with the outward act of the hand. So likewise the
Greek word leemosun derived from leo signifying mercy, is indifferently
translated mercy or almesdeedes, to note unto us, that as they are joined in
the word, so they must not be disioyned in the work.

Sect 10. That they only are blessed who join with their almesdeedes mercy and
compassion.
Which if we do, we shall assuredly be those blessed men which the Psalmist
describes and not otherwise; for the blessed man of whom he speaks, not
only disperseth and gives to the poor, but is also gracious and full of
compassion. verse 5. So not simply he that gives, but he that gives out of
mercy and compassion, lends unto the Lord. Pro. 19. 17. And he alone is
blessed according Pro 19. 17. and 14. 21.
to that. Pro. 14. 21. He that has mercy on the poor happy is he. And
therefore if we would attain unto blessedness, we must have in giving our
alms, not only a liberal hand, but a merciful and pitiful heart,
imitating our Savior, God blessed for ever, who as he exceeded all in bounty,
(for though he were rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we by his
poverty might be made rich, as it is. 2. Cor. 8. 9.) So also in pity and
compassion. For we have not an high Priest who cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was contented in our flesh to suffer many
miseries, that by his own experience, he might the rather extend unto us his
mercy and pity, when as he sees us plunged into the like afflictions, as we
may see Heb. Heb. 2. 17. 13. and 4 15. 16.
2. 17. 18. and 4. 15. 16. The experience whereof we have in many places of the
new testament, for when he gave sight to the blind, healed the sick and fed
the hungry, it is said that he was affected with compassion, and even earned
in his bowels in the sight and sense of their miseries and afflictions, as
appears. Math. 14. 14. 15. 32. 20. Math. 14. 14. and 15. 32. 20 34.
34. and in many other the like places.

Sect 11. That almesdeedes are only rightly done by those who are merciful.
And surely then alone these works of mercy are rightly and thoroughly
performed, when as the outward work proceeds from the inward habit. Then
do we communicate to the necessities of the poor, liberally, freely,
lovingly, and cheerfully, when by our pity and compassion we make their case
our own, and so not only suffer with them in their wants, but also be cheared
and refreshed in their fullness. Then do we touch these sores of poverty with
the softest hand, when as our selves have a feeling of them. Then (like good
Physicians) we take most care in curing their diseases of want and penury,
when we our selves are affected, and through compassion afflicted with their
griefs and pains. And then our heat of brotherly love will be much the
warmer and kindelier, when it is redoubled with some reflection from our selves,
and has the flame of self love to reenforce and strengthen it.

Sect. 12. Pity without almesdeedes unprofitable.
But as we are to take heed of bare alms without mercy, so much more of naked
mercy without alms; which is that false visard and counterfeit of mercy
wherewith hypocrites disguise themselves, of whom the Apostle James speaks.
Iam. 2. 15.
Chap. 2. 15. If a brother or sister (says he) be naked and destitute of
daily food, and one of you say unto him, depart in peace, be ye warmed and
filled, notwithstanding you give them not those things which are needful for
the body, what does it profit? For if we have in our hearts the inward habit of
mercy and compassion, it will surely exercise it self not only by the tongue
in fair words, but also by the hands in charitable works, the which also the
Apostle requires. 1. Ioh. 3. 18. Let us not love in word, neither in tongue
only, but in deed and in truth. And this is employed by the other name 1. Ioh.
3. 18.
which the Hebrews use to signify almesdeedes Thedhakah.
and works of mercy; whereby is also signified justice, which is such a grace
or virtue, as rests not only in the affection of the heart, but proceeds
to the act and work. So that by both these names together the nature of
almesdeedes is fully expressed; the one signifying the inward habit of mercy
and compassion seated in the heart, the other the outward exercise of it by the
hand: whereby we are taught, that in these works of mercy, we must join the
affection with the action, and the action with the affection, the one being the
fountain, the other the stream; the one the root, the other the fruit, that
flows and springs from it.

CHAP. 6. That we ought to visit the poor, that we may the better perform
these works of mercy.
Sect. 1. That we ought to visit the poor.
NOw that this compassion may the more affect our hearts, and both exercise and
manifest it self in the works of mercy, it is fit, that not only we take
notice of the miseries and wants of the poor by the ear and report of others,
but also that we often visit them, and so be eyewitnesses of their
calamities. For this the Apostle James makes a note and badge of that religion
which is pure and undefiled before God, not only to relieve the poor, but to
visit the fatherless Iam. 1. 27.
and widows in their afflictions. Iam. 1. 27. And our Savior numbreth it
among those works of mercy, which at the day of judgment Mat. 25. 36 and 43
he will reward with everlasting blessedness. Mat. 25. 36. and the neglect
thereof among those sins which shall be punished with everlasting damnation.
verse 43. So that if no more could be said to incite us to this duty, this
alone were sufficient.

Sect. 2. Reasons which may move us to visit the poor. 1. Reason
But yet consider further the use and benefit of it, which is so great and
manifold, that almesdeedes cannot conveniently be done without it. For first by
visiting the poor we shall be the better able to make good choice, and to
discover who are truly poor from those who are counterfeit; as also who are
religious, honest, and painful in their callings, from those who are profane
wicked, and idle droanes.

Sect. 3. 2. Reason
Secondly, hereby we shall the better know how to fit our alms to their
necessities, both in respect of the proportion, and also the special kinds of
their wants? and so when we not only give good, but fit things unto them, the
benefit hereby is much increased. If therefore the husband man for the well
sowing of his seed, which will bring but a corruptible crop, does not hand
over head cast it into the ground, but carefully observes the seed, the
soil, the season, and all other circumstances; why should the Christian seeds
man carelessly cast his seed he knows not where, which if it be well sown
and in fit grounds will return unto him a fruitful harvest of eternal
happiness; seeing he is not blessed who negligently gives, but he that
guides his affairs with discretion? Psalm. 112. 5. Not he simply Psalm. 112. 5.
that gives alms, but he who bestows them with good advice, according to
that. Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will Psalm
41.
deliver him in the time of trouble.

Sect 4. 3. Reason.
Thirdly, if we would thus sometime visit the poor at their houses, they would
not so often have occasion to visit us at ours, nor be forced to straggle
abroad to beg necessaries; the which the Lord forbids. Deuteronomy. 15. 4. Deuteronomy.
15. 4.
and those who have no house nor home because they will live without a calling,
like idle drones, upon the common spoil, would be easily discovered and
discouraged, whenas having neither home where to be visited, nor neighbor to
visit them, they should find little relief, unless they earne it with the
sweat of their brows.

The sight of the poores miseries is a notable means to move compassion.
Fourthly, it would be a notable means to make us more compassionate, when as
we should see their small provision, hungry fare, thin clothes, and hard
lodging: the children crying for hunger, and the parents out crying them
because they have no food to give them; some lying in straw for want of
beds, others drinking water in stead of drink, and a third sort near
starued with hunger for want of bread, or escaping that, quaking and shiuering
with cold for lack of fire. Which miseries of the poor if they move a
christian heart to hear of the^, how much more would it stir the^ up to
co^passio^ if they saw the^, for things seen more feelingly affect us, then
those which we conceive by report of others. And this is one cause why the wise
man says, that it is better to Eccles. 7. 2.
go into the house of mourning, then into the house of feasting, because it
will work upon our affections, and make us lay the afflictions of others to
heart, partaking with them in their sorrows by a sympathy and fellow feeling:
and this compassion working upon our hearts, will not let our hands be idle,
but will enlarge their bounty and make them more readily and liberally to
contribute toward the relief of the poores necessities.

Sect. 6. That if we visit the poor we may join spiritual and corporal
alms together.
Fifthly, if we visit the poor, we may do them double and treble good by
joining spiritual and corporal alms both together, instructing the ignorant,
reprehending the faulty, admonishing them who err through infirmity,
counsailing them that want counsel, and especially refreshing their hearts
with sweet consolations in these their wants and afflictions; to which purpose
we our selves have been comforted by God in our crosses, according to that. 2.
Cor. 1. 4. Blessed be God, who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we
may be able to comfort them 2. Cor. 1 4
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God. The which means of their spiritual good will at these times be most
effectual, when as by our alms we testify our love; and then shall our good
words find most easy entrance into their hearts, when as our good works have
prepared the way.

Sect. 7. That by visiting the poor we may learn to be thankful.
But this duty is so much out of use among the rich and wealthy, through the
pride, niceness, and uncharitableness of these times, that there will happily
seem to be in it some absurdity, unless it be pressed with stronger
arguments then those which arise from neighbourly love. And therefore if their
benefit will not move us to put it in practice, yet at least let love of our
selves prevail. For by seeing the wants and miseries of our brethren, we in
our own particular may receive much good. For we shall have hereby just
occasion offered of bursting forth into Gods praises, who has dealt so
bou^tifully with us, giving us not only plenty of his blessings for our own
use which others want, but also making us helpful unto our brethren. For those
who abound will never be so thankful unto God for his benefits as they
ought, unless they have learned their worth out of the experience of their
own and others wants.

Sect. 8. That by visiting the poor we may learn temperance and sobriety.
Again, by looking upon these sad spectacles of misery and penury, we may
learn temperance and sobriety in the use of Gods blessings, and not to abuse
them unto superfluity and excess, seeing many as good as our selves in Gods
true estimate do want necessaries; but to husband them in a frugall manner,
that out of our abundance we may more liberally communicate to our neighbors
wants: least abusing Gods gifts he take away, and bind us to temperance by the
iron chain of extreme necessity, when we would not be held by the gentle
bond of virtue and obedience. Finally, we have by these fights just occasion
given to prepare our selves against the day of affliction, penury and
distress, when as we see them who are clothed with the same flesh subject to
them, between whom and us there is no difference, but that which has been
made by Gods free grace and undeserved mercy.

Sect 9. That when we visit the poor we visit Christ in them.
And therefore let not pride of greatness* deprive our souls of so much
goodness; but when comparing the highness of our estate with the lowness of
this Christian duty, we are made loath to endure it, let us remember that
Christ has done the like for us; and we in token of our love and
thankfulness, do it again to our Savior Christ. For being in the bosom of
the father in all glory and happiness, this light from on high visited us, and
abasing himself unto the low degree of a servant, he has by giving his
precious blood as the price of our redemption, not only visited but redeemed
us his people, according to Zachariahs song. Luke 1. 68. 78. Yea he came among
Luke 1. 68. 78.
us, and not only saw, but also took upon him our infirmities, and
participated with us in our afflictions the more to enlarge his mercy and
compassion, when he was touched with the feeling of our griefs, as it is Heb.
2. 17. 4. 15. Now Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15.
what does he require for this unspeakable love and kind visitation, but love
for love, and that we visit him as he has visited us, not in his own person,
for he is glorious in the highest heavens, and our goodness extends not unto
him; but in his Psalm. 16. 3.
poor Saints and brethren who are the members of his body; unto whom
whatsoever we do, he accounts as done unto himself. Math. 25. 40. Math. 25.
40.
And therefore though we be never so rich and honorable, let us not disdain
to visit the poor Ezech. 16. 6. 7.
seeing in them we visit Christ, who abased himself much more for our sakes,
visiting us when we were loathsomely defiled in our blood, and not only sick
but stark dead, and like Lazarus in the grave stinking in the putrefaction of
our sins, the vassailes of Satan, the children of wrath, and very firebrands
of hell. So that there is no poor so base and loathsome as we were; nor no
worldly potentate so rich and glorious as our Savior Christ, who was God,
equal to his father. And therefore seeing he thus abased himself for our
sakes, let us for his, a little stoop and humble our selves to perform all
good offices to his poorest Saints; otherwise let us be assured that if we be
ashamed of him who has advanced us, he will be ashamed of us; if we scorn
and disdain him in his poorest members, he will disdain and contemn us at
the day of his appearing.

CHAP. 7. Of the right ends of giving alms.
Sect. 1. The principal* end is Gods glory.
AND thus have we seen the fountain from which our alms should spring; let
us consider also in a word the maine ends where to they tend, which are the
glory of God, our own and our neighbors good. The principal end at which we
must aim is Gods glory; which as it is to be the chief motive of all
Christian duties, according to that, Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so Matthew. 5.
16.
shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your father
which is in heaven: so especially of these works of mercy. Which motive the
Apostle uses to stir the Corinthians unto a liberal contribution, not only
that hereby the 2. Cor. 9. 13.
wants of the Saints might be supplied, but chiefly that God might be
glorified by this bountiful distribution. For as the Lord and master of the
family is much honored, in his wise and gracious government, when as the
steward obeying his commandment, gives every one of his fellow-seruants his
allowance and portion in due season; so is our great Lord glorified in the
Church, when as the richer sort yielding subjection unto the Gospel of Christ,
do like faithful stewards, thus employ Gods wealth and riches committed unto
their dispeniation, to the relief of those in the family that stand in need.

Sect. 2. The subordinate ends of giving alms.
The subordinate ends at which we must aim, are the good of our brethren, who
are refreshed with our alms, the adorning of our profession with these fruits
of piety, the edification of others by our good example, the stopping of the
mouths of our adversaries, when as they see our love toward God manifested in
our love toward our brethren, and have nothing to speak against our Christian
conversation: Finally our own present good, in respect both of temporal and
spiritual benefits, and the furthering and assuring of our eternal salvation.

Sect. 3. That if our ends be evil, the action is unprofitable.
But if contrariwise the fountain of our alms be pride and self-love, and
our end be, like the Matthew. 6. 2. Luc. 18.
hypocrites, to be seen of men, we have our reward, as our Savior teaches
us. Matthew. 6. 2. Or if with the proud Pharisie we give alms, that we may
glory and boast our selves in them, even unto God himself: or with Popish
Iusticiaries, do them with an opinion of merit, or to satisfy Gods justice
for our sins (for so they teach, that they satisfy for sin by those three
principal works, almes-deedes, prayer, and fasting) then in our almsdeedes,
we shall sacrifice unto God swines flesh, and the head of a dog, or (which is
more abominable unto him) our works defiled with hellish pride and horrible
blasphemy against his free grace, and the all sufficiency of Christ's merits
and satisfaction, by whose poverty alone we are 2. Cor. 8. 9.
made rich. As it is 2. Cor. 8. 9.

CHAP. 8. Of the subject matter of alms: where is showed that we ought to give
unto the poor only that which is our own; and what it should be both in
respect of quantity and quality.
Sect. 1. That we must give that only which is our own.
ANd so I come from the causes moving us to give our alms, to speak of the
work it self, where we will consider the subject matter about which it is
exercised, the persons to whom it belongs, the right manner how they are to
be bestowed, the time when we are bound to do them, the properties of
Christian alms, wherein they differ from the alms of hypocrites and
wordlings, and lastly, the diverse sorts and kinds of them. In respect of the
first, we must give only that which is our own, by just and lawful means
derived unto us: as by inheritance, free gift or honest getting, by our own
painful labors and endeauours. For almes-deedes are liberal gifts, whereby
we alienate the property of the thing given from our selves, and not from
other men, to the relief of those who stand in need. And to be liberal of
that which is not our own, but of right belongs unto others, is to take
goods from the right owners, to whom God has given them, and to bestow them on
others at our own pleasure, which is (as we say in the proverb) to cut a large
shiue out of another man's loaf, to rob Peter, that we may pay Paul, and in
truth no better then plain theft in the sight of God. Now in our Christian
sacrifice of almes-deedes, we must take heed we offer not unto God strange
fire nor stolen oblations; for if the hire of an harlot, or price of a dog,
might not Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
be consecrated unto God, because they were an abomination unto him, then
neither may we offer that which we have gotten by stealth and robbery, fraud
and deceit, oppression and cruelty, which are no less abominable and odious.
Esaias Esa. 61. 8.
61. 8. And therefore justice and mercy must be matched together, according to
that Micha. 6. Micha. 6. 8.
8. deal justly and love mercy, and as mercy must lay out that which is
given to the poor, so justice must first bring it in. The which is signified
by those phrases which the Scriptures use in enioyning unto us this duty of
giving alms; as, Cast thy bread upon the face of the waters. And honor the
Eccles. 11. 1. Prou. 3. 9. Esaias 58. 7.
Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruit of all thine increase. And
deal thy bread to the hungry. implying that it must be our own and not other
men's. And the Apostle requires every one to lay by him in store for this use,
as God has prospered 1. Cor. 16. 2.
him; so that nothing must be given to God for the benefit of the poor, but
that which he has first given unto us, in blessing our honest endeauours with
fruitful success. So as we may say with David, 1. Chron. 29. 14. All things
come of thee, and of thine own we have given thee.

Sect. 2. Ill gotten goods must not be given, out restored to the owners.
Whereby it appears that men cannot lawfully give alms out of those goods
which they have gotten by theft and rapine, briberie and extortion, simonie and
usury, dicing and unlawful gaming. For as the Ciuilians say well. Bonus vsus
non iustificat unjust quaesita. The good use does not justify the unjust
getting of their goods. Because such goods are not their own but other men's,
which they are bound in conscience to restore to their true owners; unless it
be in this case, that they cannot possibly make restitution, because those whom
they have wronged are dead or unknown unto them; and then it being unlawful
to keep these goods themselves, it is the best course to give them unto God,
the chief Lord of all, when the next and proper owner cannot be found; even as
by our Law stolen goods found in the ground of an inferior Tenant, belongs to
the chief Landlord, when the party appears not whose they are, or else to
the King, when the thief is taken with his theft about him. An example whereof
we have in Zacheus, who having by his office gotten much unjustly, after his
conversion, offers Luke 19. 8.
fourefold restitution unto all whom he had wronged, and because many could not
be found to whom he should make it, he offers to bestow half of his goods
to the relief of the poor. Where by the way we may observe that this
heathenish Publican was in his worst estate to be justified before many among
us, making profession of Christian Religion, who if they should make a
fourfold, yea, single restitution of their ill gotten goods, could not make
the poor much beholding for that half which should remain, seeing all would
be too little to make satisfaction.

Sect. 3. That it is unlawful to give other men's goods proved.
But if we know the parties whom we have wronged in ill getting of our goods,
we must restore them unto them again. For God much prefers this just
obedience before an unjust and wicked sacrifice: yea, whereas that is pleasing
and acceptable, this his soul hates, because in his word he has forbidden
it. According to that Prou. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination unto the Lord. And God himself professes, I the Lord love
judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering. Esa. 61. 8. So the son of
Syrach. Eccli. Esa 61 8.
34. 18. He that sacrifices of a thing wrongfully gotten, his offering is
ridiculous, and the gifts of unjust men are not accepted. For he who retains
ill gotten goods, and restores them not to the right owners, lives in his
sin without repentance, and as it follows in the next words; The most high
is not pleased with the offerings of the wicked, neither is he pacified for
sin by the multitude of sacrifices.

Sect. 4. Alms out of goods gotten by oppression unlawful.
But as all sacrifices and almes-deedes are unlawful, which are offered and
given out of ill gotten goods; so some above others are most abominable; as
first when as men give alms out of those goods which are gotten by oppressing
the poor, and that whether they wring from some poor by cruelty, deceit or
violence, and give unto others; for as one says, What kind of gift is that
which one receives with joy, and another loses with August. Quaie est illud
munus quod alter tum gaudio accipit, alter cum la^hymis amit^it?
tears? or pull from the same poor by pounds at one time, and give unto them
by pence at another. As is the practice of those cruel, yet vaineglorious
Landlords, who rack their poor Tenants the whole year, and in the twelve
days only keep open house, and feast them with some small part of that which
is their own. But he that brings unto God such an alms, or offering of the
goods of the poor, does as one that kills the son before the eyes of his
father, as it is Eccli. 34. 20.

Sect. 5. Alms given out of the spoils of the Church unlawful.
But much more abominable are their alms, who spoil the Church by simonie and
sacrilege, and taking into their possession the portion of Leui, which is
consecrated unto God, think to please the Lord, and as it were, satisfy for
their sin, by giving some small alms to the poor, or keeping good
hospitality of the spoils of the Church. And that not only for the time
past, but with a resolution to continue still in their sin, paying these
pittances to the poor, as the price or penalty of their sacrilegious
wickedness: but unto these may be well fitted the saying of the holy Ghost.
Prou. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is an Prou. 21. 26.
abomination: How much more when he brings it with a wicked mind?

Sect 6. Alms given By Non residents unlawful*
But above all, the alms of our unconscionable Non-residents are most odious
unto God; who multiply one living upon another, and starve the souls of the
people, that they may pamper and feed their own belly. All which impiety is
gilded over with this pretense, that they must have wherewith to keep good
hospitality, and to give unto the poor; and what is this but to come twice or
thrice a year to their charge to fleece the sheep, and prey upon the flock,
and then for a day or two put them into a fat pasture, for the feeding or
rather feasting of their bodies? which must be a full recompense for the not
feeding of their souls the whole year after.

Sect. 7. Diverse cases wherein it is unlawful to give.
Secondly, whereas alms are only to be given out of our own goods, and not
that which belongs unto others: hence we learn that it is not lawful for
one partner to give alms out of the common stock without the consent of the
other, unless he put it on his own account.

Thirdly, it is not lawful for him who is indebted more then he is well able
to pay, to give alms, seeing he gives not his own, but that which belongs to
other men.

Fourthly, It is not lawful for a man to give that which he has borrowed from
another man, or that which is left in pawn with him, when the thing is to be
restored in the same particular, and is not spent in the use, as houses, lands,
horses, plate, jewels, and such like; but if restitution be only required in
the same kind, as in things which are spent in the use, where the property is
alienated with the use, as namely meat, money, corn, etc. it is lawful to give
out of that which is borrowed, when the giver purposes to make satisfaction by
restoring the like to the true owner.

Sect. 8. That all the former cases are to be understood with some exception.
All which cases are to be understood with this exception, if the poor be but
in ordinary want, and not in extreme necessity; as when he is in danger to
be famished or starued, or in extreme and imminent peril, to perish for want
of relief. or to be utterly ruined and overthrown in his whole estate; in
which cases nothing is to be accounted proper, but all becomes commune Mat.
12. 1. 3. 4. Dut. 23. 24. 25.
through this urgent and irresistable necessity. Yet so as that he who gives
must purpose to the uttermost of his power to make satisfaction to the owner,
for those goods which he has thus bestowed; seeing though it may seem to be
a work of mercy to give relief in such extremities, yet not of justice, if
we give that which belongs to other men, without any purpose of making
restitution.

Sect 9. That a certain quantity is not determined.
The second point to be considered in the matter of our alms, is the quantity
or measure of them; the which is not particularly determined in the Scriptures,
because there are so many circumstances which alter the case that no certain
rule could be given; but it is left to the discretion of the prudent Christian,
to give according to the occasion offered, more or less, as he thinks good.
And therefore the Apostle exhorting the Corinthians to abound in this grace,
adds that he speaks not this by commandment, but by occasion of the
forwardness of others. 2. Cor. 8. 7. 8. 2. Cor. 8. 7 8.
and afterward. 2. Cor. 9. 7. Every man according and 9. 7.
as he purposes in bis heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of
necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. And this the nature of the work
requires; for giving is a free and liberal action, and therefore is to be
done freely and willingly, and consequently cannot be done by all in the like
proportion because their hearts are not alike enlarged with love and bounty.

Sect. 10. That we must give liberally.
But yet this in the general is required, that we give our alms not with a
straight and niggardly hand, but bountifully and largely; the which is employed
by the metaphor of scattering or sowing seed, fitted by the Apostle to this
action of giving alms, 2. Cor. 9. 6. which is usually done 2. Cor. 9. 6.
with a bountiful and full hand; as also by that phrase of opening the hand
wide to the poor and needy, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. and of stretching and reaching Deuteronomy.
15. 11.
out to the poor, which phrase Solomon uses to express the bounty of the
virtuous woman. Pr. Pro. 31. 20.
31. 20. And in regard hereof the act of giving alms is by the Apostle termed
by the name of bounty, and opposed to covetousness, as being contrary unto
it. 2. Cor. 9. 5. And plainly expressed, where the Apostle persuades to this
bounty by annexing that gracious promise. 2. Cor. 9. 2. Cor. 9. 5 8. 6.
6. He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; and makes it to be an
especial grace of the spirit to abound in these works of mercy. v. 8. and an
undoubted sign of the sincerity of our love. 2. Cor. 8. 8. 2. Cor. 8. 8.


Sect. 11. That in giving we must have respect to our own ability.
But yet herein respect must be had (as before I have in part showed) to our
ability, keeping (as the wise man counsaileth us) our cesternes and wels full,
that our selves may drink of them and letting the overplus (as it were at the
waste) run abroad to others in the streets. Pro. 5. 16. Pro. 5. 16. 17.
17. And this also the son of Syrach advises, according to thine ability
stretch out thine hand and give. chap. 14. 13. and give unto the most high
according Eccles. 14. 13.
as he has enriched thee, and as thou have gotten, give with a cheerful eye.
chap. 35. 10. An example and 35. 10.
of which Christian discretion we have in the faithful. Act. 11. 29. Then the
Disciples every man according to his ability determined to send relief unto
Act. ^1. 29.
the brethren. And this the Apostle means where he requires such an
equality, as that some should not be too much eased, and some too much
burdened; but that they should indifferently out of their abundance supply the
wants of others, 2. Cor. 8. 13. 14. 2. Cor 8 13. 14.


Sect. 12. That in case of extreme necessity we must strain our selves above
our ability.
Notwithstanding in cases of urgent necessity and great extreamitie, men are
to strain themselves, and to rack their estates above the reach of their
ability, to preserve their brethren from being tortured in their persons upon
the rack of necessity: for which the Apostle magnifieth the Christian bounty
of the Macedonians, who even above their ability contributed and communicated
to the relief of the poor Saints. And this our Savior requires, Luke 12. 33.
Sell that you have and give alms. And John the Baptist. Luke 3. 11. Luke 12.
33. and 3. 1^.
He that has two coats, let him impart unto him that has none, and he that
has meat let him do likewise. Whereby is meant that he who has more then is
sufficient for the sustentation of life, must communicate it unto those who are
in extreme necessity, and in imminent danger to perish; as we see it
practiced by the faithful in the time of persecution. Acts 2. 45. where they
that had possessions Act. 2. 4^ and ^^. 34 35.
and goods, sold them, and parted them to all, as every man had need,
otherwise unless it be in these cases of extremity, it is lawful to
possess not only those things which are necessary to nature, but also to a
man's state and person. For we read that Paul had a spare cloak at Troas. 2.
Tim. 4. 13. And that our Savior himself had two 2. Tim. 4. 13.
coats in his greatest persecution. Ioh. 19. 23. Ioh. 19 23.


Sect. 13. Of the quality of our alms.
And so much for the quantity. The third thing propounded in the matter of our
alms is the quality of them; in which respect it is required, that we give
to the poor things wholesome, cleanely, convenient and comfortable for the
sustentation of their lives; avoiding therein two extremes, first of those who
give unto them such base and sluttish food as they would scarce offer unto
their dogs. And to this end we must remember, that we do not relieve
contemptible creatures, of another kind inferior to our selves, but those
that are of the same flesh, children of the same father, yea members of the
same body and partakers in hope of the same precious promises. And which is
more that in them we lend unto the Lord, who justly scorneth our base refuse;
yea relieve Jesus Christ himself; and will we give unto him swill and swines
meat, who has given himself unto us, and vouchsafes to nourish our souls
and bodies with his most precious body and blood? The other extreme is to give
unto the poor superfluous, dainties; for it is required that they be fed with
necessary food, and not pa^pered wantonly with superfluities; and our Savior
when he miraculously fed the poor and hungry people that followed him, by his
sole word, did not provide for them delicates (though he might as easily have
done it as the other) but multiplied their barley loaves and fishes. Neither in
truth can men thus feed some in excess, but in the mean time others must
want necessaries, nor do the poor regard dainties (unless it be in their
sickness and weakness) but only desire necessaries, seeing hunger does make
all food sauourie, and every meal a delightful banquet. So Austine says,
vtantur diuites superfluis, dent pauperibus necessaria, Let the rich enjoy
their superfluities, and let them relieve the poor with Aug de verb. dom. Sermon.
necessaries: let them use those things which are bought at high rates, and
give the poor such as are good cheap. And another says, Communicate unto
them thy Hier^me.
riches who feed on course fare and brown bread, and not on quails and
phesants, and who take care to kill hunger, and not to increase luxuriousness.
And again, give to the poor and not the rich, give to sustain necessity and
not to increase wealth.

CHAP. 9. Of the persons who ought to give alms.
Sect. 1. That the rich are bound chiefly to give
THe second general point to be considered are the persons who are to be
exercised in this work of alms, and that both in respect of giving and
receiving. Concerning the former we must consider of the persons to whom the
duty of giving appertains, which admits a double consideration; first of
estate, who are bound to give; secondly of right, who may lawfully perform
this duty. For the first, all of any estate and degree whatsoever are bound
to give when they meet with poorer then themselves, at sometimes, and in some
cases, but principally this duty belongs unto rich men; for whereas the
Scriptures have divided all men into two sorts; the rich, whom God has endued
with possessions and worldly blessings: and the poor who are scanted of them;
God requires that those who abound should minister unto the relief of those
that want. So Luke 16. 9. Make unto Luke 16 9.
you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness. and 1. Tim. 6. 17. 18. Charge
them that are rich in this 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18.
world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate. Thus the Apostle would have the Corinthians
out of their abundance to supply the wants of the faithful that were in
poverty. 2. Cor. 8. 14. And the 2. Cor. 8. 14.
Apostle John says, that who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother
has need, and shuts up the bowels of his compassion from him, how dwells
1. Ioh. 3. 17.
the love of God in him?

Sect. 2. That none are exempted from this duty.
But for as much as men are rich or poor, not only simply, but in relation
unto others; a man is to be esteemed rich not only when he abounds with
worldly wealth, but also when he is compared with one who is much poorer; and
accordingly is to communicate of that which he has to the relief of those who
are in greater necessity. As for example, he who is of a mean and poor
estate, must give alms when he meets with those that are in geater need;
and even those who are in great need, must communicate such as they have unto
them, who are in extreme necessity, and in danger presently to perish,
unless they have some help from others. Thus he that has but a mere
competencie to supply the necessity of nature and estate, is to give something
out of it to relieve those who want necessaries belonging to nature, and those
who have only sufficient for nature, are bound to give unto them who are in
great and present extremity; unless the like necessity be imminent to
themselves. For the rule of justice and charity requiring that we should love
our neighbors as our selves, and do unto them as we would have them to do
unto us; does in the equity thereof require, that we prefer the life of our
brethren before our estate, and that we should endure small wants, to preserve
them from suffering those which are great and dangerous.

Sect. 4. The former point proved by testimonies.
So that not only they who abound in riches, but even those also who are of
mean estate are bound to perform this Christian duty. The which will more
manifestly appear, if we consider both the precepts and examples of holy
Scriptures. The Baptist requires that those who have two coats part with one,
and that they who have Luk 3. 11.
meat do likewise: that is, if he meet with those who are in extreme
necessity, these things being not necessary to the preserving of his own
life and estate. And our Savior commands us to give alms of such things as
we have, be they more or less, better or worse. Luke 11. 41. And if we have
Luke 11. 41.
nothing to spare out of superfluity, we must as (we have heard) sell that
we have and give alms, in cases of great necessity: and if we have nothing
to sell, we must work with our own hands, that we may have to give unto him
that needs. Ephesians. 4. 28. Ephesians. 4. 28.


Sect. 5. Secondly, by examples.
An example hereof we have in the poor widow, which was so much commended by
our Savior Christ, for casting into the treasury her two mites which was all
her substance. Mark. 12. Mark. 12. 43.
43. In the Macedonians who being themselves but poor, gave even above their
ability, to the relief of those who were poorer. 2. Cor. 8. 2. In the Apostles
who wanting silver and gold, gave such 2. Cor. 8. 2.
as they had to the poor criple; restoring him by miracle to the use of his
limbs, that so by his labor he might get his own living. Act. 3. 6. And Act.
3. 6.
in our Savior Christ himself, who though he were so poor, that he lived
upon that which others out of their love and duty ministered unto him, as
appears. Luke 8. 3. yet he himself gave alms to those who were in greater
want, as we Luke 8. 3.
may gather. Ioh. 12. 6. 8. To which purpose one Ioh. 12* 6. 8.
says, that the commandment of mercy is common unto all offices and ages,
neither is the Publican or Ambrose.
soldier, the husbandman or citizen, the rich or poor excepted, but all are
to be admonished that they be ready to give unto him that needs.

Sect. 6. That our small means should move us to give
And therefore let none excuse their neglect of this religious duty, because
their means are small: but rather let this move them the more carefully to
exercise it, as being in respect of them an act, not only of charity, but
also of Christian policy: seeing this is the means whereby being poor they
may become richer, for there is that scatters, and is the more increased; and
there is that spares more then is meet, and comes to pouertit. Pro. 11. 24.
And our Savior promises that Pro. 11. 24.
if we give, it shall be given to us again, good measure, pressed down and
shaken together, and running over. Luke 6. 38. Now no man will in seed time
excuse himself for not sowing his seed, because he has Luke 6. 38.
but a small quantity to spare, above that which he is to spend for his
sustenance that year; but this makes him the rather to cast it into the
ground, that being multiplied he may have also enough the year following.
There is none refuse to trade because their stock is small, but so much the
more diligently they do it, that it may be increased: and therefore seeing
giving alms is our Christian sowing and trading, let not our small means make
us neglect it, but to practice it with more cheerfulness, and so much the
rather because we shall not only reap an earthly croppe, but have also an
heavenly harvest, which will never fail us.

Sect. 7. That the alms of the poor are as acceptable as of the rich. Deuteronomy.
15. 1^.
Neither let any man say that this only belongs unto those who have much to
give; but as for their alms they are so small by reason of the meandness of
their estate, that they have no hope they will be respected; for the Lord
commands not give much, but to open the hand wide, whether it be great or
little, and he measures the deed by the will; and the outward act 2. Cor. 8.
12.
by the habit and internal virtue; he looks not so much, Quid datur, as ex
quo; not to the greatness Q^^n^ita^^m (...) C^h^s. (...) paru^^ est (...)
mag^us (...) ^pp^ra^m*
of the gift, but to the quantity of the store out of which it is given, and
the largeness of the heart, which out of a little can spare somewhat. And
therefore the affection of the giver makes the alms precious and estimable,
or vile and contemptible in Gods sight, in which respect no man's gift (as one
says) is accounted small, who gives it out a great and liberal mind, seeing
our piety is not to be measured by our outward wealth, but by the inward
riches which lies hid in the heart. It is true indeed that rich men give N^
dis^r^pat (...) operum (...) aff^ctus perantium
greater gifts, and mean men less in respect of the matter or thing given,
but there is no difference in the fruit of the work, where there is no want in
the affection of the workers; for as another says, it is the heart and mind
of the giver which makes him rich or poor, and does set Ambros. in offic.
the price upon all these spiritual wares: and in August. in Ioan^^m.
Gods sight the hand is never empty of a gift, if the treasury of the heart be
full of good will and bounty. An example whereof we have in the poor widow
who casting into the treasury two mites, was adjudged by our Savior to have
given the greatest gift, because she had the largest and most liberal heart,
which made her to give (not like others out of their superfluity, but) even
out of her penury, all she had; as also because the rich giving out of their
superfluity, rely upon their own abundance as sufficient to bear the^ out in
their bounty; whereas they who being poor, and yet give out of their penury,
do in their almesdeedes by a lively faith and affiance depend wholly upon Gods
promises. Now what greater encouragement can there be unto them that have
little, to give somewhat of their small store to those that stand in need,
seeing their work is as much esteemed and shall be as richly rewarded, as
those who give much out of their greater store? If a poor man had a gracious
promise from his Prince, that if he would lay out a few pence at his
appointment, he should have a reward equal with his greatest nobles, who have
in the same respect disbursed sums of great value, how readily would he part
with his small pittance for the assuring of such rich hopes? or if a merchant
out of his love and bounty, should offer a precious jewel to sale, setting
his price, not according to the inestimable value of the thing sold, but
according to the proportion of their ability who come to buie it, so that they
who will give somewhat out of little, shall as soon have it, as those who will
give much out of their rich estates, how would poor men crowd to come to such
a bargain, and with their speed prevent the wealthy in running to such a
market? but here is the like case, yea so much better as heavenly jewels and
rewards exceed those which are earthly, and things permanent and everlasting,
excel in worth those which are mutable and but of momentany continuance.

CHAP. 10. Of the persons who may lawfully give alms.
Sect. 1. That none may give but such as are owners of the things given.
ANd thus we have spoken of the persons who are bound to give: now we are to
speak of them who may lawfully perform this duty. Neither may all give
alms that will, but they who are qualified and fitted for it; unto which is
required that those who give, have right unto the things thus bestowed: so as
they may give their own, and not that which belongs unto others: as also
that they be left by the positive laws of men grounded upon christian
equity, to their liberty that they may dispose of that which is their own,
and of right belongs unto them, having age judgment and discretion, to
perform this duty in some good manner.

Sect 2. That it is unlawful for servants to give their masters goods.
In the former respect it is unlawful for servants to give alms of their
masters goods, unless he has given them license and liberty, if not for
every particular, yet at least by general allowance. And yet are not servants
hands so bound from doing these works of mercy, but that they may lawfully
give out of that which is their own; as either that which they have lawfully
gotten by their service, or that which they can spare out of some allowance for
their diet or apparel, which their governors are willing to make unto them.
Otherwise it is unlawful for servants to give alms, unless it be in cases of
extreme necessity, in the absence of their governors, they having a purpose
to make it known unto them; upon the assurance which they have of their liking
and approbation, or to restore unto them what they have given, if they find
that they mislike of it.

Sect. 3. That it is unlawful for children to give without consent of parents.
So also it is unlawful for children under the government of their parents or
tutors, and remaining still in the family to give alms without the consent of
their parents or governors, either plainly expressed by their words, or at
least intimated by the continual custom of the family, unless by their
labor they earne their own living, and are allowed by their parents to
dispose of their own gettings. Otherwise if they be for themselves out of the
family, or out of the family and under government, but yet allowed by their
governors some stipend for their maintenance, they may lawfully give some
alms out of their allowance, so that it be ordered with judgment and
discretion; or if they have no certain stipend, yet may they give somewhat
which out of frugalitie and parcimony they have spared even from their own
ordinary, especially if they be truly persuaded that their parents coming to
the knowledge of it would allow and approve of such disbursements.

Sect 4. That it is unlawful for those that want discretion to give alms.
In regard of the latter, those who are not of sufficient age and discretion,
though they have right to the goods they give, yet are restrained from
bestowing of them by the equity of law, because they want judgment to bestow
them well. In which respect it is unlawful for children under age and under
guardians, or for fools, mad men, and impotent persons to give alms, because
for want of discretion they may waste their state, or bestow their gifts upon
unfit and unworthy persons.

CHAP. 11. Whether it be lawful for the wife to give alms without consent of
her husband.
Sect. 1. Certain cases in which it is lawful for the wife to give alms.
But now in the last place it may be demanded, whether it be lawful for wives
to give alms, and to perform such other works of mercy without the consent
of their husbands; for that they may give them with their consent, either
plainly expressed or secretly and implicitly intimated; there is no man
makes any question. And it is agreed on by the most that she may give alms in
diverse cases, as first if the husband be a fool or mad man, and not able to
manage his estate.

Secondly, when he is far absent, so as his consent cannot be asked or
obtained; especially being persuaded that if her husband were present he would
approve and like of her doings.

Thirdly, when as he has committed the administration of his household
expenses to the discretion of his wife.

Fourthly, when having a certain allowance made unto her by her husband, she
spares somewhat out of it, being less liberal to her self, that she may
have the more to bestow in virtuous actions.

Fifthly, when she or her friends for her, have before marriage, over and above
her dowry reserved something to be at her disposing.

Sixthly, when she gets some wealth by her own proper labor, she may
dispose of it to these good uses, if at least the laws of the country be not
against it.

Seventhly, if the alms which she gives be but of small value, as bread,
drink, cast apparel, and such like.

Eighthly, if the husband be exceeding covetous, so that having much he will
part with nothing; or (as I may add) if he be so wicked and irreligious, that
though he spend much vainly, yet he will not be drawn to do any work of
mercy; or if he be content that some alms be given, yet he cannot endure that
any should be given unto those that fear God, in respect of the hatred which
he bears unto them.

Lastly, when it is the received custom of the cuntry that wives should give
alms to the relief of the poor.

Sect. 2. Some think it unlawful for the wife to give alms.
But howsoever almost all in the five first of these cases or cautions do well
agree, yet about the four last there is much question. For some taking it that
the propriety of the goods is wholly in the husband; do condemn it as no
better then theft in the wife, if she take upon her to give less or more by
way of alms, without the consent of her husband either expressed or secretly
employed. But this is an hard saying, and if it were true, I might (with better
reason) say with the Disciples, in another matter; If the case be so between
man and wife, then it were good for Math. 19. 10.
woman not to marry.

And therefore it shall not be amiss a little further to examine it, that as
on the one side wives may not be let loose to licentious liberty, and
unlawful liberality; so on the other side they may not have their consciences
unjustly ensnared and entangled, nor be restrained of their right; for he that
restrains of lawful liberty, opens a gappe to lawless licentiousness.

Sect. 3. That she must endeavor to persuade her husband to join with her
First then we thus far agree with those who oppose us in the rest; that as
God has made them yoke-fellowes, so she must endeavor by all means to work
and persuade her husband in all christian duties to draw together, that joining
in the work they may not be separated in the reward. And to this purpose she is
to use toward him all duty, respect, and reverence, all loving and sweet
behavior, that gayning her husbands heart, she may move him by loving her, to
love all goodness which she imbraceth and practices, for her sake: and also
to show such care and faithfulness in preserving and increasing his estate by
good huswiferie and painful endeavors, that like the virtuous woman in the
Proverbs, the heart of her husband may safely trust in her, Pro. 31. 11. Pro.
31. 11.


Sect. 4. The state of the question.
But what if notwithstanding all this, her husband being a right Nabal, that
is, both a churl and fool, will neither himself do any works of mercy,
nor give consent that she shall do them? what if he neglect almesdeedes,
either through covetousness and excessive love of his goods, or wicked
maliciousness and hatred of good deeds? may not the virtuous wife in this
Cautions to be observed in her giving alms. 1. That she observe the former
rules and give discreetely.
case do those good works which he neglects or abhors? some say no, but
(saving their better judgments) I hold she may, so that she carefully observe
these cautious. First that she give with wisdom and discretion, observing
the things of which we have formerly spoken; but especially her care must be
that her gifts exceed not their own ability, and so impair and impouerish
their estate; the which if it be unknown unto her, she must give but
sparingly, and things of small value; neither must she under show of giving
alms undo her husband, seeing it is said of the virtuous woman, that she will
do him good Pro. 31. 12.
and not evil all the days of her life. Now where this wisdom and discretion
is wanting, there the wife may not take upon her this duty, which is better
not done, then done foolishly and without discretion.

Sect. 5. Secondly, she must give with meekness and reverence toward her
husband.
Secondly, she must perform this duty with all meekness and humility of
spirit, with all reverence and due respect unto her husbands authority, with
acknowledgement of her subjection in all things lawful, that hereby she may
win him by her christian carriage and conversation to a liking and allowance
of her good works, yea also (if it be possible) to the practice and imitation
of them, according to that, 1. Pet. 3. 1. Ye 1. Pet. 3. 1.
wives be in subjection to your own husbands, that if they obey not the word,
they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives: to
which purpose he further persuades them to adorn themselves with the ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God, of great price.

Sect. 6. Thirdly, she must not give her husband any cause of offense.
Thirdly, she must in the manner of doing these good works carefully avoid
the giving unto her husband any just cause of offense; and not presume to use
any pride or arrogancy, stomach and sturdinesse, insolent and contemptuous
behavior, whereby she shall more disgrace her good deeds, then they can
grace her. For the Apostle will in no case permit the woman to usurp
authority over the man, 1. Tim. 2. 10. unto which 1. Tim. 2. 10.
fault they are most subject when they see their husbands defects, and know
that truth and right is on their side; whereby oftentimes it comes to pass,
that they spoil a good cause by ill handling; and are more blameworthy in
their manner of doing good, then their husbands are for neglecting the good it
self. But of this all christian women must take heed, seeing by such
behavior they do not only disgrace themselves and their profession, but also
for want of due obedience to their husbands, do cause the word of God (which
they take into their mouths to defend their courses) to be blasphemed, as it
is Tit. 2. 5. whereas on the other side, if they perform Tit. 2. 5.
these christian duties with all due reverence toward him whom God has set
over them, it will appear that they do them with a good conscience and in
obedience to God; and that the fear of their husbands would restrain them, if
it were not ouer-maistred with a greater fear, even the sincere and true fear
of almighty God.

Sect. 7. Fourthly, she must not disgrace her husband by publishing his faults.
Lastly, she must take heed, that by reporting her own good deeds, and her
husbands backwardness she do not disgrace him; but she must hide and cover
his faults from al, saving those who may help to better him, and pray unto God
for his amendment; for a good wife will not lay the foundation of her own
credit in the ruins of her husbands honor, but knowing that it is no small
disgrace to the most proper and beautiful body, to have a deformed and
misshapen head, she will hide it under the veil of secrecy, or adorn and
beautify it with the most favorable report that sincerity and truth can give
unto it; knowing that a virtuous woman is a crown to her husband, but she that
makes him ashamed is rottenness in his Pro 12. 4. 1. Iam. 25. 25.
bones, as it is Pro. 12. 4. Wherein Abigail (though otherwise a virtuous
woman) failed, excusing her husband by discovering his folly.

Sect. 8. That it is lawful for the wife to give alms these cautions being
observed. Maine grounds laid for the determining of the question.
Which cautions being observed I think it lawful for the wife to give alms,
and perform all other works of mercy, as well as the husband; the which
because it is controuerted, I will endeavor to prove. And for the better
clearing of this point, two things are to be premitted and examined, which
being thoroughly known will give sufficient light for the determining of this
question; the first is the authority, superiority, and dominion of the
husband over the wife, with all things else which they possess; the second is
the communion between them both in respect of goods and persons, the which are
not to be severed in the consideration of either of them; for the husband is
so to exercise his authority, as that he do not neglect the communion which
is between him and his wife, and the wife is so to enjoy her communion, as
that she do not forget the authority of her husband.

Sect. 9. Of the superiorite and authority of the husband over the wife.
Concerning the former, it is to be acknowledged that the husband has
superiority and authority over his wife to rule and govern her as her head,
and that she as his inferior is to subject her self to his rule and
government; and it cannot be denied but that also he has chief dominion over
all their goods, and power to rule and manage the maine estate. So the Apostle
says, that as the head of every man is Christ, so the head of woman is the
man. 1. Cor. 11. 3. In regard whereof she is in many places of Scripture
enjoined to be subject 1. Cor. 11. 3.
unto her husband in all things; and the reason hereof is given, because in the
creation the man was not of the woman, but the woman of the man, neither was
the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man. 1. Cor. 11. 8. 9. and
besides, the 1. Cor. 11. 8. 9.
man was not first deceived, but the woman, and so was first in the
transgression, as it is 1. Tim. 2. 14. and 1. Tim. 2. 14.
therefore it was a part of her punishment, that her will should be to be
subject to her husband, and that he should rule over her. Genesis 3. 16. In regard
of Genesis 3. 1^.
which superiority it is not lawful for the wife to take upon her the
managing of her husbands maine estate, or to dispose at her pleasure of great
and weighty matters, because this is a royalty which belongs to her superior
and head, who is the chief ruler and king in the little commonwealth of the
family: howsoever even in these things a wise and good husband will not
neglect the advice of his discreet wife, as being his most faithful
counsailour, and created of God purposely to this end that she might be his
helper.

Sect. 10. That the husbands government must be in the Lord.
But withal we must hold that the husbands government and the wives
subjection must be Col. 3. 18. Ephesians. 5. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 7.
in the Lord, and as unto the Lord. For in this respect has the husband
authority over the wife, as bearing in himself the image of God; and she is
to yield obedience unto him, as unto God in him, in all things which are
honest, lawful or indifferent. But if he commands what God forbids, or
forbids what God commands, he is not to be obeyed. As if he shall forbid
his wife to sanctify the sabbath, to pray, hear the word, or to perform the
works of mercy which God inioyneth, because herein he bears not the image
of God, commanding as he commands, but the image of the devil opposing
against God, and crossing that which he requires. Again, the Lord is our
supreme sovereign, and the husband but subordinate unto him as his deputy or
leiuetenant, and therefore whilst he houldeth his subordination unto Gods
government, the wife is to hold hers to him, because so in obeying him, she
obeys God, but if he leave his subordination and rebel against his
sovereign, she is not to join with him in this rebellion, but leaving her
subordination unto him, as he has left his unto God, she is to disobey him,
that she may yield obedience to the chief commander.

Sect. 11. Of the communion between man and wife.
The second point to be considered is the communion which is between man and
wife through the bond of marriage, which extends both unto their persons and
goods: the communion of persons is so near and indissoluable, that they are no
more two, but one flesh, in which regard they have no more propriety in
themselves, nor absolute power of diposing their own bodies, but either in
other; according to that, 1. Cor. 7. 4. The wife 1. Cor. 7 4.
has not power over her own body, but the husband, and likewise also the
husband, has not power over his own body; but the wife. So also there is such
communion in their goods, that there is no absolute propriety in either of
them, but it rests in them both; neither have these words mine and thine any
place between them, seeing they are but one flesh, and one body, whereof the
husband is the head. And howsoever married persons, speaking of that which they
possess unto others, may say that this is mine to note propriety, yet when
they have relation to one another, they imply this community, by saying these
goods are ours; So Jacobs wives speaking of their goods, say that all the
riches which God has taken from our father, that Genesis 31* 16.
is ours, though no part of it came by their dowry, but through the blessing of
God upon their husbands labors, only it was theirs through the communion of
marriage. And this communion both of persons and goods is signified, yea
plainly expressed in our form of marriage, both by the words and actions
there used; the communion of persons by joining of hands, and by those words,
with my body I thee worship, by which he professes that he does her honor in
vouchsafing unto her the communion of his body, for it is the honor of a woman
to have an head and husband; the communion of goods, by giving unto her a ring,
and (as it was the practice heretofore) money or gold with it, as an earnest of
all the rest, and by those plain words, with all my worldly goods I thee endow.

Sect. 12. How far the communion in goods extends.
Yea will some say but this communion extends unto use only. I answer it is
true, for what can be more required then use, where there is no propriety, but
that which is in them both? yea but (say they) the propriety is in the
husband, and for the common use which the wife has in her husbands goods, it
only extends to her meat, drink, apparel, and such necessaries as are fit
for the maintenance of her person. The former has some color, because the
husband has right to alienate and sell house and land, yea An objection that
the husband may dispose of all at his pleasure, answered.
to give all away if he please without the wives consent, unless it be her
ioynter or dowre. I answer that they may do all this wisely and discreetely
for their own good and of their wives and children, by that authority and
superiority which they have over their wives and goods, though they have no
propriety in them more then they, because the action best proceeds from the
predominant cause and chief agent; but if it be to the wives hurt and
prejudice, they abuse their authority, and sin against their spouse by
infringing the communion; and as he who with riot, wastfulnesse, excess and
ill husbandry consumes and mispendeth his estate, is a thief to himself, so
also to his wife in that he robs her of her right which by virtue of the
communion of marriage belongs to her. And therefore we read that when
Ananias (though he were but an hypocrite) sold his possession to relieve the
necessity of the Church, yet he did not do it without his wives consent, but
they joined both together in the sale, according to the custom of those times,
Act. 5. 1. Now if any Act. 5. 1.
will say that the husband has more absolute right among us to dispose of al
his goods and possessions at his own pleasure: to this I answer, that he has
it not by the law of God, but by the positive laws of men, and I dispute not
what a man may do, in foro iudiciali, in the courts of men, but what he is
bound to do in foro conscientia, in the court of conscience.

Sect. 13. Another objection answered.
Secondly, the propriety of the husband has some show of reason seeing he
has power by will to dispose of his goods at his own pleasure. I answer that
though he may make such a will in his life, yet it is not to take effect till
after his death, when the band of marriage is dissolved, and the communion
between them cease. Neither is it then lawful to give away all from his
wife, but he is bound to leave unto her a good part and share, and a part also
unto his children, the which general rule of equity, is by our law wisely and
equally determined to be a third part to either of them, another third only
being left to his disposing: wherein they are like unto partners who whilst
they continue together have equal right to the whole estate, but take every
one his share when their partnership being dissolved they go from one another.

Sect 14. That the wife has communion in goods to al good uses
To the other part of the objection which restrains the use only unto the
meat, drink, apparel and such other corporal necessaries. I answer, that
it beseems not a christian; for have they power by virtue of this communion
to dispose of their goods for all uses, saving doing good? may they employ them
at their pleasure for the good of their bodies, and may no part be allowed unto
them to dispose of for the good of their souls? may they have enough to pamper
their bellies and adorn their backs, and to bestow upon all uses, which
pride, pleasure and vanity will call necessary, and shall they have no power
to lay up treasures in heaven, nor to send some small part of their wealth by
the hands of the poor to those eternal mansions, if their husbands do not
give allowance, who care not to have any store laid up in that country,
because they mean never to travail thither? Let divines then be ashamed of
making such a limitation and restraint, which so much tends to Gods dishonor
in the neglect of charitable and christian duties.

Sect. 15. The conclusion of the former point.
Let this then be the conclusion of this point, that the chief authority over
the person of the wife and their common estate is in the husband, and that the
wife has also communion with him in all he has both in respect of propriety
and use taking it in the largest signification for all employments which may
bring good either to her soul or body; the which both of them are bound to
further in one another by all good means, it being the most excellent and
common duty of marriage to advance their mutual good. And therefore the good
woman of whom we read. 2. King. 4. 10. joins both these together, 2. King.
4. 10.
and makes suite unto her husband in behalf of the Prophet, to acknowledge
his superior authority; but yet attributes a part of the action to be done
unto her self, seeing it was to be performed by those goods, in which she had
communion with him; and this is the cause why she says not, I will make him a
chamber, to infringe her husbands authority, nor do you make him a chamber,
to impair her own right, but, let us I pray thee make him a chamber. Neither
let any man here say, that this makes against me, because she would not do
it of her self without her husbands consent; seeing no man ever dreamed that
the wife should take upon her so to do, if she can possibly by any good
means obtain her husbands allowance.

Sect. 16. The first reason. That all good works are enjoined unto the wife as
well as unto the husband.
And thus having untied the hardest knots in this controversy, and removed the
maine blocks which did lie in the way; the reasons which may further be
produced for the clearing of this point will find a fair and easy entrance.
And first, all good actions and works of mercy are charged as well upon the
wife as the husband, and where any commandment requiring them is propounded,
it extends as well to the woman as the man: as namely relieuing the poor,
feeding the hungry, visiting the sick, clothing the naked, and such like,
and therefore the wife is no less bound to do them than the husband, and
liable to the same punishment if she do neglect them. yea not only these good
works are generally commanded to all mankind but especially to this sex, as
appears. 1. Tim. 2. 10. where the Apostle 1. Tim. 2. 10.
forbids women brayded hair, gold, pearl and costly array, and requires
that instead of them they should (as becomes women professing godliness)
adorn themselves with good works. Now if any say that they must do works of
mercy out of that which is their own, and not out of their husbands goods, to
this I have answered, that by the virtue of the communion of marriage, they
have to all good purposes the lawful use of that which is in their possession.
And if they affirm that she is inferior to her husband and therefore must
not do any of these works without his consent: I answer, that as she is
inferior to her husband, so both he and she to the supreme sovereign, and
therefore though she is to show subjection and yield obedience to her husband
in all things lawful and indifferent, yet not where God commands the
contrary, seeing here the Apostles rule takes place, that it is better to obey
God then man. For he is the chief Act. 5.
Lord of all, and the husband but a steward and inferior officer under him, to
dispose of his goods as he commands, and to give unto his fellow-seruants
their portion which belongs unto them: now if he neglect this duty and
convert all to his own use like a miser, or mispend his masters goods in
excess and riot, the wife who is joined in commission with him as an inferior
officer is not to join with him in these courses and so make her self
partaker of his sin and punishment, but to employ that which is under her
hand in her masters service, and to perform those good duties to her
fellow-seruants which he neglects.

Sect. 17. An objection answered.
Yea but the husband has such authority over his wife, that though, in the
time of the law she should make a vow unto God, to consecrate any thing unto
his service, it was in his power to disanull and make it void. To which I
answer Number. 30.
that vows were either of things absolutely commanded, or of things
indifferent, either in their own nature, or in respect of circumstances; the
former vows are nothing else, but the renewing of the general vow which we
made unto God in baptism, as the Jews in the sacrament of circumcision, and
such no power of man can make void and disanull. But these are improperly
called vows, being nothing else but duties which we are absolutely bound to
perform, and are not at all left at our choice. But the other sort of vows
which are of things indifferent, at the pleasure of the wife, may be made void
by the authority of the husband; and of these that place in the law is to be
understood. For example if the wife vow unto God, that she will bestow some part
of her goods in doing works of mercy, the Husbands authority cannot make it
void, because God himself has required it; but if she vow that she will give
such and so great a sum to these uses, the husband by his authority may
disanull it, when as it is more then his estate will well bear, or that it is
otherwise unfit in respect of other circumstances, being wisely and religiously
considered.

Sect. 18. That works of mercy are commended in the wife as well as in the
husband.
The second reason is that almsdeeds and the works of mercy are no less
commended in the Scriptures in the wife then in the husband; for as it is here
made a sign or property of a blessed man, that he disperseth and gives to
the poor; so elsewhere of a virtuous and good woman. As Pro. 31. 20. She
stretches out her hand to Pro. 31. 20.
the poor, yea she reaches out her hand to the needy, by which phrases of
stretching and reachidg out the hand is signified, not only that she gives
somewhat, but liberally, and to the uttermost of her ability. And not without
good cause is it made a note of a gracious wife, because alms deeds are
ordinarily done out of household store and provision, the administration and
disposing whereof does more properly and immediately belong to the woman then to
the man, as we may see by the current of that whole chapter. So the Apostle
would have the younger women to marry, bear children, and guide the house, 1.
Tim. 5. 14. The which when the Husband allows, he gives honor to his wife;
as the Apostle requires 1. Pet. 3. 7. and contrariwise disgraceth her when he
1 Pet: 3. 7.
turns her out of this her office and viceregency. For as the man is the
principal getter of the estate, and the bringer of it in, so the wise
administration of it for the good of the husband and family, belongs unto
the woman; not only by special commission from him for every action and
employment, but as she is a Wife by virtue of her calling, place and office; if
at least she be not limited and restrained for her misgouernment and want of
discretion in abusing and mispending their estate, by the superior authority
of her husband. And as in the commonwealth, the King, though he has supreme
authority over all, yet does not take upon him to administer all the affairs
of the kingdom, but has under him many inferior officers, who by virtue of
their place and office manage great and weighty affairs without any special
commission for particular actions; and although he has ever in his hand a
superior power over them, to call them to account, and to turn them out of
their offices, when they mis-behaue themselves, and abuse his name and
authority; yet so long as they hold their place and office, they may justly
execute the affairs and duties that belong unto it: so is it also in the
little commonwealth of the house and family; for when the husband has chosen
a wife, the administration of household affairs belongs unto her by virtue of
her place and calling, unless she be suspended from this power and liberty,
for her unjust and indiscreet abusing of it; and for the husband to
intermeddle more then necessity requires with her domestical business, is as
if a King would be Chancelour, Treasurer, Chief Justice and all himself,
though he had officers appointed to all these places, which were but to
ouerburthen himself and abase his Royal condition, and also to wrong those
who are deputed to these offices, by distrusting causelessly their fidelity and
sufficiency.

Sect. 19. 3. Reason because the wife is appointed by God to be an helper in
all good things.
Thirdly, God the first Instituter of marriage, gave the wife unto the husband,
to be, not his Gen: 2. 18.
servant, but his helper, counselor and comforter. The which duties she is
bound to perform, not only in respect of temporal affairs, but also of
those things which appertain to godliness and everlasting happiness; and
therefore if he neglect religious and charitable duties, she is not only
bound to move and persuade him unto them, but also, if he still neglect them,
to do them her self for him, lest the sin and punishment lie not only upon
him, but also upon her and the whole family. For if Zeppora, performing Exodus:
4. 25.
a duty which belonged unto her husband, and not unto her, auerted Gods
judgments from him, the inflicting whereof was begun for his neglect; how much
more may a good and virtuous wife do the like, when her husband neglects
these common duties which belong indifferently to them both?

Sect. 20. 4. Reason. That the wife should be in a worse condition than a
servant if she might not give alms.
Fourthly, if a wife had no liberty to do these almes-deedes and works of
mercy without special commission from her husband, then were she in as bad an
estate as the basest servant, seeing they also may give alms and do these
works when they have leave from their masters. Yea in truth the wives
servitude should be far worse than of the meanest servant; for it is the most
grievous bondage, to be bound from doing good, and restrained from expressing
our good will by our works and actions; now the poorest servants may according
to their small estate, give alms and do good, out of that which is their own
and earned by their painful labors; and so though they give little, yet
giving according to their ability, they may (like the poor widow that cast
in her mites) be rich in good works, and richly rewarded in the life to come;
whereas the wife though she have never so much under her hand, yet may give
nothing of it, nor have any liberty without license, to express the bounty of
her heart in the outward action; or if she do (according to their conceit)
she does not therein a work of mercy, but sins, steals, and thereby
makes her-selfe liable to Gods wrath and punishment. Neither will it help
them to say that her estate is better, because having more interest in her
husbands love she may obtain his consent, and so give more liberally then a
servant, seeing this does not make her bondage less in it own nature, but
only lighter through her husbands love, neither is her chain taken from her,
but whereas before she was (as is were) bound with it to a post, now she
walks about with it in her husbands hand.

Sect. 21. 5 Reason. That the last sentence shall be pronounced to wives as
well as husbands.
Fifthly, I would feign know if the sentence of everlasting happiness will not
equally and alike be pronounced at the latter day to the wives as well as to
the husbands, for their alike doing these works of mercy; but according to
their opinion the Judge should not say to many wives, I was hungry and ye fed
me, I was thirste and Matthew: 25. 34.
you gave me drink; but you would have done these things if your husbands
would have suffered you, but yet neglected me in my members though I was in
great extremity, because you had not their consent.

Sect. 22. The 6. reason grounded on examples, as 1. of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.
Sixthly, the power of the wife to give alms appears clearly by the examples
of holy women in the scriptures; as of Abigail who (not only without the
knowledge, but contrary to the mind of her husband Naball, plainly expressed
by his absolute refusal) gave a great present to David, and his followers for
their relief. Unto which it is answered, that Abigails example is no rule for
other women; for then by the same reason it should be lawful to call their
husbands fools as she did. But to this I reply, that we must distinguish
between the infirmities showed in the action, and the action it self; the
infirmities and imperfections no man allows, but for the action it self it
was good, and she pronounced by holy David blessed for it; yea he blesses God
as being the chief author who stirred her up to the doing of this charitable
action, v 32. Blessed be v. 32.
the Lord God of Israel, who has sent thee to meet me this day. Secondly, it
is said that Abigail was a wise and virtuous woman, and therefore might the
better do it. And who gives liberty unto any other but unto those only, who
are able to perform these actions virtuously and with some discretion?
Thirdly, it is objected that Naball was a churl and a fool, and therefore it
was lawful for his wife who was wiser then he to dispose of some part of his
great estate. To which I reply that I give no authority to wives to give
against their husbands will, unless they be such Naballs and wicked churles,
who by no persuasions will be drawn to the doing of any good. Yea but he must
be not only a churl, but also a fool such as Naball was. To which I answer,
that who so does well consider Naballs answer to David's messengers, and
compares it with David's present estate, who with his company lived, in the
sight of carnal men, like fugitives and out-lawes; he will find more
wickedness in it, then want of worldly wit. Wickedness I say, because he did
not (like his wife) believe Gods promises made to David concerning his
establishment in the kingdom, when as he saw him in this afflicted estate.
Secondly, because therein he shows his churlishnes and auersenes to any
good, and particularly to relieve the distressed servants of God, though he had
abundance in his hands to bestow superfluously in riotous feasting those he
favored. Thirdly, that he was more wicked then witless, it appears by his
servants words to Abigail, v. 17. who said that he was such a wicked person or
son of Belial that no man durst speak to him, whereas folly in the master
works rather contempt than fear in the hearts of servants; and also by
Abigail her words to David, who joining his wickedness with his folly, shows
that his folly chiefly consisted in his wickedness, and though he might have
worldly wit, yet he was destitute of true spiritual wisdom, which chiefly
consists in godliness and in the fear of the Lord. Neither do we leave
liberty to wives to perform these works of mercy without the allowance of
their husbands, unless they be such fools, that is, such carnal worldlings as
will neither themselves do good, nor by their good wills suffer others; for
though these be not fools and madmen, because they have the use of reason,
yet are they foolish and mad in respect of christianity, seeing their reason
is quite opposite and contrary to religion.

Sect. 23.
Another example hereof we have in those godly women commended by S. Luke,
namely The examples urged which the Evangelist mentions. Luk: 8. 3.
Ioanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, Susanna, and many others, who of
their substance ministered unto our Savior Christ. For whereas some answer that
it is likely that they did it with the allowance of their husbands, this
conceit has little ground; for it is not probable that a man so highly in
favor with Herod, would show such love to our Savior, whom his master
contemned or rather hated. And secondly, if this good work had been done by
the consent of their husbands, it is likely that the Evangelist would have
ascribed the action to them as the chief agents, and not to their wives only,
giving them alone the praise of this charitable bounty.

Sect. 24. Last reason taken from the custom of the Country.
The last reason to prove the lawfulnes of these charitable works and
almsdeeds done by wife and religious wives, is the custom of our country,
which ordinarily authorizeth them to do these works, if their power be not
justly restrained by their husbands for their abusing of it. In regard whereof
there is no reason that any should ensnare and trouble the consciences of any
virtuous wives by persuading them that these works of mercy are not done
lawfully by them, unless they have special commission from their husbands;
seeing this christian custom sufficiently authorizeth them, if they have no
lawful restraint by their superior authority.

Sect. 25. Their objection answered who say that this liberty granted to wives
is dangerous.
Yea but though this doctrine be true, yet it is dangerous to be published,
seeing many indiscreet weomen will abuse it, to the undoing of their husbands
and the ruining of their estates. To which I answer that it is but a carnal
conceit to dream, that any evil can come by the discovery of a religious
truth, or though there should, yet fiat iustitia and ruat coelum, let truth and
right be maintained though the inconveniences which follow it be never so
great. What if some abuse their swords, must therefore all men be disarmed of
their weapons? What though some abuse their power and authority, must
therefore all be disabled deposed from their government? what if the Gospel
it self which in it own nature is the savor of life unto life, becomes to
some through their corruption the savor of death unto death, must therefore the
mouths of Gods Ministers be stopped, and the preaching of the Gospel be
interdicted? and what though Christian liberty and right being known unto
wives, some abuse it through their impiety and indiscretion, let the sin be
upon their heads who abuse the truth of God, but let not for this those which
are discreet and virtuous be kept ignorant of their duty, and have their
consciences ensnared and burdened with that which is not sinful, but in bare
conceit, yea in truth with that which is honest, charitable and commendable;
seeing when they know their Christian liberty, they will so much the more
conscionably and carefully, circumspectly and discreetly use it, and not rashly
rush beyond their bounds. And as for others what great danger is there, lest
by indiscreet giving they should hurt and ruin their husbands estates; seeing
they have always a superior authority in their hand to restrain their
excessive and unlawful liberality? or if any at all, yet how far less is
the peril by teaching their liberty in the use of their goods for the doing
of the works of mercy, then for their diet and apparel? seeing whereas one
man receives hurt in his estate by his wives too much bounty toward the
poor, and such like works of mercy, many hundreds are impouerished by their
too much daintiness and curiosity in furnishing their table, and their
excessive costlinesse and bravery of apparel. Howsoever it is, yet I am sure
no foolish wives can justly bear themselves out by any thing before spoken in
their indiscreet lauishnes: nor that any husbands who are virtuous and
religious, wise and loving to their spouses, have any just cause of
complaining, seeing such will go with them in all good actions, yea also,
before them in the light, of an holy and Christian example and in that regard
their wives may not go without them, but take their counsel in all works of
Christian charity. Neither in truth have any the least color to take
exceptions, but uncharitable worldlings and churlish Nabals, to whose wives
alone this liberty is given of doing works of mercy without their allowance,
because their hearts are so wicked and wretched, that they will not be
persuaded to join with them in these charitable actions.

CHAP. 12. Of the persons unto whom alms are to be given: and in what order
one is to be preferred before another.
Sect. 1. That alms are to be given only to the poor and needy.
AND thus we have showed who are to give alms. In the next place we are to
consider to whom they are to be given; the which has in part been touched
when I spoke of the object of our liberality; and now is more fully to be
handled. First then, howsoever we owe love unto all men, and in this love we
may, yea, ought to do them all good: yea, howsoever we may give gifts and
rewards to whom we will, either to show our love, or to encourage men in their
well deserving; yet almesdeedes are to be extended only to the poor and
needy, for therefore are they called Eleemosynae, because they are to be
exercised toward those whose penurious and miserable estate requires and
deserves mercy and compassion. So the Lord requires Deu. 15. 11. Thou shall
open thine hand wide to thy poor, and Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
to thy needy of thy land. Whereby thus much is signified, that we should give
not only unto those who are generally and absolutely poor, but also to them
who though they have a good estate, yet for the present, by some sudden
accident do want and stand in need of our relief; as when a man otherwise of
good means, is forced to ask an alms, being brought into present necessity,
through persecution, shipwreck, fire, robbery, and such like unlooked for and
unexpected accidents.

(...) proved b^ ^^st m^ni^^ ^^ Scripture.
And therefore the Scriptures enioyning this duty, express the person, who
ought to be relieved (...). 3 17
rather by the name of needy, then by the name of poor. So the 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
Who so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need; and Ephesians. 4.
28. the Apostle enioyneth men to Ephesians. 4. 28.
labor that they may have to give to him that needs. And 2. Cor. 8. 14. he
would have an intercourse 2. Cor. 8. 14.
between Christians in doing these works of mercy with equality, according to
present occasions, that those who now relieve may be relieved, and that those
who are now relieved may relieve if God make a change in their estates. That
now at this time (says he) your abundance may be a supply for their want,
that their abundance also may be a supply for your want, that there may be
equality. To which purpose also John the Baptist requires Luc. 3. 11.
him that has two coats to impart unto him that has none, and him that has
meat to do likewise.

Sect. 3. The diverse kinds of poor.
Now these poor and needy are sometimes distinguished into many kinds, so
our Savior names six, Matthew. 25. 35. the hungry, thirsty, stranger or
harborlesse, the naked, sick and poor prisoner. And out of the Prophet Esaias,
we may add the oppressed and exiled. Esa. 58. 6. 7. Especially those who
suffer these miseries for their Matthew. 25. 35.
constant confession of the truth. To which out of other places we may adioyne
those who are indebted Esaias 58. 6. 7. Nehem. 5. 11. Luc. 14. 12.
above their means, the lame, blind and maimed, the aged and decrepite, the
poor widow and distressed orphans; And unto these we Iam. 1. 27.
may add all others, who being in any such like distress do need our help
and comfort.

Sect. 4. Of the order which we ought to observe in our giving alms, and
first we are to respect men according to their need and misery.
But because men's liberality being stinted within the limits of their estates,
cannot extend Matthew. 5. 42. Romans 1^. 23. Luke 6. 30.
unto all poor, it will not be amiss to consider who, in bestowing our alms
are to be preferred before other, and to have the privilege and place above
the rest. And first we are to know that principally respect is to be had to
the state and condition of the parties, without any difference of persons,
strangers or acquaintance, enemies or friends. For those who are in extreme
necessity, and thereby likely to perish, are first to be relieved, though they
be our enemies, before our kindred and friends, though otherwise in great want;
and so likewise those who are in great need; before those whose wants are
common and ordinary. But if our state be so small, that we are not able to
relieve all that crave our help, being in the same degree of poverty, then we
may prefer our kindred and friends, and especially those who are godly and
virtuous. Wherein also we are to have no small respect to those who by Gods
providence are first cast upon us, seeing thereby, being first offered unto us,
they are after a sort by God himself preferred before others. And this our
Savior signifies in the Parable of the Samaritane, Luc. 10. 33. who finding,
as he iourneyed, the wounded man, took compassion on him, and relieved him.

Sect. 5. The Church and Commonwealth are to be respected in the first place.
But if there be an equality of estate, and the want and necessity be alike,
then is there to be an orderly proceeding of our alms, in respect of persons,
and those to be first relieved to whom we are most bound. As first the whole
Church and commonwealth is to be preferred before a man's own person, and if
there be such a necessity, we are rather to perish our selves, then to suffer
them to perish, for it is better for one member to be cut off, then that the
whole body should be destroyed: and this made the Disciples in the Primitive
Church to sell all they had for the relief of the common necessity. And in
this respect the King and such public persons, in whose safety the welfare of
the Church and Commonwealth consists, are also to be preferred before our
selves, so that if we and they be in equal extreamitie, we must neglect our
own persons for their good and preservation.

Sect. 6. In the second place we must regard our selves, and then our wives.
In the next place our care must extend to provide necessaries for the
releeuing of our own Tho. Aquin in 5. 2^. quaest. 20. Art. 11. and Azorij
instit. part. 2. lib. 12. cap. 13.
wants, for charity and mercy begin at home, and to whom can he be
pitiful and compassionate, that is cruel to his own bowels? and then unto
our second selves, our wives; for whereas the schoolmen in cases of extreme
necessity, would have our parents preferred before our wives, I take it to be
erroneous and unjust; for in the institution of marriage, man is to leave
father and mother and to adhere to his wife, so that they are no more two, but
one flesh. And the Apostle says, that a man ought to love his wife as him.
Genesis 2. Ephesians. 5. 28.
self, and therefore better then his parents. For where as they except that
the Apostle says, a man must love his wife as his own body, and that because
we ought to love our neighbors better then our bodies, and our parents best
of all our neighbors, and therefore also better then our wives: it is most
frivolous, for by the same reason a man should love his other neighbors also
better then his wife (which I confess to be the popish charity) but the
Apostle by an usual Synecdoche there puts the body for the whole man, as
he plainly explicateth himself, verse. 33. where he says, that every man
must love his wife even as himself, and therefore the reason grounded on this
place stands strong.

Sect 7. Next unto our wives, parents are to be relieved.
Next unto the wife, and even before our children, parents are to be relieved
in their necessity; for though in the order of charity a man loves his own
children better then father or mother, in which regard we usually say, that
love descends rather then ascends; and though, as some add, the child is
nearer unto a man then his parents, because he is of his own substance
(howsoever herein for my part I see no difference, unless it be on the
parents side, for why am I not bound in nearer bonds of nature unto them from
whom I had my substance and being, then unto those who have from me their
substance and being?) yet seeing almesdeeds and relief in their nature are
benefits and retribution, which do cheifely respect debt and duty, and seeing
we owe more debt and duty unto parents, in respect of our being, birth and
breeding then unto our children, therefore in cases of extremity we are to
prefer in ministering releife, our father or mother before them, when we are
so straitened in our means that we have not sufficient to give unto both. And
this is a part of that honor which children owe unto parents, the which our
savior so highly esteems that he far prefers the releiuing of our
Parents before freewill offerings and oblations which we give and dedicate to
Gods service. And therefore condemns the Scribes and Pharisees who excused
children for neglecting this duty in releiuing their old, impotent and decayed
parents, under color of bringing these gifts into the treasury, which should
have been bestowed on their maintenance. Mar. 7. 11. 12. Mar 7. 11. 12.


Sect. 8. Next unto our Parents, our children are to be cared for.
After parents our next care ought to be for our children, of which I shall
need to say little because nature it self does teach so much, and unto them I
adioyne the whole family who are under the charge of the Governors, and
therefore to be provided for by them as well, in their place and kind, as
those that come out of their own loins. And though a man's kindred and friends
may be nearer to him then many under his roof, both in respect of blood and
also loving affection; yet when he has by admitting them into his family taken
charge of them, he is to provide for them before the other. According to that
1. Tim. 5. 8. If any provide not for his own and specially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith and is worse then an infidel.

Sect. 9. Next unto our children, charge and family, we must releive our
spiritual kindred.
So that all these are in their order to be releiued before all others by the
express commandment of almighty God, even before those who are virtuous and
religious, being not so near unto us in these bonds of nature. But next as (I
take it) our spiritual kindred is to take place, and in our works of mercy to
be preferred before those who are only a kin unto us in the flesh. I say
only, because if our kindred in the flesh be also virtuous and religious, they
are to be preferred before the other; yea though they have not attained unto
that measure and degree of grace and godliness, so that it be in them in
substance and truth, and not only in a general, bare, and unfruitful
profession; as it is in many amongst us, who though they are content to be
called by the name of Christians, yet are in truth devoted wordlings, who
professing Christ with their mouths deny him in their lives and works. For
the faithful are Tit 1. 16.
children of the same father, members of the same body whereof Christ is the
head, and coheires of the same glorious kingdom, where they shall reign
together in all happiness for evermore; and therefore being mutually conjoined
in so many bonds of love, they are to respect one another more then those, who
being only a kin unto them in the flesh, are enemies to their profession,
yea even to themselves, for being worldlings they love only their own, and
not those whom Ioh. 7. 5. 6. 7. and 15. 19.
Christ has chosen out of the world; yea enemies to Gods grace and strangers
to the commonwealth of Israel, vassals of Satan, and in the state of
perdition. And for this also we have our warrant out of the Scriptures; for as
we are bound to do good unto all, so especially to those who are of the
household of faith. Gal. 6. 10. As our Gal. 6. 10.
mercy must extend to all, so principally to our brethren who stand in need,
1. Ioh. 3. 17. As we must 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
communicate unto all that want, so it is required chiefly that we distribute
unto the necessity of the Saints. Romans 12. 13. And these alms above others
have the special promises of reward. So Romans 12. 13.
Math. 10. 41. He that receives a Prophet in the Math. 10. 41.
name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward, and he that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's
reward. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup
of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, shall in no wise loose their
reward. And Math. 25. 40. He enters the faithful into the Math. 25. 40.
possession of his kingdom, because in doing the works of mercy to his
brethren, they had done it to himself. And therefore David did extend his
goodness chiefly to the Saints and excellent. Psalm. 16. 3. And our Savior
himself professes those to be his brethren, sisters and mother, who did the
will of his Father which is in heaven. Math Math. 12. 50.
12. 50.

Sect 10. Next unto our spiritual kindred we must respect our benefactors.
In the next place unto these we are to respect our benefactours, unto whom we
our selves have been beholding; for it stands with the rule of justice,
equity and thankfulness, that we should requite their kindness, and do good
unto them in the time of their need, who have been beneficial unto us in
releiuing our wants. And this argument the Apostle uses to persuade the
Corinthians to contribute unto the necessity of the poor Saints. 2. Cor. 8.
14. That now (says he) 2. Cor. 8. 14.
at this time, your abundance may be a supply to their wants, that their
abundance also may be a supply for your wants, that there may be an equality.
In which regard our benefactours are to be preferred before our kindred in the
flesh; because though we be tied unto these in a nearer bond of alliance and
blood, yet we are more straightly bound to the other in the bond of justice and
common equity. according to that Pro. 18. 24. A man that has Pro. 18. 24.
friends must show himself friendly, and there is a friend that sticks
closer then a brother.

Sect. 11. Next unto our benefactors we must extend our bounty to our kindred
in the flesh.
Next unto our benefactours we must extend our bounty to our kindred, who are
not only of Genesis 29. 13. 14.
the same flesh with us in respect of nature and common parents, but in regard
of near alliance and consanguinitie being lately and immediately sprung from
the same Progenitors. And this bond of natural affection tied even churlish
Laban himself in all kindness and love to his kinsman Jacob, till it was
broken by his worldliness and the violent strength of his greedy
covetousness. Genesis 29. 13. 14. From whence we learn that they are more
churlish then Laban, who having abundance will not acknowledge their poor
kindred, nor Minister any thing to their necessities.

Sect. 12. Next unto our kindred we must releive common friends and neighbors.
In the next place unto these we are bound to releive before others, our
common friends and nearest neighbors, who dwell in the same place and parish,
for besides the bond of neighborhood, we are in this regard also to prefer
them before others, because through Gods providence they are first offered to
our view, and have the opportunity of discovering unto us their wants and
miseries. To which purpose one says; whenas thou can August de doct. Christ.
not do good unto all, thy care must principally extend to those, who by
place, time and other opportunities, are, as it were by a certain lot, more
straightly and nearly joined unto thee. And the rather because being near at
hand they are as occasion serves ready, to perform unto us mutually according
to their poor power all good offices and Christian duties, according to that
Pro. 27. 20. better is a neighbor that is near, Pro. 27. 10.
then a brother far of.

Sect. 13. Next unto our neighbors we must respect our Countrymen, and then
strangers.
Next unto our near neighbors we are to releive the inhabitants of the same
City, Sheere, Deuteronomy. 15. 7.
and Country, before those who are of other nations; according to that Deuteronomy.
15. 7. If there be among you a poor man, of thy brethren within any of thy
gates in thy land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden
thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother. And verse. 11. Thou
shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor and thy needy in thy
land, etc. But yet we are not so only to respect them, as that we are to
neglect poor Christians of other Countries, but they also are in the next
place to be releiued, according to that Leuit. 25. 35. If thy brother be
Leuit. 25. 35.
waxen poor and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall releive him, yea
though he be a stranger or a soiourner, that he may live with thee. And this is
a part of that good hospitality which the Apostle exhorts unto, Rom: 12. 3.
and commends unto Rom: 12. 13. Heb: 13. 2. Gen: 18 3. and 19. 2. Esa. 58. 7.
us in the example of Abraham and Lot. Heb. 13 2. Be not forgetful (says he)
to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares.
And this is a part of that fast which God requires, that we bring the poor
which are exiled, or cast out, into our houses; especially when as they suffer
banishment for the profession of the Gospel; for then in receiving them we
receive Christ, and perform one of those works of mercy, which shall be so
richly rewarded at the last day, Matthew. 25. 35. I was a stranger and you took
Matt: 25. 35.
me in. In which regard they are to be relieved with the chief of our
spiritual kindred, and to have the next place to our own children and
family, reserved for them. And this duty is commended in Gaius who charitably
entertained the brethren who were strangers, and the neglect hereof condemned
in proud Diotrephes, who received not the brethren himself, and also forbad
those that would. Ioh. Epist. 3. 5. 10. Ioh. epist. 3. v. 5. 10.


Sect. 14. We must suffer our bounty to extend to our enemies.
Yea so full of mercy and christian charity ought we to be, that our good
deeds, as occasion serves, Romans 12. 20.
must not only extend unto our friends, neighbors and strangers, but even unto
our enemies; according to that Rom* 12. 20, If thine enemy hunger feed him,
if he thirst give him drink. An example whereof we have in the good Prophet
Elisha, who 2 King 6. 22.
would not suffer the Aramites to be smitten with 2 King. 6. 22.
the sword, but contrariwise caused them to be releiued in their necessity.
whereby he so won their love, that they came no more to invade the land of
Israel.

Sect. 15. A caution for the better understanding of the former rules.
And thus we have showed in what order we are to proceed in doing these works
of mercy, preferring our wives next unto our selves before all whatsoever, our
Parents before our children, and these with the rest of our family before all
others; our spiritual kindred and benefactors before them who are only of our
kindred in the flesh; our kindred before common friends and neighbors, and
these before strangers, and strangers also before enemies; so that if our
liberality cannot through the straitenesse of our estates extend to all sorts,
then must we stretch it as far as we can, according to this order. Which is
to be understood if they be in other things alike, that is, like in want and
poverty, and like in piety and honesty; for otherwise we must (as has been
showed) relieve those who are our enemies being in extreme necessity, even
before our own children being but in ordinary want; and those who are
religious and virtuous being further of, before those who being vicious and
graceless are nearer unto us. And so when we are linked unto any in many of
these bonds, we are to prefer them before any of those to whom we are but
bound in some one particular, if they be not our Parents or under our own
charge and government; as a godly kinsman, before one who is as religious but
nothing a kin unto us; or a kin unto us, but not so virtuous and religious;
a kinsman, neighbor and benefactor, before either a kinsman, or neighbor, or
a benefactor singly and alone.

CHAP. 13. Of the manner how, and time when, alms are best and most seasonably
bestowed.
Sect. 1. How we ought to give our alms both publicly and privately.
ANd so I come from the persons, who are both to give and receive alms, to
speak of the manner how they may most conveniently be distributed. And this is
either more public and common; or more private and particular. In regard of
the former the best course which we can take in giving our alms, is to follow
the laws and custom of our country; as among us to put what we can spare into
the poores box, or to deliver it to the Collectors for the poor, to be
distributed, as out of the common purse, according to their discretion who are
chosen to this office. And for our private alms which we give with our own
hands, we are to deliver them to such poor, as by our own inquiry we have
found out to be honest and needy; or else to such others as God by a more
immediate providence does unexpectedly and extraordinarily offer and present
unto us for the exercise of our charity.

Sect. 2. What is to be thought of giving our alms at our doors to common
beggars.
As for the giving of our alms at our doors to common beggars, though I do
not utterly condemn this manner of giving, whilst sufficient order is not
taken, and accordingly duly executed by the Magistrate, for the reformation of
this disorder; especially when the whole stream of men's charity does not
run this way, but some small riuulet, or as it were some little pipe or quill;
and when this is given to those who are in apparent misery, as the aged and
decerepit, the lame, sick and blind, for the relief of their present
necessity; yet can I in no wise approve it, if after this manner only we
exercise our mercy and charity giving without difference to all that come to
the door, as unto loose and idle persons, who are strong and able to labor, and
common beggars and vagabonds, who live by the sweat of other men's brows. And
my reasons are, because they who are truly poor shall by these means be
neglected, whilst these lazy drones devour that which of right belongs
unto them. Secondly, those who are bold, impudent, and most importunate, will
oftentimes speed better then those who are modest and shamefast. Thirdly, our
alms shall by this means be distributed without equality, some having all
and some nothing; and without discretion, because being given thus at random,
they cannot be fitted to the quantity or quality of their wants. Fourthly,
this kind of giving, nourishes and increases the number of vagrants and
inordinate persons, encouraging and heartning them to continue in their idle,
lewd, and wicked courses, without any fear of God or subjection unto men.
Fifthly, the allowance of this custom crosses Gods ordinance, Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
who would not have a common beggar in Israel, and proclaymeth to the world
both the mis-gouernment of Magistrates who do not reform this disorder, and
the hard-heartednes of private men, who through their want of mercy, bounty,
and compassion, thrust their neighbors into these base and inordinate courses.
And lastly, those excellent laws, which have lately been made among us, for
the reforming this abuse, are disobeyed and transgressed; and so the christian
Magistrate justly offended, whom we are bound to obey in all things lawful or
indifferent, and much more requiring such things as are godly and commendable,
as tending to Gods glory, the prosperous estate of the Church and
commonwealth, and the great good of all particular persons.

Sect. 3. Alms given by will to be esteemed according to the quality of the
persons who give them.
And this shall suffice to have spoken of the manner. The next point to be
considered is the time when these almsdeeds are to be performed; And that is
in the whole course of our lives, when we have ability, and find fit
opportunity of doing these works of mercy. But of this I have already spoken,
and therefore I will here only show, what I think concerning those almsdeeds
and works of mercy, which are not done in our life time, but by our last will
and testament, appointed to be done after the death of the benefactor. The
which actions of liberality are to be esteemed and censured, according to the
quality and condition of the persons by whom they are performed; for either
out of love and obedience toward God, and christian charity and compassion
toward men, they are done by such as have according to their ability been
exercised in these pious and charitable works in their whole life, after their
sound conversion unto God; or out of self-love, vainglory or servile fear,
they are performed by such as have utterly neglected these works of mercy in
their life time, and now would make some satisfaction for this neglect after
their departure. For the former we are to judge that it is a good conclusion of
a like good premises, and a manifest sign of their love toward God and their
neighbors, when as they are not content to do these works of mercy in their
life time, but also take care that they may be continued even after their
death; and not only relieve the poor members of Christ whilst they lived with
them, but also bequeath unto them legacies after their departure, and account
them among their children and heirs, by leaving unto them a portion with them,
and a part in their inheritance in lieu of thankfulness toward their Savior,
who has made them coheyres with himself in his heavenly kingdom. Neither is
there just exceptions to be taken, if these works of mercy done by them after
death, do exceed in number and quantity those which they have done in their
life time, seeing herein they deal no otherwise with the poor, than with their
own children and dearest friends, upon whom they bestow more by Will than ever
before they had from them. And it is just, that men should keep the largest
portion of their goods while they live for their own maintenance, giving to
the poor what they may conveniently spare from this use; and very charitable
if they design a great part of their estate to religious and pious uses, when
as themselves shall have no further use of it.

Sect. 4. What is to be thought of those that wholly defer giving alms till
their death.
But concerning the other, who have utterly neglected the works of mercy in the
whole course of their lives, and think it sufficient if they appoint somewhat
for these uses after their death; there is not the like judgment. In christian
policy they are not absolutely to be condemned, least hereby they should take
occasion to neglect the works of mercy living and dying; no nor yet in
christian charity, seeing these may be the after-fruits of their late
repentance. Besides, these good works are assuredly good unto the receivers;
and in respect of the giuers thus much may be said, that they do much better
than those who do neglect them altogether, taking no care that any good should
be done either in their lives or after death. And though now they can keep
their goods no longer, yet being to part with them of necessity, it is good
that they make choice freely to bestow them on these good uses; wherein they
are much to be preferred before those who bestow them upon such uses, as are
either evil, superfluous, superstitious, or mere worldly and carnal. Neither
may they justly be taxed for doing these good works now, but their long delay
is to be blamed, and because they would not be persuaded to do them sooner.

Sect. 5. Giving in our life time is much more commendable and acceptable.
Which fault that we may avoid, let us consider that it is much better and
more commendable, to give liberally to these good uses in our life time, making
our own hands our executors, and our eyes our ouer-seers, than to leave our
goods to these uses to be disposed of at the discretion of others. According
to that Eccli: 18. 22. Eccli. 18. 22. 25
Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy vow in due time, and defer not until
death to be justified. When thou have enough remember the time of hunger, and
when thou art rich think upon poverty and need. Secondly, it is much more
acceptable to God, as being a more infallible sign of a stronger faith and
more firm affiance in him. For if in our life time we give our goods to the
poor because God requires it, we thereby evidently declare that we rest upon
Gods providence and promises for our provision, seeing we dis-furnish our selves
of a good part of our means, even whilst we have occasion to use them.
Whereas if we keep all to our selves till the honre of death, we may be well
suspected of diffidence and want of faith, which is the cause why we do not
trust so much in God, as in our own provision and store which we have about
us. So also it is an evidence of greater love and obedience, if at Gods
commandment, and for his sake we can willingly part with our goods, when they
are still in our power, and might be converted to our own use; than if we
bestow them to such uses, when as death approaching we can keep them no
longer. For it is a small matter to give unto God that, which though we would
never so feign we cannot carry with us, and it is next to neglecting, to do so
late. For what great thing is it, if we be persuaded to put off our clothes,
when as we are ready to go to bed, to give away the relics of our meat in
the Inn, when we are ready to take horse, and to set forward our journey into
another country? Yea what thanks is it, if we then give away our apparel, when
we have so long worn it, that it will hang on our backs no longer, and then
part with our meat, when whether we will or no, it shall be taken from us;
especially when it is done in this hope, that our rotten rags shall be changed
into robes of immortality, and our perishing meat shall be supplied with the
bread of life? To which purpose an ancient Father says; Alas poor wretch,
Basil. in Diuit. auaros Sermon. 2.
will thou then be liberal and kind unto men, when as thou can no longer
live among them? shall I then only say that thou art loving to thy brethren,
when as I shall see thee a dead carcass? Thou art no doubt worthy great praise
of thy liberality, and great honor and grace is due unto thee, when lying in
thy grave, and being turned unto dust, thou shall appear munificent and
bountiful.

Sect. 5. Giving in our lifetime most seasonable and best fitted to occasions.
Thirdly, It is required not only that we give, but also that we give
seasonably, and that is when we see our neighbors wants, and have power and
ability to help and relieve them; for as in sowing our seed, we do not
think it enough if at some times we be ready to cast it into the ground, but
we have also special respect to the season and seede-time; so is it in sowing
the seeds our alms deeds, which if we sow not before death, it is, as if we
should defer the sowing of our seed, till the very time when we should reap
our harvest. Now are we sailing toward to the Holy Land, and these works of
mercy, like a good gale of wind, drive us forward unto the wished haven; now
are we to dispatch our spiritual market, wherein God offers unto us for
temporary trifles everlasting treasures; now is the time of our christian
warfare, wherein we are to fight against the devil, the world, and our own
carnal and covetous lusts, and then we overcome the world and our selves, when
we are wholly taken up with the works of mercy; and can part with our earthly
goods, in love toward God, and compassion toward our neighbors. But if we
defer them till after death, and will give nothing to the poor till all must
be taken from us; it is like a fair gale of wind after ship wrack, as if we
should set out our wares when the market is done, and make great braggs of our
valor, when the fight is finished and we put to flight. Besides, the works of
mercy are best done when they are fitted to the occasions and wants of those
unto whom they are performed; and not to give unto them when their necessity
requires, but when we can best spare our goods, is as if the steward should
give food to the family, not at meale-times, or when they are most hungry,
but when as himself has nothing else to do; or when he can keep the food
in his storehouse no longer, because thieves have dug through the wall, and
are now ready with violence to take it away from him.

Sect 6. No certainty of doing good by legacies.
Fourthly, It is much better that we do our selves the works of mercy in our
life time, than to leave them to be done by others after our deaths (not only
because the seed-time being much more seasonable, we may assuredly expect a
much more fruitful harvest, but also) because if we do not take the time
present, and relieve our poor brethren whilst it is in the power of our Pro.
3. 27.
hands to do it, we can have no certainty that they will ever be done by us
at all. For either we may be stripped of all our goods before our death, and so
have nothing to bequeath to these uses, or death may take us suddenly away, and
give us no time to dispose of our goods; or our sickness may be of such a
nature, that it will deprive us of the use of our memory and understanding; or
else if all things be left in good order by our Will, yet may this our last
Testament be concealed and Vna transpefita litera, vnum no^ probe apposit^m
signum totam sententiam mutare ac irrit^am facere vale^it. Basil. in Diuit.
Auares S^r. 2.
suppressed, or defeated and made void upon some nice point in law, or unjust
testimony of some false witnesses, or not be performed according to our
purpose and project, through the dishonestie and corruption of our executors.
For the avoiding of all which dangers, let us take the Wise-mans counsel, Pro.
3. 27. Withold not good Pro. 3. 27.
from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it:
and the Apostles exhortation, Gal. 6. 10.
Gal: 6. 10. whilst we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men. And let
us remember that death will not be long in coming, and that the covenant of
the grave is not showed unto us, and so do good before we dye, and according
to our ability stretch out our hands to give unto him. Let us not defraud our
selves of the good day, nor let the part of a good desire ouerpasse us; because
we shall leave our travels unto another, and our labors to be divided by lot.
as the son of Syrach persuades. Chap. 14. 12. 13. 14. 15. Eccli. 14. 12. 13.


Sect 7. Giving alms in our lifetime most suitable and comely for a Christian.
Fifthly, it is most comely and suitable that a charitable life should go before
a charitable death, and it well beseems a Christian so to live continually as
he means to dye. For who can expect a pleasant epilogue, after a direful
tragedy? or that he should be pitiful, compassionate and liberal in the
end, who in all his former course has been cruel, hard-hearted and
niggardly? or that God will honor him with a close of bounty and blessedness,
who has all his whole life dishonored God and wronged his poor Saints with
his extreme miserableness and gripplenes? or how shall a man take his words
spoken in extremity of sickness, I give and bequeath pounds and hundreds to
these and these good uses, who would not in his whole life part with a few
pence to relieve the poores necessity and preserve them from staruing? who
seeing such dissonancie and disagreement between his present words and former
practice, would not think that he raued and talked idly, rather then out of a
settled judgment and good deliberation? Again, it better futeth with the
nature of these good works to be done by our selves in our lifetime, then to
be left unto the discretion of other to be done by them after our death; in
which respect our Savior calls our good works by the name of lights, to
imply unto us, that we must see them go before us, and not suffer them by
others to be held behind our backs.

Sect. 8. Almesdeeds to be suspected when they are only done after death
Lastly, howsoever, we are to judge charitably of such actions, when we see
them done, because we discern only the outward work, but cannot search the
heart and secret thoughts; yet when as we see all on a sudden cruelty turned
into mercy, and miserly hardness into profuse bounty; the hands wide opened
toward the approach of death for the relief of the poor, which have been
close shut in the whole life; and the works of mercy practiced, which always
before have been utterly neglected; there is great cause of jealousy and
doubting, that these actions proceed not from those right and religious causes
which set the true Christian a work to do the like things, but rather from
sinister, worldly and carnal respects, which have ouerswayed and ruled them in
the whole course of their lives. Not from the love of God, Christian obedience,
charity and mercy toward the poor; for if these graces had residence in their
hearts, they would have produced the like effects in their health and strength;
but rather from self love, which is always accompanied with carnal fear and
vain glory; whereby they are made willing to employ their goods to these pious
and charitable uses, when as they see they can keep them no longer, either to
eternize their names in this world by these long lasting monuments, or to
escape the better before Gods judgment seat, where now they must give up the
account of their stewardship, and to be freed from that fearful condemnation
in the world to come. From which jealousy and suspicion there is no means to
be freed, unless these works of mercy thus performed do apparently proceed
from serious and sound repentance, and a lively faith in Christ; which are
seldom granted to any in their deathbed, who have neglected and contemned
them, through the whole course of their lives.

CHAP. 14. Of the properties of the Christians alms, wherein they differ from
those which are done by worldlings; And of the diverse sorts and kinds of them.
Sect. 1. That there are many and great differences between the alms of
Christians and of worldlings. And first in the causes moving them.
THe next point which I propounded in this duty of almesdeedes was their
properties, whereby the pious and charitable alms of Christians, which are the
undoubted signs of a godly and blessed man, may be discerned, from those
counterfeit alms which are done by hypocrites and worldlings; the which are
great and manifold. For first they differ in the causes and fountains from
which they arise and spring; For the alms of Christians are the fruits of a
lively and and justifying faith, and are done out of unfeigned love and
obedience toward God: and therefore is a Christian merciful unto others,
because he is assured of Gods mercy to himself; therefore does he give small
things to men, because he has received great things from God; and for this
cause is he liberal to those that need his help, not because they have
deserved it, but because God has commanded it. So also his alms spring from
Christian charity, mercy and compassion toward the poor, because he is a
member of Christ, and of the household of faith, or at least a creature of God
and of the same flesh. But the worldlings alms arise from self-love, whereby in
his alms he aims at some temporary and earthly good to be derived by them
unto himself, out of pride and vainglory, that he may be praised Matthew. 6.
and magnified amongst men, or may merit a far greater reward at the hands of
God, or out of servile fear of Gods judgments in this life or the life to
come, which by this means he would auert and turn away from him; and
therefore not proceeding from true charity they profit nothing. 1. Corinthians.
13. 3. 1. Cor. 13. 3.


Secondly, the Christian shows mercy, being inclined thereunto by the motion
of Gods spirit, and the inward fountain of goodness, which is thereby wrought
in him, which make him when he wants occasions of doing good, to enquire and
seek after them: but the worldlings mercy is the mere work of nature, and
is moved and excited only by the presence of some miserable object, which
stirs up in him the natural passion of pity for the present: but no sooner
is the object removed out of sight, but his mercy and compassion presently
cease.

Sect. 2. That they differ in their ends.
Thirdly, they differ in their ends; for the main end at which the Christian
aims in his alms, is, that God by them may be glorified; and the subordinate
ends are the good of his neighbors, the adorning of his profession with these
works of mercy, the edification of others by his Christian example, his own
present good in the assurance of Gods favor, and his future glory in the life
to come. But the hypocrite aims cheifely at his own glory and good, either
for the obtaining of some worldly benefits, or the avoiding of some temporal
or everlasting punishment; or finally, that he may satisfy Gods justice for
his sins, make him beholding unto him, and merit at his hands everlasting
happiness.

Sect. 3. That they differ in the matter. And first, in respect of propriety.
Fourthly, they differ in the matter of their alms, first in respect of
propriety; for the Christian is liberal in giving out of his own store
wherewith God has blessed him, and which he has gotten by his honest labors
in his lawful calling: but the worldling gives out of that which is other
men's, and having raked much together by oppression, extortion, deceit, usury,
simonie and such like unlawful means, he is content to give out of it some
penny-almes, to make some satisfaction for his sins, and to stop the cry of
his conscience, that he may more securely sleep in his wicked courses, and so
more quietly go into hell.

2. In the quantity.
Fifthly, in respect of the quantity; for the Christian gives liberally not
only out of his abundance but out of his mediocritie and mean estate, and
spares something willingly out of his own necessaries, if the extreme
necessity of the poor require it. But the worldling gives with a niggardly
heart and hand, and will hardly give unto the poor the least part of his
superfluities, and that not before his own turn be served in furnishing
himself with all worldly vanities, whereby he may be delighted in the fruition
of all sinful pleasures.

3. In the quality.
Thirdly, in respect of quality; for the Christian gives unto the poor things
profitable and wholesome, but the worldling his basest refuse, things sluttish
and filthy which he would not give to the vilest creatures by which he has
any delight or benefit.

Sect. 4. They differ in the object and extent.
Fifthly, they differ in the object or extent, for the Christians mercy
extends to all that stand in need, even to Infidells because they are Gods
creatures; to their enemies, because they look not to their deserts but to
Gods commandment; but especially it is exercised in releiuing poor
Christians, because they are the children of God and members of Christ. And
though they be ready to do good unto all, yet chiefly to those who are of the
household of faith: though their goodness like their heavenly Fathers reaches
to the good and bad, yet especially it extends Ga. 6. 10.
to Gods Saints and to the excellent; and because Math. 5. 45.
it cannot extend to God himself, by reason of Psalm. 16. 3.
his all-sufficiencie. Therefore to show their love toward him, they exercise
it toward his sons and servants, who are above all others most dear unto
him. But the worldlings mercy reaches only unto those who have somewaies
deserved it at his hands, or who (as they imagine) may deserve it, or to his
kindred, friends or such as are some way linked unto him in the bonds of
nature, going no further herein then Publicans and Hypocrites, whose mercy
Christ rejects, as being of no worth in the sight of God. Matthew 5. 46. 47.
Math. 5. 46.


Sect. 5. They differ in their manner of giving, 1. in respect of simplicity
Sixthly, they differ in their mind and manner of giving; Romans 12. 8.
He that gives let him do it with simplicity. Not intending by his alms his
own praise and profit, or yet to please men, but only to obey and please God;
which our Savior expresses to be such a simple kind of giving, wherein the
left Math. 6. 3.
hand knows not what the right hand does. Whereby is meant that he does not
make show of his alms unto those who are next unto him. No nor often
presents them to the view of his own conscience; least his mind should be
too much exalted in the remembrance of them. Not that it is unlawful to give
alms before others, for elsewhere he commands us, that our light of a Math.
5. 16. Non est ingrata Deo quae visa fuerit ab hominibus eleemosy^a, sed quae
godly life should shine before men, that they seeing our good works may
glorify our father which is in heaven; but his meaning is, that we should not
do them to this end to be seen of men, that so we may have the praise our
selves, and rob God of his glory. For our Savior like a good Physician ideo
facta est vt visa sit. Chrysostom. in Math. 6. Vana gloria leuiter volat, leuiter
penetrat sed non leave infligit ^ulnus; cito interficet. Bernard.
feeling our pulse, easily discerned how apt we are to be swelled with the
dropsy of Hypocrisy and to be puffed up with the wind of vain glory, which
caused him so carefully to press us strictly to the avoiding of the least
occasions which might corrupt us with so subtle and dangerous a vice. But the
wordling in his works of mercy hunteth after some advantage, or at least Verse.
2.
for the glory of the world and praise of men, before whom he does his
almes-deedes that he may Math. 23. 5.
be seen of them. So one says, that there are some which give unto the poor a
little that they may receive Hieronym. ad Nipotian.
much, and under the pretense of giving alms, do seek to enrich themselves,
which rather is to be called hunting, birding, and fishing then alms giving;
for so birds and fishes are caught when by the small bait they are allured to
swallow the sharp book. But this hope L^ctan. instit. 6. cap. 12.
of retribution (as says another) should be far from them who do these works
of mercy; for if profit be expected it is not humanity, but putting out of a
benefit to usury. Neither is it an act of mercy but of self love, which
makes them give to the poor, that out of their liberality they may raise
advantage unto themselves, by binding them unto perpetual vassallage with the
bonds of their benefits, and making them to earne it double at their hands by
their painful labor. But this is to give meat to the poor as they give
prouender to their horses, not out of any humanity and love unto them, but out
of self love, that they may hereby be strengthened and encouraged to do them
better service; or as the Husbandman gives food to his sheep, feeding them
only to this end, that he afterward may be fed of them.

Sect. 6. 2. In respect of humility.
Secondly, the Christian does these works of mercy with great humility,
remembering that whatsoever he gives to the poor for Gods sake, he has first
received it from God with all other blessings which he enjoys; In which
respect when he does the most, he acknowledges that he does far less then
his duty, and that with much infirmity and weakness; and therefore in this
regard he humbly confesses that his alms are sufficiently rewarded if they
be graciously pardoned; the which, as it makes him to carry himself humbly
before God, so also meekly and gently toward the poor. But the wordling when
he does these works of mercy, is puffed up with pride, thinking that thereby
he satisfies for his sins, meriteth heaven, and makes God beholding unto
him forsooth, by giving him a feather of his own foul, and an handful of
corn of his own harvest. And as he is proud toward God, so arrogant,
superstitious and insolent toward his poor neighbor, the which he shows
in his lofty and ouertopping looks, his insulting speeches, and severe
examinations; which so leaueneth and sowreth his gifts, that oftentimes they
are more distasteful to the receiver, then wrongs and injuries, if at least
they be sweetened with outward complements and shows of humanity.

Sect. 7. 3. In respect of cheerful giving.
Thirdly, The Christian is willing and cheerful in doing these works of
mercy, because he knows that his heavenly Father does love a Cor and non
substantiam Deus pensat, n^c perpen^it qu^d in eius sacrifici^, sed ex quanto
preferatur. Gregor. 1. Tim. 6. 8.
cheerful giver, and looks more to the heart of him that gives, then to
the quantity of his gift, and that it is not enough for us to do good, and to
be rich in good works, unless we be also ready to distribute and willing to
communicate, as it is 1. Tim. 6. ^8. Besides his outward works of mercy
proceed from an inward habit, and therefore it is no more painful or greiuous
unto him to do them, then for the eye to see or the ear to hear; yea rather
they are the delight of his soul, and his meat and drink to do the will of
his Father. And this cheerfulness of his heart he shows (as has been
said) in the pleasantness of his countenance, in his sweet and comfortable
words, and in the action it self, by his ready and speedy giving. For his
works of mercy are not drawn out of him through the importunity of suitors,
but are kindly sent out of his heart, and (like waters out of the spring) do
readily flow from the inward fountain of his bounty and benignity. Neither
is he apt to make delays, because they so afflict oftentimes the heart of the
poor suter, that he prefers a quick denial before a slow grant; but he
gladly lays hold upon the occasion when it is first offered; and doubleth the
gift by his speedy giving. But the worldling does his works of mercy
grudgingly and churlishly, and dum manu dat, vultu negat, whilst his hand
gives, his look denies: and proudly insulteth over the poor in their
miseries, by his rough speeches, bitter taunts, and harsh expostulations,
turning his bread that he gives into stones and gravel; so that he does not
so much comfort the poor man by his gifts, as he does vex and afflict his
soul with his manner of giving; causing him in his heart to prefer a
courteous refusal, before a grant that is so sour and churlish. And as he
gives harshly, so hardly and slowly, putting of and even tyring the poor
Suter with many delays and denialls. And when he gives, it is rather because
he is impatient of importunity, like the unrighteous judge spoken of in the
Gospel, then pitiful and compassionate Luke 18. 5.
in the sight of the poor man's misery. Sed non contulit beneficium qui sic
dedit, sed extorsit qui accepit, he bestows not a benefit who so gives, but
he extorteth a gift who so receives it.

Sect. 8. They differ in time.
Lastly they differ in time, for the Christian exercises himself in the
works of mercy in the whole course of his life, and gives his goods to the
poor whilst he might enjoy them himself: But the worldling is only liberal
at the approach of death, and then alone he is content to employ them to these
uses, whenas he sees he can keep them no longer. And that not out of any love
toward God or his neighbors, but out of fear of approaching judgment, and
that dreadful account which he must presently make before a just and terrible
judge; or out of self love either that he may gain the vain glory of the
world, or that he may satisfy for his sins, and so escape eternal
condemnation. In which respect he gives to the poor, and casts his bread
upon the face of Eccles. 11. 1.
the waters, as the Merchant casts his goods into the sea in the time of a
storm, to preserve the ship from sinking, and himself from drowning. For were
he not in danger to make shipwreck of his soul, and of sinking into the gulf
of hell, and condemnation, he would be no more liberal at his death, then he
has always been in the whole course of his life.

Sect. ^. The conclusion.
And thus have I showed the great and manifold differences between the alms
and works of mercy, which are done by true Christians, and those which are
performed by worldlings and hypocrites. Now what remains but to persuade all
those who fear God, and have any care of their own souls, that they content
not themselves with that false counterfeit, and shadow of mercy, but that they
labor after that which is true and substantial. For as our Savior said of
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, so may I say in this case:
Except your mercy exceed Matthew. 5. 20.
the mercy of worldlings and hypocrites, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.

Sect. 10. Of forgiving debts.
The last thing to be considered is the diverse kinds of alms, the which are
principally 3. giving, forgiving, and free-lending; For not only do we relieve
the poor when we give unto them, but also when we ease them of the burden of
debt wherewith they are oppressed. To which duty we are bound, when we see
our neighbor decayed in his estate, and not able to pay what he has
borrowed; for when by the hand of God he is cast down, we are not with the
weight of our hand to keep him down, but by the lightning of his load, we
must help him to rise again: which mercy, if we ordinarily show to a brute
beast, when we see him lying under his burden, how much more should we
exercise it toward those who are of the same flesh, children of the same
father, and members of the same body? And this is commanded Exodus 22. 26. If
thou at Exodus 22. 26.
all take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver it unto him by
then the Sun goes down. 27. For that is his covering only, it is his
raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? And it shall come to pass,
when he cries unto me, that I will hear him, for I am gracious. The which
duty good Nehemiah Nehem. 5. 11.
caused the princes of the people to put in practice, as we may see, Nehem.
chap. 5. 11. Restore I pray you to them, even this day, their lands, their
vineyards, their oliue-yards, and their houses, also the hundredth part of the
money, and of the corn, and of the Luke 6 35.
wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them. The which our Savior also
requires, when as he bids us to lend, looking for nothing again, in case
our brother be not able to pay. And this is a part of that fast which God so
much esteems. Esaias 58. 6. Is not this (says he) the fast that I have chosen,
to loose the bands of wickedness, and to undo the Esaias. 58. 6.
heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every
yoke? And in this regard every year should be the Christians Iubile, wherein
all debts are to be remitted to the poor, who have not wherewith to make
payment, which if we perform not, but cruelly catch our brethren by their
throats, and cast them into prison, to take our penny-worths (as they say) on
their bones, and to make dice of them; then surely, we may justly expect that
our Lord and Master, to whom we owe so much, will take the same course with
us, exacting his debt to the uttermost farthing, and Math. 18. 28. 34
when we are unable to pay, casting us into the prison of outer darkness,
where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Sect. 11. Of freelending
Finally we releive the poor by free lending. For as when their necessity is
general, and their poverty so great, that their estate in it self is
unrecoverable, we must give freely without expecting any return; so when it
only pincheth them for the time present, and they are brought, in respect of
their estate, but upon their knees, so that if we afford them our helping hand,
they will be able in the strength of their own state to rise of themselves,
and by having the only use of our goods for a while, will sufficiently repair
their ruins, we are then bound to lend unto them. According to that Deuteronomy. 15.
8. Thou shall open thine hand wide to thy poor brother, and shall surely lend
Deuteronomy. 15. 8.
him sufficient for his need in that which he wants. So our savior Christ
commands us, to give unto him that asks, and from him that would borrow of
us that we do not turn away. Math. 5. 42. The Luke 6. 35.
which must not be done with an usurious intent and expectation of advantage,
but so liberally and freely, that we can be content, when we lend, to loose
the principal, if the necessity of our poor brother so requires. Luke 6.
35. which if we do, then shall we hereby have assurance, that we are those
blessed men whom the Psalmist here describes; for as it is verse 5. A good
man shows favor and lends; and though the poor Psalm. 112. 5.
fail us we shall find the Lord, who is their surety, to be a sure play master,
who will return unto us for our earthly things heavenly, and for these that
are contemptible and momentany, such treasures as are most excellent and
eternal.

CHAP. 15. That Almesdeedes are an act of righteousness, so that they be not
left arbitrary, but we in conscience are bound to do them.
Sect. 1. Of the meaning of the word righteousness.
AND thus having showed what almesdeeds are, and how this duty is to be
performed; it now follows, that I come to speak of the second part of the
text, wherein are contained many effectual and strong arguments, to move
every Christian to the diligent and frequent doing of them. His righteousness
endures for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor. In which words there
are expressed two maine reasons to persuade us to this duty, the first is the
lasting benefit of their works of mercy unto themselves; the other the
establishment of their estate with honor and glory before God, men and the holy
Angels, in this life and the life to come. The which principal arguments are
like the root and body of a goodly tree, from which spring many boughs and
branches, or like the prime ancestors of the stock and kindred, from whom do
issue a numerous posterity. Which that we may the more plainly conceive, let
us breifely examine the meaning of the words. And first, by righteousness, we
are to understand, not generally all righteousness which consists in our
whole conformity to the Law, nor that whole part of Legal righteousness which
consists in obedience to the second table; but certain special fruits of
this righteousness, in the works of mercy toward the poor, by a Synecdoche of
the general for the special: or, if you will, almesdeedes themselves, which
(as I have showed) are by the Hebrews called by the name of righteousness,
and sometime Dan. 4. 27.
by the name of mercy, to show unto us, that
it is such a grace which rests not only in an internal
habit or bare affection of the heart and mind, but also exercises it self
in the outward act of releeuing those whose penurious estates we pity and
commiserate. And this is a work not only of mercy, but of justice, the which
is such a virtue as gives unto every one t kathkonta, those things which are
due unto them; that is, to our superiors reverence and obedience, to our
equals love and friendship with all good offices and fruits of them; and to the
poor and needy comfort and relief. And hereof it is, that the vulgar
translation thus reads that place of Matthew. chap. 6. 1. Take heed that ye
do not your righteousness Matthew. 6. 1.
before men, to be seen of them. And so the old interpreter has rendered it,
righteousness, because righteousness in the Hebrew phrase signifies
beneficence and almesdeeds; even as contrariwise the 70. Interpreters have
rendered the Hebrew word Tsedakah signifying righteousness, Deuteronomy. 24. 13.
leemosne, almsdeeds. Yea the Apostle himself does best of all determine
this point, for alleging this verse of the Psalm, to incite the Corinthians
to beneficence and almsdeeds, he does 2. Cor: 9. 9.
retain the name of righteousness, to signify these works of mercy. His
righteousness remains for ever; what righteousness? surely that which he had
named in the words immediately going before, consisting in beneficence and
giving to the poor. And as the Psalmist here speaks of the dispersing and
sowing of the works of beneficence and almsdeeds; so the Wiseman signifies
the selfsame duty by the phrase of sowing the seed of righteousness, Pro. 11.
18. To him that Pro. 11. 18.
sows righteousness shall be a sure reward.

Sect. 2. That alms deeds are absolutely required, proved by many testimonies.
Now whereas almsdeeds are called by the name of righteousness, from hence we
may gather a strong argument to persuade every Christian to the doing of them.
For they are not only works of mercy, but also fruits of righteousness, and
therefore are not left as things arbitrary and indifferent at our own choice,
to do or leave them undone, as we think good; but are absolutely required and
straightly enjoined in the law of God, which is the rule of righteousness, and
with great earnestness pressed and urged in the Gospel, as the fruits of our
faith, and testimonies of our love toward God and our neighbors. The which
will more plainly appear, if we consider, both some testimonies of scriptures,
and some effectual reasons grounded upon them. So Deuteronomy. 15. 11. The poor
shall never cease out of Deuteronomy: 15. 11.
the land, therefore I command thee saying, thou shall open thine hand wide
unto thy brother, to thy poor and to thy needy in thy land. and Esa. 58. 7.
The Lord Esa. 58. 7.
tells us, that the fast which he requires and chooses, is to deal our
bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor that are cast out into our houses;
when we see the naked that we cover them, and that we hide not our selves from
our own flesh. And these are the fruits of the just man, who shall live in his
righteousness, if he has given his bread to the hungry, and has covered the
naked with a garment. Ezech. 18. 7. Thus in the New Testament John the Ezech.
18. 7.
Baptist gives charge, that he who has two coats, should impart to him that
has none, and that he who has meat should do likewise, Lu: 3. 11. that is,
that Luc: 3. 11.
if we have any thing to spare from our own necessary use, we must be ready to
releive the poor with it, whom we see to be in extreme or great necessity.
So our Savior Christ himself Math: Math. 5. 42.
5. 42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee,
turn thou not away. and Luke 11. 41. Give alms of such things as you have.
Yea Luke 11. 41.
this duty is charged upon us with such strictnes, that if we have not any
thing to bestow, we must by our labors get somewhat to give unto our poor
brethren, whereby they may be releiued in Ephesians. 4. 28.
their necessity* and if we have no superfluity, we are charged (if their
wants be extreme) to sell our goods and possessions, that we may have to give
unto them. Luc. 12. 33. as we see it also Luke 12. 33. Act. 4. 34.
practiced in the primitive Church. Act. 4. 34.

Sect. 3. That our riches are not our own but Gods talents committed unto us as
his stewards.
All which testimonies clearly prove that we are bound by Gods commandment to
give alms; and therefore it is not left at our own choice, but to be
performed, not only as an act of mercy, but also of righteousness, as it may
more plainly appear by these reasons. First, because our riches are not
absolutely our own but Gods talents, which he has committed unto us not to
mis-spend them in the satisfying of our worldly and carnal lusts, but to
employ them to the best advantage, for the honor of our master and the good of
our fellow-seruants. Now God is honored when as we bestow the wealth which he
has committed unto us according to his appointment and commandment; and when
as by them (as much as in us lies) we advance the means of his worship and
service, whereof one principal part is the relieuing of the poor, for these
as the Apostle tells us, are such christian sacrifices, wherewith he is well
pleased. And finally, Heb. 13. 16.
when as by our christian carriage in this behalf, we manifest his wisdom,
goodness, love and providence in the government of his Church, which is his
house and family. For it is the honor of a good Master, when by his care and
providence the house is so well governed, that every officer performs his
duty in his place, and all in the family have food convenient with all other
necessaries belonging to them. To which purpose our great Lord and Master has
preferred some to be his stewards, unto whom he has committed his goods, not
that they should appropriate them to their own use, but that they should
wisely, justly, and charitably, dispense and dispose of them for the good of
all the household; and howsoever by virtue of their high place and office they
may take unto themselves (as it were) a double portion, and that which is
sufficient not only for nature, but for the due maintenance of their person;
and not for necessity alone, but also for their honest delight (unless it be
that this their allowance be necessarily to be shortened to supply the extreme
necessity of others who need their help) yet their Lord and Master requires
of them, that they communicate so much of their goods as they can well spare
from these uses, to relieve and sustain others of their fellow-seruants, who
want such things as are needful for their releife and maintenance; which who
so neglect, and either riotously spending and wasting, or niggardly and
miser-like keeping and hourding up these goods, do suffer the poor to starve
for want of necessaries, they do herein exceedingly dishonor God, when those
who are without see the servants of his family perish for want of food; and
they overthrow (as much as in them lies) his providence, whilst they withdraw
that provision which he has allotted to the maintenance of his household from
these uses and convert them to their own.

Sect. 4. That they who will not releive the poor are guilty of theft
sacrilege and murder.
Finally, they greiuously offend his divine majesty by committing those three
fearful and heinous sins of theft, sacrilege and murder. For they play the
thieves, who having received much riches from God to this end, that they should
communicate them for the relief of others, do appropriate the^ to their own
use. For as the steward of a Noble-mans house receiving great sums yearly of
his Lord to this end, that he should disburse and lay it out for the keeping of
his house and maintenance of his family; should therewith buy and purchase
lands for himself, or prodigally mis-spend them in banqueting and
belly-cheare, gaming and reuelling, gorgeous apparel or sumptuous furniture,
and in the mean time suffer his fellow-seruants to starve and perish for want
of food and apparel: or as the Kings Almner should thus mispend the money and
treasure entrusted unto him for the use of the poor, they would be counted no
better than thieves amongst men: so if they who being placed in these offices
by God do mispend his rich talents after the same manner, they shall one day be
arraigned as notorious thieves before his judgment seat, and receive the
sentence of condemnation, for robbing both their master and their
fellow-seruants. Yea they commit not only theft but also sacrilege; for that
which we are commanded to give unto the poor is consecrated to Gods service,
and is in some sort a part of that portion which belongs unto him, whereof it
is that almsdeeds are called by the name of sacrifices which were alone to be
offered unto God; and therefore seeing the Lord has allotted this part of his
portion for the use of the poor, it is not only theft against them, but
sacrilege against God himself to rob and spoil them of it. Finally, if
detayning from the poor that due releife which belongs unto them, they
suffer them to perish in their wants, they do stand guilty before God, not only
of theft and sacrilege, but also of the sin of murder, because they deprive
them of the means whereby their lives might have been preserved, according to
that, Eccli: 34. 21. The bread of the needy is their Eccli. 34. 21.
life, he that defraudeth him thereof is a man of blood. For whereas in the
sixth commandment God forbids murder, he forbids also the neglect of the
means whereby the life of our neighbor might be preserved and sustained. In
which regard Ambrose doubts not to say, Si non pauisti, occidisti. Thou have
killed the poor, if thou have not fed them. And again; This is to kill He
est occidere hominem vitae suae ei subsidia denegare. Amb. in Psalm. 1 18.
a man, when we deny unto him the means of preserving his life. For he is
alike the cause of the falling of a staff who pulls away his hand which held
it up, and he who takes and casts it down: and he is the cause why the fire
goes out, that with-draweth the fuel which should nourish it, as well as he
who casts water upon it. And therefore (as he infers) take heed that thou
do not include in thy bags the health and safety of thy neighbor, and as
it were bury in the grave, the life of the poor.

Sect. 5. That God has a^lotted all we can spare to the poor as their
portion.
Secondly, it is not only an act of mercy but also of justice to give alms to
the poor, because the Lord, who is the chief owner of our goods, having
appointed all that we can spare to their use, it is not our own, but their
portion allotted unto them; which they have as good right unto as we have to
the rest, because it is ratified unto them by the same authority. For if we
have right to the maine estate because God in his bounty has given it unto us,
then they have right also to the overplus which we may well spare by virtue of
the same donation. Only here is the difference that God has given unto us our
riches immediately himself, but unto the poor mediately by us, whom he has
enjoined to perform unto them these duties of mercy and Christian charity. In
which regard as it is theft in us to rob them of that portion which God has
allotted unto them, so it is theft in the poor to take it from the rich without
their consent, seeing they have the right of disposing them from God; even as
it is theft in the inferior servants, if when the steward neglects his duty
in feeding and providing for them, they take upon them to be their own
caruers; for as it is the will of the Master that he should feed them, so also
that they should be fed by him, and not forcibly take it from him by fraud or
violence. To this purpose one says, it is the bread of the hungry which ^st
pa^is s^mi(...)*
mouldeth in thy binge or cupbord; it is the coat of the nes, nudi tunica quam
tu in conclaui conser^^a^. etc. Basil.
naked which hangs vselesse in thy chamber or wardrope, they are the shoes
of him that goes barefoote, which lie rotting by thee; It is the silver of the
needy which rusteth in thy chests, and so many thou do iniure, as thou can,
and do not releive in their wants and miseries. And another says, that it is
alike faulty and blameworthy to take from the right owners, and Ambros. in
Luc^m.
to deny necessaries to the poor when we have abundance. And therefore know
that thou spoylest so many of their goods, as thou deniest releife unto, when
thou art able to give it. In which regard the Apostle James speaks thus unto
rich men who neglect this duty, Iam. 5. 1. Go to now ye rich men, weep and
houle, for your miseries that shall come upon you. Iam 5. 1.
2. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moath-eaten: your gold and
silver is cankerd, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire; you have heaped treasure together for
the last days. And the wise man speaking of alms, makes it a matter of duty
and not of mere benevolence, Pro. 3. 27. withhold not good (...).
from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it.
And this is employed by the name diakonia that the Apostle uses to signify 2.
Cor. 3. 4. and 9. 1. Heb. 6. 10.
alms, and diakonesante to signify those that give them, which do not import
a mere gift out of free choice, but a ministration and service, which we are
required to do unto those of the same family, who need our help, at the
appointment of our great Lord and Master.

Sect 6 Their objection answered, who say their goods are their own; so that
they need not to give except they list.
So that here is met with one special objection of worldly men, whereby they
excuse their not giving of alms when they are pressed unto them; namely that
their goods are their own and therefore they are not tied to employ them in
such uses, but have free liberty to dispose them at their pleasure; seeing
they are not absolutely their own, but the Lord, who is chief owner of them,
has only entrusted these talents unto them as his servants and stewards, not
giving them full authority to dispose them at their pleasure, but has limited
them to those uses which he has appointed and determined; of which this is
one of the chief that they give some chief portion of them to the releife of
the poor. According to that of the Apostle. 1. Pet. 4. 10. As every 1. Pet. 4.
10. e auto at diakononte.
man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold grace of God. And so our Savior having exhorted us to
make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon, adds, And if ye have not been
faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your
Luc. 16. 12.
own? plainly intimating that the riches which we possess are not our own
but Gods, and only entrusted unto our disposing as stewards of his family. As
stewards (I say) to dispense and lay them out, and not as treasurers to lay
them up, and hourd them in our chests; or if as treasurers, yet not to reserve
them for our own use, but for the service of our sovereign and the good of
our fellow servants. And this was typically signified by the gathering of
Manna, which though the Lord rained it down from heaven, and could as easily
have doubled the quantity ten fold, if so it had pleased him, yet he would
not allow that those who had gathered much should keep and hourd up their
superfluity, but enjoined them to communicate of their greater store to them
who had gathered less. The which the Apostle applies to the giving of alms
out of our abundance to those that want, 2. Cor. 8. 14. That now 2. Cor. 8. 14.
at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their
abundance might be a supply for your want, that there be equality, as it is
written, He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little
had no lack. Neither are we to think that God has caused this inequality of
estate amongst men, because he respects the rich and neglects the poor;
and would have them pampred with all superfluities and delitious dainties, and
the other starued with want and penury; but hereby he would exercise the
diverse graces which he has given to his Church and people; as namely the
charity, liberality and fidelity of the rich in dispensing of his talents,
and the faith, affiance and patience of the poor; that being approved both
might be crowned at the day of Christ's appearing, according to that of Basil;
Cur tu diuttijs circumstu^s, cur ille eger? etc. Basil. Orat. 14. de diuit. and
paupert.
why (says he) do thou abound with riches, and he want necessaries? surely
that thou might receive the reward of thy faithful dispensation, and he
also after many conflicts and victories might have the reward and crown of his
patience. And also he would hereby give occasion unto humane societies of
lincking themselves more nearly and firmly together by natural offices of
giving and receiving, laboring and rewarding.

Sect. 7. That as stewards we shall be called to an account.
But if this argument of their right and our possession, as stewards, and not
as absolute Lords, will not persuade us to communicate to their necessities;
yet let this consideration prevail with us, that a day will come, when as like
stewards, we shall be called to a reckoning; and be forced whether we will or
no to give an account before God, his Saints and blessed Angels, how we have
carried our selves in our stewardship, and increased our Lords talents.
According to that of our Savior, Luc. 16. 2. Give an account of thy
stewardship, Luc. 16. 2.
for thou may be no longer steward. And if we have increased and doubled
them, by delivering them to these bankers, the poor members of Jesus Christ;
then shall we hear that comfortable sentence pronounced by our Lord, Well done
thou Matthew. 25. 21. and 24. 45. 46.
good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I
will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Matthew. 25. 21. But if contrariwise we neglect those charitable uses which our
Lord has enjoined us, and neglecting the poor, do spend our masters goods in
excess and riot; if then in steed of feeding the hungry, and clothing the
naked, we bring in account, so much spent in dainty fair and gorgeous
apparel, so much in stately buildings and costly furniture, so much in rich
jewels and needelesse vanities, so much laid out on hounds, horses and harlots,
so much consumed in gaming and reuelling, in plays and enterludes, so much
spent in needelesse suites of law, in giving bribes, and entertaining rich
friends, and in a word, so much prodigally wasted in the pleasures of sin and
voluptuons delights, or so much miser-like hoorded up and hid in a napkin: then
shall we hear that fearful sentence which will make our hearts to ache, and
our joints to tremble. Thou wicked and Matt. 25 26. 27
slothful servant, thou know that I reap where I sowed not, and gather
where I have not strawed; thou ought therefore to have put my money to the
exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with
advantage. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him that has
two talents. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Sect. 8. That the communion between us and the poor, should move us to
relieve them.
The third reason to move us to give alms as being an act of righteousness,
and Christian equity may be taken from that communion which is between the
poor and us, with our head Christ; for this is equal and just, that they who
are united together in the nearest communion of persons should also communicate
in the use of their goods, for their mutual relief and comfort; Romans 15. 28.
2. Cor. 8. 4. and 9. 13.
whereof it is that almesdeedes are called koinona, that is, such gifts as
arise out of communion, by a metonymie of the cause inducing, for the effect
which is produced by it. But the nearest communion that can be imagined is
between Christians, one with another, and all of them with their head Jesus
Christ. For besides the civil communion between all men, whereby they are al
of one flesh (which the Prophet Esaias thinks a sufficient argument to move us
to do these works of mercy in releeuing the poor) the offspring Esaias 58.
and generation of God, as the Apostle Acts 17. 19.
speaks, the sons of the same Adam and Noah, and so brethren one with
another, and of the same country and common wealth, yea, it may be of the
same city and corporation; there are many spiritual respects, and more divine
relations, which make a more near communion between Christians one with
another. For we are elected to the same eternal happiness; and who would not
love and releive those who have communion in the same decree of life and
blessedness? we are Gods worke-man-ship, who are not only created in Adam,
according to his glorious image, but re-created and restored unto this divine
image lost by Adam, in the second Adam Jesus Christ? and who would not cherish
those who have such spiritual resemblance and likeness with God and one
another? For if (as one says) Idolalaters so much reverence the insensible
image of their Idoll-gods, that they willingly bestow upon them the most
precious things they have, of which notwithstanding they have no use, and
Lactant de vero Cu^tu. l. 6. c. 13.
cannot so much as give thanks unto them for all the oblations which they have
received: how much more just and equal is it to respect and cherish the living
images of Almighty God, that thou may be thought worthy to find him who
ever lives, especially, seeing they can use what they have received, and give
unto thee thanks, and God also in whose sight thou do these good deeds
will approve them, and pay unto thee the wages of thy piety? we are redeemed
in our souls and bodies with the same precious blood of Jesus Christ, and
therefore why should we make question of giving a poor alms for the
preservation of their bodies, seeing our Savior has given such an inestimable
price for their redemption? we are partakers of the same calling, whereby we
are called out of the world, and gathered into the Church and Communion 1. Cor.
1. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 9. and 3. 9 and 5. 10.
of Saints, yea, of Jesus Christ our Lord; out of darkness into his marvelous
light, that we may inherit the blessing of eternal glory, and out of a
desperate condition, to be partakers of the same precious promises. And by
virtue of this Ephesians 4. 5.
calling, we serve one and the same God, be of one Church and Family, and have
one Religion, one Faith, one Baptism; and why then should we think it much
to communicate unto the poor, earthly trifles, for whom God has provided
heavenly happiness? why should we not do for those who are of the same
family with us, and grudge to give unto Gods servants such things as we would
be ashamed to deny unto the meanest of our own? why should they not have
fellowship with us in our houses at our own table, who have communion with us
in Gods house, and are invited guests to his table, as well as our selves? we
are brethren of the same father, and co-heires of the same heavenly kingdom;
and therefore let us take care of those who are so near of kin unto us, and
not cast them off, as though we had nothing to do with them; for it is the
voice of Cain to say, Am I my brothers keeper? and seeing God has thought them
worthy to reign with us in heaven, let not us think them unworthy to live
with us on the earth; if he vouchsafe to give them with us a glorious and
everlasting kingdom, let not us look upon their present vile and contemptible
condition, unless it be to pity and relieve them, seeing they shall be
advanced with us, if not before us; nor refuse to make them partakers with us
of these earthly and contemptible trifles, which are small in worth, and
momentanie in continuance. For this the Apostle James condemns for such an
heinous sin as shall procure judgment without mercy. Iam. 2. 5. Hearken my
beloved brethren, has not God chosen Iam. 2. 5.
the poor of this world, rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom, which he
has promised to the^ that love him? but ye have despised the poor. And what
follows? He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.
And this Austin notes, as most unseemly August. De Tempore. Sermon. 2. c. 10.
and unequal, that among men professing Christianity, and under the government
of the same Lord, some should be pampered and drunken with excess, and others
should be tormented and perish with hunger. We are all the servants of one,
and redeemed with one price, all having alike ingresse and egresse into, and
out of the world; and if we do well, we shall all come to the same
blessedness. And why then does not the poor now eat with thee, who shall
hereafter reign with thee? why do thou not permit him to put on thine old
and cast clothing, who is to receive with thee the robe of immortality? why is
he not thought worthy to eat thy bread, whom God has thought worthy to receive
the Sacrament of Baptism? and why deemest thou him unworthy to eat the
relics of thy meat, whom God has enuited to feast with the blessed Saints
and Angels? Finally, we are the same spouse, of the same heavenly Bride-goome,
and 1. Cor. 12 12. 13. 14.
members of the same mystical body, the head whereof is Jesus Christ; and
therefore if the limbs of Satan will not (being combined one to another in an
hellish friendship) deny to do these small tristles one for another; much
less let us who are knit together in this spiritual and holy union; seeing if
we do good to our fellow members, the benefit must needs redound unto our
selves, who are of the same body, even as the hand giving nourishment to the
mouth, and the mouth preparing it for the stomach, do in nourishing it
provide nourishment for themselves?

Sect. 9. That our communion with our head Christ should move us to relieve
the poor.
The second bond which binds us to this duty, is the communion which the
poor, together with us, have with our head Christ; which is so near and
indissoluable, that our Savior esteems that as done unto himself, which is
done unto them; even as the head acknowledges the benefit done unto it which
the meanest member of the body immediately receives. Yea in truth that is much
more acceptable which we do for his poor members, than if we should do it to
his own person, as being a sign of greater love; for it is but an ordinary
kindness to confer benefits upon our dearest friends, but to extend our
bounty to the poorest and meanest that belong unto them is a sign of much
greater love. For if for their sakes only we do good unto these, how much more
would we be ready to do it unto themselves if they had occasion to crave our
help? And as in this regard he much esteems this christian bounty, so also
he will richly reward it at the day of judgment; for then these merciful men
who have releiued the poor for Christ's sake, shall with rauishing joy hear
that sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father; because the works Math: 25 40.
of mercy which they have done to the poor, Christ will acknowledge as done
unto himself. Now what can be a more forcible reason to make our hearts
relent though they be never so stony, and our bowels to earne with pity and
compassion toward the poor, though they were of brass and iron, than to
consider that our dear Lord and Savior in them does crave releife? For who is
so more than brutishly ungrateful, that can turn him away emptie-handed, who
being infinitely rich in all glory and happiness, was content for our sakes to
become poor, that by his poverty he might communicate 2 Cor. 8. 9.
unto us his heavenly riches? Who would not give Christ lodging, yea even (if
need should require) the use of his own bed, if he remember that he was
content so far to abase himself for our sakes, as to make a stable his
chamber, and a manger his lodging? Who could deny to clothe him being naked,
who has clothed our nakedness and covered our filthiness with the precious
robe of his righteousness, in which we stand accepted before God and receive the
blessing of eternal happiness? Who would not spare food out of his own belly
to releive poor Christ, who has given unto us his blessed body to be our
meat, and his precious blood to be our drink, whereby our souls and bodies
are nourished unto everlasting life? Who would not leave all pleasure and
profit to go and visit him in his sickness and imprisonment, that came to visit
and redeem us with the inestimable price of himself, when we were inthralled
in the miserable bondage of sin, satan, hell and condemnation? and to set us
free in that glorious liberty of the sons of God, was content to be himself
apprehended like a malefactor, imprisoned, arraigned, accused, blasphemed, and
rayled at, buffeted, spit upon, whipped, crowned with thorns, condemned to
death, and crucified between two thieves? Neither let us excuse our hardness of
heart in denying relief to the poor, by saying, that though we reject them,
yet we would if Christ were in their place show all love unto him, seeing this
is but to cover our rockie obduratenes, with the filthy veil of impious
infidelity. For Christ in his word has plainly told us, that what we do to
his brethren and poor members, he Math. 25. 40. 45.
does esteem as done unto himself; and therefore if thou still refuse to
relieve the poor, either confess thy infidelity which will not let thee
believe him; or thy hardness of heart which will not suffer thee to relieve and
comfort him.

Sect. 10. What we give to the poor is given to God himself.
Lastly, it is a just and righteous action to give unto the poor, seeing in
giving unto them, we Pro. 19. 17.
give unto God himself; for as the Wiseman speaks, He that has pity on
the poor, lends unto the Lord, Pro. 19. 17. Now what can be more equal and
just than to give a little unto him, who has given all unto us? especially
seeing he has granted unto us the use only of that we possess, reserving
still the chief propriety unto himself? and to spare something unto the
poor out of our abundance at his request, who has not spared to give unto us
his only begotten and dearly beloved Son, that by a shameful death he
might free us from everlasting death and condemnation, and purchase for us
eternal happiness? yea in truth, what madness is it to deny, being requested,
to give at his appointment, some small portion of our goods, who by his own
right and authority may take all? and what senseles folly were it to turn
away our face from him when he asks in the behalf of the poor some earthly
and momentany trifles, from whom we expect as his free gift heavenly happiness
and everlasting glory? D^ (...) ^o quod dedi tibi. (...) quaro, and mihi non
donas? da and reddo. Hab^isti me largitore^, facito debitorem. Aug. de verbis
Domini.
Christ (says Augustine) thus speaks unto thee. Give me something of that
which I have given unto thee. I ask but mine own, and will thou not give it?
Give and I will restore; thou have found me a free giver, and now make me to
become thy debtor.

CHAP. 16. That in the works of mercy we resemble God, please him, and make
our calling and election sure.
Sect. 1. That we resemble God in these works of mercy.
ANd so I come from the reason included in the name of righteousness, here given
to alms, to those maine arguments whereby the Psalmist enforces this duty
which are plainly expressed in the text. The first whereof is the lasting
benefit wherewith these works of mercy shall be rewarded, in these words; his
righteousness endures for ever. Where two things are to be considered; first
the benefit or privilege promised to the merciful man, the which is the fruit
and profit of his beneficence. And the second is the time how long this benefit
and fruit of his good deeds shall last, that is not only in this life, but also
in the life to come; for his righteousness, or the fruit of his mercy toward
the poor, endures for ever. The benefits which accompany these works of mercy
are inestimable and innumerable; for first the inward habit of goodness and
mercy in our hearts, exercised in the outward actions of liberality and
bounty by our hands, does make us to resemble God himself, and that in such
an attribute as he delights in above others to style himself withal. For
howsoever he is infinite in glory, greatness, justice, power, and all
perfections, yet most usually in the Scriptures he is called a God of mercy and
compassion. And hereby principally he made himself known unto Moses desiring
to see him. Exodus: 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and Exodus 34. 6.
gracious, long-suffring, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin etc. So in the
Scriptures, though his works be described to be most excellent,
incomprehensible and past finding out; yet his mercies are said to be above
them all. And therefore seeing mercy and goodness do make us above all other
graces to resemble God, and then the creature attaineth to greatest perfection
and blessedness, when he is likest and comes nearest unto the excellency of
his Creator; And seeing we profess our selves to be children of our gracious
and glorious God, and we can no way grace our selves so much, as by resembling
our heavenly father in those Attributes wherein he most shines and excels,
and nothing makes us more like him than mercy and compassion; let us hearken
unto our Saviors exhortation, and be merciful as our heavenly Father is
merciful. Luke 6. 36. Luke 63. 6.


Sect 2. That the works of mercy please God and make us accepted of him.
Secondly, nothing makes us more pleasing and acceptable unto God then this
inward goodness outwardly exercised in the works of mercy and compassion. And
this must needs follow upon the other; for the more like we are unto God, the
more he likes us; and the nearer we approach unto him in his perfections, the
better he loves and approves us; it being the nature of love to arise from
likeness between them that love and those that are beloved. And therefore
Fructus sit laboris placere melioribus. Symac^us.
God being infinitely gracious and merciful, best likes those who shine
brightest in his own beauty, and best loves those children, which most
resembling their heavenly Father, do approve themselves to be legitimate. And
this appears by the Scriptures, where God so highly prizeth and esteems
mercy, and the works wherein it is exercised toward the poor, that he
prefers them before the outward act of religious duties. Hos. 6. 6. I
desired mercy and not sacrifice. This Hos. 6. 6.
is the oblation which he chiefly requires, wherwithall Eleemosyna est non
tantum pro sacrificio, sed prae sacrificio.
(says the Hypocrite) shall I come before God, and bow my self before the
high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year
old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands
of rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgressions, and the
fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? No none of all these says the
Prophet, but if thou would be accepted of God, I will tell thee what he
requires Mich. 6. 6. 8.
of thee; to do justly and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.
Mich. 6. 6. 8. This he esteems the most acceptable sacrifice. To do good
and communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb.
13. 16. This is the fast Heb. 13. 16.
that he delights in, to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring
the poor that are cast out into thy house; when thou see the naked, that
thou cover him; and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh. Esa.
58. 6. 7. This is pure religion and undefiled Esa. 58. 6. 7.
before God, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted of the world. Iam. 1. 27. Finally these almesdeedes
Iam. 1. 27.
and works of mercy are not only an odor of a sweet smell, and a sacrifice
acceptable and well-pleasing unto God, as the Apostle speaks. Phil. 4. 18.
Phil. 4. 18.
but also such an oblation, as if we offer unto God with a lively faith, the
use of Gods creatures shall become clean unto us, according to that of our
Savior, Luc. 11. 41. Give alms of such things as Luke 11. 41.
you have, and behold all things are clean unto you. Not that alms satisfy
for our former sins as the Papists infer out of this place, and so make all
things clean unto us; but only hereby thus much is signified, that if we give
alms out of a lively faith all things are clean without Jewish and
Pharisaicall washings, invented by them for the purifying of Gods creatures, of
which the text specially speaks.

Sect. 3. That by these works of mercy we make our calling and election sure.
Thirdly, by these works of mercy we make our calling and election sure, for if
we do these things, that is, add to our knowledge, brotherly kindness, and
to brotherly kindness charity, and so abounding in these graces, be neither
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall
never fall. 2. Pet. 1. 7. 8. 10. and this the Apostle Paul 2. Pet. 1. 7. 8. 10.
makes an infallible note of our election. Col. 3. 12. Put on, as the elect of
God, holy and beloved, Col. 3. 12.
the bowels of mercy and kindness etc. And as these works of mercy are
undoubted marks of our election, so also of all the inferior means whereby
it is effected; as first of saving knowledge and spiritual wisdom; for the
wisdom that is from above is full of mercy and good fruits. Iam. 3. 17. Iam.
3. 17.
Secondly, of unfeigned repentance and our sound conversion, whereof it is that
Daniel counsels Nebuchadnezzar to approve his repentance and conversion unto
God by these special fruits. Wherefore (says he) O King let my counsel be
accepted unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Dan. 4. 27. The which Zachaeus
practiced, Dan. 4. 27.
for no sooner was he converted unto God, but to testify his unfeigned
repentance, he gives half Luc. 19. 8.
of his goods unto the poor. Thirdly, they are infallible signs of a lively
faith, whereby we may approve it unto men, because they are those good fruits
which spring from it, according to that Iam. 2. 18. Show me thy faith by thy
works, and I Iam. 2. 18.
will show thee my faith by my works. Which fruits if our faith bear not, it
is dead, and not a living body, but a carcass that breaths not. verse. 26. For
if we be truly assured of Gods love toward us, we will undoubtedly love him
again; and if we love him unfeignedly, we will also love our neighbors for
his sake, and be ready to show all duties of love to all those that need our
help. So also they are in this regard signs of a lively faith, seeing thereby
we apprehend Gods promises, and so are encouraged to do these works of mercy
for his sake; for no man easily parts with his worldly goods to these uses,
unless by faith he be assured that he shall have in lue of them heavenly and
everlasting treasures. Fourthly, they are undoubted signs of our love toward
God, whenas we so love the poor for his sake, as that we be content to spare
somewhat even from our own backs and bellies, that we may the more liberally
communicate unto their necessities. And as our alms are a sign of our love to
God, so the quantity of our alms (respect being had to the proportion of our
state) is a sign of the quantity of our love; for he loves but little, that
having much, gives but little, and contrariwise his heart is inflamed with
fervent love, who has it enlarged with bounty toward his poor brethren; the
extension of our love toward them, being the true touchstone of the intention
of our love toward God. And as a great tree, with many and large branches are
an undoubted sign of a root proportionable in greatness; and a small shrub
above the ground, plainly proves that the root also is small which is under
it; so is it with our love and almes-deedes which spring from it; for if we be
bountiful in alms, we are plentiful in love, if we be slack in giving, we
are cold in loving; but if we be utterly defective in bringing forth these
excellent fruits, then it is a manifest sign that this grace of Gods love is
not rooted in us. For if any man have these worlds goods, and sees his 1. Ioh.
3. 17.
brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? And as they are manifest signs of our love
toward God, so also of our love toward our neighbors, when as we carry
ourselves in all Christian bounty toward them, as unto children of the same
father, and members of the same body, suffering with them in their wants,
through compassion and fellow-feeling, and rejoicing with them in their
fullness and prosperity. And as they are plain demonstrations of our faith and
love, so also direct proofs of their sincerity and truth, and that they are
not hypocritical and counterfeit. In which regard the Apostle Paul brings the
Corinthians to this touchstone of almesdeeds, to prove the sincerity of their
2. Cor. 8. 8. 24.
love. 2. Cor. 8. 8. And again verse 24. Show ye to them, and before the
Churches the proof of your love. And the Apostle James also plainly
affirms, that it is but an unprofitable and hypocritical love, to make show
of kindness and compassion in word, and to perform nothing in deed. Iam. 2.
15. Fifthly, these almesdeedes are notable signs Iam. 2. 15.
whereby we may be comfortably assured of the remission of our sins. For
though they be not causes of pardon, by satisfying Gods justice (as the
Papists absurdly teach) yet are they testimonies unto us, that they are
pardoned; for our mercy toward the poor arises from the assurance which we
first have of Gods mercy toward us; and as our giving much to Christ's poor
members for his sake, does show that we love much (for if we do this to the
feet, how much more would we do it to our head himself?) so our loving much
is an infallible sign that many sins are forgiven us, as our Savior
speaks to the woman, Luke 7. 27. Lastly, by these almesdeedes Luke 7. 47.
and works of mercy, we may be assured that we are godly and blessed men,
sound Christians, and true citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem; for here in
this Psalm it is made a note and property of a blessed and good man (not as
the world speaks, to have goods in possession, for Dives in the Parable was
such a good man, and yet afterward cast into hell) but to do good by giving to
the poor, and releeuing the poor members of Jesus Christ, according to that
Prou. 14. 21. He that has mercy Prou. 14. 21.
on the poor, happy is he. And without the doing of these works of mercy,
we can have no assurance, that we are now good men, and subjects of the
kingdom of grace, or shall hereafter be citizens of heaven. For how can there
be any goodness in us, and we not exercize it in doing good unto others? how
are we subjects of Gods Kingdom, if we will not yield him obedience in one
of his chief commandments? how are we strangers here, and citizens of the new
Jerusalem, if we mind only worldly wealth, and have our hearts fast nailed to
the earth? how can we be the servants of Christ, and continue still vassals
unto the earthly Mammon, not parting with the least part of it, to approve our
love unto him? Finally, how has Christ our heart, if it still remain fastened
to riches? or how is heaven our country, when as we will send none of our
wealth thither before us?

Sect. 4. That by these works of mercy we are assured of our interest unto
Gods promises.
The fourth maine argument, to persuade us with cheerfulness, to the
exercizing these works of mercy, is because hereby we may be assured of our
right and title unto Gods most gracious promises, the which are either general
or more special. Generally, God makes this promise, that if we cast our bread
upon the face of the waters, Eccles. 11. 1.
we shall after many days find it. Eccles. 11. 1. and in this text, that if
we give to the poor, our righteousness, that is, the fruit and benefit of
these works of mercy, shall remain for ever. So our Savior promises that
our heavenly father seeing our almesdeedes, which we do in secret, will reward
us openly, Matthew. 6. 4. And lest any should be discouraged from performing
these duties, because he is able to give but little: our Savior assures us,
that, Whosoever gives but a cup of cold Matthew 6 4.
water unto a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise lose
his reward. Matthew. 10. 42. For Matthew. 10. 42.
this reward is not grounded upon the excellency and merit of the work, but
upon Gods righteousness and truth in fulfilling his promises, according ding to
that Heb. 6. 10. For God is not unrighteous Heb. 6. 10.
to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his
name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. Whereby he
implies it, that it is no more possible, that those, who in love and obedience
have exercised themselves in these works of mercy should lose their reward,
then that God himself should lose his righteousness. And these with such like
are the general promises, in which are comprehended all particular blessings
and benefits, respecting this life or the life to come. Besides which there are
many special promises, which may encourage us to exercise our selves daily in
these works of mercy. As first, that whatsoever we give in this kind, it
shall not be lost, but we shall surely have it restored unto us again. For
though there appears no more possibility of having those goods returned unto
us, then of receiving the bread which we cast into the sea, yet being thus cast
upon the face of the waters, they are not cast away: for the Holy Ghost
assures us, that after many days, even when they seem to be so long lost,
that they are quite forgotten, then we shall find them: for so the faithful
are put in mind, by our Savior Christ, of their works of mercy, when they
seem utterly to have forgotten them, as appears by their question, When saw
we thee an hungry, and fed Matthew. 25. 44.
thee, or thirsty and gave thee drink? etc. So our Savior assures us, that
if we give, it shall be given unto us again. Luke 6. 38. And the Wiseman
Luke 6. 58.
tells us, That he who has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord, and
that which he has given, he will repay him again. Prou. 19. 17. Neither in
Prou. 19. 17.
truth can it be otherwise: for if mercy and bounty be in God, as in an
inexhaustible and euer-springing fountain; and in us, as in a little stream
that flows from it, how is it possible that our small and shallow riuulet of
mercy should flow to our neighbors, and that the everliving spring of Gods
mercy and goodness should be dry unto us? or how should the stream flow,
and the fountain and wellhead be dried up? yea, let us assure Quemadmodum
q^^unque putei scaturiant exhausti, in pristinam mensuram ^^^ertuntur: ita
etiam clargitio, quae est bonus fons b^nig^^tatis, potum sit^enti^us
communicans, rursus augetur and repletur. Clemens Alexan. padagog. l. 3. c. 7.
our selves, that we can no faster, in a wise and discreet manner, empty our
selves of these waters of Gods blessings, for the satisfying and quenching of
the poor man's thirst and releiuing of his wants, but we shall again be
replenished from the fountain of all goodness; and if like kind nurses we let
these dear children of God suck the breasts of our bounty for their comfort
and nourishment, that which is thus spent will again be restored; whereas if
we churlishly refuse to impart and communicate this milk of Gods blessings, it
is the readiest way to have it quite dried up.

Sect. 5. Their objection answered, who think their riches lost which are
given to the poor.
So that here are answered two objections of worldly men, which are notable
impediments to hinder them from doing these works of mercy. The first is that
their riches bestowed on these good uses are unto themselves utterly lost;
which argues such carnal diffidence, that it utterly mis-beseemeth those who
take upon them the profession of christianity. For seeing we have so many
gracious and infallible promises from God himself, that if we give to others,
we shall receive from him; if we let the streams of our liberality water the
dry and thirsty lands into which he would have them run, they shall again be
replenished from the all-sufficient fountain of his bounty, why should we
restrain and withold our alms from the poor in the time of need? or why
should we give unto them with a strait and niggardly hand? why should we
hazard the drying up of our breasts, which are only replenished from God with
his blessings, by refusing to communicate them to the use of his children, and
not let the poor draw them which is the only means to preserve their fullnes
and plenty? why should we assuredly lose our riches for fear of losing them;
and not rather seem to lose them, that we may in truth find them? according
to that, Eccli: 29. 10. Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend, and let
it not rust under a stone to be lost. Eccli. 29. 10. Terrena omnia seruand^
ami^timus, largiendo seruamus. Is^^d^rus.
For in truth these earthly things are lost with keeping, and kept with
bestowing. For they and we cannot continue long together, seeing either they
will leave us in our lifetime, or we shall leave them at the hour of death.
For then all that we possess shall be left behind us, and that only shall be
our own which we have sent before us. In which respect our riches are fitly
compared Si frum^nt^m s^ruas, perdis: Si seminas renouas. Solas quas dederis
semper habebis opes. dicit. Glossa in Math. 16. 25.
unto seed, which can no otherwise be truly kept, than when we seem utterly
to lose it. For if we keep it in our graners, it will either be spent in the
use, or in time must, corrupt, and perish; but if we cast it into the ground,
where it seems to rott and to be lost, it is the only way to preserve and
keep it from losing and perishing. And therefore let us not, by giving to the
poor, fear the loss of our riches, seeing it is the best and safest course
to preserve them for our use; whereas otherwise they cannot be without peril
of miscarying. But let this consideration move us to give more freely and
liberally, imitating herein wise Trauaylors, who being in a strange and
dangerous country, will not carry their riches and treasures about them,
because they then be in danger by thieves and enemies to be spoiled of them,
hazarding also there with the loss of their lives, but deliver them rather to
the Agents and Factors of sufficient Merchants dwelling in their own country,
that so taking from them bills of exchange, they may receive them at their
coming home; so let not us carry about us all our wealth and riches whilst we
travail in our worldly pilgrimage, where we are still in peril to be robbed
by thieves and enemies; and though we escape many dangers, yet are sure at last
to be spoiled, when death our mortal enemy shall set upon us. But let us put
a good part of our goods (even as much as we can well spare from our own use
for the well finishing of our journey) into the hands of the poor, whom God
has appointed as his agents and factors, and so it shall most surely be
repayed, when having finished our pilgrimage, we shall safely arrive at our
heavenly home; and though whilst we are trauayling we have it not in sight but
seem for the time to be dispossessed of it; yet in the end we shall find that
it was not lost, but sent before us, and that it only remains for our use and
benefit, when death has spoiled us of all the rest. And this is the right
course to make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon, unto which our Savior
persuades us, Luc. 16. 9. This is to play the wise stewards, that when by Luke
16. 9.
death we are thrust out of our stewardship, we having discreetly laid out our
masters goods may be joyfully received into those everlasting habitations.

Sect. 6.
The other objection is, that if we be so liberal in giving to the poor, we
shall hereby consume Their objection answered who say that by giving alms
their estates will be consumed, and they brought unto penury.
our estate, and so our selves be brought into penury. To which I answer, that
we must in this regard order our affairs with christian discretion, and
deliver so much to be sent before us, as that we our selves do not want
necessaries for our honest occasions and the well finishing of our journey,
which being observed there is no cause why we should fear poverty by
releiuing the poor. The wise husbandman does not cast all his seed into the
ground, but reserueth so much at least as will be sufficient to maintain his
family; and so we must sow not all we have, but all which we can spare, that
through our indiscretion we want not food before the time of harvest. And this
is all I desire (says the covetous miser) but seeing my goods are subject to
many casualties, and I may have many extraordinary occasions which may bring
me into want, I will not part with much, because I will be sure to leave
sufficient for my self. Yea but how will thy hourding up of riches preserve
thee from these perils, and not rather through Gods just judgment expose thee
unto them, because thou disobeyest his commandment, through diffidence and
distrust in his providence and resting upon thine own provision? Or how can
thou tell when thou have sufficient to maintain thee and thy charge? seeing
Hag: 1. 9.
if God do but blow upon thy wealth, all, as well as a part, will vanish away
and give thee no warning when it departs? In which regard how much better
were it to use things present, and to commend our selves and our estates
without carking and caring unto God who cares for us, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Heb. 13. 5.
and is all-sufficient to supply all our wants, having so many faithful
promises that he will provide for us and repay us what in obedience to his
commandment we lay out, on these charitable uses. And this argument the
Apostle uses, to persuade the Corinthians to give liberally to the use of the
poor, 2 Cor: 9. 8. Because God (says 2 Cor. 9. 8.
he) is able to make all grace abound toward you, that you always having all
sufficiency in all things may abound to every good work. Now he that
ministers seed to the sower, does minister bread for your food, and
multiplyeth your seed sown, and increases the fruits of your righteousness.
Whereby is signified, that he who inableth us to give unto the poor, is as
able to provide things necessary and comfortable for our use in this life
present, and so to bless our seeds of beneficence, which we have sown by his
direction and appointment, as that we may reap a fruitful harvest in the
life to come. And as he is able so we shall find him willing; neither are we
to imagine that if we be careful in feeding Christ, that he will be careless
in feeding us; that he will deny us meat who has given us his precious
blood; that he will suffer us to want earthly trifles, who has provided for us
heavenly riches. Let such more than heathenish diffidence be far from us who
profess our selves to be of the household of faith, and if we will be thought
worthy the name of Christians, let us not so much distrust the promises of
Christ. As therefore no husbandman refuses to sow his seed in due season for
fear of want, but lest he should want will therefore sow it; so let not fear
of poverty make us poor in these works of mercy, but let us sow our
almsdeeds with a plentiful hand in assured hope of fruitful increase. For
by whose providence and provision do we live and are we maintained? Is it our
own, and not rather Gods, whose power rules over all, and whose eye never
sleeps? Is it not he who gives us all things to enjoy; and preserves the
things given, when they are exposed to innumerable perils? Is it not he (as
Hannah speaks) 1 Samuel: 2. 7.
that makes poor and makes rich, that brings low and lifts up, and
raising the poor from the dust and dunghill, does set them among Princes, and
makes them to inherit the throne of glory? Do we enjoy all things through
Gods blessing, and can we think to keep our riches by disobeying his
commandment? Are the goods we posses our own absolutely, and not Gods talents
which he has entrusted unto us, as his stewards, to be disposed according to
his appointment, and do we think to be continued in our office of
administration, when like thieves we convert them wholly to our own use; and
not rather by employing and disposing them, as he has commanded us, to the
glory of our Lord and Master, and good of our fellow-seruants?

CHAP. 17. That what we give to the poor we shall receive again with great
increase.
Sect. 1. That God will repay us with great increase*
BY that which has been said, it appears, that by giving alms we shall be
no loosers, seeing God will repay what is thus laid out. Now let this
consideration further induce us to the performance of this duty, that we shall
not only receive our own again, but with great increase, according to that
Luke 6. 38. Give and it shall be given Luc. 6. 38.
unto you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over
shall men give into your bosom. And the Wiseman tells us, that if we will
thus honor the Lord with our substance, our barnes shall be filled with
plenty, and our presses shall burst out with new wine. Pro. 3. 9. 10. And if
we thus scatter the seeds of our beneficence, they shall Pro. 3. 9. 10.
be the more increased; whereas if contrariwise we withold more than is
meet, it is the ready way to bring us to poverty, as it is, Pro: 11. 24. Pro.
11. 24.
And hereof it is that almes-giuing is compared to sowing of seed: so in my
Text the Psalmist says, that the blessed man has dispersed, he has given to
the poor; and the Apostle says, that he 2 Cor. 9. 6. Lucru^ e^t ^^etati^
n^mine f^^er^ sumptu^. T^rtull.
which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully; to note unto us, that there
is no loss in giving to the poor, but great gain and advantage, even a
fruitful harvest, yielding 30, 40 or an 100 fold increase. In which regard it
may be truly said, that Eleemosyna non est diuitiarum dispendium, sed
ditescendi potius compendiu^, quaestusque omnium vberrimus. Giving alms, is
not the way to waste our wealth, but the Art of thriuing, and the most
compendious course to come unto riches. The which consideration should make us
bountiful in doing these works of mercy, seeing we have much more benefit by
the alms we give, than our poor brethren who do receive them. For they are
the ground into which these seeds are cast, and we the husbandmen who disperse
and scatter them; now as seed is chiefly for his benefit who sows it, and
not for the benefit of the ground into which it is cast; so the poor have but
the present use and possession of this seed of almsdeeds, but the benefit of
the happy and heavenly harvest belongs to those good husbandmen, who sow in
these grounds the feeds of their beneficence. Let us not then grudge to give
alms to the poor when we have fit occasion, but rather do them with joy, and
thankfulness unto God, who has given us fit opportunity of sowing our seed,
that so we may reap a fruitful harvest. For what husbandman would not readily
and cherefully harken to one who should offer unto him fertile and fruitful
land, ready prepared and manured, to sow his seed in, with a faithful
promise that he should reap the whole crop for his own use and benefit? But
thus God deals with us when he gives us opportunity of releiuing the poor:
yea in truth much better and more liberally. For though a man should freely
receive of another, land to sow his seed in, yet he were not sure of a
fruitful harvest, for many accidents happen, which cut off the hopes of the
most skillful husbandman, as frosts and milldewes, worms and locusts, tares
and weeds, too much wet, or too much drought, may destroy the corn, though the
seed were never so good; or when it is ready for the sickle, the enemy may
come and reap it: but if we sow these seeds of our beneficence, believing
Gods promises and hoping for an happy harvest, we shall never fail of our
expectation, because God who is infinite in power and truth, having promised a
fruitful crop, no outward accident is able to hinder it. And although our
Almesdeedes seem (like the seed sown) to perish and rot, yet believing what
we see not, we shall assuredly see what we believe, and find such a fruitful
increase in our heavenly harvest; as we shall conclude, that much greater
benefit redounded to us who gave, then unto the poor who were the receivers of
our alms.

Sect. 2. Almesdeedes compared to lending upon usury.
In the same respect, almesgiuing is in the Scripture compared to lending; yea,
to such a loan, whereby we have not only the principal restored, but with
great increase. For whereas if we lend our money unto men, we shall have but
ten in the hundred, if for Gods sake we lend unto the poor, we shall have an
hundred for ten, yea, an hundred for one, and eternal life to boot. Neither
Mark. 10. 30:
need we to doubt of the payment, for though the poor be never so unable,
yet they have an all-sufficient surety, even GOD himself, Prou. 19 17.
who has undertaken in this bountiful manner to repay whatsoever is thus laid
out. Luke 6. 35.
The which should make us cheerful in doing works of mercy, seeing we our
selves are sure of the largest gain, for not the taker, but the putter out to
usury has the greatest profit. And not to give readily upon this
consideration, is to proclaim, either that we do not believe Gods promises,
nor give that credit unto him on his word, which we would give to a Turk or
Infidel dwelling among us; or that we do not esteem the payment of his
spiritual grace or heavenly glory for current money, or of equal value to
these transitory trifles which we impart unto the poor. For if a man of any
credit should promise for the laying out of an hundred pound, that we should
have a yearly annuitie of so much for term of life, how eagerly would we
catch at such an offer, though the quick approach of death might make us losers
by the bargain? But God promises, that if we will lay out our money on these
uses, we shall have an hundred for one, and for these earthly trifles,
heavenly and everlasting treasures; and who then would not willingly listen to
such a motion, if he believes him that makes it, or valueth the bargain
that is offered unto him? when Alchymists promise great sums of gold for the
disbursing of a little money, though they never fail to deceive those that
believe them, yet they find many, who, to the utter ruin of their estates,
will give credit unto them, being deluded with these golden hopes; and
therefore let it be a shame unto all, which professing Christianity, will not
trust God, who is truth it self, and cannot deceive us, promising better and
more durable riches, even heavenly and everlasting treasures, unto those who
for his sake are liberal to the poor, seeing hereby they discover gross
hypocrisy, in professing faith when as they are wholly possessed of
infidelity, and heathenish diffidence, seeing they are ready to trust a
cozening impostor, rather then the only true God; and carnal worldliness,
which makes them to esteem more a little bread, a few scraps of meat, or cast
apparel, then the bread of life, the heavenly Manna and food of Angels, and
those rich robes of glory and blessedness which shall never be worn out.

Sect. 3. That love of our money should move us to part with it to charitable
uses.
There is nothing that hinders a man more from doing these works of mercy,
then excessive love of money and riches, which makes them so loath to part with
them; whereas in truth if they loved them wisely, nothing should make them more
ready to bestow them upon these uses. For even worldly men that are wise in
their generation, the more that they love their money, the seldomer they let it
lie by them where it increases not, and is subject to many casualties, but the
more ready they are to put it out, either upon usury, if they can find a
sufficient debtor, or upon some good bargain which will return it again with
great increase. O why then should not we who profess our selves spiritually
minded imitate this wisdom in our own kind: seeing if we will lay out our
coin on these charitable uses, the gain is inestimable, and our play master
all-sufficient and infallible in his promises? For what greater gain can be
imagined then to change earth for heaven, transitory trifles for eternal
treasures, the bread of men for the bread of Angels, rotten rags for glorious
robes; and a little drink, yea, a cup of cold water, if the well or river be
our best cellar for the water of life, which will infinitely delight and
satisfy us, without glutting or satietie? why should we think the poor so
much beholding unto us for our scraps and superfluous relics, and not rather
our selves beholding unto them, seeing they are the occasions of such
inestimable gain, for such trifling disbursements? Be mindful (says one) o
Augustine.
man, not only of that which thou give, but also of him who receives. For
the poor may say unto thee: consider, o man, that I in receiving alwies give
no less unto thee, then thou in bestowing them give unto me. For if there
were not some to receive thy alms, thou could not give earth and receive
heaven. Do not look upon me, but upon him that made both thee and me; and
because thou have heard me, ask of him what thou will, and he will hear
thee. Give therefore thanks unto him, who has given thee means by such a
small price to procure a thing so precious. Give earthly things and thou shall
receive heavenly, give temporal things and thou shall receive eternal. Let
therefore no man say that he gives to the poor, when as it may more truly be
said, that he gives unto himself rather then unto them.

Sect. 4. That God is the surest paymaster.
And as the gain is inestimable, so the payment most assured; for we have
Gods word and handwriting for it, who never failed of his promise; for as he
is true of his word, so he is all-sufficient to perform. Nihil promittit and
non reddit: fidelis ille factus est debtor, esto tu auarus exactor. He Aug. in
Psa 32.
pays whatsoever he promises; he is a true debtor, be thou a covetous
exactour. Fear not to be an usurer, so thou lendest unto God; put out to him
thy money, and expect great increase: for thou have God for thy debtour, and
his payment (like himself) is infinite. Give to him who has given all to
thee, for thou can never exceed him in bounty, though thou should give him
all thou have and thy self to boot; neither can thy liberality bring any
loss, seeing the more thou give the more thou shall receive. Do thou love
thy money, and would thou have it increased. Deliver it not into the hands
of men, who Homine^ quaeris; quando accipit gaudet, quando reddit plorat; vt
accipiat precatur, ne reddat calumniatur. August. de tempore sermon. 146.
(as Austin says) will rejoice when they borrow, and mourn when they repay
it; Entreat that they may receive, and calumniate when they should restore;
who may be bankrupt and cannot, or deceitful and will not pay: Or who will put
thee off with many delays, and trouble thee with expecting, as they have
formerly troubled thee with their importunity in borrowing. But if thou be a
wise usurer, choose God himself for thy debtor, who is the surest play master.
Give me of mine own (says Christ) and of a creditor make me to become thy
debtor; and I will repay thee eternal treasures for transitory trifles. But
understand this soberly. For we cannot (as the Debtor factus est, non aliquid
a nobis a^cipendo sed quod ei placuit promittendo Au^. de verbis Apost. sermon.
^9.
Papists dream) make God our debtour by the merit of our works, but by his
own free and gracious promise. According to that of Austin; He is made a
debtor, not by receiving something from us, but because it has pleased him to
promise something to us. For we after one manner say unto man, thou owe me
that which I have given thee, and after another, thou owe me because thou
have promised me: when as thou say, thou owe me, because I have given
thee, the benefit has proceeded from thee, though it were lent and not given.
But when thou say, thou owe me, because thou have promised, thou requirest
that which thou have not given. For his goodness that has promised, will
move him to give, lest his fidelity should degenerate into maliciousness* etc.

Sect. 5. That it is the end of riches to be employed on good uses, and not
locked up.
Again, the love of our money should not hinder us from doing the works of
mercy, but rather make us more diligent in them; for he that loves any thing
wisely, desires above all, that it may attain to his right and chief end, as
being the best which his love can wish unto it: now the end of our money and
riches, is not that they should lie rusting and rotting by us without use, but
that they should be communicated to the glory of God and the good of our
neighbors; and therefore seeing the more we love our wealth, the better we
wish unto it, and nothing is better for it then to attain to these ends, they
love it not at all, or at least after a foolish manner, who by inprisoning
their riches, and so frustrating their chief end, do hinder them from
attaining unto their perfection.

Sect 6. That by giving our riches to the poor, we long enjoy them.
Finally, if we wisely love our wealth, let it be our chief care, that we
may long enjoy it: the which we cannot do by keeping it on the earth, for
though we keep it under lock and key, bolt and bar, continual watch and
ward, it may be lost whilst we live; but if not so, yet when death comes
(and for ought we know it may come to day before to morrow) it will spoil us
of all, and turn us naked out of the world, as we came naked into it. But the
only means to have the fruit and benefit of our riches for ever, is to send
them before us into our heavenly country, where we shall have our everlasting
habitation, and the best means of transporting them thither, is to deliver
them unto the poor, who like trusty porters will carry them for us, for if
we carry them our selves, they will, like heavy burdens, hinder our journey,
and like the camels bunch, keep us from entering into the straight gate;
whereas if the poor whom God has appointed for this service carry them for
us, we shall avoid the trouble, and escape this danger. The which should be a
forcible argument to move us with a bountiful hand to give unto the poor,
seeing whatsoever is so given is sent before us, and whatsoever is hourded up
in our chests is lost and left behind us. And what folly is this, there to
leave thy wealth whence thou art departing, and not to send it before thee
whether thou art going? to leave and loose thy riches in thy Inn and the place
of thy pilgrimage, and not to transport it into thine own Country and
mansion house where thou art ever to reside? And therefore seeing the only way
to keep our goods for ever, is to part with them for a time, and the means to
preserve them for everlasting use, is to disperse and scatter them amongst the
poor members of Jesus Christ; and contrariwise the keeping them too carefully
on earth, is the direct way to loose them in heaven; let us give that which we
can no otherwise keep, that we may receive that which we can never loose, and
if we think that heaven is our home let us send our wealth thither before us,
that we may the more cheerfully travel after it. For he who is eternally to
dwell in those heavenly mansions, does in this life send his heart thither to
take possession: which that we may do let us lay up our treasures there, that
so our hearts may be there also. Whereas contrariwise he whose only care is
to hourd up riches upon the earth, does plainly show that this world is his
native home and Country, and that he has no right or interest in the
heavenly Canaan.

Sect. 7. That our inestimable gain counteruaileth our temporary forbearance.
A second impediment, which hinders men from doing these works of mercy is,
because they look at this great return of gain, as being many years and
ages after to be received; for though they like these heavenly treasures,
which the Lord promises to those, who by giving to the poor do lend unto him;
and cannot but confess that God is the best and surest Paymaster, yet they are
discouraged from thus laying out their money, because he seems to take long
days of payment, and has appointed the place of receipt in another world,
whereas they, both for place and time are wholly for the present, and in truth,
desire to be paid in their own coin, that is, in transitory and momentary
riches which are subject to their senses. But to these I answer, that if they
live only by sense and not by faith, they have indeed little cause to exchange
their earthly possessions for heavenly treasures, seeing they can have no true
hope of coming into that place of happiness, or of inioying those divine
riches which are prepared only for the faithful; and therefore let such keep
their money till it perish with them. But let those, who being true Christians,
can with the eye of faith pearce the heavens and there behold things invisible,
continually exercise themselves, in these works of mercy, notwithstanding this
discouragement; seeing they know not how soon the Lord will call them to
account, and make all reckoninges straight which are between them. For
howsoever they may conceive hope of prolonging their lives to an hundred
years, yet it may be, it will not last another month or day, and so their
payment shall be as speedy and quick, as great and inestimable. But say that
the line of their life should outreach the length of their longest hopes, yet
have they good cause to lay out their wealth on this spiritual and heavenly
bargain. First, because if they will wait and expect with patience, they have
such a sure Play Master who will not fail to accomplish all his promises.
According to that Gal. 6. 9. Let us not be weary in Gal 6. 9.
well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. And though
our bread seems to be cast on the face of the waters, and so even cast away,
yet we shall surely find it after many days, as it is Eccles. 11. 1.
Secondly, the inestimable Eccles. 11. 1.
worth of the heavenly reward which also will be everlasting, when we do enjoy
it, may sufficiently encourage us to lay out our riches on such infinite hopes,
though the full payment be a while delayed. Even the most greedy Usurer will
lend his money for longer time, according to the greatness of the interest and
increase which he expects. The husbandman though never so covetous is
content to spare his seed wheat for a longer time, then his summer corn, and
to expect the harvest almost the whole year with as much patience and comfort,
as he does a few months for the other grain, because he knows that when it
comes it will be of much better value. And we see by experience that our
Merchants as willingly venture their wealth into the furthest parts of the East
Indies, as into the next adjoining Countries, because their greater gain will
sufficiently recompense their forbearance and reward their patience. And yet
the Usurer meeting with banrupts may with his hoped gain loose his principal;
the husbandman after much cost and pains, may by unseasonable weather and many
casualties, loose both the gain of harvest, and also a great part of the seed
which he has sowed; and the Merchant if he loses not his goods together with
the expectation of his gain, yet he gets and recouereth them after long
time and innumerable dangers. O why then should we not choose rather to put out
our money to such a debtor, as promising inestimable gain for the time of our
forbearance, is also most true of his promise and all-sufficient to perform?
why should we not patiently expect the coming up and ripening of the seeds
of our beneficence, seeing we are sure of such a rich croppe and heavenly
harvest? and why should we not like wise Merchants venture our goods into the
holy land, seeing though the return be slow, yet in the end it will bring the
best and surest gain?

CHAP. 18. Of certain special benefits both corporal and spiritual promised
to those who give liberally to the releife of poor.
Sect. 1. That he who releeueth the poor shall be blessed in his posterity.
AND thus have I showed, that if by giving to the poor we lend unto the Lord,
we shall receive full restitution with great advantage. Now we will consider
wherein this restitution is to be made, and in what things it principally
consists; namely, in all blessings and benefits both temporal and aeternall.
The temporal benefits respect either our posterity, or our selves; for if we
bountifully relieve the poor, the reward of our charity shall not only extend
unto us, but also to our offspring and progeny; according to that in the
second verse of this Psalm: His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the
generation of the upright shall be blessed. So the Lord promises, Esa. 58. 10.
12. that if we will draw out our soul to Esa. 58. 10. 12.
the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; the Lord will not only satisfy
our souls in drought and make fat our bones, but that those also that come of
us shall prosper unto many generations. Now what better inheritance can we
leave to our children than the blessing of God, which like an euer-springing
fountain will nourish and comfort them in the time of drought, when as our
own provision which we have left unto them may fail, and when the heat of
affliction rises, will like standing waters be dried up?

Sect. 2. That God rewards our almesdeeds with corporal and earthly
blessings.
The temporal benefits which respect our own persons are either corporal or
spiritual. For the Lord, to encourage us in these works of mercy, does repay
and reward us, not only with the true treasures of his spiritual graces; but
stooping to our infirmity, he pays us with our own money also, even with
the coin of worldly blessings which is so current among us. According to that
Pro. 3. 9. 10. Honor the Lord with thy Pro: 3. 9. 10.
substance, so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall
burst out with new wine. And because by this liberal giving, men doubt lest
they themselves should come unto poverty; he assures us, that he who gives
to the poor shall not lack, Pro: 28. 27. So that if we sow the seed of our
Pro: 28. 27.
beneficence it will return unto us a double harvest; the crop of temporal
benefits in this life, and of everlasting blessedness in the life to come. Yea
but thou see not this increase in thy worldly estate by giving alms. And if
thou beleeuest no more than thou see, why do thou take upon thee the name
of a Christian, who lives by faith rather than by sense? For by how many
secret passages can God conueigh unto thee the reward of thy almesdeeds, though
he writes no superscription upon them, to certify thee for what it is sent?
it is sufficient that thou have it, and that thou know that he sent it, as
for the reasons which moved him to give these benefits unto thee, he will
acquaint thee with them more particularly, when as he shall call thee to make
up thy Math. 25. 34.
reckoning. Thou growest in thy stature from a child unto a man, and thou
see not thy growing, though thou perceiuest that thou art grown; neither
know thou the particular time and means, when, or whereby thou came to
this height. And thou know and acknowledgest that thou art nourished by thy
meat, though thou see not the secret passages whereby it is carried from the
stomach to the several parts, nor can tell at what time or by what food
thou have been chiefly nourished. Why then have thou not the like faith and
much stronger in spiritual, which thou have in respect of natural things,
seeing they are much more secret and insensible? and when thou have Gods
promise of reward, and see it performed by his blessings multiplied in thy
bosom, why do thou doubt or call them into question; or ascribe them to thy
self or other helps, seeing whatsoever are the means, they are of Gods
sending? Finally, if thou say that thou see no possibility of increasing
thy wealth by giving away a great part of it unto the poor: I answer, and what
more reason have thou by the collection of sense, that thy seed which thou
sowest should be multiplied, which thou castest away and let rott in the
earth, unless thou had learned it by experience? And is not Gods word a much
more infallible teacher and surer ground for thy faith to rest upon, especially
when thou art not without experience of the like increase springing from the
sowing of the seeds of thy beneficence? To conclude this point, if thou
doubtest of these promises of God made unto those who relieve the poor,
because thou see not how or when they are performed; why do thou believe
the remission of thy sins, salvation by Christ, and everlasting life, when as
thou see none of these, nor have any other ground but Gods promise, even as
thou have for the reward of thy almesdeeds? and therefore if thou doubtest of
the one, thou doubtest of the other; and were not the profession of thy faith
concerning those spiritual things good cheap, but should cost thee as dear
as the giving of alms; thou would doubtless discover and proclaim thy
infidelity there as well as here, and plainly show that it was in mere
formalitie and hypocrisy.

Sect 3. That God will be merciful to those that show mercy.
The promises also of spiritual blessings are many and diverse. In which
respect Chrysostom Chry^. in dictum Apostoli, Oportet esse haer^ses.
compares almsdeeds unto good corn sown in a fertile soil, which every
year brings forth fruit in due season: saving that herein they differ,
namely whereas, this fruit in the richest ground comes but once a year, the
spiritual fruit of almsdeeds springs every day, as confidence in God,
assurance of the remission of sins, a good conscience, spiritual gladness,
joyful hope, and other good things which God has prepared for those that love
him. But among these innumerable spiritual blessings we will observe some few.
As first, they who are merciful to the poor, shall find mercy at the hands
of God; according to that Math. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, Math. 5. 7.
Eccli. 4. 10.
for they shall obtain mercy. Now what an excellent thing is this, to have the
treasures of Gods mercy in our own keeping, and to have the key in our hand,
by which we may go in to and enjoy them our own pleasure; for if we be
merciful to the poor, and impart unto them some of our small store, the Lord
will be merciful to us, and communicate unto us abundance of pity and
compassion, out of the infinite treasures of his love and goodness.

Sect. 4. That if we hear the cry of the poor, God will hear us. Esa. 58.
7. ^.
Secondly, if we hear and regard the cry of the poor, begging of us such
things as are necessary, the Lord will hear our cry when we call upon him for
a supply of our wants; according to that Esa. 58. 7. If thou deal thy bread to
the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out into thy house etc. Then
shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say,
here I am. An example whereof we have in Cornelius, who with his fasting Act.
10. 4.
and prayers joining almesdeeds, had this comfortable message from God, that
his prayers and almesdeeds were come up for a memorial before him. Yea in
truth, these works of mercy will speak loud for us in Gods ears, when we
hold our peace; and the loins of the poor shall bless us, Job. 31. 20.
when they and we are sleeping in our beds. But contrariwise, if we will not
hear the suites of the poor, neither will the Lord give us audience when we
sue unto him, according to that. Pro: 21. 13. who so stops his ears at the
cry of the poor, Pro. 21. 13.
he also shall cry himself, and shall not be heard.

Sect. 5. That if we pity the poor God will pity us in our afflictions.
Thirdly, if we pity the poor in their miseries, and with our helping hand
free them from their distress, the Lord likewise will take compassion on us in
the time of our afflictions, and when it is most seasonable will deliver us
from them: according to that, Ps. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the
Psalm. 41. 1.
poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. 2. The Lord will
preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth, and
thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. 3. The Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his
sickness. So Eccli. 29. 12. Eccli. 29. 12.
Shut up alms in thy storehouses; and it shall deliver thee from all
affliction. 13. It shall fight for thee against thine enemies, better then a
mighty shield and strong spear. And the Lord promises that if we draw out
our souls to the hungry and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall our
light rise in obscurity, and our darkness be as noone day; Es. 58. 10. whereby
is meant, that the light of comfort by a gracious Isa. 58. 10.
deliverance shall shine unto us in the night of afflictions; or such a measure
of inward joy, as is able to make the afflictions themselves, even whilst they
last, sweet and comfortable; according to that, Psalm. 30. 5. weeping may
endure for a Psalm. 30. 5.
night, but joy comes in the morning.

Fourthly, by our bounty toward the poor we have the benefit of their
prayers unto God, the which are very available for the obtaining of all good
things for us; the which argument the Apostle uses to incite the Corinthians
to a liberal contribution, 2. Cor. 9. 14. As also by the 2. Cor. 9. 14. 13.
same means we give them occasion of praising and glorifying God, whilst by
the experiment of this ministration they see our professed subjection to the
Gospel of Christ, as the Apostle speaks in the same place. verse. 13.

Sect. 6. That almesdeedes further our salvation.
Finally by these works of mercy we are furthered notably in the way to
salvation, the which our Savior implies, whenas he persuades us to make us
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness that when we fail they may receive us
into everlasting Luke 16. 9.
habitations. Luke 16. 9. For in these earthly riches which are of small value
the Lord tries our fidelity and obedience, and if in the trial we be found
faulty, these talents are taken from us, and we cast into the prison of outer
darkness; but if by our honest, faithful and charitable disposing of them we
are approved, the Lord will commend us for good stewards, and commit to our
keeping those heavenly riches and everlasting treasures. According to that
which follows in the next words, he that is faithful in that which is
least, is faithful also in much: and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust
also in much: If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? and if ye have not
been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is
your own? So the Apostle would have rich men charged to do good, to be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, that they might lay
up store for themselves, a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on eternal life. 1. Tim. 6. 18. 19. 1. Tim. 6. 18. 19
Yea in truth by exercising our selves in these works of mercy, everlasting
happiness is begun in this life; not only, as thereby we have an entrance
into it by assurance of faith; but also have the earnest and fruits of this
happiness and blessedness. In both which regards they are in the Scriptures
pronounced blessed, who taking compassion on the poor do liberally relieve
them. As Pro. 14. 21. He that has mercy on the poor happy is he. And Pro.
22. 9. He that has a bountiful Pro. 14. 21. and 22. 9.
eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor. And thus are
they blessed of God, according to that. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Thou shall surely Deuteronomy.
15. 10.
give to thy poor brother and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou
give unto him: because for this thing the Lord thy God, shall bless thee in
all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand to; which blessing in
these temporal things is unto the faithful an earnest and pledge of their
everlasting blessedness. And our Savior pronounces them, blessed who are
merciful, because Matthew 5. 7.
they shall obtain mercy, Math. 5. 7. and tells us, that if in stead of our
kindred and rich friends, we will inuit the poor to be our guests, we shall
be Luke 14. 14.
blessed. Luke 14. 14. And thus also they are blessed of men; as we see in the
example of Job, who says, that because he delivered the poor that cried, Job.
29. 12. 13.
and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him, the blessing of him
that was ready to perish came upon him. Job. 29. 12. 13. And in this regard,
because our almesdeeds are the means of deriuing unto us so many blessings,
they themselves have the name of a blessing given unto them by the Apostle, 2. Corinthians 9. 5.
2. Cor. 9. 5.

Sect. 7. That the greatest benefit of our alms redoundeth to our selves. Acts
20. 3^
By all which it appears, that it is much better to give then to receive, as
it is Acts 20. 35. Because the poor receive only things transitory, and but
of small value, but they that give, things spiritual, inestimable and
heavenly. In which regard it may be truly said, that as he who is merciful
is good unto others, so he is best of all to himself; for whereas he only
releeueth their bodies, he feeds and refreshes his own soul; according to
that Prou. 11. 17. The merciful man Prou. 11 17. and 25.
does good to his own soul. And ver. 25. The liberal soul shall be made
fat, and he that waters shall be watered also himself. Whereof it is that
God is said to have bestowed, and the Churches of Macedonia to have received
grace, when in their affliction and poverty they abounded unto the riches of
their liberality, and even above their power contributed to the necessity of
the poor Saints. 2. Cor. 8. 1. 2. And therefore let us also labor to abound
in this grace, as the Apostle exhorts. 2. Cor. 8. 1. 2. v. 7
verse. 7. because there is no loss in this spiritual traffic, but the more
we lay out, the greater will be our gain, the more liberally we give, the more
bountifully we shall receive.

Sect. 8. That fearful threatenings are denounced against the unmerciful.
But if all these arguments, taken from our own good, will not persuade us to
be bountiful in doing these works of mercy, yet let those thretnings of evils
and comminations of Gods judgments, somewhat rouse us up to the performance of
these Christian duties. For the Lord so abhors the neglect of them, that he
reckons it among those heinous sins of Sodom, which moved him in his
fearful wrath to destroy them with fire and brimstome from heaven. Ezech. 16.
49. Ezech. 16. 49.
And that we may not fall into it, threatens against all who live in it, most
greiuous punishments. As first, that he will turn away his ears from hearing
their prayers. Prou. 21. 13. Who so Prou. 21. 13. Frustra manus ad Deum ex
pandit, qui has ad pauperes non extendit. 2. Cor. 9. 6.
stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he shall also cry himself, and
shall not be heard. That as they sow nothing in the seed-time of this life, so
they shall reap nothing in the harvest of happiness. 2. Cor. 9. 6. that as
they have sown only to the flesh, so of the flesh they shall reap nothing but
corruption. Gal. 6. 8. that they shall lie open to the curse Gal 6. 8. Prou.
28. 27.
of the poor: according to that. Prou. 28. 27. He that gives unto the poor
shall not lack, but he that Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
hides his eyes, shall have many a curse. The which curses of the poor he
will hear and ratify, according to the saying of the son of Syrach. chap.
6. 5. Eccli. 6 5.
Turn not away thine eye from the needy, and give him no occasion to curse
thee. 6. For if he curse thee in the Job. 31. 16. to 29.
bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him.
Finally, the Lord threatens unto them judgment without mercy who have showed
no mercy. Iam. 2. 13. To which purpose one says, Iam. 2. 13.
Thou have not been merciful, and thou shallt not find mercy, thou have not
opened thy gates to the poor, and Basil. Orat. ad Diuites.
thou shall be shut out of the gates of heaven; thou have not given bread, and
thou shall not receive the bread of life. And again: The fruits which thou
shall reap, will be like the seed which thou have sown. Thou have sown
bitterness and thou shall reap bitterness; thou have sown cruelty, and
thou shall reap cruelty. Thou have shunned mercy, and mercy shall shun thee;
thou have hated the poor, and he in like manner shall hate thee, who being
rich was content for our sake to become poor. The which denunciation of
judgments shall accordingly be executed at the latter day, when unmerciful
men shall be banished out of Gods Kingdom, not only for hurting the poor,
but for not helping them: nor for taking away their bread, drink and clothes,
but for not giving these things unto them. An example whereof our Savior
propounds in the parable of the Luke 16. In inferno positus ad petenda minima
peru^nit, q^ae hi^ parua negauit. August. de Conflict. virt.
rich glutton, who having received from God the large portion of a child,
grudged to spare out of his plenty and superfluity the portion of a dog, even
the scraps which fell under his table. And therefore his punishment was
answerable, for he who denied his crummes, to satisfy poor Lazarus his
hunger, was himself denied a drop of cold water to quench his own heat
and thirst.

CHAP. 19. That they who are liberal in giving alms, shall be rewarded with
permanent and eternal blessings.
Sect. 1. That our almesdeedes shall be rewarded with permanent blessings.
ANd thus much have we spoken of the manifold blessings and benefits which are
promised to those who exercise themselves in the works of mercy; now we are to
speak of the durable continuance of them, expressed in those words; endures
for ever. The first word signifying, that the fruits of our almesdeedes are
lasting, for they fly not from us, but endure; the other, that they are
everlasting, for they stay with us, not only a long time, but they endure for
ever. Concerning the former, the benefit of our almesdeedes is very great, for
whereas our riches are in their own nature most flitting, mutable and
inconstant, they being every day ready to leave us, or we them; by giving of
alms they are preserved for our use: whereas like an Eagle they are still
ready to fly away from us, as the wise man speaks, Prou. 23. Prou. 23, 5.
5. by this means their wings are clipped, so as they cannot take their flight
nor depart from us. In which respect that conceit should not hinder us from
giving alms which hinders many, namely, that thejr riches so bestowed are
merely lost; yea, rather nothing more should persuade us to be bountiful in
giving, seeing it is the only means to preserve them from losing; for if we
keep them, they will fly away from us, but if we give them, they will
continue with us. If we imprison them within stone-wals never so surely under
lock and key, bolts and iron bars, they will make an escape; but if we
commit them to the custody of the poor, they will become lasting treasures and
durable riches which will long continue with us. So that if we would make choice
of a treasury for our wealth which cannot be violated, of a lock that cannot
be picked, and of an iron barred chest that cannot be broken open; let the
poor keep it in their bellies, which of all other places is most safe and
secure. For this is Christ's treasury, which none can burst into, and what is
put into it, is in his custody, and therefore safe enough, because he is the
strong man whom none can turn out of possession, nor pluck any thing from him
with violence, which he holds Luke Ioh. 10. 28.
in his hand. In which regard it may be truly said, that as the merciful man
is of all others most rich, so also most provident in keeping his goods the
safest and securest, through his providence from fear of losing them; for what
he gives, he places in a sure treasury, out of which there is nothing Pecu^ia
quae ser^atur casi^us, seruit: quae in misericordia res^ruatur (...) f^turum
(...)rit. A(...) Temp(...)
lost. He that keeps his money reserueth it to many casualties, as fire,
thieves, oppression of the mighty, invasion, of enemies, by which how many have
been suddenly spoiled of all they have: and if we follow the same practice, who
can privilege us from the same dangers? with which if we be overtaken, how
will we befoole our selves, that we did not give some part to the poor, which
might have been preserved out of the gunshot of all peril? because what is
thus bestowed is in Gods keeping and reserved in the Invasit hostis d^m^m;
nunquid invaderet coelu^? occidit seru^m custo^e^, nunquid Dominum seruator^m?
August.
treasury of heaven for our use. Now as one says, though the enemy has
invaded the house, he could never have invaded heaven; though he has killed
thy servants that watched thy wealth, he could not have killed God the chief
keeper and preserver. And this argument the Wiseman uses to persuade us unto
these works of mercy with a bountiful hand, Eccl. 11. 1. 2. Cast thy bread
Eccles. 11. 1. 2.
upon the face of the waters; for thou shall find it after many days. Give a
portion to seven and also unto eight; for thou know not what evil shall
befall upon the earth. So our Savior Math. 6. 19. Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves
break through and steal. 20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven,
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through and steal. and Luke 12. 33. Sell that ye have and give alms, Luke
12. 33.
provide your selves bags which wax not old, and treasures in the heavens
that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither moth corrupts. What
foolish covetousness (says one) is this which makes men hide their money here
among thieves? for if thou love money truly, lay them up where they may be
safe, and open to no violence. For that which thou now do, shows not thy
love to thy wealth, but the mischiefs of thy servitude, and that thou but
hereby seek thine own continual vexation and grief. If any man would show
thee a safe place for thy treasures, though it were in the wilderness, thou
would harken unto him; but now not man but God shows thee a place of
safety, not in the wilderness but in heaven, and thou regardest it not* but
though thou should hide them ten thousand times in the earth, thou could
never be freed from care. For howsoever perhaps thou should Nam etiamsi
nunquam ^as f^^^^sse perdas; nunquam tamen carebis timore perdendi. Chrysostom. in
Math. 6. Homil. 21.
not loose them, yet thou should never be without the fear of loosing them.
But if thou give thy riches to the poor, thou shall be free from these
fears and cares. And which is more, thou shall not only safely hide thy gold,
but thou shall hereby sow it, and receive plentiful increase which (herein
better than other seed) shall endure for ever.

Sect. 2. That by giving alms we lay up treasures in our own country.
But let us consider where this place of safety is, in which we are counseled
to lay up our treasures; namely not in a strange kingdom whither we shall not
come our selves, or being come thither shall make but small stay; but in
heaven, our own native cuntry, the place of our inheritance, among our kindred
and chief friends, and of our perpetual abode and everlasting habitation; for
they that feed Christ being hungry, and clothe him being naked in his poor
members, shall inherit the heavenly kingdom which God has prepared for them
from the foundation of the world, Math. 25. Math: 25. 34.
34. they that deal their bread to the hungry and cover the naked, shall have
their righteousness to go before them, and the glory of the Lord shall be their
rereward. Esa: 58. 8. They that sell and give to the poor, Esa. 58. 8. Non
sunt bona hominis quae secum far non potest. Sola misericordia est comes
defunctorum. Ambros. Prae^e tectu^, and accip^es coelum. August.
for their transitory riches, shall have a treasure in the heavens that
fails not, Luke 12. 33. Now what an excellent change is this, to have
heavenly things for earthly, and treasures in our own country, where we shall
enjoy them for ever, for parting with uncertain riches in the place of our
pilgrimage, which we are ready every day to leave behind us; to forgo things
which we cannot keep, and obtain such as we cannot loose? But this exchange
merciful men do make; for when they give their goods to the poor, they do not
loose them, but only commit them unto them, as unto porters, to be carried and
transported for their use into those heavenly and everlasting habitations:
whereas if they should hourd them up and keep them unto themselves, they would
be cumbersom burdens, which would hinder their journey thither, and yet when
they have done what they can, death at length, if not some other casualtie in
the mean time, will strip them naked of all, to go out as they came into the
world, and let them carry nothing with them, but the sin and guilt which they
have committed Quae stultitia est illic relinqu^re, vnde exiturus es: and illuc
non praemittere quo iturus es* Chrysostom. in Math. 6.
in compassing of them. What madness therefore is it to leave our wealth there,
from whence we are every day departing, and not to send it before us whither we
are going? to leave and lose it in a strange kingdom, when as we might safely
send it before us into our own country? especially considering (as one says)
that he who places Chrysostom. ibid.
his treasures on earth, has nothing to expect and hope for in heaven: for why
should he look up into heaven, who has laid up nothing there? whatsoever thou
do for thy soul, that is truly thine, but what thou leauest behind thee
that thou loosest.

Sect. 5. That the reward of our almes-deedes and the punishment of their
neglect shall be everlasting.
And thus we see the place where our riches will endure and remain for us; now
the time of their continuance, and of our inioying them in heaven is for ever;
in which respect we may truly say of almsdeeds, that they are that meat
which will not mould, the drink that sowreth not, the garment that will not
wear out, and the treasure which is not subject either to rust or stealing;
And this eternity of reward is promised in many places of Scripture to those
who exercise themselves in these works of mercy. So Luke 16. 9. Luke 16. 9.
Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when you
fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations. And the Apostle would
have those who are rich in the world to be rich also in good works, ready to
distribute, and willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves a
good foundation, against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal
life. 1. Tim. 6. 19. yea so 1. Tim. 6. 1^
does the reward of everlasting happiness through Gods free grace and goodness
belong to these works of mercy, that the doing or neglecting them is
accompanied with eternal blessedness or endless misery; for the sentence of
absolution or condemnation shall be pronounced, either for or against us,
accordingly as we have performed or omitted them. To those who have fed the
hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick etc. come ye blessed of my
Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world;
and contrariwise to those who have not done these duties; Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The
consideration whereof should be a sufficient motive to stir us up to the
doing of these good works, though there were no other reason; for if we
either love heaven or fear hell, if we would be everlastingly rewarded or
would not be everlastingly punished and tormented; if we desire with
unspeakable confidence and joy to appear before our sweet Savior and to our
inestimable comfort hear that blessed sentence; or would not be astonished and
perplexed with that horror and guilt, which shall make us to cry out to the
hills and rocks to fall down and cover us from the presence of our terrible
judge; let us spare something from our superfluities, yea if need require, even
from our necessaries, that we may relieve and cherish the poor distressed
members of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 20. That God will make the estate of the merciful prosperous and
flourishing.
Sect. 1. That by giving alms our estate is confirmed and increased.
ANd so I come from the first maine argument expressed in the text, to the
second contained in the last words: his horn shall be exalted; with honor. In
which words the holy Ghost promises to them who are liberal and diligent in
doing the works of mercy, a most prosperous and flowrishing estate in this
world and in the world to come. For first by exalting of their horn is
signified the confirmation, strengthening and increasing of their prosperous
estate, the metaphor being borrowed from those beasts whose chief strength,
both for offense and defense, is principally Psalm. 18. 2.
in their horns. And thus it is said Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my rock and my
fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my
buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. By all which
borrowed speeches the same thing is signified, namely that the Lord was his
chief strength by whom he had safety and defense maugre the malice of all his
enemies. So Psalm. 75. 10. All the horns of the wicked will I cut Psalm. 75. 10.
off, but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted. By which is meant that
he would disable and destroy the one, and advance and confirm the prosperity
of the other. And thus the Apostle expounds these words; for persuading the
Corinthians to be bountiful in doing these works of mercy, he takes away a
secret objection which might hinder them in their liberality, namely that
hereby they should impouerish their estates, and bring themselves to want:
assuring them that there was no cause to fear this, for God (says he) is able
to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency
in 2. Cor. 9. 8. 10.
all things, may abound to every good work, as it is written, he has
dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains for
ever. And in stead, of those words, his horn shall be exalted with honor; he
adds: Now he that ministers seed to the sower, does minister bread for
your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
righteousness. Whereby the same thing is signified, to wit, that God will
increase their plenty and confirm their estate, so that the sowing of the
seeds of their beneficence, shall bring them no more loss, then the sowing of
corn does to the Husbandman, which is the only means of continuing his store
and abundance. And thus also the Lord by the Prophet Esaias promises to those
that draw out their soul to the hungry and satisfy the afflicted soul, that
he will guide them continually, satisfy their soul in drought and make fat
their bones; and that they shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
water whose waters fail not. Esa. 58. 10. 11. So Pro. 11. 24. There is Ps 58.
10. 11. Pro. 11. 24.
that scatters and yet increases, and there is that withholdeth more then is
meet, but it tends to poverty. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters shall be watered also himself. And Pro. 28. 27. He that
gives to the poor shall not lack. Pro. 28. 17.
The which consideration should effectually move all to be bountiful in doing
these works of mercy, seeing they do not weaken, but much strengthen our
estate; and are so far off from being the causes of our want and poverty,
that they are the only means of our plenty and abundance.

Sect. 3. That the merciful shall be filled with joy.
Secondly, by exalting their horn, is meant that their hearts shall be
replenished with joy, and delight; for it is the manner of horned beasts to
express their inward joy by lifting up and tossing their heads and horns. And
surely it is no small pleasure which a Christian takes in performing these
works of mercy; For first these virtuous actions in themselves do even for
the present fill their hearts with joy who rightly perform them, in which
regard the heathen man defines a benefit to be an action proceeding from
goodwill, yielding joy to him that receives it, and receiving it Seneca.
whilst it yields it. But much more do they fill our hearts with joy, as
they are evident signs to assure us that we are endued with Gods saving
graces, and as they do, being fruits of a lively faith, ascertaine us of our
future rewards, and the fruition of Gods presence, where there is fullness of
joy for evermore.

Sect. 3. That the merciful shall attain to a prosperous estate with honor.
Lastly it is said, that his horn shall be exalted with honor, or glory;
whereby is meant, that merciful men shall have a fair passage to the
compassing of their riches and inioying of their pleasures; and whereas
worldlings whilst they advance and confirm their estates, and obtain their
pleasures by unlawful means, are commonly branded with the marks of their
sin, and exposed to dishonor and reproach both before God and men; they
atcheiuing these things by sowing the seeds of their bounty, which God
blesses with this fruitful increase, become honorable and of high esteem,
not only amongst men, but also in the sight of God himself. Yea in truth the
duty of almes-giuing it self is exceeding honorable; for if it be a great
honor amongst men to be the Kings steward, and to have the power of disposing
his goods for the use of all his family, or to be his Almner to distribute his
alms unto the poor, how much more honorable is it, to bear these offices
under the most high and mighty Monarch of heaven and earth? And as it is very
honorable in it self, so also it brings much honor with it. For he that
relieueth the poor honoreth God, according to that Pro. 14. 31. He that
oppresses the poor reproacheth Pro. 3. 9. and 14. 31.
his maker, but he that honors him, has mercy on the poor, and who so
honor God, those will he honor, as it is 1. Sam. 1. 30. those that draw out
their souls 1. Sam. 1. 30.
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, their light shall rise in
obscurity, and their darkness shall be as the noone day. as it is. Esa. 58.
10. They shall Esa. 58. 10.
be glorious in the sight of men whilst they live, for their virtuous
actions, and be had in an honorable remembrance amongst them after their
death; yea and (which is the perfection of all their happiness) they shall not
only be honorable in earth, but be made glorious in the fruition of God and
everlasting blessedness in the kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. 21. Certain objections and excuses answered and taken away, whereby men
are hindered from doing the works of mercy.
Sect. 1. Their objection answered, who excuse their not giving alms by their
poverty.
AND thus have I propounded many and weighty reasons, whereby we may be induced
to exercise our selves in the works of mercy, and to be bountiful in relieuing
the poor members of Jesus Christ. Now it only remains that we answer some
objections, which we have not met with in the former discourse, and which, like
blocks in the way, hinder men from entering into, or going forward in this
christian course. And of these some respect the giver, and some the poor who
are the receivers. Concerning the former; some will give no alms, pretending
that they are poor themselves, and have nothing for them when they crave
relief. And surely many of them speak more truly than they are aware, for
though they abound with earthly riches, yet are they bare and beggarly in
respect of the chief riches and spiritual treasures; though they are rich in
goods, yet they are poor in grace, poor in love toward God and their
neighbors, poor in faith and in obedience, and poor in pity, mercy and
compassion toward their brethren, which makes them so niggardly and
close-handed, that they will part with nothing for their relief. But herein
commonly they think themselves rich enough, and contrariwise they pretend that
they are poor in worldly wealth, wherein they have not only sufficiency, but
also superfluity and abundance. For these who have nothing for the poor which
crave relief, have plenty and too much to bestow upon idle, unprofitable and
wicked uses. They have not for the poor a few scraps to preserve them from
perishing with hunger, but they have enough for themselves to pamper their
bellies, and with the rich glutton to fare delicately every day. They have
enough to entertain their rich friends with superfluous pomp and plenty; and
they who will not leave them to their own appetite, but press them with their
importunity to eat still more, when already they have eaten enough and too
much, will not allow some small pittance to the poor to keep them from
famishing. They who make no spare of their most costly wines, but swallow them
down themselves with great excess; and provoke, yea even compel others to
drink of them unto drunkenness, will not give a little small drink to the
poor members of Jesus Christ to quench their thirst. They have not for the
poor some out-worne and cast apparel to cover their nakedness, and keep their
bodies from the injuries of the wind and weather; but they have enough not
only for their own use, but also for pride and ostentation; their chests full
thrust of rich clothing, and their wardrops thoroughly furnished with gorgeous
garments, which serve for little other use, than to keep those from sloth and
idleness, that keep them from moulding and moth-eating; and whereas they have
no course clothes to cover naked Christ, they have costly ornaments for their
walls of Arras and Tapestry. Finally, they have not a few pence to spare for
the relieuing of those who are in extreme necessity; but they have many
shillings and pounds to spend wastfully and riotously, upon dicing and gaming,
vain sights, obscaene stage plays, and upon all other sinful pleasures and
worldly delights which their carnal appetite any way desires. But what a
fearful account have these men to make in the day of judgment, when as they
shall make their reckoning unto God, Item so much spent in excess and
superfluity, and so little in performing the works of mercy; so much laid out
upon worldly vanities and sinful pleasures, and so little for good uses, and
especially for relieuing Christ in his poor members.

Sect. 2. That we ought to give something to the poor, even out of our mean
estates.
But say thou have but a mediocritie of estate, and do not attain unto such
plenty or superfluity; Luke 12. 33.
but have only a competencie and sufficiency for thy self, yet out of this
thou must spare somewhat to relieve those who are in extreme necessity; and
if thou have so little money in thy purse, that it will only serve thine own
turn, thou art enjoined to sell somewhat which thou may best spare, as
either corn, land, or vseles household stuff, that thou may raise a stock,
out of which thou may relieve the poor. For if carnal wicked men will make
sale of such things, rather than they will want that which is sufficient for
the satisfying of their sinful lusts, how much more should we do it for the
better performance of these christian duties? If they care not to waste their
estates in the service of the Devil, let us not spare such disbursements as
will further us in the service of God, seeing he is such a liberal master as
will reward our kindness and never suffer us to loose by our bounty? Finally,
though it were granted that thou had nothing to sell, yet God commands
thee rather then that thou should neglect these works of mercy, to labor
with thy hands, that thou may have Ephesians: 4. 28.
to give unto him that needs; and therefore excuse not thy neglect of this
duty, by saying that thou have nothing for them, unless thou have nothing to
waste upon thy superfluous vanities, nothing which thou can spare from thy
necessary use, and sell for these charitable employments; yea unless thou art
not only poor in estate, but impotent and unable by thy honest labors to
earne thy living, and have both an empty purse and also shaking hands and weak
knees, and in a word art thy self such a one as needs by others to be helped
and relieved.

Sect. 3. Their objection answered, who put off this duty to those who are
richer.
Yea but there are many richer, and therefore this duty of giving alms lies
rather upon them than upon thee, who art but poor and of small means in
comparison of them, and if they neglect to give, much more may thou (as thou
supposest) and yet be excused before God. I answer first, that none are
excepted, but every one is to give according to his ability; wherein if thou
failest, their neglect will not excuse thee, for their example is no president,
but every one must bear their own sin. Secondly, if having little, thou art
content in obedience to God, to part with somewhat, thou performest a duty the
more acceptable to God, and in the day of Christ's appearing, thou shall be so
much the more richly rewarded; and for the present, thy work shall be so much
the more commendable: as we see in the example of the poor widow and the
Macedonians, who are so much commended for parting with somewhat out of their
small store. Thirdly, if thou will not live by precepts but by examples, why
do thou propound them for thy pattern, who are carnal and covetous, and
not rather the example of our Savior Christ, and the holy men of God, whose
bounty even out of their poverty, is for this very purpose recorded in the
Scriptures? Lastly, thou must consider, if thou art poor, that almesdeedes are
a notable means to make thee richer, as being a spiritual kind of husbandry
and merchandise, wherein if we labor and trade, we shall thereby have our
wealth increased. Now no man in his right wits having small store of corn will
omit to sow it, because others neglect the seasonable seede-time who have
greater plenty; no wise merchant will refuse to trade and lay out his money
upon a good bargain, because those who have greater stocks will not employ
them, but so much the rather they will sow and trade, that their store and
stock may be increased; and why then should we be less wise in spiritual
things, seeing we may be assured, that we shall receive a greater and better
increase?

Sect. 4. An objection answered, grounded upon the poores unthankfulness.
Thirdly, it is objected that the poor are now adays so unthankful, that all
is lost which is bestowed upon them; for though we give them never so largely,
they will not afford us so much as a good report; if we need their help they
are to seek, and they will not take any pains for us, to watch with us when we
are sick, or to work for us, when we need their labor. I answer, that if in
giving thy alms thou aimest at these ends, thou art rightly served; for they
did not spring out of the fountain of charity, but self-love and worldly
respects, and were done for thine own praise or profit, and not because God
requires these duties at thy hands; the which is not to do works of mercy,
but to put out thy money to usury for thine own advantage. Secondly, I may
say of alms, as the heathen man of benefits, that if we be so curious in
avoiding the giving of our alms to those who are ungrateful, we shall give
none at all, and so these good deeds will perish Ita ne apud alium pereant
apud te peribunt. Seen. Epist. 81.
in our own hands for want of doing them, for fear lest they should perish in
the hands of others. According to that Eccles. 11. 4. He that observes the
wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds shall not reap. And
elsewhere; What great thing were it to do good unto many, if none should
deceive us? but it is true virtue to give when we hope not for any recompense,
Senec. de benef. ib. 1. cap. 1.
no not so much as thanks. So that though all hope were cut off to find a
thankful man, I had ratber receive nothing then not give, because he is more
faulty who gives not, then he who having received a good turn is
unthankful. And again: Is he ungrateful? he has therein not injured me,
but himself. I have done my duty when I gave. Nor will I for this give more
slowly, but with greater diligence: for Non est magni animi dare and perdere,
sed perdere and dare. Senec. de Ben^f. lib. 7. cap. 32.
what I have cast away upon this man, I shall find among others, Yea, I will
give unto the same man again, and (like a good husbandman) I will overcome
the barrenness of the soil, with my care and painful tillage; neither is it
any great matter to give and lose, but to lose and give. And yet Christian
benificence goes further, requiring that we should give, not only to those
who are ungrateful and do us no good, but also to such as are enemies and do
us hurt: according to that Romans 12. 20. If thine enemy Romans 12. 20.
hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink, because by this means, we
shall overcome evil with good, our greatest enemy being no more able to bear
malice when we load him with benefits, then his head is able to bear fiery
coals rhat are cast upon it. But say we should not overcome them with our
kindness, yet it shall be a noble work, and worth our labor, to overcome
our selves; say, that he offends through his ungratefulness, let him bear
his sin, and let us do our duty; for it is too much charity toward
another man, to commit a certain sin, in not giving; because we guess that
he will sin in his receiving; and to prevent the fault of another, by
committing a greater in our own person. Finally, let us remember, that what
we give unto the poor, we lend unto the Lord, and therefore though Prou. 19.
17. Matthew 64.
they fail never so much, yet having such an all-sufficient surety we are sure
of good payment, yea, the less we receive from them, the better it will be for
us, if we be not discouraged with their unthankfulness; for then God being
our play master, he will pay us like himself, not only with transitory
things for transitory, but also with such blessings as are spiritual,
heavenly, infinite and everlasting.

Sect. 3. Their objection answered, who say that the poor are wicked.
Fourthly, it is objected that the poor now adays are so wicked and evil
that they deserve no relief, and what is given unto them, is but cast away,
seeing it does but maintain them in their ungodly courses. To which I answer,
that this should not discourage us from giving, but make us more diligent in
seeking out those who are worthy to be relieved. The husbandman does not
refuse altogether to sow his seed, because there are some grounds so barren,
that they will bear nothing but weeds and thistles; but this makes him
careful either to look out more fruitful soil, which will return fruitful
increase, or with his good husbandry to make that which in it self is bad, to
become better; neither does he expect that all he sows should prosper and
increase his harvest, seeing some falls by the wayside, and is trodden under
foot, some is devoured by the fowls which prey upon it, and some falls among
the stones, or is so choked with weeds and thorns, that it thriueth not. And
so the wise merchant gives not over trading, because some of the goods which
he aduentureth, is lost by shipwreck, pirates, banquerouts and other
casualties, but is so much the more diligent in his employments, and sends
out his goods into many places, that his gains at one time, may counteruaile
and exceed his losses at another: And so the miscarrying of some part of our
alms, should not discourage us in sowing the seeds of our beneficence, nor
make us give over our spiritual merchandise, but cause us rather to exercise
our selves in these Christian duties with more diligence, that the
well-bestowing of alms at one time, may make amends for that which at another
time is cast away and perishes; according to that Eccles. 11. 6. In the
evening sow thy seed, and Eccles 11. 6.
in the morning withold not thine hand; for thou know not whether shall
prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good. And
our Savior would not have us to be too scrupulous, but would have us to give
unto every one that Matthew. (...).
asks of us, namely, when as we see that they are in great necessity. For
to be ouer-iealous and suspicious without apparent reason, is to proclaim
that we are utterly destitute of Christian charity; for the Apostle tells
us, that love thinks no evil, it believes all things, it hops all things.
1. Cor. 13. 5. 7. Yea, but experience teaches 1. Cor. 13. 5. 7.
that the most that crave are unworthy to receive our alms, for they are so
wicked in themselves, so irreligious and destitute of the true fear of God,
and toward us so deceitful, coloring their estates with lies, and using so
many fraudulent devises to blind our eyes, and to stir us up to pity, when
as there is no true cause, that those that give are commonly couzened by them,
and do no good in the exercise of their bountic. To which I answer, that this
should not weaken our hands, in doing these works of mercy, but increase our
care and diligence, in making better choice. It is but too true which is
objected, but yet if by this we be utterly discouraged from giving alms, we
shall sin no less in not giving, then they shall do in their unworthy
receiving. For as they commit a kind of sacrilege in diuerting our bounty
from those who are truly poor, unto themselves, so we if we keep in our
hands the goods of the poor vnbestowed under the color of these pretenses,
our keeping of them is no less sacrilegious then their receiving them. Again,
though it cannot be denied, but that the poor grievously sin, in drawing
alms from us by many notorious lies and subtle devises; yet it is a question
whether we be not as faulty, in putting them to these shifts, through our
uncharitableness and hardness of heart, which manacleth so our hands that we
will not stretch them out to do these works of mercy, unless our pity and
compassion be excited and awakened out of their deep lathargie, by these
extraordinary inventions. So Itaque simulatio illius tuae est in humanitatis
preco. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 9. Hom. 21 Tom. 4. c. 487.
Chrysostom says, that the poor man's dissembling proclaymeth the inhumanitie
of the rich. For when by begging, and crouching, and speaking words to move
piety, and looking heavily, and weeping bitterly he cannot in the whole day get
necessary food; he is put to devise artificial shifts, which do not so much
disgrace him, as those who drive him to these extremities. And therefore he is
worthy pity, whose necessity inventeth these arts; and we innumerable
punishments, who bring the poor by our obdurateness into this necessity. For
if ordinary means would move us, he would not wrong us, or himself by using
those which are extraordinary.

Sect. 6. Reasons why we should not be over scrupulous.
Let not therefore the poores unworthiness hinder our bounty, but taking
reasonable care to bestow our alms as well as we can, let us continually
exercise our selves in these works of mercy. And to this purpose let us
consider, that if we be ouer-curious in choosing, we shall neglect our duty
and not give at all; according to that, Eccles. 11. 4.
Eccles: 11. 4. He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that
regards the clouds shall not reap. Be not (says one) over careful and
curious, in examining Olympiodorus in Eccles. 11.
those to whom thou should give; as whether he be a believer or an infidel,
just or unjust; for if thou hangest thus in suspense, thou will let the
seasonable seed-time pass, and so find nothing to reap in the time of
harvest. Secondly, let us set before us the example of our heavenly father, who
makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust, that so Math. 5. 45.
we may approve our selves to be his children. And let us not (as the Apostle
exhorts) be overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness: for it Romans
12. 21.
is a notable means to make them like and embrace our profession, and follow
our holy conversation, Beneficia in vulgus eum largiri iustitu^ri^. Perdenda
sunt multa vt semel ponas been. Senec. de benef. li. 1. c. 1.
when as tasting of our bounty, they love our persons for the good they
receive of us. Thirdly, let us remember, that it is much better to give unto
many that are unworthy our alms, than that one who is worthy should be
neglected in his necessity; for it is their fault if they be unworthy, but
ours if being worthy we do not relieve them. To which purpose one says; Be not
Gregor. Nazianzen. Misericordia no^ de meritis iudicare consucuit; sed
necessitatibus subvenire, iuuare paupere^ non examinare iustitia^. Ambros. in
epist.
over diligent in examining, who is worthy the alms thou give and who is
unworthy, seeing it is better to give to the unworthy for the love of the
worthy, than to hazard it, that he who is worthy should be defrauded of his
due, for the suspicion of his unworthiness. 4ly let us consider that mercy
looks not after merit but after misery and extreme necessity; and, chiefly
intends to relieve their poverty, and not to examine their righteousness. It
is one thing (says Chrysostom) to be a Judge, and another to be Chrysostom. de
Lazaro, Conc 2. Tom. 2. col. 1350 N^m ad h^c vt pauper dignus ^ab^^tur
eleem^s^^a, satis est ^g^^^as etc. N^c moribus camus sed homini etc. Ibid^m.
a giver of alms: and therefore they are called alms, because we also give
them to those that are unworthy. And again; Only the want and penury of the
poor man makes him fit to receive an alms etc. Neither do we give to the
manners but to the man, nor do we take compassion on him for his virtue, but
for his misery. Fifthly, let us know that if God should take the same course
with us as we do with the poor, and examine our merits and deserts before he
would bestow his gifts upon us, we should never have our requests granted, but
hopelesly perish in our wants and miseries. Sixthly, let us forbear these over
strict examinations of the poor that crave our help, seeing we shall not so
much comfort and refresh them by our gifts, as vex and torment them by our
harsh manner of giving. To which purpose Chrysostom demands: Chrysostom. in Math
10 Homil. 36. Tom. 2. Col. 328
Why do thou (says he) afflict the distressed and wretched soul? he flies
unto thee as unto a safe harbor, and why then do thou raise against him
these waves and billows, and tossest him with a greater tempest than that of
his poverty? why do thou condemn him to the suffering of further misery?
would he think thou have come unto thee, if he had expected such hard
measure? or if he looked for such entertaynment, and yet would come, his case
is to be pitied so much the more, because he was thrust into thy presence by
mere necessity. Finally, consider that though the poor be unworthy to whom
thou give, yet God is worthy for whose sake thou give; and if thou give
in obedience to his commandment, though it be cast away in respect of the
party who receives thy alms, yet not unto thee who bestowest them; and though
in respect of their unthankfulness and wickedness thou may justly
complain with the Prophet, in another case, that all that thou have done for
Esa. 49. 4.
them is in vain; yet thou may also surely conclude with him, that thy
judgment is with the Lord, and thy works with thy God, who will in no case
suffer it to go unrewarded.

Sect. 7. Their objection answered, who refuse to give, because they have many
children.
The last objection which worldlings make against the exercise of the works of
mercy is, that they have a great charge and many children, and therefore they
must not give away their goods to strangers, for the Apostle teaches us, that
Parents must lay up for their children, and that he who neglects this duty,
has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Unto whom I might 1 Timothy:
5. 8. Basil. de diuitijs and paupertato. orat. 14.
answer with Basil, Ne transferant culpam in insontes, let them not lay the
blame upon those who are innocent; for they who are miserable having wife and
children, would not be liberal if they were without them. Again, was not the
Gospel written as well to the married as unmarried, to Parents, as well as
those who have no children? and are not therefore both alike to yield
obedience, and equally bound to perform these works of mercy? Did they desire
of God children to this end, that they might plead by them a privilege to
neglect his commandments? or may they not justly fear if they thus abuse the
blessing of posterity, that God will lessen their number, lighten them of this
charge, and so take away their excuse, by depriving them of their chiefest
comfort? the which should be just with God thus to punish them, seeing they
make idols of them, loving them better than they do God that gave them. But
thy children are dear unto thee and must be provided for. And good reason; yet
let thy God be dearer, and let them not make thee to neglect him, who gave thee
to thy self, and them unto thee, and has provided all that thou injoyest,
both for thee and them. Provide for them competencie and sufficiency, but deny
not unto God of thy abundance and superfluity. De Disciplina Christ. cap. 1.
Tom. 9. col. 914.
Christ (says Austin) asks, yet does not receive, and thou scandalizest thy
profession of piety with words of cruelty, saying, what shall I reserve for my
children? I oppose Christ unto thee, and thou re-objectest thy children unto
me. But this no doubt is great justice, that thy son should be left enough to
maintain his riotous expenses, and that thy God should want necessaries? For
have thou not read, have thou not observed, when ye have not done it to one of
these little ones, ye have not done it unto me? have thou not read? have thou
not feared? Behold who it is that wants and asks, and do thou begin to
number thy children? Number them and spare not, but among them reckon thy Lord
as one of the number. If thou have one, let him be the second; if two, the
third; if three, the fourth etc. For thou know what thy God is who has
given thee whatsoever thou have, and will richly recompense what thou returnest
unto him: but thou know not what thy children will prove, perhaps
ungrateful, and will not remember thee for thy bounty; it may be wasters and
prodigalls, who will wickedly and riotously spend, what thou have as wickedly
gotten and reserved. Yea it may be that the wealth which thou leauest them will
be the cause, at least the occasion of their everlasting ruin, whereas thereby
they are furthered in the fruition of their sinful pleasures, and enabled with
more freedom to run on and perish in their ungracious and wicked courses.

Sect. 8. We show our love toward our children when we are bountiful toward
the poor.
Yea but thy love and care over thy children is so great, that nothing can make
thee to neglect it. Be it so. Yet love them wisely, and take care to provide so
for them, as that their estate may be sure and durable. Now whether is this
better effected by thine own provision, or by the leaving them to the good
blessing of God in a moderate estate, and to the wise and gracious guidance of
his special providence? This question is easily determined, for though thou
prouidest must abundantly for them, their state is subject to such innumerable
casualties, that out of the highest flow of plenty, they may easily be brought
to as great an ebb of want and penury. They may be oppressed by those who are
more mighty, or defrauded by those that are more crafty; the Princes just
displeasure, or their own faultiness, may turn them out of all, or in this
cunning age, wherein there are none more skillful to build strongly, then
others are to undermine and supplant, there may some crack or flaw be found in
their title, and so for want of words or letters to carry it, thy children may
be deprived of the benefit of thy care and providence. But if God take the care
and charge over them, he is such a faithful Tutor and powerful Guardian and
Protector, that none shall be able to wrest their portion and patrimony out
of his hands. Now what is the means whereby thou may make thy children Gods
wards and pupills, how may thou procure for them his blessings, and assure
them of the gracious protection of his all-ruling providence? surely not by
greedy covetousness and immoderate care in hourding up for them excessive
wealth, nor by neglecting the works of mercy and the releeuing of the poor,
that thou may leave to thy children abundant riches. For how is it likely
that he will bless unto them thine estate which is gotten and raked together
by unjust keeping that, which he has enjoined thee to bestow, and by the utter
neglect and contempt of his commandment? or that God will regard and feed thy
children who have neglected his and suffered them to pine and perish for want of
relief? But the only means to obtain Gods blessing upon thy self and thy
posterity, is to obey his commandments, to trust him upon his word, and to
give liberally unto the poor. For the righteous man who is merciful and
lends, not only himself, but his seed also is blessed. Psalm. 37. 26. He
does not say that his Psalm. 37. 26.
children shall live in a rich and pompous estate, for so they may do, and yet
with the rich glutton be everlastingly condemned; yea this worldly wealth may
be the means of furthering and increasing their fearful condemnation; but
that they shall have Gods blessing upon that which they enjoy, which whether it
be less or more, will make it sufficient, and so sanctify it to their use,
that it shall be unto them a pledge of Gods love, and a pawn and earnest
penny of their eternal salvation. In which regard we may truly say, that
there is no loss to our posterity through our performance of these works of
mercy, but rather great gain and advantage, and that (as Augustine says) we
perform for the good Forsitan haeredi praest^abis quicquid misericordiae causa
de eius portione detraxeris. August. de tempore Sermon. 76
and advancement of our children, whatsoever we wisely detract from their
portion, for the doing of these works of mercy. And therefore let not our
children hinder us from relieuing the poor, but rather let us in Christian
discretion do it more freely, that so we may bring Gods blessing upon our
posterity, and move him with his gracious providence to protect and watch over
them; and the greater care we have of their benefit and welfare, so much the
rather let us commend them unto God, who will take care of them when our care
shall cease and do them no good

Sect 9. No reason why we should neglect the poor to leave our children rich.
Finally though we are assured, that the goods which we spare from the releife
of the poor and leave to our children, should prosper with them, and make them
great on the earth, yet were there no reason why for this we should neglect
these works of mercy? for why should thou love thy children better then
thine own person, and in providing for them neglect thy self? yea why
should thou prefer their wealth before thine own soul, and their
flourishing estate in the world, which is but momentany and mutable, before the
fruition of those joys which are infinite and everlasting? what will it profit
thee when thou appearest before thy judge to allege, that thou have plaide
the good husband, and provided liberally for thine own children, when he
shall lay it to thy charge, that to do thus, thou have neglected and starued
his? what comfort will it be unto thee, if for getting some trifles for thy
posterity on earth, thou have lost heaven, or to remember that thy children
ruffle it out in worldly wealth and superfluous abundance, when thou shall be
stripped of all, and want a drop of cold water to cool thy scorching heat?
And therefore provide for thy children with a good conscience, and so as that
thou neglect not the poor members of Christ: that God may bless thy provision
unto them in this life; and provide for thee and for them, if they walk in thy
ways, eternal mansions and an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that
passes not away, in the kingdom of heaven. The which he vouchsafe us who has
bought it for us, Jesus Christ the righteous; To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, be all praise and glory, power and dominion, both now and for
evermore.

AMEN.
FINIS.

