Spiritual physic to cure the diseases of the soul, arising from
superfluity of choler, prescribed out of Gods word.

Wherein the chollericke man may see the dangerousnesse of this disease of the
soul unjust anger, the preservatives to keep him from the infection thereof,
and also fit medicines to restore him to health being already subject to this
raging passion.

Profitable for all to use, seeing all are patients in this disease of
impatiencie.

Habet et musca splene^, et sua formicae bilis inest.

PRO. 16. 32. He that is flow to anger is better then the mighty man: and he
that rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a City.

Imprinted at London by Gabriel Simson for William Jones, dwelling near
Holborne Conduict at the sign of the Gun. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT honorable sir Thomas Egerton knight, Lord Keeper of the great
seal of England, and one of her Majesty's honor able privy counsel, my very
good Lord: health and prosperity with increase of all spiritual graces in
this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
HAVING HAD through your honorable bounty, a part of the Lords Vineyarde
allotted unto me his most unworthy woorkeman, by your Honor his most worthy
steward, to the end I should plant and water, purge and prune it, I thought it
my part not only to perform my duty in this behalf, in such measure as God
enableth me, but also to present unto your honor the first fruits of my labor
which have yet offered themselves to public view, to the end that I might
thereby both show my self not altogether negligent in our great Lord and
masters business, and also give some token of most obliged duty and humble
thankfulness to you his honorable steward, by whose appointment I have
obtained a place wherein I may employ my pains, whereas otherwise I should
either have stood idle in the market place, or else been compelled to have
dug in another man's ground, with great labor and little fruit. If these my
first fruits seem unpleasant in your most learned and judicial taste, either
impute it to the immaturitie caused by their short time of grouth and
small-experienced skill of the vintager, or else consider that they are
destinated to a physical use for the purging away of choler, and therefore
though they be not pleasant in taste, yet may they be profitable in operation.
Such as they are (in all humility, craving pardon for my bouldnes) I commend
them to your honorable patronage and protection, and your self to the
Almighties, most heartily beseching the glorious and great Lord of the vinyard
long to continue you his faithful steward amongst us, to the advancement of
his glory, the propagation of his vine, and the exceeding comfort of his poor
contemned laborers. Amen.

Your honors in all humble duty most bounden. JOHN DOWNHAM.

To the Christian reader.
COnsidering the universal infection of this contagious disease of the soul
unjust anger, and the manifould pernicious evils which it works, both private
and public, I thought good to prescribe out of Gods word, some remedies for
those patients which are committed to my cure, whereby they might either be
preserved from these feuer-like fits, which cause men outwardly to shake, and
tremble when as inwardly they are most inflamed; or else have their heat
somewhat allayed and abated when they are already fallen into them. The which
my prescript I thought at the first should have been communicated to no more
then mine own patients, till I was persuaded by more skillful Physicians then
my self, that the publishing thereof might redownd to others profit. And
therefore desiring nothing more then to exercise my poor talent to the glory
of my master who bestowed it, and the benefit of my fellow servants, for whose
good also I have received it, I willingly condescended to their motion. And for
as much, as I had only shadowed a rude draught without color or countenance,
I was feign to take a reueiw of my work, altering some things, and adding
others as it were new lineaments, which I thought more fit for the Press then
for the Pulpit. If any think me too quick in practice, they will (I hope)
excuse me, if they consider that I make experience of my slender skill, not in
the vital parts, but in the feet of the soul, namely the affections, and yet
the curing of them, or but this one of them, may greatly redound to the benefit
of the whole, for as the diseases of the feet do grieve the heart and offend
the head, and the curing and healing of them does ease and comfort both, so
when the affections are distempered being infected with the contagion of our
original corruption, even the chief parts of the soul the understanding and
will, are not a little disturbed and disordered, by receiving from them their
contagious pollutio^. And therefore he who can skilfully purge these nether
parts shall ease the higher, by drawing down those corrupt humors which do
offend and annoy the^. Seeing then there may come by my practice great good
with little danger, I have the rather adventured the cure: being contented to
undergo the censure of some for too much have, who (I fear me) are in these
cases as much too slow, to the end that I may to the uttermost of my skill
benefit many. The Lord who is the only true Physician of souls diseased with
sin, bless this and all other my endeavors that they may be profitable for
the setting forth of his glory, the benefit of my brethren, and furthering the
assurance of mine own salvation. Amen.

Spiritual physic to cure the diseases of the soul, arising from
superfluity of choler prescribed out of Gods word.
Ephesians 4. 26. Be angry and sin not, let not the sun go down on your
wrath.
Chap. 1.
Sect. 1.
THe miserable ruins of our excellent state by creation which were the
lamentable effects following the sin of our first parents: and the foul
spots of original corruption, which like a contagious leprosy derived from
the^, have infected all their posterity, do not so evidently appear in any
part of the body or foul as in the affections, which are so corrupted and
disordered that there scarce remain any small relics of their created
purity. And hence it is that the Heathen Philosophers though they did not
perceive how much the bright shining beams of our reason, and the
understanding part of the soul, were dimmed and darkened with the foggie mists
of original sin, but highly extolled with over parciall praises, the
excellency and perfection of them, yet they plainly discerned the great
corruption of our disordered affections in so much that some of them being
ouerswayed with too great vehemency of affection in speaking against the
affections have condemned them as simply, and in their own nature evil, and
therefore wholly to be abandoned, seeing there was no hope they should be
amended: others with a more judicial insight discerning between the things
themselves and their corruption, have written whole tractates for the reforming
of them, esteeming the chief top and perfection of wisdom to consist in the
well governing and ordering of these disordered and tumultuous passions.

If then the heathen Philosophers walking in the dark night of ignorance and
error, and illightened only with a small glimmering spark of natural reason,
could thereby both discern their corruption and also did study to reform and
bring them under the rule of reason, how much more earnestly should we endeavor,
not so much to marshall them under the co^duict of natural reason, which is it
self but a blind leader, as to reform and purge them by the word of God,
which like a glorious shyning sun, has dispelled the foggy mists of
ignorance and error, and so discovered all the spots and deformities of them,
far more clearly then our blind reason.

And as we are earnestly to labor for the reforming of all the affections, so
most earnestly of all this of anger, which of all other is most turbulent and
violent if it be not bridled and restrained. And for our better furtherance in
so good an endeavor, I have made choice of this text, to the end I might show
how far forth anger is to be aprooued and embraced, and in what respect it is
to be avoided and shunned.

In handling whereof I will first show the meaning of the words, and afterward
entreat of their several parts.

In showing the meaning of the words I will first define what anger is, and
then What anger is in general.
set down the diverse sorts thereof. Anger therefore generally considered is
thus defined: it is an affection, whereby the blood about the heart being heated
by the apprehension of some injury offered to a man's self or his friends, and
that in truth or in his opinion only, the appetite is stirred up to take
revenge. The names of anger with the notation.


First we will speak of the thing defined. and after of the definition. Anger
in the latin tongue is called (ira) which name has his notation from the
effect, for when by the apprehension of an injury the heart is inflamed with the
heat of anger, it does make a man (quasi ex se ire) as it were to go out of
himself, and in this respect he who was angry was said by an usual Latin
phrase (non esse apud se, not to be with himself, and ad se rediisse, to have
returned to himself, when his anger was passed over. The Grecians did
especially use two names to express this affection, which did contain in them
the very nature of anger. The first (...) which signifies the preturbation it
self, or the heating of the blood by the apprehension of the injury offered,
the other (...) which signifies the appetite or desire of revenge which follows
the the perturbatio^. So that these two names contain in them, both the
material and formal cause of anger: for the material cause is the heating of
the blood about the heart which is signified by the first name (...): the
formal cause is the appetite or desire of revenging the injury offered, which
is understood by the other name (...).

The most usual name used by the Hebrews to signify anger is Aph. which
signifies also the Nose, and by a synecdoche the whole face: which name is
given unto it either because in a man's anger the breath does more vehemently
and often issue out of the nose, which is as it were the smoke issuing from the
flame kindled about the heart, or else because in the face anger is soonest
discerned by the often intercourse and change of colors.

Our English word anger is derived from the latin word Angor, which either
signifies throtling and choking, or vexatio^ and grief, because anger works
both these effects if it be immoderat: for it stops the throat leaving no
passage for words, and it vexes and tormenteth both the body and the mind.

And so much for the name: now we will The definition explained.
speak of the definition. First I say it is an affection: for the whole
essence of a m^n consists of these 3. things, body, soul, and affections,
which do participate of both the other now anger cannot be said to be a
quality or property of the soul alone, for the material cause thereof is
the boiling of the blood about the heart, nor of the body alone, for the formal
cause, namely the appetite and desire of revenge stirred up by the apprehension
of the injury offered, does more properly belong to the soul, and therefore I
call it a mixed affection proceeding from them both.

I add the material cause, namely the hea^ing of the blood about the heart,
which heat or inflamatio^ is caused by the apprehension of the injury offered
or the dislike which the heart co^ceiueth of the injury aprehe^ded: which is
either in truth an injury, or but in opinion and appearance only: for anger
has not always a true cause, but sometime fained and imaginary: and this
material cause (namely the heating of the blood by apprehension of the injury)
the formal cause follows, that is to say, an appetite or desire of revenge,
for before we desire to revenge the injury, we first apprehend and feel it,
which desire is either just or unjust: just, if we be angry for a just cause,
with those with whom we ought to be angry, after a just manner, observing a
fit time, and to a good end: unjust, if these circumstances be not observed.
Furthermore in this definition the cause of anger is expressed namely injury
offered (for anger always presupposes injury) and the subject thereof which is
the heart, as also the object to wit revenge of the injury.

Sect. 2.
And so much for the general definition The kinds of anger.
of anger: now we are to show the diverse sorts thereof, or rather the diverse
acceptance of the same affection.

First it is taken for the natural affection Natural anger.
of anger as it was created of God, and had his being in man before the fall.

Secondly, as it is corrupted since the Corrupt anger
fall by original sin. Thirdly as it is renewed and sanctified by Gods
Sanctified anger.
spirit. We are not therefore with the Stoikes to confound these three
together, and without difference to The Stoics confuted.
condemn them all: for how soever this affection as it is corrupted, is most
turbulent, and of all others most pernicious, yet we are to hold that the
natural affection considered, either as it was created by God, or so far
forth as it is renewed and sanctified by Gods spirit is just, holy, and
lawful.

And this may easily be proved by diverse reasons: First because it was
created That the affection of anger is in it own nature lawful.
by God, and was in man before the fall, and before any evil entered into the
world* being therefore the Lords own workmanship, which by his own testimony
was approved to be very good. Genesis 1. 31. and of greater antiquity then Genesis
1. 31
evil it self, it follows, that the affection in it own nature is to be
esteemed as good and lawful.

Secondly, because in many places of Romans 1. 18
the scriptures it is attributed to God himself, Romans 1. 18. the Anger of God
is made manifest from heaven against all impiety Ioh: 3. 36. he that believes
not Ioh. 3* 36.
in the son shall not see life, but the Anger of God shall abide upon him.
Seeing therefore it is ascribed unto God, to whose most perfect and just nature
nothing agrees but that which is just and holy, it follows that this
affection it self is so to be esteemed. True it is that neither this nor any
other affection is in God if we speak properly, but only attributed unto him,
that our weak capacities may better conceine how he excerciseth his works and
eternal counsels toward his creatures: But yet for as much as nothing is
attributed and ascribed unto him which is not good and just, so farforth as it
is ascribed* it evidently shows that anger in it own nature is not evil.

Lastly this manifestly appears in that this affection was truly and
naturally in our savior Christ himself as he was man as it is evident Mar:
3. 5. where it is said that he looked angerly Mar. 3. 5*
upon the Scribes and Pharisees mourning for the hardness of their hearts: so
likewise being incited with an holy anger* to see his fathers house turned into
a market, he drives the buyers and sellers out of the temple, John. 2. 17.
seeing then Christ was angry and yet free from all John. 2. 17
sin, it follows that Anger in it own Pet. 2. 22
nature is just and holy.

But it may be objected that Anger is in many places of the scriptures
condemned Mat. 5. 22
and forbidden: as Math. 5. 22. He that is angry with his brother unadvisedly
is culpable of judgment, I answer that not anger simply but unadvised Anger is
there comdemned: and in a word al other places and very necessary, as being
the whetstone of true fortitude, whereby we are stirred up and encouraged to
maintain the glory of God, and our own persons and states against the
impiety and injustice of men. Though Anger therefore be but a bad mistres to
command, yet is is a good servant to obey: though it be but an ill captain to
lead our forces into the field against our spiritual and temporal enemies, yet
it is a good soldiour so long as it subiecteth it self to the government and
discipline of sanctified reason. But it is further objected by the Stoikes and
necessary occasions is just and commendable: as for example when a man seeeth
God dishonored, religion disgraced, wickedness unpunished; If therefore his
mind be perturbed and troubled, this perturbation is not to be condemned, nay
to be commended, and they rather to be condemned who are not so troubled. Thus
was our savior perturbed when he saw Gods house dishonored, as also when he
raised up Lazarus, John. 2. 17 and 11. 23 No^. 24. 7.
thus was Phinees disturbed and troubled in mind when he saw that shameless
sin of Zimry and Cozby: and King. 19
Elias when religion was conte^ned, idolatry erected, and the Lords true
prophets destroyed.

Though therefore anger be a perturbatio^ of the mind it does not follow that it
is evil for not the perturbation it self but the cause thereof makes it good
if it be good, and evil if it be evil. Furthermore and moderate it does
seruiceablely wait upon reason, and not imperiously over rule it: and rather
makes a man more constant and resolute in walking the path of truth which he
has descried with the eye of a clear judgment, then any ways dazell or
offend the sight whereby he should be caused to stumble in the way, or else
turn aside into by paths of error. Secondly though it should be granted that
for the instant reason is some what disturbed with the passion, it does not
follow that it is evil or unprofitable, for before the affection is inflamed,
the reason apprehends and judges of the injury, and so as it were first
kindles the flame, which being kindled does for the instant perturbe the
mind, but the perturbation being quickly over passed and the mind quieted,
reason is made no less fit thereby to judge of the injury, and much more fit to
revenge it. And therefore moderate and sanctified anger is so far from
hurting and hindering the judgment of reason, that it rather seruiceably
aydeth and supporteth it by inciting and in-couraging it courageously to
execute that which reason has justly decreed and resolved: as therefore the
most precious eysalue does presently after it is put into the eye dim and
dazell the sight, but afterward causes it to see much more clearly: so this
affection of moderate and holy Anger does at the first somewhat perturbe
reason, but afterward it makes it much more active in executing and performing
all good designs.

And so much for the lawfullnesse of Anger, both in respect of the first
creation thereof, and as it is renewed and sanctified by Gods spirit, as also
concerning the diverse sorts of Anger: Now in the next place we are to consider
which What anger is commanded and what forbidden*
of these is commanded or forbidden in my text.

First for the affection as it was created by God, howsoever it was just and
holy in it self, yet now the beauty and excellency thereof is defaced with
the foul spots of original sin, so that there remain only some relics
of the perfection wherein it was created, till it be again renewed and
restored by Gods sanctifying spirit. This therefore is not here commanded or
forbidden, but only that we labor as much as may be, that it may come near his
former excellency. The other two sorts namely corrupt and sanctified Anger,
the one in these words is commanded, the other forbidden.

These words therefore may be divided into two general parts. The first an The
general division.
exhortation or commandment wherein just and holy anger is enjoined or
commended unto us in the first words (Be Angry) the second a prohibition or
dehortation from unjust, and corrupt anger in the next words (But sin not)
and because by reason of our corruption we are prone to fall into it, the
aposttle in the words following limiteth and restrayneth it to a short time
least it should turn into malice. Let not the Sun go down etc. as though he
should say, though through infirmity ye fall into rash and unadvised Anger,
yet continue not in your sin. Let not the Sun go down. On your wrath:

The most of our new interpreters think That just Anger is here commanded.
that the first words are rather a permission the^ a precept, and therefore to
be understood thus. If you be angry, sin not; or thus Are you a^gri; sin not:
that is though through infirmity ye fall into a^ger yet ad not sin unto sin by
continuing in it. but I see no reason why the words should be thus wrested
seeing there follows no absurdity or inconvenience, if they be plainly
understood without any alteration, which cannot be avoided if we admit of their
exposition: for I would ask of the^ whether is here meant a lawful and just
a^ger, or that which is unlawful and unjust: if lawful and just, why may it not
be commanded seeing it is as necessary and profitable to the furthering of Gods
glory and our good as any other sanctified affection; if unjust and unlawful
as they understand it: I would know how we ca^ be angery and sin not. But say
they if a holy a^ger were here meant what needs the restraynt, Let not the Sun
etc. seeing the longer it lasted the rather it were to be commended, if it were
just and holy; I answer these words are to be referred not to the precept (Be
angry) but to the prohibition (But sin not) where unjust Anger is forbidden
as before just Anger was commanded and this is manifest in the text, for he
does not say, Let not the Sun go down (...) upon your Anger but (...) upon
your Wrath or unjust and inueterate anger as this word is commonly used.

So that the sense of these words is The meaning of the words.
breefely thus much: be angry and spare not so that your anger be just and
holy: but seeing by reason of your infyrmity and corruption, your just Anger
may easily degenerate and become unjust, if due time, place, person, and other
circumstances be not observed, therefore take heed you sin not by being
unjustly angry, yet if through infyrmitie ye fall in to this sin, do not
harbor it no not one day. Let not the Sun go down on your wrath.

Sect. 4.
And so much for the meaning of the Of just Anger.
words: now I will entreat of their several parts. And first concerning just
anger, what it is and what is required in our Anger that it may be just and
holy* this The definition of just Anger.
Anger is an holy and reasonable desire of revenge stirred up in us upon just
weighty and necessary causes, whereby we being after a lawful manner angry
with our own and others vices and sins rather then with the persons, do desire
justly to punish and revenge the vices and sins, to the end God may be
glorified, the parties amended, and that the anger of God being pacyfied may be
auerted not only from the party offending, but also the church and common
wealth. First then it is required to holy and lawful Anger, that the cause
thereof be just: now the just causes of Anger are diverse. First when we are
moved thereunto with The first cause of just Anger the glory of God.
a zeal of Gods glory: for when we see God dishonored, and his glory defaced
it is not only lawful to be angry with the offenders but also necessary: for
we profess our selves to be Gods subjects, now we know that no good subject
can with patience endure to hear or see the glory of his sovereign impeached:
we profess our selves Gods servants, and what good servant can abide to see
his master disgraced? we profess our selves Gods children, and good children
are more grieved and offended when they perceive that their parents are any
ways abused or injured, then if the injuries were offered to themselves: if
therefore we be loyal subjects, faithful servants, and loving children, we
cannot choose but be incited to a holy anger if we see our glorious sovereign,
our good master, and gracious father, by any means dishonored.

When Moses saw that the children Example.
of Israel had contrary to Gods express commandment reserved Manna till
the next morning, he could not contain himself from showing this holy Anger,
when he saw his Lord and masters will not observed, Exo. 16. 20. So that though
Moses were the meekest man Ex. 16. 20. Number. 12. 3
that was on earth, yet could he not with patience endure, to see gods
ordinance contemned. In like manner when he saw that honor and glory which was
due only to God almighty, derived to a base and brutish Idol, he was
provoked to an holy anger, and so wholly possessed with a divine and heavenly
rage, that he not only breaks the two tables written Exo 32.
by Gods own hand, but sharply reuengeth this idolatry with the death of three
thousand of the offenders. So that though the people were dearer to him the^
his own life, nay then the salvation of his own soul, yet was the glory of
God Verse. 3^
more dear and precious unto him then either of both. Phinees also when he saw
God dishonored with that shameless sin of zimry and Cozby being provoked
Number. 2^ 7. 8.
with an holy anger he revenged this dishonor with the death of both the
offenders. Thus also was Elias zealous for Gods glory because the Children of
1. Kings 19. 14.
Israel had forsaken his covenant, cast down his alters, and slain his
Prophets.

And thus was our savior Christ possessed with a fervent zeal of his
fathers John. 2. 17
glory John 2. 17. If therefore we would approve our selves to be Gods
children, we must follow their example and for as much as nothing more
dishonors God then sin, nothing should Offend and displease us more then
sin, whether it be in our selves or in our neighbor. When therefore we fall
into sin, we are to be offended with our selves, that so we may divert
the Lords Anger from us, for as they which 1. Cor* 11. 31.
judge themselves shall not be judged of the Lord, so they who are angry with
themselves for sin shall escape the Lords anger. And this our anger must proceed
to a holy revenge. Those who have offended by surfeting and drunkenness are to
punish themselves with fasting and abstinence. Those that have wallowed them
selves in voluptuous pleasures are to subdue and mortify them, though they be
as dear and precious unto them as their right hand and eye. Those who have
defrauded their neighbor by purloyning away his goods are with Zacheus to make
restitution four fold, Luke. 19. 8.

And as we are bound by the law of charity to love our neighbors as our
selves, so also to be angry with them as with our selves, namely with this holy
kind of Anger for sin. Whenever therefore we see them by their sins
dishonor God we are to be displeased therewith, and so far forth as the
limits of our callings extend to show our selves offended, according to the
example of the prophet Jeremy, who because the people would not hear the
word of the Lord was even filled with divine wrath, Jeremie. 6. 10. 11. But
how cold Ier. 6. 10. 11.
men's zeal of Gods glory is in this age fro sen in the dregs of sin, too
lamentable experience shows: for first who almost is angry with himself for
his sins in this respect because he has by them dishonored God? every one
shows spleen enough if his sins receive condign punishment, but having to
do with them selves in respect of the sin it self they are like mild doves,
without gaul. The adulterer is much displeased if for his sin he be enjoined
to mask in a white sheet, though thereby he have deserved death, but the
poison of his sin is most sweet to his e^uenomed appetite. The covetous
extortioner is much offended if he be justly deprived of that riches which he
has unjustly gotten, but he is not angry with his sin into which he is fallen,
by unjust coming by them. The blasphemer is enraged if he be but reproved for
his blasphemy, though by the law of God he deserves to die for it, but he is
nothing displeased with himself for dishonouring the majesty of God: In a
word every one is angry with the smallest punishment, yet not moved with the
greatest sin: but if we would be angry and sin not, we must not be so much
displeased for incurring that punishment which we have justly deserved, as that
by our sins we have dishohonoured God.

And the like abuse there is of our Anger toward others: men are soon stirred
up to choler against their neighbors upon every slight occasion and show of
injury offered to themeslues though it be but an unkind word, or a mistaken
speech, or but a strange countenance: but when God is dishonored, his name
blasphemed, his religion derided, his Sabaoths profaned, his whole worship and
service contemned, they can look upon the offenders with a smiling
countenance and so confirm them in their sin, or if they be angery they will
either nor be seen in it at all, or else they will show it after so cold a
manner, that it shall hardly be discerned. Whereas if there be the least injury
offered to themselves they can contain their fury in nolymites, till it be
satisfied with revenge even unto blood. But if we would approve our selves to
be be Gods childern and servants we must be as truly zealous of his honor and
glory as of our own credit and reputation

Sect. 5.
The second cause of just anger is when injury is unjustly offered unto our
selves: for by the law of God we are bound The second cause of just anger is
injury offered to a man's self.
to seek the preservation of our own good name and state: and therefore when
either of them is violated or impeached, we may justly use aid of the holy
anger in defending our selus and repelling injury, yea also in taking such
revenge as is fit in respect of our callings: that is by unsheathing the Svvord
of justice if it be committed into our hands, or by seeking the help of the
magistrate if our private estate will not admit us to be our own caruers.
Many examples might be brought to clear this point if it were necessary.
Though Moises were the meekest man living yet when he was Nom: 16. 15.
contumeliously abused by Corah and his companions, it is said he waxed very
angry, and prayed unto the Lord, that he should not respect their offerings Nom:
16 15. though the Apostle Paul were of more the^ an admirable patience yet
being unjustly smitten by the commandment of the high Priest he shows his
Anger by a sharp reproufe. Act: 23. 2. yea our savior Christ the lively e
picture of true patience, when contrary Act. 23. 2.
to all justice he was stricken by the high Priests servant, he shows himself
displeased by his reprehensio^, though at that time he offered himself as it
were John. 18. 23.
to suffer all co^tumelious injuries which pride assisted with malice could
imagine or impose.

But here it may be objected that our Math. 5. 39.
received a blow on the one cheek to turn the other. I answer that Christ's

Sect. 6.
The third cause of just anger is when injury is offered to our brethren, for
The third cause of just Anger is injury offered to our neighbor.
as by the law of charity we are bound to love them as our selves, so the same
law binds us to be angry for those injuries which are offered unto them, as
if they were offered unto our selves. And thus was Moses angry with the
Egyptian who wronged the Israelite. Act. 7. 24. Act. 7. 24. 2. Sam. 13. ^1.
Thus was David angry with Ammon for deflowring his sister. 2. Sam. 13. 21. and
with Absolon for his cruel murdering of Ammon. And thus was good Nehemie
provoked to anger when he saw the people oppressed. Neh. 5. 6. And this anger
Neh. 5. 6
is not only lawful but also necessary, and the neglect thereof a greiuous
sin in Gods sight, as we may see in the example of Elie: for when his sons
abused the Lords people and he would not for their sin show his anger in
correcting them otherwise the^ by mild and loving admonitions, his indulcencie
moved the Lord to inflict upon him a most heavy punishment, Et quia ira Eli
Bernard.
tepuit in filios ira Dei exarsit in ipsum. Because Elie his anger was luke
warm toward his sons the anger of God waxed fire hot against him, and
that justly, for as one says, Non irasci cum oportet est nolle peccatum
emendare. Not to Gregory.
be angry when just cause is offered is to nill the amendment of sin: and
not to hinder sin when a man has good opportunity and a lawful calling
thereunto is to be come accessarie.

But as they offend against the party who is injured, so also against him who
does the injury. For by not showing themselves offended, they give
approbation, and by giving approbation they countenance and confirm him in his
sin. Whereas if they showed their displeasure it might be a notable means to
reclayme him, by working in his heart a consideration of his offense for which
he is reproved. And in this respect Solomon says that Anger is better then
laughter, for by a sad countenance the heart is made better. Eccles. 7. 5.
Eccles. 7. 5.


Sect. 7.
And so much for the just causes of anger: but there is further required to The
cause of just anger must be weighty.
holy and lawful anger, not only that the cause be just, but also weighty
and of some importance; for if every small trifle be sufficient to provoke us to
anger, well may we manifest great justice, but without question we shall show
little love: for love suffers long, it is not easily provoked to anger, it
suffers all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5. 7. it covers 1. Cor. 13. 4. 5. 7. 1.
Pet. 4 ^.
a multitude of sins, 1. Pet. 4. 8. how little love therefore have they who
are angry upon every small and trifling occasion how just soever it be? Let us
then before we let the raynes loose to anger, consider not only of the
justness of the cause, but also whether it be light or weighty; and if we
find that it is but a trifle, we are either wisely to disse^ble it or mildly
to pass it over, knowing that in many things we offend all: Iam. 3* 2.
if weighty then we may not only justly, but also necessarily we are bound to
show our anger; for it is no less a sin to show mildness where the Lord
requires anger, then anger where he requires mildness.

Sect. 8.
And so much for the causes of our What is required to just anger in respect of
the manner. 1. Moderation.
anger: now we are to speak of the manner, wherein first this general rule is
to be observed, that we use moderation, least we mingle therewith our corrupt
and carnal anger, and so it degenerates into fleshly anger, and from that to
fury. Let us therefore herein imitate the Lord himself who in wrath remembers
mercy; and not so be carried away with the violence of anger, that in the
mean time we forget love. And on the other side we are not with Ely to be
altogether remiss and mild when either Gods glory or our neighbors good
requires that we should show just anger, and so by approving the sin for his
sake that offends make our selves accessory to the sin and consequently
subject to the punishment; but we must keep the mean if we will approve our
Anger to be just and holy.

The neglect where of causes many The neglect of moderation.
to fall into sin: for some if they can mask their deformed anger under the
fair visard of a just pretense, they think they may lawfully show all violence
and fury in their affections: but let such men know that though the cause of
their anger be never so just, yet in the manner they greiuiously sin against
the rule of charity; in respect whereof they may fitly be compared to cruel
hangmen, who having a just cause to execute their office (namely the Judges
lawful commandment) do in the execution thereof use all barbarous cruelty:
so they being commanded by God to be angry with the sins of their
brethren, seem glad they have gotten such an occasion to show their rage and
fury: But howsoever such men pretend the goodly title of justice, yet if they
be unmasked there will appear nothing but rancour and malice disguised under
this fair pretext: for let their friend to whom they are and must be much
behoulden commit offenses far more notorious, and they who seemed almost
choked with a small gnatte, can find room in their consciences to swallow a
pill of sin as big as a Camel, if it be sugered over with the sweet title
of freindship. Others under pretense of a mild or patient nature are content
to hear God dishonored, his servants scorned, and all religion disgraced; but
cursed be such mildness as causes us to betray the glory of God and his
truth by houlding our peace and wincking at the offenders. These men who are so
mild and modest in defending Gods cause that they are ready to blush if they
but in a word show their dislike of sin, as though they had done that
whereof they might be ashamed, will blush and swell for anget if their own
credit be but touched, or their reputation suffer any disparagement; and
whence does this proceed but from the overmuch love of themselves, and over
little love of God? whence is this bastard mildness but from pride the mother
of evil, which causes them to seek the praise of humanity and courtesy by
betraying Gods glory.

Sect. 9.
The second thing required in the manner, 2 Christian modesty and charity.
is that we observe christian modesty and charity in abstayning from
malicious and wicked speeches, or unjust and spiteful actions in expressing
our anger; and to this purpose we are always to remember of what spirit we
are; for undoubtedly how just soever our cause be, if we defend it with
spiteful and bitter speeches it is not the spirit of God which speaks in us.
Let us rather follow the example Ioh. 18. 23.
of our savior Christ, who when he was buffeted and grosely abused reproved
the offender with great mildness; and of Michaell Tharchangell who when he
strove with the Devil himself about the body of Moses, durst not Jude. ^.
blame him with cursed speaking, but said the Lord rebuke thee.

Sect. 10.
The third thing required is that in 3. A fit decorum and due respect of the
parties.
our anger there be observed a fit decorum, and due respect, and that both in
regard of the party himself, who is provoked to Anger, and also the other
with whom he is angry; for first in respect of the party himself, he is
not to behave himself alike in what place and calling soever he be: for if he
be a magistrate he is to show his anger not only in countenance and word,
but also in action, if he be a father he is not with Elie to show his
displeasure toward his rebellious sons only by mild admonition, but also
by dis^reete correction: on the other side it is sufficient for him who is a
private man if he manifest his anger in word or countenance. Nay it is
unlawful for him to proceed any further unless his calling warrant him the
revnto. Again the offenders are not to be used al alike, a mean private man is
not to show his anger in the same manner to a noble man or a magistrate as he
would to his equal or inferior, for though he may justly be angry with his
sin, yet he is to reverence his place and calling. The son must not show
his anger toward his father as the father shows his toward his son, for
he is bound to fear and reverence his person though he justly hate his sin.

And both these points have the Examples
Saints from time to time duly observed: Moses being a Magistrate to whom the
sword of justice was committed, when he was provoked to anger by the sin of
the people, did not only show his anger in countenance or by a mild
admonition, but by unsheathing the sword of Justice, and justly punishing
Exodus 32. 27.
the offenders for their execrable idolatry. John Baptist having only
authority to use the sword of the spirit, being offended with the hypocrisy
of the Scribes and Pharisees, expresses his Math: 3. 7.
anger by sharp and vehement reprehensions: Jacob being a private man Genesis
31. 36.
shows his anger toward churlish Laban his father in law by mild and
gentle admonitions. Jonathan being justly incensed by the barbarous tirannie
of 1. Sam: 20 34*
his merciless father; signified his anger only by rising from the table and
departing. The three children though with a godly zeal they abhorred the Dan.
3. 16*
kings profane idolatry, yet they showed their displeasure in humble and
respective words. And so though Paul detested the gentilisme of Festus and
Agrippa, yet he used them with all due respect as it beseemed their high
callings. By all Act^ 25
which examples it is manifest that we are to use Christian seemelines and
discretion if we would have our anger approved as just and holy.

And so much for the manner of our Sect. 11.
Anger; in the next place we are to speak The object of just Anger.
of the object thereof; and that must not be the person of our neighbor, but
his vice, sin, and injustice. For though we are to be angry at, yea to hate
the vices of men, yet we are to love their persons, and in the midst of our
anger, to seek their good, especially the salvation of their souls, and in
regard hereof we we ought to grieve more for their sin, then for the iniures
which by their sins they have offered us. And thus was holy David affected
whose zeal did even consume him, because his enemies had forgotten the word
of the Psalm* 119. 139.
Lord, Psalm. 119. 139. and such was the anger of our Savior Christ, who in the
midest thereof did mourn for the hardness of their hearts. Mar. 3. 5. But on
the Mar. 3. 5.
other side we are to take heed that we do not approve of the sin for the
offenders sake, for we ought to hate sin in our friends, parents, yea in our
own hearts or wheresoever else we find it, and in no wise to love this deadly
poison, though it be brought unto us in a vessel of gold never so precious in
our eyes. Here therefore we must avoid two extremes, the one to hate the
person for the sins sake; The other to love the sin for the persons sake:
for as we would condemn his folly who would loath an exquisite picture because
it had a spot of dirt upon i^, or his that should so extremely dote upon the
rare workmanship of so excellent a feature, that he also would be in love with
the dirte for the pictures sake, and on the other side commend his wisdom who
should so like the picture as in the mean time he disliketh of the deformity;
So alike foolish is he who will be angry at the person of man it self which
was formed after Gods own image because this image is spotted and defiled with
sin, or he who will like and approve of such filthy corruptions and
deformites where with it is defaced; but he is truly wise who so hates the
polluted spots of sin, that in the mean time he loves Gods excellent
workmanship, and so esteems of the workmanship, that he is much displeased
with the pollution which deformeth it. But the practice of the world is far
otherwise: for men will hardly be friend to the person, but they will be a
friend to the sin also; nor an enemy to the sin, but they will with all
malign the person; or else that which is worse, they will hate the person of
their neighbor and love his vice.

Sect. 12.
And so much for the object of just anger. The fourth thing to be considered
The time of just anger.
in just anger, is the time which must be short. Not that it is unlawful to
continue long in anger if it continue just, but least our holy anger by reason
of our corruption degenerate into malice. For as the most pure wine does in
time wax sower upon the dregs; so our most holy anger if it be long retained,
is in danger of receiving some sowrenesse of malice from the dregs of our
corrupruption. The saufest therefore and best course, is quickly to be
appeased, especially if the party offending show signs of repentance, either
for his sin toward God, or his injury offered unto us: for seeing upon
hearty sorrow God pardons and forgiueth, let us not retain that which he
remitteth.

Sect. 13.
And so much for the time: The last The ende^ to be propounded in just anger.
thing to be considered is the end which (if we would have our anger just and
holy) must be just and holy also. The end of our anger is just and holy, when
therein we propound unto our selves either the glory of God, or the public
good of the church or common wealth, or the private benefit of him who either
suffers or does the iniure. First for the glory of God, we set it forth by
our anger, The glory of God.
either when being private men we show our selves his children and servants by
manifesting our hatred and detestation of sin in word or countenance, and so
adorn the profession which we profess; or being Magistrates do become his
instruments in punishing sins, and executing justice; if therefore either
private men or Magistrates propound unto themselves this maine and principal
end in their anger it is just and holy.

The second end is the good of the 2. The good of the church and common wealth.
church and common wealth, which end, though it appertain unto all which are
members of these bodies, yet does it more properly belong unto Magistrates,
who are to show their anger in punishing sin, not only that civil justice
which is the proppe of the common wealth may be maintained, but also that
Gods anger which hangs over whole countries where sin is countenanced or
not justly punished may be auerted: for if sin be punished by men in
authority, God will not punish the common wealth for it. Whereas otherwise
if Magistrates vvincke at sin, and so neglect their duty imposed by God, the
Lord will in anger take the sword of Justice into his own hands, and punish
not only the malefactor for offending, but the Magistrate for not executing
his duty, yea the whole commonwealth which is stained and polluted with their
sins.

Examples hereof are plentiful in the Examples.
word of God, for the sin of Zimrie with Cozby God sent a greiuous plague
Nom. 25.
amongst the people, but after Phinees had executed justice by slaying both the
offenders the plague ceased. For the sin of Achan God took away the hearts
from the people, so that they fled and Ios. 7.
some of them fell before the men of Ai, but when the malefactor was justly
punished, Gods anger was appeased. Judge. 21.
Because the Beniamites did not punish but rather countenance the sin of
those who so shamelesly did abuse the Levites concubine, we know what
followed, not only the offenders but also the whole tribe (some few
excepted) were attached by Gods heavy judgment. If therefore Magistrates
would have the Lords anger auerted either from themselves, or the commonwealth,
they are to show their anger in punishing sin: and if in drawing out the
sword of Justice against iniquity, they propound unto themselves the good of
the Church and commonwealth, their end is just and holy, and their anger
also.

The third end of just anger, is the good 3. The good of the party who suffered
the injury.
of the party who suffers the injury, for hereby the offendour is restrained
from committing the like, when either private men sharply reprove him, or
Magistrates severely punish him for his offense; whereas if neither private
men do by their anger show their dislike, nor magistrates inflict punishment
for his misdemeanour, he is ready to redouble his injuries.

The last end is the good of the party 4. The good of the party who offered the
injury.
who by offering the injury provoke us to anger. For private men are to be
angry with their neighbor, not because they malign him or seek his hurt,
but because they may discourage him in his sin and so work his amendment.
And in like manner Magistrates must show their anger in punishing offenders not
to revenge themselves on their persons, but that they may seek their good in
reforming their vices For what greater good can a man do his brother then to
reclayme him from his sin which otherwise would destroy both body and soul
by remaining in it?

But here it may be demanded how he seeks his good and amendment wealth
with the private good of the party offending, which is to be neglected in
respect of the other: if therefore his offense be such as deserves death he
is to be punished with death that the burden do not lie upon the land.
Secondly I answer, he does the party good by bringing him to the sight of his
sin, and repentance by apprehending the pain of the punishment; whereas
otherwise he would desperately run on in his sins and so cast away both
body and soul. To prevent therefore and cure this desperate disease, it is
necessary to apply desperate physic and to destroy the body, that both
body and soul may be saved.

And these are the things required in just and holy anger, which if we observe
our anger will be not only lawful but also necessary, both for the setting
forth of the glory of God, and also for the good of our selves and of our
neighbors.

Of unjust anger. Chap. 2.
Sect. 1.
ANd so much for the first part of my text, wherein just anger is commanded:
now I am to speak of unjust anger forbidden in the words following But sin
not, that is by falling into corrupt and unjust anger. Which Unjust anger
condemned as a great sin.
vicious affection is not only here condemned but also in other places of the
scripture, as in the 31. verse of this Chapter, Let all bitterness, and anger,
and wrath, and evil speaking, be put away from you with all maliciousness. So
Col. 3. 8. Put ye away all these things, wrath, anger, maliciousness, Col. 3*
8.
etc. and in the 5. Chapter of the Gala. verse 20. 21. it is reckoned among the
Call. 5. 20. 21.
works of the flesh which who so follow shall no inherit the kingdom of God.
It is forbidden also in the sixth commandment under the name of murder; both
because it is the chief means and cause which moves men thereunto, as also
because it is the murder of the heart, and therefore murder in truth in Gods
sight, who more respects the heart then the hands, for a man may be innocent
before him, though his hands have slain his neighbor if his heart have not
consented thereunto, as appears in the old law, where Cities of refuge were
appointed for such by the Lords own commandment: but if the heart have
consented and desired any way to violate the person of our neighbor (which
unjust anger always affects) though our hands are free from the act, we are
guilty of murder in the sight of God. And this our savior Christ teaches us
in the exposition of the sixth commandment Math. 5. 22. Whosoever is angry
with his Mat. 5. 22
brother unadvisedly is culpable of judgment. By these places it is evident
that anger is forbidden and condemned as a great sin, and therefore it is to
be avoided of us as a most dangerous enemy to our souls health. Which The
generality of this vice of unjust anger.
that we may perform with so much the more vigilant care: Let us further
consider that this vice is generally incident to all by reason of our natural
corruption: so that there is none so young, nor any so old, none so wise nor
any so foolish, neither male nor Female, which do not carry this fire in their
bosom: and therefore unless they quench daily this fiery dart of Satan with
the water of Gods spirit, and the shield of faith, they will be in danger of
burning, for who can carry fire in his bosom and not be burnt? Pro. 6. 27.
Pro: 6. 27.


Sect. 2.
But the dangerousnes of this affection will more evidently appear if we
consider the violence thereof: for there is The violence of this turbulent
affection. Cant 8. 6.
scarce any other affection so strong which it does not easily subdue. Love is
said to be stronger then death. Cant. 8. 6. and yet anger if it be once
admitted easily overcomes it, for there was never any love so hearty and
entire but anger has subdued it: The father in his anger forgets his love
to his child, and the child to his father, the husband to his wife, the wife
to her husband, and causes them in stead of duties of love to bring forth the
fruits of hatred: yea it makes a man to forget the love of himself, as
appears by those men who to satisfy their anger violently thrust themselves
into imminent dangers of death. Nay it makes a man offer raging violence
against such a friend as is more dear to him then his own life, as it is
evident in the example of Alexander, who in his anger slew his friend Clitus,
whom he loved so entirely that he needs would have revenged his murder, by
putting himself to a wilful death. As therefore we cannot discern the heat
of the sun, when we are near unto a scorching fire, so the heavenly heat
of divine love is not felt if the furious flame of anger be kindled in our
hearts.

Covetousness also is a most violent and strong vice, which nothing almost can
vanquish but death, and they who are possessed therewith do love their riches
better then their own lives, as we may see in their example who being
deprived of them murder themselves; yea they are more dear unto them then the
salvation of their own souls, as may appear by those who fall into
outrageous sins, whereby they plunge their souls headlong into hell that
they may get momentarie riches; and by them also who despise the means of
their salvation in compaparison of a small worldly trifle: and yet anger being
once admitted does overcome covetousness, as it is evident in the example of
them who to satisfy their furious anger by the death of their enemy, are
content to forfeit their goods though they be never so covetous; besides the
double hazard of their lives which they incur, both in their private
quarrel, and in satisfying by deserved punishment public justice. The like
also may be said of them, who by anger being incired to revenge are content to
spend all their substance by prosecuting wrangling suits in law of little or no
importance, to the end they may impouerish him also with whom they are
offended; and so are content to pull the house upon their own heads, that
they may ouerwhelme another under the waighte of of the same rume.

Fear also is an affection of no small force and violence; for oftentimes it
compels men to thrust themselves into imminent dangers that they may avoid
dangers, and to kill themselves for fear o^ greater torments: and yet anger
vanquisheth fear, many times causing them who would tremble to see another
wound, contemn their own death, and so turns the most cowardly fear into
most desperate rage and furious resolution.

So that other affections lead a man, but this draws him, other entice him,
but this compels him, other dazzle the sight of reason, but this makes it stark
blind, other make us prone unto evil, but this casts us headlong even into
the gulf of wickedness.

Sect. 3.
Considering therefore that this turbulent vice of unjust anger is in the eyes
of God so heinous, in regard of us so general, and in respect of it own
nature so strong and violent, I purpose to entreat of it at large to the end
we may learn the better to prevent it, or the more easily to subdue it. And
to this purpose I will first show what it is, and what are the causes and
properties thereof; Secondly the kinds of it, and lastly I will prescribe the
preservatives and medicines whereby we may cure this vice in our selves or in
others.

For the first. Unjust anger is a wrongful and an unreasonable desire of
revenge, The definition of unjust anger.
stirred up in us by unjust causes, whereby we having no respect of the glory of
God, nor the good of our selves or our brethren, are after an iniust and
immoderate manner, angry with them with whom we ought not to be angry.

That unjust anger is a desire of revenge, it is so evident that it needeeh no
Anger an unreasonable desire of reueng.
proof; for we know by daily experience, that he who is provoked unto anger by
an injury offered in truth or in his opinion, desires revenge according to the
nature of the injury received, or the opinion which he has conceived of it. If
he be injured by a scornful look he seeks to revenge it with a disdaynfull
countenance; if by words he reuengeth by words; if in deeds he desires to
revenge by deeds; yea oftentimes the fury of anger casting a mist before the
sight of reason, causes small injuries seem great, and according to that false
opinion, inciteth men to take revenge without all proportion; For an angry
look with angry words, for angrye words with blows, and for blows with
death, according to the violence of the affection and not the quality of the
injury received.

Sect. 4.
Now that this desire of revenge is unjust and unreasonable it appears by
that which follows in the definition. And first because the causes thereof are
unjust.

The causes of unjust anger are either The causes of unjust anger 1. internal
1. selfloue.
internal or external. The internal causes are diverse, as first self love,
whereby we so immoderately love our selves that we never think of the injuries
and indignities which we offer others, or else suppose them to be none; or else
lightly esteem of them, as not worthy the recital; but on the other side it
makes men hainously aggrauate injuries offered unto themselves: and so to make
huge mountains of small molehils; it causes the heart easily to apprehend the
wrong, busy in meditating of it being apprehended, eager in seeking revenge
after meditation; and the hand no less forward in acting those tragedies
which the heart has invented. For by self love men are induced to think
themselves worthy of all love and honor; and therefore if a small injury be
offered unto them, they suppose that death is too small a revenge for so great
an indignity offered to such worthy personages. Yea if they be not so much
respected as their haughty ambition desires, or if others be preferred before
them, and that deservedly, this is matter enough to provoke them to furious
rage, not only against them of whom they are not regarded, but them also who
are preferred in others judgment. And this is evident in the example of Caine,
who because God respected the offering of Abell more then his, was incensed to
wrath, and had his anger so inflamed that nothing could quench it Gen: 4.
but the blood of his dear brother; and in Saul who could with no patience
endure, that the praises of David should surmount his in the sight and audience
1. Sam. 18. 8.
of the people, but was enraged with deadly anger against him, who for his
merits deserved to be advanced.

And thus does self love make a man wincke at those injuries which he offers
others, and to put on the spectacies of affection when he looks on those
wrongs which are offered to himself, whereby it comes to pass that every
small injury seems great and provoke to great anger. Whereas if we thought
meanly of our selves and loved our neighbors as our selves, we would not
suffer our judgment to be so over balanced with the weight of affection in
judging of the injury, nor give the raynes to our anger in persuing it with
revenge.

Sest. 5.
The second internal cause of unjust Anger is pride and arrogancy The second
cause of unjust anger pride.
of spirit, which is a fruit of self love; for self love it is which makes
us have an high opinion of our selves, this high opinion causes arrogancy and
pride, and pride causes men to be more sharp sighted in discryeng wrong, and
more furiously insolent in taking revenge. The reason hereof is apparent:
proud men being jealous of their honor and reputation, are also very
suspicious of contempt, so that the least injury provoke them to choler and
disdain, because they are ready to imagine that thereby they are exposed to
contempt. And this is the reason why proud men do more impatiently suffer an
injury offered in company where they would be respected because they think
it a great disparagement to their credit and reputation. An example hereof we
have in Nebuchadnezer, who waxed pale for anger, because he thought himself
disgraced Dan, 3. 19
in the sight of all his princes and people, by the repulse which he received
of the three children who refused to obey his wicked commandment. And in
Haman who was so enraged with fury because Mordecay would not in the Esthe. 3.
5* 6.
sight of the people do him that reverence which his proud heart desired, that
he thought his death too small a revenge for such an indignity, unless also
for his sake he utterly rooted out his whole kindled and nation. So that the
least spark of anger kindled with the smallest occasion bursteth out into a
raging flame of fury if it be blowed with the wind of vaineglorie. Whereas on
the other side he that is humble is not provoked to anger though he be
neglected, because his lowly conceit makes him think that he is not worthy
to be much esteemed: nor yet though he have received an injury, because he is
ready to think that he has deserved it, either by like faults committed
against men, or more heinous sins against God.

Sest. 6.
The third internal cause of unjust The third cause of unjust anger
couetuousnesse
anger is covetousness, for this vice makes men desire much riches, and if
their hopes fail them and be not correspondent to their desires, their unquiet
and turbulent thoughts are fit harbingers to prepare a lodging in their hearts
to entertain anger. It makes them undertake great matters, which when they
are not able to compass, their hearts are filled with vexation, and they become
more way ward then children; or else if their covetous desires carried with the
wings of ambition mount not so high a pitche, they baselie stoop even to the
most sordidous pray; and finding themselves unable to compass great matters
abroad, they entermeddle with every domestical trifle at home; and if they
see any thing miscarrie through the default of wife, child or servant, though
it be of no value, their anger can contain it self in no bounds of reason. So
that these men are angry abroad but mad at home, chollericke with every
man which hinders or does not further their commodity, but outrageous to their
wives, children and servants, if they sustain the least loss.

Sect. 7.
The fourth internal cause of unjust The fourth cause nice luxuriousness.
anger is nice luxuriousness, or luxuriouse niceness; which commonly being
the fault of weomen, or at least a womanish fault, is especially to be seen
in domestical matters. For if you come into the house of one who is nice and
curious, you shall easily perceive how soon they are incited to great anger
upon little cause. If the decking and adorning of their house be not fully
answerable to their minds, if their costly eats be not so daintelie cooked,
that they may delight their curious-learned taste and cloyed appetite, if a
spot or wrinckle be upon their garments, or but a glass broken, if their nice
ears be offended with the least displeasing noice, though it be but by some
chance, they are so enraged with anger, that the house will scarce houlde them,
or at least not contain their clamorous voices. These curious folks are not
only offended with injuries, but also with shadows and apparances, Nam vbi
animum simul et corpus voluptates corrupere nihil tolerabile videtur non quia
dura sed quia molles patiuntur, for when volouptuous pleasures Senec. deira.
lib. 2. c. 25.
have corrupted both mind and body, nothing seems tolerable, not that the
things which they suffer are grievous, but because they that suffer them are
nicely effeminate. And like as they who are tormented with the gout, are
angry if a man come but toward them, and cry out if they be but touched: So
but a show of injury moves these voluptuous wantons to choler and anger, and
the least injury offered in truth inciteth them to rage and fury. Whereas others
who have not their minds effeminated with this luxurious curiosity, they can
easelie pass over such trifling imperfections, and repel anger in far more
violent assaults. If any think these A prolepsis.
toys too small to undergo a public censure; I would have such know, that
the lesser the occasion is which provoke to anger, the greater is their sin
who are so easelie provoked, and the rather they deserve a sharp reprehension
for that anger which is incited by every light and trifling cause, then if it
were weighty and of some importance: for howsoever the occasions are but
small, yet their sin is not small, nay their sin is therefore great, seeing
the occasion which moves them thereunto is but little, especially considering
that the same parties who are fire-hot in these trifles which concern
themselves are key ^old in those things which much concern Gods glory and
their own spiritual good. For I appeal unto their own consciences whether
they are not provoked unto more violent anger for these trifling toys, then
when they dishonor God by most greiuous sin, or see him dishonored by
others* and if their consciences plead guilty, let them rather be offended
with their own corruptions then with the Physician which desires to cure them.

Sect. 8.
The fifth internal cause of unjust anger The fifth cause of unjust anger
curiosity.
is curiosity, whereby men are tickled with a vain desire and itching appetite
to see and hear all things: how their friends behave themselves in their
private meetings; what their adversaries do and say behind their backs; how
their servants bestow them selves in every corner; whereof it comes to pass
that desiring to know all things they also know many things which displease
them, and provoke them to anger, for which they may thank their vain
curiosity: for if with the wise man they would think it their glory to pass
by infirmities. Pro. 19. 11. or follow his counsel, Eccl. 7. 23. Give not
thine heart to Pro. 19. 11 Eccl. 7. 23.
all the words that men speak, least thou do hear thy servant cursing thee;
They might have less cause of anger, and more contentation of mind. Whereas
by inquisitiue inquiry after every rumor, and curious prying into small
domestical faults, they inflame their hearts with great anger. for as the
looking upon a small print does more offend the sight; then a greater because
we hold it nearer our eyes and more intentiuely behold it, the letters
standing thick and near together: so often times it comes to pass that these
small domestical faults being curiously pried into do more offend and anger
us; because they are near unto us and fall out thick; and as it were one in
the neck of another, then greater injuries offered abroad which fall out
more seldom and are not so much subject to our view.

Sect. 9.
The sixth internal cause is to have an The sixth cause credulity and listening
to tale-bearers. Pro. 26. 20
open ear to every talebearer, and a credulous heart to believe them. Pro. 26.
20. Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebearer strife
cease. So that as wood is the fires fit nourishment, so is a talebearer fit
to nourish anger. An example hereof we have in Saul, who giving a credulous
ear to those lying suggestions of that pickthanke Doeg was incensed to such
raging anger, that the blood of the innocent priests was not sufficient to
quench the heat thereof, unless he spilt also the blood of all the 1 Samuel 22*
19.
inhabitants of Nob, yea of the oxen, asses, and sheep with more then brutish
fury. And therefore David speaking of Doegs tongue. Psalm. 120. 4. compares
Psalm. 120. 4.
it to coals of Juniper (that is too hot burning coals) because it so
furiously inflamed Saules anger. Yea David himself giving ear to the false
report of ziba, was moved to unjust anger against 2. Sam. 16.
innocent Mephibosheth; and therefore having experience of those manifold
evils which followed credulity and listening after talebearers, he professes
that he will destroy him that privily slaundereth his neighbor Psalm. 101. 5.
7. Psa. 101. 5. 7.
And hence it is that James compares the tongue to a fire, because nothing
more inflameth the heart to furious anger James. 3. 6. Iam. 3. 6.


Sect. 10.
The last internal cause of unjust anger is want of meditation concerning The
last cause want of meditation concerning human infirmities. Iam 3. 2.
the common imperfections whereunto we are all by nature subject: for if we
did but consider that in many things we offend all, and that we our selves
have the same faults or greater then those which we epsy in others, we would
not hastily be moved to choler upon every trifling occasion. But it is the
custom of me^ adicted to anger, to imitate the Lamiae, who (as the Poets
feign) use their eyes abroad, and put them into a box when they come home: so
these are but too quicksighted abroad in spying the faults of others, but
stark blind at home in discerning their own faults; and though they have a
great beam in their own eyes, yet they can easily discern a small mote in
the eye of another. And the reason is because they put their own faults into
that part of the wallet which they cast behind their backs and therefore never
look upon them, but the faults of others into that part which hangs before
them, where into they are always curiously prying.

The external causes of unjust anger. Cap. 3.
Sect. 1.
ANd so much for the internal causes of unjust anger, now we are to speak of
the external; by which I understand all outward occasions which are unjustly
taken, as first when we are angry with our neighbor for his virtuous
actions. For some there are 1. virtuous actions and domeanor
whose malignant eyes do abhor nothing more then the bright beams of virtue,
either because they think that the beauty of others perfection causes the
deformity of their vices seem more vggly; or that their degenerated natures
are become like unto satan's who hates virtue because it is virtue. An example
hereof we have in Cain whose Examples.
anger was kindled against his brother because he was accepted in Gods sight as
being more holy then himself. Genesis Genesis 4. 5.
4. 5. as also in Saul who was incensed against Jonathan for his virtuous
demeanor 1. Sam. 20 30.
toward David 1. Sam. 20. 30. in Asa who was offended with the Prophet the
Ambassador of the Lord, for delivering faithfully that embassage which the
Lord had put in his mouth, 2. Chro. 16. 10
2. Cro. 16. 10. In Nebuchadnezer who was enraged against the three children
because they refused to commit Idolatry, Dan. 3. 13. and in the Jews who were
filled Dan. 3. 13.
with wrath because our savior Christ made a true exposition of the Luke. 4.
28.
scriptures, and rightly applied it unto them, Luke. 4. 28. and too many
examples we have in these days of such as cannot with any patience endure to
hear their duties taught them, and their vices publicly reproved out of Gods
word, or yet any private admonition, but they are ready (like those that are
in a raging fit of a burning ague) to despite the Physitio^ that endeavors
to cure the^. So that in our times he is like to incur more anger yea and
danger also that reproves sin, the^ he that commits sin, he that
reprehendeth Atheism and profaneness, then he that lives in them. Yea so
desperate is the disease of this declining age surfetted with sin, that the
Physician may sooner incur hurt and damage by the fury of his patient, then
the patient help and health by the skill of the most exquisite Physician.

Sect. 2.
Secondly the cause of our anger is unjust, when it is only imaginary, having
no other ground but our own suspicion. And thus was Eliab angry with his
brother David because he suspected him to be proud whereas in truth his own
pride was the cause of his suspicion. 1. Sam. 17. 28. and this is the most 1.
Sam. 17 28.
common cause of anger in these days; for want of love causes men to
interpret the actions of other; in the woorst sense, and upon their false
surmises they ground their anger. One is angry because saluting his neighbor,
he did not resalute him, whereas perhaps he not see him, or at the least having
his mind otherwise occupied did not observe him: another is offended if any in
this company is merry, thinking that he makes himself sport with his
infirmities; another because he is too sad imagining that it is because his
company displeases him. In a word as men's surmises are innumerable, so also
are the causes of unjust anger. Yea so prone men are to invent causes where
none is that oftentimes they are s^re displeased because they have received
small benefits not answerable to their expectation, or not equal to those
which they see bestowed upon others; and so they are provoked to Anger with
small gifts as though they had received great injuries, but let us be ashamed
of such folly and learn to leave it. Has thy friend given more to an other
then to thee? why it may be he has deserved more, and though he has not, yet
that which thou have received might content thee it thou would make no
co^parisions. Nunqua^ erit foelix quem torquebit Senec. deira. lib. 3. Cap. 30.
foelicior, he will never be happy who is vexed when he sees one more happy.
Has he given thee less then thou did hope for? why perhaps thou did hope
for more then thou did deserve, or then thy friend could conuenientlye give,
but if thou would not be ungrateful consider rather what thou have
received, then what thou have not received, before how many thou art preferred,
rather then how many are preferred before thee.

Sect. 3.
Thirdly the cause of our anger is 3. when the cause is light and of no moment.
unjust when we are provoked thereunto by every small and trisling occasion;
because hereby love and charity is notably violated when every slight cause
incenseth us to anger: for love suffers all things: 1. Cor. 13. 7. and
therefore their love is small who will suffer nothing. 1. Cor. 13. 7.
Love covers a multitude of sins. Pro. 10. 12. they therefore who Pro. 10.
12
rather find causes where they are not, then cover them where they are, do
plainly show their want of love, and their too great pronenesse to anger* it is
the nature of love to make great faults seem little, and little faults none
at all: but anger makes every small slip a capital offense, and every word
of disgrace worthy a stabbe. And as when we behold the sun rising thorough
thick and foggie vapors, we imagine it to be of a far greater quantity then
when the air is pure and clear: so when the foggie mists of anger do
ouershadowe reason, we suppose every fault to be greater then it would
appear, if this turbulent affection were dispelled with the lively heat of
ardent love.

Some are angry of the imperfections of nature, which being not in the parties
power to amend should rather move compassion then provoke anger. Others are
angry at faults committed at unawares unwillingly and vnwittinglye, whereas
they might with as great reason be angry with a traveler for going out of his
way, or with one who stumbleth in the dark, for not keeping footing or with a
blind man for iustling or rushing against them; For as the want of bodily sight
causes the one, so ignorance which is nothing else but the blindenes of the
mind causes the other; or with one who is sick because he is sick, for what
is ignorance but the minds malady? but he whose heart is seasoned with true
wisdom, is not easily provoked with faults of ignorance, vnlesle it be wilful
or extremely rechlesse, considering that while we continue in this vale of
misery, our minds are shadowed with more then Cimerian darkness. And therefore
these small trifling errors whereinto we fall for want of knowledge, will in
them rather move laughter, or at least pity, then provoke anger. For as the
unhappy speeches and shrewd turres of little children are excused because they
proceed from want of wit; so should the same excuse serve for them who
commit faults thorough ignorance and simplicity.

Sect. 4.
Lastly our anger is unlawful when 4. when the end is unlawful.
as in our anger we propound unto our selves no lawful end; as the glory of
God, the public good of the Church or common wealth, or the private benefit
of our selves or of our neighbors: but rather private revenge and satisfiyng
of our tumultuous affections by the hurt or destruction of him with whom we are
displeased. And this is always to be observed in all examples of unjust anger,
as in Caines anger toward Abel; Saules toward David; Nabuchadnezers toward
the three children, the Scribes and Pharisees toward our Savior Christ.

And so much for the causes of unjust anger; now we are to speak of the
properties thereof.

Of the properties of unjust anger. Cap. 4.
Sect. 1.
THe first property of unjust anger, is The first property, want of
moderation.
that it is immoderate; for though our anger have never so just a cause, yet if
it grow violent, and degenerate from anger to wrath and fury it is unjust,
for it sauoureth not of the spirit of God who is merciful and easy to be
entreated, but rather of the flesh and the corruption thereof. And therefore
wrath (that is violent anger) is numbered amongst the works of the flesh, the
doers whereof shall not inherit the kingdom Gal. 5. 20* 21. How to diseeme
immoderate anger 1. by the fruits.
of God: Gal. 5. 20. 21.

Now if we would know how to discern when our anger is immoderate, it is
easelie known by the fruits thereof. As first when it provoke us to utter
words dishonorable to God, either by profane blaspheming of his holy name;
or wicked cursing and imprecations, whereby we desire that he should be the
executioner of our malice; or opprobrious to our neighbors, as when our anger
bursteth out into bitter and reuiling speeches tending only to his disgrace.
An example whereof we have in Shemei 2. Sam. 16. 5. who reproving David 2. Sam.
16. 5.
for his sins, uses such gaul and bitterness, that it clearelie appears
his anger proceeded not from the hatred of his sin, but rather of his person.

Secondly when we have no regard of any decorum or order, either in respect
^ By the want of fit decoru^.
of our selves or those with whom we are angry. Not in respect of our
solues, as when by anger we are provoked to take revenge being but private
men, whereas revenge belongs only to God, and to the Magistrate who is the
Lords deputy, according to that Romans 12. 19. Avenge not your selves but give
Romans ^2. 19.
place to anger: (that is to Gods anger and revenge) For it is written,
vengeance is mine and I will repaye it says the Lord. They Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
therefore who take upon them revenge having no lawful calling thereunto,
violate Gods ordinance by arrogating to themselves one of Gods royal
privileges, and so make themselves guilty of high treason against God, as they
are guilty of treason against an earthly prince, who intermeddle with any of
their royal prerogatives.

So also our anger is immoderate when we have no respect of the party with
whom we are angry, as when the son being provoked to anger against his
father, though it be for a just cause, does not use him with that respect and
reverence which becomes him, but bursteth out into undutiful and insolent
speeches: quite contrary to the example of Jacob, who being but a son in
law did not in his anger forget his duty, but used all discretion and
moderation, Genesis 31. 36. and of Jonathan who though he had just cause to be
angry with his Genesis 31. ^6.
father Saul, yet he only showed it by rising from the table and departing.
(...) 34. and the like may be said of 1. Sam. 20 34.
the (...) anger toward his master, the subjects toward the Magistrate, and
of all inferiors toward their superiors. For howsoever the law of God
binds us, to be angry when just cause is offered yet it also tyeth us to
moderation and discretion: For it is the author of order and not confusion.

Sect. 2.
The second property of unjust anger, The second propertye of unjust anger is
in respect of the object
is in respect of the object, for whereas just anger opposes it self only
against sin and injustice, unjust anger is incensed against the person of the
offendour, yea oftentimes of them who are innocent, nay because they are
innocent, as appears by those examples which before I rehearsed: But if we
will be Christ's disciples we must follow his doctrine and example. His doctrine
Math. 5. 44. Love your enemies, do good to those that hate you, etc. that you
may be the Mat. 5. 44
sons of your father which is in heaven. Where he plainly intimates, that
they are not the sons of God, who do not love the persons of their very
enemies: we must follow also his example, who prayed for his enemies even while
he was upon the cross subject to their outrageous injuries. Luke. 23. 34.
which Luke. 23. 34.
blessed president holy Stephen imitated. Act. 7. 66. Acts. 7. 66


But many are not only incensed against the persons of their enemies who are
men like unto themselves, but also with brute beasts, which are not capable
thereof, as we may see in the example of Balaam. Number. 24. 10. yea even with
Nu^. 24. 10
things which want both sense and life, and so was Xerxes angry with the
rivers, Plutarch. de cohib. wacun.
and sent letters full of menacing threatenings to the hills. And many such are
subject to continual view, who if any thing in their hands displease them,
will not stick to dash it against the ground, though after they are feign to
take it up again, or to spoil and break it in pieces though afterward they
must be glad to bestow great labor in repayring that which by greater folly
they have defaced. But these men may fitly be compared unto children who having
gotten a fall beat the earth; so they having received some hurt through their
own folly or negligence, are angry with those things which are ruled by them
as bare instruments.

Sect. 3.
The last property of unjust anger respects the time when as it being long
retained becomes hatred. And this happens not only when men are provoked
unto anger upon weighty causes, but also when it is grounded on the most
slight occasions: for when vain trifles have stirred them up to wrath they
persevere in it, least they might seem to have begun without cause, and so
against all reason the injustice of their anger makes the^ persist in it with
greater obstinacy. For therefore they retain it yea increase it, that the
greatness of their anger may make men believe that it could not choose but arise
from some weighty occasion and just cause: and so they chuise rather to seem
just then to be just. But more of this afterward when I come to speak of the
restraynt of unjust anger.

Of the kinds of unjust anger. Cap. 5.
Sect. 1.
ANd so much concerning the causes and properties of unjust anger, now we are
to speak of the kinds thereof. It admits of a twofould distinction: first
it is either hidden and covert, or else professed and manifest. Hidden anger is
Hidden anger which is comendable.
of two sorts; the first is commendable when as men labor by all means
possible to subdue the affection and to smother the flame after it is kindled
that it burst not forth into unseemly words or actions sauouring of revenge.
And this is a fruit of the spirit, which when it cannot repel anger and
keep it from entrance; in the next place it endeavors to expel and
repress it.

The other sort of hidden anger is to Hidden anger which is to be condemned.
be condemned, when as men nourishing it in the heart do notwithstanding
conceal it, that they may have the better opportunity of revenge, which they
are purposed to seek with such a full resolution, that they refuse all parley
least they might be brought to a truce or conclude a peace. This anger is far
worse then that which is professed both in respect of the party who is angry,
and the other with whom he is angry. In respect of the party himself because
containing in him this turbulent affection, it does vex and torment him, like a
raging fire which has no passage, or a violent stream whose current is
stopped. And hereof it is that anger is said to be of the vipers brood because
it pineth and consumes him in whom it is bredde. In respect of him also with
who^ he is angry, because it makes him less wary in preventing his malice,
and therefore the more easily surprised. In regard whereof a secret enemy is
more dangerous then one who professes his emnitie, for as a small company of
men lying in an ambushment, will more easily overcome a greater force, then if
they should march against them with banners displayed: so a weak enemy hiding
his anger and watching his best opportunity of revenge, is more like to
circumuent and surprise one more mighty then himself, then if he should
profess his malice.

Examples hereof we have in the Examples
scriptures: in the old serpent who cloked extreme malice under goodly words
and fair promises, professing himself a kind friend to our first parents
when he wholly intended their eternal destruction. Genesis 3. 1. etc. as also
Genesis 3. 1.
in Cain who talked familiarly with his brother as in times past when as he
already had resolved his murder in his heart, which also presently after he
acted with his hands. Genesis 4. 8. So Absolon like a cunning Genesis 4. 8.
courtier concealed deadly malice two years together against his brother
Ammon; to the end that being not suspected he might obtain the more fit
opportunity of revenge. 2. Sam. 13. 22. 23. 2. Sam. 13. 22. 23.
The like example we have in Ioab who kindly saluting Amasa cruelly stabbed him
while he lovingly embraced him. 2. Sam. 20. 9. As also in the traitor Judas who
betrayed his master while he kissed 2. Sam. 20 9.
him. Luke 22. 47. Neither is our age fruitful in all sin, barraigne of such
Luke 22. 47.
example^: for how many Italionate machiuilians live among us, who will not
stick to give most kind congeis with hand cappe and knee, to them from whom
they are most en^^r^nged in their hearts; and look most smoothly upon them
against whom they have conceived deepest malice? So that their anger is like
unto rivers which are most daungerously deep where the stream runs
stillest and smoothest. If you ask these men the reason hereof, they will tell
you that (according to the rules of their master Machiuill.) Professa perdunt
odia Senec in Medea.
vindictae ^ocum. Professed anger takes a way opportunity of revenge* but let
us know that as in malice, and dissembling thereof, they are like unto the
Devil himself, so without repentance they shall be like to him in punishment.
And so much for hidden anger.

Sect. 2.
Professed anger is to be seen when either Professed anger two fould.
men of set purpose do neglect the signs and duties of love, or else in showing
and bringing forth the fruits of a^ger. For the first: some in their anger are
sullenly 1. Sullen or silent anger.
silent from day to day, and month to month, not vouchsaufing to speak a
word to those with whom they are displeased, though they daily converse with
them; as though with their love and charity they had lost their tongues also.
But such me^ forget the end why God gave them a tongue, that is, that it might
be not only an holy organe to sing our creatours praise, but also that we
might be enabled thereby to converse more familiarly and lovingly one with
another; as also that thereby we might preserve this love begun by taking away
all offense; for as the lord has given a tongue to enquire out an injury as
also to reprove and reprehend the offendour, so he has given the same tongue
to make ^iust excuse for the working of reconciliatio^. It may be if thou
would come to expostulate the matter with thy neighbor, he would either
justly excuse his fault, or humbly confess it and desire pardon, whereas now
thou make him thine enemy by denying him all means and hope of
reconciliation: for what hope can he conceive of peace, seeing thou will not so
much as come to a treaty.

Sect. 3.
Secondly professed anger is showed 2. Anger is manifested by evil speaking or
evil doing. 1. Evil speaking.
by the manifest fruits thereof, and they are of two sorts evil speaking and
evil doing. By evil speaking, as when men do manifest their anger in
spightfull railing words which are far unbeseeming not only a Christian,
but also an honest infidel. This is condemned in the one and thirty verse of
this chapter. Let all bitterness, anger, and wrath crying, (that is clamorous
railing) and evil speaking be put away from you. And that we may the rather be
moved to abstain from this odious vice, let us consider that God made the
tongue to be an instrument of his praise and not to dishonor him by cursed
speaking. And therefore he will not hold him guiltless, which makes this
heavenly organe of his spirit created to show forth the creators praise a
cursed instrument of Satan in reuiling and slaundring our neighbor* and this
our Savior Christ teaches us: Whosoever (says he) shall say unto his brother
Raca; (that is the least word of reproach) shall be worthy to be punished with a
council (that is an assembly or senate of Magistrates) And whosoever shall say
fool shall be punished with hell fire Math. 5. 22. Let us remember that by our
words we shall be Mat. 5. 22
justified and by our words we shall be conde^demned: and good reason, for Verba
sunt animi indices, the tongue is the hearts interpreter, and therefore our
savior Christ says, Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur. Math. 12. 27 34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. yea this the wise
Socrates well knew; and therefore when a certain father had sent his son to
him, to the end that seeing him he might perceive his disposition, he said to
the young man: Loquere adolescens, vt te videam speak young man that I may see
thee, noting thereby that the disposition of his heart was best known by the
words of the mouth. Seeing therefore God judges according to the heart, and
seeing the heart is best discerned by the tongue great reason it is that by our
words we should be justified or condemned* let us remember also that if for
every idle Math ^^ 36.
word we must give an accoumpt at the day of Judgment, how much more for
railing and reuiling speeches? and if these meditations always run in our
minds we will in our greatest Anger follow the practice of the Prophet David,
Psa. 39. 1. that is, we will bridle our mouths that we may not sin with our
Psa. 39. 1.
tongue.

Secondly professed anger is expressed 2. Evil doing.
by evil doing, when either in our anger we offer imuries or seek revenge for
those which are offered us; both which are forbidden in the word of God. The
first Leuit: 19. 13. Thou shall not do thy neighbor wrong and Psa. 15. 3. it
is set Leuit. 19. Psa. 15. 3.
down for a note of an inheritour of Gods kingdom not to do evil to our
neighbor: and consequently he that is provoked by anger to offer injury to his
brother, can have no assurance with out repentance that he is an heir of Gods
kingdom. And this may Math. 5. 22.
further appear Math: 5. 22. for if he who uses reproachful words be in
danger of hell fire, what shall we think of him that goes further, namely
to wicked deeds? as therefore we tender our souls salvation, let us rule our
hands though we cannot rule our affections.

Secondly it is expressed by revenging injuries received, which though it be
not altogether so great a sin as the other, yet it is also condemned and
forbidden as no small sin in the word of God. Math. 5. 39. Resist not evil
but to him Math. 5. 39.
who smites thee on the right cheek, turn the left also. etc. Romans 12. 19.
Avenge not your selves, for it is written, vengeance is Romans 12. 19.
mine, and I will repay says the Lord. And so much for the first distinction
of anger.

Sect. 4.
Secondly anger is distinguished into three kinds in respect of the subject A
second distinction of anger in respect of the subject.
thereof: The first is of those who are soon angry and soon pleased. The
second of them who are slow to anger and also slow in being reconciled. The
third of those who are soon provoked to anger, and also long continue in it.

For the first they may not unfitly be 1. Hasty anger.
compared to flax which is soon kindled and set on fire, but soon also
extinguished unless the flame be continually nourished with new matter: so
their anger is easily inflamed by the least spark of occasion, but soon
mitigated unless it be nourished with new prouocations* or their anger may be
likened unto ^r^ in thorns which makes a great blaze for the time, and
yields a crackling noise but soon goes out unless a new supply of matter
be continually added: so they are soon inflamed, but when their anger has a
little spent it self in words like the crackling of thorns, it is soon
quenched and pacified.

These me^ in the world are said to have Hasty natures in the world commended.
the best natures, but intruth it is far otherwise. For that nature is best
which most resembles God himself, who as he is slow to anger so he is ready
to forgive. Psa. 103. 8. 9. If therefore we would Psa. 103. 8. 9.
in truth have good natures we must imitate the Lord, that is, be long before
we are provoked to Anger and ready to be reconciled; to the first we are
exhorted Iam: 1. 19. Be slow to wratb; to the Iam. 1. 19.
latter, Math: 5. 25. Agree with thine adversary quickly, and that not only
when Math. 5. 25.
thou have offended him, but also when he has offered the injury unto thee
and that not once or twice or till seven times, but unto seventy times seven
times, as our Savior exhorts Math. Math. 18. 22.
18. 22.

Sect. 5.
But least we should content our selves Hasty anger forbidden.
with this nature which of natural men is thought commendable, let us consider
first that it is condemned and forbidden in the word of God. Eccl. 7. 11. be
Eccle. 7. 11
thou not of an hasty spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of
fools. Yea our Savior condemns it as murder in Gods sight. Math. 5. 22.
Math. 5. 22.


Secondly we are to consider, that this hastines to anger is a foolish vice,
for as Hastiness to Anger a foolish and dangerous vice.
it always begins with rashness, so it most commonly ends with
repentance; for after the hasty man has injured his neighbor by unadvised
words or injurious deeds, then he shows himself sorry for it; and so like a
foolish Surgeon first he breaks his head and after gives him a plaster,
which though it heal the wound, yet oftentimes it leaves a scarre.

And yet I speak of the least evils which accompany rash anger, for how many
have there been who in their fury have revealed their friends secrets, more
dear unto them then their own lives? yea how many thorough this rash anger
have violated the persons, nay murdered them with whom they were linked in the
straightest bond of friendship? and so have done that in a moment which they
have with bitterness repented the whole course of their lives, then the which no
greater folly can be committed. And therefore it is well said of the wise man,
Pro. 14. 17. He that is hasty to Pro. 14. 17.
anger commits folly, and verse 29. He that is slow to anger is of great
wisdom, but verse. 29
be that is of an hasty mind exalts folly. And least we should think that
he seldom thus offends, he tells us. Pro. Pro. 29. 22.
29. 22. that a furious man abounds in transgression. Pro. 12. 16. Eccl. 7.
10.

Sect. 6.
But here the chollerick man will allege for himself, that he is hasty by
nature Esa. 11. 6. 7. Esaias. 11. 6. 7.
The Woolfe shall lie with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid;
and the Calfe and the Lion and the fat beast together, and a little child
shall lead them, and the Bear shall feed with the Cow and their young ones
shall lie together: not that regeneration does take away nature and the
affections, but because it does partly subdue their violence and fury, and
partly sanctifies and reformeth them; so that whereas they were hurtful and
and pernicious, now they are good and profitable to themselves and others, the
qualitye and the object of them being altered. Their love which was
immoderately set on the world and the pleasures of the flesh, is now fixed
upon God, their neighbor, and spiritual things. Their ambitious hope which
expected nothing but honors and riches now longs after the presence of God
and fulness of joy in the heavenly Jerusalem. Their timorous fear whereby
they were restrained from doing good, and constrained to do that which was
evil, because they would not displease men; is now a notable bridle to curb
in their unlawful desires, and a sharp spur to prick them forwards in the
course of Godliness, because they would not offend God; and whereas before it
was a corrupt fountain from which nothing did spring but polluted streams of
sin, whose descent is into the deep gulf of eternal perdition, now it is
become the Welspring of life to make us avoid the snares of death, as it is,
Pro. 14, 27. So Pro. 14. 27.
likewise rash and unbridled anger, which before regeneration caused men to
rage against the person of their neighbor, does now oppose it self against
sin and injustice only, whereby God is dishonored and the church and common
wealth damnified.

Sect. 7.
Do not therefore hereafter excuse thy furious and rash anger by alleging
thy nature, for thou might as well say, I cannot abstain from it, because I
am carnal and unregenerate, as because I am hasty by nature: for those who
have laid aside the old man, and are renewed by Gods spirit, have this
affection partly tamed and subdued, and partly sanctified, reformed, and made
fit for necessary and profitable uses: whereas on the other side they that let
the raynes loose to this corrupt affection were never washed with the water of
Gods spirit, and consequently while they continue in this state cannot enter
into the kingdom of Heaven Ioh. 3. 5.

But that we may never allege this Ioh. 3. 5.
vain excuse let us consider further that it is no better then Lazers rags
to cover the deep festred sores of our corruption; or then Adams fig leaves to
hide the nakedness of sin, which may be as fit a vizour to disguise even the
most ugly vices as this of anger: for nature corrupted provoke not only to
rash anger, but also to all outrages. And therefore the murderer by as great
show of reason might excuse his murder because he is by nature cruel; or the
adulterer his adultery because he is by nature lecherous; or the these his
theft because he is by nature covetous, as the hasty man his anger because he
is by nature chollericke. As therefore if a muttherer or thief should come
before a judge, and excuse his fact by saying it was his nature, and therefore
he could not choose but commit it, the Judge would answer that it was his
destiny also that he should be hanged: so when we shall be arraigned before
the Lord chief justice of heaven and earth, the alleging of our corrupted
nature will be so far from excusing us, that it alone will be sufficient to
condemn us. And so much for the first sort of anger which is to be seen in
angry and chollericke men.

Sect. 8.
The second sort is of such as are 2. Anger which is slowly entertained but
long retained.
slow to anger, but being incensed are hardly pacified. And these are like
unto more solid timber, which is long before it be kindled, but being kindled
continues long in burning. As these are better then the other in respect of
their slownes to wrath, so they are far worse because they continue in it;
for anger retained becomes hatred, which is an affection far more
pernicious then anger it self, and much more incorrigible; for as rash anger
is most commonly joined with repentance, so this inueterate anger is always
joined with perseverance in evil. And he that is subject thereunto does not
only fall into sin, but also is resolved to continue in i^; yea he takes
delight therein often times by meditating on revenge; as we may see in Esau who
was resolved to retain his anger against Jacob till his fathers death, and in
the mean time comforted himself by thinking on revenge, Genesis 27. 41. 42. Genesis
27. 41. 42.


But if we would be the children of our heavenly father; we must resemble him
not only in slownesse to anger but also in swiftness to forgive: and
thoughour brother offend us seauentie times seven times, yet must we
continually be ready to embrace reconciliatio^. Math. 18. 22. and so we shall
not be overcome Math. 18. 22.
of evil, but overcome evil with goodness, as the Apostle exhorts us. Romans
12. 21. Whereas if we continue in malice we shall make our selves like Romans 12.
21.
unto Satan, and subject to Gods wrath: For with what measure we mete it
sball be measured unto us again. Math. 7. 2. Math. 7. 2
And as we forgive men their trespasses, so will our heavenly father forgive
us. Math. 6. 14. 15. and so much for the Mat. 6. 14 15.
second sort.

Sect. 9.
The third sort is of them who are Hastiness to anger and slownes to
reconciliation.
easily provoked unto anger, and being provoked will never be reconciled. These
men are monsters in nature, and flat opposite to the Lord: for whereas he is
slow to anger and ready to forgive, they are most slow to forgive and most
prone to anger. This anger I know not how to express, nor to what I may
compare it, seeing natural things cannot resemble it, because it is monstrous
and against the nature of all things saving man. For the most fierce Lions and
cruel Tigers have some cause which incenseth them to anger, and some measure
and end of their fury after it is provoked: and therefore they are far worse
who are angry without a cause and know not how to make an end. Seeing therefore
natural things are not fit to resemble them, let us consider artificial. they
are like unto tinder, which being kindled with the least spark will also
retain the fire till it be consumed: but herein they are unlike; the tinder
may easily be extinguished but their anger can by no means be mittigated, the
tinder does but consume it self, or at the least those things which are near
about it, but those that are from them furthest distant are often scorched
with the burning heat of their furious passion. It is like unto vvild fire
which most easily takes hold of every thing and is most hardly quenched, but
herein it is far more violent and pernicious, that whereas wild fire may be
exstinguished with Vinegere or Milk, this can be quenched only with blood
yea with the heart blood. There is nothing therefore in the world natural or
artificial, which does sufficiently express this vilde affection; it only
can be resembled by the malice of Satan, who for no cause maligned God and us,
and yet his malice will never have end, unless therefore we would be worse then
all things natural or artificial, yea as bad as the devil himself, we must
be either slow to anger or ready to forgive.

The manifould and great evils which accompany unjust anger. Chap. 6.
Sect. 1.
ANd so much for the kinds of Anger: now we are to set down the preservatives
whereby we may be preserved from this sickness of the soul, and some
medicines to cure us when we are fallen into it. But for as much as it is in
vain to prescribe physic unless the patient will take it; and seeing few or
none are willing to take physic unless they see the necessity thereof in
respect of the daungerousnesse of their disease; I will first show the
greatness and malignitie of this sickness of the mind unjust anger, and
afterward prescribe the remedies.

The greatness and daungerousnesse The daungerousnes of anger showed by the
evils which it works.
of this disease appeateth by those great evils which it works, and that both
private and public. The private evils concern either our selves or our
neighbors. The evils which concern our selves are incident to the whole man
or to his several parts the body and the soul.

The evils which anger brings to The evils which anger brings to the whole
man. 1 Unjust anger defaceth Gods image. It overthrows piety.
the whole man are diverse. First it defaceth in us the image of God; for
whereas the image of God does specially consist in the virtues and graces of
the mind, anger overthrows them all, and first of all piety which is the
chief of all, and the some of the first table.

It extinguisheth the love of God: for how should we love God whom we have not
seen, if we do not love our neighbor whom we have seen? 1. John 4. 20. And
how do we love Ioh. 4. 20
our neighbor, if upon no cause or every trifling cause, we be incensed to
iniust anger against him?

It overthrows the principal part of Gods worship invocation: for if we
would compaesse the A^lter and there offer up the sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving; We must first wash our hands in innocence Psalm. 26. 6. And this
the Apostle Paul requires 1. Tim. 2. 8. That we lift Psa. 26. 6. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
up pure hands without anger. And our savior Christ commands that before we
offer any gift unto the Lord we first seek to be reconciled. Math. 5. 23. Mat.
5. 23
so long therefore as we continue in our anger we are unfit to pray, as it most
manifestly appears in the fifth petition, where we desire so to be forgeuen as
we forgive: and because the Lord would have us deeply consider thereof, he
thinks it not sufficient to set it down in the Lords prayer. Math. 6. 12.
but he again does single this out of all other the petitions, and inculcates
it the second time, verses 14. 15. If you forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly father will also forgive you, but if you will not forgive men Math. 6.
12.
their trespasses no more w^ll your father forgive your trespasses. If
therefore we v. 14. 15.
offer up this prayer unto God continuing in our Anger, what do we else but
entreat the Lord that he will continue his anger toward us? A notable place
to this purpose we have. Eccl. 28. 1. He that seeks vengeance shall find
vengeance of the Lord, and he will Eccles. 28. 12. etc.
surely keep his sins. 2. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done
to thee, so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also when thou prayest. 3. Should
a man bear hatred against man and desire forgiveness of the Lord? 4. he will
show no mercy to man who is like him self and will he ask forgiveness of
his own sins? 5. If he that is but flesh, nourish hatred (and ask pardon of
God) who will entreat for his sins? 6. Remember the end and let emnitie
pass, etc.

It also makes men notably sin against the third commandment, by causing
them thorough impatience to fall into cursing and imprecations, swearing and
blaspheming the name of God.

It causes them also grieuouslie to sin against the fourth commandment, by
making them unfit for the exercises of the Sabbath, as Invocation and hearing
of the word, because they who are possessed therewith have their minds
disturbed and distracted either by thinking upon the injury, or else of
revenge. So that there is not one commandment of the first table which anger
does not notoriously violate.

But as it overthrows the virtues It overthrows Justice and charity.
of the first table which respect piety, so also of the second table which
respect Justice, and first of all justice it self; whose general rule is
this, Vt suum cuique tribuatur, that that be given to every one which
belongs to him. For anger makes men not only to neglect all good duties
which they owe unto their neighbors, but also to oppress them with undeserved
injuries and unjust revenge.

It overthrows also charity which is the some of the second table, whose
general rule is this, That we love our neighbors as our selves: for anger in
steed of performing any duties of love, causes men to bring forth the fruits
of hatred: and in stead of loving their neighbors as themselves, it makes
them to hate them as their mortal enemies.

Infinite it were to stand upon particulars, but by this which has been said
it is apparent, that the furious flame of anger does consume in us all the
virtues and sanctifying graces of Gods spirit, wherein principally the Image
of God consists.

Sect. 2.
Secondly as it defaceth in us the image of God, so it does make us like 1.
Unjust anger makes men like the devil.
unto Satan, for he is the spirit of discension, wrath and revenge, as God is
a spirit of love and peace. It is the nature of Satan to delight in rage and
fury, for he is a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44. not only
murdering Ioh. 8. 44
himself, but provoking others to murder, by filling their hearts with wrath
and revenge. And this the Heathens were not ignorant of; for they called these
wicked spirits which are the authors of anger, discension, and revenge, furies,
because they filled men's minds with fury and madness.

Sect. 3.
Thirdly it makes us subject to Gods 3. It makes men subject to Gods anger.
Math. 6. 14. 15.
anger: for as we forgive others, so does God forgive us. Math. 6. 14. 15. If
therefore we retain our anger toward our brethren, God will retain his
anger toward us. We know by common experience, that he who is appointed an
arbitratour or daysman to reconcile neighbors, is oftentimes by the froward
behavior and obstinate stiffnes of the one party so offended and displeased,
that whereas he was indifferent he is made an adversary: so the Lord plays
the part of an vmpire or arbitratour, to work reconciliation between
brethren; But if either of them be so stiff and contentious that he will not
be reconciled, what does he else but by refusing the Lords arbitrament and
detetmination make God his enemy?

Sect. 4.
Fourthly it exposes men to contempt: 4. Unjust anger exposes me^ to contempt.
for howsoever they are therefore angry because they would not be despised and
disregarded, yet nothing in truth does sooner work contempt in the minds not
only of strangers but also of a man's own children and servants then unjust
anger. For when their anger and the fruits thereof, clamorous brauling and
fighting are usual and common as well for trifles as weighty matters, men
desperately contemn both, when they have no hope to prevent either. They
therefore who desire that these bitter drugs of correction should have any
effectual operation in the minds of inferiors, for the purging away of their
faults and vices, must use Correction to be used like Physic.
them like Physic, which if it be ordinary will work noe extraordinary
effect, because it grows familiar with our natures and therefore not fit to
work upon them: nam medentur contraria: and hence it is that Physic
becomes unprofitable to those men in the time of grievous sickness, which
upon every trifling occasion have used it in the time of health, and made it
as it were sauce to digest their meat: so if we would have the physic of the
mind, correction and chastizement, to work desired effect, they must be used
sparingly and not for every slip and infirmity, which oftentimes in wisdom
should be dissembled as though it were not perceived, and often The vanity of
ordinary scoulding and brawling.
pardoned in hope of amendment, otherwise if every toye and small oversight
provoke anger, and anger incite to scoulding and fighting, not only the
parties corrected are not bettered, but rather made more obstinate and obdurate
in their vices (for their hearts like Anuils become harder with often beating)
but also he that corrects, does disfurnish himself of all fit remedies to
cure more desperate diseases. For if he use bitter chiding and severe fighting
for the cure of every trifling fault, what remedy does he reserve for
correcting and reforming heinous offenses? surely none. Whereby it comes to
pass, that inferiors will not be restrained from committing all faults, but
rather will be as easelie induced to commit the greatest as the least, because
there is no great difference in the punishment.

But he who is wise and discreet will pass over many small faults as though
Discretion required in correction.
he perceived them not, both because (as one says) Gratissimum est genus
veniae nescire quid quisque peccauit. It is the most acceptable kind of pardon
to seem Senec. de ira lib. 2. cap. ^3.
ignorant of the fault; as also least taking notice of every little slip, he
make the offendour shameless and impudent in defending that as well done,
which he cannot excuse as not done. Whereas so long as he thinks his fault
unknown, he will be so fearful of committing the like, that he w^ll be
careful in hiding that which he has already committed. But if he perceive
that the offendour takes occasion by his ignorance to offend often in the like
kind, then is he to take notice of the fault by using mild admonition; if
that will not prevail, then more sharp reprehension; but yet in private, for
many witnesses of the fault makes him less ashamed to commit the like;
whereas fear of open disgrace will restrain him from it so long as he is not
already disgraced. But if the offendour impudentlie and obstinately persist in
his vice, or that the fault at the first be more notorious, then is he to
proceed to chastizement and correction as the Surgeon to the mortifiyng of a
member, when the soar is past all other cure. In doing whereof he is to
avoid all furious anger, and to use soberness and discretion, joining with
his chastizement wholesome admonitions, conuincing the conscience of the
offendour, by laying open the haynousnesse of his fault out of the word of
God; or else by showing him how he has offended against the law of nature or
civil honesty. And hereby it will appear to the offendour, that his
punishment proceeds from the hatred of his sin and not of his person; and
so it will cause him also more to hate his fault, them either his superior
that corrects him for it, or then the punishment it self which is deservedly
inflicted.

If superiors would use this mild and The profit that follows well governed
discretion.
sober discretion, surely it would better contain inferiors in obedience
then furious anger. For whence is it that one man's look is more regarded then
another words? one man's mild admonition, then another bitter reprehension?
one man's discreet reproof then another continual brawling and fighting?
surely from mild and well governed discretion which works in inferiors an
awful love and son like fear, which more strongly contains them in
obedience, and more forcibly restreineth them from committing any fault
repugnant thereunto, then furious anger and rage, or the fruits thereof
continual chiding and fighting. For continual anger and severe punishment for
every small fault, without admitting any excuse, does not make inferiors
sorry because they have offended, but careful and cunning in hiding and
dissembling their faults, or shameless and impudent, either in denying or
defending them.

Again as many stripes do harden the skin to endure them; so do they harden
the heart to contemn them; and they which use much chiding do move their
inferiors to imagine that it is their natural communication and not any
reprehension. If lightening and thunder were as common as the sun shine,
though they be terrible in their own nature, yet who would regard them being
so usual? and how much less then the impotent brawling of an angry man? They
therefore who would have their anger feared and respected, must let it like the
thunder happen seldom, or else it will not be regarded like the thunder. When
the Fox first saw the Lion, he trembled and quaked for fear, not daring to
come near him; when he saw him the second time he approached somewat nearer,
but when he saw him daily, he feared not almost to come within the reach of
his paw: so if thou but seldom show thy self like a Lion, thou will be feared
and respected, whereas if continually thou appear in this shape, even thy most
basest underlings will not regard thee. Yea if peradventure they spy the
Asses ears under the Lions skin, that is, folly in thy fury, (which are
seldom severed,) they will not stick to ride, and deride thee.

Sect. 5.
And so much for the evils which anger The evils which unjust anger brings to
the body.
brings to the whole man: now we are to speak of the evils which it
brings to his several parts, and first of his body. Whereas the body of man
is excellent by nature, and far surpassing all other earthly creatures, anger
does so deforme it, that it becomes more 1. It deformeth it
ugly and horrible then any of them. For it makes the hair to stand an end,
showing the obdurate inflexiblenesse of the mind. The eyes to stare and
candle, as though with the Cockatrice they would kill with their looks. The
teeth to gnash like a furions Bore. The face now red, and soon after pale, as
if either it blushed for shame of the minds folly, or enuyed others good. The
tongue to stammer, as being not able to express the rage of the heart. The
blood ready to burst out of the veins, as though it were affraide to stay in
so furious a body. The breast to swell, as being not large enough to contain
their anger, and therefore seeks to ease it self, by sending out
hot-breathing sighs. The hands to beat the tables and walls, which never
offended them. The joints to tremble and shake, as if they were afraid of the
minds fury. The feet to stamp the guiltless earth, as though there were
not room enough for it in the whole eleme^t of the air, and therefore sought
entrance into the earth also. So that anger deformeth the body from the hair
of the head to the soale of the foot; how ugly therefore is anger it self, when
the effects thereof are thus monstrous in so beautiful a subject? how
monstrouslie does it deforme the mind, when the signs thereof be thus
horrible in the body?

Sect. 6.
But as it deformeth the body, so it exposes it to infinite dangers by
provoking 2. It exposes it to dangers.
men to enter into private frayes and needless quarrels, with such desperate
resolution, that they wholly neglect themselves that they may hurt their enemy.
Like to the Waspe or Be which venture their own lives, that they may butsting
those that a^ger the^; so they, that they may satisfy their fury by revenging
a small injury are ready to receive a greater, for they care not to defend
themselves so they may offend their enemy. Nay they are desirous to give
wounds, though it be through their own bodies. And hence it is that some
paynting anger have put in either hand a sword, as being fit to hurt another,
but not to defend himself.

But what should I speak of receiving hurt by outward enemies, seeing the
angrye man when he has noe other foes to hurt him, does with his own hands
offer violence unto himself? as is evident in their example who in their rage
will not stick to pull of the hair of their own heads and beards, and to
offer many other furious outrages against their own persons. So that the wise
Solomon might well say, That a man of much anger shall suffer punishment, for
if Pro 19. 19.
no man else will, he will punish himself, And so much for the body.

Sect. 7.
But anger brings no less evils to The evils which anger brings to the
soul.
the soul. First like a dark cloud it ouershadoweth and blinds the light
of reason, and for the time makes men as though they were distraught of their
1 It blinds reason.
wits. Whereof it is that anger is called Breuis furor, a short madness,
because it differs not from madness but in time. Saving that herein it is
far worse, in that he who is possessed with madness, is necessarily, will
he, nill he, subject to that fury: but this passion is entered into wittinglie
and willinglye. Madness is the evil of punishment, but anger the evil of
sin also; madness as it were thrusts reason from it imperial throne, but
anger abuses reason by forcing it with all violence to be a slave to passion.

And in this respect it may fitly be compared unto a cruel tyrant, who having
invaded the government of the commonwealth, does overthrow counsel, law,
and order, and over rules all by force and fury: so anger having obtained
sovereignty over the mind, takes away all judgment, counsel and reason,
and ouerswayeth all by foolish affection and raging passion. And therefore
Solomon says well, that Anger rests Eccle. 7. 11
in the bosom of fools, for either fools it finds them, or fools it
makes them. The reason is apparent, because anger makes men rash and
unadvised in their deliberations, and so their counsayles and designs prove
imperfect and without life, like abortiue byrthes which are borne before their
time.

Examples hereof we have in Symeon Examples. Genesis 34. 25.
and Leuy, who like mad men imbrued their hands in the blood of many
innocents to revenge the injury of one offendour. In Saul who for an
imaginary fault of one man, put to death, man, woman and child, in the City
of Nob, and not satisfied herewith, 1. Sam. 22 19.
he raged also against the beasts with more then beastly cruelty. Yea David
himself being haunted with this fury, vowed the death not only of churlish
Naball, but also of all his innocent 1 Samuel 25 13. 22.
family for his fault.

You see then that anger peruerteth judgment, overthrows counsel, and
puts out the eyes of reason, making it the slave of passion, fit to
execute those works of darkness, in which rage imployeth it. Like unto the
Philistines who having put out the eyes of Sampson, made him to grind Judge.
16. 21.
in their Myll, and to do their drudgerie: So this raging passion having put
out the eyes of reason, makes it a fit instrument for his own business, that
is, in plotting and devising that revenge which is pleasing and acceptable
unto it. Whereby it euidentlye appears, that furious anger is a notable
means which Satan uses to work our destruction. For when once by rage he
has blinded the eye of reason, he can easelie lead us into a gulphe of all
wickedness. In respect whereof Satan is compared to a carrion Crow, which
intending to make the carcass of some seely Lamb his greedy pray, does
first pick out the eyes, that it may not be able by flight to prevent a
further mischief: so he indeauouring to make a pray of our bodies and souls,
does first seek to blind reason, which is the eye of the soul, with the
fury of passion, that so not having judgment to discern his sleights, nor
wisdom to avoid them, he may the more easily lead us into the pit of
perdition. Or he may be likened to a cunning Fisher man, who troubles the
water that the Fish may not discrie his net: so Satan blinds our reason
with this turbulent affection, that we should not discern the sins which
like nets he has laid to entangle us, before we be fallen into them. For
anger casting a mist of perturbation before the sight of reason, makes men
unable to judge of good or evil, right or wrong; and whereas reason in it own
nature judges that which is right, anger makes that seem right which it
judges.

If therefore we avoid those things most carefully which hurt the eyes, or if
they be hurt use such medicines as are fit to cure them, because the eye is the
light and guide of the whole body: with how much more attentive care ought we
avoid anger that blinds reason, seeing it is the light and guide of the
soul, which only eye of humane direction being put out, like Poliphemus we
wander in the desartes of sin and wickedness? if men abhor drunkenness
(and that worthily) because it makes them differ from brute beasts only in
shape of the body; why should they not for the same cause hate this vice of
anger, which like a burning ague does so distemper and disturb the mind, that
while the fit lasts it utters nothing but rauing.

Sect. 8.
Secondly as anger hurts the soul by blinding reason, so also it does
macerate 2. It inflameth the soul with the heat of fury.
and vex it by inflaming it with fury; for what greater torment can be imagined
then to have the mind distracted upon the rack of rage? as therefore we would
account him a mad man, who with his own hands should set his house on fire
and consume it: so alike mad is ^e to be thought, who will set his soul on
fire with the raging flames of anger, wherein it is not only tormented in this
life, but also (without repentance) in the life to come it shall be tormented
everlastingly; because unjust anger i^ murder in Gods sight, as appears.
Math. 5. 22. and murderers shall not inherit the kingdom of God, but Math. 5
12.
have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
Reave. 21. 8.
is the second death. Revel. 21. 8.

Seeing therefore anger inflicteth on the soul the wound of sin, and sin
unless it be cured with the sovereign salve of Christ's merit, causes death:
Let us carefully arm our selves against the violence of this passion, and
manfully repel this fiery dart, with the shield of faith. Yea let us so
strongly curb it in with the raines of reason, that no outward injury prick
it forward to seek unjust revenge. For as we would condemn him of folly, who
when a wrong were offered him by another, should in revenge wound his own
body: so more foolish is he to be esteemed, who when another offers him
injury does in seeking cruel and unjust revenge wound his soul with sin.

Sect. 9.
And so much for the evils which anger The evils which anger brings to our
neighbor 1. It overthrows all friendship.
brings to a man's self: now we are to entreat of the evils which it
brings to our neighbor. First it ouerthoweth that excellent and comfortable
virtue to mankind true friendship; for there was never any friendship so
inviolable, which anger (if it were admitted) has not violated. And hence it
is that wise Solomon counsaileth us not to make friendship with an angry man,
because he will be sure to break it. Pro. 22. 24. well Pro. 22. 24
therefore may that speech of Juno to Alecto be applied to anger.

Tu potes vnanimes armare in praelia fratres, Virgil Aeneid. lib. 7
atque odiis versare domos. thou it is who ca^starme most loving brethren one
against the other, and overthrow whole houses and families with contentious
discord.

Sect. 10.
Secondly it provoke to offer all 2. It provoke men to offer injury.
indignities and wrongs to a man's neighbor, as also to revenge the smallest
injuries without all proportion. For men incensed with anger will wittingly and
willingly revenge those injuries, which have unwittingly and unwillingly been
offered; for angry words they will give blows, for blows vvounds, and for
vvounds death. And therefore the wise man says; That anger is cruel, and
wrath is raging. Pro. 27. 4. Yea it provoke Pro. 27. 4
men not only to revenge small injuries, but also no injuries; for anger
rages even against the innocents, and that oftentimes because they are
innocent, and but too virtuous, as the furious man imagines. And this is
evident in the example of Cains anger against Abell, Saules against Jonathan
and David; Nebuchadnezers against the three children, Herod's against the
innocents, the Scribes and Phariseis against Christ as before I proved.

But as anger causes men to be hurtful to all others, so especially to those
Anger most hurtful to a ma^s own family.
whom they should most love, cherish, and defend, that is, they who are of a
man's own family. Who because they are necessarily conversant with them, are
continually subject and even exposed to their fury and outrage: the wife to
their bitter speeches (if they do not worse, that is, like mad men beat
their own flesh) the children to furious and unreasonable correction, the
servants not only to reuiling speeches, but also to cruel stripes and blows:
so that (as one says well) we may know an angry Plutarch decohib. irac.
man if we but look in the faces of his servants, namely by their scarres and
bruises.

Sect. 11.
And so much for the private evils which The evils which anger brings to
common wealther.
accompany unjust anger; now we are to speak of the public. Unjust a^ger is
the cause of all tum^^^s and vproares, sedi^ions and conspiracies, massakers
and bloody wars, yea the overthrow and confusion of all cities and common
wealths. It is the cause which inciteth the magistrate against the subject,
and the subject against the magistrate, the prince against the people, and the
people against the prince, kingdom against kingdom, and nation against
nation: and that not only upon weighty causes, but also upon trifling
occasions. For as to make a farious and unquenchable flame, it is not material
how small the fire is that kindles it, so the matter be apt to receive it
wherein it is kindled, for one coal is mough to burn a whole city, if it fall
among flax, and one spark if it light in tinder or gu^powder: so it mattereth
not how small the cause is which inflameth anger, for if the mind which
receaueth it be subject to be inflamed, it is sufficient to set on fire and
consume whole kingdoms and common wealths; especially if power be
correspondent to the violence of the affection.

Infinite examples might be brought Examples.
to make this manifest: as of Simeon and Levy, who in their anger put a
whole Genesis 34.
city to the sword, though their quarrel were but to one man. Of Abimilech, who
Judge. 9.
in his fury destroyed all the city of Sichem, of Saul destroying Nob, of Hamon
1. Sam. 2^ Hest. 3
who being incensed only against Mordecay, laid a plot for the destruction of
the whole nation of the Jews. But I shall not need to stand upon it, seenot
only the book of God, but also ancient histories yea even our own cronicles
and daily experience do make this but too evident.

You see then the manifold evils which wait upon this raging disease of the
mind unjust anger, for it is not only a deadly impostume breaking out in our
selves, but also an infectious and contagious plague which destroieth whole
peoples and commo^wealthes. with how great care therefore should we use all
good means and wholesome remedies, to prevent or cure such a dangerous
disease?

The remedies of unjust anger. Cap. 7.
Sect. 1.
The remedies against Anger are of two sorts: first those which cure anger in
our selves, secondly those which cure it in others; and they both are of two
kinds: first such as prevent anger and preserve us from falling into it,
secondly such as free us from it after it has taken place. For anger is a
disease of the mind: as therefore wise Physicians think it the We must first
seek to prevent anger.
better and saufer course to preserve health and prevent sickness, then to
remove the disease after it has taken possession of the body; so the best
course in ministering spiritual Physic is to preserve the soul from vice,
rather then to purge it away after it has infected it; for Vitia facilius
repelluntur quam expelluntur, vices Sen. epist 119.
are more easily kept from entrance then thrust out after they are entered: for
as the common proverb is; there are but twelve points in the law, and
possession is as good as eleauen of them. If therefore anger have gotten
possession, we shall hardlye dispossess it: It is our souls mortal enemy;
as therefore we first seek to keep the enemy from entering the frontires of
our country, but if he be entered, as soon as we can to expel him, so we
must first endeavor to repel anger by stopping the passages of our hearts,
that it may have no entrance, but if it have taken place, quickly to expel and
remove it. For if we suffer it to fortify it self, it will grow so strong
and violent, that we shall be unable to dislodge it. And as in a siedge of a
City the Citizens provide all things necessary for their defense before the
assault, that the enemy when he approaches the walls, may not take them
unprovided; so if we will repel anger when it comes, we are to fortify and
arm our selves against it before it comes: for if it take us unprovided, it
will easily make entrance, and more easily overcome us.

Let us therefore first of allendeauour to use all good means by which we may
prevent anger: for if it have once gotten hold of us, it will easelie plunge
us headlong into vyolence and fury, whereas we may with greater facillity
prevent the danger before we fall into it. For as experience teaches us, a
man may easelye contain himself from running down the hill, while he is on
the top, but after he is entered into a full race, he cannot stave himself
before he comes to the bottom: so it is more easy for any to abstain from
running into anger, then to contain when he is in the race, from falling into
the bottom of fury.

Sect. 2.
Let us then see the means how to The means to prevent anger. The causes
thereof are to be removed.
prevent anger: the first remedy is by taking away the causes thereof for:
sublat a cause a tollitur effectum. The cause being taken away the effect
cease.

The first cause of anger is self love. If therefore we would not fall into
anger, 1. Self-love.
we must labor to banish self love, and to follow the rule of charity; Love
our neighbors as our selves, and do nothing unto them which we would not have
them do unto us. Before therefore we let the raines loose unto our anger, let
us set our selves in the place of him with whom we are angry, and consider
how we would desire to be used if we had so offended, and in like manner are we
to behave our selves toward him. So shall we not aggrauate those i^iuries
which are offered us, and extenuate those which we offer others, so shall we
not have our judgment over balanced with an unequal affection, so shall we
not be incensed for suffering that, which we have often offered.

Sect. 3
The second cause of anger is pride and 2. Pride.
haughtiness of spirit: if therefore we would not fall into anger, we are to
subdue pride, and labor for the contrary grace of humility. For they who
would be meek with our Savior Christ, must also learn of him the lesson of
true humility. Math. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I Math. 11. 29.
am meek and lowly of heart. If we would lay aside that arrogant conceit
which we have of our selves, and the ouerweening opinion of our own
excellencies, if we would consider with Abraham that Genesis 18. 27. Psa. 22. 6.
we are but dust and ashes, and with David that we are worms and no men; or
if we would in sincerity of heart say with Job, Unto corruption thou art my
father, and unto the worm, thou art my mother and my Job. 17. 14
sister; If we would but remember that by our sins committed against God and
our neighbor, we have deserved not only contumelies and wrongs, but also
eternal death of body and soul; we would not so easily be provoked to anger
upon every trifling occasion, nor think it any great disparagement to endure
lesser injuries, seeing we have deserved far greater.

Sect. 4.
The third cause is covetousness, which uice we must banish out of our hearts,
if 3. Couetuousnesse.
we would not be overcome with unjust anger: so shall we not gape after great
preferments, nor expect much; and consequently we shall not be disturbed with
unquietness, nor incensed with anger, when we come not short of our hopes.
So shall we not intermeddle with every domestical trifle, but commit some
thing to the care of servants, some thing to children, and most of all to the
wife, who is a ioynte governor in thy little common wealth. And if any thing
miscarry under any of their hands, we will not so much look to the means,
as to the supreme cause, the providence of God, considering that if he build
not the house, they labor in vain that build it, if he bless Psa. 127. 1
not their labors they cannot prosper.

Sect. 5.
The fourth cause is luxuriousness and curious niceness; if therefore we
Luxurious niceness.
would subdue anger, we must subdue this vice also, and labor to attain unto
decent homeliness, the Nurse of good hospitallity, and the preserver of peace
and quietness: for if with our first parents Adam and Eve we were clothed
with skins, that is with mean attire, we would not be so easilye provoked
to anger if a spotte or wrinckle be found upon our garments; if with them we
did feed upon roots and herbs, we would not eat with surfeyted and
cloyed appetites, and consequently (our meats being sauced with hunger) our
tastes would not be so wantonly curious, that no ordinary cookery can please
them. If with Abraham we dwelled in tents like Pilgrims, we would not be so
nice in decking our houses, nor so angry for a Copweb; If with Jacob we had
the earth for our bed, a stone for our pillo we, and the sky for our Canopie,
we would not be so much displeased for the hardness of a featherbed, or
vneasinesse of a down lodging: take away therefore luxurious niceness, and
you shall take away also the most common cause of unjust anger.

Sect. 6.
The fifth cause of unjust anger, is vain curiosity, in desiring to hear and
see all 5 Curiosity.
things. If therefore we would avoid anger, we are to abandon this
troublesome companion, needless curiosity. For many things will neither
grieve nor hurt us, if we never see nor hear them. Whereas he that busilye
enquireth what is said against him in every company, he that listeneth at
every door, and under every wall, he that rippeth up ill words spoken against
him in secret, does both disquiet himself with anger, and make his own
faults more public. Antigonus when he heard two of his subjects speaking
evil of him in the night near his Tent, he called unto them, vvilling them to
go further off least the King should hear them. Whose example if we would
follow, our anger would not so much vex our selves, nor trouble others.

Sect. 7.
The sixth cause is, to have open cares to every talebearer, and credulous
hearts 6 Credulity*
to believe them. For it is the nature of men, to be most desirous of hearing
that which most displeases them, Et libenter credere quae inuit audiunt,
vvillinglye Senec. de ira lib. 2. cap. 22.
to believe those things which they are most sorry to hear. But if we
would avoid unjust anger, we must avoid this vice also: Multos absoluemus
Senec de ira. lib. 3 cap. 29.
si caeperimus ante iudicare quam irasci, we shall acquit many, if we will
not be angrye before we judge. Let us not therefore suffer execution to go
before judgment, but rather defer our more severe censure, till time have
revealed the truth, considering that it is most usual with men to report
untruths, some that they may deceive thee, some because they are deceived
themseues, some because they would set friends at variance, some in their
accusation will feign an iniurye offered us, that they may take occasion to
show their sorrow, because it was offered; but scarce any of them will stand to
that which they have spoken. And therefore let us not be angry before we
judge, nor judge before we hear both parties: For what injustice is it to
have both ears open to an accusation, and both shut to an excuse? to proceed
to sentence of condemnation, before we ask the party accused what he can say
for himself? what greater wrong then to believe in secret, and to be angry
openly?

Sect. 8.
The last cause of unjust anger, is want 7. Want of meditaon concerning human
infirmities.
of meditation, concerning human infirmities, either those which are common
to all mankind, or those which are more proper and peculiar to our selves. if
therefore we would be restravned from anger, we must often think of this
contagious leprosy of original sin, which has so generally infected all the
the sons of Adam, that their remains nothing in us but pollution and
filthiness. And the^ as one infected with the plague, is not offended with him
that is subject to the same infection; As the Lazar does neither with scorn
nor choler, but rather with pity and compassion behold the sores of his
fellow: so the plague and sore of sin which we see in another, will not make
us angry with the party which is affected and visited, but rather in
commiseration and pity to use all good means whereby he may be cured, if we
consider that this plague and sore of sin is so universal that it has
infected all mankind.

When word was brought to Anaxagoras Plutarch, de cohib, irac.
that is son was dead, he was not much moved with the news, because (as he
said) he knew and had considered long before that his son was mortal: so if
we would consider and meditate on humane frayltie and infirmities, we should
not be so much vexed when they did show themselves, because they would not
happen beyond our expectation. If he that hireth a servant would think with
himself, that he hireth one who is not free from faults, if he that choseth a
friend would then consider that he has his wants and imperfections: If he that
maryeth a wife would remember that he maryeth a woman, and therefore one
subject to infirmities: neither the small faults of his servants, nor
imperfections of his friends, nor infirmities of his wife, would easily
provoke him to choler and fury, seeing he did not come short of his reckoning.

More over we are to meditate upon our own peculiar infirmities and wants,
and before we are angry with another to enter into our selves, and to say with
Plutarch. de cohib. irac.
Plato: Nuncubi et ego talis? have not I also offended in this, or in that
which is worse? am I clear from offering the like injuries or greater to my
brethren? Alas no, but though I were, yet how often have I provoked God to
anger by my sins? for which great debt how can I crave pardon, if I cruelly
exact every trifle of of my fellow servant? Thus if we would speak unto our
own consciences in the presence of God, we would not so easily be incited to
anger and revenge, seeing we our selves do many things which need pardon; and
our greater faults might serve to excuse those which are less in others, if
we would but look upon them: for no man without blushing could extremely
punish those faults in his neighbor, for which he shall need to crave
pardon himself.

And so much concerning the first remedy of anger which is by removing the
causes thereof.

The second means to subdue anger is to labor for patience. Cap. 8.
Sect. 1.
THe second means to subdue anger is to labor for the contrary virtue of
patience and long suffering. And to All things happen by Gods own providence.
Rom 8. ^^
this end we are first to consider that nothing happens unto us without Gods
al seeing providence, who if we be his children will dispose of every thing for
our good. Why therefore should we vex our selves with anger, seeing God will
turn the injuries of men into blessings? let us rather when any wrong is
offered us, which we cannot by just and lawful means avoid, say with our
savior Christ John. 18. 11. should not I drink of the cup which my father
has Ioh. 18. 11
provided for me? should I be angry with the cup because the physic is
bitter? or with the hand whereby it is conuayghed unto me? My heavenly father
corrects me for my good and amendment, I will not therefore be angry with the
rod wherewith I am beaten, but rather look to the hand which inflicteth the
chastisment, and I will say with David. Psalm. 139. 10. I am dumb and do not
Psa: 139. 20.
open my mouth because thou do it. Otherwise I should commit as great folly
as he, who is angry with the staff wherewith he is beaten, and never
regards the smiter, and show my self as mad as the dog, who looks
not to the caster, but vvreaketh his anger by biting (...)
the stone.

Sect. 2.
Secondly we are to consider that the injuries which we have received are much
Our injuries received less then our sins have deserved.
less then by our sins we have deserved; for they are but light, or if not
light yet momentary, but our sins have deserved infinite and eternal
punishments. If therefore the Lord use these earthly rods to correct our
sins; we are rather to admire his mercy then to be angry at so gentle
chastizemenr. let us therefore look upon our sins and not upon our
punishment, and so shall we patiently bear the injury offered as sent from
God, because in respect of him it is no injury, and not as it is inflicted by
man, and be ready to follow the example of David, who when he was
injuriously abused by Shemei, was not provoked by anger to take revenge,
because he looked not upon Shemei, as being but* the instrument, but upon God
who was the author. 2. Sam. 16. 10. 11.
2. Sam. 16. 10. 11.

Sect. 3.
The third means to subdue anger 3. Means to meditate on Christ's Passion.
by arming us with patience, is to call continually to rememberance the bitter
passion and sufferings of Christ for our sins. For if we consider how
patiently he endured scoffs and reproaches, railing and reuiling, buffeting and
scurging, yea death it self, and the anger of God more grievous then death,
not for any demerit of his, but for our sakes, we may easily suffer such small
injuries as are offered unto us by men, at our savior Christ's request, seeing
we Mat. ^. ^9. Nu^. 21. 6
have deserved far greater. As therefore those which were stong with the
fiery serpents, were healed if they did look up to the brazen serpent which
was erected for this end: so if this fiery serpent of unjust anger have stong
us, and the burning poison thereof has inflamed us, let us cast the eyes of
our souls upon the true brazen serpent, our savior Christ hanging upon the
cross, and suffering the wrath of God due to our sins, and so the heat of
our wrath and anger will soon be cured and cooled.

Sect. 4.
The fourth means to work patience 4. The necessity of this duty.
and repel anger is to consider the necessity hereof, for if the love of our
brethren be not of more force to restrain us from revenge, then anger to
provoke us thereunto, we can have no assurance that we are the children of God.
1. John 3. 10. In this are the children of God 1. Ioh. 3. 10. 15.
known and the children of the devil, whosoever does not righteousness, is
not of God neither be that loves not his brother* so verse 15. Whosoever
hates his brother is a man slayer, and no manslayer has eternal life abiding
in him.

But some will say, though I am rashly angry, yet may I love my brother. I
answer with the Apostle 1. Cor. 13. 4. 7. that love 1. Cor. 13 4. 7.
both suffers long and suffers al things: and therefore they want this love
who will suffer nothing, and be provoked every minute, nay he says expressly in
the fifth verse, that love is not provoked to Anger. that is, to rash and unjust
anger; and therefore they are destitute of love who are so easily provoked.

Secondly it is most necessary to subdue anger, because while we remain
therein we can have no assurance that our prayers are acceptably hard of God;
not only because we pray so to be forgiven as we forgive, and therefore if
we retain our anger toward our brethren, we pray that God will retain
his toward us; but also because our savior expressly tells us, That if we
do not remit men their trespasses our heavenly father will not forgive us our
sins. Ma. Math. 6. 15.
6. 15. And that with what measure we mete unto others it shall be measured unto
us again. Math. 7. 2. Let us remember the Math. 7. 2
parable of the servant who being forgiven ten thousand talents, and after
exacting with all cruelty of his fellow servant an hundredth pence, was cast
into the prison of utter darkness. Math. 18. 23. Whereby thus much is
understood Mat, 11. 23
that if we will not fogiue small injuries to our brethren, seeing the Lord
has forgiven our infinite heinous sins, we shall be used like that
merciless and cruel servant. And therefore let us follow the counsel of the
Apostle. Ephesians. 4. 32. Be courtcous one to another and tender hearted, freely
forgiving one Ephesians. 4. 32
another, even as God for Christ's sake freelye forgave you. And so much for the
necessity of this duty.

Sect. 5.
The fifth means to arm us with patience against the assaults of anger, is 5.
The examples of patience in others.
that we propound unto our selves the examples of others: for the looking upon
green color is not more sovereign, for those who are troubled with
inflamatio^ of the eyes, then the behoulding of the clemency and patience of
others, is for those whose hearts are inflamed with anger. First therefore let
us set before us the example of God himself, who is merciful, gracious, and
slow to anger, as himself describes himself, Exodus 34. 6. And hereof the
Prophet Exo. 34. 6.
David tasted by often experience, and therefore he says likewise, Psalm. 103.
8. The Lord is full of compassion Psa: 163. 8 9
and mercy, slow to anger and of great kindness. And as he is not easily
provoked to anger, so being provoked his anger lasts not long; for He will
not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever, as it is verse 9. Nay no sooner
can we knock at the gate of his mercy, but he is ready to open, as he has
promised, Math. 7. 7. If therefore we would resemble our heavenly Father, and
so approve Math. 7. 7
our selves to be his children, we must learn to imitate his patience and long
suffering.

Secondly we are to propound unto us the example of our Savior Christ, the
lively character and express Image of his father, as he exhorts us. Math.
11. 29. Math. 11. 29.
Learn of me for I am meek and lowly of heart, and you shall find rest to
your souls. What this meekness was, Peter tells us. 1. Peter 2. 22. Though
he were free from sin, and had no guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22
yet when he was reviled, he reviled not again, and when he suffered he
threatened not. Though in respect of his infinite power, he was able not only
to have threatened, but also to have utterly destroyed his enemies. If therefore
Christ was so mild and patient, who was free from sin, surely much more
should we be (if it were possible) who by our sins have deserved the
greatest injuries, yea eternal death.

But if these examples be too high for our imitation, let us cast the eyes of
our minds upon the patience and long suffering of our fellow brethren. As of
Abraham, who when just cause of offense was offered by Lot and his
Shepherds, was rather content to part from his right, then he would have any
discord and dissension. Genesis 13. 8. Of Moses, who then Genesis 13. 8
was ready to pray for the people, when they were ready to stone him, Exodus
17. Exo. 17. 4 11.
4. 11. Of David who having reuendge in his own hand, when he was provoked
by the out-ragious injuries of Shemei, did notwithstanding contain himself,
2. Samu. 16. 10. and of 2. Sam. 16 10.
Steven, who when the stones slew about his ears, prayed for his enemies
that threw them at him, Acts Act. 7. 60 The example of others being in their
fur^
7. 60.

Or if these examples will not move us to the love of myldenesse and patience,
let us set before our eyes those men which are subject to the fury of anger,
and so shall we easily discern in others what an ugly and brutish vice it is
in our selves. One says, that if an angrye man would look himself in a
Glass Senec. lib. 2. de ira cap. 36.
in the midst of his fury, he would appear so horrible in his own sight,
that it would be a notable means to work an hatred in his heart, of so
deformed a vice; but for as much as angry men will hardly be brought to this
while they continue in their rage, or if they could, they have somewhat
relented already, and so the copy of their countenance is changed; or though
it were not, the fury of their affection so cloudeth the judgment of reason,
that they think all things become them which they do in their passion: Let us
therefore follow the example of the Spartanes, who would cause their
children to look upon their Hellottes and slaves when they were drunken,
that they might be brought into detestation of so ugly a vice, when they
beheld the beastliness thereof in others: So let us set before our eyes other
men, while they be in their fury, and consider how it deformeth the body, and
disableth the mind, the lamentable tragedies which it acts, and follies
which it commits; and the ugly deformity, joined with brutish follye,
must needs move us to hate so foul a vice.

Sect. 6.
The sixth means is to abstain from multitude of business, because not 6. To
abstain from multitude of business.
only the mind is distracted and disturbed therewith, and so made a fit
Inn for anger to lodge in, but also because in such abundance of business,
some things of necessitye will miscarrie, and among such a multitude of Irons,
some will burn, and so inflame the mind to anger.

Sect. 7.
The seventh means, is to avoid 7. To abstain from co^tentious
controversies. Senec. lib. 3. de ira Cap. 8.
contentious controversies; for facilius est a certamine abstinere quam
abducere, howsoever it be very easy to abstain from them before they are
begun, yet after a man is entered into them, he cannot easily give them over.
Because he thinks that it will derogate from his wit and judgment, if he
be forced to yield though it be to a truth: and besides men naturally desire
to bring others to be of their opinion, and therefore they will use great
earnestness to persuade, and often times burst out into anger and fury, if
they cannot obtain their desire.

Sect. 8.
The eight means to prevent anger, 8. To avoid the company of collerick men.
Pro. 22. 24
is to avoid the company of those who are angry and chollerick: because men
will easily be infected with their contagion. And this Solomon teaches us.
Pro. 22. 24. Make no friendship with an angry man, neither go with the furious
man, least thou learn his ways and receive destruction to thy soul. And also
because they are likely to be provoked by them, and to receive the heat of
their flame. For as one stick of wood being set on fire, does kindle that
also which is next unto it: So one man being inflamed with anger, inflameth
them also who are near about him with his prouocations.

Sect. 9.
Lastly, those who find themselves 9. To bridle anger for a day.
by nature prone to anger, are to labor, and as it were to vow with
themselves, that they will contain their fury for one day, whatsoever
occasion shall be offered, and after that another, and a third, and so by
little and little they shall attain unto an habit of patience, and custom
will alter nature.

The remedies to expel or bridle Anger. Cap. 9.
Sect. 4.
ANd so much for those means and remedies, whereby we may prevent and repel
anger before we fall into it. Now in the next place I will set down, how we
are to behave our selves after that anger has made an entrance, and taken
place in us. And this the Apostle teaches us in the restraint: Let not the
Sun go down on your wrath. That is, if thorough infirmity ye fall into
unjust anger, yet continue not in it, but rather abandon this corrupt affection
with all possible speed. So that our anger must not sleep with us, and after
we awake, awake also; we must not use it like our garments, lay it aside
ouernight, with a purpose to take it again the next day: but rather we are
to put it off like the old man, with full resolution never again to
entertayne or assume it, or like some polluted rags which are not worth
the wearing. And this must we do not once or twice, but if every day with the
sun anger arise in our hearts, we are every day to dislodge and expel it,
before the sun going down. And as the night does cool the heat which in
the day time the sun has made; so must it also quench the flames of anger
kindled in our hearts. And not without The danger of anger retained.
great reason he requires that before night comes, we abandon anger, for
otherwise we shall give place to the devils tentations, as he intimates in
the words following: for having exhorted, us not to let the sun go down on
our wrath he presently adds: Neither give place to the devil. Noting thereby
that they who do not only entertain anger in the day, but also lodge it in
the night, do thereby lay the^ selves open to the fiery darts of Satan. For he
continually goes about like a roaring seeking 1. Pet. 5. 8,
whom he may devour. And when he finds such as have retained anger even in
their beds, thinking them a fit pray, he approaches and with his bellows of
fury, he more inflameth the fire of anger, till it flameth out into furious
revenge. he aggrauateth the injury received, telling the^ that if they put up
such an indignity, they will expose themselves to the like, or for suffering
this loose all their credit and reputation, by incurring the note of cowardice.
And so having wrought in their hearts a full resolution to take revenge, in the
next place he puts into their heads the most fit means and opportunity
of performing it with all rage and cruelty. And so often times it comes to
pass that when they arise, they put that in practice which they have devised
lying upon their pillow.

To prevent therefore so great an evil; if we cannot altogether repel anger,
yet let us soon expel it. For though at the first it be but a small spark,
yet if it be nourished it will quicklye increase to a furious flame. As
therefore when a house is newly set on fire, men labor earnestly, and with all
speed to to quench it, before it have taken hold of the main poastes and
great beams; otherwise it will be too late afterward, when it is increased to
his full strength: so when our hearts are first set on fire with anger, we are
presently to quench it, with the water of the spirit, for after we are
thoroughly enflamed, it will be too late to apply any remedy till the flame hauc
spent it self.

But some will say, I fall into anger many times when I never mean it, and it

To the first I answer; that if we carefully watch over our selves we shall
easily perceive when we are inclining to anger: for as there are many signs
which go before a storm, and many symptoms which discover diseases before
we fall into them: So we may easily discern in our selves many notes and
signs, of this tempestuous storm and raging fever of the mind, unjust anger.

To the other I answer; that anger does not presently as soon as it is entered
into the heart ouerrule us, before it be grown to greater strength then it has
at the first, for as the greatest fire has but a small beginning, and when it
has but begun, is easily quenched: so the most furious anger attayneth not to
his full strength at the first entrance; but by little and little increases
like a flame, by taking hold of new matter. And therefore howsoever after it
has wholly inflamed a man, it is most hardly quenched, yet in the beginning
thereof, it is easily suppressed.

Sect. 2.
But let us see the means how The first means to withdraw the food thereof.
we may subdue anger after it has given the assault. The means is by
withdrawing the food from it, wherewith it is nourished. For as the greatest
fire if new matter be not supplied will of it self go out: so the most furious
anger will soon be mitigated, if it be not continually nourished with a new
supply of matter. Multiplying of words the chief food of anger.


The chief nourishment whereby anger is nourished and increased, is
multiplying of words, for though the injury at the first be small, yet if
either it be aggrauated by him that suffers it, or defended by him that
offers it, it incenseth men to great anger. Well therefore in this respect
may words be said to be but vvinde; for as nothing sooner then vvinde causes
a small spark to burst out into a furious flame: so nothing sooner does cause
a small spark of anger increase to a raging flame of revenge, then the vvinde
of words. We are not therefore to imagine with some, that we can disgorge
our stomachs of anger by vomitting our spleen in bitter words; for they do
not only in their own nature whet and sharpen our own affections, but also
provoke the other with whom we are offended to requite us with the like, and
so to add new matter to the old flame. As well therefore may we think to
quench the fire with vvood, as anger with words, for as vvood is the
nourishment of the fire, so words are then ourishment of anger. Let us rather
in our anger imitate the wise Socrates, who when he was most angrye used
most Plutarch. decohib. irac.
modesty mildness of speech and lowliness of voice, and so vvithdrawing the
nourishment from the fire of anger, it will soon of it self be extinguished.

Sect. 3.
The second means to subdue anger, The 2. means to withdraw a man's self out
of company. 1. Sam. 20 34.
is to get out of the company of others, especially of them who have offended
us, according to the example of Jonathan 1. Sam. 20. 34. who being justly
provoked by his unjust and cruel father, rose from the table and departed,
least by his fathers prouocations, he might have done or said that which did
not beseem him. whose practice if we would imitate, we shall not only appease
our anger by removing out of our sight the object and cause thereof; and prevent
further occasions of increasing it, but also cover our infirmities, which
otherwise we should discover by the violence of the passion.

As therefore they who are vexed with the falling sickness (if they cannot by
their ordinary remedies prevent their fit) will go out of the company of
others, that falling secretly, they may have noe witness of their deformity;
so they who are not able to curb in their anger with the rain of reason, were
best to withdraw themselves and to keep private, while their fit lasts;
that so they may hide the vgglinesse of their vice, which being seen does
often move their adversaries to scorn and laughter, and their friends to
sorrow and pity. And this is made a note of a wise man by the vvisest* Pro.
12. 16. A fool in a day shall be Pro. 12. 16
known by his anger, but he that covers his shame is wise.

Sect. 4.
The third means to vanquish anger, The 3. means to restrain it for a while
from bursting out into fury.
is for a while to bridle and restrain it from bursting out into present
revenge. For if we resist it in the first encounter, we shall find the
strength thereof much weakened. and this the wise Athenodorus knew well; who
being to depart from Augustus, was requested by him that he would Plutarch. in
Apotheg.
leave behind him some good instruction for the well governing of his empire,
to whom he gave this counsel, that he should do nothing in his anger, before
he had numbered on his fingers the letters of the Greek Alphabet. An example
hereof we have in Socrates, who finding his anger incensed against his
servant, deferred to take correction, saying: I would beat thee if I were not
angry. Senec de ira li^ ^ cap. 15
And also in Plato, who being provoked to anger by some notable fault
committed by his servant, took a cudgel into his hands, and held it over him
a good space, as if he would have stricken; And being asked of his friend
Speusippus, what he meant by such kind of act on. O (said he) Exigo paenas ab
homine iracundo. I take punishment of one Senec. de ira lib. 3. cap. 12.
who is angry; meaning of himself, by bridling his affection. If then the
heathen could thus defer and curb in their unruly passions; who had only
the small glimse of natures light, and heathen Philosophy to direct them; let
us be ashamed to come behind them, seeing we have not only that, but also
the bright sun shine of the word of God to guide us.

And that we may the rather be moved to abstain from sudden and desperate
resolutions when our anger is provoked, let us consider, that we are in great
danger to do those things in a moment, which we shall repent our whole life;
for Ira breuis furor: Anger is a short madness. That in such shortness of
time we cannot rightly examine the circumstances of the matter, which in such
eases are most material, whereas veritatem dies aperiet. Truth is the
daughter of time, and will bring all to light. Quicquid voles quale sit scire
tempori trade. Nihil diligenter in fluctu cernitur. Whatsoever thou would be
perfectly informed Senec. de ira. lib. 3 cap. 12.
of, commit it to time, for nothing is thoroughlie known on the sudden. That
it is a foul shame, first to be angry, and then to judge, first to take
punishment, and then to examine the cause; that is to say, whether has
offended, he that takes punishment, or he on whom it is inflicted: whereas in
process of time the truth will appear, whether revenge may be more justly
taken or omitted. And then if after due examination he inflict deserved
punishment, it will be more effectual for the reformation of the offendour,
when he sees that it does rather proceed from true judgment, then from the
spleen. As therefore Phocion said to the Athenians, when by hearing of
Alexanders death, they were thereby moved to use more unbridled speeches, and
insolent practices. O ye Athenians if Alexander be dead to day, he will be
dead to morrow also; And therefore Plutarc. de cohib. ira.
you may well defer these courses, till ye be fully informed in the truth:
so may I say to the angry man: do not so hastily revenge thy self on thy
inferiors, for if it be a fault to day, it will be a fault to morrow also:
and as one Senec. lib. 2. de ira ca. 23.
says, Potest paena dilata exigi, non potest exacta reuocari; Punishment
delayed may be inflicted, but being inflicted it cannot be recalled. Non
peribit potestas ista si differetur. Sine id tempus veniat quo ipsi iubeamus.
Thy power to punish Senec de ira. lib. 3 ^^ 32.
being deferred is not lost: let it therefore so long be delayed, till thy
self may command the punishment to be inflicted, and not thy passion of
anger.

Sect. 5.
The fourth means to subdue anger is this: Let the angry man think with The
4. means.
himself whether he is purposed ever or never, to lay aside his anger. If
ever, how much better were it that he should leave his anger, then that it
should leave him? that he should vanquish it, then that it should be over come
of it self? that he should quench it with the water of the spirit, then that
it should last until it burn out? for not only this but all other passions
will in time tire themselves, and fall down with their own ruin. But if
they purpose to live in perpetual enmity, let them consider that they nourish
in themselves a Viper, which will fret out their own bowels. For who
receives more vexation grief and disquietnesse by anger then himself, who
is subject to the passion? and what does sooner cut off the thread of life, then
the sharpness of fretting grief? Lastlve, let him think with himself what
good time he spends in a badde matter, which being so short and precious,
should be more esteemed and better employed; as in seeking to get friends, and
not to loose them being gotten by unjust anger, in pacifying and reconciling
enemies, rather then exasperating them by offering new injuries; in performing
the works of charity and Christianity: that so we may hear at the latter day
that comfortable sentence. Come ye blessed and inherit the kingdom prepared
for you: For I was an Mat. 25. 34
hungered and you gave me meat, etc. rather then in acting the works of the
flesh, among which anger is numbered, Gal. 5. 20. which who so commit shall Gal.
5. 20.
not inherit the kingdom of God, but shall hear that fearful sentence, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels. Math. 25. 41.


Sect. 6.
The last and chief means both to The last means fervent prayer.
keep us from falling into anger, and to subdue it after it has taken hold
of us, is earnest and hartye prayer unto God, that he would vouchsafe us the
gracious assistance of his holy spirit, whereby our affections may be so
ruled and sanctified, that they being freed from natural corruption, may be
made fit and serviceable for the setting forth of his glory, the good of our
brethren, and the furthering of our own salvation. For it is only the water of
the spirit, and the shield of faith, which is able to quench the fury of our
passions; and prayer is a chief means to obtain Luk 11. 13
these spiritual graces at Gods hands.

The remedies to cure anger in others. Cap. 10.
Sect. 1.
ANd so much for the remedies which serve to cure anger in our selves: now we
are to speak of the remedies whereby we may cure it in others. The first
means to mitigate anger in another, is The first means is silence.
to use silence: for as the fire cannot long continue if the wood be taken from
it, so anger cannot long endure, if words and cross answers be not
multiplied: whereas on the other side, cross speeches and perverse replies,
make the chollericke man proceed from anger to rage, from folly, to fury and
madness. And this the wise man teaches us Pro: 26. 21. As the Pro. 62. 21
coal makes burning coals and wood a fire, so the contentious man is apt to
kindle strife. So chap. the 30. and the last verse. As he that wringeth his
nose causes blood to Pro. 30. 33.
come out: so he that forces wrath brings forth strife. By silent yielding
therefore thou may easily abate another anger, whereas cross answers make
it ragingly violent. For as the Cannon shot loses his force if it light in
soft earth or Wool, but dasheth the stony wall in pieces: so the violence of the
most furious anger is abated, when it is not resisted, but furiously rages,
where it finds any opposition. And hence it is that Plato calls anger
Neruos animi, qui and intenderentur acerbitate, and laxarentur mansuetudine:
The nerves or sinews of the mind, which are intended and made stiff, with
sharpness and bitterness, but slack and easy, with courtesy and
gentleness. If therefore thou would pacify an others wrath, follow the
counsel of Jesus the son of Syrach, Cap. 8. 4. Ecclus. 8. 4
Contend not with a man full of words, neither heap up wood on his fire. Where
he notes, that as the wood increases the fire, so multiplying of words
increases anger.

Sect. 2.
But silence is not always expedient, especially when men have a just cause,
The second means a soft answer.
and an honest excuse: for oftentimes the angry man will imagine, that silence
argues contempt; as though they were silent because they scorned to return an
answer. And therefore the second remedy, namely a soft and mild answer,
either excusing their fault by showing their innocence, or in all
humbleness, confessing it, and craving pardon, is more fit physic to cure
anger in some natures and dispositions. And this medicine the wise Physician
prescribes us. Pro. 15. 1. A soft answer puts away Pro. 15. 1.
wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. So Pr. 25. 15. a prince is pacified
by staying a^ger, and a soft tongue breaks the bones, or as it is in the
original, a man of bone, that is: such an one as is most stife and obdurate.
An example hereof we have in Abigaile: who by her mild and discreet speeches,
quickly appeased David's furious anger. 1. Sam. 25. 24. 1 Samuel 25 24.


As therefore Iron which is red hot, being dipped in cold water, presently
loses all his heat, and returns to his natural coldness: so is the heat
of the hottest anger, soon mitigated with a cold and mild answer. Whereas on
the otherside, cross and untoward speeches, makes the least spark of anger
flame out into fury: as we may see in the example of Moses, who though he were
the meekest man living on the earth, as it is Number. 12. 3. yet by the
contentious Nu^. 12. 3.
wrangling of the people, he was so provoked to wrath, that he grievously
offended God, by speaking unadvisedly with his lips; as may appear by
comparing the twentieth chapter of Numbers, Number. 20. 10. 11. Psalm. 106. 32. 33.
the 10. and 11. verses, with the 106. Psalm. the 32 and 33. ver. As therefore if
a man blow upon a spark, he makes it increase to a flame, but if he spit
upon it he quenches it, and both proceed out of the mouth: so he that
utters cross answers, does make the least spark of anger become furious
rage, whereas mild and soft answers do easily appease it.

Sect. 3.
The last means is after his anger is ouerpast to give him wholesome counsel
The 3. means discreet admonition.
and good admonitions, whereby he may be taught the great evils which follow
anger. For as it is not fit to minister Physic to a sick patient while he is
in a fit of an ague, and therefore discreet Physicians rather make choice of
their patients good day: so it is in vain for a man to seek the curing of
anger by good counsel, unless he stay till the fit be passed over, and the
heat of anger somewhat assuaged. For a man cannot, nor will not hearken to
another man's reasons, while he is subject to his own passions. And as a man
hears nothing almost which is said when his house is on fire, for the noise
of the multitude, the crackling of the flame, and the perturbation of his own
mind so the violence of this affection, and fury of this passion, does make a
man while he is in a fit of rage, deaf to all reason. And therefore they are
to be admonished when the fury has somewhat spent it self, and the great
evils of anger both in respect of their souls and bodies, their neighbors and
friends, the church and common wealth, are as it were in one view, to be
presented to their more sober meditations.

But they who admonish are to remember, that they use al al mildness and
Mildenes required in admonishing an angry man.
discretion in their admonition, least while they go about to prevent anger for
the time to come, they presently provoke it. For if they be too austere and
and rough in using too insolent inuectiues and bitter reprehensions, they do
not only commit them selves a great absurdity, while in reproving anger they
show their own spleen; but also make their admonition altogether
unprofitable. Because the angry man (if he see them so sharp and severe) will
rather think how he may defend his fault by aggravating the injuries which he
has received, then either confess it, to such a synick censurer or labor to
amend it. For as no man will suffer his wound to be searched by such a surgeon,
as has a rough hand, and a hard heart, neither will any patient commit himself
to the cure of a froward and merciless Physician: so no man can abide (and
therefore much less an angry man) to have his gauled faults, too much rubbed,
or the wounds and diseases of his mind, healed and cured, with too sharp a
corrasiue and loathsome potion of insolent and bitter words. They therefore
who will angerly reprove anger, are no fit Physicians for them who are
subject to this passion. For to such they will either hide and dissemble their
imperfections, rather fayning themselves well, then they will discover their
disease to such a crabbed Physician; or else they will justify, and defend them
as lawful and necessary. And as the fearful snake, when he has noe means
to fly away, will turn again, and desperately leap into the face of him
that pursues him: or as the tymorous Stagge, when he can escape noe longer by
running makes a stand, turning cowardly fear into desperate rage. So the
angry man being so hardly pursued with sharp inuectiues and bitter
reprehensions, that he has no evasion of excuse to cover his fault, nor hope
of pity by confessing it, does as it were fly into the fare of the reprouer,
by obiecting his greater faults, that they may serve to extenuate his, which
are less, You (will he say) who so sharply reprove me for my choler, have
other faults as great as this, and therefore you may do well to cure your
self before you become another Physician. Yea in this you would show your
self no more innocent, if you had the like occasion to show your anger. And
howsoever you seem in your conversation sweet and harmles, yet he that should
taste you would not find you free from gaul, he that should handle you
somewhat roughly, would soon perceive by his own smart that you have a sting,
though you do not thrust it out being not provoked. In a word the angry man will
never cry peccaui, unless afterward with some confidence he may add
miscrere neither will he suffer his wounds to be cured by such an one, who by
his rough handling will more vex him, then pleasure him by the cure.

Sect. 4.
And so much for the remedies and The conclusion.
medicines which we are to use for the curing of anger, either in our selves or
others, which I would wish every one who find themselves subject to this
unruly passion carefully to apply unto themselves: for as it will not benefit a
sick man to read his Physicians prescript, or to carry the medicine in his
pocket, unless he take and receive it according to his direction: so will this
Physic of the soul little avail for the curing of anger unless it be
applied to the heart and conscience. But seeing we are not able so much as once
to think a good 2. Co. 3. 5. Phi. 2. 13.
thought, as of our selves, but it is God only which works in us both the
will and the deed: let us entreat the Lord who is the only true Physician,
that he will not only vouchsafe to anoint the blind eyes of our understanding
with the precious eye salve of his holy spirit, that we may see the deformities
of this and all other disordered affections. And also that he will with the
same spirit enable us, to reform and renew them; that their violence and fury
being abated, and the corruption and filthynesse of them being purged,
cleansed, and sanctified, they may become fit and serviceable, for the setting
forth of his glory, the good of our brethren, and the furthering of our
eternal salvation. Which grace he vouchsaufe unto us, who died for us, Jesus
Christ the righteous, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be ascribed
all honor and glory, principality, power and dominion, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Epist. to the reader. page 2. line. 19. for he read the. Ibi. li. 23. for
does, read do. Pa. 2. b. li. 27. for (...), read (...). Pa. 63. a. li. 23.
for is, read his. pa. 71. 1. li. 22. read roaring Lion. pa. 72. b. li. 16.
read the first means.

